

Editorial
Something you learn all too quickly working on a magazine like Guitarist is that some things are difficult to adequately describe.
Sound is a real bummer to put into words, so we use benchmarks like Strats, Les Pauls and Marshalls in our sonic descriptions of other products.
There's really not much else we can do, short of giving an oscilloscope readout of the ‘voice’ of every amp or guitar.
But there's more to a musical instrument than its basic tonal ‘fingerprint’.
What matters is the way equipment interacts with you.
It's the dynamics that occur between the player and the guitar/pickup/amp that count.
But how many times has a manufacturer of, say, microphones said, ‘Look at the specification of our new such-and-such; it beats the Shure SM58 hands down.’
Well, on paper, perhaps so.
But people love SM58s for the way they interact; the way the tone and dynamics change when you sing closer, more powerfully or more softly.
The same is true for amps and pickups, and I'm convinced some manufacturers don't realise this.
For instance, it's easy to plug in, set up a good tone and say, ‘There you go — a great amp!’
Well, as a sonic snapshot that might be true, but it doesn't necessarily transfer to a musician playing live, in anger, and across the gamut of dynamics that a night's performance involves.
I mean, what happens when the guitarist turns the guitar's volume down?
Does the sound clean up?
Does it break up?
Does it fall apart?
What happens when the player hits the strings harder?
Does the amp respond or does it buckle under the strain?
One of the things often overlooked in the ‘valves vs tranny’ debate is this interaction.
And the reason so many stagewise guitarists tend to prefer valves is because of their ability to follow, in a particularly human way, the dynamics of the music being fed into them.
That said, transistor amps and processors are often great in the studio because their sound is so consistent.
Plus, the signal's passing through a trillion other transistors anyway: in the desk, in outboard EQ and so on…
Actually, I'll digress here and relate a tale which highlights another madness — tone snobbery.
I used to work with an ex-BBC engineer who revelled in the fact that, in his day, Radio 3, which was deemed by many hi-fi buffs as tonal nirvana, emanated from studios with ageing turntables and consoles, odd lengths of disparate signal cable were employed and much of it was held together with string and Sellotape.
And to cap it all, the Brahms and Beethoven so beloved of the buffs was going through amp stages by the score, before and during transmission.
And these fanatics were at home, dismantling their stereo power amps and mounting them equidistant from their speakers, using plutonium-plated terminals and 112-strand speaker cable.
Yes, I know much of it does work and is done to improve whatever signal does eventually arrive at the house.
But I'm sure you get my friend's drift…
But back to the plot, and it's exactly the same with pickups.
The higher the output the fewer dynamics become available in practice.
Any good Strat, for example, responds to every tickle and forearm smash, but a lignum vitae-bodied plank with an overwound Deathbucker in it is going to be far less responsive.
Sure, it'll take your brain out, but in terms of following your every nuance, forget it.
Of course, much of this is down to familiarity — knowing where the goal posts are.
But manufacturers can sometimes move the goal posts to suit their own ends — or perhaps they were oblivious to them from the start.
I mean, how many times has someone tried to re-invent the fret?
Thanks, but the fret is just fine as it is.
And if I'm used to the dynamics of a Shure SM58, some competitor showing me a graph of his mic's superior frequency range cuts no ice when I jump on stage and have to revise my singing to suit it.
To suggest that change is a bad thing would be stupid; we'd never advance if that were so.
I'm simply reminding manufacturers that the guitarist's craft developed from the tools originally available to him, and equipment designers should work to enhance that craft, not enforce change upon it.
Recall the beauty of a pure Strat tone if you need convincing or, as someone here recently discovered, the thrill of playing loud through a 100w valve stack.
‘So that's what you blokes have been on about,’ he said, newly converted…
See you next month…
WHAT'S NEW News & New Products Our consistently convivial compilation of covetables continues with…
(That's enough c-words — Ed.)
STICKY FINGERS
as if the 10-string Chapman Stick — the notoriously demanding tap-technique instrument — didn't offer enough musical possibilities, here comes a new big brother in the form of the Grand Stick .
With a neck that's 3⅝″ wide instead of the ‘normal’ 3¼″, the Grand Stick has space for twelve strings arranged in just about any format you can think of.
‘Stick players who try the Grand for the first time are surprised at how fast they adapt to it,’ says inventor, manufacturer and player Emmett Chapman.
‘There's loads of extra space for improvising and extending melody lines, bass lines and chordal voicings.’
All Stick models now come with new, mega-adjustable hardware: a new bridge/tailpiece unit, a patented truss rod, a height-adjustable nut, a pickup that can be tweaked for individual string volume and a four-way strap system for altering the angle of dangle.
Stick players or potential Stick players who feel emboldened enough to — er — branch out should contact  
HUCKE'N'ROLL
Making their debut at this year's London Music Show were a new range of British-made guitars.
Handbuilt in Battersea by 24-year old Jens Hucke and 20-year old Richard Stott — both ex-students of Norman Reed's School Of Guitar Making in Totnes, Devon —J.J. Hucke guitars come in four or five different models with such features as plateless shaped neck/body joints, 24-fret bound necks with no wimpy fingerboard overhangs, a selection of top-flight hardware and pickups, and custom finishes to suit all tastes.
Jen and Richard's ambition is to fulfil the needs of ‘guitarists in search of individualism and ever higher playing standards’.
Contact J.J. Hucke Ltd on  
CORE ANGLAIS
British custom string manufacturers Newtone will talk to you for hours explaining their new range of Burns strings.
It's all very complicated and there's a lot of stuff about original ‘round’ core as opposed to the more modern ‘hex’core, and something about wrap wire being able to move around a round core, and the wrap stretching on tuning and just the core moving through the nut, and the smaller space available for gunk to gather, and a heck of a lot more besides.
But anyway, Newtone claim an unprecedented string life, a tighter, clearer fundamental note and a lower tension-to-pitch that allows the string to vibrate more freely, resulting in unsurpassed playability.
We say: they actually feel pretty different, and maybe you should try some.
See your local stockist, or call Malcolm on  
RECORD NEWS
Rory Gallagher has decided to put the boot into the bootleggers with the first in a series of live concert recordings.
‘G-Men Volume 1’(cat.
ESBCD 187)is a 32-track, three-CD set that includes songs like Messin' With The Kid, Tattoo'd Lady, Bull Frog Blues, Calling Card, Shadow Play, Shin Kickers, Hoodoo Blues and many more…
If you're the only person in the world without a Jimi Hendrix compilation, consider Polygram's ‘The Ultimate Experience’.
Track listing is All Along The Watchtower, Purple Haze, Hey Joe, The Wind Cries Mary, Angel, Voodoo Chile, Foxy Lady, Burning Of The Midnight Lamp, Highway Chile, Crosstown Traffic, Castles Made Of Sand, Long Hot Summer Night, Red House, Manic Depression, Gypsy Eyes, Little Wing, Fire, Wait Until Tomorrow, Star Spangled Banner from Woodstock and Wild Thing from Monterey.
Two new debuts on Shrapnel Records are Bernd Steidel with ‘Psycho Acoustic Overture’ and Darren Householder with his self-titled record.
Steidel is a 25-year old German ex-GIT scholar whose compositions have been described as a cross between Mike Oldfield and Al DiMeola; Householder brings together the influences of Hendrix, Van Halen, Aerosmith and Ted Nugent.
Fans of Yorkshire's finest,Allan Holdsworth , will be chuffed to bits to learn that his new record, ‘Wardenclyffe Tower’, is positively stuffed with guitar solos.
Further contributions come from Steve Hunt on keys, Jimmy Johnson on bass, Chad Wackerman, Vinnie Colaiuta and Gary Husband on drums and, on ‘jazz fan solo’, Joel (The Demon Barber) Schnebelt.
Erm…
The next release from Maestro Alex Gregory , ex-pat Brit, self-styled justice commando and complete, authentic nutter is rumoured to be entitled ‘Paganini's Last Stand’.
With the help of a fear-stricken band, his Fender 7-string Strat, an 8-string Gibson ‘piano guitar’ and his ‘heavy metal mandolin' (an instrument with which, he claims, ‘even a moron can reach the sublime’), Gregory has assembled a Gothic extravaganza full of fretboard pyrotechnics and in-jokes such as Clapton's Hideaway solo played in real time at double speed.
Is the man completely mad?
We hope so.
Bassist, columnist, teacher and well-known fusion-head Joe Hubbard has a new CD entitled ‘Vanishing Point’, with contributions from keyboards player Peter-John Vettese, guitarist Pat Thomi, drummer Neal Wilkinson, Al Jarreau's horn section of Michael Paulo and Patches Stewart, and sax ace Mornington Lockett…
‘Imaginary Guitars’, the latest from the the acclaimed Canadian electric guitarist and composer Tim Brady , contains three Brady pieces and one each by Rene Lussier, Michael Rosas Cobian and Sinan Savaskan.
They're mostly compositions for guitar, tape and live electronics; the album is released on Justin Time Records.
Finally,Hank Marvin's perennially silvery twang and amiable spectacles return once more with ‘Into The Light’, an album featuring covers ranging from Sylvia by Focus to Steely Dan's Rikki Don't Lose That Number .
Duets with Brian May on We Are The Champions and Duane Eddy on Pipeline perk up the proceedings.
Jimi's rigorous practice schedule took its inevitable toll
Maestro Alex Gregory pays tribute to his peers
ALL THAT JAZZ
Chris Larkin is proud to present a new addition to his range of handcrafted guitars — the ASAS small-bodied semi-acoustic guitar.
ASAS stands, apparently, for ‘All-Singing All-Swinging’, and the guitar comes in two versions: ‘semi’, with 60mm deep sides, a mahogany sustain block, a tune-o-matic bridge la ES-335 and two humbuckers; or ‘jazz’, with 85mm deep sides, hollow construction and an ebony bridge.
Both models have flamed maple backs and sides, handcarved solid spruce tops, multi-laminate maple necks, Indian Rosewood fingerboards and tailpieces of carved Irish Walnut.
Available by custom-order only, Larkin's new semis can be fitted out to the customer's exact taste and will cost in the region of IR£1,950.
BONEY M
Continuing their tradition of affordable limited-edition guitars, Martin's special 1993-model D-16 is the D-16H, an all-mahogany dreadnought with herringbone trim around the soundhole and down the centre of the back.
It also has a solid spruce top with an ‘aged’ tone finish, vintage-style X-bracing scalloped and shifted to within an inch of the soundhole, tortoiseshell-style binding, a bridge and fingerboard of rosewood, ebony-buttoned machines, pearl diamonds on the bridge and a pre-war ‘diamonds and squares’abalone inlay pattern down the fingerboard.
Add to that a low-profile neck, and you've got a pretty funky little thang.
Also, watch these pages for news on Martin's long-awaited onboard preamp system…
PACIFIC GRAVITY
Launched at Frankfurt and now dropping, apple-like, into the eager paws of UK guitarists, the Yamaha Pacifica 1230S features a 24-fret Warmoth-made bolt-on maple neck with a compound-radius rosewood fingerboard.
The American basswood body has some obvious Telecaster influences, but it sports three custom-wound DiMarzio Q-100 pickups, a single tone and a single volume control, a 5-position pickup selector switch and a Floyd-Rose licensed locking tremolo system.
Available in Crimson, Light Violet Metallic, Dark Blue Metallic and Yellow Pearl, the 1230S costs £935.
More from 
STOLEN
A band with a name like Dented Fender don't deserve to get ripped off.
But alas, alack, someone in Dover took a can-opener to their trusty Sherpa van on Sunday 22nd November and waltzed off with the following: a purple sunburst ESP Horizon 5-string bass in flightcase; a 1982 Stratocaster in faded cream with ciggie burns on the headstock, also in a flightcase; a sunburst Telecaster , also with ciggie burns and in a black moulded Fender case; a 100-watt Marshall Hi-gain Dual Reverb head; a Roland R-5 drum machine; an Aztec wireless system in case with Studiomaster mic; two bags — one ex-army, one sports bag — containing a large assortment of leads, strings, tuners, power supplies etc., and a home-made pedal-board with a BOSS Stereo Chorus, an Ibanez bass compressor and an Aria stage tuner.
Make some poor people less poor by ringing 
Everyone else out there in twangland — make a note of your serial numbers!
BLACK'N'BLUE
Hughes & Kettner's new £269 Tubeman thingie is designed to function as an amp expander on stage, as a recording amp in the studio, as a floorpedal on stage, as a practice amp at home and as a fully-featured preamp just about anywhere.
It's a valve-driven box with four separate switchable channels — jazz, funk, blues and rock — and on top of that you have the usual gain and master volume controls, EQ for treble, mid and bass and a switchable mid-boost.
A line out lets you connect to a power amp and cabinet, while a speaker-simulating recording out enables you to record, to connect with a PA or, alternatively, your inner soul via headphones.
Telepathise with your local store or with 
TALKING SHOP
Rock Around The Clock are showing some recession-defying ability by opening up a new store in Crouch End, London.
Heading the bill are guitars from Fender and Gibson, amplifiers and PA equipment from Marshall, Trace Elliot and Fender, and effects from Korg, Roland and BOSS.
Plus there's a huge range of accessories, tuition videos and sheet music to suit all tastes, and a fully-soundproofed demo suite for fully testing all the gear before you part with your hard-earned spondulicks.
And should you have an argument with your guitar, then full repair facilities are provided by the highly experienced John Beeby in premises directly behind the shop.
SONIC BOOM
Peavey's redoubtable TNT bass combo has been redesigned with major changes to the enclosure and loudspeaker that provide an entire additional octave of low-end response.
Putting 150 watts into a 15″ Scorpion speaker or an optional Black Widow, the TNT 115 also features improved interstage coupling capacitors, a new nine-band graphic EQ, high and low ‘shelving’ type EQ controls, a variable crossover, a built-in footswitchable chorus unit, push-bright and push-punch functions, and Peavey's patented DDT compression circuit.
Hassle your Peavey dealer or call  
HEAVY DUTIES METALLIC KO ONE ON ONE Kirk Hammett ‘My wife had a baby six months ago.
When I left home that baby wasn't even thought about and by the time I get home it will be a year old!’
It's one of Metallica's tour personnel talking at the band's hotel, just prior to leaving for the night's Wembley gig…
David Mead is our man with the laminate.
Moving one of the world's biggest bands around on a tour of this size is a massive operation.
It involves a huge staff of unseen hands working together to give four guys a trouble-free two hours on stage every night.
It's a circus — a huge moving machine with the public ‘take no prisoners’ image reserved for showtime.
Backstage there exists a very Boys R Us attitude:esprit de corps in its most literal sense.
It's been a long tour.
The highlights, or perhaps the lowlights, have included singer James Hetfield getting himself barbecued by an over-enthusiastic pyro, while the temporary pairing with Guns N' Roses caused further turbulence — or so the press would have us believe.
But Metallica are more interested in playing for people than telling tales of in-fighting between these two giants of bad-boy rock.
I mentioned to Kirk that I had no intention of asking him about that part of the tour.
‘Thank you,’ he replied, with genuine gratitude.
How long has the tour been going?
‘Fourteen months, but we've still got another six months to go.’
That must be pretty hard on you as a player.
So how do you keep in shape?
‘I play a lot in my hotel room.
I don't go out and carry on like I used to.
Basically, I just sit down with a little Pignose amp and a tape recorder and play all night.’
What guitar do you use for that?
‘A Strat from the Custom Shop at Fender.
It has Lace Sensors, which are great; I love those pickups.’
I had you figured as a dedicated humbucker user…
‘In the beginning I was a single coil man.
But then I started putting humbuckers in all my guitars and now I'm back to the single coil thing, but just for playing in my hotel room.
On stage I still have humbuckers in everything, although for the next tour I hope to change my amp setup to accommodate single coil guitars as well.
But I love old Strats — I love the Strat sound, period.
To me it's one of the classic sounds, as is the vintage PAF humbucker…’
What sort of things do you play when you practise?
‘I have chromatic exercises I run through; I play scales; I run through my modes in every key.
And I just play.
It depends what I feel like playing, because I've got into the blues lately and I'm learning all these licks I should have learned ten, fifteen years ago!
The trouble was I started wanting to play straight-ahead rock and heavy metal and so I left the traditional blues stuff on the back burner.
But now I'm finally getting to that burner.’
But the early metal bands drew very heavily upon the blues influence…
‘Yeah, I hear it totally now that I'm familiar with all these blues licks, and so I'm starting to apply that sort of thinking to the more modern type of playing.
I feel now that I can express myself better than I ever could in the last fifteen years; I've even gotten into the Mississippi Delta style, fingerpicking blues.
The Robert Johnson stuff is incredible!
I've been listening to that a lot.
Me and Jason (Newsted, Metallica's bassman ) jam a lot, and we play a lot of Robert Johnson stuff, a lot of traditional blues stuff, some Albert King, some Buddy Guy, some Howlin' Wolf, some Earl King.’
Does this mean that Metallica is set to become more blues-biased in the near future?
‘I don't know.
It's more like a hobby with us, so I don't know if it would ever be that strong.
The influence is there but I don't think it will creep its way into the songwriting because with that we have a certain focus.
But you never know, it's really too early to say, but all of us have our little musical platforms.’
But surely the blues will inevitably influence your own style and find its way into the band quite naturally…
‘Well, I certainly find that if I sit down and play blues for forty-five minutes or an hour, it's hard to get back into the rock feel.
It's like two distinct things, two different worlds, and it takes time to make the transition between them in one sitting.’
We spoke to Johnny Winter recently and he said he has to be really careful about what he listens to before getting on stage, in case it influences him too much.
‘I can see where he's coming from.
The two styles are so different in approach and thought, even though they're very similar in some ways.
The blues is a distinct feel, and the modern technique is another distinct feel, where you have these fluid runs and patterns and a more scalic and arpeggiated type of thinking; the blues is basically certain boxes and chromatics.
So it's real easy to get stuck in that frame of thinking, because with modern rock you play a lot faster, a lot more fluidly, and the blues, depending on what type of run you're playing, is more disjointed, more chromatic.
But it's getting easier for me to blend it all now; I certainly don't get as stuck as I did four or five months ago.’
It's a widely-known fact that you had lessons from Joe Satriani…
‘I took a bunch of lessons from Joe for about five years off and on.
That was between ‘82 and ‘87.’
You could obviously play when you went to Joe, so what was it in particular that you wanted to learn from him?
‘To learn scales, to apply myself to certain scales.
There were scales I would hear in music and I used to think to myself, ‘I need to learn that scale,’ or, ‘I need to learn how he got that effect using that scale with those chords,’and basically what Joe gave me was that sort of thinking.
‘It was a heavily technical thing.
We would sit down and work out chord progressions and scales and we'd go over modes; we'd map out scales and modes over three octaves and go over arpeggios.
You can get the same sort of information from a Mel Bay book but going to Joe and doing it in a rock/heavy metal format made it a lot more interesting and a lot easier for me to learn.
Now, when Joe and I see each other we just get together and play a bunch of Hendrix songs.
We have a mutual admiration for Hendrix.’
Metallica have a no-compromise attitude towards volume on stage, and you're renowned for being one of the loudest bands on the planet.
Seeing as an electric guitar becomes an almost entirely different animal at high volume, how do you compensate for that when you practise?
‘As long as it sounds good when I go out on stage then it works for me.
And if I'm practising and it sounds good it'll work for me too.
Making that transition isn't so bad, unless I want to do something that relies heavily on feedback or ambience.
But I don't practise at full volume — I don't know anyone who does!
It's very rare when I'm practising at home that I'll need feedback or a lot of ambience.
My practice setup at home is basically just a small Marshall combo and a wah pedal for certain sounds.
If I want a different sound altogether I have a collection of Fender amps.
I have a Twin Reverb, a Vibroverb, a Super Champ — which is louder than those two put together!
And I have a variety of outboard gear which I use if I want to get that ‘big hall’ sound in my little room.
But if I want to play real loud I just go down to my basement — I have a stack down in my basement and just crank that up!’
Your gear comes in for some heavy duty usage.
Do you have a favourite guitar at home that you daren't take out live in case it doesn't stay the course?
‘I have a ton of guitars at home.
I'll take a ‘56 Strat out with me — bang it around, scratch it, drop it — I don't really care.
Guitars are made to be played!
Jason and I collect guitars, but the guitars I buy, I buy to play.
I don't buy guitars to put up in a cabinet on the wall.
I think that's defeating the purpose; it's like buying a television and never watching it.’
Surely every player has a prized possession?
‘I've got a few pieces that I really like.
My ‘56 Strat is a marvellous guitar, a dual-tone sunburst.
I've got a ‘56 goldtop Les Paul with soapbar pickups which I like a lot.
Then I have a '60 Strat, one of the first with the rosewood necks, and it has this amazing sound.
I also have a ‘63 black Strat which I got recently and that plays so neat!
I have a Gibson ES295 — a big hollow-body, goldtop finish — which I like quite a bit.
And I just bought a really nice ‘87 Les Paul Standard reissue, with a really nice maple top on it and vintage PAF pickups.
Then I have my Flying V which I used to play all the time.
I played that on almost every album back in the early days; it's a black one and it's a beautiful guitar.’
We recently reviewed an ESP Kirk Hammett Custom guitar.
What exactly was your involvement with its development?
‘What I did was I went to the ESP factory in New York, back in 1987.
I went through a bunch of necks and felt them, and after feeling about twenty I said to the guy, ‘This is the one.
I want you to take this neck and make it a neck-through-body Strat-style guitar.’
Then I asked for the inlays, two humbuckers, two volumes and a tone.
That's basically how I came about doing it.
‘Actually, they were never supposed to make it a commercial thing, but they did so anyway…
I guess it's because I hit them up for so many guitars, they had to even out the balance!!
But I really like neck-through-body guitars, even though all my favourites — the vintage guitars — are bolt-ons.
I love my ESPs too.
When we're off tour I play those a lot.
They're just so well made and so rugged — they're workhorses.
I bang on them, drag them all over the place, throw them around!’
How many do you take out on tour with you?
‘I have three or four: two black Strats, a Les Paul Junior with a neck-through-body — really heavy guitar, sustains really well — a Flying V that they built me with one pickup — neck-through-body also — and a regular Flying V.’
Do you play an acoustic on this tour?
‘No.
James does; he has one of those Chet Atkins Gibsons.
All my acoustics are vintage, but I don't take those out because they're a bit too fragile.
I have an old Dobro — it's one of those wooden ones with a metal resonator.
Then I have one of the Robert Johnson Gibsons, which is great to play with slide because you get that tone!
Then I have another Gibson, a '50s model with a big old cutout — that's beautiful.
Those are all steel-strung guitars, but I have a regular nylon-strung one as well.
I'd like to get a Martin D45; I saw one in a catalogue for $100,000, which is a bit more than I would care to pay!’
You could buy your own fighter plane for that!
‘Yeah, or a guitar factory!’
How do you keep the material fresh on such a long tour?
‘On the last tour I basically played the same thing every night and I suddenly came to the realisation that I wasn't progressing as much as I should.
I was going out and playing five nights a week and I realised I should be a hell of a lot better than I was.
So on this tour, because I'm playing so much off stage, I have the opportunity to work on certain things, certain licks here and there, and then the next night I can go out and actually play them live.
‘There are certain songs now that I leave open for improvisation; I play something different every night instead of playing the solo from the record.
Obviously I don't do that with every song because a lot of people like to hear certain things as they are on the record.
But learning things in the hotel room and trying them out on stage the next night leaves it fresh, but gives me room to interject new ideas and see if I can pull them off or not.
I also play an open solo and I play that differently every night.
The last tour I had the whole thing note-for-note worked out and it got a bit boring after a while; this way it stays exciting and sometimes I pull it off and sometimes I die a death.
But, hey, that's the chance you take.’
Is there a specific point in the set that you look forward to every night?
‘I enjoy playing it all.
When we take breaks — when I'm at home or on vacation — my chops go down drastically because I'm enjoying my free time and doing things I don't usually have time to do.
So when I'm on tour my guitar playing hurts a little bit, and it usually takes three or four days to get my chops back.’
‘I have a clear head, too, so things seem more fresh.
I like it because I know that every time I walk out on that stage my fingers are getting stronger and I have that much more playing behind me.’
‘But you never know how the gig's going to go.
Sometimes if I've had a particularly bad day and I go out there thinking I'm going to have a particularly bad gig I'll have a really great one.
If I've had a great day and I've been playing a lot and I feel real confident, it sometimes doesn't come together on stage at all.
It's a weird thing.
Having said that, my playing never sinks below a certain standard, although sometimes it's hard to tell if you're actually improving, because you're so close to it.
But I'm beginning to tell — all these off-the-wall blues licks finding their way into my regular playing.
So that gives me an idea of where I'm headed.’
THE SECOND PART OF MY interview with Kirk was conducted amidst the mayhem backstage at Wembley, approximately an hour away from showtime.
I asked him how he usually deals with pre-stage time.
Does he have to warm up?
‘I do need to warm up or else I don't have the flexibility and I don't have the finger strength.’
Your rhythm style calls for a great deal of aggressive down-stroke picking…
‘I warm up for the down strokes by doing fast alternate picking…’
He picks up a guitar to demonstrate and I notice that his picking action seems to be coming from his elbow, with a fairly stiff forearm…
‘Yeah, it's partly from the elbow and partly from the wrist.
It's like a combination, although it's very slight on the wrist.
I do that a lot — get the down beat going.’
It must be exhausting in a two-hour plus set…
‘By the end of a show my fingers are pretty loose and I feel pretty good, so I use the opportunity to go to my hotel room and play some more.
The two situations complement each other, although there was no intention originally for it to turn out that way…’
Kirk is famous for his monster rhythm sound.
I had the opportunity to get beneath Metallica's stage, where all the amplification is stowed and noticed that Kirk is still using ADA MP-1 preamps with MESA/Boogie Strategy 400 power amps.
My understanding of the ultimate grunge rhythm sound was to remove a good amount of mid-range, while boosting the low and high ends…
‘Yeah, to a large degree I still scoop a lot out for the rhythm sound, but for lead I add a bit of mid.
For the lead I also have an Ibanez Tube Screamer.
I just love those things — such a great sound.
I use it as a boost, in conjunction with the ADA.’
Metallica have made a stand in the past against conventional promotional devices.
Decidedly MTV-unfriendly videos, for instance, seem to be the norm in the Metallica camp…
‘We're doing our part to spread this style of music.
People don't realise that we're opening up ears to this type of music.
For instance, we're the first metal band to have a gold album with this kind of music…’
We're avoiding the word ‘thrash’ here, aren't we…
‘Yeah,’ he laughs.
‘Exactly.
But we were the first metal band to have a platinum album and the first metal band to sell six million albums in the States alone.
Also, we decided to make a stylistic change on this record and I see a lot of other metal bands following suit.
It's kind of funny.’
You drop-tune for some songs…
‘Yeah, on Master Of Puppets we dropped it down to D and live we took it down to C sharp.
The problem with that was that every time me and James played, we played with varying degrees of attack on our guitars so we were constantly out of tune with each other because the strings were flapping around so much.’
Didn't you compensate by using a heavier gauge string?
‘We didn't know that back then!’
Kirk laughs.
You tuned down to C sharp using 009s?
‘Well, 010s.’
‘But even with 10s they're going to flap around, tuned that low…
‘It was especially bad for me because I played with a guitar that had a floating bridge, which didn't really help things.
But now I play it on the Jackson and the bridge is stationary, so it helps it to stay in tune a lot better.
It's a great guitar for doing that, because the neck is so even; it's so solid from the nut to the bridge.’
You drop-tuned on Sad But True from the last album.
That's one heavy industrial rhythm sound…
‘There's a 6-string bass overdubbed in there!’
Also drop tuned?
‘Yeah, we tried playing that just recently, with James playing a baritone bass — actually it's like a guitar with super-light bass strings — but in my opinion there's too much bass.
Between James and Jason playing bass and me playing rhythm guitar there's just too much; we're super-heavy and you can't hear any chunk!’
What was it like doing the Freddie Mercury Tribute gig?
‘It was great because I met Brian May, Tony Iommi, Mick Ronson, Jeff Beck, all in one day!
It was the greatest thing.
‘You know, I saw the bits that were video-taped and it was really interesting.
We were all pretty jet-lagged.
In fact I'm kind of jet-lagged right now; it's one of those groggy days!’
I heard you soundcheck with Stone Cold Crazy.
Do you do that in the set?
‘Yeah, when we feel like it.
Trouble is, I can't ever remember how to play the guitar solo!
Whenever that happens, rather than going back to the track I play something else that will fit, or I leave it as an improvisational section, so to speak.
That's how it happens, all those improvisational sections coming out — me forgetting what I played on albums and not going back and re-learning it.’
Do you still get a buzz from playing live, even this late in such a big tour?
‘Yeah.
It's great!
There's nothing like going out there and playing in front of people.
The thing that you do best, which is playing guitar and doing it on a level which is artistic and creative, not only is that challenging but it's satisfying too…’
I've got into the blues lately and I'm learning all these licks I should have learned ten, fifteen years ago!
I'll take a ‘56 Strat out with me — bang it around, scratch it, drop it — I don't really care.
Guitars are made to be played!
On the last tour I basically played the same thing every night and I suddenly came to the realisation that I wasn't progressing as much as I should
If I've had a great day and I've been playing a lot and I feel real confident, it sometimes doesn't come together on stage at all.
It's a weird thing
Aria Pro-II Mad Axe Aria's not-so-crazy little thing!
Eddie Allen wields ‘The Axe…’
Take a really nice grain, add a seductive dark sunburst finish, gold plate the hardware, and then think of a classy name.
Like Mad Axe.
What were Aria thinking of?!
I haven't been able to find a plausible answer, and Aria UK weren't letting on either.
The name Mad Axe is about as inappropriate as anyone could imagine.
Having said that, I've heard the French love it, and over there the Mad Axe is selling like, er…mad.
Visually, the body reminds me of a Schecter or Tom Anderson and if it wasn't for Aria's distinctive headstock you'd be hard pushed to tell this wasn't a £1500 guitar from a few feet away.
Even close up the Mad Axe still has an air of quality about it and the finish is one of the best I've seen on a Korean guitar.
Information on body materials is hard to come by, but it's obviously a two-piece maple-veneered top and back, contoured with Stratocaster-type shaping; it's also weighty enough to offer good sustain.
The tremolo routing is excellent and any overspray or rough wood underneath has been neatly covered by a black foam mat, further adding to the well-made look of the guitar.
All too often these little details are ignored on lower-end instruments but Aria have proved that it can be done.
I like the feel and setup of the gold-plated Floyd Rose licensed tremolo, which pivots on two vertical height adjusters.
It floats enough to raise the pitch of the top E string by a full tone, but this amount of movement means that any slight pressure from the player's right hand on the bridge affects the pitch of the strings.
Of course, some players don't have a problem with this and it's not the fault of the instrument, but it catches me out every time I dig in.
Soundwise the Mad Axe relies on three Aria Pro II pickups.
The bridge humbucker can be tapped to match up with the neck and middle single coils by pulling out the tone pot; this, along with a volume pot and a slightly stiff five-way selector takes care of the electrics.
The maple neck has 22 frets inlaid in a rosewood fingerboard.
The neck joins the body at the sixteenth fret and top fret access is on a par with any Strat-bodied instrument.
Fixing is by four bolts through a gold-plated neck plate and the Koreans have excelled themselves again here, because the fit into the body is very precise.
One slight disappointment is in the fret finishing: the frets seem properly set into the fingerboard but some of the ends on the treble side are sitting (or have lifted) slightly off the fingerboard, allowing the top E to occasionally catch underneath them.
The problem could just be confined to this guitar and removing the strings and lightly tapping the frets down with a block of wood and a small hammer could well fix it.
However, this is something to watch for because, unless sorted, this kind of problem on a guitar only gets worse.
Other than that the neck feels really good and solid, and although it's of the slim, wide variety (43.75mm at nut) the fingerboard isn't so wide that you can't wrap a thumb over the top if you're so inclined.
The gold-plated locking nut suffers from sharp peaks on the string grooves but the grooves themselves are okay and, again, it's well fitted.
The other side of the headstock sports a set of gold plated, Gotoh-type machineheads and an Allen key holder, both in gold.
Somehow the shape of the headstock doesn't really go with the traditional body design, but at least Aria haven't tried to turn this guitar into a direct Strat copy, and more credit to them for that.
Playability
All too often, low-price guitars which look good are severely let down by their tone, but the Mad Axe sounds as good as it looks.
Clean sounds are rich and bright and the neck pickup in particular has a really warm quality which, to be honest, I wasn't expecting.
The Mad Axe's very impressive acoustic sustain helps a lot on clean settings, and for rich, Knopfler-type sounds the pickups are voiced just about right.
The humbucker carries a clean sound well, although there's a hint of midrange that made me go for the coil-tap to keep things sounding sweet.
On full dirt through a Marshall Valvestate combo the Mad Axe lived up to its name and any kind of rock tone proved possible.
In particular, the humbucker's midrange qualities made generating harmonics easy, and all the pickups tracked well when the tremolo was pushed flat to the body.
At this point the strings were flapping against the fingerboard, and although this kind of treatment played havoc with the tuning it soon stabilised.
Restringing and stretching in the strings properly would make a big difference here.
There was a slight tendency for the pickups to squeal when the amp was pushed hard and loud, but then I have to remind myself that this is a Korean-made instrument and I've yet to find one with its pickups totally sorted out.
Conclusion
As I said more than once during this review, I keep forgetting that what I have in my hands is a £300 Korean-made guitar, not one costing three times as much.
Therefore, any criticisms should be balanced against that.
A gentle wrist-slapping goes to Aria for the lifting frets (hopefully, only a fault on this particular example).
Other than that it's good to see a company producing a cheap guitar which not only looks convincingly like a no-nonsense, top-of-the-range instrument, but won't let the side down if it actually has to earn its keep.
What lets this guitar down most, for me, is its name, but the alternative isn't any better.
I mean, would you think you were impressing anyone by telling them you play an ST-02-3X?
I didn't think so.
Come on Aria, the Mad Axe might be a reasonably cheap guitar but it looks and sounds upmarket and it deserves a more upmarket name.
And that's the only thing mad about it in my opinion.
Korg A4 Guitar Signal Processor Effects aplenty.
Galore on the floor from Korg…
Review by Eddie Allen.
The rack-mounting multi-effects processor's main generic competitor is the self-contained floor-standing unit, and the choice of the latter is now wider than ever with the arrival of Korg's A4.
The A4 contains sixty effects programs, half of which are factory presets and the remaining thirty being user-programmable.
It is possible to reprogram the factory presets, but any changes will need to be stored in a user preset.
The factory and user presets are called ‘areas’ and both areas contain five memory banks, each holding six programs.
The programs can include up to six basic effects, although three double up: chorus/flanger, distortion/overdrive and pitch/delay (the delay does have separate parameter settings, however).
The other effects are Compressor, 3-Band Equaliser and Reverb.
The A4's control layout should prove accessible to anyone new to programming, and in this respect Korg have managed to retain the simplicity of the compact pedal but include some of the sophistication of rack-mounting processors.
The incoming signal level is controlled by a rotary pot with a green LED showing a signal is actually present.
Too much signal and the LED changes to orange, while input overload turns it red.
The output level is also controlled by a rotary pot but individual patch levels can be adjusted and mixed by accessing the Utility section.
There are a further six rotary pots labelled A to F and these adjust the parameters of the selected effects.
These pots sit directly under the programming map printed on the top of the A4 and apply to the section directly above.
Selecting the effect to be programmed is done using the A4's two mode select buttons; the choice is confirmed by an LED on the left-hand side of the map.
Pressing the mode buttons together allows the user to compare the modified patch to the original.
I've said how much I like programming from a simple map printed on top of this type of unit (BOSS's ME-6 and ME-10 operate in a similar way), and the A4 really couldn't be simpler.
Selection between factory and user presets is via the User/Preset button which illuminates the attendant LED.
No LED means the A4 is using the factory presets.
In program mode (again, confirmed by an LED), six of the A4's lower bank of footpedals select any of the user or factory complete patches.
In edit mode a red LED comes on and the pedals select individual effects, in the same way that you'd switch between a row of compact effects pedals.
The bank and program number are displayed in a two-digit LED and above this is the A4's on-board tuner.
Activating the tuner is achieved via the footpedal on the bottom right, which also serves as the effects Bypass switch.
Tuning can be done with either a bypassed (dry) sound, or by holding the pedal down for slightly longer the A4 is muted completely, for silent tuning.
The final item to mention is the remaining footpedal for bank selection.
Unfortunately, the banks can only be advanced, so selecting from bank five to bank four means the pedal has to be pressed four times.
A solution, of course, is to program the patches in a logical order, but a bank ‘Down’ pedal would have been a better idea, especially as the A4 can be used to send MIDI commands to external MIDI devices, such as another processor.
The A4 can also switch channels on the amp it's plugged into, at the same time as a patch is selected.
This is achieved by connecting the A4's rear panel jack to the channel change footswitch socket on the amp — a really useful idea.
The remaining rear sockets are for connecting a volume pedal, headphones (mini jack), stereo outputs and guitar input.
MIDI In and Out and 9 volt DC in make up the rest of the sockets, with the mains switch completing the facilities.
In Use
Connecting the A4 is simplicity itself, as is selecting both the user and factory presets for that initial run-through of the patches before consulting the handbook…
The A4 contains a good variety of usable sounds in both user and preset modes, and with the A4 plugged into a Boogie combo and using an Aria ‘Mad Axe’ I could've headed straight to the gig.
The various delay, reverb and pitch/chorus sounds all stood up well to close scrutiny and the A4 proved very quiet in use.
Interestingly, these sounds are designed to flow over the patch changes so, while patch selection is already hardly noticeable, this extra feature masks the change very well indeed.
In my view the weakest sounds in the A4 are its overdrive and distortion, not because of the amount of effect available, but because of the various voicings on offer.
There are seven voicings or ‘Modes’ and these are quite wide-ranging, offering bags of tonal variation.
However, I couldn't help thinking that there wasn't enough attention paid to the more natural types, the emphasis being instead on sharp or heavily mid-biased sounds.
Admittedly, these could be EQ'd, but they still had that all-out processed sound with a slight nasal quality.
One point to note here, the EQ can be programmed to appear in the distortion patch or not, as required, so a bright rhythm sound doesn't mean a thin, weedy lead sound.
I would recommend experimenting with the distortion sounds here, because there's a lot to choose from.
Recording with the A4 connected direct to the mixer again produced good results, but my comments on tone still stand.
The onboard switchable amp simulator (it isn't listed as an effect) makes a difference, but again I would strongly recommend experimentation, as the sound character can change between mixers — and amps as well for that matter.
Conclusion
Korg's A4 isn't claiming to be the last word in processors, but still it offers a lot for the money.
All the effects work well, although I think (as I always seem to these days) that the distortion sounds, while varied, could be less processed.
The facilities on the A4 are the kind you'd expect on a unit costing rather more.
For instance, the tuner is the best I've used on any processor — it's accurate and very easy to use — and the facility to externally channel-switch your amp is a sensible bonus.
For anyone with techno-fear, the A4 could be just the thing for those first, tentative steps into the world of programming, and the MIDI facility means you'll already have the foot-controller if or when you feel the need to expand your effects with another processor.
I'd say Korg have got the A4 just about right, and if not all the sounds are to my liking, then that's really my bad luck.
Fender ‘51 ‘Custom Shop’ Precision Fender get on-line with a reissue of Leo's legacy of genius.
Review by Gibson Keddie.
Although greater attention tends to be lavished upon Leo Fender's 6-string designs, in the time between the releases of his Telecaster and Stratocaster, Leo demonstrated his ability to create without precedent, inventing from scratch the electric bass guitar.
Today, it's difficult to imagine how electric guitars were received in an environment where rock'n'roll did not exist.
Never again, one suspects, will anyone witness the arrival of such revolutionary instruments — instruments which, within the space of a decade, wrought such changes in the way music was played, and did so increasingly thereafter.
Country music was unquestionably one of the forerunners of rock'n'roll, and certainly one of its main constituents when it arrived in its recognised form.
Country stars of the day were hugely popular, accessing mass audiences through a thriving network of local radio stations, but the accompanying pressures of success often led the performers to personal excess and chemical abuse long before the rock'n'rollers thought it was cool.
Hank Williams was only 29 when he died in 1953, an early lifestyle ‘victim’.
But big audiences meant that country guitarists were quick to realise the benefits of an amplified electric guitar.
Bass players of the time were most unhappy about the situation, though; their instrument, the double bass, was exceedingly bulky, very fragile and did not take at all well to the rigours of touring, especially if strapped to the roof of a car, as many were.
Worse still, the bull fiddle possessed no appreciable volume, and what volume it did have was easily submerged by thronging crowds of noisy dance-goers.
And so Leo applied his creative hand to the problem, and the result was the electric bass.
Its story is well-known: its fretted neck allowed guitarists to relate to it, and it allowed them to double-up on bass if required.
They could also be ‘precise’ with their note-playing.
Hence the Fender ‘Precision’.
Mass-market success of the instrument was not immediate, however, although the reputation of the bass did grow in the country, blues and jazz fields as the '50s progressed and rock'n'roll established itself.
Many early r'n'r bass players continued to use the upright bass, which lent a distinct voice to the records of the time.
Obvious examples would be Bill Black on the early Elvis records, and Joe B. Mauldin of the Crickets, both fine, melodic and rhythmic upright players.
Like most good inventions, the essential simplicity of the Precision belied its effectiveness.
It was a stretched Telecaster, using the same ‘slab’ ash body with no contouring whatsoever, while its elongated top horn extended to above the twelfth fret and offered good balance for an instrument of its considerable weight.
The new bass made use of Leo's bolt-on maple neck, with the now traditional long-scale measurement (the distance in which the top string can vibrate freely, ie. from the nut to where it passes over the bridge saddle) of 34″, and twenty frets set directly into the maple fretboard.
The darker ‘skunk-stripe’ of walnut in the back of the neck covered up the rear installation of the truss rod.
Even the original Tele guitar was designed to have some bass-playing ability, and as a consequence was not wired as it is today, although it did possess the customary three-way selector switch.
After 1952 and until 1967 this setup gave a forward position which included extra capacitance in the circuitry to give the neck pickup a ‘bassier’ sound, allowing it to supply bass-ish lines.
Switching to the middle position allowed the neck pickup to play with its natural sound.
Flicking to the back position selected the bridge pickup, as ever.
The Precision bass, however, was designed to be tuned down an octave from a guitar's lower four strings.
A single pickup sits centrally in the body, with four poles set in a straight-across arrangement, unlike the later ‘split’ Precision pickup with its ‘two poles per string’setup.
The P-bridge is the very essence of simplicity, being a face-mounted plate of thin chrome-plated steel, upon which sit a pair of saddle barrels, each carrying two strings and offering intonation adjustment via two, tail-mounted screws, and height adjustment via threaded adjusters.
The Precision is strung through the body, behind the bridge — again, like the Telecaster guitar — and the strings are located by huge individual ferrules in the back.
Controls are equally basic; chromed, knurled rotaries look after volume and tone.
A traditionally-shaped single-ply black scratchplate covers a large area of the body (Bakelite then, plastic now), secured by correctly-positioned mounting screws, and a finger-rest (so the player can thumb-pluck the strings) situated at a slight angle below the G-string, by the end of the neck.
Even the understated ‘Dan Dare fins’ styling of the chrome bridge and pickup covers does not look dated, and although these came to be regarded as obstructive (the fashion was to use them as detachable ashtrays, or discard them permanently) the bass would have looked seriously unfinished without them.
Without doubt, the neck is a substantial chunk of maple, feeling remarkably similar to current production Precisions.
Nut width is the infamously wide 44mm, expanding to 58mm at the twelfth fret.
It's pretty chunky too — the maximum depth of the very oval section extending straight into the headstock — while the depth is a consistent 25mm along its length.
The frets are quite fine at just over 2mm in width, and the quality of the fretwork and the fit of the nut is first class.
The headstock is of course the early Precision shape, a direct enlargement of the Telecaster guitar's.
A circular G and D-string retainer is mounted beside the spaghetti ‘Fender’ logo.
The machinehead positioning allows the strings a perfectly straight path over the nut, and the large, long-stemmed, elephant-ear, open-backed machines use an initially unsettling reverse-gearing mechanism.
This was designed to emulate the action of double bass tuners: ie. you turn the key towards you to tighten a string.
IN USE
For many years the sound of the Precision, whether by accident or design, simulated that of a double bass, with a distinct bias towards the low frequencies emitted by the lower E and A strings, but a comparatively weak response from the other two.
Nowadays we can judge the sound from the advantage of good quality roundwound strings, but for many years flat/tapewound strings with their poor magnetic response and rapid note decay were the only option.
No such problems on the modern reissue, however; the tone is well-balanced across the bass, with a degree of brightness gained from the maple neck.
The tone control has the ability to do exactly what you'd expect, thickening the sound or leaving it open and bright.
The overall tone is warm and woody — hardly surprising when you consider the sheer mass of wood involved!
I took this bass out on a gig and got on very well with it.
The lack of contouring presents no real disadvantage, though the lack of a ribcage cutaway means that the bass tilts slightly forward from the top, so you can't quite see where you are on the fretboard for occasional quick reference.
However, I found that my arm rested quite comfortably along the 44mm-thick body, allowing relaxed fingerstyle playing while resting on the neck-side of the pickup.
CONCLUSION
So what does your (quite considerable) investment get you in terms of Custom Shop rock'n'roll history?
Apparently a physically accurate copy of bass playing's Big Daddy.
Colour-wise it looks a bit anaemic; I presume its cellulose finish will darken, if you can wait that long, although I would have preferred Fender to have tinted the lacquer a little to increase the ‘butterscotch’ element in the colouring.
The bass has been beautifully set up, though, and traditional principles combined with components made to today's criteria make this bass as valid and effective as it ever was.
Yes, it's pricey, but it is still a fairly exclusive instrument (though rumour has it that the Japanese will be issuing their ‘51 Reissue some time in the future).
I'd say there's a real lack of good-quality, basic, no-frills bass guitars at the moment, basses which are capable of producing a warm, user-friendly, real wood tone.
So it's ‘welcome back’ to the ‘51!
FROM GENESIS TO REVELATIONS Daryl Stuermer ‘Not many hippies in tonight,’ remarked an official in the foyer of Earls Court during Genesis' recent six-nighter at the London venue…
Interview by David Mead.
He spoke the truth.
I first saw Genesis around 1973 and at the time knew their music very well.
The subsequent departure of both Peter Gabriel and Steve Hackett and the passing of the years in general have all added up to a change of direction for the band.
Gone are the concept albums and such thirty-minute epics as Supper's Ready , to be replaced by shorter, straight-to-the-point material like Tonight, Tonight, Tonight and the chart hit I Can't Dance .
Phil Collins has become an essential focal point for the band, his success as a solo artist no doubt adding considerable fuel to the fire — and many more of the CD generation to the audience.
Genesis took a rather unique way round the problem of replacing lost manpower by resolving to confine the writing and recording duties to the surviving three band members and taking on ‘extra hands’ for live performance.
Thus, Milwaukee-based guitarist Daryl Stuermer became a fully paid-up member of the Genesis live auxiliaries.
Daryl's early musical experiences began by playing trumpet in the school band, but by the time he was eleven he had discovered the guitar.
‘My brother was the one who was playing guitar first,’ he told me, ‘so I was kind of influenced by him originally.’
Stuermer's early listening included Elvis Presley, The Beatles and Buddy Holly, but during his mid-teens he became more involved with jazz guitar: ‘I started enjoying people like Joe Pass, Howard Roberts and Wes Montgomery,’ he confided.
But Daryl was also becoming aware of the British ‘progressive’ rock movement…
‘Groups like King Crimson were around when I was about 17, and I suppose the earliest progressive British groups I would have listened to were Procol Harum, The Nice, et cetera.
So I was probably enjoying British progressive rock at the same time I was listening to American jazz.’
Were you in bands around this time?
‘Yes, I was playing gigs on the club circuit in Milwaukee.
I had a band in town with my brother, covering music by Chick Corea, John McLaughlin and Herbie Hancock; those were our jazz fusion influences at the time, around ‘71 to about ‘74.
‘And groups would come down and sit in with us.
The promoter would say to bands, ‘There's a group you should come and see; they'll let people sit in.’
Frank Zappa's band came into town and actually sat in!
‘What happened was Chester Thompson brought them all down, because he had met me about a year prior to that and we just corresponded.
Then when he joined the Frank Zappa group he came down with almost every member of the band, and George Duke was at the keyboard…’
So that would be the Ruth Underwood, Tom Fowler manifestation of the Mothers?
‘Exactly, and they all sat in, the horn players too — Walt Fowler, Tom Fowler, Bruce, all the Fowler brothers.
Chester and Ralph Humphrey played drums because there were two drummers in The Mothers at that time.
At one point, George Duke said to me, ‘Why don't you stay up here for a minute — I want you to play.’
And at the end of the evening he said, ‘Give me your number, I'd like to have it for the future.’
‘Later on I took a vacation to Los Angeles and called George up and he said, ‘What hotel are you at right now?
I'd like to have your number; Jean-Luc Ponty is looking for a guitarist.’
So I waited at the ‘phone and Jean-Luc Ponty rang me, and two days later I auditioned at his house.
He told me that he liked my playing and that he would give me a ring when I got back to Milwaukee, and about three to four months later we actually formed a band and went on tour.
That was 1975.’
Were you aware of Genesis in those days?
‘I had heard of Genesis but I had never heard them.
I had never taken a record and listened to them, even though they were labelled ‘progressive’ rock.
By that time I wasn't so much listening to that kind of stuff — I had gone through it and stopped.
What's more I didn't realise Genesis was that type of band — I thought they were Black Sabbath!
‘So I wasn't actually that interested, but Jean-Luc Ponty gave me a tape and on one side was ‘A Trick Of The Tail’ and on the other side was ‘Wind And Wuthering’.
And he said, ‘Listen to this one track, this drummer.’
And the song was Squonk , and he said, ‘I love the feel of this drummer.
I'd like to see if this guy would play on my album.’
But he never rang Phil.
I think he just figured he wouldn't do it — he's in this big rock band and wouldn't think of doing it, although I think at the time Phil would have!
‘That was my first experience of Genesis and I loved it!
I didn't realise there was a band like that around.
They were playing music that was atmospheric and cinematic and all those things, so that was my introduction to it.’
So your first contact with the band was post-Peter Gabriel?
‘Yes, when I auditioned I hadn't heard any music with Peter Gabriel.’
How did you come to audition for the band?
‘Someone else who had auditioned for Genesis didn't get it, but actually recommended me.
So I got a call one day, saying that they'd like to audition me; they would fly me to New York and Mike Rutherford would audition me there.
‘They had sent me a tape of four songs; one was called Down And Out and Squonk was another.
The other two I don't remember.
Mike had a cassette that he ran through some speakers — they had the whole equipment set up for me.
I just brought my guitar, played a couple of minutes of each song and Mike Rutherford said, ‘That will be fine.
I think you're the one.’
And I thought ‘I didn't do anything!’
‘He told me they had auditioned a lot of people back home and that they had five names in America that they were auditioning, and I was the first that day.
He said, ‘I'll give you a call at around 5 or 6 o'clock at your hotel…
I just have to audition the other four, but I think you're the one.’
‘I think it was after we'd talked a bit and then played a bit our personalities seemed to go well together and our playing did as well.
But I was very surprised.
I had gone through auditions before and they were much tougher than that.
But Mike is a very intuitive and instinctive person and I think that's what he went on.’
What was the first thing you did with the band?
‘It was a world tour!
When I auditioned with Mike, he gave me a list of twenty-five songs to work on and I thought I had to learn them all in five days, because we were starting rehearsals only a week later!
‘So I got back home and took five songs a day and learned them.
I was frantically doing this and I showed up at rehearsal thinking they were going to do all the songs, but we didn't do anything until two or three days later!
It was mainly equipment setting up, and then when we did rehearse we only did a couple of songs a day.’
It must be strange playing live with the band, but having no say with the recording side.
‘What's interesting about it is that I have both worlds, because I play with Phil Collins’ band as well as Genesis, and with Phil I do all the records too.
‘Genesis is basically the three of them, writing in the studio and then recording.
So basically what happens is Mike Rutherford will ring me up after they've done the album and sent me a tape.
He will say, ‘On this song I think you should play bass and on this song I think you should play guitar…’
For instance, when we did Jesus He Knows Me on the newest album, he said ‘Live, I think we'll want a guitar solo at the end of this, and it has to be a kind of fast, frantic type of guitar solo.’
So he has me do that and on other songs he has me play bass.
A lot of their songs have so much personality that Mike has to be the one that plays it live.’
You also have a solo career…
‘Yes, and I'd actually like to do another album.
In fact I'm now in the process of putting a demo together.
As I said, I work with Phil's band and Genesis, and there's usually about a year off in between so I'd like to do another record of my own.’
What was the first one called?
‘Stepping Out’— it was more or less the record company's idea; it was like ‘stepping out’ of Genesis.’
Do you tour with your own material?
‘No, I just do that locally in my home town.
Every year I put a band together when I'm off and just play local clubs.’
Do you enjoy the contrast of playing the stadiums with Genesis and the smaller clubs with your own material?
‘It's great!
Sometimes I enjoy it more .
There again, that's the best of both worlds; I have a chance to go out and play stadiums and arenas and then I get to go home and go back to the way I was, although with a lot more experience under my belt.
‘There's a lot of good local players and we will do things from my album, we will cover other people's music, even do a couple of Genesis songs.
I play instrumentally the song Squonk — and I'll do a Pat Metheny song or an Eric Clapton tune.
I'll just run the whole gamut of styles of music.
What's your main guitar?
‘I use a Fender Stratocaster, the Eric Clapton model, and I also play some Steinberger guitars and a Yamaha bass.’
Of course, it was Genesis that got you into playing bass.
‘When I originally started with them I was playing bass on three or four songs.
Then, as Mike became more and more the lead guitarist, I played more and more bass.
He's playing guitar on all the albums, so mainly I play guitar on the songs Steve Hackett played guitar on, but those songs are gradually being pushed out, because they're much older.’
Entering the bass world would probably feel quite strange for a guitarist…
‘Yes, when I'm listening to the drummer I'm listening much more to the bass drum than I did before, because that's what I have to play with.’
What effect has it had on your guitar playing?
‘I'm not really sure.
I know that when I'm playing live, to go from the bass to the guitar is tough; to go from one song to the next and all of a sudden you put a guitar neck in your hand…your hand feels so big !
It hasn't hurt my playing any, though, but I have to practise more to keep myself limber.
I suppose it's kind of like going from drums to percussion.’
Has it focused you rhythmically?
‘I hope so.
I think I also write better bass lines than I did before, because when I'm writing with my sequencers and things I can think ‘bass’ very easily.’
What guitar amp do you use?
‘What I've been using for about the last five years are Seymour Duncan amps.
I use two separate cabinets, with one 12″ EV in each.’
That's the only amp on stage?
‘On stage I just use the Seymour Duncan and a Roland digital delay.
I don't use as many effects as I used to; it's pretty much straight guitar sound with delay.
Pretty boring, really!
For bass, I have a Trace Elliot amp.’
All the swapping around must be a bit of a nightmare.
‘What I don't like about swapping around is that while you're playing one song you're thinking about getting near the end and that you're going to have to swap over very quickly.
You can't concentrate on the music because you're thinking, ‘Okay, I turn off this button, then I have to press this thing, pull out the cord…’ and then the tech hands me the guitar…
It gets a little bit like a job.’
Do you have the one lead through an A/B box?
‘Yes, that's what happens.
In this case just swapping between bass and guitar is no problem.
In the old days there were a lot of acoustic songs, and a lot of switching.
Mike does more switching than anybody.
In the middle of the medley he'll go from bass to guitar and I'll be playing bass pedals when he's swapping!’
Have you considered a double neck?
‘No, because I never have to play both guitar and bass in the same song.’
You have used guitar synth in the past…
‘I haven't played guitar synth live for a long time, but what I use is a Photon MIDI converter, which I actually got about two weeks ago; I put it on one of my Steinberger guitars.
There's not much to say about it other than what I do is plug it in!
‘I do a lot of writing with it though.
And what's nice about it is that it tracks better than most.
It has a sensitivity wheel on the front, so you can adjust it to your type of playing quite easily.
You don't have to get inside it and keep adjusting and adjusting it like you do with some others.
It's very new to me; it's just too bad that they still haven't come up with the perfect guitar synth.
But I don't actually know if you can.’
What synth modules do you use?
‘I have a Korg M1R and a Korg Wave Station, and that's what I've been writing with.
But I also have a Roland D550 module and a Yamaha TG77.’
Mike Rutherford is known for dropping his top E string to D for a lot of his playing.
Do you?
‘No, and I'm glad I haven't had to!
When he used to write music he used to have different tunings for almost every song, but he's been doing this now for the last five to seven years — the E string tuned down to D. If I have to play guitar on a song where he's played guitar, I just learn it my way, using traditional tuning.’
It must make some chord fingerings awkward, though…
‘Right!
He writes the song that way so it fits in with his playing; he doesn't play guitar any other way now so it's become quite natural for him.
But I haven't had a problem yet.
If I had to I'd tune it down, but I don't play enough guitar on the Genesis tour for that to be a problem.
‘The Phil Collins band is a different kind of music entirely, and I do enjoy playing guitar all night.
With Genesis, one thing that makes it a lot of fun is that it's a smaller group.
It's probably an easier group to work with, because personality-wise the three guys have such a focus on what they do that it's very easy to work with them.
‘With Phil's band, he's basically trying to juggle nine or ten different people.
He's got a horn section, he's got singers and he's got the rhythm section.
What we normally do is get together with the rhythm section for about the first week or so — and it's just heaven because you're just a small band.
Then the next week you're adding a horn section, the week after that you're adding singers, so by that time it becomes quite a big production.’
How long do you rehearse with Genesis before a tour?
‘On average about four to five weeks.’
Are the rehearsals in England?
‘This time we rehearsed in England for three weeks and then flew to Houston, Texas, and rehearsed in the Goodyear Blimp hangar, because the screens the band use are so huge that we had to find a place big enough hold them!
We rehearsed there for about two weeks — it was about 90 degrees in there!’
The Genesis gigs at Earls Court are rounding off the tour…
‘When we played Knebworth during the summer, the band discussed the possibility of doing more dates in England.
We were originally going to do two shows at Knebworth, but we had to cancel one because they figured it would be too hard — we couldn't get the trucks there on time and get the show going when they wanted to do it.
Also, the stage was bigger than they'd first thought.
So they cancelled the first show and had the day off so they could set up all the gear.
‘So they thought that a lot of the people who couldn't go to Knebworth would maybe come to the shows if we did them in London — Earls Court and places like that.
They felt that basically we didn't play England enough — we did Knebworth and that was it.
‘What I like about the three guys is that they actually care about that.
It's not a big money-making thing — if they could break even they'd be happy.’
So after this tour, are you straight back to working with Phil Collins?
‘I'm pretty sure we are.
He hasn't been specific yet.
He knows that he'll be doing some writing and he's going to be doing an album next year.
I don't think we'll be straight into it, though; I think we'll have some time off.
‘So what I'm doing now is putting my demo together, to start shopping it around.
But the way the economy is right now — all over the world, not just here — it's very hard to get a record deal because the companies are afraid to sign anyone.’
When the dust had cleared that night following Genesis' storming two-hour set in front of the party faithful, I stood in the foyer once again and reflected.
I'd sort of missed the music of the band I once knew, so maybe there had been one hippy in attendance, after all…
What's more I didn't realise Genesis was that type of band — I thought they were Black Sabbath!
I just brought my guitar, played a couple of minutes of each song and Mike Rutherford said, ‘That will be fine.
I think you're the one.’
And I thought ‘I didn't do anything!’
To go from the bass to the guitar is tough; to go from one song to the next and all of a sudden you put a guitar neck in your hand…your hand feels so big!
GENESIS EXODUS Anthony Phillips
In the beginning was Anthony Phillips.
Phillips begat Hackett, Hackett begat Stuermer.
Since his Exodus from Genesis in 1970, Phillips has released seventeen solo albums, the latest of which is volume eight in his ‘Private Parts And Pieces’ project, entitled ‘New England’.
Anthony Phillips may have quit Genesis twenty-two years ago, but he has never stopped exploring the musical landscape that was once uniquely their own.
Described as ‘a very English sort of whimsy’, his music is rich with 12-string washes of colour set against gentle keyboards and shuns the more industrial stadium rock extravaganza that is Genesis now.
I wondered what inspired the young Phillips to pick up the guitar?
‘Hank Marvin.
I was at one of these awful prep schools, stuck in the middle of the countryside and pop music was a real lifeline.
I just copied the Shadows stuff on acoustic guitar, then The Beatles followed pretty quickly, and then The Stones.
I got a second-hand Strat for about £70.
To have a red Strat like Hank Marvin's at the age of thirteen was something!’
On to Charterhouse, the public school at which the first stirrings of what was to become Genesis began…
‘Genesis wasn't really a group to start with; it didn't really exist at Charterhouse.
What became Genesis was a group of songwriters that used to gather around the piano.
‘Gabriel used to sing a bit and Mike Rutherford and I started to write together.
We did some demos and we asked Tony to come along and play keyboards.
We got our first publishing contract through that, but we were just signing as songwriters and we made the odd grotesque, poppy single!
‘The writing was a weird mixture, because having gone through The Beatles and The Stones, Mike and I were very influenced by the blues era.
Going round seeing people like Peter Green — I followed all the early incarnations of John Mayall around — was just a fantastic experience at that time.
‘There was a guy at school who had a 12-string guitar and the sound just blew my mind, and so I got one.
After that point, I started to write some much more original stuff and we began to find a style of our own.’
How old were you when ‘From Genesis To Revelation’ came out?
‘Sixteen or Seventeen — I was a bit younger than the others.
We did ‘From Genesis To Revelation’ in the summer of ‘68.
It was great fun to be rehearsing at friends’ parents' country houses, doing a week here and a week there.
We ended up in a basement flat in Earls Court, which sounds grotty but of course at the time that was wonderful — a basement flat in Earl's Court was the thing!’
By the time the next album, ‘Trespass’, came out things were beginning to gel…
‘The thing that people don't know is that there was a horrendous gap in between.
The first album came out and nothing happened; we weren't sure whether to go on the road and everybody was very depressed.
‘There was nice stuff written during that era but it never saw the light of day.
So basically there were two years between those two albums, and an enormous transformation from a group of naive songwriters to a fully-fledged band.
There was some nice material which is gold-dust to the devout Genesis fans.
‘Live, we did a couple of things from ‘Genesis To Revelation’ and we did quite a lot of very gentle acoustic things which didn't last.
We gradually forged a more convincing set.
We did things like ‘The Knife’; that came fairly early on but got modified later.’
I hate myself for asking, but why did you leave?
‘Too many strong minds.
You can't have that many strong minds in one group.
You often get this if you have a very strong guitarist or a strong keyboard player — you end up with a group without one or the other; they just can't co-exist.
It doesn't necessarily mean that they're unscrupulous in the way that they get their own way; they just have very clear ideas and it's impossible for them to see it any other way.’
After leaving the band, Phillips plunged himself headlong into studying music…
‘I never could get to grips with classical music at all at school.
I think it was because it was too associated with the establishment.
I heard a piece by Sibelius and I thought, ‘This is wonderful — I want to be able to have this skill.’
I was probably reacting in part because leaving Genesis was a sad note.
There was a part of me that didn't want it, and there was a part of me that was still bound up in it.’
All this led to the release of the first solo album…
‘The Geese and the Ghost’ was quite successful once it had eventually gone out.
The record company tried to force me to do more songy-type albums and it wasn't really me, trying to be very commercial.
So as a sideline I managed to persuade them to put out an album of the more acoustic stuff.
That's when ‘Sides’ came out.’
I wondered what initiated the ‘Private Parts And Pieces’ series.
‘It seemed to be a lovely idea once the first one was put out to try and do a series.
There was never any budget and so I was just using stuff that I'd already recorded here and there — hence the roughness of it.
I would always try and choose pieces which I thought had a bit of atmosphere and mood, a passion which made up for the lack of presentation!’
In common with his former school chum Mike Rutherford, Ant (as he likes to be known) has a weakness for special tunings…
‘I've got a book of about thirty!
We started off in the old days, just tuning the top string down to D. It's funny, but we used to do that before we'd tune the bottom ones down.
The open chord of E minor would have the 7th at the top and then if you play A7, you get the D and C sharp between the top two strings — that's a really nice quality, I love that.’
That explains a lot about early Genesis chords.
‘That probably explains quite a lot of it!
You've got that constant semitone — that distended quality which is lovely.
Even in the early days we used to do other slightly more bizarre tunings — then they got a lot more bizarre!
‘Mike used to find very odd tunings.
I worked a lot in one which I used to call D4 — basically taking the second string down to A and then sometimes taking the third string down to F sharp — open D. But sometimes keeping the third string tuned to G. I also used to tune to D minor sometimes and take the F sharp down to F, but sometimes keeping the E at the top so you'd have a ninth.’
Have you got an electric 12-string?
‘Yes, the terrible thing is I hardly ever play it!
I was in New York and managed to get a Rickenbacker, a white one, absolutely gorgeous, in that ‘77 or ‘78 era.
I used to have it in stereo with a Dynacomp and an early BOSS chorus — a real monster sound!’
I wondered what Ant thought about the path Genesis had followed since his departure.
‘I tend to listen to odd things they do but not in any depth.
I would say I tend to listen to Peter Gabriel more.
He's gone into a slightly different area — very much his own.
I've got a lot of respect for the boy!
‘But I'm not convinced that Genesis are doing stuff which is breaking new ground so much now.
But you can't blame them: they've got this huge sort of industry around them.
That's the thing about becoming incredibly successful — it's less easy to experiment.’
Moon Double Cutaway A custom guitar from renowned Glasgow maker Jimmy Moon.
Review by David Mead.
Jimmy Moon is an independent builder and repairer whose workshops have been in Glasgow since 1985 and before that on the Isle of Arran, off the West coast of Scotland.
Originally, Jimmy was building mainly dulcimers and acoustic guitars, but soon came to recognise the demand for quality hand-built electrics.
Basically, Moon will build anything you want, with whatever hardware, body shape, neck profile or pickups you desire.
It is always a problem for a custom builder to supply a review model because, obviously, they don't tend to carry stock, as such.
This particular model was built to demonstrate at shows and has been generally lent, hired out, pawed, mauled and knocked about as a result.
There are several dings and dents in the body where the guitar has suffered the slings and arrows of a curious public.
You might just catch these blemishes in the photo and think I'm being overly generous about a dodgy finish.
Not so: I'm simply assessing the overall quality of the guitar above and beyond its ever-so-slightly battle-scarred state.
Construction
All through this review, I must keep reminding myself that virtually everything I see before me is in fact a variable.
If I don't like the neck profile, for instance, then fine: if Moon were building one specifically for my own use, I could have whatever profile I wanted.
Also, the guitar has no official model name or number.
‘Double Cutaway’ sounds a little plain Jane, but the owner could of course christen it with whatever apt title came to mind.
The body on the Moon is made from mahogany, with a birdseye maple top.
Unfortunately, the red lacquer is slightly too opaque to do the maple much justice.
My view is, if you've got it, flaunt it!
I'm a sucker for pretty wood finishes and would probably have requested a much more translucent look than the one I see here.
Anyway, this mahogany/maple combination is currently my favourite recipe for guitar construction.
I like the warmth of tone that comes with mahogany and the slight glimmer of brightness that the maple top adds into the bargain.
It's a tried and trusted construction, let's face it.
The set-in neck is maple, with an ebony fingerboard that's loaded with twenty-four biggish frets.
Scale length checks in at the Fender-like 25½″.
The diminutive size of the headstock suits the overall slender appearance of this guitar perfectly.
The inlaid mother-of-pearl crescent moon logo looks the part, too.
The only thing that lets it down in this area is a slightly off-centre truss rod cover.
The tuners are the Sperzel locking variety, finished in gold, and the nut is graphite.
More designers are going down the locking tuner route and it's something which I personally welcome; it does away with that lumpiness at the nut end of the fingerboard and offers up a more traditional look into the bargain.
The whole instrument has been edge-bound in attractive ivoroid, which is destined to turn slightly yellow with the passing of time.
Modern finishes tend not to encourage the ‘nicotine’ yellowing of binding any more and the chronically nostalgic will no doubt miss it.
The tremolo is by ABM and this model features a ‘trem setter’ device.
Simply put, this replaces one of the springs in the rear cavity with an adjustable ‘piston’ which is set to return the tremolo more accurately to its standing position, hence keeping the instrument's tuning more stable.
It's certainly possible to do a fair modicum of string bending on the Moon without suffering from the usual de-tuning syndrome which afflicts most floating trems.
It does have the side-effect of making things feel stiffer and less responsive, though, and I'd probably be inclined to leave this item off my own custom shopping list.
The pickups are Bartolini's 1C models, although let me stress once again that all personal preferences will be gladly catered for at the Moon workshop.
The controls are standard volume and tone, with a three-way switch to select one, the other or both, in the fine tradition of twin humbucker guitars.
However, Moon have also added a third rotary which is in fact a five-way switch.
PRS and Patrick Eggle have revived this fashion, which was predominant once upon a time on Gibson's ES345/355 models.
The Moon's five-way does the following: position one is straightforward humbuckers; position two coil taps both pickups, leaving just the outer coils operational; position three activates only the inner coils; position four gives you the humbuckers in parallel and five puts them out of phase.
All this should add up to an exceedingly varied tonal palette indeed.
In Use
Idle strumming on this guitar is a delight — it feels really very good.
Having stated several times that everything about the Moon is a variable, I'm not about to comment on its form.
But what becomes apparent straight away is that a considerable amount of craftsmanship has gone into its building.
You can sometimes discern quality in an instrument immediately upon picking it up and that's certainly the case here.
The strings feel very bendable and a low, choke-free action tells me that all is well with the neck.
Through an amplifier, the Moon is short on surprises.
Everything sounds very much as I anticipated.
The guitar's clean tone is precise and toneful — a very good balance between lows, mids and highs.
Playing with the selectors challenged my mathematics as I tried to work out the exact number of available tones, but let's just say there should be something here for virtually every style of player.
And if you just happen to think of one that isn't here — just tell Jimmy and I'm sure he'll accommodate you.
Distortion tones are thick and wholesome or thin and wiry, depending upon your selection, but once again, most bases are covered.
My own preferences tend toward the simple and straightforward as far as switching is concerned.
I believe in coil-tapping because I like single coil-type sounds, but all this parallel/series switching is something I'd probably avoid on my own guitar.
The trem works well, even with extreme whammery.
That slight stiffness I mentioned earlier takes a little getting used to, but no more than a slightly eager clutch, say, in a new car.
Conclusion
Summing up a custom-made guitar, especially when it was made for no-one in particular, is a difficult task at the best of times.
But I like this guitar for a number of reasons.
It is well-built, great to play and it sounds good, too.
There is enough in evidence here to convince me that if I were to submit a checklist to Jimmy Moon the resulting guitar would be a very fine instrument indeed.
And few could ask for more than that.
Award Quad-FX Loop Expander Loop the loop with Award Design's new mini-mixer.
Review by Eddie Allen.
The problem of mixing incompatible effect units through an amplifier's send and return loop can give the guitarist a giant-sized headache.
But help is at hand.
The problem stems from the fact that all effects devices, whether digital or analogue, rack-mounting or the compact variety, all have one thing in common: they generate noise.
What's more, they're probably incompatible with one another, so connecting them in series (one after the other) is going to allow the noise from the first to be amplified and added to by the second.
And so it goes on, the more units you connect.
Another problem of compatibility (or the lack of it) can manifest itself when attempting to use effects with an amp's effects loop: older valve amps or budget combos often don't even have them!
If there is no loop on your amp, you'll find that passing a guitar signal through a bunch of effects and into the amp's input degrades the true signal to a point where the preamp struggles to compensate for it.
Try hooking up all your effects into the front of your amp and then compare the signal with that of the guitar going straight in, and you'll see what I mean.
There are various devices on the market to help solve this problem, and the Basingstoke-based Award Design company have produced the Quad-FX, which not only mixes and balances effects in parallel (in effect, each one goes in individually, not one behind the other), but will also make all your processors and stomp boxes compatible, and offers adjustment of the input and output levels so each unit lines up individually with your amp's effects loop.
And that's not all.
The Quad-FX will also serve to boost under-powered effects loops; drive four preamps or combos from one guitar without signal loss; add gain boost to a guitar; cross-feed and combine other signals into your setup for monitoring (ideal for mixing in tapes, CD players or drum machines to your amp, either for solo performance or rehearsal).
And even that's not all…
If you have a home recording setup, the Quad-FX will expand the number of insert points on 4- or 8-track recorders; add extra inputs to your mixer (4 in stereo, 8 in mono); act as a DI box for bass and guitar or anything else that requires a high impedance input section; work as a 4-way distribution amp and an 8-mono or 4-stereo into 2-line mixer (both at the same time!); match analogue effects pedals to mixer insert points; convert your hi-fi into a 4-stereo-input monitor system; and even expand a power amp's inputs to accept signals from up to four separate stereo sources.
Finally, it will serve as a general purpose mini line mixer.
For this review I'll concentrate on the guitar effects/mixer side of the Quad-FX, as space is limited.
The unit sits in any 1U rack space and all connections are made on the back panel.
Here there's a single mono input, followed by four mono effects sends and then four groups of stereo effect returns.
Next come a pair of stereo outputs for the effects mix only, followed by another stereo pair for the main mix (dry signal plus effects).
Power comes in via an external mains adaptor, but watch out — only the supplied adaptor will do the job.
That's it for the back, which is surprising really, considering what the Quad-FX is capable of doing.
The front panel is where the mixing action is, starting with the input control pot on the left.
This features plus or minus adjustment from the unity gain (straight signal level) point, with a peak indicator and a sensitivity button to increase the signal coming into the Quad-FX from low level processors or instruments.
Next come the four effects return trim pots, again with plus or minus from the unity gain point, and these are used to fine-mix the level of the effects returning to the Quad-FX's four stereo loops.
Return pair No.4 can be switched to mono via a push-button alongside its return trim pot.
Master level controls for the effects signal and dry signal allow overall mixing and balancing of the two, after the individual levels have been established.
There's also a phase inversion switch for correcting old processors, which might have problems with their input and output phasing, although I'd admit this is a very rare case.
Finally, there's a master volume pot with its own unity gain point and a peak level indicator to ensure the output signal is below distortion point.
The mains switch and LED add the finishing touches.
In Use
One of the things claimed for the Quad-FX is its ability to take an amp's effects loop — one which won't line up with effects units — and correct the levels so it will.
By chance there happened to be a 12 year-old MkII Boogie combo in the Guitarist studio with just such a loop.
So the Quad-FX was duly hooked up.
I decided to go overboard with processors and connected three digital multi-effects units and a mono delay.
The first problem was to work out the correct overall send and return levels, but with the Quad-FX's input and master volume set on unity gain I found the processors worked at roughly the same settings anyway, so there wasn't much need to tweak the levels.
It was more important to set the processors' internal patch levels so that when switching between processors the levels still matched.
This done, I set each processor to a different effect and balanced the quantity of each effect coming into the Quad-FX with the four trim pots.
I have to say the results were incredibly heartening, and after a minimal amount of extra tweaking with the Quad-FX's master controls the Boogie was powering all the effects individually, with no extra noise and no unwanted distortion at all.
I then switched all the processors on at once, each with a different patch to produce a compressed, pitch shifted sound with reverb and a really big delay…and it all worked!
Switching between the different combinations of effects and processors produced the same results, and apart from inventing some really stupid effect chains I found plenty of interesting combinations; these could be mixed with the dry signal without losing any of the basic guitar sound.
Of course, switching between the digital processors has to be done via a MIDI foot-controller, so if analogue effects are to be used as well , that could mean booking some tap dancing lessons!
The bottom line is, however, that an amp with an effects loop which couldn't be used properly before, not only handles one processor but can feed four with no trouble at all and with no signal corruption.
Conclusion
Quite how useful a device like the Quad-FX can be isn't really obvious until you try one out.
It's certainly the way to mix effects, help an inefficient effects loop and even expand a basic recording setup.
But there's even more to it than I've already told you.
Connect it up to your hi-fi and you can plug in your guitar preamp without running the risk of blowing your speakers while you play along to your tape, CD, record player — or all three simultaneously if you like!
For such a simple device the list of possible uses is vast, and although the Quad-FX isn't the only device of this type on the market, it's certainly one of the best.
And it's British! n
Spec List
Lakewood Acoustoicube 120 watts of ‘acoustic’ power through an 8″ speaker.
Rick Batey asks, ‘Is size really important?’
There's a junkshop near where I live that sells TVs, videos, air rifles, fishing rods, car radios, outdated hi-fis, cheap guitars and all the general paraphernalia of unfortunate people's overdrawn lives.
Strangely enough, they consistently demand outrageous prices for things like basket-case Eko Rangers and Westone basses that have obviously been used to fell fair-sized pine trees, but they also have the laughably ignorant if highly convenient habit of pricing guitar amplifiers on the simple basis of how large they are.
So who knows?
Maybe one day they'll have a Lakewood Acousticube in the window, and I'll score £1,100 worth of amp for the price of a pair of All-Stars.
Built in Germany, the Lakewood Acousticube is intended to be the ultimate compact amplifier for any form of electrified acoustic guitar, whether miked, piezo'd or bugged.
At 13″ high, 13″ wide and 11″ deep, it's about the same size as a Polytone Minibrute or a 40-watt Roland Cube, but don't be fooled; it weighs a healthy 29lbs and the power section pushes 120 watts into 8 ohms — in this case an eight-inch coaxial speaker with a separate tweeter.
The cabinet is fully enclosed, very chunkily built, and finished in a matt industrial-type grey paint rather like ultra-fine wet'n'dry sandpaper.
There are four rubber feet on the bottom, and another four on the side, opposite an excellent, deeply-recessed handle that wouldn't look out of place on a 4x12″ cab.
However, there are no protective corners.
Features
The Acousticube might be small but it sports a heck of a lot of knobs and sockets.
It's a two-channel amp, for a start.
Channel 1 has individual cut/boost controls for bass, mid and treble, a ‘gain' control for setting the right input level, a ‘clip’ light to indicate when you're driving the input too hard and two push-push mini-buttons: one for a special ‘mid’EQ preset, and another that alters the input stage for the best results with different pickups.
Thus ‘Line’ is for active electro-acoustics or magnetic-pickup guitars, and ‘Hi’is for guitars with standard bugs or undersaddle pickups wired straight to the output jack, with no onboard tone controls.
Channel 2 is essentially the same, but there's no ‘mid’ control, no EQ preset button and the tone controls have been honed down to just bass and treble.
This time the mini-button selects between ‘Line’— the same as before — and ‘Mic’, for when you're amplifying your guitar with a dynamic or a condenser-type microphone.
Finally, on the front panel, there's the master volume knob and the controls for the onboard Alesis reverb/delay unit — a sixteen-notch rotary knob and a ‘return’ control for setting the required level of effect, from the tiniest hint of echo through to a nightmare in a bathtub.
Around the Acousticube's rear, the dominant feature is a large heatsink to help dispel the warmth of transistors cooking away in the virtually sealed box.
Just above it is a block of plastic which combines a Euro-style power socket, a fuse carrier and the main power switch — which should be easy to find in the dark, as it's directly above the mains lead.
The rear panel is divided into four areas.
The ‘Auxiliary’ section has three jacks: ‘Tuner’, which can be used either for plugging in an electronic tuner or as a non-effects direct out; ‘Phones’which is self-explanatory; and ‘Mastercontrol’, a special socket for use with a volume pedal — very useful for electro-acoustics without onboard volume controls, or even violins or mandolins.
The second section, ‘Output’, contains an XLR DI out, plus ‘Preamp L’ and ‘Preamp R’— more of which later.
The third section, ‘Switch’, has a socket to take a double footswitch for turning the internal or any external effects on and off, and there are two more of those push-push buttons, this time for assigning effects to channel 1 and channel 2.
And finally, the ‘Effect 2’ section contains the effects loop, a knob to control the level of the external effects and a mini-button for ‘series’or ‘parallel’mode.
Essentially, this either bungs the whole output through the effects loop (good if you're using EQs, gates or compressors) or else splits the output in two, sending one half past the effects loop and straight to the power stage (best, apparently, for when you have a multi-processor in the loop).
To backtrack slightly, the ‘Preamp R’ output is also the output for Lakewood's matching powered Acousticube ‘monitor’.
Although we don't have one for review, the idea is obviously to make full use of the stereo Alesis delay on gigs small enough not to need further amplification.
Their use of the term ‘monitor’ as opposed to‘satellite amp’is rather confusing, though.
Obviously, having two amps means you'll hear yourself better on stage, but I would have thought that a performer would prefer actual monitoring or foldback to come from a PA source (ie. what the audience is hearing) rather than a backline source.
Anyway, the ‘monitor’ also sounds as though it will add considerably to the overall cost.
Performance
The first job when plugging into the Acousticube is to set the ‘gain' controls to the proper level for a strong, clean sound.
I should say at this point that the channel 1 ‘clip’ indicator on this example doesn't work, although you can't blame the British distributors, as we were in such a rush to lay hands on the Acousticube that they didn't have time to check it (also, pushing the Line/Mic button on channel 2 produces a large bang through the speaker).
But anyway, if it were working properly, the ‘Cube's ‘clip’ light would only come on when you were actually overdriving the input stage, which is not as helpful as the Trace Acoustic version, which lights up green and occasionally flashes red to tell you when you've got the input level exactly right.
With the Lakewood, there's a little more guesswork involved.
The basic sound of the Acousticube is excellent, considering the size of the cabinet.
I tried a variety of electro-acoustics as well as a solid electric guitar through the amp and was impressed by the clarity and purity of the sound.
I'd also say that the 8″ coaxial speaker with tweeter combination gives a bigger, more natural tone than the Trace's multiple 5″ driver units, which can sound a little tizzy and synthetic to some ears.
Acoustic combos might be designed specifically for acoustic guitar, but that doesn't mean you can wave feedback farewell.
Using an Ovation, hardly the most ‘live’ guitar in the business, I found that feedback on the undamped D string set in with the gain on 4 and the master volume on 5, which surprised me.
Cutting the mids helped knock out the troublesome frequencies, but the sound did suffer, since it's often the mid frequencies that you need to increase at higher volumes to prevent that harsh, trebly electro-acoustic sound.
Unlike the Trace, the Acousticube does not feature an adjustable notch filter to cut the worst feedback point, and I think this is a serious omission.
The ‘mid EQ’ preset on channel 2 has the effect of tightening up the sound while adding a little more in the way of mid/top frequencies — a bit like playing a Strat and switching between neck pickup only and middle'n'bridge.
It's possibly a subtler, more usable effect than Trace's ‘shape’ switch, but then the Acousticube, being a single-speaker combo, lacks Trace's excellent ‘speakers out of phase’option.
Finally, we compared the three different ways the Acousticube can be plugged into a desk, and we found some problems.
The ‘tuner’ output is fine — mono, of course, but post-EQ and pre-master output, as it should be; in other words, changing the master volume on the amp does not affect the level of the signal to the desk.
Next, the balanced-line (therefore also mono) XLR is also post-EQ and pre-master output, but it has much,much more gain than the ‘tuner’ out.
It's also rumbly and hissy, and you'd expect the DI to be virtually silent.
We managed to decrease the noise by backing off the low-mid rumble point and the 11kHz hiss by about 13dB, but to attenuate the DI output down to a reasonable level we'd have had to use a separate DI box, and that means making up a special XLR-to-jack lead.
Lastly, the ‘Pre L’ and ‘Pre R’outs are the Acousticube's only stereo outs, so they'd expect to see considerable use.
But, bizarrely, these outs are post -master volume, which means that tweaking your on-stage level is going to screw up your PA mix.
Conclusion
On the good side, the Lakewood amp is crammed with features and it essentially sounds really good.
On the bad side, the lack of a notch filter is unfortunate and there are a number of faults — the ‘clip’ indicators, the noisy switch and the badly imbalanced outputs — which indicate the need for some re-thinking at the factory.
Those problems aside, Acousticubes might prove to be good, quality nerve-centres for a touring, pro musician's setup.
But for amateurs, semi-pros or just anyone with less money to burn, it's not so simple.
If you're convinced that an acoustic amp is the way to go — and not everyone is convinced, by the way — then you'd have to compare the Lakewood against the £799 Trace Acoustic TA-100R and perhaps the even more affordable, if more basic, Carlsbro Sherwood.
And, ultimately, you're bound to realise that this amount of money would go a long, long way towards buying your own small PA system — cabs, mixer amp, processor, parametric, vocal mike and all.
Now there's a decision…
Neil Murray TOO GOOD TO HURRY…
Neil Murray has certainly earned his bass playing colours, but here he tells Gibson Keddie why he can never find a sound he's really satisfied with…
Playing trombone isn't the obvious way to start a bass playing career.
At least it's certainly not the method recommended in the current crop of instructional books and videos relating to the subject.
But that was how it started for Neil Murray, freelance bassist to some of the weightier names in rock…
‘When I was about eleven or twelve I was more into drums than anything else,’ admits Neil, ‘but wasn't particularly good.
I studied piano, too, then trombone, but it wasn't until someone at school turned up with a guitar which had been ‘converted’ into a bass that I really thought about the instrument.
I proceeded to borrow it and, working on the principle that possession was nine-tenths of the law, I made a bass in the woodwork shop at school, ‘borrowing’ some of the parts from the converted one to complete mine.
I wanted it to look as Gibson EB3-ish as possible, Jack Bruce being my hero at that point.
However, due to a lack of refinements such as a truss rod, the neck was so warped that I couldn't put any frets on it, and so I was introduced to the world of fretless bass at an early age…’
Additional, and equally radical inspiration for the aspiring bassist arrived slightly later on, in the form of the Mahavishnu Orchestra and the unusual bass-playing talents of Stanley Clarke.
‘The Mahavishnu thing was such an obvious follow-on from Cream, Hendrix and Zeppelin — exciting and powerful music, very different and difficult to play, I suppose, but certainly challenging.’
After leaving school, Neil came to London to join a course in graphic design.
Since a youthful Murray hadn't moved to London primarily to find the bass player's Eldorado, how had he become involved in the live music scene?
‘Although I didn't have any live playing experience — I'd never done the youth club/dance band/pub/club thing — I still felt that I was technically quite good, having evolved my style from playing along to records.
And at that time I rather fancied being involved in something with jazz-rock elements.
Just after I'd finished at college, I went along to someone's party and I remember telling this girl who I was chatting up that I played bass.
She seemed most impressed, and said that I should meet her boyfriend who was looking for a bass player, and so I joined his jazz-rock band back in 1973 and we did some touring in Britain.
‘Then I went to the States to record and tour with another band and, when I returned, a bassist friend had left Cozy Powell's ‘Hammer’ band when Cozy was charting regularly, and so I took over from him.
So, by my twentieth gig I was playing the Rainbow in Finsbury Park with Cozy, supporting Suzi Quatro, and was more than a bit nervous.
Again, although I felt my ability allowed me to play well enough, I think my lack of live experience held me back a bit, and it wasn't until the gig with Whitesnake that I felt totally comfortable with the situation.’
Assuming that the home-made EB3 had signally failed to cut any jazz-rock mustard, which direction, instrument-wise, had Neil taken after that?
‘When I came down to London, I finally got myself a decent bass, a Fender Mustang, then started changing pickups to get a raunchier, more distorted sound.
When I played, people who heard what I was doing and liked it recommended that I should get a Precision, which I eventually did, but I couldn't seem to get enough of my own playing character to come through with it.
I thought the sound a bit boring, and still do.
Then again, I find a ‘normal’ bass sound rather dull and tedious; I always prefer players with some colour and individuality in their sound, usually with some distortion.
As an obvious example, I would cite Billy Sheehan, because he has a distinctive style using essentially a Precision, now a Yamaha, coupled with a slightly distorted sound.’
And what of John Deacon, for whom Neil has deputised on recent occasions?
‘A good player, but again he uses a clean sound, which isn't my thing.
Conversely, many players get caught up with the fashionable aspect and spend ages learning how to, say, play slap impressively, then get a gig with a band only to find that there isn't a context where it can be used.
So you have to beware of blind alleys like that; from personal experience, there are loads of these styles that no-one has ever asked me to play.’
After Neil's stint with Cozy Powell's band, he changed tack, adopting a more jazz-rock leaning with his next band, Colosseum II.
This featured the dynamic talents of a young Gary Moore who, at the time, was involved in a dalliance with Thin Lizzy.
Obviously uncertain as to his own musical direction, Moore recorded with Lizzy, but was not a full-time member of the band, which at the time featured Brian Robertson and Scott Gorham.
Moore felt at the time that jazz-rock offered a more obvious challenge to his talents, and the Colosseum line up, apart from Neil and Gary, included Don Airey on keys and Jon Hiseman on drums.
This line-up recorded a couple of albums and toured successfully in many countries.
Did he benefit from that band in terms of technique and ability?
‘In terms of Colosseum, I was required to hold everything in its place, because Jon Hiseman was drumming up a storm, being very busy, as was Gary Moore on guitar and, to an extent, Don Airey on keyboards.
So there was no way I was going to be able to step out as well.
In terms of actual technique, perhaps I wasn't up to it anyway.
‘In the case of Colosseum II, and early Whitesnake, in order to even be audible, I went to using flatwound then groundwound strings, which are physically very hard to play.
I don't have the hand strength to play really fast things on them, and so that would have slowed me down anyway.
‘My contribution ended up as a very defined, but audible sound.
If you listen to early Whitesnake records the bass is quite light in the mix, but it's a very definite sound, and the strings had a lot to do with that.
If I'd wanted to really zoom around the fretboard I would've opted for a medium/short-scale bass with really light, roundwound strings.
‘In general, I think it's slightly unfair when you've got someone who's considered a virtuoso player such as Mark King — he's obviously very talented, but his basses are so incredibly easy to play that it seems a bit of a cheat to me.
And you can't get a big powerful sound out of a bass that's fitted with 30–95 gauge strings, because it's actually more of a tenor guitar.
My bass, for instance, has a .040″ 1st on it and I can bend it quite easily.
Don't get me wrong, I like flashy bass playing and it would be wrong for me to sound as if I didn't approve; it's just that these kind of situations are always a trade-off.
I also like simple lines if done with feel and melody — McCartney being a prime example of that type of player — although the context is equally important and McCartney's style was exactly right for The Beatles.’
The jazz-rock element became more ‘progressive’ with Neil's next band, National Health, which featured Bill Bruford and Dave Stewart (the other one!).
National Health may have been jazz-rock, but it wasn't the searing explosion of sound that described Mahavishnu at its best.
Was that the situation Neil wanted to be in?
‘The bands I ended up in at that time were very English, and a bit too cerebral.
It seemed, too, that the fusion thing had run its course and become fuzak, which made for too easy listening.
The sort of things I was doing seemed to be difficult for difficult's sake; it was like, ‘If anybody likes it, then it has to be crap!’
‘And that's why I was pleased when the Whitesnake opportunity came along in ‘77, because there was more feel to their music then.
It offered the chance to be melodic and even funky within the context of the group, but still powerful and aggressive.’
The late '80s saw Neil join Brit-based Japanese metallers Vow Wow, followed by Murray moving into the somewhat more credible Black Sabbath camp, alongside Sab mainman Tony Iommi, Cozy Powell on drums and vocalist Tony Martin.
This line-up recorded ‘Tyr’, and an international tour ensued.
However, with record companies realising the appeal and financial benefits of bands like Sabbath having a line-up as close to the original as possible, Neil found himself out in the cold after Geezer Butler was reunited with his former partners.
By 1991 Neil was involved in an increasing variety of projects, including a stint with former Whitesnake sparring partners in the Moody/Marsden Band.
‘I'd have liked to have done more with M/M because they're out on tour now.
But, as ever, it never rains but it pours and typically I had to say ‘no’ to that in order to do Brian May's gig.
I've done various things like that with Bernie Marsden on a casual basis; we do the gig at the Hard Rock Café every summer when they have the Wimbledon tennis players' party where McEnroe and Cash get up and play.
Bernie's in charge of that band and it's a really fun thing to do.’
Neil was also drafted in on bass for the Guitar Legends festival in Seville, alongside Brian May, Joe Satriani, Steve Vai et al , not to mention ‘doing’The Stonk , the charity single which went to No 1.
The association with Brian May's solo endeavours has proven particularly fruitful.
At the time of rehearsals for Freddie Mercury's tribute concert at Wembley, former Queen bass player John Deacon strangely opted to go off on holiday, leaving Neil to dep with the band.
Thereafter, having performed on Brian's ‘Back To The Light’ LP, Neil was pencilled in to do the tour…
‘After Brian's album had been recorded, a tour had been tentatively planned, but to have a band sitting around doing nothing until the album came out wasn't realistic.
Nothing was confirmed until recently, and even these gigs we've just done in South America were only a testing ground to see how Brian would feel being the lead singer and mainman in general.
It's gone well, and so there are plans to do quite a lot of touring next year, starting in March, as Brian's album doesn't come out in the States until January or February.
A few months ago Cozy put a solo album out, and a band together which I'm also part of, with a few gigs coming up in Germany now, and then more round Europe in January.
‘The band includes the singer who we played alongside in Black Sabbath, Tony Martin.
It's combining forces really; with Cozy's thing it would have been mostly instrumental, including Cozy's ‘Greatest Hits’, but with Tony involved we can legitimately do some Sabbath songs which he co-wrote, as we effectively have three quarters of the line-up.
‘But it's been a complicated situation; we've had to cancel or reschedule gigs with Cozy's band because of Brian's thing, and there was a further complication…
Tony was supposed to have been singing in a Black Sabbath ‘reunion’ in the States, which didn't happen for him in the end, but that gave us some breathing space.
At one point we were going to have to travel straight from Rio to Germany — a technical nightmare with equipment, not to mention the fact that it's physically shattering.’
It's stating the obvious to say that Brian May could probably open doors to any country he wanted to play in.
So why was South America the choice for his initial gigs?
‘Queen were the first big band to really plunge into the South American market, back in 1981,’ explains Neil.
‘They've got many contacts there and it was quite easy for the management to arrange gigs.
We played a couple of club dates, one of which was filmed as the next video for ‘Back To The Light’, and then we did three smallish stadium gigs with Joe Cocker and the B-52s, and they went very well too.
‘If it is full steam ahead for next year, I'd predict that it won't be a marathon slog, although we'll probably try to do as many countries as possible.
In the States it would be preferable to do a set number of smaller theatre-type places, rather than slogging round for ever as a support band.
But I don't really know exactly what is planned.’
Another session Neil played on recently was with Free/Bad Company singer Paul Rogers…
‘There's a film which will be released here soon, a Hitchcock-type thriller called ‘Doctor Giggles’, and we did a remake of an old song for it written by Moon Martin, called Bad Case Of Loving You .
Simon Kirke was on drums and the guitarist was a guy called Johnstae Hale, who's American and lives over here.
That was good fun — another item for the CV!’
Known for being something of a perfectionist when it comes to his equipment, Murray had Martin Petersen, whose work has been favourably reviewed in Guitarist , build him a bass last year.
Is this still Neil's main guitar?
‘Certainly.
The Petersen bass is the one at the moment, and I'm fairly happy with it, although when you get to work with something you realise what its strengths and weaknesses are.
As I mentioned earlier, when you get something that plays really easily and fast you won't necessarily get the best sound, and so on.
At the moment the EMG pickups on the Petersen have a good clean sound, if a little clanky on the top end, but my ideal would be where you had a bass with a thousand different possibilities and you could just slot them in in two seconds flat!
‘Various Arias are my ‘second string’ choice, and then there are always situations where a P-bass sound is perfect, particularly with Brian, as we do some Queen songs and that's their bass sound.
‘I always feel I'm getting near to my ideal bass sound, but it never quite transpires.
The only alternative is to butcher the basses around, which I have done with various instruments in the past, like my B C Rich — a real mess!
‘But it gets to the point where I can't wait any longer and I've got to try out whatever mod I have in mind.
At the time it might be great and five years later I think, ‘Why did I do that?’ but sometimes it's the only way of finding something out.
You can't always wait until someone else tries it.
Plus, you're in the best place to know exactly what the modification is that you want.’
Because Neil plays very hard he produces a lot of power through the pickups, and he has recently realised that he can't just put any pickup with any EQ system, otherwise the signal from the bass simply overloads things…
‘What I've been doing in the last few weeks, long overdue, is to match up these various components.
On a couple of my basses I've got Alembic pickups and ideally they have to go into Alembic circuitry.
The same with Bartolini pickups, they work best with Bartolini circuits, so that's brought back into service a couple of basses that were sitting leaning up against a wall in my house.’
In spite of all the obvious agonising, has Neil ever experienced a time when he was totally happy with his sound, and could quote a recorded example of this?
‘Hmm…
At the time, I was happy with the sound on ‘Ready An’ Willing', with songs like Fool For Your Loving .
In some ways that was the classic sound that I had with Whitesnake, but that sound wasn't usable in later, more AOR versions of either that band or even other things that I've done; all you can say is that it was right for that particular music.
If the sound is right for a certain combination of musicians, or a certain style of music, then obviously you play better, but I don't think there are very many people who have their sound, and go from one band to another just using that sound.
‘And there are other factors.
If I want to do some slap bass or play some very fast, light jazzy stuff, I'd probably have to wear the bass quite high up, almost Mark King height, to really be comfortable.
Even to play with a pick I would have to do the same thing, like Phil Lynott did, whereas to play with my fingers in a heavy metal kind of way, as I normally do, I have to have the bass quite low or else my wrist gets mangled up and I start having problems with tendonitis.
It's all very well having lots of different combinations of pickups, but many players don't realise that factors such as the height of the bass and the thickness of the strings all affect playing style.’
At the end of the day, Neil has had to come to terms with the fact that he plays in a certain way…
‘I also have to accept that maybe I'm not that versatile, so I have to make sure that I'm in the right situation to show myself off to my best advantage.
Early Whitesnake was good, because I was pushing the limits of a fairly simple kind of music — probably being a bit over-busy through trying to be not just a standard rock bass player.
I gave in to that later on in the '80s, by trying to be more conventional and blending in a bit more, and actually I shouldn't have done that.’
Neil Murray has often had to come into bands and reproduce another player's bass part, or even their bass sound…
‘That can be very frustrating.
You feel as though you're a Xerox machine: ‘Today I've got to sound like such-and-such, next week I've got to sound like so-and-so…’
Of course it's a great challenge, but you can end up losing your own personality, because you've got to ‘be’ somebody else if you're playing these old songs, or maybe just following someone else who played on a particular album…’
I think my lack of live experience held me back a bit, and it wasn't until the gig with Whitesnake that I felt totally comfortable with the situation
It's all very well having lots of different combinations of pickups, but many players don't realise that factors such as the height of the bass and the thickness of the strings all affect playing style
Marshall S80 Stereo Chorus Two 40w Valvestate amps in one, plus chorus and reverb and all for £320.
Eddie Allen gets stuck in…
Marshall Valvestate combos have been getting a thumbs-up from players for some time now, but does a stereo chorus model add anything to their appeal?
The list of Valvestate users includes our old mate Geoff Whitehorn.
Now, from what I know of him he can get a good sound out of anything, but the amps he's been using recently (until he had them nicked from his car) were Marshall Valvestate 80s.
This might lead you to the assumption that I'm going to do nothing but heap praise on this one, the S80 Stereo Chorus combo.
But it ain't necessarily so.
I adore what other players get from Marshall amps but for some reason they've never done the same for me, so this one's going to have to prove itself, the same as the rest.
CONSTRUCTION
The technology behind the Valvestate S80 might be the latest thing, but the look and construction are unmistakably traditional Marshall.
A solid cabinet houses a pair of 12″ Celestion G12T speakers and, although 2x12 combos are normally quite bulky, Marshall have utilised every inch of space to keep the S80 as compact as possible.
Even the spring reverb unit has been moved from its traditional combo location, at the bottom of the cabinet, to a new site underneath the main chassis.
This of course leaves enough space for carrying the supplied channel change, chorus off/on footswitch, a few leads etc.
Looking at the large back panel of the S80 the most noticeable thing is the lack of sockets.
I'd assumed it would be bristling with DI sockets, speaker outputs, effects loops etc, but not so.
Instead there's just the mains socket, footswitch socket and a left and right direct out.
So where are the speaker outputs?
Well, because the internal speakers already run at 4 ohms, any additional speakers would create the wrong impedance and, besides, the S80 is loud enough to handle most situations without extra cabs.
(If more volume really were needed then the direct outputs could be fed to a stereo power amp and then to additional speakers, but I'm sure Marshall have aimed the S80 at a specific player who would find its volume adequate and who, if he or she needed more, would probably upgrade to a more powerful Marshall product.)
Moving to the front panel, sitting among the other controls on this two-channel combo is the effects loop.
I don't like these sockets to be on the front, because it means cables trailing all over the amp (and there's so much empty space at the rear), although it does save having to crawl around the back before and after the gig.
The loop features a mono send and stereo return sockets (left is mono) with a loop attenuation switch to drop the signal from 0 to -20dB, and something I really like: a rotary mix/dry pot for balancing the amount of effected signal to the main, or dry signal.
Everyone should follow Marshall's example here because the amount of effect level needed can change from gig to gig and the mix pot makes this adjustment instantly, without your having to mess about with the processor's levels.
The effects loop and mix pot is actually the first part of the S80's master control section.
The rest is made up of stereo reverb master, rate and depth controls for the onboard stereo chorus and the Master volume pot itself.
Between the depth and master volume is the manual switch for the chorus, while the ‘effect on’ light sits between the rate and depth pots.
To the left of the master section is the Boost channel.
This is where the EC83/12AX7 valve does its stuff.
There are two overdrive modes, OD1 and OD2 (just like the JMP-1 MIDI preamp, which obviously shares much of the S80's technology), selected by a push switch alongside the boost channel gain pot.
OD1 is a fatter, bluesy type distortion while OD2 gives you rock distortion to full metal mayhem.
The EQ section is a standard bass, middle and treble setup but a fourth pot, labelled ‘Contour’, shifts the midrange voicing, and this is really effective in colouring the tone of both overdrive modes.
The last control on this channel is a volume pot which enables it to be balanced with the Normal channel.
For the kind of squeaky clean sound that only a solid state amp can produce, the S80's Normal channel takes some beating.
A single gain pot and bass, middle and treble pots are all it needs to deliver some superb clean tones, but if these sounds are too clean and a slight amount of edge is preferred, then a push switch adds in some crunch.
This channel might be solid state but the crunch sounds quite natural, and experimenting with the various options on both channels I can't imagine many players not being able to come up with a sound which meets their particular requirements.
IN USE
As hard as Marshall try to convey the message of versatility in this type of combo, I defy anyone who plugs into it for the first time not to go straight for the overdrive sounds: ‘If it's a Marshall then it's going to rock, whether it wants to or not!’
True to form, the Valvestate S80 is more than happy to oblige and at low volume the Boost channel switched to OD2 handles everything thrown at it.
Power chords have that distinctive bite while still retaining sustain and clarity for individual notes.
Using the contour control, it's possible to change the character of the sound from British bite to almost an American West Coast wash, while maintaining that essential edge which Marshall amps are famed for.
OD1 proved itself much more like the classic Marshall sound, with enough dirt to make things ballsy, but not so much that backing off the guitar didn't clean up the tone for real blues rhythm playing and crunchy Bryan Adams-type chords.
For old-style feel playing, I found this by far the best and most controllable overdrive setting, even on full tilt.
The fact that there is only one preamp valve feeding a solid state output really isn't obvious within the power range of the S80.
Switching to the Normal channel I would say that using the crunch option for rock solo work is a matter of taste.
On the other hand it does offer a usable alternative where ‘clean’ actually sounds too clean.
Unfortunately, the clean/crunch and OD1/OD2 switching has to be done manually, and if this could be achieved via a footswitch it would in effect make this a four-channel combo with all the versatility which that implies.
What the Valvestate S80 is really all about is its stereo chorus, and that really is impressive.
Not because it's the most versatile on the market, or necessarily the best-sounding, but it's set to work perfectly with the Marshall tone on all channels and that makes it a winner.
The clean channel with a goodly amount of reverb, and the chorus rate and depth set about halfway makes chords really shimmer and finger-picking come alive.
Switch across to the Boost channel on OD2 and the setting still holds good for that real processed, ‘I've spent an arm and a leg on my effects rack’ sound.
This is helped by the depth that the stereo effect gives.
To keep this depth and spread without using chorus I just left the chorus switched on and backed off the rate and depth controls to 0; switching the chorus off again put the sound back in the middle of the speakers and sounded quite boring by comparison.
CONCLUSION
I said at the beginning of this review that the Valvestate S80 was going to have to prove itself.
Well, to be fair it has.
Granted, you have to be a fan of the Marshall sound to really appreciate it, but there's no denying the quality and the versatility of its sounds.
The limitations are the lack of footswitching between the clean/crunch and OD1/OD2 modes, and that I see as a drawback (unless you find you prefer one or the other and stick to it).
If footswitching could be sorted out for these then the covers and pub band scene could well be awash with Marshall S80s.
(Come to think of it, it probably already is!)
The only other possible limitation could be volume, and although 40 watts per side should handle the average pub-type situation, I doubt there's enough projection from the open-backed cabinet to handle extreme levels without being miked up.
But that is something you'll have to judge for yourself.
If I had to personally choose from the combos available in this price range then I really can't think of anything that offers better solid state and valve sounds than this, with such an obvious stamp of credibility into the bargain.
Hamer 12-String Bass Can a 12-string bass have any practical place in the real world?
Review by Gibson Keddie.
It's strange the way Chinese Whispers start about certain guitars; by the time the umpteenth person has told you about the amazing instrument that they've seen, you begin to be very sceptical about whether anything can be as outrageous as described…
When we were north of the border recently for the Scottish Music Show, before I'd had time to look round myself, people were rushing over to describe a monster the like of which they'd never before seen.
It's at times like these that the brain cells slip into surrealist ‘wavy picture’ mode as you mentally conjure something with a 10 inch wide fretboard and a progression of thick wound strings tensed across it, creating monstrous internal forces and straining various components to breaking point.
I mean, 6-string basses are commonplace, 7- and even 8-stringers are not unknown, but twelve?
A quick trip to Trace Elliot's stand secured the ‘monster’ for review, and here it is: Hamer's 12-string bass, looking impressive, but certainly not too imposing…
The main timber used is maple, for both the body and the glued-in, three-piece neck.
The body shape is the well-known Hamer-adopted version of the double-cutaway Les Paul Special; widely used as a pleasingly symmetrical guitar body shape, it's unusual to find it in the context of a bass.
The cherry finish extends over the entire instrument, with the exception of the black-faced headstock, and under the lacquer on both the front and back of the body is some very pretty striping in the maple…
Pickups are two close-set EMG humbuckers, and the row of three controls offers straightforward volume for each pickup, and a master tone control.
Congratulations to Hamer here for commendable restraint.
As you have no doubt gathered, the string arrangement is quite novel, offering a traditional four-course setup, but with each main string allocated a matched pair of drone strings.
These extra guitar-gauge strings lie on the topside of each ‘bass’ string, so using a plectrum lets the instrument operate to maximum effect, since the drones are struck first — as with a 12-string guitar.
The bridge looks somewhat minimalistic, considering the job it has to do.
The bridge and tailpiece are actually two separate components, a sort of abbreviated version of Gibson's tune-o-matic system.
The bridge has two substantial height-adjusting screws, one at either end.
A ‘U'-channel contains what looks initially like four separate saddles; in fact, these are centrally split, so intonation adjustment is available for each bass string and its accompanying pair of drones.
Four large screws make sure the tailpiece is securely located, and it'll need to be, since all twelve strings anchor in its raised tail, so what looks like a decoratively machined brass rod at the back is in fact a dozen ball-ends grouped together!
Helping to minimise the physically imposing aspect of the bass is its short scale of 30½″.
The body's symmetrical horns join the neck at the seventeenth fret, leaving the remaining four on the 21-fret neck positioned over the body.
The neck uses a rosewood fingerboard, inlaid with plastic dot markers.
It's quite wide (48mm at the nut, 57mm at the twelfth fret), but eminently playable.
A gentle ‘D’ profile facilitates comfort and positive note location, aided by a slim and consistent depth of approximately 22mm along the neck's entire length.
Fitting and cutting the nut must have been tricky, but whoever was responsible obviously knew what they were doing.
This is a critical feature on such an instrument, as a badly cut nut here would wreak havoc on playability.
The layout of the machineheads is neat and logical.
Whilst you can spend many a happy hour with a regular 12-string guitar plucking one string while turning the wrong key, since they all look identical, this isn't a problem on the Hamer.
The four principal strings are tensioned by full-sized Schaller machines and, though each pair of accompanying drones are identical in gauge, each is assigned a different-sized machine key to let you know exactly which one is being adjusted.
A large truss rod cover above the nut hides a very substantial dual truss rod system; two rods lie parallel along the neck, keeping the whole assembly firmly in shape.
In Use
The real joy of an instrument like this lies in playing it.
With something so idiosyncratic there are things it can't do at all well, and others it can perform superbly.
It's all a matter of experimentation — something a unique setup like this positively encourages, since it sounds like no other bass.
The double drones add an additional treble ring, which cuts through over the thicker, enveloping sound of the main bass strings.
The overall sound benefits from the use of active circuitry, all of which is contained, along with the battery, in the roomy rear control compartment.
Describing the Hamer's sound is not easy, but if you imagine a normal bass being played through an octaver then you're getting warm.
As mentioned, a plectrum extracts the most from the system; fingerstyle playing, with its up-stroke action, tends to negate the effect of the drones, although this can be advantageous when a more traditional sound is required.
You cannot wimp out on your playing style, though; the strings must be played with commitment and a reasonable degree of attack across each grouping, otherwise you hit a bass string for one note, then one of the drones for the next, and so on.
Ultimately the Hamer 12-string bass is great fun.
But it's also surprisingly practical, especially if you're searching for different and impressive sounds.
If it were mine and I wanted to make serious use of the bass, I'd probably take the E and A drones off, as one could argue that they don't do enough on top of the heavier bass strings, which might be better used for playing ‘proper’ bass lines.
This would leave the bassist free to add little chordal colourings on the G and D. You could also use them for striking solo intro riffs, something they excel at, while adding a touch of stereo chorus provides an even sweeter sound.
Being short-scale in a Gibson EB3 sort of way, the Hamer is quite comfortable to wear.
But, as was mentioned in David Mead's recent review of the latest Hamer guitars, access to the upper frets for chordal doodlings is not great, because of the fairly restrictive cutaway arrangement, and that rather hinders some of the bass's potential.
Lastly, everyone I've spoken to on the subject would shorten the length of the bass by cutting off the V-shaped cleft in the headstock, which adds nought to the decorative aspect of the bass.
Verdict?
Surprisingly practical yet loads of fun, with a sound which suits a varied range of styles.
Plus could it be the ultimate indie bassist's revenge?
Tell that guitarist to move over with his poncy Ricky 12-string, because you're taking over…yeah!
Silver Machines National Tri-Plate Steels A true design classic and some of the strangest and most beautiful guitars ever built, National Tri-Plates hold a weird fascination for players and collectors alike…
By Rick Batey.
The story of National guitars is a mind-bendingly complicated one, full of arguments, company takeovers, mergers and just plain confusion.
So we'll leave all that, for the moment, and concentrate on the instruments themselves — and what instruments they are…
The centrepiece of this month's article is a trio of National Tri-Plate steels.
These are the real, early National guitars, built by Czechoslovakian immigrant John Dopyera and his four brothers in Los Angeles from 1926 onwards.
The more commonly seen single resonator National guitars were a different animal altogether, and we'll be looking at those next month.
Photographs are an inadequate preparation for meeting a National Tri-Plate in the flesh — they have to be the most extraordinary-looking guitars in existence.
The bodies were made of ‘German silver’, essentially bell-brass, but with a high nickel content that turned the metal white and hardened it ready for engraving.
After engraving, the bodies were nickel-plated, and that's why a 60-year old guitar can be so shiny; for some complex metallurgical reason, electro-plated nickel on top of nickel doesn't tarnish.
But the amazing looks are only half of the story; National made these instruments specifically to be the loudest acoustic guitars in existence — and they succeeded.
Underneath the rounded, triangular coverplate lie three six-inch spun aluminium cones, activated by a T-shaped bar that connects the bridge to the centre of each speaker.
From there the sound radiates outwards through the holes in the front, giving a pure, sharp, sweet sound with amazing projection.
It was this sweetness of tone that made National Tri-Plates a favourite of Hawaiian lap-steel players, although — bizarrely enough — the National company had much higher ambitions for their guitars.
They wanted them to be recognised as concert orchestra instruments, and disapproved highly of their Tri-Plates occasionally getting into the hands of rough-and-ready blues musicians.
In fact, that situation didn't often happen.
For one thing, blues players often preferred the harsher attacking sound of single-cone resonator guitars, and for another thing, Tri-Plates were massively expensive instruments.
Remember, at this time you could buy a really good Martin flat-top for around forty dollars, but the cheapest Tri-Plate — the plain, unengraved Style 1 — would cost you eighty-five dollars.
A Style 2 decorated with a relatively simple ‘Wild Rose’ motif would set you back $105; a Style 3 with the more elaborate ‘Lily Of The Valley’pattern, $145.
And if you really wanted to blow two years' wages for a working man, then you could spend $185 on a Style 4 Tri-Plate with full ‘Chrysanthemum’ engraving on front, sides and back.
Then, as now, to play a National Tri-Plate you either had to be very rich or very lucky.
The production figures for National guitars are surprising.
The most recent estimates, painstakingly compiled from a worldwide ‘known serial number’ list, indicate a total yield of around 30,000 resonator-based instruments (guitars, mandolins, tenor guitars, ukuleles, Hawaiian guitars, electric guitars) in the period between the founding of the company in 1926 and the steel rationing that accompanied America's involvement in the Second World War.
Of those 30,000 sales, a good third — up to 10,000 — comprised the basic, metal-bodied, single-cone Duolian and Triolian models.
National made between 3,000 and 5,000 Tri-Plate instruments, and out of all those, less than 600 or 700 were round-neck Tri-Plate guitars, since square-necks were standard and round-necks were a custom order.
And of those few hundred roundneck Tri-Plates, only eleven of the top-line Chrysanthemum-pattern Style 4s are known to exist.
Which makes the guitar at the top right in our main picture a very rare beast indeed, and an expensive one; these days, a Style 4 as fine as this might easily outprice an original ‘59 Les Paul Standard.
It's an early example, dating from late 1927 or possibly 1928, with an unusual oak-faced headstock instead of the commoner cream-coloured pearloid plastic.
The decoration on this most high-class of Nationals was designed by George Beauchamp, a partner at the company; John Dopyera disapproved of the Style 4, saying that the frills impaired the guitar's tone!
To the left we have a square-neck Style 3, with its John Dopyera-designed ‘Lily Of The Valley’ motif.
Style 3s are actually rarer than Style 4s, and this one has features and serial numbers that date it to 1931 or 1932.
The pearl-faced headstock is standard, but the large abalone position markers are a more lavish trimming than is usual on this model.
Like many square-necks, it sounds fatter, sweeter and more mellow than a typical round-neck.
Also, being structurally stronger, you can fit a square-neck with the kind of strings best suited for Nationals — the heaviest in the shop!
At the bottom of the picture lies the workhorse of the Tri-Plates, a round-neck Style 2 with its ‘Wild Rose’ livery.
Along with Style 1s and the basic-model single-cone Duolians, this model was the one most commonly imported into the UK by Boosey & Hawkes in the late 1930s.
This particular guitar is a bit of a video star; Dave Stewart used it in the promo for The Eurythmics' The City Never Sleeps .
All Tri-Plates are highly collectable these days, but as Hawaiian star Sol Hoopii's famous guitar remains undiscovered and blues-player Tampa Red's legendary gold-plated model remains just that — a legend — the ultimate collector's Tri-Plates must be the presentation models the company made for certain employees.
Bob Brozman has a National made specially for George Beauchamp in 1932, and English slide player Michael Messer has a beautifully engraved round-neck Style 4 that was a leaving present for the shop foreman, Harry Worth (it lay undiscovered in an attic in North Wembley for sixty years).
National also presented instruments to many of the royal houses of Europe.
George V was a dedicated Hawaiian music nut, and the rumour persists of a mint Style 4 lying somewhere in the bowels of Windsor Castle!
Well, let's hope the firemen got there in time…
Clockwise from upper left: ‘Lily Of The Valley’ Style 3 square-neck; ‘Chrysanthemum’Style 4; ‘Wild Rose’Style 2
Rear view of the Style 4.
The cost of the engraving alone would have paid for an entire single-cone Style O guitar
Square-necks are generally less desirable than round-necks.
Notice the different construction and the Style 3's extra-high nut, plus the inlays and the headstock facings
Randy Hansen IF SIX WAS NINE…
‘Jimi was playing in the rain and I stood right at the front of the stage and water dripped right off the tips of his boots onto my head.
And I just stood there and just watched him blow lead.’
Interview by Neville Marten.
Seattle-born Randy Hansen saw Hendrix live on stage once and only this once, but he's by no means vaunting the experience as his single turning point, the moment when he decided to devote his playing life to Jimi's music.
That commitment had already been made…
Even so, though Hendrix has more or less possessed Randy for the past fifteen years, Hansen's original guitar influences couldn't be further removed from the blues-based, howling feedback style that was to become his shared trademark.
‘I've been playing Jimi's stuff live for about fifteen years, now,’ says Hansen, ‘but The Ventures was what I listened to first, then it was The Stones and The Beatles.
Those were the first guitars that I remember going: ‘Wow, that's a guitar!’
Then after that there were Apache and Telstar …’
Hansen first heard Hendrix in 1967, when Jimi exploded onto an unexpecting and often disbelieving public.
And it was right at the beginning when the demon took over…
‘I used to go and play basketball at this gymnasium,’ recalls Randy, as though it were only yesterday, ‘and from there I'd go over to this drummer's house and we'd jam.’
Hansen was leaving the gym, guitar in hand, when a young man came over and said, ‘Who do you think you are, Jimi Hendrix?’
Randy takes up the story…
‘I said, ‘Who's Jimi Hendrix?’ and he goes, ‘You don't know who Hendrix is?
Man, he's the newest thing.’
And he said, ‘Go down to Market Time and buy ‘Are You Experienced’ by Jimi Hendrix, go home and listen to it and then come back tomorrow and tell me what you thought.
''
Young Hansen bought the record and listened to it, and it changed his life.
‘I mean, up to that point, I thought The Ventures were taking the guitar to its limit; I didn't see that it could go any further.
But then hearing that…
I just had no idea what he was doing, how he could get those sounds.
I know a lot of it was recording technique, but a helluva lot of it is just him.’
Did Randy immediately start getting into the Hendrix style, the way other people were getting into, say, Eric Clapton or Mike Bloomfield?
‘Well, I'm not so much a guitarist; I'm more of a listener — still.
One thing that I always wanted not to happen to me was to become like a TV cameraman who goes home to watch TV and says, ‘Aw, look at that lighting,’ or something trivial that really has nothing to do with the actual story.
So I wanted to remain a listener, still be excited by other people's music and so I've always remained a listener.
And the fact is Jimi just turned me on more than anybody else, for his music.
It seemed to flow out of him easier than anybody else that I've heard, except maybe Beethoven.’
Watching Randy play, the spirit of Hendrix certainly seems to take him over.
But does Hansen consciously try to become Jimi?
‘I try to just get the feelings across that I know he probably felt.
Sometimes I'll even do more exaggerated things than he would have done, but I do it because that's the way the music makes me feel.
There are songs of his where, when you start playing solos, sometimes it's hard to stop because you get into this…
It's almost like meditation, playing his stuff.
‘But I used to actually paint myself black and wear an Afro wig!
The whole thing!
And a lot of people in the States still think I am black, because of it.
I've met so many people who've come up and been introduced and just looked at me and gone, ‘No, that's the wrong guy…
We saw a black guy.’
‘But what I got out of Jimi is the freedom on the guitar, to show how you feel at the time.
And that feeling has gone the second you let it out.
And for that reason I try never to look back at what I've played; it's more like living right now, while I'm playing.
It's like a kind of flowing thing where no note has more value than any other, and where I don't even know what's going to happen at any given point.
As a matter of fact, all the playing that I do, the fingering and the fast stuff that I try to do, doesn't turn me on half as much as the accidental feedbacks and things that happen with the more experimental side of my guitar playing.
That's what Jimi was into, too.
And I'm sure a lot of times he had no idea what was going to come out, but he knew there was going to be some sort of feedback or something, so he'd just play with it when it came.’
Hansen only saw Hendrix once, in Seattle, on the last North American concert that Jimi played.
But did the two ever meet?
‘No, that one time when I was standing underneath the stage was close enough for me.
I could have jumped up and battered his foot if I'd wanted to, but I had more respect than that!’
Hansen has been seen at various shows, demonstrating Jim Dunlop pedals.
Was Randy using Dunlop pedals anyway?
‘Yes, I was using a few of them.
Then I found out that Jim was making all the original pedals as well, so I decided to get rid of all the stuff I'd been trying to make all these sounds with and just use the original things.
Because you can't get that sound any other way.
There are certain things about those old pedals…
It's like a recipe — you leave out this or that ingredient and it kind of tastes the same, but not exactly.
So I'm trying to put in all the ingredients: left-handed guitar, all the original effects, Marshall amplifier, everything that Jimi used — go for authenticity from the beginning and then take it from there.
‘Maybe after I get an album of my own material out — which does sound a lot like Jimi, because I can't help it — then I'll try to take that a step further…maybe where he was going himself, possibly.’
People have had problems with being labelled ‘Hendrix clones’, possibly when they don't want such a tag — the excellent Robin Trower springs to mind.
But Randy only revels in such comparisons.
‘I don't see how anybody can pick up a guitar nowadays and not give some credit to Jimi Hendrix because, at the time — people don't remember this — but at the time he came out, people were ready to give up the guitar and go onto other instruments.
I mean, it could have very easily gone from there to everybody following a different path — going away from rock'n'roll and getting into jazz, or I don't know what.
So if Jimi hadn't come along when he did, the guitar might not be half as popular an instrument as it is today.’
Randy is of the school of guitarists who gauge another's ability by that inexplicable tingle at the back the neck…
‘I don't understand it sometimes.
I'll sit there and watch some guy and go, ‘Man, the work that must have gone into that!’ and they're just whizzing right along making it look easy, but at the same time it doesn't make those hairs stand up.
There's other types of music that I listen to that do make my hair stand on end and they don't have a single guitar in them!
Peter Gabriel.
I listen to Peter Gabriel and there's barely any guitar in any of his music, but I love his stuff, his stage presence and everything, his singing…
‘It's when you can go, ‘That guy knows exactly what he is and that's exactly what he's going for,’ and everybody just loves the shit out of it because of that.
And I know what I am, but what I am so closely resembles somebody else that at times it even scares me!
And it does kind of stand in my way because, for one thing, there will never be a greater guitar player than Jimi Hendrix, as long as people can remember that name.
Nobody is going to take that place.
It's like, you can re-invent the light bulb as many times as you want, but Thomas Edison invented it!’
Noel Redding has pointed out that what hit home to people about Jimi Hendrix, apart from his guitar playing and in many instances more so, was his extraordinary voice.
Hendrix's vocals had an almost hypnotic effect, an effect which Randy Hansen has captured with uncanny accuracy, as surely as he has emulated the sound of Jimi's guitar.
‘Jimi was my favourite singer, besides being my favourite guitarist.
And so, through playing his stuff so many times, hearing him play it on record and on bootlegs and actually hearing him sing live — once — it's got to the point where it's hard to say whether this is my natural voice or if it's something I learned.
I don't know.
But it's the only way I know how to sing.’
The fact that both Jimi and Randy share the same Seattle accent must account, at least in part, for the accuracy with which Randy mimics (if he does mimic) Hendrix's singing…
‘It's like when Jimi said ‘thing’.
If you spelt it phonetically you'd spell it ‘thang’.
The Seattle accent is like that.’
According to Randy Hansen, the people of Seattle look at Hendrix in much the same way as The Beatles are viewed in Liverpool.
‘There are a lot of musicians in Seattle and every one of them looks up to Jimi Hendrix.
We all get to say, ‘Jimi was from our town.'’
Of course there are many English people who consider Hendrix an ‘Honourary Brit’.
‘It was certainly in England that he made it first.
He could have kicked around forever in the States, and if he had never come here he might have never gotten anywhere.
He might just have been another guitar player who ended up playing back-up for a lot of people, which was what he was doing in America.’
Randy has played with Mitch Mitchell and with Noel Redding…
‘We did a tour with Mitch and we also did a tour with Buddy Miles, but we've never had the two of them in the same room together.
I guess they don't like each other, judging from talking to each of them, one on one.
What's funny about it is, they actually do like each other; they just don't realise that both of them have the same views in everything.
But they have a lot of misunderstandings, and because they won't talk, they don't like each other.
But if they were to get together they'd realise that they're very much alike.’
There has been a lot of talk about The Beatles playing a one-off gig with Julian Lennon as John.
The same scenario must have presented itself to Randy, Mitch and Noel.
‘You know what I want to do — and I wanted to do it for Jimi's birthday in his anniversary year, but it didn't happen — I want to get everybody that ever recorded with him, anybody who played live with him, get them all at a big reunion and go out and play Hendrix all night long — every song that I know, every song that we could possibly do.
It might be boring after about the fourth hour, but it would be fun!
And I know so many songs that it would be fun to go out there and say, ‘Hey, man, do you remember this one?’ or, ‘Here's one you haven't heard in a long time.'’
Randy Hansen's stage show is an extension of what Jimi Hendrix was doing at around the time of Woodstock and the Isle Of Wight festivals.
But what does Randy think Jimi would be doing now?
‘I think you'd have to look at somebody who is in a similar position to him, who is still around, to try and figure that out.
Someone I'd say who was probably almost as good a guitar player and also had a lot of mystique about him, although he was never as big as Jimi, is Johnny Winter.
And Johnny Winter hasn't changed that much.
If you went to see him in the '60s and you go and see him now, it's pretty much the same; he holds true and keeps his tradition.
I think Jimi would have changed a little bit, though, because he was always into change.
Johnny Winter is a traditionalist.
‘I think Jimi would have still been fusing things, and when he got done finding everything that he could fuse together then he would have invented a couple more things and then fused them with everything else.
But he may not have done another thing; he may just have faded into obscurity if he'd lived on.’
Could Randy see Jimi as a Clapton-style superstar?
‘No.
Eric mellowed and lost a lot of the fire that he had.
He seemed to be more content to be just a consultant to everyone in the music business than actually being a pioneer.
He was a pioneer at one time, but he's not really pushing for anything right now — just kind of playing the blues.
Having said that, lately I've heard him and he's trying to get back some of his fire, but the originals, the ‘Disraeli Gears’ album and the Bluesbreakers…he doesn't come close to the fire that's on those songs any more.
And he hates the fact that people think that, too.
‘But I don't think any musician has a good grasp of how other people see them.
When you're on the outside, then you have a much better view of what they're doing and whether they're on or whether they're not.
A musician can fool himself and say, ‘Yeah, I'm doing great because I'm getting all these write-ups and my career seems to be looking good,’ but what it boils down to is what you're actually doing — whether or not you're breaking any new ground in music.
After a while people get tired of hearing the same old thing and they'll eventually turn their back on it if they hear enough of it, and they'll turn to something else — like rap.
And there's no comparison between music and rap, but one thing about rap is that at least it does have metre and the words are selectively placed, and the beats to the words are selectively placed, and they have meaning.
But I don't consider it really music; it's not music because anybody could take those words and learn how to say them and it would sound just as good with anybody else saying them.
It's not like a musical fingerprint where you go, ‘Ow, man, that's that guy's sound.'’
But does Randy have the right to say such things when, to put it bluntly, he is trading as a self-confessed copyist?
‘I've certainly been criticised for that.
I did some shows with Ritchie Blackmore and Ritchie himself was really nice to me, but some of his team were real jerks, and we really didn't give them any reason to be that way.
But they did a whole bunch of things to us, like trying to sabotage our show.
For instance, they gave us just two power lines per side on a huge concert stage, and just one spotlight, and that was all the lights they gave us, and they gave us half the PA.
Then they cut the PA on us at the end of the show, turned the lights on us before our time was up, and cut my power.
Then I went down to my dressing room and there was this big, long note that somebody had written and stuck on my dresser, saying, ‘How dare you bask in the reflected glory of others’ and stuff like that.
That hit me pretty hard, because I don't feel right about it anyway!
I don't feel right when I'm out there signing autographs.
I'll do it because they ask me to, but I don't feel, like, ‘Oh God, I'm a big star signing autographs.’
Now that would be basking in reflected glory.
‘I don't feel like taking any reward for this.
If anything, I just make sure I don't starve to death.
I don't expect anything for it.
I certainly don't want to bask in any reflected glory; I just think the music deserves to be heard, and I don't hear anybody else doing it…’
I said, ‘Who's Jimi Hendrix?’ and he goes, ‘You don't know who Hendrix is?
Man, he's the newest thing.’
But I used to actually paint myself black and wear an Afro wig!
The whole thing!
I don't see how anybody can pick up a guitar nowadays and not give some credit to Jimi Hendrix
MAKING TRACKS STREETS AHEAD Stephen Street When a record company needs a producer to nurture the talents of an up-and-coming guitar band, the man they turn to is Stephen Street.
From his attic studio in south-west London, Stephen tells Andy Strickland how he coaxes a sound session from nervous musicians…
THE DAY A YOUNG STEPHEN Street gave up his place in the school football team for a job on a record stall in London's Walthamstow Market, friends and family knew he was serious about this music lark.
At the time, the teenaged Bowie and Roxy Music fan dreamt of getting out of the rain and opening his own record shop.
But writing and producing a No.1 album, sharing the bill with Prince and becoming an integral part of ‘the greatest band of the '80s’ seemed less obviously within his grasp.
Today, sitting in his cosy attic studio in south-west London's genteel Mortlake, relaxed and tanned from a recent family trip to Sardinia, Stephen Street has done all this and more.
He's top of the A&R man's list when it comes to nursing young guitar bands through their first, tentative studio steps.
And in recent months his behind-the-desk skills have been in demand from established acts such as The Psychedelic Furs, The Triffids, The Darling Buds and Danielle Dax.
In between work on these sessions — and having just failed to squeeze in the Charlatans and Bob Geldof — he's been releasing his own dance records under an assumed name and running his own record label, Foundation, for two years.
And, maybe most important of all, he's watched The Dylans, Blur and Thousand Yard Stare storm both the charts and the music press with his name on their record labels.
He carries a picture of wife Sarah and his two young boys, just in case he forgets what they look like!
Five guitar cases sit in the corner of the room, betraying his affection for — and expertise in producing — guitar-orientated groups.
Neatly arranged opposite is an array of samplers, sequencers, drum machines and keyboards — just to prove there's more to the man than the jingle-jangle of six strings over a pickup.
‘I'm more comfortable working with guitar-orientated bands than with keyboards,’ Stephen admits.
‘Some producers will know a Korg M1 inside out and they'll know exactly what sounds you can get out of the latest Roland synth.
I don't.
If I wanted to have something like that, I'd get a good programmer in on the project.
‘I tend to work with up-and-coming guitar bands because that's the music I like listening to and that's what I understand better.
‘But while people think of me perhaps as just a guitar producer who doesn't go anywhere near sequencers, I actually use them quite a lot.
I use them to help me make a record, to make the band sound tighter than they would do otherwise.
I'll use technology as long as it doesn't stop the song coming through.
That's the main thing — the song.’
That was a lesson Stephen learned while playing in a succession of bands in London during the late '70s and, crucially, when he made his entry into the world of professional recording.
Hearing on the grapevine that Island Records' in-house Fallout Shelter studios were in need of a trainee engineer, he pestered them for an interview that afternoon and began work the next day.
‘It was very good training,’ he remembers.
‘It was good quality stuff, good to work on and I gradually worked my way up to being one of the house engineers and it took off from there.’
Stephen's big break came in 1984 when a young Manchester band by the name of The Smiths turned up to record a single,Heaven Knows I'm Miserable Now .
‘I remember talking to Johnny Marr and Morrissey about records we liked, and there was certainly a similarity there in what we listened to — Bowie and things.
I think they just liked working with someone like-minded!’
And so began one of the most successful record production partnerships of the decade — the glitzy music biz rewards of which are an impressive collection of gold discs, hanging along the stairwell at Street Mansions and continuing up into the studio, where they are accompanied by a blown-up print of The Beatles hard at work in the studio on the ‘Let It Be’ sessions.
Not even The Smiths, it seems, could surpass the admiration the man in shorts has for the Fab Four…
If it was Morrissey who would eventually encourage Stephen to write more songs (for the set that would become the No.1 album, ‘Viva Hate’, at the beginning of 1988), it was Smiths guitarist Johnny Marr — now one half of Electronic with New Order's Bernard Sumner — who provided him with the opportunity to learn his craft as the guitar player's producer par excellence.
‘Johnny is such a good player.
His timing is incredible and his sheer touch on the guitar means that whatever he plays sounds impressive straight away.
Obviously you get to know that a Gibson has a different tone from a Strat, and you'd also know the kind of sound you wanted.
But often we wouldn't get that straight away; we'd have to go through a few guitars before we found the combination of guitar and amp and EQ on the desk.
‘We did learn together, to a degree.
I was a young engineer and they were a young band, and we were all finding our way.
The records got better-sounding progressively because of that.’
So what's the end result of Stephen's education?
The man himself is more than happy to spill the beans about how he goes about capturing a memorable guitar sound on tape…
‘I sometimes use an ambient mic on guitars, but I find that it can make things sound a bit too boxy and I'd rather have the choice on the mix if I want to add a bit of ambience.
I tend to record guitars dry.
Then if I want to put a bit of ‘plate’ or ‘room’on, I'll either put a bit on when I'm recording it, by putting it through an effect, or using the guitar player's FX.
or I just wait till the mix.
‘I've tried many different mics and I often find that some of the more expensive condenser mics don't sound as good as something like a good, straightforward Shure 57 or something like that — one of the cheaper dynamic mics.
They seem to take the level from the amps without breaking up or sounding too middley.
‘A trusted formula for me is a 57 or a Beyer 201, with perhaps a Neumann U87 in the room — but definitely not too close to the cab.
If the guitar player has a certain patch on his FX which he's happy with, and which he wrote the song around, I'm quite happy for that to be put down as it is.
I like it when you've got the FX actually going through the amplifier, rather than adding it at the desk, because there's a certain quality and tonality when everything's going through that guitar speaker.
It doesn't sound quite the same when you put it on at the desk.’
No mean guitar player and bassist himself, Stephen can point to a collection of guitars which simply don't get used often enough.
Now, having been stuck behind the desk for weeks at a time, he doesn't need asking twice to unlock the cases and parade his collection…
‘I've got a Gibson 330 cherry red semi-acoustic, an early '70s model, which is a nice guitar,’ he grins.
‘But my favourite is a ‘64 Fender Telecaster, which has a knackered old body on it but a great feel and a great sound.
It's a natural wood finish — a typical Bruce Springsteen guitar!
‘I've got a Fender USA Strat which is only about four years old, but it's a nice guitar.
I replaced the treble pickup with a Seymour Duncan ‘Hot Strat Stack’, which improved the sound a bit.
‘There's a Takamine acoustic, which is not the best acoustic I've ever heard in the studio, but okay, and a Fender Jaguar and a Precision bass.
‘Someone recently got me a small Vox practice amp which is okay, but when I'm recording at home I go straight through a JHS Rock Box.
I use it normally on a clean setting, but if I want distortion I tend to go through a BOSS Turbo Overdrive pedal and then into the Rock Box.
It's good for a direct amp-type sound; I can't crank an amplifier up here that loud, so to get a good sound I might as well put it straight into the desk.’
There's no doubt that Stephen Street makes some of the very best guitar pop records of the day.
Listen to Blur's marvellous There's No Other Way single and you'll hear not only brilliant young musicians cutting free, but a producer who knows how to encourage his fellow workers and cajole them into producing their best in the studio.
Over years of practical experience, Stephen has evolved a tried-and-tested strategy guaranteed to make the most studio-shy newcomers sound spot-on.
‘A lot of guitar players I come up against have lots of good ideas, good little lines, but sometimes their timing is a little bit at odds,’ he explains.
‘A lot of them look up to the likes of Johnny Marr and say: ‘That's what I want to sound like!’
But you're not going to sound like Johnny unless you get as tight as hell, because Johnny's a really tight guitar player.
If a guitar player isn't locked in with his drummer, it can sound awful — especially if you're playing fast chords.
And you can't always blame the drummer!
‘It's really hard for drummers these days because people are used to hearing such tight rhythm tracks.
I never replace a drummer with a drum machine straight away, unless it's absolutely necessary.
What I often do is get the drummer to play, and if he's a little uneven with his touch, I'll take what he's played from the tape machine, go through a MIDI trigger device and record onto Creator the notes from his bass drum and snare.
If he's glaringly out, I'll then use the template I've made from the bass and snare samples, quantise that and get him to play cymbals and hi-hat again on top.
‘At least then the drummer feels he's done something; it's using technology to help him, rather than making him feel he's being replaced.’
This softly-softly approach to studio etiquette extends through the whole band and through the entire session, as Stephen explains:
‘I always try to make people feel that, while we're making the record, I'm just another member of the band.
I'm in it with them — part of the gang.
You don't want to put up a wall between you and the band.
You need the band to be relaxed to get them to do their best work.
You've got to make them feel that you're not expecting too much of them, or you may make them freeze.
‘On the other hand, you also need to make them feel that this may be their one chance to make a record — and they'd better work pretty hard to make sure it sounds good.’
The echo of that street-market record stall still lingers in Street's insatiable appetite for new music, for, unlike many in-demand producers, Stephen is not of the opinion that music stopped evolving in 1975!
‘I like to buy lots of records.
Sometimes I hear something and I think it's really different and exciting, and it inspires me to perhaps do something like that on the next record.
You're always taking in new things from different sources, and then hopefully coming up with something new yourself.
‘I do like the first Suede single, and I love the second Ride album.
Ride are just going from strength to strength — one of the bands that are really cutting through at the moment.
I like some of the heavier stuff from America: I heard a couple of things by Superchunk that I really liked, and obviously the Nirvana album was a ground-breaking record.
They've created a vibe that everyone will be influenced by.’
No matter how deep his respect for an act, Stephen Street would never admit to pursuing a band he particularly wanted to work with.
Nevertheless, there are ways of doing these things.
When he discovered Blur were on the same label as Jesus Jones — with whom he shares the same management — Stephen ‘put a word through’ expressing his admiration.
He got the gig.
‘They were a bit wild in the studio, but nothing I couldn't handle!’ he laughs.
‘We were doing some vocals and Damon (Albarn ) was in one of his mad moods and was climbing up one of the acoustic screens they had in the studio.
He started shaking it backwards and forwards.
On the other side of the screen were all Graham Cooxon's guitars and all my guitars in a line, and I had visions of the screen collapsing and completely demolishing all these guitars!
I couldn't interrupt him, though, because he was in the middle of his performance as an artist.’
Such is the care with which a producer has to tread — even a producer with as big a reputation as Stephen Street.
Still, it's all worth it in the end, isn't it?
‘The first playback to the A&R people is the thing I dislike most about the job,’ he concedes.
‘But sometimes a band has a magic balance between them and it's so wonderful.
When you've finished a record and you listen to it and you know it's really special, that's the most wonderful feeling in the world.’
STUDIO CHECK Stephen Street's attic studio
Fostex M80 ¼ins; reel-to-reel eight-track, with Fostex 812 mixer ‘The 812 is the most recent desk they do; it has 12 inputs, which I find very useful.
If I'm recording on eight-track I very rarely record the drums — I just have them running off the C-Lab system onto a couple of channels, and record voice, guitars and bass on the eight-track.’
Yamaha SPX-90 MkII and SPX-900 FX units ‘But the 900 is often out with me at other studios!’
Alesis Micro Limiter ‘A very good little unit for the money which does the job.
I use it as a compressor on vocals and guitar when I'm recording.’
Korg M1 synthesiser ‘A good keyboard which I bought mainly for the piano sound.
It's also got some good string pads.
I've never once got the sequencer in it to work, though!’
Roland D-110 synthesiser module ‘A very good source of sounds for the money, although it has its limitations.
It's what I used for all that weird Eno-esque synth stuff over Morrissey's Last Of The Famous International Playboys single.
I'd bought it two days before and was just trying it out!’
Roland R-5 drum machine ‘I don't program rhythms into it, but I think the pads are the best I've ever used.
The choice of hi-hats and cymbals is excellent, and I often use it for programming percussion.’
Alesis HR-16 drum machine ‘Some good bass drum sounds.’
Akai S1000 sampler ‘A great workhorse in the studio, which gets used a helluva lot.
I couldn't do a session without one now.’
Sony DTC-1000 DAT machine ‘I do all my demo mixes onto it.
Another good piece of machinery, often seen in studios.’
Technics CD player ‘For listening and sampling.’
STREET SELECTION Six of Stephen's favourite self-produced records…
‘Black Swan’, The Triffids (Island LP)
‘The Queen Is Dead’, The Smiths (Rough Trade LP)
‘Leisure’, Blur (Food/EMI LP)
‘All Love Offers’, The Caretaker Race (Foundation LP track)
‘Suedehead’, Morrissey (HMV/EMI 45)
‘I Blood Brother Be’, Shock-Headed Peters (El Records 45)
Musicians Institute, London G.I.T., B.I.T.
& P.I.T.
Come To Docklands…
Early in 1992 the Musicians Academy in Wapping transmuted and expanded to become the Musicians Institute, in association with the Hollywood-based school of the same name…
By Gibson Keddie.
The past decade has seen a major increase in the number of aspiring musicians wishing to incorporate the rigours and discipline of formalised training into their playing.
I would guess that we all occasionally promise ourselves some lessons, in deference to the particular brick wall we feel is impeding our progress at any given time.
The challenge, yet at the same time the frustration of being a musician is the ever-present feeling that, no matter what level you find yourself on, you know you could be better.
But while some of us console ourselves with the promise of tuition sometime in the future, others decide to immerse themselves in a more intense personal schedule via the Musicians Institute, located in the heart of London's Docklands.
Whether it's the desire for a career in music, or the pursuit of greater musical understanding or technique, the reasons for enrolling are as varied as the nationalities of students now attending the Institute.
ORIGINS
The famous Musicians Institute in Los Angeles was founded in 1976 by musician/businessman Pat Hicks.
Previously, a series of guitar-based seminars in the United States (by Howard Roberts in particular) had provided evidence that there was a requirement for a full-time vocational guitar training programme.
And so the first full-time students began class in May, 1977 at the Guitar Institute of Technology (G.I.T.) in Hollywood.
This naturally created interest in other aspects of musical tuition, and the Bass and Percussion Institutes (B.I.T.
and P.I.T.) were initiated in 1977 and 1978 respectively.
As no such facility existed in Britain in the early '80s, bass player Tony Muschamp (today a co-director of the London M.I.) decided to enrol with B.I.T.
in Los Angeles.
‘I felt I'd hit that wall with my playing,’ he explains, ‘and searched all over Britain to try and find somewhere that could help, but there were no schools or colleges operating such courses.
B.I.T.
really did benefit me.
I was so determined to make the most of it that, along with the tuition I was receiving, I was also practising between 12 and 14 hours a day!’
The regular quota of British students who attend M.I. in Hollywood attest to its effectiveness upon their return.
It's also significant that the school's reputation seems greater abroad than it is within the USA, with a large complement of each class being made up of foreign students.
Much individual attention is given to students by the tutors, and famous musicians call in to give seminars and advice on a regular basis, a policy adopted by Tony Muschamp at M.I. UK.
Tony returned to Britain with the idea that the M.I. concept could work equally well over here, albeit on a smaller scale.
A feasibility study funded by Pat Hicks and conducted over a six month period confirmed this, although subsequent funds and the original idea of an M.I. ‘franchise'-type system for the UK were not forthcoming and the British operation was left to proceed independently.
Fortunately, the conclusions reached by the feasibility study proved to be accurate: the school has progressed and increased its attendance with each academic year.
A major contributor to M.I.'s success is the flexibility of the courses, both in style and structure.
So what exactly is on offer?
The school is based on the concept that ‘Anyone aspiring to be a professional player can be trained to meet the vocational standards of the industry in a dramatically short period of time’, a statement guaranteed to raise optimism in any potential student.
The principles set by the schools on both sides of the Atlantic are effectively the same; they are vocational training centres which make use of speed-learning techniques in a high-energy learning environment.
Not only does the Institute possess the facilities and staff to implement such tuition, it also realises the need for flexibility in catering for a whole range of requirements.
For those thinking of saturating themselves in full-time tuition, a G.I.T., B.I.T.
or P.I.T.
course lasts one year (effectively, four ten-week terms) with graduates receiving a diploma upon completion.
The course follows the American precedent, with two and a half days each week allocated to in-house tuition, augmented by home study, and governed by an acronym which becomes fixed in the minds of all students: DPR, or, Daily Practise Routines.
We all know we should do it, but success within M.I. actually depends on it.
Such routines also have the advantage of pre-empting the ‘easy’ route of ducking out of what the player feels is his or her weakest area…
Incidentally, although a level of ability is required for the full-time course and potential students are assessed either playing in person or on cassette, ‘O’ and ‘A’levels are not pre-entry requirements, and (although a useful personal asset) neither is the ability to read music.
A variety of part-time courses are also offered for those who can't commit themselves full-time.
These would take place on a series of Sundays, for instance, or as a block of evening classes, and cater for all levels of ability from foundation and introductory courses to advanced tuition, allowing students to progress at a steady and consistent rate.
The most popular styles covered are rock and blues, though jazz features prominently, as does country, funk, latin, reggae, etc.
Just like the M.I. in Hollywood, clinics and demos by well-known musicians are a feature of the school.
Frank Gambale appears quite regularly, and the past year has seen demos by Scott Henderson, Wayne Krantz and Leni Stern, Barney Kessel and Mo Foster.
Hopefully, the burgeoning reputation of the school will encourage more ‘names’ to pop along and motivate students to greater things.
All of the full- and part-time teaching staff are pro musicians, though, and quite a few are associated with Guitarist in some way.
B.I.T.
Director/tutor Tony Muschamp has his monthly Bass Space, and Phil Hilborne and Robbie Gladwell (aka Dr Robert) also teach regularly at the school.
If asked, Tony Muschamp would probably say that what M.I. offers the student most, is the potential to develop.
At M.I. London you are in an environment conducive to progress, with the emphasis very much on performing with new-found skills in an active hands-on situation, rather than remaining a bedroom virtuoso.
It's proven that being surrounded by like-minded people is itself inspirational.
Find out more about G.I.T., B.I.T.
or P.I.T.
by writing for information, or attending one of the school's open days.
Ring for details on 071 265 0284, or write to 131 Wapping High Street, London, E1 9NQ.
GUITAR OF THE YEAR 1993 WIN A CUSTOM PRS CUSTOM 10 TOP Our second Guitar Of The Year competition gives you the chance to win the product which came out a clear winner in the ‘most desired instrument’ section of our 1992 readership survey…
While our annual GOTY competition does not represent Guitarist 's opinion as to what is actually the ‘best’ guitar that year, we do only choose instruments whose design and construction offer no compromises.
Hence 1992's superb Lowden and this year's equally prestigious Paul Reed Smith Custom — Custom Custom in fact, for this is what we are planning to do…
After answering a few PRS and generally guitar-related questions, a winner will be chosen and that winner will decide, during a phone call to Annapolis to Mr P. R. Smith himself, on exactly what options the prize guitar will incorporate.
HERE PAUL SHOWS WHAT YOU CAN CHOOSE
TOP.
Flamed maple?
Quilted?
Talk to me and discuss how you want your top to look.
COLOUR.
Select anything from PRS's extensive range of sunbursts or see-throughs.
NECK.
PRS offer different necks to suit different playing requirements: vintage-style (sort of a cross between old Fenders and old Gibsons) or wide and thin (for more modern techniques — tapping, etc.).
NECK FIXING.
Some people prefer the solidity and dark, woody tone that a glued neck helps impart; others like the livelier sound of a bolt-on.
I will talk you through the mire and help you decide.
BRIDGE/TAILPIECE.
The PRS tremolo proved that a free-floating system can hold its tune and feel great.
But you might be a fixed bridge fan.
Again, talk to me.
PICKUPS.
Fancy a Chain Saw?
Or how about a Deep Dish II?
Speak to me and I'll tell you what's what; which neck pickup best suits which bridge pickup; which pickups most complement the music you play.
INLAYS.
Birds or moons?
PRS's bird inlays are legendary, but you might prefer the subtlety of my combination abalone/pearl ‘moon’ dots…
This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to win the PRS of your dreams.
Paul Reed Smith guitars are acknowledged as some of the finest produced anywhere today, and Guitarist 's Guitar Of The Year will be a classic!
Photographs will be taken of the guitar during its production and these will be mounted, framed and presented along with the instrument itself, as a bonus prize — a memento of a truly unique guitar.
The Custom will also be signed by Paul Reed Smith and the legend ‘Guitarist ‘93’ will appear on the back of the headstock, to underline the fact that the instrument is a real one-off.
THE QUESTIONS
This is a superb prize and Paul Reed Smith has asked that the questions provide at least something of a challenge.
So they relate to PRS, to music, and to guitars in general.
1
) How many samples did Paul take on the road with him when he originally went out to sell his guitar design across America?
(The answer to this can be found in the PRS brochure, available from dealers nationwide.)
2
) Which degrees of the musical scale constitute a minor seventh chord?(eg. 1, 2, 3, 4 etc.)
3
) Name any four woods commonly used in the construction of electric guitars.
4
) Who was the principle designer at Gibson, and who was his counterpart at Fender during their electric guitar heydays of the 1950s?
5
) Excluding Gibson and Fender, which guitar company do you feel has had the most impact on the guitar industry in the last decade, and why?
(Paul insists that the answer to this question does not necessarily have to be PRS.
If you feel it's Yamaha, for instance, due to their quest for quality in Far Eastern production, then say so; we're looking for any reasoned answer.)
WHAT TO DO NEXT
Once you have your answers sorted out, dial the ‘Guitar Of The Year’ hotline on , not forgetting to leave your name, address and daytime telephone number if you have one.
You are advised to keep your answer to question 5 as concise as possible (no more than a few sentences); be sure that you know exactly what you want to say before you pick up the phone.
Due to the timescale involved in ordering the guitar and building it, this competition will close a little earlier than would normally be the case — on 19th February 1993.
The ordering will take place as soon as possible after that, and the guitar will be built during the next couple of months.
The official presentation will occur as soon after that as in convenient for all parties.
This really is the prize of a lifetime: nearly £2,000 worth of modern classic.
The best of luck!
the small print
The Editor's decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into.
This competition closes on February 19th 1993.
All phone calls will be charged at 36p (cheap rate) and 48p (at all other times).
FRETBUZZ
ROWLAND S HOWARD These Immortal Souls' Australian exile recounts more than a decade on the musical edge…
As befits such a central part of the still-eulogised Birthday Party (Melbourne's terrifying gift to Europe's post-punk scene), myth and misunderstanding has stalked Rowland Howard ever since the Party ended in 1983.
Back on vinyl following a two-year bout of writer's block, he's surprised and depressed to find the media's image of him as rock's Mr Glum has survived, in spite of the exhilarating content of the new LP, These Immortal Souls' ‘I'm Never Gonna Die Again'.
‘A lot of the record,’ Rowland sighs, ‘is about other people's perceptions of you and how if enough people treat you in a certain way that's what you become after a while.
For years people have described records I've made as being depressing, and admittedly I've made a lot of melancholic records, but I don't find records like that depressing.
I find Buck's Fizz depressing…or any music that expresses no humanity.
And also I've just got tired of the group being viewed as this humourless…thing.
There's always been a lot of irony in the songs; people seem to take so much at face value, so literally, and that's a shame.’
And beyond the wry wit of the lyrics, there's Howard's guitar playing.
Fiery and unsettling, it's the sound of Tom Verlaine with a rocket up his butt — hardly the sound of a man who's tired of life.
‘I started playing guitar when I was fourteen,’ says Rowland, ‘and I was listening to people like Roxy Music and David Bowie.
But when I learned to play guitar I just got a book of chords and learned them and just sort of thrashed around.
I'm still incredibly limited, technically, with what I can do.
But if you want to play things that sound good and you have those limitations, then often you have to resort to things that other people wouldn't do.
Most people, if they can play something that sounds like something that they've heard on a record, are in danger of falling into the trap of saying, ‘A-ha!
I'm playing real music at last.’
Because I could never do that it never became a problem.
‘The review of ‘I'm Never Gonna Die Again' in Select started off saying that all the guitar playing that I did in The Birthday Party was genius and that since then I've been very vague and confused.
Which really is the worst sort of hype, because although I think that some of the things I did in The Birthday Party were good and some of them were great, some of them were just, ‘So what?’
I think that some of the playing on Crowned and on Insomnicide is just as good as virtually anything I've done before and it's just sheer nostalgia to suggest otherwise.’
Which just goes to show how strong a hold The Birthday Party still has on the public imagination.
When Rowland recently got up on stage with Nick Cave & The Bad Seeds at London's Town & Country Club (reuniting three of the four surviving BP members) the old songs were greeted with hysteria.
‘It was pretty funny,’ smiles Rowland.
‘It was really good and really exciting but in a way it was also like a flashback to 1983 or something, because I still wanted to do completely different songs to everyone else!
I suggested what songs I thought we should do and Nick and Mick (Cave and Harvey ) said, ‘That's stupid…’
And I thought, ‘Right, nothing's changed…!’
In their prime, The Birthday Party did very weird things to rock, fracturing its structure and tinting it with hints of country, blues and spooky carnival music.
They were also, very, very noisy.
Were they aware at that time of how experimental they were being?
‘There was such an incredible level of will involved,’ reflects Rowland, ‘and we just took it for granted that we were, like, better than everybody else by about 50 million miles.
And when you have that level of confidence it's easy to do things because, you know, you just do it; it never occurs to you that you might not be capable of pulling something off.
‘Our attitude was very much one of reacting against people, so we would get constant impetus to behave as we did because there was so much around us that was lacking .
Others didn't really seem prepared to do things that demanded a response from people.
They didn't seem prepared to say anything that might appear embarrassing or gauche later on.
And rock music has to be like that.
If you're too cool you just don't get anything done, basically.
You have to be prepared to be a bit dumb.’
Dumb, yes, but literate with it, The Birthday Party's black, macabre edge had an immediate effect on an impressionable British scene.
Inevitably, though, some people missed the point entirely and as a result they've often been tarred by the indiscriminate brush of ‘gothic rock’.
For Rowland, this is clearly a sore point…
‘It's obvious that bands like The Sisters Of Mercy and Fields Of The Nephilim have taken various things from The Birthday Party.
But, a band like The Sisters are about the surface level of things and the trappings.
To most people it's more important what Andrew Eldritch (The Sisters’ mainman ) looks like than anything else.
And the quantity of dry ice they use, and how much flour the Nephilim have on their clothes!
Whereas, none of the bands I've been in have ever been showbizzy in that sense, and if we're in a bad mood then we play really badly.
What you're getting is a representation of how the band feels at that time.
We don't attempt to disguise that we're four fallible people up there playing music.
‘Bands like the Nephilim and The Sisters do everything they can to cover up the fact that they are mortal.
It's a comic book sort of thing, doing everything in your power to present yourselves as greater than your audience.
I think that's a very significant difference.’
Rowland's quick to understate his own importance as a guitarist, but he's not prepared to attribute the host of apparent Howard derivatives entirely to synchronicity.
‘Sometimes,’ he admits, ‘I hear things that sound so ridiculously like something I do that it's not funny.’
So, for budding Howard soundalikes everywhere, here's Rowland's gear rundown for I'm Never Gonna Die Again …
‘I had a Fender Twin, a graphic EQ with everything on ten and the amp with everything on ten.
I had an MXR Distortion Plus and an MXR Blue Box (a prehistoric harmonizer making up for its dodgy tracking with an intriguing wobbly sound and some rather excellent white noise — Ed).
For guitars I just used the Jaguar and a Broadcaster-type thing made for, I think, Jerry Donahue, which I found at the studio.
They said the body had been cut from the top of a bar!
Whenever I use anything else — a different amp or something — I just can't get anything to happen, so I've given up trying, basically.’
It's the same late '60s Jag and the same Twin that he had in 1980 when The Birthday Party first broke.
It's the only guitar and the only amp he actually owns and, basically, that's his sound.
‘I don't like using effects, really,’ he explains.
‘The more effects you use the more you lose the original signal of the guitar and I like the fact that it sounds like a guitar and it sounds really twangy.
I don't see the point of doing things that make it sound completely unlike a guitar.
Most effects to me sound like oil on top of water.
I like Duane Eddy, and I like a guitar to sound twangy and hard and brittle.’
However, the Howard sound often goes beyond that of a mere guitar.
In fact, he seems on occasion to recreate the clatter of an entire wrecking yard, and it sounds terribly tough on the instrument itself…
‘Well it's not particularly well looked after,’ he agrees, giving the Jag a rough old shake to illustrate his point.
‘In fact, I'm always surprised when I see Sonic Youth.
They have about 14 guitars on stage and they actually do seem to have to half destroy their guitars to get those sounds out of them!
Whereas I hardly ever break a string; I mean, you don't have to hit your guitar with a hammer to make it sound loud.’
Alongside its work with the increasingly excellent These Immortal Souls, Howard's guitar has seen recent service with Crime & The City Solution and Lydia Lunch.
He also guested on The Bad Seeds' ‘Kicking Against The Pricks’.
But what was it like working with Blixa Bargeld, The Bad Seeds' legendarily perverse guitarist?
‘When I told Blixa I'd be playing on the LP, his response was, ‘Oh good — less work for me to do!’
He's the only person I know who considers not playing on something to be a contribution.
He thinks, by the sheer fact of not playing on something, his contribution has been to leave all the space for everybody else.
Which is quite an admirable trait, because most people seem hell bent on playing all over every single track, whether it's needed or not.’
Rowland's also worked with Bargeld on Einsturzende Neubaten's Thirsty Animal 12″…
‘When I walked into the studio Blixa had his body miked up and they were punching him to get a bass drum beat.
And the studio floor was covered with meat, and they had this dog they'd starved for three days with contact mics all over its stomach…and they were recording him eating the meat!
It was really bizarre.
I had to stand in the middle of this studio, the floor strewn with these bones and meat, and play guitar.
It was quite a hard act to follow, believe me.
‘Somebody told me that they saw the Bad Seeds recently and the show was being recorded, and that Blixa had had his volume knob turned down the whole time!
After being in The Birthday Party, where everybody wanted their part to be as loud as is humanly possible, it's quite refreshing to find someone who doesn't even care if he's on the record or not!’
DE 
REEVES GABRELS Bowie's right-hand sonic terrorist looks to the future…
Don't be fooled by Reeves Gabrels' studious exterior.
This man has been known to play guitar solos with the aid of a vibrator; come to that, he sometimes unplugs his guitar and plays a solo directly through the jackplug.
This man ordered an all-chrome finished Steinberger guitar — including the fingerboard — and then found that stage lighting rendered the instrument too dazzling to use.
This man plays in a performance art band whose antics include forcibly kidnapping members of the audience, tying them to chairs and emptying entire trashcans full of fake vomit over their heads.
But now, in the light of David Bowie's recent solo record deal, we must put aside such frivolity and pop the big question.
After two studio albums and ‘Oy Vey Baby’, the recent live album, has Tin Machine has finally failed its MOT?
‘Oh, dear,’ Reeves sighs.
‘Being in Tin Machine is a bit like having an affair:you know where it's at, because it's you who's having the relationship, but everybody else in the world thinks they know where it's at!
But the answer is no.
The band doesn't occupy all our time, but we're alive and we're well; I spoke to David a few weeks ago, and we're trying to juggle the schedules to go into the studio early next year.’
Gabrels is not in the habit of twiddling his thumbs in the gaps between Tin Machine projects.
As well as writing soundtracks — his latest, the music for a TV documentary on the architect Frank Lloyd Wright — he busies himself playing with no less than three other outfits.
‘The Bent Men is one band, and we've just put a CD out,’ he explains.
‘Bent’ doesn't have quite the same connotations over here, by the way…
How do I describe it?
It's based on a lot of African tribal rhythms, but played on urban ‘found’ percussion — bits of old metal, anything.
We've got three percussionists, some backing vocals, a lead vocal, bass guitar, two lead guitars, and we tend to be extremely threatening to the audience.
I do love that confrontational stuff…
‘Lately I've been getting a hankering to play country music again, so I've got together with a friend and put together a fun band called Modern Farmer.
You've heard of death metal; well, this is death country.
And it's a great excuse to play all my country licks without having to apologise for it!
‘But my main band outside Tin Machine is called The Atom Said.
The first show we ever did was opening for Living Colour, and we've just done a mini-tour with Adrian Belew's band.
It's especially interesting because our vocalist is female and black, which not only avoids the Tin Machine comparisons, but it gets us away from the whole rock'n'roll boy's club scenario.
The way she's had to deal with her life is very different to the way us three suburban-born white guys have dealt with ours, and we're learning something every day — it's a cool band.’
Reeves' guitar playing has changed somewhat since Tin Machine's debut three years ago.
‘I think I feel more sanctioned to explore, to keep pushing forwards,’ he says.
‘And another thing that's changed is that I used to be wary of getting into certain types of music, for fear they would show up in my playing; these days, though, I figure that listening to just about anything is cool.
‘There's this fascinating gestation period between listening to something and waiting for it to come out in your playing.
For a while I got deep into The Coasters and The Platters and all this old doo-wop stuff, and that somehow led to writing a song for Tin Machine's second album.
Then I discovered the Bulgarian women's choirs, ‘Le Mystre Des Voix Bulgares’— it's really funny to hear this stuff come screaming out of your subconscious and out through the amplifier…
‘Another thing is that I've started trying to play real tunes, real melodies — straight from the heart, really trying to commit myself.
And that's led to a change in the guitars, as well, because any guitar with a tremolo arm is a guitar with a trapdoor, an escape route you can take any time you're feeling uncomfortable — and they make you lazy with your finger vibrato as well .
Honestly, getting up there in front of people with no effects and no tremolo is about the scariest, most challenging thing I've done.
‘So I've been turning to simpler guitars, guitars that limit you, but that limit you in interesting ways.
I've been playing a Les Paul plugged straight into a Boogie Dual Rectifier, and this great ‘63 Telecaster I bought in Boston which might or might not be Ronnie Earl's old guitar.
That Tele's so basic, but it gives you so much freedom.
It'll be interesting to see if I'm still on this basic-guitar tack when we go in to record the next Tin Machine album.
‘I haven't completely given up on the Steinbergers, though.
The little black cricket-bat GL model is still my favourite for recording, and the M-series ones are still the main stage guitars.
I've got DiMarzios in all of them save for one, which has four Chandler Lipstick Tubes.
But they're strange guitars; I love the necks, they really suit me, but they never seem to ‘wear in’ the way wooden necks do.
Mind you, I found a way round that: never clean the fingerboards…’
In Britain, Tin Machine's imaginative brand of tense, futuristic grunge has regularly been the butt of the kind of vitriolic press coverage that would have many a younger, less experienced band pleading for their day jobs back.
Has Reeves read all the reviews?
‘Some of it,’ shrugs Reeves.
‘I understand it, in a way.
You've got to remember that David has a 20-year history of being a rock star, and he's broken his word and come back from retirement about three times.
I mean, I can remember him quitting after Ziggy Stardust in ‘73, and even at that age I was going ‘Oh, yeah,sure he's retiring!’
So, to a degree, he's earned the shit he gets, because of the way he's manipulated the media — but it's true, a lot of the criticism in the UK is stupid, really B-grade stuff.
But the thing to remember is they're always talking about something we've already done, not something we're actually doing at the moment.
And it's weird; it's almost as if the European press is mad at us for ‘taking their David away’, or something.
In America, it's ‘Ah!
Finally he's rockin'!’
CRAIG McLACHLAN Kylie and Jason were founder members, now it's the turn of Craig McLachlan, the latest musical Neighbour to join the club…
Craig McLachlan could be very easily dismissed as just another soap star turned muso, but Craig was playing guitar in bands long before he became an actor.
The release of his second album, ‘Hands Free’, follows the success of Mona , a hit from his first album which established him as a singer/songwriter but did very little to convince a cynical world that under the suntan there lurked a talented guitarist.
Craig, however, is determined to be taken seriously.
‘I saw Kylie do the Stock/Aitken/Waterman thing and Jason went down that same road, and I realised I wasn't going to do anything musical while I was with Neighbours, because Kylie and Jason were just copping flak from everywhere.
So I knew I had to avoid that.
‘By 1988, having joined the show in 1986, I was desperately missing gigging, and I was asked to put my old band The Y-Fronts back together for a charity performance.
I said, ‘Sure,’ called the guys up, they flew down from Sydney and we played and it was just like we hadn't stopped doing the pubs; it felt real good.
‘We gigged through the end of ‘88 to ‘89.
I was filming Neighbours five days a week and then two or three nights a week we were gigging.’
Craig is adamant he never saw Neighbours as a launch pad for his musical career.
‘Ever since I was a little boy, I've been fascinated by acting in the cinema.
I grew up in an area that didn't have any live theatre to speak of, but we did have a local cinema house, and I was just in awe of this thing called the cinema.
The other thing that captured my imagination was rock'n'roll, more than I can describe.
I was listening to weird stuff like Iron Butterfly when I was, like, still learning my alphabet!
‘Lyrically it didn't mean anything to me, but the guitars and solos, the bass…ah!
It just swept me up.
So ever since I was a little boy, all I ever wanted to do with my life was play rock'n'roll guitar and make movies.
Getting Neighbours was, as far as I was concerned, just a foot in the acting door.’
Ask Craig about musical influences and the answer is surprising.
‘By the time I reached High School — twelve, going on thirteen — I could play the whole Kiss repertoire.
And then jazz captured my imagination.
And the Police really blew me away…
‘Outlandos D'Amour’, the inversions that Andy was using, that really excited me for a period.
I'm sure all guitarists go through phases like that.’
Craig's first album utilised his band but they weren't used on ‘Hands Free’.
‘One problem with having two career paths happily bubbling along is that there just aren't enough hours in the day a lot of the time.
For the boys in the band, it was becoming like they were frozen fish fingers, waiting to be thawed out for the next meal, because I was off doing a mini series or whatever.
So I went into the studio and, as it turned out, I ended up doing the whole album.
For the next album, though, I'll definitely get a group of guys round me again, just for the camaraderie.
You know, like, when you've got a group of musos who you dig around you, spontaneous things happen; it's that whole sort of vibe.
You know, Gene Simmons said, ‘Don't play with your head, play with your dick’— basically it was a crass way of saying, ‘Feel it.’
And he was absolutely right.’
For anyone who still needs convincing that Craig is first and foremost a guitarist he quotes an incident that happened when the Y-Fronts got back together for a gig in Melbourne, during the time he was with Neighbours.
‘We were playing this gig in a notorious venue called the Village Green, and they had a blues band supporting us — real grunge, a great-sounding blues band.
And this band were just getting encore after f***ing encore; it was really good stuff, a real grunge-fest.
They finished and we were backstage and our guys were setting up our stuff and all these bikers in the audience started to chant, ‘Poofter, poofter,’ which was aimed at me, and we were thinking, ‘Oh know, this is ugly.’
We were playing three piece at the time and we thought, ‘What are we going to do?’
And they were still going, ‘Poofter, poofter’— like, fifteen hundred bikers!
So I said to my guitar tech, ‘Just crank the Marshall right up.
Just turn everything up,’ and I said to the drummer, ‘Get out there and start drumming the intro to Hot For Teacher and I'll come in at the appropriate moment.’
So he goes out and starts the number and I followed with the guitar intro — you know, the tapping thing — and it turned the whole gig around.
They loved it!'
RICHIE SAMBORA The guitar playing cornerstone of New Jersey's finest has decided to stay faithful…
Following Bon Jovi's two year hiatus, in which rumours of splits and individual projects kept the public guessing as to the future of the band, the release of a new album ‘Keep The Faith’ sees the circus back in business.
But how much, if anything, has the break changed the band's music?
Richie thinks the group have matured both musically and personally…
‘We grew up a little bit as people, but also as a band.
So on the one hand we wanted to be a bit harder edged in our music, but also we couldn't get too far away from Bon Jovi as it was, because people obviously bought our records because of the character of them — the songwriting and the playing.
So there was a definite conscious effort during the making of ‘Keep The Faith’ not to get too far away from what Bon Jovi were.
And we did a lot of experimentation as far as going for certain guitar sounds and stuff like that.
There's a lot of cool stuff on this record; I really enjoyed making it.’
Sambora's current enthusiasm for the album and the reforming of the band prompted the question, ‘What was really behind the long layoff?’
Richie explains…
‘Basically, the thing that went down between Jon and me was more of a band kind of thing than anything really personal.
At the end of the New Jersey tour we were just so burned out.
I mean, when you get to a point where you're playing stadiums and it's nothing special any more, you know something's wrong.
We seemed to only just muster up enough energy to go out on stage and play that day, and after the show was done we were exhausted.
So when you get to that point it becomes really tough to communicate, so of course no-one was communicating.
No-one actually said ‘Piss off’ to anyone else, or ‘You're fired’or ‘You're hired’; it was more or less a thing where none of us really communicated at all.
So that's why we needed to take a break.
And this is like chapter two of the band…’
So have new ground rules been laid for the reborn Bon Jovi?
‘Well, they've changed in a way.
Before, we were just listening to everybody else telling us to keep on playing and carry on doing this and that, but that was really just because they were afraid we were going to be a flash in the pan.
So the band has now decided to take control of its own future.’
Bon Jovi's layoff did have a few positive spin-offs for Sambora, providing him with the chance to do his long-planned solo album.
‘My solo record was a way of finding myself, a way almost of validating myself as a musician.
You know, it probably sounds weird, but after you've been on the road all that time, you kind of forget whether you're any good or not.
To me, that record was like, ‘Okay, I'm in this band, we've sold thirty million records or whatever it was, but do I deserve this success?’
And doing that record was a way of validating myself to myself.
And I also got to play with Eric Clapton and things like that — which really was an honour.
‘So doing the solo record was a real confidence-builder in my life.
Any time you do a record, or any time you practise anything new, you're trying to be better at what you do.
You have that in your sights, to become a better musician, a better songwriter, a better record maker, producer, whatever it may be.
And there was a neurosis and an anxiety involved around doing that solo record for me, because I'd never done one before and I didn't know if I could actually pull it off.
So, having done it, my confidence is built back up and I've also become a better player and a better singer — hopefully.
‘Actually, I'm sure it's true because I'd say my work on ‘Keep The Faith’ is my best playing on any Bon Jovi record to date.
But as well as the playing being better, we also went for a lot of different arrangements and different sounds, using a whole variety of guitars.
I used a lot of vintage instruments on this record, especially a lot of old Strats.
I have a ‘58 and a ‘63, plus I also have a couple of ‘65s.
I used all of those, as well as a 1959 Les Paul which I played a lot on this record.
And there were Martin acoustics, a couple of Gretsches — including a great little Duo Jet.
It was really good using all these different guitars, guitars which I've never really used before.
Like I said, making ‘Keep The Faith’ was a whole lot of fun.’
Competition CRAZY!
Just look at the prizes on offer in this first Guitarist issue of the New Year: a fabulous Signature model Jackson guitar; a superb Korg A4 guitar processor; and one of a dozen excellent Note Tracker music slide rules…
JACKSON ‘MARTY FRIEDMAN’ SIGNATURE
Guitarist has got together with John Hornby Skewes & Co Ltd and Roadrunner Records to bring you this unique competition: the chance to win an exclusive ‘Marty Friedman’ Signature model guitar from Jackson.
Megadeth guitarist Marty Friedman recorded for Shrapnel Records from 1981 to 1989 and has recently taken time out from working with the band to record a new solo album, ‘Scenes’, for Shrapnel/Roadrunner Records.
To celebrate the release of Marty's new album, Jackson have asked us to give away the new ‘Marty Friedman’ Signature model, which is so new that even we haven't seen it yet.
In fact, this guitar is such a closely guarded secret that at the time of writing there aren't even any pictures available.
But here are some details to whet your appetite…
The ‘Marty Friedman’ Signature is based on the Jackson Pro and features a Poplar body with a 24-fret bolt-on maple neck.
The tremolo and locking nut are the new Takeuchi system and, like the rest of the hardware, comes in black, to match the body.
There are two pickups, a Jackson J5ON in the neck position and a J92C in the bridge; they're controlled by a single volume pot and three-way toggle switch.
Tempted?
Then all you have to do to win this exclusive guitar is to answer the following six questions and, if you're the first correct entry out of the hat, this incredible instrument is yours.
Good luck!
1) Which Japanese musician appears on Friedman's new solo LP ‘Scenes’?
2) What was the title of Marty's first solo LP?
3) Who did Marty Friedman replace in Megadeth?
4) What was the title of the first Megadeth LP Marty played on?
5) What is Mr Jackson's forename?
6) In which US State are Jackson Custom Guitars made?
This is a postal competition so, when you think you've found the right answers, jot them down on a postcard along with your name, address and daytime phone number and send it to Guitarist .
If yours is the first winning entry out of the hat then we'll be in touch right away.
The address to send your entry to is:Marty Friedman Competition, Guitarist, Alexander House, Forehill, Ely, Cambs CB7 4AF .
the small print
The Editor's decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into.
The closing date for entries is Friday 26th February 1993.
The prize will be awarded on Friday 26th March 1993.
Entry forms for this competition are also available on purchase of the Marty Friedman LP ‘Scenes’.
One entry per LP only.
KORG A4 EFFECTS PROCESSOR
You've seen the picture, read the review, now enter the competition to win Korg's amazingly versatile A4 Guitar Signal Processor…
The Korg A4 has 30 user-programmable patches and the same again in factory presets, along with all the usual effects like delay, chorus and reverb — in fact everything you'd expect to find on a top-notch multi-effects machine.
The A4 is completely self-contained and MIDI compatible, and it even has amp switching capability, along with built-in simulator and noise gate.
Winning the A4 couldn't be easier.
All you have to do is answer the following three easy questions and phone the Korg A4 Hotline on 0891 100733 with your answers.
Don't forget to leave your name, address and a daytime telephone number !
Remember, this is a phone competition, so get thinking, then get dialling!
1) Korg's A3 effects processor is rack-mountable.
True or False?
2) How many presets, in total, are there in the Korg A4?
3) Apart from the A3 and A4, name one other Korg guitar processor with the prefix ‘A’.
the small print
The Editor's decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into.
This competition closes on February 28th 1993.
All calls are charged at 36p per minute (cheap rate) and 48p (at all other times)
12 NOTE TRACKERS
Note Tracker is a quick-reference musician's slide rule which clearly displays the note content and musical structure of a whole host of musical forms.
The note content of each interval, chord, scale and mode is clearly shown in all 12 keys and their musical structure appears in consistent geometric patterns.
If you want to know what goes into the scales, chords and intervals you use, the Note Tracker will give you all the information, instantly.
We have a dozen Note Trackers to give away and you can win one by answering the following three questions and being one of the first twelve correct entries out of the hat.
1) How many notes are there in a Triad?
2) How many notes are there in a Pentatonic scale?
3) How many notes are there in a Chromatic scale?
Now, pick up that phone and dial the Note Tracker Hotline on 0891 100734 , giving your answers, your name, address and a daytime contact number .
If you're one of the lucky twelve winners, we'll be in touch…
the small print
The Editor's decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into.
This competition ends on 28th February 1993.
All calls cost are charged at 36p per minute (cheap rate) and 48p (at all other times)
Takamine EN 40C Down-home acoustic meets onstage electric.
David Meadjoins in…
The electro-acoustic guitar occupies two essential dimensions: that of being a ‘domestic’ 6-string on the one hand and offering stage-orientated freedom on the other.
After all, you don't want to be rooted to the spot in front of a microphone — you want to perform !
The problem faced by manufacturers of this type of instrument is that of providing the world with the happy medium — a guitar that will perform both functions equally well.
And there's the rub: each dimension requires a differing approach as far as construction is concerned.
In other words, quite often, the best we can expect is a compromise.
Takamine have long since featured in the upper echelon of electro-acoustic manufacturers and this guitar enters the range in the mid to upper price bracket.
Construction
The Lowden-style, matt-finished top of the EN 40C is fashioned from solid red cedar, while the back and rims are mahogany.
This matt-finishing idea is apparently a reaction to the regular gloss tops being prone to reflect studio and stage lights, posing problems for video or TV.
This way round, the grain is still attractive even under pretty severe lighting.
The neck is also mahogany, with a thickish rosewood fingerboard harbouring twenty frets.
The EN 40C has a cutaway, unlike its companion model, the EN 40.
The cutaway here has been effected quite neatly and if your playing style incorporates the occasional sojourn past the fourteenth fret, then it's fairly obvious which model you would go for.
Clues to the exact build quality on a guitar such as this lay within, which is a tall order for the humble reviewer, but by hook or by crook — or at least with a simple mirror — all is revealed.
Everything inside appears neat and tidy, with no unsightly blobs of glue apparent around the kerfing.
The bracing, too, is well-finished — no gaps underneath and finished off nicely.
Outside, it's pretty much the same story, so quality of workmanship is well up to expectation.
The bridge is a little lumpy for my tastes.
It seems to be made of exactly the same grade of rosewood as the fingerboard and I think a tighter, less coarse grain would have been more attractive.
A small point, but worth Takamine taking a look at.
The strings on the guitar are fed through the back of the bridge, Ovation fashion, which saves the ‘pulling teeth’ experience of changing strings on a normal peg bridge.
Some may not like this idea, because it veers away from established convention, but it's quicker, plus it saves the hassle of breaking a string peg at an important moment and being left dangling, so to speak.
The nut has been nicely cut, giving a low, comfortable action in the campfire chord area.
Around the twelfth fret, too, the action remains easy.
The feel is still that of an acoustic, but it's less stiff and unyielding than the traditional flat-top box — light years away, in fact, from the cheese-grater regime prevalent when I were a lad.
Tuners are Takamine-badged Gotohs, with attractive pearloid keys.
The electronics on this guitar have been kept subtly out of sight, the jack socket being concealed in the end pin and the pickup under the split bridge.
The control panel is sited very sensibly in a line-of-sight position, on the upper edge of the body, toward the neck joint.
Basically, the panel comprises a three-band graphic EQ, offering ±5dB cut or boost at carefully selected frequency bands, and a separate slider for gain.
The battery compartment is located in the same place, so you won't have to shred your hand through the soundhole to effect a changeover.
In Use
Acoustically, the Takamine has a fairly flat response, with no boomy bass or tinny treble tendencies at all, though the evenness of its tone may have been achieved at the expense of some character.
It's a big dilemma where guitars are concerned, and acoustics, in particular, seem to be the subject of fierce debate.
This guitar's sound is quite full, although it doesn't seem to project particularly well — not a problem if you consider that the nature of the beast is part electric.
The acid test of this type of guitar is to put it through a mixing desk with a totally flat EQ and let the instrument literally speak for itself.
And one thing that becomes immediately apparent is that the EN 40C is a fingerpicker's delight.
The response in this area was far more positive than it was for simple strumming.
In a studio situation, I think I would choose to use both DI and an ambient microphone, in order to access the best of both worlds.
The EQ on the Takamine is useful and not too eager.
A simple tweak on, say, the treble slider gives you enough of a change, but without biting your head off, as some acoustic graphics are prone to doing.
The cutaway on this guitar would suggest a soloing facility and the EN shines in this department, too.
All notes have that crisp, interesting electro-acoustic sonority, without sounding wimpish or feeble.
Conclusion
Different people have different reasons for wanting or buying an electro-acoustic.
The electric side of the equation suggests that performance or recording is a prime consideration, because otherwise a straightforward acoustic for the same money would be an obvious better buy.
Takamine's experience in this field alone would recommend the EN 40C to many, although it must be said that Lowden, Ovation, Washburn and many other acoustics that we have reviewed in these pages recently provide stiff competition.
But as I have already said, individual tastes vary enormously and the best advice is to play as many different models as possible and buy on personal suitability.
One thing for sure, this Takamine is very well-built, sounds good and feels great to play.
And few players could require more.
n
Dr Robert Answers your queries From the hum that just won't buck, to the buck that barely hums…
Need a problem sorted?
Write to:
AWASH WITH FEEDBACK
Dear Doctor I have a Washburn WP-90.
It's a Les Paul-type guitar and it's great, apart from the fact that I seem to get terrible feedback, even at low volumes.
I use an overdrive pedal first (only slightly overdriving), then on to a BOSS delay and then a wah-wah.
My amp is a Marshall Valvestate 100 watt head through a Marshall 4x12 cab.
All effects go through both channels but on the boost channel the feedback is virtually uncontrollable, even with the gain at 11 o'clock .
Do you have any suggestions?
→ The cause of the problem lies within the mechanical construction of the pickups.
If the coil windings or bobbins are loose, microphonic feedback can occur — especially with the amount of gain at your disposal with the Marshall Valvestate.
Most guitarists have heard of the ‘waxing’ method of eliminating feedback, but unfortunately this is a difficult process to carry out at home as it involves dipping the whole pickup assembly into hot paraffin wax, which has to be carried out at a controlled temperature: too hot and the bobbins melt, too cold and the wax doesn't penetrate the coil windings.
Pickups fitted with metal covers quite often benefit by their removal, as the air gap between the cover and the coils often gives rise to microphonic feedback.
On certain pickups the bobbins are held in place by screws (on the underside of the baseplate).
If these work loose, feedback can arise, so check and tighten if necessary.
If feedback is still apparent you will have to have the pickups waxed by a professional.
Kent Armstrong offers this service at a reasonable price.
He can be contacted on: 023373 2527.
THE BUZZWORD
Dear Doctor Please help!!
It's those old problems again.
Buzz and Noise .
I own a custom-built, Charvel-style guitar made out of mahogany, with a maple neck, two humbuckers and a single coil wired to a five-way selector, vol and tone.
It has a Schaller fixed bridge.
The problem is a really noticeable buzz when I use a loud overdrive sound — Marshall half stack with Shredmaster.
I know the problem is not the amp or the pedal, as every other guitar I've tried is nowhere near as bad.
I've also had the wiring checked numerous times and told it was fine.
All the components are top quality (ie. Jackson and Seymour pickups, and Switchcraft, Ernie Ball pots and selector).
I have also had all internal cavities sprayed professionally with nickel screening paint from Maplin, but that doesn't seem to have made any odds.
One strange thing is that the buzz is worse when the volume pot is turned half-way on and gets less noisy when full up, but even then it's still noisier than my brother's Squier which cost less than the pickups on my guitar!
The other point is that the guitar is left-handed and therefore is wired to work counter-clockwise.
Could this be the solution?
Do I need different types of pots?
Any idea what I'm doing wrong?
→ There are a few things that you can try before you bin your guitar, John.
First, check that all the pots and the selector switch chassis are earthed, then check that there is a good earth connection to the nickel screening in the cavities.
If any ‘open’ circuits exist anywhere in the guitar's earth circuit a buzz will be noticeable — even with humbuckers — at the sort of mega gain you're talking about.
Do you have an earth connection to the tailpiece or bridge?
If not, fit one, because if the strings are not earthed you will definitely experience buzz.
You mention that the noise increases as you reduce the volume control on the guitar.
This can be cured by reversing the connections on the volume pot.
The wires leading to the middle ‘wiper’ tag, and the outside tag (not the one connected to the pot chassis) should be unsoldered and swapped around.
The fact that the pot is wired in reverse should have no effect on noise levels.
This modification will bring the signal output down to earth as you reduce the volume on the guitar and should, hopefully, eliminate your buzz.
Good luck!
IT'S TOTALLY BUCKED!
Dear Doctor I have an Encore Strat copy, the one with the humbucker in the bridge.
Just recently, however, the humbucker has decided to give up on me.
It's still working but only with loads of distortion and then the output is quiet and acoustic, instead of loud and gutsy.
When the pedal's off and it's just the clean channel there is no output whatsoever .
I am no expert on pickups but I don't want to get a replacement if I can fix the existing one.
Do you have any idea what the problem is?
Also, the pickup has Allen heads in both coils.
How do these change the sound, as compared with, say, the normal pole pieces or screws?
→ I'm afraid to say that the pickup is probably duff and will need attention by your local guitar repairer, or a pickup rewinding specialist.
If you can find nothing wrong with the external pickup wiring and associated circuitry, the chances are that a wire has broken inside one of the coils and will require rewinding.
Regarding the question of pole pieces, there should be little or no difference in performance between pickups (of identical specification) fitted with Allen head screws, compared to those fitted with slot head screws.
The important factors are the coils and magnets.
Fancy screws are by and large a manufacturer's fad!
THE PAULVERISER
Dear Doctor
I have recently acquired a Gibson ‘The Paul’.
I paid £150 for it with a case.
I haven't seen this model before and can't find anything about the guitar in all my issues of Guitarist .
The guitar itself, as you're probably well aware, is a basic Les Paul shape in natural mahogany with no binding whatsoever, and the pickup selector is down just above the volume and tone pots.
The headstock is normal Les Paul style with ‘The Paul’ neatly engraved on the truss rod cover plate and ‘Gibson’in gold lettering across the top.
The serial number on the back of the headstock is 70309536.
Could you please tell me: a) how much I made on the deal; b) year of manufacture and finally; c) why is the thing so rare?
It's basically a gorgeous guitar with a great sound and a beautiful neck.
Cheers!
→ The Paul is not a particularly rare Gibson.
Several hundred were imported into Europe during the late '70s and early '80s.
Walnut was used for the bodies and necks during the first few years of production but later Gibson switched to mahogany as this proved to be a more stable material, with less material wastage during the timber selection procedure.
As well as having no binding, the tops were flat, as opposed to the traditional carved top of the Custom and Standard; the pickups were exposed (no covers); the necks were three-piece laminated and used ebony fingerboards; the guitars were finished with a natural, matt cellulose lacquer.
Gibson also produced a ‘distressed’ finish version of The Paul and The SG (its sister model) with mahogany bodies and necks.
They created this distressed finish by marking and denting the guitar all over with a tool which gave the instrument a used/vintage appearance.
A related instrument called the ‘Firebrand’ appeared shortly afterwards.
The Firebrand featured the Gibson name branded into the headstock instead of the usual gold ‘Gibson’ decal.
Your particular guitar was made in 1979 at the Nashville factory and sold in the UK for around £400.
Its current value is around the £250–300 mark
D.C. Smith SJ-20 High-quality good value in a solid-topped acoustic from Japan.
Review by Rick Batey.
Making its debut on the Summerfield stand at this year's British Music Fair was an attractive new range of acoustic guitars.
Made by the Japanese firm of Saga (the same people who brought us the Lowden-esque Trameleuc acoustics, plus reissues of Maccaferri gypsy jazz guitars and Regal wooden-bodied resophonics) these new acoustics sell under the name of O.C. Smith and promise an interesting combination of European but strongly American-influenced design, together with Japanese efficiency and affordability.
The range is built around four different models, all with solid spruce tops, and all available in either ‘dreadnought’ or ‘jumbo’body shapes.
Thus we have the SD-10 and the SJ-10, both priced around £475, with backs and sides of laminated mahogany; the laminated rosewood SD-20 and SJ-20; the solid mahogany SD-30 and SJ-30; and finally the top-of-the-range SD-40 and SJ-40 models, priced at £799 and featuring ebony bridges and fingerboards and solid rosewood backs and sides.
Those are the basic models, but in addition there are four 12-strings — dreadnought or jumbo, in laminated or solid mahogany — and, for fingerpickers who like a bit more space to play with, there's also a ‘wide’ 47mm neck option on the low-end SD-10 and SJ-10.
There are no factory-supplied electro-acoustic models, so if you want to go amplified then you'd have to get a pickup fitted yourself.
Construction
It always makes a change to get away from dreadnoughts, so for a review guitar we chose the SJ-20 model.
It's a big guitar, 16″ wide across the body and just over 4¾″ deep at the bottom bout, and with handsome-looking wood and satin-finished lacquer throughout it makes an immediate impression.
It's designed, apparently, by the German distributor of Saga instruments, and by the look of it he's a real acoustic freak with some pretty tasty ideas.
The outline of the body has strong hints of Martin's J-model, with further Martin-esque echoes courtesy of the herringbone soundhole rosette and the varied assortment of pearl ‘snowflake’ inlays up the fingerboard and on each side of the bridge.
At the same time, both the tortoiseshell-style scratchplate and the headstock — and a very elegant headstock it is too — provide a faint tip of the hat in the general direction of Guild.
The SJ-20 has a solid spruce top with a fairly pronounced built-in arch or ‘belly’.
The quality of the wood is very reasonable; as with many other guitars the grain at the edges is much wider than the grain in the middle, but it's a good overall colour and free of blemishes.
Inside, the medium-weight bracing is in the traditional Martin X-pattern and everything looks neat and clean.
Incidentally, the truss rod nut is located just inside the soundhole, instead of up at the headstock; it's perhaps a slightly heavier system, but easier to adjust.
The back and sides are laminated rosewood, not necessarily a bad thing, as solid backs and sides have a far less obvious effect on an acoustic's sound quality than a solid top.
It's also good-quality stuff, and it takes a good couple of minutes of comparing the grain on the outside and the inside of the guitar to make absolutely sure that the back and sides aren't actually solid.
The body is neatly bound in cream-coloured plastic, with a matching cream line up the centre of the back and running between back and front, at the strap button.
There's some decorative plastic purfling running inside the binding on both back and front, but the triple-line soundhole rosette looks like wood, which is a nice touch.
The neck is (you guessed it) mahogany, again of reasonable quality, and all of one piece, save for an extra block making up the traditionally-pointed heel.
The rosewood fingerboard has twenty noticeably well-finished frets, and almost invisible rosewood-coloured plastic edge-binding.
Personally, I prefer my fingerboards either to be bound with something you can see or left plain as nature intended, but for some reason Saga obviously like their fret-ends disguised.
One thing is amiss — fingerboard shrinkage.
The rosewood has contracted slightly across the grain, taking the plastic binding with it and leaving a just-perceptible ‘step’ from the neck itself up to the binding.
Fingerboard shrinkage on new instruments has two possible causes — excessively dry storage or shipping conditions, or the use of hastily-seasoned fingerboard blanks — and although it doesn't affect the SJ-20's playability in any way, it might be enough to make me put this particular guitar aside and buy a different example of the same model.
Finally, the little bits.
The machines are very good quality, Schaller-style but presumably Gotoh, gold-plated — as they are on all O.C. Smith guitars — and dead smooth to use.
The bridge-pins and the strap button are white plastic, lightly spiced with a soupcon of pearl, but the nut and the saddle are genuine bone — a rare feature on mid-priced Japanese acoustics, and a strong point in this guitar's favour.
In Use
Without wanting to state the obvious, the SJ-20 is a big guitar that takes up a lot of room.
Although about an inch less wide than a Guild F-50 or a Gibson J-200, this is still definitely not an instrument for players of the short-armed variety.
But if you've got the limbs to match, then it feels good.
The neck is a sensible 43mm wide at the nut, medium deep, D-shaped as opposed to V-shaped and well rolled-over at the fingerboard edge.
It feels something like a late-'60s Gibson J-45 — in fact, a comfortable, all-rounder kind of profile.
The neck has just the right amount of forward relief, and needs no adjustment to the truss rod.
The intonation at the 12th fret is, well, varied.
It's acceptable enough on the wound strings, but the unwound B and E sound distinctly sharp, and combining low open strings with high chords above the octave is an inadvisable move.
The action around the fretboard's upper regions is perhaps tougher than some would like, but there's enough height at the bridge-saddle to bring it down a fair way.
Playing open chords around the bottom frets feels fine; the top two strings have been left a little high at the nut, but the E, A, D and G are perfect.
One swing with a pick proves this to be a big, bold beastie with enough power to out-boot many a dreadnought.
The SJ-20's general tone is rich and deep, but at the same time it's still quite a controlled and well-balanced instrument; I'd say it falls somewhere between the ‘Martin' and ‘Guild’ camps in character of sound.
There's enough treble response to make it a fair enough fingerpicker, but it comes off particularly well on rhythm and general chord accompaniment.
Conclusion
An SJ-20 would be a good choice for the all-rounder kind of player who's looking for a healthy amount of out-and-out acoustic oomph from an instrument without sacrificing much in the way of tone quality.
It's neatly made, structurally sound, very pleasant to play and combines an American-style appearance with a competitive price tag.
Well worthy of a trial.
n
Feedback Your Letters To The Editor Don't just sit there bottling up your emotions.
Write to:
SEEING REDS
Dear Guitarist Can you clear up the mystery of the early Fender custom colours, Salmon Pink and Fiesta Red ?
I have seen magazine articles in which experts say that there never were any salmon pink Fenders, yet I know there were, because I had one.
It was a new Fender Strat, bought from a shop on Shaftsbury Avenue in February ‘62, and yes, I wish I still had it, but only to sell it for the large sums they fetch now!
It was pink, not red like Hank Marvin's, which disappointed me rather at the time.
Nor was it a fluke, as the bass player in the band, not to be outdone, bought a Fender Precision from Selmer's a week later that was exactly the same colour.
The ‘62 Strat shown in the recently published Fender Book described as Fiesta Red, is red and I've seen pictures of others in mags described as Salmon Pink that were pink, like mine was.
The theory that pink ones are faded red ones is also ridiculous.
I still have photographs of the old band showing the Strat and the Precision: they were pink from new.
So, two different Fender reds.
Bad quality control or what?
→ Fiesta Red was (and still is) a bright, orangey red; Dakota red (like Hank's guitar) was a stronger, more blood red colour.
In the early '60s, Selmer's (who had the distinction of distributing both Fender and Gibson guitars at the time) used to have a lot of their Fenders sprayed here, owing to the differing tastes of British guitarists back then — the Shads’ influence, I would think.
Selmer used a well-known paint specialist called Derek Adams, who put finishes on much of the British guitar output of the time — Watkins, etc. — and the ‘pink’ Fenders you refer to were Derek Adams' attempt at Fiesta Red.
These Selmer/Adams Fenders were exactly the same colour as the Watkins Rapiers which Derek also sprayed.
But Adams' polyester used a peroxide catalyst to harden it, and the peroxide bleached some of the red from the polyester (the US-finished instruments were cellulose).
Hence the pinkish colour of these instruments.
The great majority of Selmer/Adams colours were pink (it became known colloquially as Flamingo or Salmon) and Sonic Blue.
While The Shadows were responsible for this red/pink mania, some years later Jimi Hendrix inspired most of these to be refinished or over-painted — this time mostly in white.
The Selmer/Adams polyester was rock hard, and thick, and many of those who attempted a quick refinish (thanks Jimi!) found they'd bitten off more than they could chew.
WHERE'S BUDDY'S STRAT…?
Dear Guitarist I have been meaning to write to your fine mag for a long time, but whenever I was about to put pen to paper someone else got there before me with the same topic.
However, I now have an excuse…
Buddy Holly has been a very big influence to me ever since I was a kid and over the years I have read articles and watched documentaries about his life.
But very little is ever said about his Fender Strat.
Could someone please put my mind at rest and tell me whatever happened to it?
→ Buddy's original Strat was bought in ‘56 and stolen on tour in ‘58.
The guitar would be recognisable by chips out of the treble side of the pickup covers; however, it has never resurfaced and, like Scotty Moore's ES295, there are probably hundreds of so-called ‘originals’ around the world.
The instrument which Holly used on his last tour is on display in a music museum in Texas.
The reason this one survived is because it travelled on the tour bus and not on the chartered plane, which crashed after take-off from Mason City airport in Iowa, while taking Holly, the Big Bopper and Ritchie Valens to a gig in Moorhead, Minnesota.
Incidentally, the comedian Des O'Connor owns a guitar which was given to him by Holly, while Buddy was on tour in the UK.
This instrument is not a Fender Strat, however; I believe it's a Höfner President or something similar.
SHADOW OF HIS FORMER SELF
Dear Guitarist The nightmare that haunts every musician has happened to me.
I simply seem to have lost my ability to play!!
Over the last year or two my playing has deteriorated to the extent that I am now virtually a one-fingered guitarist!
It appears to be a case of my fingers not doing what my brain tells them to do!
Furthermore, I can't seem to maintain even a simple rhythm on the guitar any more.
I find myself in the position of the dart player who one day discovers he is unable to let go of the dart!
I love to play Shadows and Ventures instrumental music, and, as you know, rhythmic and melodic expertise is the absolute essence of this type of playing.
Ten years ago I could make a reasonable job of most Shads' numbers.
Today, that would be an impossibility.
It's so frustrating.
There is nothing physically wrong with my hands, so the problem must be in my mind.
Is this type of psychological block common amongst musicians?
The fact that I am hopeless, useless, and can't play any more doesn't really matter, as I am an amateur player.
Will I ever be able to play again, or should I shoot myself and then throw away my guitars?
I am 46, going grey and on the point of total collapse.
Could this all be part of a mid-life crisis?
Please, please help.
You are my last hope!!
Yours in desperation,
PS.
I am on medication for high blood pressure; could this be part of the problem?
→ If your letter is serious, I am in no position to offer advice, since you really should see your doctor and ask him to refer you to someone who can help.
I actually knew someone who suffered from the ‘dart syndrome’ you mention, and he eventually overcame his disability, I believe with the help of a psychologist.
And don't say it doesn't matter just because you're an amateur; it's important whether you're a part-timer or Eric Clapton, so take it seriously and go to your doctor.
A&R: AIRHEADS AND RIPOFFS?
Dear Guitarist After reading your article on A&R depts, I feel moved to put pen to paper.
The A&R depts that we dealt with when last I was in a band (about 18 months ago) all seemed to consist of young men in Armani suits and long raincoats, who only stayed for the first four numbers then left.
These ‘raincoats’ were nine times out of ten the tea boys of the A&R department and were nine times out of ten a complete waste of time.
Most serious bands have at some stage attracted A&R interest.
This is followed by frenzied activity on the part of the band in setting up some sort of show, usually in London with all the expense that that entails, only for the big day to arrive to find that A&R have sent a tea boy (resplendent in his raincoat) and not the ‘man’.
This is annoying, to say the least, especially when a firm commitment has been received from the same ‘man’.
In my experience most A&R guys are not so much unhelpful as just plain uninterested; the ones showing interest perform the most agile of U-turns as quickly as a week later.
I don't want readers getting the wrong idea about this letter, but the compulsion to write came on seeing people like Jeff Young, who thinks I Should Be So Lucky is a good song (well, it probably is, if you're 10 years old); Norman Jay, who doesn't want bands to get in touch if all they want is a record deal; Mick Clarke, who ‘wants people to tell him what he's listening to is good’, then only signs people he likes, etc.
The point I'm trying to make is that A&R depts only know a ‘hit’ when it gets to No 4 in the national charts.
They have no more idea of the public's response to something musical than the average man in the street.
Seemingly, the only criterion adhered to by these ‘starmakers’ in signing new talent is not to upset the suits upstairs.
Put bluntly, these people have NO BALLS!
The ‘flavour’ of the piece in Guitarist was one of balanced vetting by the various A&R departments, when in fact they couldn't give a damn.
John Giacobbi sums it up quite nicely when he portrays the average A&Rs as narrow-minded lemmings worried about job security.
MEN VERY EASILY MAKE JUGS…
Dear Guitarist After the recent debate over sexist ads in Guitarist , I feel that I have to respond to an ad running in your magazine.
The current advert for the Washburn Mercury guitar revolts me to the very depths of my soul.
As any young astronomer should know, Mercury isn't the planet nearest the centre of the universe but the planet nearest the centre of the solar system!
ANGLE ON THE CENTREFOLD
Dear Guitarist I am writing to compliment you on an almost unbeatable magazine.
The features, reviews and techniques are superb.
The reason it is almost unbeatable is because there is one thing missing: a ‘centrefold’ poster, of the person shown on your front cover.
I always buy your magazine, but to get a picture of ‘Slash’ or ‘Satch’I have to cut out half of the interview page.
Other mags I've looked at give this centrefold pull-out picture, yet their books do not give the great info like yours.
So could you take up my idea, and make Guitarist unbeatable — PLEASE.
→ We don't really see Guitarist as a poster magazine, although we appreciate the fact that you approve so highly of James Cumpsty's photos.
I know they say a picture's worth a thousand words (and James would no doubt agree with you), but I think we'll keep things as they are for the moment.
UPSIDE YOUR HEAD
Dear Guitarist What do the following have in common?
Eric Clapton, Jeff Beck, Jimi Hendrix, Hank Marvin and Yngwie Malmsteen.
Answer — they are all influential guitarists who play Fender Strats.
Now spot the odd one out.
Got it?
That's right, Jimi Hendrix — all the rest have Signature series guitars but for some reason probably the greatest hasn't.
I know you can buy ‘68 reissues but why don't Fender produce a proper Hendrix Strat (maybe even with a reverse body).
Gibson did it with the Flying V — a guitar not immediately associated with Jimi — so why not Fender?
While I'm on the subject, whatever happened to the Randy Hansen interview which was promised quite a while ago but never appeared?
One last thing.
How about Phil Hilborne giving us mere mortals some tips on the twiddly bits in Jimi's version of Like A Rolling Stone ; it loses me every time.
Yours (not as experienced as I'd like to be),
→ The Hendrix model might be rather exciting to think about, but have you actually played an upside-down Strat, Gerry?
You can hardly play anything above the 12th fret (I know Jimi did, but he was Jimi)!
I suspect Fender would say the market is just not there, and point you in the direction of their Custom Shop, who would build whatever you wanted (phone Tom Nolan on: 071 602 6351).
I'd say, if you really want to emulate Jimi, buy a second-hand Strat and turn it upside down yourself.
Randy, as you can see, has finally made it into this issue.
COVER AVERSION
Dear Guitarist I am writing this letter in the hope that I may save a lot of Gibson-lovers grief with their pickups.
A lot of people who own Gibsons with humbuckers want to take their covers off.
You can only do this safely if your pickup has a metal base plate.
Some years ago a humbucker was designed for Gibson that has a base plate which looks like a printed circuit board.
If you attempt to remove the cover from this type of pickup then you will certainly break one if not both of the coils.
If any of your readers are unsure of the type of pickup they have then they can call me on 
GREAT FOR DANES
Dear Guitarist I feel I must put pen to paper, having just been to an excellent ‘30 Years of Jim Marshall’ evening here in Copenhagen, Denmark.
The night was organised by the Danish importer of Marshall, and Jim himself was on hand to sign jackets, books, T-shirts and just about everything.
The full ‘how it all began’ story was given by Jim, with Geoff Whitehorn giving both an amusing and informative demonstration of the latest range of Marshall gear.
The majority of Danes asking ‘Geoff Who?’ were soon enlightened and by the end of the evening there was hum of comment about this tasteful guitarist with a tone that would impress Peter Green himself!
(Gulp!— Sub-Ed .)
I feel more of these manufacturer-meets-customer events should happen.
After all, what could be better than a get-together with local musicians, listening to your favourite gear played how it should be played, and the all-important bottle of Carlsberg!
‘PROBABLY THE BEST NIGHT IN THE WORLD’— thanks Jim!
HOMEMADE SPONGE
Dear Guitarist I was just reading Joe Satriani's article in your mag and found that he suffered the same as myself regarding the tremolo unit on his Ibanez.
I thought it a bit extreme to take the unit off as I've found a much simpler way of stopping this problem of the springs sounding off in the back.
In the back of one of my homemade guitars I used a bit of thin foam, rolled up tight, to hold a battery in place; then I had a brainwave to use a piece of this and lay it across the springs, between them and the rear plate.
An amazing difference occurred; the guitar suddenly became cleaner, clearer when played acoustically and through an amp, plus I still had full use of the tremolo unit.
I could still purr it, bomb it, whatever, without any noticeable difference — other than the clarity.
I wonder if maybe you could pass this information onto Joe.
I would be more than thankful and hopeful that I may have helped him in return for the inspiration he has given me.
SMASH AND GRAB
Dear Guitarist Catching Nirvana's ‘performance’ on the recent MTV Video Music Awards I was reminded of the time when, as a youngster, the guitar-smashing exploits of my heroes — the likes of Townshend and Hendrix — left a bad taste in my mouth.
I'm sure I wasn't the only young hopeful to feel bitterness and a sense of being let down by those who otherwise inspired us in our guitar playing.
They were destroying something we dreamed of owning and playing but had no prospect of affording at the time.
It was obvious that hammering a Strat into the stage or setting it on fire meant nothing in financial terms to our heroes.
But it was — and still is — an affront to those who respected the great classic guitars, having to see them being used as dispensable stage props!
I can only assume that this continuing violence to musical instruments is being pursued in the interests of ‘entertaining’ the majority of the audience (who are non-musicians).
For me, it is still offensive and presents an amazing contradiction of the lyrics being accompanied, which stress non-violence and anti-materialism.
Perhaps, after all, playing great rock guitar is just another way of making money, and the pay-back in gate receipts from smashing up a Les Paul Custom makes the vandalism profitable.
I wonder what Eric Clapton thought of that part of Nirvana's performance?
(Still not good enough to justify a ‘real’ Strat or Les Paul!)
→ You can always justify owning a real Strat or Les Paul, Andy, if only by saying it might inspire you in your playing; great guitars can do that.
I'm not sure whether it's morally wrong to smash guitars or not.
It probably isn't — at least not from any ‘artistic’ standpoint.
True, it's a waste of natural resources, but a single issue of some daily newspapers is a far greater ecological sacrifice than all the guitars that have ever been put to death on stage.
I'll admit I felt just like you do when I first saw Townshend doing his smashing act; I would have died for the SG he splintered at Woodstock!
But now I think if someone buys something, then they've a right to do with it what they will.
It's easy to say that the smashing of a guitar is a loss to some potential player or other, but very few guitars are smashed compared with, say, the thousands of great instruments that are stored away in collections, in bank vaults etc.
It's all relative.
I think we're just jealous; we just think, ‘Well, he could have at least given it to me…’
RING OF CONFIDENCE
Dear Guitarist Many times I read in your magazine complaints about service in music shops.
In this month's edition, I read M. A. Dunbar's letter with regards to the commendable service from Patrick Eggle guitars.
In a similar vein, I can only praise the service offered by Doug Chandler and his merry men at Chandler Guitars in Kew.
Having purchased a very high quality/expensive combo (Rivera S120) from the same shop, within the warranty period the combo went seriously wrong — a fault that could not be fixed by the shop (even after faxing Paul Rivera in America!).
But rather than saying, ‘Sorry mate, you'll have to wait for it to be repaired,’ Doug said, ‘Take that one over there!’pointing to an equivalent amp.
‘We'll call you when yours is ready.’
This enabled me to keep working without causing additional expense; it caused Chandlers disruption because they do not have this loaned item of stock to sell — and, furthermore, when it's returned to the shop, will probably be sold as ex-demo.
This service is superb and worthy of note in your magazine.
PHIL HILBORNE Solo Analysis SOMETHING TO HOLD ON TO — Trevor Rabin…
Scales
This solo uses only one scale type throughout…
C Mixolydian mode:
C D E F G A B♭ C
1 2 3 4 5 6 ♭7 1
In addition to the above scale there are also a couple of arpeggio ideas used, and these are both F phrases — sus4 (F, B♭, C) and F Major (F, A, C)— and they are played in bars 2 and 6…
PERFORMANCE NOTES
1)
This solo is a very good example of Trevor Rabin's playing style, which to my mind always contains an effective blend of taste and melody, combined with a very well-rounded technique.
The phrasing in a couple of the sections is a little tricky, so you would be well advised to work through his solo in close conjunction with the record.
2)
The muted phrases in bars 2 and 3 should be performed using fairly heavy palm muting and a strong pick attack.
3)
For the phrasing of the bends, let-downs and pull-offs in bars 4 and 5 you should treat the notation as a guide and consult the record if you encounter any problems.
4)
The C Mixolydian scale run in bar 5 and the tremolo picked closing phrase should be alternate picked throughout — I personally prefer to start the scale run and each of the tremolo picked notes with a down-stroke — but you should remember to experiment and use whatever picking scheme works best for you.
5)
This solo was played on a Westone ‘Trevor Rabin' model guitar, probably through Marshall amps and cabinets.
6)
Many thanks for suggesting this solo go to Mr S. Adams from Plaistow, London — a couple of sets of Scalar strings courtesy of Clive Norris at Selectron will be on their way to you soon…
7)
Taken from the Trevor Rabin album ‘Can't Look Away’— Electra 960781/2.
techniques
HILBORNE'S Rock Guitar DOUBLE STOPS PART V — MORE BLUES
This month I would like to take a look at some further practical applications of blues-based double stop ideas.
All the examples shown here have been transcribed from the music of the late Stevie Ray Vaughan — as played on his stunning first album (‘Texas Flood’ EPIC/EPC 460 9512).
The first example (fig 1) is taken from the intro of the track Love Struck Baby .
This is very much a '50s rock'n'roll-type intro which consists of a combination of 4th double stops, two note bends (6-♭7, over static b3s) and full chords (B7b9 and E7).
Play this with a lot of attack, and don't worry too much about hitting any adjacent strings accidentally.
Remember, it's the feel that counts!
Fig 2 shows the opening two bars of the solo from Love Struck Baby .
This entire solo is very much a showcase example of double stop and fragmented chord playing.
The main point of interest here is the bends in bar 2 which follow the 4ths in bar 1.
These involve bending the b5–5 and the 6-♭7, therefore implying an A7 chord sound.
Be very careful to pitch these bends correctly — they will sound awful if they are inaccurate.
Fig 3 is the intro to Pride And Joy .
The main rhythm part of this example is very similar to the walking bass idea that we saw in fig 2 of last month's article.
So the same guidelines apply: pick the bass notes hard and the top notes a little softer to give the impression of two independent parts being played simultaneously.
Also, the turnaround found in bars 13–16 is a little tricky so, if you have any problems, break it down into small parts and practise it slowly, only building up the speed when you're feeling more comfortable.
The next example (fig 4) features some double stops that are very effectively ‘thickened up’ by the addition of open high E string pedal tones.
This part is taken from the first 4 bars of the Pride And Joy solo and illustrates a great device for filling out the sound of your lines.
As usual, after playing through it try to develop some ideas of your own.
The last example (fig 5) is similar to the start of the second chorus of the solo from Tell Me .
In common with fig 4 this relies on fast alternate picked double stops, only this time they are at a faster tempo, phrased in sixteenths and have a moving line added as a third (lower) part.
Technically, this is quite difficult to play accurately up to speed; I find the best approach is to try to maintain a very relaxed right hand wrist and to pick in the general area around the top end of the fingerboard.
Next month, I will be having a look at some readers' requests.
If there are any specific parts, styles, players or techniques that you would like to see covered in future Rock Guitar articles please drop me a line c/o the mag and I will see what I can do.
DAVID MEAD Get Rhythm TIME GENTLEMEN, PLEASE
Okay, okay…
I know that if we speak of the ‘rhythm guitarist’ as such, the image of a second-rate underdog player springs instantly into view, playing a tiresome, subordinate role to a far more experienced (and inexcusably vain) lead player.
The truth of the matter is that, conceptually, rhythm occupies that grey area of learning that few students of the guitar will admit to having any desire to explore.
But I have found that it is often the factor in a player's style which, with a little bit of work, can yield the most impressive results.
For instance, most players will admit to taking to tablature in a very big way; it's easy to decipher and you can play something very like the part in question almost immediately.
But the one damning aspect of tab is that unless you know the solo, riff or whatever really well, getting the exact timing spot on, without being able to decipher rhythmic notation, is a bridge too far.
And no matter how accurate the notes are, if the rhythm isn't happening, yer stuffed!
Rhythm gives your playing focus .
Listen to Nuno Bettencourt, Steve Vai, Clapton — any great player — and you're hearing great timing, phrasing and articulation, which are all the offspring of a basic understanding of rhythm.
What I intend to do in this column is to explore and explain rhythm in its purest sense — from the point of view of notation, theory and practical application.
And so, first of all, let me present to you the battlefield.
A single, empty bar into which can be poured almost literally anything you want.
It will faithfully record your nightmarish, most avant garde guitar parts — bass, rhythm or lead.
And all it takes is just a little work to understand exactly how.
All you are going to need to work through the examples and exercises I will be giving you each month is access to either a metronome or drum machine.
(If you don't have either of these, find someone who has and ask them to record a few straightforward patterns or beats at around 80–100 beats per minute on a cassette — it will work just as well.)
Also, a very basic understanding of simple arithmetic would be an asset.
This month, I'll leave you with a super-hairy Steve Vai guitar lick, broken down into rhythmic notation: ie. no notes.
It probably looks a bit like hieroglyphics now, but in a few months, I guarantee that you will understand this and will begin to see a difference in your playing.
Trust me!
MICHAEL FATH Technique as a Result of Harmony THE SEVENTH & MINOR SEVENTH
Recently I was in Glasgow playing a show and someone remarked to me that they would like to see something written in my column about sevenths.
So, for whoever that was, here you go…
A seventh chord (and arpeggio) is comprised of the 1st, 3rd, 5th and ♭7th of the major scale.
The seventh degree being flat will give you more of a blues feel, as opposed to the normal seventh as found in a major seventh chord (1st, 3rd, 5th and 7th) which I discussed in my July ‘92 column.
I will once again use the key of A as my example: A7 = A (1) C&sharp;(3) E (5) and G (♭7); and Am7 = A (1) C (b3) E (5) G (♭7).
Diagrams 1–4 illustrate several positions of the A chord.
To create an Am7 just flatten all the major third notes (from C&sharp; to C).
Examples 1 and 2 are simple yet effective one octave versions of the A7 and Am7 arpeggios.
Example 3 illustrates a two octave A7 arpeggio.
Note the hammer-ons and pull-offs and sweep picking technique.
To play this version of the Am7 just substitute C notes (minor 3rd) for the C&sharp; notes (major 3rd).
Example 4 is a very popular sweep pattern for the Am7 (listen to any Yngwie record!).
Example 5 is an A7 with Lower Neighbour Tone embellishment.
LNTs are always a half step below the arpeggio note.
More on this technique next month.
Example 6 illustrates a simple right hand (A7) tapped melody.
More on tapping sevenths (& 9ths) in a future column.
Example 7 shows A7 in full 3 octave splendour!
Thanks for reading and be sure to check out my latest CD on Music Maker Records, ‘Suspended Animation’.
Also feel free (as my friend in Glasgow did) to ask for something special in a future column.
GERRY HOGAN Rockabilly'N'Country Licks GOLD FINGERS…
After attempting last month's first 8-bars of the 16-bar solo from Linda Ronstadt's That'll Be The Day , we'll crack on with the second half this month.
You may recall that the solo is split between Andrew Gold and Waddy Wachtel, with Waddy featuring last time.
Andrew enters at the end of the eighth bar, slightly across the final burst from Waddy.
I quite like the raunchy, fat tone he gets.
In fact, it sounds rather like the tone of a flat-out, old Fender Champ — not the kind of thing they'd like to hear down at your local C&W club!
Having said that, this aggressive, attacking style has been used on country records for 30-odd years — listen to sessions by Glen Campbell, James Burton, Chet, Fred Carter Jr., Wayne Moss and the like, from back in the early '60s.
Of course, there's country and there's ‘country’— know what I mean?
In fact, Andrew's tone reminds me at times of Marc Bolan, particularly when he's playing the percussive, rhythmic section across bars 4 and 5.
Altogether, the solo is nicely formulated, but I don't really like the D notes which creep into bar 5.
I'm sure they weren't meant to be there, but the solo probably felt so good that they decided the Ds weren't horrific enough to worry about.
Andrew and Waddy play bars 7 and 8 in harmony, so I've written them separately, for clarity's sake.
There's something to have a bash at while you're relaxing over the Christmas hols!
Next month I'm going to tab out a request from Mr Bob McGhee, of Basingstoke, who has asked for Don Rich's solo from Buck Owens' Love's Gonna Live Here .
ALAN LIMBRICK'S Pentatonics PENTATONICS WITHIN THE MAJOR SCALE…
This month we're going to start exploring the possibilities of superimposing pentatonic scales over any chord derived from a particular key.
To start with, let's have a brief review of major and minor scale harmony.
To harmonise a scale (ie. build the chords that are contained in a particular key), we stack up thirds on each degree of the scale using only the notes found in that particular key.
For example, in the key of G it would be G, A, B, C, D, E, F&sharp;: and the chords built on each degree of G Major will look like this:
F&sharp; G A B C D E
D E F&sharp; G A B C
B C D E F&sharp; G A
I = G A B C D E F&sharp;
If we examine the intervals of each note of the chord from its root note we get the following:
So the chords found in any major key are: I maj7, II m7, III m7, IV maj7, V dom7, VI m7, VII m7b5.
Since the notes in the key of G major are exactly the same as those in the key of E minor (the ‘relative minor’ of G major) the chords found in E minor will be exactly the same as those found in G major.
The only difference will be the degree of E minor which they are built on.
This is where the theory starts to help us get more mileage from our old friends the minor pentatonic scales.
The important thing to remember is that wherever we find a minor 7th chord in any key (major or minor) we also have a minor pentatonic scale.
Let's examine the key of G major as an example.
In any major key we have minor 7th chords built on the 2nd, 3rd and 6th degree of the key: ie. in G major we have Am7 (II) Bm7 (III) and Em7 (VI).
Therefore we can assume that there are 3 minor pentatonic scales all found in the key of G Major: ie. A, B and E minor pentatonics.
The important points to remember for the next series of lessons are these…
1.
There are three minor pentatonic scales found in any major key/scale.
2.
They are derived from degrees II, III and VI of any major key/scale.
3.
Any or all of the three minor pentatonics can be used to improvise over any of the chords in the same key.
Obviously the same theory applies to minor keys, but in minor keys the minor pentatonics are found on the first (I), fourth (IV) and fifth (V) degrees of the scale/key.
Personally I like to keep things as simple as possible, so I always relate this concept to the relative major key even if I'm dealing with a song which is in a minor key.
Next month we'll see why the pentatonics can be taken from II, III or VI of any major scale/key and examine the sounds they create when superimposed over various chords.
See you then.
JOE HUBBARD'S Bass On Top SCALE FORMS — A NEW WAY OF PRACTISING
The traditional way of practising scales — up and down the fretboard in two octaves — is great for technique but doesn't help much for connecting your ideas all over the fretboard in any given key.
Because you're always starting on the root, reversing directions on the root and ending on the root, you're only using one seventh of the possibilities inherent in each scale.
Bass players suffer inherently from this ‘root bias’ approach.
So we need a better way to practise our scales where we can relate to a key area from any one of the seven notes in the scale.
There are five positional patterns that can be played laterally up and down the fretboard and which relate to any major scale (and its relative minor scale): you'll start on the lowest diatonic note in each key and move up the fretboard to the highest comfortable form (more on this later).
All the five patterns will be the same for any major or minor scale, but the order in which these forms appear on the fretboard will vary from key to key.
To understand this concept, think of your fretboard as a conveyor belt.
You will notice all five fingering patterns placed one after the other.
If the conveyor belt is rotated part the way around, all of the relationships between the fingering patterns and the fretboard will still hold, only the specific location of those patterns will move along the fretboard.
Each pattern relates to the scale degrees of the key.
In the key of C, the first pattern is called 3–4.
This is because E is your lowest diatonic note.
The next form is 5 followed by 6, 7–1 and 2.
These are all five forms (the accompanying fretboard diagrams give a detailed overview of this).
To understand how this applies to all 12 keys it is helpful to know the starting form, as each key will continue sequentially up the fretboard from the starting pattern.
What follows is a table outlining this:
You'll notice that the first five keys, if moved up one half step, will share the same starting form.
Not bad — 10 keys for the price of 5!
Play up and down each form using a steady stream of 16th notes.
After the 5th pattern the 1st form occurs again, only up an octave this time.
Continue ascending two more forms and then play the whole thing descending.
Study the fretboard diagrams and I've also written out the exercise (in C Major).
Notice that the patterns rarely fall on the downbeat.
This whole scale concept across the entire fretboard is a powerful way of improving your familiarity with the fretboard, although you might not see the full implications of this exercise until you memorise it in all keys.
Until then…
Bass Regards.
JOHN CURRIE Bass Analysis LED ZEP II
The second of our John Paul Jones analyses was requested by Rob Scholes of Sutton Coldfield, and looks at the 4th and 5th 12-bar sequences of the ‘quiet’ section in the middle of The Lemon Song from Led Zeppelin II, just before the concluding uptempo choruses (CD time 4.33 to 5.34 apparently!).
One set of Elite bass strings all yours Rob, courtesy the Bass Centre.
This track is an extended 12-bar workout in two tempos, and John comes very much to the fore for 60 bars playing what is more of a solo than a bass part, though he does still strongly outline the changes, as we will see.
The groove here is a funky, sixteenth note blues (not a shuffle) played fingerstyle on a Jazz bass, showing definite signs of the James Jamerson influence yet again.
Notes:
1)
Bars 1–4 are based on the E minor pentatonic scale: E, G, A, B, D. As is often the case in a blues style song, though the underlying chord may be major and frequently dominant (in this case E7: root E, major 3rd G&sharp;, 5th B, ♭7th D), the melody or soloist will often make use of a flattened 3rd interval (here a G) to help create a bluesy mood.
Note also the B♭ approach note, a b9th of the following A7 chord, sounding forceful yet with a jazzy flavour.
2)
In bars 5 and 6 John chooses A mixolydian mode phrases (A, B, C&sharp;, D, E, F&sharp;, G) with added chromatic passing notes D&sharp; and G&sharp; to complement the A7 chord (root A, major 3rd C&sharp;, 5th E, ♭7th G), and similarly goes for E mixolydian (E, F&sharp;, G&sharp;, A, B, C&sharp;, D) with passing note D&sharp; on the E7 in bars 7 and 8.
3)
Major pentatonics are found in bars 9 and 10: B, C&sharp;, D&sharp;, F&sharp;, G&sharp; for the B7 phrase, and A, B, C&sharp;, E, F&sharp; for the A7, rounded off with a pair of quavers, G&sharp; and B, the major 3rd and 5th of the following E7 chord.
4)
With the exception of the chromatic link in bar 16, the other lines in this piece are all based on one or other of the above scales.
Check the rest out for yourself, making sure you can recognise the intervals and scale shapes in relation to each chord.
If you are not familiar with any of these, I have summarised them below so you can learn the fingering shapes and go on to practise them in all keys.
Have a good ‘93 everyone.
I hope you enjoy your bass playing as much as I intend to!
ADRIAN INGRAM From Rock To Jazz CALLISTHENICS: READER'S RESPONSES
In a previous issue,Guitarist ran an article on callisthenics, in which I invited readers to submit exercises which have proved to be particularly useful.
Because these columns are planned well in advance, I have been unable to print your responses until now.
So here, in effect, is a From Rock To Jazz column written by its readers!
I found your ideas to be very helpful, from a teaching point of view, and I am sure that players will find them particularly beneficial for the development of control and co-ordination.
STEPHEN HUMPHRIES
I have been performing many exercises to aid specific problems within my playing for some time now, which could be referred to as callisthenics.
Exercises 1–3 were designed to get me out of a rut in my playing.
Whenever I picked up my guitar I played the same basic scalar and arpeggiated patterns.
In an effort to develop a unique sound I stumbled across the very first pattern which I discovered I had never played before.
I worked on this for some time and extended, integrated and tried to twist it to my style.
The other exercises were designed to help me with a problem of co-ordination in hammer-ons and in string skipping.
These exercises have helped me remedy this to a large extent.
T C VOGEL
A while ago I had to build up my left hand strength to be able to do justice to J S Bach's Prelude, Fugue, Allegro for Lute, so I developed the enclosed ideas.
They were and still are helpful in my classical playing, but they also helped me in developing slurring in my electric playing.
EXERCISE 1
All four fingers must be kept on the fretboard as Fig 1a, gradually moving up the strings as Fig 1b.
EXERCISE 2
All four fingers must be kept on fretboard as Fig 2a, gradually moving up as Fig 2b.
EXERCISE 3
All four fingers must be kept on the fretboard as Fig 3a, gradually moving up the strings as Fig 3b.
Now try Ex. 1, 2 & 3 with triplets (on, off, on).
EXERCISE 4
Scale in thirds 
Here are two exercises that were given to me by ANDY WATSON and TREFOR OWEN, part-time tutors at Leeds College of Music.
ANDY WATSON
Continue the pattern on the 2nd and 1st strings.
TREFOR OWEN
Trefor's exercise, for picking and co-ordination, is based on a major seventh chord shape *INSERT CHORD BOX* moved chromatically up the fingerboard.
Repeat the picking pattern on strings 5–2 using the following major seventh shape: *INSERT CHORD BOX*
TONY MUSCHAMP'S Bass Space MINOR MODES
Carrying on from my last article let's look at the Harmonic Minor modes.
Make sure that you have covered all the information that we have learned so far: ie. the construction of the harmonic minor scale itself and the scale harmonised in triads and seventh chords.
And don't forget to practise in all keys!
The first mode or scale is quite simply the C harmonic minor.
This mode can be played over a Cmn7 chord.
The second mode is D Locrian&sharp; 6 and this scale sounds good over Dm7b5.
The third mode is E♭ major augmented and outlines Ebmaj7&sharp; 5.
Our fourth mode is F Dorian&sharp; 4, which is used for Fm7.
G mixolydianb2b6 is played over the G7 chord.
The sixth mode is A♭ Lydian&sharp; 2 and goes with Abmaj7.
Our last mode is B altered b♭7 and is played over the seven chord B7 (o = diminished).
The best way to learn these modes is to take them one at a time and examine the construction of each one.
For instance, the second mode is 1, b2, b3, 4, b5, b6, ♭7,(8); once you have memorised this information try playing it over Dm7b5.
Record a backing tape with this chord and try experimenting with the mode.
This will take a little getting used to, so be patient and be sure to memorise any melodies or lines that you come up with.
When you feel you have the first mode together, move on to the second and so on.
This might sound like a lot of work but, believe me, it is well worth the effort.
Of course, after you have been through the modes in one key, remember to transpose this information to all keys, not forgetting to learn the scale harmony (I mn7, II m7b5, III maj7&sharp; 5, IV min7, V Dominant7, VI maj7, VII Diminished7).
I've presented you with a lot of information in this article, so remember to take your time and try to practise every day.
In this way you will be sure to get through the work load.
Good luck!
READERS’ ADS
FOR SALE
'87 USA Strat Standard Deluxe, mint condition, £550 ovno.
Rickenbacker 330, excellent, plays beautifully, £650 or swap.
ADA MP-1 MIDI guitar preamp with MIDI footswitch, £395 ono.
ADA MP-1 with SC foot controller, SP300 stereo amp plus stereo 300 watt cabinet, all brand new, flight cased, excellent sound, quick sale needed, £850.
ADA MP1 MIDI valve preamp, plus ADA MIDI footcontroller. £500 for both.
ALEMBIC SN bass, 4-string, as new, £700.
ALESIS SR16 drum machine, £245.
PF1 MIDI tape synch.
Yamaha RX17 drum machine, £95.
ALLAN Holdsworth fans, Epiphone USA prototype, like ‘59 Les Paul Special, double cutaway, 1 P-90, all Gibson parts, signed by Allan, this guitar bites, offers.
AMERICAN Standard Deluxe Stratocaster, mint, as new, basically same as Clapton's, £550 ovno.
Rickenbacker 330, excellent condition, £550 ovno.
AMERICAN Stratocaster, 1977, sunburst, Kahler trem, very heavy, nice sound, £475.
AMPEG R15R superb reverb valve amp, vibrato, reverb, 15″ speaker, classic '60s valve sound, virtually unmarked, £400.
AMPEG Reverbrocket, 1962, £300. 1968 VT22 100 watt twin, £270. 1971 D25 bass head, £250.
AMPEG SVT bass preamp, £300.
AMPEG V60 240 watt bass amp, £240 ono.
ARIA 25 watt amplifier, excellent condition, £110.
ARIA TA50 varitone with flame top, with case, £185.
Fender Telecaster, 1966, £350.
ARIA ZZB Deluxe bass, Explorer shape, black and yellow zebra stripe, gold plated hardware, good condition plus hard case.
ART Multiverb Alpha MkII and Art X15 with expression pedals, 1 month old, mint condition, boxed with manuals, £400.
ART Multiverb LT rack effects processor, mint condition, virtually unused, boxed with manuals, £150 for quick sale.
ART X15 Ultrafoot, realtime MIDI footcontroller, never used, boxed, £100.
ART X15 Ultrafoot, £155.
ARTISAN LW-30 acoustic, dreadnought size, beautiful woodbound instrument, immaculate, very little used, £225.
ASSORTED guitars, Fender Japanese 12-string, mint, £325.
Silvertone amp-in-case guitar, £250.
Bond Electraglide, £250.
Gittler guitar, strange! £250.
ATN Thetatronics tone circuit, make your Stratocaster sound like a Gibson or Rickenbacker etc, £30.
BASS Collection 401, active, dark sunburst, fast neck, with fitted case, cost £515 accept £390.
BASS rig, Gallien Kreuger 800 RB head, 1x15 and 4x10 cabs.
Musicman Stingray plus Clifton custom fretless basses, as new.
BC Rich Mockingbird NJ series, black, hard case, 6 months old, £320 ono.
BOOGIE .22+ combo, £450.
Black Fenix DiMarzio'd Strat, cased, £250.
Swap with cash for bigger Boogie.
BOOGIE 1977 Mk1 60/100 head, £500 ono.
BOSS CF2, BF2B, CE2B and BCB3, all cased, £150 ono, will not split.
BOSS CF3 compression sustainer, £40.
Aria stereo chorus, £25.
Flightcase for electric guitar, £25.
BOSS DR550 drum machine, boxed with manuals and all accessories, £125.
BOSS DSD3 delay sampler, £45 ono.
Vox 50 watt tranny lead combo, £75 ono.
KMD 100 watt twin channel reverb combo, £120 ono.
BOSS HF2 hi-band flanger, £58.
OD-2 turbo overdrive, £54.
Pearl AD08 delay, £44 ono.
BOSS HM2 heavy metal pedal, £35 or swap for CS3 compressor with cash adjustment.
BOSS MB-5, mint condition, boxed with manual, £220 ono.
BOSS ME-5, home use only, studio quality, 5 digital effects at once, fully MIDI-able, perfect condition, bargain £190.
BOSS ME5 effects board with hard case, excellent condition, £275 ono.
BOSS ME6 multi-effects with slight surface marks and also Fender Strat with locking trem system, metallic green, good condition, offers.
BOSS PS2 pitchshifter delay, boxed, as new, perfect, £100.
BOSS RPQ-10 preamp/parametric equaliser, half rack effects processor, sell £60 or swap for A-1 condition wah-wah pedal.
BURNS Double 12 reverb combo amp, excellent condition, offers around £330.
CARLSBRO B115 150 watt bass combo, 11-band graphic, 15″ speaker, compressor, DI, effects loop etc, as new, £275.
CARLSBRO Marlin 150 watt PA amp, £130, pair Peavey 1x12 PA speakers including stands, mint, £160.
CARLSBRO Renegade 150 watt amp with channel change, overdrive and reverb, £200.
CARVIN DC-125 custom, all black, single pickup, original Floyd Rose, complete with Carvin hard case, £400.
CASIO PG-380 synth guitar, A1 condition, including case, £550.
CELESTION 18″ 200 watt speakers, 2 cabs, will split, £75 each.
CHANDLER custom built superstrat type Soloist, one humbucker, 2 single coils, recessed trem, £850 or swap for Jackson USA.
CHANDLER guitar, Strat shaped, Schecter flamed maple neck and body, sunburst, single OBL humbucker with locking trem, vgc, £250 ono.
CHARVEL active lead guitar, metallic pink finish, vgc, £300 including luxurious hard case.
CHARVEL Avenger, black, 2 months old, unwanted gift, still boxed, hardly played, tiny paint chip hence £280 ono.
CHARVEL Model 5, neck thru-body with active circuitry plus case, £400 ono, or swap/px for Charvel 550XL.
CHARVEL ST Custom, cherry sunburst, immaculate condition, £260.
CHARVEL Surfcaster, seagreen and white with case, stunning guitar, 3 months old, usual features, £350.
CONTRERAS Flamenco guitar, 1986, pegged head, unused, £1,500.
CRY BABY wah pedal, £35.
Tokai overdrive, £25.
DIGITECH GSP-21 Pro, 8 months old, boxed, manuals, reluctant sale, £450.
DIGITECH vocalist, as new, £450.
ELECTRIC guitar, reasonable condition, £70 ono.
ELECTROVOICE 12″ speaker, 8 ohms, boxed, £90.
Digitech Whammy pedal, boxed, £80.
Morley Wah Volume pedal, £60. tel: Tony, 081 541 3894, Surrey.
ELECTROVOICE system 200 with controller plus bass bins plus Peavey CF800 power amp, £1,750 ono.
EMU Drumulator and pad programmer, £250.
Ibanez HD-1000 harmonics and delay unit, rack mount, £175.
EPIPHONE by Gibson Sheraton semi-acoustic, natural, mint condition, no case, £175.
EPIPHONE Riviera, 1964, sunburst, one P90, one Alnico V, master volume, unusual, £475.
EPIPHONE Texan, early 60s, £550.
Gibson 335 Dot, £650.
Cobra lead amp, £125.
ESP Custom, ex-Gary Moore, solid flame maple body, sunburst, birdseye maple neck, ebony fretboard, £1,500.
FENDER ‘85 Deluxe, minus bass control on channel one, £250 ono.
Boss CH1, £40, Boss FT2, £40, Boss HM2, £35, Boss pedal case, £15.
FENDER 35th Anniversary Strat, ungigged, mint, fabulous spec, very few in UK, £1,500, including case and custom shop certificate.
FENDER 75 1x15″ all-valve combo, switchable channels, pull/push boosts, as new with cover, only £325 ono.
FENDER Anniversary Stratocaster, in original white finish, extremely rare, complete with original deluxe flight case and certificate of authenticity, £550.
FENDER Bass V, 1966, £750. 1963 Precision bass, £750.
Fretless Precision, EMGs, £275.
FENDER Bassman, 1964 vintage, blackface with professionally fitted valves, 3 spring Accutronics reverb, with matching 2x12 Fender cab, £650.
FENDER Bassman, original, made 1960, 50 watt head and matching 2x12 reclining cab, superb condition, £750.
FENDER Clapton Strat, green, immaculate, hard case, £595.
Also USA Standard Telecaster, red, maple neck, 9 months old, home use only, £325.
Marshall 80 watt Valvestate combo, never gigged, 6 months old, £270.
Peavey Bravo, home use only, absolutely mint, £240.
P.R.S. Standard bass and HFS humbuckers, unused and boxed, £85 the pair.
507.
FENDER Clapton Stratocaster, red, excellent condition, £595.
FENDER F-210 acoustic guitar, natural finish, 2 months old, quick sale required hence £120, cost £160 new, no offers please.
FENDER Jaguar, pre-CBS, 1962, Fiesta Red, matching headstock, with case, very rare, £1,250 ono.
FENDER Jap Strat USA pickups, active, tobacco sunburst, £220.
Ibanez Musician bass, thru-neck, pearl ivory, active, excellent condition, £195.
FENDER Jap Strat, red with nicely fitted maple neck, refinished, upgraded electrics, very good condition with case, £225.
FENDER Japanese Strat, white, maple neck, excellent condition, £175.
FENDER Mexican Strat, red, maple neck, brand new, unused and boxed with tags, £245 ono.
FENDER moulded case for Stratocaster, £30.
FENDER Musicmaster shortscale bass, USA, red, 1977, excellent condition, £150.
FENDER Precision bass USA, immaculate, £220 ono.
FENDER Precision, USA, circa 1980, black, maple neck, chrome scratchplate, good condition, £295 ono.
FENDER Precision, USA, early 70s, mint condition, Fender case, £425, or do a deal on a Martin.
FENDER Pro 85 combo, excellent sounds, reluctant sale, £290.
FENDER Prodigy, with maple fingerboard, brand new, never used, £250 ono, including case.
Fender USA Standard Strat, late '80s, red, rosewood fingerboard, excellent condition, including case, £300 ono.
FENDER reissue ‘62 Stratocaster USA, Fiesta Red with all tags and tweed case, never played, mint condition.
FENDER Rhodes Stage 1 88-key electric piano, £275 ono.
FENDER Squier 15 watt practice amp, as new, great sound for only £50.
FENDER Squier Strat and Tele, both early JV series, EMG pickups in both, hard cases, £300 each ono.
FENDER Squier Strat, red with maple neck, 1 year old, excellent condition, changing to Marvin Squier, £150.
FENDER Squier Stratocaster, black, bridge position humbucker, Divebomber tremolo, excellent condition, with hard case, £125.
FENDER Strat ‘57 reissue, sunburst, plus Super 60 amp, as new, bargain, £600.
FENDER Strat ‘62 American reissue, in good condition with case and amp, £500.
FENDER Strat ‘62 reissue, £250.
Vox AC30 top boost '60s, £280.
Korg guitar tuner, £25, also case.
FENDER Strat copy Encore with trem, excellent condition plus practice amp and lead, £65.
FENDER Strat Plus Deluxe, £350 including case, also Princeton Chorus amp, £250, both mint, £550 for both.
FENDER Strat USA E-series, black, Floyd Rose locking trem, Seymour Duncan bridge pickup, professionally set up, looks and plays excellent, £500 or px for Les Paul.
FENDER Strat, 1963, L-series, original, tremolo, serious offers welcome.
FENDER Strat, Japanese built, Kahler trem with locking nut, sunburst body, maple neck, £175 ono.
FENDER Stratocaster USA, 1976, non-trem, maple neck, good condition, £350 ono.
FENDER Stratocaster, 1960, original except respray, very good example, great sound, offers.
FENDER Stratocaster, 1969, refinished red, rosewood neck, no trem, £550 or may swap for good acoustic.
FENDER Stratocaster, fixed bridge, USA, 1979, natural wood finish, maple neck, excellent condition.
FENDER Super 6 reverb valve combo, very rare, classic vintage Fender tone, £375 ono.
FENDER Super 60 amp, good condition, for those who know the difference, only £310.
FENDER Super 60 valve guitar combo, £300.
Laney linebacker 50 watt bass combo, £125.
Various Boss pedals, instructions, all boxed.
FENDER Tele Plus, ebony frost finish, excellent condition, £450.
FENDER Telecaster 1962 reissue, bound edge, mint condition, £265.
FENDER Telecaster bass, late '60s, excellent player, maple neck, £290.
FENDER Telecaster, 1966, natural finish, all original, good condition, £550 ono.
FENDER Telecaster, 1969, off-white with 16/10 compound radius rosewood fingerboard, high frets, Seymour Duncan Quarter Pounders and Grover tuners, £700.
FENDER Telecaster, 1971, blond with maple neck, exceptional condition, never gigged, superb sound and great to play, with original case, £565.
FENDER Telecaster, 1983, excellent condition, signed by Mick Taylor, £450.  30pm.
FENDER Telecaster, customised by Gleneagles Guitars, black/red, gold hardware, mint, £350 including case etc.
FENDER The Twin amp, new valves, good condition with aluminium flight case, £550 ono.
FENDER The Twin, 1 year old, excellent condition, £450.
FENDER The Twin, 2x12 combo, 100 watt valve amplifier, excellent condition, £400.
FENDER Thinline Telecaster, twin humbuckers with hard case, good condition, £250.
FENDER Tremolux, 1964, piggyback blonde tolex, blackface, £475.
Also 1964 Tremolux head, £275.
Also silverface Twin Reverb, £345.
FENDER Twin Reverb, 1965 black face reissue, mint condition, brand new, full flight case, £500.
FENDER Twin Reverb, circa 1970, excellent condition, great sound, £475.
FENDER USA 1957 reissue Strat with tweed case, absolutely gorgeous sound, £425 or might consider p/ex.
FENDER USA Standard Stratocaster, 1989, black, black scratchplate, maple neck, looks stunning, £300 including case.
FENDER USA Strat Standard, good condition, £350 ono.
FENDER USA Stratocaster, 1975, black, £300 ono.
FENDER USA Telecaster Thinline, 1972, twin humbucker model, superb original condition, £450 or px The Twin, AC30, Bassman or similar.
FENDER Walnut Strat, 1981, mint condition, original case, £675.
FENIX Strat copy, £100.
Marshall JMP 100 watt cab and head, £200.
Access Strat copy and Semix 40 watt amplifier, £100 pair.
FIREBIRD sunburst, Gibson True Blues and Dirty Fingers pickups, gold hardware and vibrola, £295.
GIBSON 335 semi-acoustic, 1969, sunburst with Bigsby, immaculate condition, £750.
Two P90 pickups, chrome covers, £25 each.
GIBSON 1966 ES-175D, sunburst, replacement Schallers, original hard case, £950.  5590, office hours, Leeds.
GIBSON B.B.King Lucille, black, stereo, Varitone, excellent condition, case, £750 ono.
GIBSON Byrdland, sunburst, 1962, Venetian cutaway, all original, excellent condition with case, £2,250 or swap other guitars.
GIBSON Chet Atkins nylon-strung solid electric guitar, mint condition including case, £580 ono.
GIBSON ES-330, 1962, sunburst, good condition, Bigsby tremolo, £625 including case.
GIBSON ES-335 Dot reissue, 1981, beautiful blonde, immaculate condition, better than the usual Gibson quality, £575 ono.
GIBSON ES-335 Trini Lopez Standard, 1966, cherry, wonderful neck, sounds stunning, £595 ono.
GIBSON ES-335, cherry, hardly played, £545, original case.
Takamine electro-acoustic classical, cutaway, hard case, £295.
GIBSON ES-340, 1969, original and rare, £1,200.
GIBSON ES335, brown sunburst, great condition, £600.
GIBSON Firebird V and case, 1972 gold medallion limited edition, mint original condition, £600 or px The Twin AC30 bassman or similar.
GIBSON Firebird, 1968, refinished with heavy case, immaculate condition, £500 ono.
GIBSON Flying V plus case.
Yamaha FX500 plus foot controller.
Marshall 80 watt stereo pro amplifier, 2 Marshall 1x12 speaker cabs, SKB 2u rack case.
GIBSON Hummingbird custom, 1979, super condition, ex-Kalamazoo factory, £550.
GIBSON J-45 acoustic, circa 1943, prized vintage round-shoulder model, ‘Banner’ headstock, beautiful sunburst, excellent condition, best offer over £1,000.
GIBSON J-45, 1962, mint, £895 ono.
GIBSON J-200, blonde, excellent condition, lovely sound, £995.
GIBSON Johnny Smith single pickup jazz guitar, superb instrument, £2,500 ono, might part exchange.
Gibson L-50 jazz guitar, 1936, all original with original case, £575 ono.
GIBSON Kalamazoo flat top, circa 1930s, mahogany sides and back, spruce top, £495 ovno.
GIBSON Kluson machineheads from 1961 Les Paul, these are genuine, offers please.
GIBSON L-5, 1947, blond, near mint, diamond, offers or swap.
GIBSON Les Paul Artisan, 1978, as shown in Ultimate Guitar Book, excellent condition plus case, £900 ono.
GIBSON Les Paul Classic, amber flame top with case, immaculate condition, £895 ono.
GIBSON Les Paul Custom Plus, stunning flame top, vintage cherry, reduced from £995 to £795.
GIBSON Les Paul Custom, 1977, black, £450.
Marshall JCM900 100 watt head, as new, £370.
GIBSON Les Paul Custom, 1981, ebony, with shaped Gibson case, excellent condition, £650 ono.
GIBSON Les Paul Custom, cherry sunburst, 1 year old, never gigged, mint, hard case, £750 ono.
GIBSON Les Paul gold top, mid '70s, original pickups, beautiful sound, £500 including hard case.
GIBSON Les Paul Standard, 1973, black, with case, good condition, £500 ono.
GIBSON Les Paul Standard, bookmatched tiger-stripe flame top, Seymour Duncan pickups, 1988 model, £700.
GIBSON Les Paul Standard, gold top, limited, 25th anniversary, all mahogany, immaculate, £850, will take Yamaha SG-3000, SG-2000 plus cash.
GIBSON Les Paul Studio, 1990, black, chrome hardware, mint condition, £475 ono.
GIBSON Les Paul, 1981, silver sunburst, excellent condition, £750, all original parts.
30pm.
GIBSON Les Paul, original 1957, gold top, refinished, £5,500.
GIBSON SG double-neck copy, metallic blue with solid case, £200.
GIBSON SG, cherry, mid '80s, Les Paul type fingerboard, inlays, Seymour Duncan pickups, good condition, £450 ono.
GIBSON The Paul, 1978, hard case, immaculate, natural brown finish, like Bob Marley's, £450.
GIBSON U2, 1989, cherry red superstrat, Floyd Rose trem, HSS configuration, coil tap, tone bypass switch, £280 ono.
GODIN Acousticaster 12-string, professional setup, as new, unmarked, with case, £700 or sensible offers.
/
GOODFELLOW Player bass in rosewood, gold hardware, superb condition plus fitted flight case, £500, or may swap for Musicman.
GORDON Smith GS-1, black, new Klusons, Duncan ‘59, £160.
Fender Jap '50s or '60s reissue Tele or Squier wanted.
GREGORY handmade F-type guitar, simply the best available, look no further, very high quality, £1,750 ono.
GRETSCH Nashville 6120 plus case, original, very good condition, £850.
GUILD D-15 mahogany guitar with Ashworth transducer, £295.
Hiscox case, £50.
GUILD F-50 acoustic, sunburst, 1979, mint, original condition, case, £795 ono.
GUILD Starfire 2, 1959, cherry sunburst, all original, great condition.
GUITAR For The Practicing Musician and Guitar School magazines, 1984–1992.
HAMER Blitz bass, white, complete with case, good condition, £575 ono.
HAMER Sunburst, figured maple arched top, Seymour Duncan pickups, gold Schaller locking trem, £1,000.
HANDMADE Dick Knight guitar with Carlton case, £450.
HARMONY Sovereign 1965.
One owner from new, serial number 677601260, 6-string jumbo acoustic, £250 ono.
HARTKE speaker cabinet, 2x10 aluminum speakers, cost £400 new, will sell for £150, clear punchy tone.
HIWATT custom valve combo, 1972, rare, in collectors condition, original cover, £180.
Dean Markley Overlord tube overdrive preamp, £60.
Nomad Axxeman, £120.
Lintek S4 monitors, £85 pair.
AKG D202 ES studio mic, £130.
Swaps?
HOHNER Hollywood JT-60 guitar, Jazzmaster shape, ATN circuitry, 1 year old, cost £275 with hard case, accept £195.
HOHNER Jack bass, natural finish plus hard case, £220.
Carlsbro Stingray 300 head and speaker, £280.
HOHNER lap slide guitar, pearl finish, mint condition plus case, £135.
HOHNER Les Paul with Seymour Duncan pickup, Marlin Loner with locking trem, Torque T50PL combo, £100 each.
IBANEZ Destroyer, X series, metallic red, excellent condition, hard case included, £395.
IBANEZ Jem 77 floral with case, mint condition.
IBANEZ Jem 77, floral pattern, excellent condition, £695.
IBANEZ Jem, pink, maple neck, disappearing pyramids with hard case, £560.
IBANEZ Joe Satriani model, marvellous condition, misty green, silver Floyd Rose and switches, £400 only.
IBANEZ RG560, flightcase, excellent condition, £250 or swap for Les Paul Studio 1 model.
IBANEZ Salvador, narrow waisted roundhole, possibly Cuban or Brazilian, good Maccaferri sound, bridge saddle pickup, offers!
JACKSON copy lead guitar, red, twin humbuckers, double locking trem, treble boost, great action, quick sale hence £145.
JACKSON Fusion Pro with case, excellent condition, hardly used, £400.
JAYDEE Supernatural bass, 2 pickups with active EQ, red woodstain finish, excellent condition, plus case, £450.
KAHLER fulcrum Strat-type locking trem, complete with locking nut, £35.
KALAMAZOO Gibson, f-hole model, very rare, good condition, good offers invited.
KIMBARA acoustic, single cutaway, built in transducer, tone and volume controls, £135 ono.
KINKADE Model P hand built acoustic, wonderfully balanced sound, Barcus Berry pickup, Hiscox case, £525 ono.
KITTYHAWK Quattro 4 channel guitar preamp, footswitch and 8 spare valves included, £250.
Kittyhawk 60 plus 60 watt stereo poweramp, £400.
KNIGHT Imperial archtop, natural, as new, re-advertised, £850.
KNIGHT semi-acoustic, Johnny Smith style, beautiful instrument, fast action, amazing sound, with hard case, £850.
KRAMER Aerostar, red, with bag.
KRAMER Gorky Park, limited edition, stunning pyramid shape body, graphic finish, Floyd Rose tremolo, immaculate, £295 or p/ex.
L'ARRIVEE C-09 cutaway steel-string acoustic guitar, cost £900, nearly new, hard case, £590.
LANEY 30 watt valve combo, 3 months old, immaculate condition, £240 no offers.
LANEY 100 watt lead head, £140.
Sun 6350 PA, as new, £300.
Kudos cluster speaker stands, £150.
LANEY DT150 bass head, graphic, 4x10, 2x15 Laney cabinets, powerful setup, move forces sale, £400 ono.
LEE Jackson preamp, £150.
Kittyhawk preamp, £150, as used by Holdsworth and Henderson.
MIDI Octopus plus rack mount, £120.
LEFT-HANDED BC Rich Gunslinger, American, EMG pickups, full flight case, £750.
Left-handed Gordon Smith Explorer, £250.
LEFT-HANDED Gibson Les Paul Custom, 1986, tobacco sunburst, £650, never gigged.
LEFT-HANDED Gordon Smith GS-2, coil taps, humbuckers, hard case, excellent condition, £250.
LEFT-HANDED Hohner PB-01 bass guitar, black Precision copy, good condition, £60.
LEFT-HANDED Lag Rockline, red snakeskin, 4 months old, £625 ono.
LEFT-HANDED Les Paul Junior by Chris Eccleshall, fitted humbucker and single coil, quality guitar, £200, includes case.
LES Paul copy, black custom model, Acrobat 10 watt practice amp with reverb, £80 each or £150 for both.
LEVINSON Blade RH-4, honey, ebony fingerboard, tapable humbucker and two single coils, 3-way actives, usual Levinson refinements, gorgeous, £485 ono.
MANSON solid electric guitar, 1 of only 3 made in 1980, as new, including flightcase, £450 ono.
MARLIN Sidewinder, black, tremolo, hard case, mint, £90 ono. 15 years of Guitar Player etc, offers.
MARSHALL 25 watt rev/trem amp, 15″ speaker, footswitch, good condition, £250 ono.
MARSHALL 25/50 watt Jubilee series valve amplifier, model 2553, not gigged, excellent condition, £170.
Williams, 605582, Milton Keynes.
MARSHALL 30 watt masterlead combo, very good condition, £100.
Epiphone Sheraton, sunburst, including hard case, £250.
MARSHALL 30th Anniversary limited edition, full stack, unused, boxed, one of only 40 in UK, offers around £2,000.
MARSHALL 50 watt Artist combo, 1971, immaculate condition, £450 or swap for Super Lead plus cab.
MARSHALL 50 watt master volume reverb combo, £175.
Also Rockman Sustainer preamp, £120.
MARSHALL 50 watt valve combo with 2x12 speakers plus spare valves, £180.
MARSHALL 100 watt lead master volume Mk2, plus 4x12 angled cab, £150.
MARSHALL 100 watt MkII Super Bass head, valve, very loud, in immaculate condition with Marshall cover, £185.
MARSHALL 100 watt valve bass, 4x10″ combo, model 4150, compressor bass amp with parametric EQ, Marshall serviced, rare, late '70s, £265.
MARSHALL 150 watt dual channel reverb head, footswitch and cover, never gigged, £350 ono.
MARSHALL 300 watt straight cab, 4x12, £150.
MARSHALL 1978 50 watt master volume combo, large badge, green Celestion D12Ms, very good condition, a fine example of the best Marshall made to date, £250 ovno.
MARSHALL 4100 100 watt head, 1960A 300 watt 4x12 cab, £670 ono, year old, worth £850.
MARSHALL 9000 valve preamp plus 4 way foot controller, excellent condition, never gigged, £250 ono.
MARSHALL JCM800 100 watt lead head, £175. 2x12 cab, £35.
MARSHALL JCM800 lead series, master volume, 100 watt valve amplifier, excellent condition, £200.
MARSHALL JCM900 100 watt dual reverb 2x12 combo, excellent condition, £400.
MARSHALL JCM900 100 watt head, Marshall JCM900 4x12 cab, bought new, gigged once, £545 for both.
MARSHALL JMP MkII 100 watt lead valve head, 300 watt Jubilee 4x12 cabinet, head in excellent condition, the cab tatty but loud, £350.
MARSHALL JMP Super Bass Mk II 100 watt valve head, serviced by Marshall, £245. 15″ 250 watt Celestion loaded speaker to suit.
MARSHALL JMP50 2x12 MV valve combo, good working order, £175 ono.
Also Marshall 100 watt Super Lead MkII valve head, £120.
MARSHALL JMP50 head, 1971, mint condition, £295 ono.
MARSHALL JMP900 hi-gain 100 watt combo, excellent condition, £300. 9001 valve preamp with footswitch, £250.
MARSHALL Jubilee series 300 watt rack mount bass head, perfect condition, £310 ono.
MARSHALL lookalike, slanted front, 4x12, 200 watts including castors and cover, £100.
MARSHALL Valvestate 80/80, twin channel, 80 watts, 1x12 combo with reverb, 6 months old, pristine condition, £300 ono.
MARSHALL Valvestate 100 watt stack, unwanted gift, £495.
Also Zoom 9000, £200, as new.
MARSHALL Valvestate 100 watt stack, unwanted gift, £495.
Also Zoom 9000, £200, as new.
MARSHALL Vintage Artist combo, 1971, mint condition, gorgeous tone, a real classic for only £450.
MARSHALL vintage Bluesbreaker amp, 1966, all original except the speaker cloth, £1,500.
MARTIN D-41 in case, 1991, as new, £1,350.
MARTIN guitar model E-28 plus Martin case plus Martin built-in pickup and lead, ultra mint condition, £900.
MARTIN J-40M plus flightcase, £750 ono.
MARTIN M-36, mint condition, 1 years guarantee, £950.
MECHANICS of Metal guitar lessons, lessons 1 and 2 with cassette tapes, £20 plus DiMarzio Fred pickup, £20 ono.
MESA Boogie 6L6GC power valves, 1 pair, new, £16 ono.
MESA Boogie Mk I reissue, excellent condition, £700, or swap for new Studio 22+.
MESA Boogie Mk II B, 1981 model, non-graphic, Celestion speaker, recently serviced, £500 or part exchange for P.R.S. EG or similar.
MESA Boogie MkII B, hardwood, EV, graphic and all footswitches, flightcased, recent service, £860 ono, part exchange considered.
MESA Boogie MkIII Simul-Class combo, EV loaded, graphic, all sorts of switches, mint condition, flight cased, £950.
MESA Boogie MkIII Simul-Class 60 watt combo, excellent condition, complete with road case, £1,050.  30pm.
MESA Boogie MkIII Simulclass combo, £850.
MESA Boogie MkIV combo, Groove Tubes, footswitch included, very good condition, £1,150 ono.
MESA Boogie Quad preamp, as new, immaculate with footswitch, £700.
MORENO and Castro concert classical, rosewood/cedar, very bright treble, as new with case, £600.
MUSIC books Pornograffiti, Flying In A Blue Dream, Surfing With The Alien, all tab, £20.
MUSICMAN Silhouette pick-up module, brand new, all black finish, two single-coils and one humbucker at bridge, £170 inc p&p.
MUSICMAN Stingray bass guitar, early 1980s model, sunburst finish, £450 ono.
MUSICMAN Stingray bass, natural, pre-Ernie Ball, £525 ono, or maybe swap for Fender Precision/Jazz.
MUSICMAN Stingray bass, natural, pre-Ernie Ball, £525 or possible p.x.
Yamaha BB-1100F plus cash or Precision.
MUSICMAN Stingray, blueburst, mint condition, £670.
Mesa Boogie Mk111 Simul-Class, £895 ono.
MXR mains flanger, £55.
NADY 101 wireless guitar system, mint condition, boxed with two nicad 9 volt batteries and charger, £110.
NADY 201 diversity guitar wireless system, £125.
NATIONAL Resophonic ‘Jazz-Blues’ resonator guitar, 1989, USA replica of 1920's original, sunburst wood body, loud, excellent, case, £650 ono.
ORANGE OR120 and 4x12 cab, excellent condition, £285 the pair.
Also Wem ER15 head, excellent condition, £95.
OVATION Adamas 11, blue speckle, mono/stereo, cutaway, home use only, immaculate condition plus Ovation flightcase, £950.
OVATION Applause roundback electro-acoustic guitar, recent setup, £180.
OVATION Ultra series limited edition including flight case, immaculate, £425.
Fernandes graphite bass, £400, Carlsbro Viper combo, £185.
OVATION Ultra shallow bowl, approximately 1 year old, immaculate condition, £299.
OVATION Viper, rare solid bodied electric plus hard case, £250.
Possible swap for interesting electric or acoustic.
PA Bose 802s and graphic, mosfet Studiomaster 500 amp, 6/2 Studiomaster desk, £1,000.
PA system, bass 802 and graphic, mosfet, studio master 500 amp 6/2, studio master desk, £1,000.
PALMER Speaker Simulator, £110.
PATRICK Eggle Berlin, amazing flame maple top, limed oak finish, Seymour Duncan pickups, £500 including case.
PEAVEY 18″ Black Widow bass bins, as new condition, 500 watts each, £200 each.
PEAVEY Bandit 112, 80 watts, immaculate, £225.
PEAVEY Bravo valve amp, as new, £175.
PEAVEY Bravo valve combo 112, very loud, mint, £210.
PEAVEY Classic 65 2x12 combo, immaculate condition, recent revalve, £250, p/x or swap for 1x12 combo.
PEAVEY Classic Chorus 2x12 stereo guitar amp, 150 watts, vgc, £220.
PEAVEY Database 450 watt combo, very compact, very loud, excellent graphic equaliser, cost £695 sell £450.
PEAVEY Heritage 2x12 Black Widow combo, valve power stage, £395.
PEAVEY Mk III bass head, £175.
Carlsbro Cobra 90 bass combo, £140.
HHK150 keyboard combo, £195.
PEAVEY Special 130 watt combo, as new, £225.
PEAVEY Stereo Chorus 2x12, ungigged, never been used, excelent condition, couple of months old, £550.
PEAVEY TNT 150 watt bass amplifier with Black Widow speaker, £250.
Fenix bass, redburst finish, 10 months old, £300 or both for £500.
PEAVEY Triumph 60 watt amp, £325 ono.
Bass Collection SB301 bass, £225 ono, both in excellent condition.
PEAVEY Triumph 120 valve combo, 10 months old, £400 ono.
PEAVEY Triumph 120 watt valve combo, 3 channels, reverb, footswitch, great condition, £450 ono.
PROAMP combo Venom, 100 watts, twin Celestions, switchable gain and reverb, twin channel, excellent condition, £110.
PRS Bird Custom, vintage yellow, lovely flame maple body, pristine, £1,250.
PRS Bird custom, vintage yellow, lovely flame maple body, Brazilian rosewood fingerboard, hard case, £1,295.
PRS Signature in vintage yellow, quilted top, £1,550, may px for old Strat.
REGAL Resonator copy, £150 ono.
RICKENBACKER 325, short scale John Lennon model, Bigsby tremolo, perfect condition, £650.
RICKENBACKER 4001 stereo bass, 1979, natural wood finish, £410 ovno.
RICKENBACKER 4001 stereo bass, natural finish, mint, £500 or swap fretless Status, Washburn Status, Wal.
RICKENBACKER 4001 stereo bass, ruby, 1980, excellent condition, bargain, £370 including case, can deliver.
RICKENBACKER Roger McGuinn plus case, natural, as new, with tags, £950.
ROBIN Ranger guitar, ex-Jimmie Vaughan, £425 ono.
Studiomaster all valve combo, very rare, £225 ono.
ROCKTRON Hush RX-20 noise gate, £140 ono.
ROLAND GP-16 digital effects unit with FC-100 Mk II foot controller plus EV10 pedal plus 2U rack, £550 ono.
ROLAND GP16 stereo multi-effects unit, home use only, £295.
ROLAND GR-50 guitar synth plus GK2 driver, hardly used, £620.
MC50 sequencer, as new, £420.
ROLAND GR-50/GK-2 guitar controller fitted to Fender Squier Strat, immaculate, £900.
ROLAND GR-505 drum machine, good condition, home use only, boxed, £115.
ROLAND GR-700/G-707 guitar synthesiser, 3 memory cartridges and flight case, very good condition, £450.
ROLAND GT-8 MIDI footswitch, excellent condition, £275.
ROLAND GT16 stereo digital mutli-effects, 16 effects with 12 simultaneous, Boss FT-50 MIDI footcontroller, Yamaha GC-2020 stereo compressor limited date, all in flight case, £500.
ROLAND JC-120, £275.
ROLAND GS6 preamp effects unit plus foot controller and manuals, excellent condition, £180.
ROLAND R5 drum machine, £225, Ampeg 4x12 cab, excellent condition, £50.
Yamaha MT1X 4-track, £190.
SELMER Zodiac Twin 30 combo, new valves, excellent condition, £150.
SELMER Zodiac Twin 30, £140.
SESSION guitar combo, 75 watt, twin channel, 2x12 Celestion, tweed, immaculate, £150.
SEYMOUR Duncan Hot Strat stack, white single-coil sized humbucker, £30.
SEYMOUR Duncan Hotrails neck and bridge pickups, £70 pair.
SPECTOR LS-5605 bass, fireglow, A1 condition, £550 or swap for Musicman Stingray or Warwick.
STATUS 2000 5-string bass, natural graphite, good condition with case, £995.
STEINBERGER GM4TA black Strat-type guitar, £1,000.
STEINBERGER GM4TA Strat-style body with TransTrem system and EMG active electronics, mint condition, £675.
STEPP DGX, the ultimate guitar synth controller, programmability of all playing dynamics, no delays and no glitches, hard case plus extras, £650 ono.
STEVIE Ray Vaughan guitar hero T-shirt, brand new, never worn, a rarity, £12.
Also 2 Evans twin coil pickups, £40.
STRAT copy, white body with rosewood neck, good sounding guitar, plays beautifully, never been gigged, £70 ono.
STRAT replacement pickup single coil by ESP, £15.
SUNN Mustang electric guitar, Strat design with tremolo, tone and volume control, matching amplifier and all leads, £125.
TASCAM 238 rackmount, 8-track cassette recorder with 8 channel mixer in rack bag, £975.
TASCAM 488 8-track cassette, excellent condition, hardly used, £750.  30pm.
TASCAM 488 Portastudio, 50 hours use, vgc, boxed, manuals, lack of record deal forces sale, £820.
TASCAM Porta 2 4-track portastudio, boxed, as new, £300.
TASCAM Porta 058S 4-track mini studio, boxed, brand new, cost £350, sell £300 ono.
TC 2290 digital delay and effects control processor plus TC 0014 remote controller, £1,000 ono.
TC Electronic 1140HS parametric equaliser and preamp, very good condition, £300.
TOKAI Telecaster, R/N, excellent, Fender moulded case, £195 ono.
Boss HM2 pedal, boxed, £25.
TRACE Elliot 1x15 200 watt bass combo, 1 year old, excellent condition, £475 ono.
Would consider part exchange for Status fretless bass.
TRACE Elliot 715S bass combo, as new, £300.
TRACE Elliot 1518 1x15 cabinet, as new, £325 ono.
TRACE Elliot AH300 plus Trace Elliot 1518 cab, £650.
TRACE Elliot bass rig AH500X amplifier, £500. 4052H bright box, £150. 1x15 cab, £250, vgc.
TRACE G-60XL, as new, home use only, £130.
TUITION videos, Yngwie Malmsteen, Richie Kotzen and Tony MacAlpine, £15 each.
VAN Halen, Vai, Satriani, Mr Big and Lynch, rare audios and videos, send SAE to Drew, 46 Holm Park, Inverness, IV2 4AQ, Scotland.
VESTER Telecaster, superb beginners' instrument, home use only with gig bag, £90.
VIGIER Excaliber, Kahler tremolo, Seymour Duncan pickups, superb low action, stunning finish, brand new, £650.
VOX AC30 collector, mahogany case, mint, £650.
VOX AC30, 1963, no handles, plenty of spares, otherwise original and working, £275 ono.
WAL custom 4-string fretted bass, birdseye maple, very good condition, £600.
WARWICK 4-string bass, red, excellent condition, £675 ono.
WARWICK Thumb bass, absolute mint condition, beautiful feel and sound, reluctant sale, £890 ono.
WASHBURN bass B2, black, £100 ono.
WASHBURN D25S 12-string acoustic and case, mint condition, £260 ono, or swap for comparable 6-string.
WASHBURN Jumbo acoustic, sunburst finish, current price new £550 exc case, sell for £275 inc case, mint condition.
WASHBURN KC-40, white, Floyd Rose tremolo, £180 ono.
WASHBURN Les Paul Standard copy, tiger stripe sunburst, good looking, excellent condition, £200.
WASHBURN RS-8V, white, EMG pickup, Floyd Rose trem, good condition, £225.
Boss digital metalizer, £50.
WASHBURN Woodstock EA40BI electro-acoustic guitar, arched top and back, including hard case, £300.
WATKINS early Copicat echo unit, collectors piece, valve version with black and white centrefold case, £170.
Williams, 605582, Milton Keynes.
WESTBURY Custom, DiMarzios, £150.
YAMAHA 4-track, Ensoniq ESQ1 with cartridge, Alesis MMT8 sequencer.
YAMAHA 100 watt 2x12 twin channel combo, reverb, parametric, footswitch, £145.
YAMAHA acoustic, top of range, 20 years old, solid top, Gibson style bridge, mother of pearl inlay, £185.
YAMAHA APX-6 electro-acoustic guitar, active electronics, excellent condition, hardly used, £250.
YAMAHA Attitude limited edition bass, DiMarzios, D-tuner, stereo etc, mint condition, £850 ono, or swap for Trace Elliot AH250 head and 2 cabs.
YAMAHA BB-1100S bass, rosewood neck, black, 3 band active, £275.
YAMAHA BB200 bass, red, totally immaculate, £140 ovno.
YAMAHA BB3000 bass, active, customised by Jaydee, metallic black, beautiful condition with case, £550 ono.
YAMAHA FG260 12-string jumbo guitar, 1976, one owner from new, slotted head model, £200 ono.
YAMAHA PFR-46000 keyboard, including stand and RAM pack, £400.
YAMAHA RGX612A guitar, 24 frets, £125.
Boss digital metalizer pedal, £35.
YAMAHA SA-2100 semi-acoustic guitar, natural and gold, coil splitters, Yamaha hard case, as new condition, absolutely stunning, £490.
YAMAHA SF-1500, top of the range, ebony board, natural, coil taps, mint condition, £295.
ZOOM 9000 plus footswitch and power supply, boxed as new, £175.
ZOOM 9002, 6 months, good condition, brilliant sounds, boxed plus free guitar CD from Germany.
ZOOM 9002, as new, £190.
Gordon Smith, Explorer shape, £145.
ZOOM 9030 processor with Zoom MIDI foot controller, mint condition, new and boxed, bargain £399.
PERSONNEL
15 year old lead guitarist with strong vocals seeks musicians for serious heavy metal band into G'n'R, Maiden etc.
AMBITIOUS young thrash band requires vocalist, influences include Megadeth, Metallica and Slayer, plus some own material.
ANY band looking to go further.
Please tel: 0689 862829.
BASS player wanted for gigging band, everything from Rock to Rock'n'Roll.
BASS vocal available for good semi-pro work, soul/funk, excellent equipment and transport.
BASSIST from recently split Jazz/Funk fusion band seeks similar band or musicians in London area.
Commitment guaranteed.
BASSIST singer, keyboardist required to form band with two guitars and drummer, influences G'n'R, Queen, Doors, Maiden, age 14–16, Swindon area.
BASSIST wanted, must be solid and imaginative.
BLUES guitarist available for work, or seeking others to form band and write own material, from T-Bone to Vaughan.
CHRISTIAN Rock band seeks drummer in Surrey area.
Write to: PMW, Entonhurst, Enton, Godalming, Surrey, GU8 5AG or tel: 0483 422699.
CHRISTIAN vocalist required to join soulful musicians with professional aspirations.
Do it!
Worthing/Brighton area.
COMPETENT guitarist aged 15 seeks people to jam with in holidays.
Into Metallica and most metal.
Letchworth/Hitchin area.
COUNTRY and Western lead guitarist wanted to join a forming female fronted band for gigs, must have experience.
DEDICATED musicians urgently needed by bass player and drummer, insanity helpful.
DRUMMER ambitious, professional with ample live and studio experience seeks band with recording deal and/or tour.
No time wasters.
DRUMMER needed for powerful, melodic band, Chameleons/REM.
Ability, imagination required.
Beds/Thames area.
DRUMMER required for ambitious, original, London based band, transport, image essential, gigs waiting.
DRUMMER required for powerful, mature rock band, influences Rush, It Bites etc.
South East London based.
ENLARGE your musical horizons, classical and folk player gives lessons, beginners to advanced.
ENTHUSIASTIC guitarist aged 21 seeks other musicians interested in forming Blues or Rock band in Bracknell area.
EXCELLENT guitarist with excellent vocals, professional, versatile, for gigs, deps etc, anything considered.
EXPERIENCED guitarist seeks professional/established rock band, willing to relocate.
EXPERIENCED heavy rock vocalist required for solid covers/originals band, rehearsing in Croydon.
Think you're good enough?
Then phone Ed Kragh, evenings only.
EXPERIENCED versatile creative musician, guitar, fiddle, mandolin, seeks accomplished musician into country roots for gigs, mainly duo, Gloucestershire.
EXPERIENCED vocalist wanted for own material rock band, Van Halen sounding, Northampton, Bedford, Milton Keynes areas.
GUITARIST aged 25 seeks musicians in Withinshaw area to form rock or metal band.
GUITARIST aged 27 looking to form or join band into UFO, MSG, Bon Jovi etc.
Prepared to travel.
GUITARIST and keyboard player with good image wanted for London funk/metal techno band.
GUITARIST wanted for rock/indie band, Southport area, gigs booked, management interest.
GUITARIST , ambitious, professional with ample live and studio experience, seeks band with recording deal and/or tour.
Studies in USA include Jennifer Batten and Paul Gilbert.
No time wasters.
HARMONY singer/guitarist, 40, seeks similar to form duo, Everly Brothers, Beatles, Simon etc, gigs waiting, North West.
HOT guitarist featured in ‘Guitar Player’ magazine and ‘Guitar for the Practising Musician’with top name endorsements seeks serious rock band, management and label interest preferred.
LEAD guitarist required for Essex based band, influences from Cult to Sepultura, equipment and transport required.
Lead /rhythm guitarist, age fourteen, wanted to join rock band e.g. Iron Maiden, Wasp, must be in Cambridge area.
MALE singer and bassist urgently required to complete rock band, equipment and transport essential, sense of humour appreciated, Hertfordshire area.
MUSICIAN /songwriter into Prince, Stevie Wonder, Roachford, Todd Rundgren, Seal etc.
Seeks musicians, collaborators.
Details/demos etc please to; Gareth Driscoll, 4 Langport Avenue, LLanrumney, Cardiff, CF3 9TL.
MUSICIANS wanted, experience preferred, dedication and commitment essential to form hard working band in the North West.
Tel or Fax: 0244 342152.
NW London versatile guitarist, songwriter/singer seeks bassist and drummer, influences Almighty, Aerosmith, Vai, ability and dedication essential.
RHYTHM guitarist into 70s to 90s rock/blues seeks local band for jamming/gigs 
RHYTHM guitarist with vocals needed, ability to double up on lead useful, South Devon area.
SINGER and drummer wanted for working club band.
SINGER and keyboards required for class rock band, 1 LP already released in Europe, management etc.
Influences Deep Purple, Rainbow, Whitesnake.
London area, must be totally dedicated, no under 20s.
SONIC Youth type drummer wanted for exciting creative noise, we have songs, practise room and gigs, dedication essential.
TALENTED bassist and guitarist seek to join hard rock/metal band, South East area.
UNEMPLOYED guitarist, 19, seeks band.
Blues/rock, Led Zeppelin, SRV, Hendrix etc, commitment, Beds area.
VOCALIST and drummer required by band with original material.
VOCALIST for starting out rock'n'roll band into Stones, Blues, Rock.
Doncaster/Retford/Lincoln area.
VOCALIST , male, required to form rock band with own material in the Rochdale area, experience not essential, dedication a must.
WANTED
ACOUSTIC bass guitar, absolutely anything considered.
ART SGX2000 guitar effects processor, also wanted Art X15 Ultrafoot, will buy separately.
BLACK scratchplate for Squier Jazz bass.
CONTACTS to swap magazines, videos, CDs, transcriptions, books etc.
Also Allan Holdsworth on CD.
ELECTRO-ACOUSTIC roundback or similar, reasonable condition, will pay cash.
EMG single coil pickups needed for a Fender Strat.
FENDER Pro 185, must be in good condition and with footswitch.
FENDER Stratocaster USA ‘57 vintage reissue.
GIBSON black Firebird, must be in vgc with case.
GIBSON Les Paul Pro Deluxe, cash waiting.
GIBSON Les Paul Standard, natural finish, good condition please.
GR700 owners, I need a copy of your GR700 memory on my cartridge because my presets have erased.
Reward.
HAGSTROM Viking semi-acoustic guitar, mid-60s to early 70s in reasonable condition.
HAMER sunburst bridge and saddles, also black or white scratchplate for Hamer prototype.
HARMONY Sovereign acoustic guitar, must be American, preferably early 60s.
IBANEZ 500 series, preferably with low pro trem, must be in good condition, for around £300.
IBANEZ catalogues from mid-70s to early 1980s wanted for cash, also Gibson and Hamer catalogues from the same period.
IBANEZ Jem 777 urgently wanted, any colour, any condition, but must play well, genuine private buyer, good cash price paid or part exchange for my stuff, can collect.
IBANEZ Tube Screamer.
Tony: 0249 444298, Wiltshire area.
KORG A2 or A3 guitar cards to borrow or a system exclusive data on a 3½″ computer disk.
LATE '80s Gibson Les Paul Standard or Custom in good to excellent condition.
MARSHALL head, ‘66 to ‘67, sensible price or swap for Peavey Stereo Chorus.
MARSHALL Super lead amplifier wanted urgently, age and condition unimportant, anything considered.
MESA Boogie 60/100 Simul-Class combo, EV, must be in good condition.
RICKENBACKER bass, preferably mono unbound model, any condition, preferably cheap, would part-exchange for Hohner Jack or fretless.
ROLAND G505 guitar controller with GR100 synth unit.
ROLAND RMC-1 MIDI converter, must be excellent condition.
SELMER amp wanted.
Slater, 0325 282394, North East area.
TELECASTER bass neck in maple, any make, also Telecaster bass pickguard.
TUITION Intermediate level guitar player seeks experienced teacher of electric blues, North Herts/South Cambs area.
UNIVIBE effects unit, working or not.
VIGIER guitar, second hand, Passion or Arpege custom model in top condition sought.
WESTONE Spectrum FX guitar.
ZOOM 9002 guitar effects processor.
SWAP
8-TRACK studio 488 bass for 1991/92 Beta Zero.
20 Watt Aria combo practice amp for drum machine, cash difference will be paid.
1973 Gibson Dove acoustic, natural and crimson, mint.
Swap for Everly Brothers Gibson acoustic.
1978 Fender Jazz, excellent condition, original ticket/ash trays, swap for Chapman Stick.
AMPEG SVT bass preamp for Fender Precision bass, maple neck.
BASS Collection SB401, sunburst for Fender Precision bass.
BOSS Digitech shift delay for Boss GE7 equaliser or sell for £60.
CHARVEL active lead guitar, £300 or swap for Rickenbacker, Gibson Les Paul or Fender Jazz Bass.
FENDER Heavy Metal Strat with Fred pickups, Kahler Spyder trem, in good condition, for Fender USA Strat with maple neck in same condition.
FENDER Jap Malmsteen Strat, 50 DiMarzio, brand new, £280 ono, or swap for Washburn N2.
GIBSON Les Paul Classic for Warwick, Wal, Goodfellow bass plus cash, or sell £895.
GIBSON Les Paul with case, good condition, swap for decent Portastudio.
IBANEZ 540S, as new, for good Gibson Les Paul Standard or Deluxe.
IBANEZ RG570 with hard case, hardly used.
Swap for rack mounted multi-effects system, preferably with foot controller.
JACKSON Randy Rhoades Sharkfin, black with Ibanez 500 series, good condition, or Jackson Strat, decent condition.
L'ARRIVEE RS4CT superstrat, cost £650, ebony fingerboard, thru-neck, including hard case.
Swap for your USA ‘62 reissue Strat or '70s Strat.
LANEY AOR 50 head plus 4x12, never gigged, excellent condition, swap for Marshall Valvestate 80/80 or sell for £330 ono.
MARSHALL JCM900 100 watt Dual Reverb 2x12 and Washburn flame-top Les Paul copy for newish Boogie Studio 22 plus.
MARSHALL JCM900 hi-gain 1x12 combo with 1x12 extension cab, for your Marshall 100 watt head plus 4x12 cab, preferably early '70s model.
MARSHALL SE100 speaker emulator, swap for Fender valve combo.
NUNO Bettencourt XL OBL Double Lines humbucker, brand new, p/ex for Jeff Beck humbucker or Trembucker or EMG 85/89 humbucker.
PEAVEY Special 112 for Fender Twin or 4x10 Super Reverb.
STATUS 2000 5-string, natural graphite, vgc, for Warwick 5-string Thumb or Streamer.
STRAT Ultra, as new, ‘82, black Strat, mint, black Paisely Burton Tele.
Swap for old Tele or Burns Marvin.
WESTONE Rail bass, good condition, with soft cover.
Swap for rack mounted sound module.