

Seasonal style Great ideas for Christmas decorations READERS' HOMES MICROWAVE MAGIC We test for the best CHRISTMAS COOKERY Festive dishes with a difference WINTER GARDENS How to breathe life into yours
CONTENTS
IDEAL HOME
HOME MATTERS
Each month in this column I'll be looking at subjects of particular interest to me that reflect certain aspects of homeownership
BYE BRITISH
Although the past few months have seen quite a number of problems for European unity, one area that remains firmly fixed is the demolition of trade barriers in 1993.
While there have been a few, if any, import restrictions on EC goods coming into this country, our community partners have astutely managed to find ways to restrict the flow of British goods into theirs.
Add to that our unfortunate preference for foreign goods rather than our own (25 per cent of what we spend as consumers is on imported products) and it's quite easy to see why the UK manufacturing base has become so fragile.
When the single market does come into effect in January, through greater freedom of choice British products should achieve increasing success abroad.
An, if we fail to support them at home, we'll only have ourselves to blame.
DREAM HOMES
Despite the recession in the housing market, sales of Ideal Home have risen by more than 30,000 copies per month during the year.
Could it be that, like me, more and more readers are dreaming of the time when they can either afford to move home or, at the very least, redecorate their existing one?
LIVE AND LEARN
On the subject of home improvements, why is it that whenever I attempt to carry out a simple repair job at home it always seems to cause big problems?
Recently, a small crack appeared in our pedestal hand basin in the bathroom.
I ordered a new basis — correct code, number and style — only to discover when I fitted it that it wasn't quite as deep or wide as the original.
The tap connections needed to be changed, the old wall brackets didn't match and had to be replaced and, finally, the tiled surround shaped carefully around the original basin now had unsightly gaps and needed retiling.
I've learnt one thing from this — in future I'll make sure I tile behind sanitaryware before it's fitted.
Terence Whelan Editor       
READERS' Christmas HOMES
A TIME TO CELEBRATE
Bill and Rita Petite's Victorian house is transformed at Christmas time with beautifully individual festive decorations — made by Rita — which add to the original features.
Judi Goodwin drops in for a mince pie and soaks up the atmosphere of this warm, family home.
Photography by Spike Powell
Christmas for the Petites is a wonderful opportunity to transform their Victorian house in Sale, near Manchester, into a festive Aladdin's cave.
And the decorations are really special because Rita and bill spend their working lives creating exciting visual extravaganzas for other people — Bill is a creative director at the advertising agency McCann Erickson, and Rita, who trained as a fashion designer, now makes spectacular dried flower arrangements using yards of draped silk.
But, at this time of year, Rita turns her attention to her own home.
She uses silks and satins, glitter and glitz, and cones and candles to create a wonderful seasonal mood for all the friends and family who visit.
Rita and Bill love using colour — the hall is pink; the living room is turquoise and peach; and the   master bedroom is pink and green.
And at Christmas these colour schemes are given an extra layer of sparkle.
Big satin bows now adorn the magnificent marble fireplaces, golden ivy trails up the banister, and filmy white voile and translucent glass baubles float across the dining room mantelpiece.
For Christmas I like to give every room a special seasonal mood with plenty of sparkle
Bill and Rita had always wanted a Victorian house — they used to live in a 1930s semi and spent four years trying to make it look Victorian.
They filled it with period furniture and even had an antique staircase installed.
Then Rita noticed a large Victorian house for sale — one she had long admired.
When she went to look round she was both daunted and enchanted by its dark, gloomy interior which was mostly painted green and seemed to be trapped in a 19th-century time warp.
The owner, who had recently died, had travelled the world.
The artefacts he'd collected were everywhere and the cellar was full of old toys and Victorian prams.
Although the house needed a lot of work, Rita and bill were drawn by its friendly atmosphere and long family history.
‘The first night after we'd   moved in, we lay in bed and cried,’ said Rita.
‘Every room had bare floorboards and was covered in dust.
We realised it was going to be years before it would be right.’
But they did have a very clear idea of how they wanted the house to look and resigned themselves to living with the mess while they tackled it room by room.
Our house is really for family and friends to enjoy — we always offer a warm welcome
At first, the family lived in one room upstairs and began with a bedroom for Ella, then aged four, and Joel, who was five months old.
Meanwhile, the kitchen had to have priority downstairs.
And by this time money had started to be a problem.
Basics such as new plumbing, central heating, rewiring, new floors and a damp-proof course had drained their funds.
‘So it was do-it-yourself time,’ says bill, ‘and, with the help of my father, we did just that.
We put the kitchen and bathroom in ourselves because we couldn't afford to pay anyone to do it.’
Bill's father had just retired, so the timing was right.
Rita had given up her fashion career when she had the children, so she could now divert her energies to tasks   such as decorating and making curtains and other soft furnishings.
All the decorations are in place by Christmas Eve and then we can start to relax and enjoy it all
Their Victorian furniture, which had never looked right in the pre-war semi, was very much at home in their new house — they just needed more of it.
So Rita scoured junk shops for second-hand pieces to fill the rooms.
Fortunately, the couple agree on furnishings and decorations and have the same taste.
What's more, Bill has had the benefit of 15 years' experience in roomset photography for his advertising clients.
‘We spent months looking for ideas that would appeal to us,’ he remembers.
Now, after living in the house for nine years, some rooms need redecorating before the others have even been revamped for the first time.
The living room, originally furnished in rusty browns, has just been given a brighter look with soft peach paper and multi-striped curtains by Designers Guild.
The dining room, with its pale marbled walls and black and glass furniture, has survived from its first overhaul as it is only really used for entertaining and for Ella's piano practice.
And Rita's workroom, where she  makes her satin-draped baskets of dried flowers, is still untouched with boxes of flowers lying all around.
by next Christmas we will have made even more changes to the house, so we'll probably adapt the decorations to suit
Christmas is a particularly busy time for Rita's business because all her clients want special decorations and gifts.
So she makes sure the decorations for the family home are ready well in advance.
By Christmas Eve all the jobs are done and Rita and Bill can settle down to enjoy an evening with friends.
After Boxing Day the family likes to spend time relaxing together in this comfortable, welcoming home.
‘We did our house for ourselves, not to impress others,’ says Bill.
‘It's a friendly house — people seem to relax when they visit.
We have a real fire blazing in the hearth and the kettle's always on.’
By next Christmas there will be even more changes in the house.
Soon they plan to revamp the kitchen and perhaps invest in some unusual modern furniture, which is a particular passion of Bill's.
But the traditional family feeling will never change.
It's very likely that the Petites and their children's children could be living here for another 100 years.
Main picture: Decorations in shades of orange and gold bring the living room to life for Christmas.
Above: The family open their presents by the magnificent marble fireplace in the living room
Far left: Build in 1850, the house had changed very little in 130 years
Main Picture: The grand piano lends a dramatic air to the dining room which has quite a modern look with its black chairs and stark glass table.
The small tree on the pedestal in the corner has been decorated with white fairy lights and satin bows
Left: On the mantelpiece Rita has created a magical effect using glass baubles, draped ivory satin and a group of lit candles
Far left: With its white marble fireplace and misty pale walls, the dining room suits the delicate, frosty scene that Rita has created with a vase of twigs as a centrepiece
Main picture: A stylish silver and black theme gives the dining room table a chic, sophisticated look and makes the perfect setting for a wonderful Christmas meal
Top: Joel helps Rita to make some pretty cone decorations which are sprayed gold and wired together
Above: Even the kitchen shelves are given some of Rita's expert treatment and are festooned with large, bright bows
Far left: Each place setting is decorated with a silver cracker and silver-covered sweets in a bag made of black net
Main picture: Pale pastel tones combine well in the pretty bedroom.
Rita and Bill painted the old-fashioned dressing table, which was originally dark wood, to match the colour scheme
Left: Rita made this festive Christmas heart by attaching dried roses, gold-sprayed flowers and spruce to a heart-shaped frame.
She then draped it with vivid red silk, secured in place with a glue gun.
Now it hangs by one of the large windows.
Above left: Large silk bows adorned with trailing gold stars are watched over by a golden cherub and help to liven up the staircase
Above: Bill refitted the bathroom himself with the help of his father.
To give a period look, the bath and basin have been panelled and the walls tiled just up to dado height.
by installing the bath a few inches from the wall, Bill was able to create a tiled ledge for soaps and sponges.
Making merry
With a roaring fire and candles shedding a soft glow, the Dysons' home is an idyllic place to spend Christmas.
But, as Jill Abraham found out, it didn't cost a fortune to create this peaceful setting.
Photography by Tony Timmington
Christmas in Kate and John Dyson's Victorian terraced house is a gathering together of the family after a hectic run-up to the holiday.
Kate Dyson owns The Dining Room Shop in south London and before the family get round to decorating their own home they create inspirational and exciting festive table settings in the shop.
It's only once all these preparations have been done that the family concentrate on decorating their own home.
Kate and John's two elder daughters, Jemima and Jenny, particularly enjoy this part of Christmas.
Jenny makes all the crackers and this year she designed and made the living room decorations, including the red felt pelmet that hangs above the fireplace.
Kate and John liked here idea so much they decided to sell the pelmets in their shop.
(However, if you're planning to make a pelmet like this one, Kate warns that the felt should be coated with a fire-resistant spray.
This is especially important if you want to hang it over a mantelpiece or table.)
The Dysons also have two younger children, their son, Jack, and Kinna, their youngest daughter.
‘When you have children it's really lovely to decorate the house for them,’ says Kate.
‘We have a tradition in our home of setting up a little crib and surrounding it with Nativity figures.
We picked these up on a visit we made to the island of Haiti a few years ago, and they've become part of our Christmas celebrations ever since.’
Kate describes their Victorian home as a ‘scruffy, old family house that manages to withstand   the rough and tumble of four children, two cats and a dog’.
But despite all the comings and goings, the Dysons' home has an attractive, cheerful atmosphere.
When you have young children it's really lovely to decorate the house for them
The family living room, for example, has a warm, bright feel with its cream colour scheme, comfortable sofas and colourful rugs.
The large ornate mirror that takes up nearly one wall by the side of the fireplace was a bargain junk shop find and, on the other side of the fireplace, John has built a set of bookshelves.
He is an excellent carpenter and the couple have done a lot of DIY throughout their home.
As the house doesn't have a dining room, the family eat in the large kitchen.
It's a cheerful and cosy room, with a large window that overlooks the River Thames.
The colour scheme is blue and white and the blue-and-white china Kate collects looks perfectly at home on the old white-painted dresser.
The dining table has been covered with a lovely antique Toile de   Nantes quilt.
And, to give the table setting a special festive feel, Kate has attached wide red satin ribbons from the corners, taken them up into a pyramid shape and tied them to the lamp above.
Every year I try to give our decorations a rich look.
It's quite easy to do this without spending a fortune
The red theme has been carried through to the goblets that the family use every Christmas, the napkins and the candlesticks.
Used together they create an ideal setting in which to enjoy Christmas dinner.
but, as Kate points out, the decorations she has used to trim her table and all those used around the house are not expensive and are simple to make.
‘Each year I try to give our decorations a rich look — both at home and in the shop.
It's quite easy to do this without spending a fortune,’ she says.
‘Ribbons and felt, for example, don't cost much and can add colour and warmth to a room.’
And it's quite clear that the decorative touches have made this house a warm and welcoming home in which to spend Christmas.
The Dysons' shop — The Dining Room Shop — is at  .
Main picture: The living room is warm and cosy with cream walls and colourful rugs
Top: Kate enjoys celebrating Christmas at home
Above: The crimson felt mantelpiece pelmet is a stunning centrepiece
Below: Nativity figures are displayed on the bookshelves that John made for the living room
Bottom: The Christmas tree has pride of place in this family home
Main picture: A junk shop bargain, the large mirror in the living room adds an ornate touch
Right: Every available surface has been decorated with evergreen leaves, crimson berries and flowers
Below: This bread-dough bear ornament, crowned with a red ribbon, adds a lighthearted touch
Bottom: Kate's collection of blue and white china looks perfectly at home on the country-style white dresser
Main picture: In the kitchen/dining room a magnificent arrangement of satin ribbons finishes off the table setting
Right: Fresh flowers continue the red theme in this Christmas display from Kate's shop
READERS' HOMES
Country contrasts
Pauline Bishop's beautiful house by the Lake District has a cosmopolitan influence inspired by her travels around the world.
Jude Goodwin went to see this most unpredictable home.
Photography by Keith Adamson
Pauline Bishop has done more than her fair share of globe-trotting.
Born and brought up in New Zealand, she taught in Sweden, the United States, Britain and Japan before she met her husband, Paul, on a railway in northwest Canada, following the Klondike Trail.
Because of Paul's job, the early years of their married life were spent in America, then in London.
Such an unsettled lifestyle made it difficult for Pauline to accumulate much in the way of household possessions, but what it did give her was a very cosmopolitan view.
Pauline and Paul moved to their house in Cumbria, 10 years ago.
After teaching English as a foreign language for many years, Pauline wanted to establish a house in a country setting where her students could stay for up to three or four weeks at a time.
here they could experience English country life and learn to speak the language at the same time.
Paul knew the Lake District well from his mountaineering days at university, so he was enthusiastic about the idea of living there.
Though he travels a good deal in his job as an engineering manager, he could now enjoy the prospect of climbing, walking and fishing in the beautiful scenery he loves.
Eleven-year old Samantha, their daughter, is away at school during term time, but Pauline keeps busy with a succession of visitors from all parts of the globe.
Swiss, Swedish, Colombian, French, Italian, Japanese, Argentinian students all live as part of the family and join in outings.
‘We're out to dispel the   myth of cold English houses with poor food,’ grins Pauline.
Unlike many of the other traditional houses in the Lake District, there's no English country house furniture here, and you won't find heavy damask fabrics or faded silks.
Colour is the first thing that hits you as you walk through the door.
Where are the soft subtle colours usually associated with country furnishings?
Poppy red sofas and big baggy armchairs are clustered round the welcoming fire in the kitchen-cum-living room.
As you cast your eyes around, you wonder if you've landed in America, without even noticing the ride.
There are Early American patchwork quilts in red and white, an 1840 American cradle and a homely 20-dollar porch chair, all collected over the years.
But it hasn't always been so welcoming.
When the Bishops moved into the house 10 years ago, it had been on the market for 18 months and had become very run down.
It had been split into five separate flats in the mid-1970s and, according to Pauline, some inappropriate alterations had been made.
In an attempt to put the house back in order, Paul drew up a list of jobs to be done and employed a local architect to oversee the work.
Five men worked five days a week for eight months until the interior was back in good order.
Meanwhile, Pauline was hunting round local auctions, collecting furniture and creating colour schemes.
‘I wanted to keep a Victorian flavour but I didn't want all the dark, heavy aspects of a Victorian house.
I know they used silks and damasks, but I prefer cottons and chintzes.
And I'm not keen on colours with sludgy overtones.
I like clear, bright, strong colours — happy colours that make you feel alive,’ she says.
Pauline doesn't often agonise over decorating decisions.
‘I try not to analyse anything,’ she says.
‘I   just go in like a bull at a gate and most of the time it works.
The only place I hesitated was over the hallway.
It took 30 rolls of wallpaper and I knew it would have to last.’
Eventually, she and Paul decided on an Osborne & Little design in a soft raspberry colour.
Inevitably, Pauline has been greatly influenced by the houses she has seen on her travels in America and Sweden.
The morning living room, facing east, often used by guests is yellow and blue, the colours of the Swedish flag.
‘I love the Swedish sense of colour,’ she says.
‘They use lovely clear colours and mix them with wood.’
Her kitchen is a wonderful example of this — a pine kitchen on a timber floor, with the living area decorated in poppy red, emerald and white.
Patchwork quilts, shawls and laces are everywhere.
‘I like things to look very natural — nothing too studied,’ says Pauline.
‘They look like they've just fallen there.
Furniture must look generous,’ she adds.
‘Nothing mean or pinched or skimpy.
I just want a big comfortable feel, so you look at a sofa and want to curl up in it.’
The surprising thing is how little some of the room schemes cost.
Old armchairs were imaginatively re-covered and secondhand Lloyd Loom furniture was restored with a lick of paint, with simple gloss or matt painted walls as a background.
Work on the house still continues, and each year they take on a new project.
‘Last summer it was the terrace after that we restored the pond area and next spring we'll do the tennis court.’
Every three months they draw up a list of new jobs.
‘but then, just when you think you've got to the end of it, something else turns up,’ says Pauline with a smile.
For enquiries about Pauline Bishop's English as a foreign language courses ;.
Main picture: The living room is a bold mix of strong colours and patterned fabrics
Above: The Bishops' Lakeland home is full of surprises
Below: With daughter Samantha in the drawing room
Main picture: Gaughin's Tahiti paintings were the inspiration for the kitchen colour scheme
Above: A patchwork quilt makes a stunning tablecloth
Below: At one end of the kitchen is a cosy sitting area
Main picture: A huge mirror covers one wall in the main bedroom, where armchairs and a blazing fire make the room seem cosy
From the inside out Instead of letting structural details determine the interior style, Jon and Catherine Edgson prefer to start with the inside, so that it dictates the whole look of the house.
Richard Wiles went to meet them at home.
Photography by Simon Butcher/Houses & Interiors
Kicking sand in the face of established practice, Jon Edgson is something of a rebel as far as interior design is concerned.
Usually decorating is seen as the final stage in refurbishing a home, but Jon feels that this should be the starting point of any plan — with structural works and more practical details falling into line behind.
Along with his wife, Catherine, Jon Edgson runs a business offering an innovative service for clients.
Their individual approach to interior design is fully demonstrated in their own Regency house in Cheltenham.
Jon, an interior designer with a wealth of experience, struck out on his own some 20 years ago.
‘People originally came to us for help with choosing wallpapers, paints, fabrics and curtains, but we realised we could give them a much broader service,’ explains Jon.
‘Our concept is that although the building may need to be upgraded and restored, the inside is the most important factor.
We look at the interior first, then work outwards.’
The Edgsons now offer a package deal for clients, specialising in the period houses that they particularly like.
‘We'll tackle everything, from planning considerations, architectural requirements and structural work, to choosing the fabrics and upholstery,’ says Jon.
Jon sees his role as helping clients identify the type of home they want — one that fits their lifestyle.
And he tries to keep his own personal tastes out of the decision.
‘It's no good me saying: ‘This is the colour, this is the fabric, this is the atmosphere you want.’
What I must do is get to know the people over   a few hours or days and find out what they're trying to do, what their activities are, whether they have children or pets.
I'm not creating something for posterity — it's for comfort and enjoyment.’
The Edgsons bought their own house — built in 1834 — about five years ago, mainly because they liked its quiet Gloucestershire location.
And its separate lower ground floor was ideal as Jon's studio.
Most of the houses in the streets are villas — each one quite different from its neighbour and built with the warm golden limestone blocks that are typical of this part of the country
The ground floor comprises a hallway, through kitchen, living room and dining room.
‘This area was originally a formal dining room decorated in dark, oppressive olive green,’ explains Catherine.
‘There were large double doors which, although they were very nice, made it difficult to position the furniture.
‘So we decided it would be much better to have a combined living, eating, kitchen room instead — it's very informal and suits our lifestyle.
I don't see any point in having a formal dining room with a table stuck in the middle.
This scheme is practical for people with younger children, too, as you can keep an eye on them while you cook,’ she points out.
A separate utility room nearby houses all the noisy domestic appliances.
The living area is furnished with Art Deco armchairs in blue with cream speckles and piping, a green leather, buttoned chair and a wicker conservatory chair.
Alcove shelves at either side of the marble fireplace are crammed with books on art and design, cookery and Jon's great love — cricket.
On top of the shelves you notice a 1930s bust sporting a straw hat, and a collection of old, autographed cricket bats.
‘It's easy to get nostalgic about cricket,’ John smiles.
‘Pride of place in my collection goes to a book by WG Grace that's signed by him.’
The dining area has a modern pine octagonal table and round-backed chairs.
Like much of the house, the walls of the L-shaped room are virtually covered with pictures, prints and posters.
The kitchen is dominated by a huge pine dresser and pine cupboards.
An island unit provides worksurface space and divides the cooking area from the living space.
Dried flowers, collections of country-style crockery, bottles and stoneware jars create a more rustic theme than in the rest of the house.
Linking the three elements of the kitchen, dining and living room is a highly ornate cornice, with the moulding detail picked out in the same   pale creamy tone as the walls
An elegant staircase leads to the first floor, where the Edgsons have another living room overlooking the street.
This room has a more formal atmosphere than the downstairs living area, and is the place where Jon and Catherine generally spend their evenings sitting, reading or watching TV.
The light grey corded carpet sets a neutral tone, while a white bordered rug, white suite and white walls make the room seem fresh and bright.
Fine-slatted Venetian blinds show off the tall sash windows, which are too elegant to be obscured by curtains.
The most dominant feature of the room, however, is a collection of framed prints depicting sportsmen and politicians.
‘They're Vanity Fair prints — known as Spy prints, after the caricaturist who drew most of them,’ says Jon.
‘There are a lot of cricketers, about 30-odd, in the set that I'm collecting.
The whole collection covers 60 years and there are about 3,500.
I'm not sure exactly how many I have, but in this room alone there are about 200.’
As a rule, the Edgsons prefer putting up pictures to displaying traditional ornaments.
‘People always comment on the large number of pictures, but we've always displayed things on the walls and have never particularly liked putting up flowery wallpaper — or wallpaper at all,’ Catherine explains.
‘We prefer groups of things.
I like to contrast showy posters with quite valuable prints.
People send a lot of matching wallpapers and curtains but the end result often doesn't look very homely.
I think it's the things you collect that give a house character.’
Other rooms in their house are less important to the Edgsons than the ‘living’ spaces.
Jon, in particular, would rather be working or studying cricket almanacs than sleeping.
Even so, these ‘inactivity’ spaces are decorated in the Edgsons' inimitable style.
The couple's bedroom has a richly veined marbled wallcovering, with bed linen and window blind in a delicate fabric printed with grasses.
The Edgsons believe that all houses are in a constant state of change, as they reflect the lives of their occupants.
Even these photographs, Jon believes, are not a true representation.
‘What the pictures show is the house stopped in time — like a time capsule,’ he says.
‘I strongly believe that if someone says to me, ‘I've had my house interior designed’, it's just meaningless rubbish.
It doesn't stop there, but goes on evolving — or at least it should.’
These words may sound odd coming from an interior designer.
But, as Jon Edgson says: ‘All we can do is start the ball rolling, after that it's up to the individual concerned.
A house is a living, growing, moving environment.’
Contact Jon and Catherine Edgson on .
Main picture: Venetian blinds make the most of the light in the upstairs living room, while Jon's cricketing books and prints add character
Above: The Edgsons' beautiful Gloucestershire town house was build in 1834 from traditional limestone
Left: Jon's collection of Vanity Flair caricature prints dominate the living room's white and cream scheme
Main picture: In the downstairs dining area, the cream walls are covered in prints and favourite posters.
A large dresser lends the kitchen a more country look
Left: At the bottom of the elegant staircase, two separate entrances leading into the dining and living area
Main picture: The dining area is given an informal look with comfortable armchairs, favourite ornaments and, again, prints on the wall
Left: The Edgsons' bedroom is decorated in marbled wallpaper and pastel fabrics with a grasses and rush motif
All The Trimmings
Christmas is a time to have fun with decorations.
And this year there are more ways than ever to make your home special — from unusual decorations, swags and tiny trees, to ideas that are simple to make yourself.
Denise Brock explains
A WARM WELCOME
A room can look festive and jolly without being overwhelmed by lots of gaudy decorations.
The secret is to concentrate on just a couple of areas.
In this room, the tree has pride of place, decorated with purple, red and gold baubles with strings of pearl beads and silver cord garlands draped from branch to branch for a touch of elegance.
We've even matched the colour of the gift wrap to the decorations so  the presents around the tree help balance the overall effect.
The other focal point in the room is the fireplace.
Cards, bead chains and baubles are displayed on the mantelshelf while a garland is carefully stapled to the underside, with tiny cherubs and tassels tied in place.
Candles give a warm glow to the festive arrangements (but make sure they are far enough from the wallpaper not to scorch it or damage it with hot wax).
If you don't have a fireplace, a side table could be decorated with bowls full of fruit, nuts and flowers.
WREATHS AND GARLANDS
Thick swathes of greenery give a luxuriant festive touch — drape them around apiece of furniture, around a beam, or twist around the handrail of the staircase.
If you don't have fresh greenery to make garland, fake ones are practical and just as attractive.
FIT FOR A FEAST
Do your Christmas meals justice with a beautiful festive table arrangement.
An original an inexpensive idea is to stencil your own tablecloth with festive motifs.
A single bed sheet makes a good-sized tablecloth for an average rectangular table and you can choose exactly the colour you want.
The holly stencil could be applied along the edge to outline the top of the table or in squares along the middle of the tablecloth.
Special fabric paint is applied using a stencil brush and then the design is fixed permanently by pressing with an iron.
You can use this appliqué cotton table linen year after year
Full-length tablecloths always look sumptuous and extravagant.
This bright red undercloth covered by a shorter fringed green one definitely brings a touch of Christmas cheer.
If you'd like to create a similar look in your own home turn to page 52 for details of our special table and tablecloth offer.
Christmas stockings hung at the fireplace make a simple and traditional decoration
TOP OF THE TREE
Instead of a large tree, why not choose a small-scale alternative.
Check out our mini forest of futuristic topiary-style trees.
This unusual, colourful hanging ornament will brighten any room.
It's made of coloured paper, silver beads, bells and cloth birds on a wooden frame.
Measures 48 cm long by 20 cm sq, £7.95, Oxfam Christmas Catalogue
A cascading arrangement of evergreen branches and fresh and dried flowers looks perfect above a fireplace, but make sure it's kept away from the fire
Candles and flower complement each other well.
The silver basket has holders for three candles to surround a floral arrangement, £128, Kenneth Turner.
A wicker version costs £54.50
HOW TO
Full circle
Give your home a festive feel with this colourful, easy-to-make wreath that will look good wherever you decide to put it
This Christmas wreath has a fresh, original look.
It's very simple to make using traditional patchwork fabrics — or any light cotton in festive colours, such as red, gold and green.
YOU WILL NEED
26 cm diameter dry foam ring cardboard and glue
1.5 m dark green paper twist
Dressmaking pins
4 x 25-cm long pieces of 114 cm-wide patchwork fabric in various colours
Pinking shears
Pencil or chalk
Fine knitting needle or pointed nail file
50 cm of 15 mm-wide ribbon
50 cm of narrow ribbon in three colours
1
Place the dry foam ring flat side down on the cardboard and draw around its outline, following the outer and inner edges.
Cut out and glue to the back of the ring.
2
Unravel and flatten about 1.5 metres of paper twist and cut in half along its length.
Bind around the foam ring, gluing the ends in place until it's completely covered (illustration 1).
3
Take the first piece of fabric and fold in half, selvedge to selvedge.
Then fold again by taking the centre fold to the selvedges.
Secure with pins.
Trim the raw edges of the fabric with pinking shears.
Mark every 7.5 cm along the folded side edges.
Using a ruler, line up the sets of marks and draw across the folded fabric with a pencil or chalk (illustration 2).
Cut along these lines using pinking shears.
4
Unfold and place the three strips on top of each other.
Using a pencil and ruler, draw a line every 7.5 cm across the fabric width to form squares (illustration 3).
Cut with pinking shears.
5
Repeat steps 3 and 4 with the remaining three fabrics.
6
With the right side uppermost, place the point of the knitting needle in the centre of a square of fabric.
About 1 cm from the outside edge of the ring, push the fabric square firmly into the ring so the centre is embedded in the foam by about 1cm and the fabric corners stand up.
Continue every 25 cm around the edge of the ring using each of the different fabrics in turn (illustration 4).
7
After completing the first circle of fabric tufts repeat with a second row about 1 cm away towards the centre.
Position this row so it starts to fill the spaces between the first tufts to give good coverage.
8
Repeat with three more rows until you have worked right into the centre of the ring.
If there are any leftover squares, use them to fill in any gaps.
9
Finish off by gently fluffing up the tufts.
10
Secure a loop or bow made from the length of 15 mm-wide ribbon with the glue and dressmaking pins so you'll be able to hang the wreath.
11
Attach lengths of narrow, decorative ribbon with a pin to the opposite end and then hang up your completed Christmas wreath.
1
Bind the paper twist around the foam ring and glue the ends in place
2
Using a ruler, line up the sets of marks and draw across the folded fabric with a pencil or chalk.
Cut along these lines using pinking shears
3
Put the three strips on top of each other and draw a line every 7.5 cm
4
Push the fabric squares firmly into the ring so the centre is embedded in the foam by about 1 cm and the fabric corners stand up
Wreath made from patchwork fabrics
Festive Fireside
A mantelpiece edging is perfect for giving your fireplace a special decorative touch.
We show you how to make your own
This mantelpiece edging gives an extra Christmas look to your fireplace and provides some protection from scratches and dripping candle wax.
YOU WILL NEED
About 75 cm patchwork fabric, depending on the size of your mantel shelf
15 cm or 90 cm-wide red felt
8 to 10 large beads or metal hanging decorations
6 m thin ribbon
1
First make a paper pattern for the shelf cover.
Measure the width and depth of your mantel shelf.
Add 2 cm to the width and 4.5 cm to the depth.
This allows 3 cm overhang at the front.
2
To decide the width of the triangles along the edge, divide the width of the shelf into equal measurements.
We used seven 17.5 cm-wide triangles along a 122.5 cm-wide shelf.
3
To make a pattern for the triangles, drawn the finished width of the triangle on a piece of paper.
Make a mark in the centre of the line and, using a set square, drawn a guideline at right angles from it.
Mark off the length of the triangle along the guideline.
Draw lines from this mark to either end of the first line.
Try out other triangular shapes (more or less elongated) until you are happy with the shape (illustration 1).
Add a border of 5 mm on all three sides of your chosen triangle for the seam (illustration 2).
4
To make a pattern for the felt zigzag edge, draw a line about 30 cm long.
Draw a second parallel line 13 mm from the first, then a third one 5 mm from the second (illustration 3).
Along the first and centre lines make marks every 6 mm.
Using a ruler and the marks as a guide, draw a zigzag line.
5
Using the patterns, cut out the shelf cover and triangles.
Cut enough zigzag felt edging to fit the short edges of the triangles and the length of the shelf.
6
Turn a 1 cm hem along the long back edge and the two short side edges of the shelf cover and stitch in place.
7
Take a fabric triangle and, with the right-side facing, pin a length of felt trim to one of the side edges with the raw edges matching (illustration 4).
Stitch.
Trim off the last felt triangle at each outside.
Repeat on the other side.
Turn over the felt edges.
Press lightly.
Repeat for all triangles.
8
With the right side of the fabric facing, sew lengths of felt trim to the raw long edge of the shelf cover, matching up the joins.
9
to join the triangles to the shelf cover, place the right sides together and pine the first triangle to the centre of the shelf cover.
Pin a triangle next to the first so that it overlaps slightly.
Repeat along the length, so that all the triangles are evenly placed and cover the edge (illustration 5).
Tack and machine sew.
10
Finish off by sewing on bows and beads.
1
Having drawn the finished width of the triangle decide how long you want it to be
2
Add on a boarder of 5 mm on all three sides of your chosen triangle for the seam
3
To make a pattern for the felt zigzag edge, drawn three parallel lines.
Along the first and centre lines make marks every 6 mm.
Using a ruler and the marks as a guide, draw a zigzag line
4
Take a fabric triangle and, with the right-side facing, pin a length of felt trim to one of the side edges with the raw edges matching
5
To join the triangles to the shelf cover, place the right sides together and pin the first triangle to the centre of the shelf cover.
Repeat along length.
Tack and sew
To find out who to ring and where to go for items featured here, see our Shopping Director on page 132
HOW TO Needlepoint
A stitch in time
Even if you've never attempted embroidery before you'll find this tablecloth easy to make.
Using simple cross-stitch the tartan-inspired design can be worked quickly so you'll see the results in next to no time
One of the advantages of cross-stitch is that you don't need a lot of materials and equipment to create wonderful designs — like the smart border on this tablecloth.
This border is just one of 30 new designs in Amelia Saint George's book The Needlepoint & Cross-Stitch Book (£16.99, Conran Octopus) which includes themes such as fruit, butterflies, roses, ribbons, animals and berries — all designed and embroidered by the author.
There are easy-to-follow charted patterns, backed up with plenty of information on planning and designing your own patterns.
Cross-stitch can be worked either on evenweave fabric — woven with single threads; Hardanger fabric — woven with double weft and warp threads (horizontal and vertical threads); or Aida — woven in blocks of threads which makes it easier to count holes and therefore suitable for beginners.
These fabrics come in various gauges, referred to by the number of holes or threads to 2.5 cm (1 ″).
The higher the count, the smaller the stitches.
Stranded cotton is the best to use because the six strands can be separated and re-combined to make the thickness you require.
Working the cross-stitch
Each square on the chart represents one cross-stitch.
Work each cross-stitch over one block of fabric, using three stands of the stranded cotton.
See below for the colour key.
Begin with the corner motif, positioning it 7 cm from the edge.
Continue with the bands of plaid.
The chart shows one pattern repeat for each band.
work appropriate repeat patterns five times along each side, then add other corners, checking if they work out correctly.
If you want to make a different-sized tablecloth, your border will probably end at a different part of the plaid pattern.
In this case, chose an appropriate combination of lines to finish with, so the design continues around the corner.
To make up, turn up a 1 cm double hem, mitring the corners.
Making the tablecloth
YOU WILL NEED
DMC stranded cotton.
Buy four skeins of each of the following colours: reds (dark to light) blues (dark to light) greys (dark to light) pink, purple 
Piece of 11-count Aida fabric 100 cm sq.
The finished size is approximately 106 cm sq.
FURNISHING
THE PERFECT SETTING
Turn a meal into a special occasion with stunning tableware.
Julie London shows you how to dress your table to impress
Backgrounds: Blue Lilac, Red Devil and Velvet Plum vinyl matt emulsion from the Crown Expressions range
To find out who to ring and where to go for items featured here, see our Shopping Directory on page 132
Festive flair
An occasional table and two tablecloths for just £44.95
IDEAL HOME OFFER
An extra table is a very welcome addition to any home at Christmas time and, this month, Ideal Home offers you an easily assembled table, plus two festive tablecloths in traditional Christmas colours.
And whether it's used for holding a special Christmas arrangement, potpourri, a bowl of fruit or just as handy side table for your guests to put their drinks on, this occasional table will prove indispensable all year round.
Measuring 51 cm (20 in) in diameter, the table is made from 12 mm (½″) chipboard and stands about 61 cm (24 ″) high.
The base comes in two sections which simply slot together and the top is fixed by putting the four screws provided into pre-drilled holes.
The two tablecloths can be used together at Christmas time, and, for the rest of the year, the bottom cloth can be used on its own.
The floor-length bottom cloth measures 170 cm (67 ″) diameter and is made from high-quality polyester and cotton.
It has a scallop edge and comes in a choice of berry red or holly green.
The 84 cm (33 ″) square top cloth has a festive holly-sprigged pattern.
Made from polyester and cotton, it also has a scallop edge.
There is also an optional 4 mm (⅛) thick glass top with a smooth edge.
And, remember, as with all our offers, we guarantee to refund your money if you're not delighted with your purchase.
HOW TO ORDER
Please complete the coupon in block capitals.
Remittance may be made by Access/Visa, PO or cheque (name and address on back of cheque please), crossed and made payable to Ideal Home Offer.
Send to .
Only available while stocks last to readers in England, Scotland and Wales, mainland only.
Orders are normally dispatched within 28 days.
You will be notified if a longer delay is expected.
Or take advantage of our phone-in service.
Access/Visa cardholders may order direct on .
Offer subject to availability.
Readers' offer enquiries,.
NEWS & VIEWS
A CHRISTMAS PLAY WITH A DIFFERENCE, RIBBONS FOR ALL OCCASIONS, SENDING CHARITY CARDS AND WHAT'S HAPPENING WHERE.
LINDA NEWMAN HAS LOT OF IDEAS FOR THE FESTIVE SEASON
POWER PLAY
Battery-operated toys seem to run down very quickly.
But, according to Boots, rechargeable batteries and chargers can save you more than £70 a year.
Boots says a supply of alkaline batteries for a personal stereo used for four hours a day, five days a week over a year will cost about £90, while rechargeable batteries and a charger cost from £18 to £27 (from selected branches of Boots).
We have 10 Boots Two-Hour Multi-Chargers, worth £19.99 each, plus packs of four batteries (£6.99) or the first readers whose names are drawn from the postbag.
Write to:
DREAMING OF A GREEN CHRISTMAS
Gone are the days when all Christmas school plays focused on the Nativity.
Now, some children are performing plays with very different themes.
One of the last Christmas' success stories,The Bumblesnouts save the World is an ideal play for primary school children.
the play is a musical about eco-friendly aliens whose mission is to save our planet.
Composer Debbie Campbell says she really enjoys writing for children and developing their natural enthusiasm for wildlife and the environment — a book of the play has been published in association with the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF).
And as a music teacher, Debbie thinks that inspiring children to play and enjoy music is very important.
‘Creating a rich musical environment in the home will stimulate a child's interest.
Lots of listening to music and singing from an early age always helps,’ she says.
However, Debbie thinks that it's not a good idea to pressurise children into playing an instrument too early.
‘A good age to start music lessons is about eight or nine when children are reading well,’ she says.
The bumblesnouts save the World music score is available from music shops, price £6.95 (Novello and Company Ltd).
The Bumblesnouts save the World Written by DEBBIE CAMPBELL Illustrated by Richard Oke
SWEET CHARITY
Charity Christmas cards have become big business over the years, but it's not always clear just how much they benefit charitable organisation.
According to the Charity Christmas Card council (4C), it all depends where you buy the cards.
‘If you buy direct from a charity then you will be helping their cause.
However, while charities can benefit from cards sold by stationers, they may retain a substantial amount of money.
Often there's no information on how much is given to the charity.’
By Christmas 1993 ‘a clear and unambiguous statement’ will become law under the Charities Act 1992.
Meanwhile, 4C, which was established in 1966, says customers should feel free to ask retailers how the money they spend will be divided.
Temporary Christmas card shops in London, Belfast, Cardiff, Bristol, Manchester and Croydon are being set up by 4C, and 82 per cent of the retail price will be given to leading charitable organisations.
For addresses and further information, tel:
CLASSIC GIFTS
If you're in search of Christmas presents with a classic look this year, why not take a look at the Sanderson range of festive gifts?
This includes travel goods, kitchenware and decorative accessories in classic Sanderson designs.
New Christmas additions include floral pomanders, potpourri boxes, drawer liners and tissue packs.
Look out for them at major department stores.
ACID REMARKS
When you feel your temper fraying over the festive period and are on the verge of hurling some rather choice insults, sneak off and read The Bedside Book of Insults by William Cole & Louis Phillips (£7.95, John Murray).
This entertaining book is packed with over 500 quips and cutting comments, such as‘Who's got childbearing lips?’
‘Who is Attila the Hen?’
‘Who's a genius with an IQ of 60?’ and ‘Where is the queen who can't dress?’
You'll find the answers and many more acid quotes in this amusing book available from leading book stores.
Exhibitions and Events
Boxing Day to New Year's Day (inclusive)
Walk Back To Health.
Join a countryside walk led by the Ramblers Association and The National Trust.
There are hundreds of walks varying in length from three to nine miles which are open to everyone, free of charge.
If you would like details of the dates, times and meeting places, send an sae to The National Trust,.
4 to 6 December
The Knitting and Stitching Show.
Demonstrations and displays of all forms of needlecraft, fashion, furnishings and accessories for the home, plus Kaffe Fassett and William Morris roomsets.
At .
For further details, tel.
.
Open 9.30 am to 5.30 pm.
Admission:.
And if you take this issue of Ideal Home along with you, you'll be entitled to one reduced adult admission of just £3.50.
SAY IT WITH RIBBONS
‘Last Christmas, customers queued from the basement all down the road for gift wrap ribbons,’ recalls Annabel Lewis of VV Rouleaux.
There are some 4,500 ribbons to choose from, with prices starting at 15p per metre for curling confectioners' paper ribbon and 60p per metre for a paperlace sweet box edging that can be used to trim dresser shelves.
For a touch of extravagance there's wired ombre ribbon from £1.85, gold mesh from £2.23 and Japanese passementerie braid from £2.40 to £47 per metre.
But ribbons are not only ideal for wrapping presents — household furnishings can be instantly revived with rich braids.
A rosette on a pelmet can add interest to tired curtains; small rosettes and bows hide stubborn stains; while pleated grosgrain ribbon can give plain calico and sheeting fabric a decorative edge.
‘We can match almost any colour and fabric including antique silks and velvets,’ says Annabel.
This Christmas, VV Rouleaux is stocking exclusive Japanese papers and ribbons.
Special ribbons can also be woven (minimum order 50 metres).
If you would like samples or orders to be posted to you, send a large sae to VV Rouleaux,.
You can get Gift Wrap Duets , a useful booklet of ideas which contains all the materials stocked by V V Rouleaux, by sending a cheque for £4.25 and a large sae (the booklet measures 21 mm by 20 mm) to the address mentioned above.
CAROLYN CHAPMAN
EASY-TO-ENTER COMPETITION A CLEANER ENVIRONMENT
Three Siemens washing machines to be won — worth £479.90 each
With new technology making our lives easier by the day, it's good to know that the environment is being looked after at the same time.
And top manufacturer Siemens has developed its latest range of quality washing machines with both energy and money saving features very much in mind.
Its WM 21010 model has an Aqua-Tronic scoop and shower system to make washing more efficient.
And the days of trying to decide of you have half or full load to wash are gone.
Siemens' machines automatically weigh your wash load and judge exactly how much water is needed.
Spinning is gentle with electronically controlled low-speed breaks to loosen and redistribute the load, leaving clothes tangle free.
Vibrations are reduced and the machine will detect unbalanced loads, so the cycle runs smoothly and quietly.
No detergent is wasted either because Siemens has come up with a specially designed Ecovalve.
This ball valve device seals off the sump area and ensures all detergent is used and isn't just washed away — another money saver.
Siemens is giving away three washing machines to Ideal Home readers.
If you'd like to win an WM 31010 model, worth £479.90, then here's your chance.
All you have to do is ring  and answer the following questions.
1.
On a garment's care label what does the circle symbol mean? a) Do not bleach b) Dry-clean professionally
2.
Again, on the care label, what does a circle inside a square mean? a) May be tumble dried b) Dry flat
The winners will be selected at random from the correct answers received.
Calls cost 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p per minute at other times.
Competition closes 14 December 1992.
MONEY TALK
HOW TO INVEST FOR GRANDCHILDREN, GET THE BEST RATE OF INTEREST FROM YOUR BUILDING SOCIETY PLUS SPECIALIST FINANCIAL PLANNING BY WOMEN FOR WOMEN.
WENDY ELKINGTON REPORTS
FINANCE FOR WOMEN
When it comes to financial planning, women often have different requirements to men, so it can help to see an independent financial adviser who specialises in this area.
Fiona Price & Partners Ltd is an all-women company of financial advisers and is well known for having an almost all-female clientele.
About 80 per cent of its clients are business and professional women.
As well as a regular newsletter, the company also produces a helpful booklet,The Shark-free Guide To Financial Advice .
Another book,The Shark-free Guide to Pension Planning , is due out soon.
The company is a member of FIMBRA, the industry watchdog.
For more information, phone Price & Partners Ltd. on .
ROOM TO LET
Need a little help with the mortgage?
Then taking in a lodger or renting out a room may be the answer.
Thanks to a new tax allowance from the Government you can keep more of the money in your pocket.
In future, you can earn £65 a week tax-free.
And if you're married, the rental income can be treated as either the husband's or the wife's, depending on which suits your circumstances best.
In addition, the money can be divided equally between you.
But you should be aware of the impact on your house contents insurance policy if you do take in paying guests.
Some cover may be withdrawn as the insurance company sees it as a greater risk.
You may not be insured for theft or malicious damage by a lodger and usually you can only claim for theft if there has been a forced entry from outside.
In the first instance, tell your insurance company of the changes and they will let you know if there is any small additional premium to pay.
It also makes sense to tell your lodger that his or her possessions are not covered by your insurance policy.
GENERATION GAME
The UK's largest friendly society, Family Assurance, has joined forces with the medical group Private Patients Plan (PPP) to make it easier for young people to buy their first home, with a policy called Generation Builder.
It allows grandparents to invest £3,000 in their grandchild's name so they will eventually be able to buy a house worth £50,000 at today's prices.
At the same time, there should be enough left over to pay for all the extras involved when you're buying a house.
Generation Builder takes advantage of the concession which allows children to have a tax-free friendly society policy.
The idea is for grandparents to invest money when the child is very young.
The fund should build up tax-free over the years so there will be enough in the kitty for the grandchild to buy his or first property between the ages of 20 and 30 with an interest-only mortgage.
Further details and application forms are available from .
COST OF EDUCATION
Many parents concentrate so hard on finding the cash for private school fees, they forget about the cost of higher education.
At present, about one in five children is in full-time higher education and this number is expected to double over the next 25 years.
Full student maintenance grants are now frozen at between £1,795 and £2,845, but, only about a quarter of students actually receive the full award.
It is usually left to the parents to finance the shortfall and it can easily cost £10,000 today for a student to attend a three-year higher education course.
This needs careful planning and it makes sense to start saving early.
The Norwich Union has published a useful book called Education Planning .
It describes the schemes available, including regular savings plans, personal equity plans (PEP) an endowment policies.
Further information and a copy of the booklet can be obtained from the Norwich Union .
INFORMING CUSTOMERS
The 1992 annual report from the Building Societies Ombudsman shows that unhappy customers bombarded the industry watchdog with more than 9,500 complaints — twice as many as the previous year.
And the barrage of complaints is likely to increase this year.
Customers are often incensed with the poor interest rate they get on their savings.
Many societies launch a new-style account and advertise it heavily to pull in thousands of new investors.
They they reduce the rate, and a year or so later bring out a new account paying top rates.
But the top rates do not benefit existing investors.
The Ombudsman has instructed societies to make sure customers are kept fully informed about interest rates and, in particular, obsolete accounts.
But, at the end of the day, it is still down to the individual to make sure that he or she is getting the best deal possible.
Check regularly with your society to make sure you are getting the best rate of interest on the type of account you have.
The address of the Building Societies Ombudsman is .
LETTERS
Let us know your new, views and home hints.
There's a set of two Gien holly-design cups and saucers for the start letter; £15 for every other letter published
CURTAIN CALL
I usually make my own curtains but a few years ago I decided to make use of a free making-up service offered by a large department store.
When the assistant worked out the overall cost I was astounded.
Even allowing for the cost of the curtain tape and cotton required, I calculated that I would be overcharged by £80.
I did query this with the manager of the store.
He agreed the figures were wrong and that they would be amended.
Having my doubts about the discrepancy, I decided not to place my order.
Recently, having seen an advertisement in a local shop for free curtain making, I was again tempted to given it a try.
I asked to see a breakdown of the price quoted to me and found that I was being charged four times more than the normal retail price for curtain tape and hooks and was quoted for more material than I needed.
When I questioned this, the sum was magically reduced.
I would advise anyone taking up such offers to work out the amount of fabric required and the normal retail price of curtain tape and hooks in advance as a way of calculating whether or not the cost is fair.
Mrs J D Bowers Bath, Avon
It does seem a bit misleading for a shop to advertise something as ‘free’ when really it isn't.
But, according to trading standards officers, shops can charge what they like for something and if they choose to recoup the cost of making curtains by charging more for the cost of raw materials they use, then they're entitled to do this.
You're quite right, though — it's a good idea to ask for a breakdown of charges first and, if you're not happy, shop around.
Gaynor Morgan Consumer File Editor
BABY TALK
I was interested to read what you had to say about the safest types of bedding for babies on the Solutions page in your August issue.
Although you advised readers to use blankets rather than duvets, another feature in the same issue had a photograph of a cot with duvet and cot bumper — inside was a six-month-old baby.
I was left feeling confused and wonder if you could clarify what recommendation you'd make.
Fiona Nairn Brighton, Sussex
We are sorry the photograph conflicted with the advice on our Solutions page.
The picture in our feature was supplied to us by a manufacturer to illustrate a particular cot set and was not intended as a recommendation of how to put a baby down to sleep.
As it happens, the company in question produces a leaflet to accompany its products which gives full safety advice to parents.
We do advise against duvets for babies under one year old on the basis that, although good at insulating, duvets can cause overheating.
It's far better to use several lightweight layers of sheets and blankets that can be added to or removed as necessary.
The Editor
NO PLACE LIKE HOME
Twenty years ago we were thrilled when our accountant advised us to move into a larger house in order to qualify for a much higher tax exemption on our mortgage.
We eagerly set out to find our dream home but, after much searching, eventually we decided that there was no way we could leave our quiet countryside house with its beautiful views.
We're still here, two extensions later, and very happy not to have jumped on the house-moving bandwagon.
Over the years we've enjoyed annual family holidays without feeling the pinch and we've built up good relationships with our neighbours and the surrounding community.
Our house has increased in value and we feel lucky that we're not affected by the slump in the housing market.
Mrs. J Seed Nelson, Lancs
CHARACTER BUILDING
We bought our 1920s terraced house two years ago because of the size and character it offered compared to new houses of a similar price.
However, what we've noticed is how much more expensive it is to decorate an older house.
While our friends have made their new houses look good in just a few hours with a lick of paint, we've had to put up new ceilings, repair skirting boards and hack off layers of old tiles.
We certainly don't regret the move but wish we'd known how much work and cost would be involved.
Jennifer Evans Cardiff, South Glamorgan
INSPIRED BUDGETING
Last year we moved into our first flat.
We had a really tight budget and we feared the cost of turning it into a home was way beyond our means.
However, after reading several copies of Ideal Home, I felt inspired to paint and decorate using some of the striking designs and techniques illustrated in the magazine.
Your features in DIY upholstery and soft furnishings also told me all I need to know about renovating second-hand furniture.
With your advice we now have an eye-catching and comfortable home.
Mrs. Rosemary Morris London
Our main aim in producing the magazine is to give readers inspiration and ideas for their homes and it's heart-warming to hear of the success you've had.
We hope we can continue to help.
The Editor
If you want to learn how to make your own curtains, why not go on our curtain-making course?
See page 85 for further details.
Please address letters to The Editor, ‘Letters page’,
The writer of our star letter receives two Glen breakfast cups and saucers worth £46
PATIENCE IS A VIRTUE
The last few years have been depressing for those of us trying to move house.
However, there is something to be said for being kept waiting by a buyer.
It gives you time to decide whether a particular property is absolutely right for your needs.
Had we sold our house two years ago, we'd have certainly made an offer on a property that I later realised was quite unsuitable.
Since then we've had plenty of time to take stock, to get to know areas and compare different locations, ages and styles of house before making any decision.
It's very easy to be swept along when you're feeling enthusiastic, but enforced spells of patience can pay off in the end.
Mrs A Paterson York 
SOLUTIONS
Ideal Home's experts are on hand to give you advice on problems all around the house
Q When we built a conservatory this summer we didn't link it into our central heating system as our boiler wasn't big enough.
Now the weather has taken a turn for the worse we realise we need to heat it.
Any ideas?
A Bottled gas is a convenient, portable and safe way to heat a conservatory.
For a Victorian-style conservatory, Verine Ltd produces a range of French heaters called La Fontaine, which run on Calor gas.
Available in traditional black or dark green metal with heavy-duty castors, they feature on art Nouveau-style design with fountain, lovebirds and water lilies.
The heaters are easy to use, with three push-button settings — 1.5 kW, 2.8 kW or 4.24 kW.
Prices start from £500.
For a more modern-style conservatory, the Calorflame Deluxe from Calor is the ideal heater.
it has a realistic flame effect, a black casing and costs about £170.
If the conservatory has an outside wall with a gas supply nearby, you could have a fitted heater.
Burco Maxol's Montana is a conservatory wall heater available in two sizes: the 1500 (1.4 kW) for small rooms, £129.95; and the 2000 (2.1 kW) for larger rooms, £164.50.
Depending on the style of your conservatory you may need a fixing kit for plastic base panels, £23.50 from Burco Maxol.
Above: La Fontaine Art Nouveau-style cast-iron room heater by Verine
Above: The Calorflame Deluxe
Right: Neat an unobtrusive the Maxol Montana is a gas-fired wall heater
Q Over the years I've accumulated a motley collection of kitchen knives, none of which are very sharp.
I'd like some new ones but haven't a clue which to buy.
Have you any ideas?
Unfortunately, good knives don't come at bargain prices.
Individually forged knives take longer to make, so they're more expensive — but they're more robust and better at cutting.
Stainless steel blades are best as they're hardwearing and stain-resistant but, when choosing, check that the blade is made from a single piece of steel.
A word of warning: don't be fooled by the name ‘Sabatier’.
Although it once guaranteed good quality, now no one company holds an exclusive licence over the use of the name and the quality of the knives really does vary from brand to brand.
You don't need to buy a whole collection of new knives — you can do any cutting job with just four basic ones: a cook's knife, with a deep, broad back and strong, rigid 15 to 30-cm long blade; a filleting knife with a 15 cm flexible blade for fiddly jobs; a paring knife for trimming and peeling; and a carving knife with a 25 cm blade and sharply pointed tip.
Have these professionally sharpened once every two years.
Above right: Deglon Sabatier knives from Lakeland Plastics have stainless steel blades and range in price from £10.95 to £28.95
Right: The Victorinox range has dishwasher-safe nylon handles.
Prices start from £1.95 for a peeler up to £11.45 for a cook's knife.
Q I'd like to replace the gas fire in our living room with a more attractive ‘living flame’ model to match the old fireplace.
But I've heard they aren't particularly efficient.
Is this true?
A Some flame-effect fires do tend to send most of the heat they produce up the chimney — sometimes as much as 85 per cent.
A far more efficient option is a fire which has a convector firebox to boost output.
Convector models work by drawing in cold air which is then warmed in a convection-chamber.
Heat usually lost up the chimney is recovered and passes back into the room; in fact, some models claim to increase efficiency by about 40 per cent.
The Gazco log-effect convector fire gives out up to 4 kW of heat for about 12p per hour — enough to keep a large room warm on a winter evening — and costs £570.
If you'd prefer a sleek, brass finish, the Brass Dream fire by Valor is a good choice and costs about £399.
Above: Add a sophisticated touch to any living room with the Brass Dream flame-effect fire from Valor
Right: The Gazco Log Fire means you can enjoy watching flames flicker over the logs without all the hard work
Q Our heating bills are always astronomical in the winter and I'm convinced it's because we live in an old draughty house.
The wind seems to whistle through the doors and windows.
Can you advise me on an effective type of draughtproofing that won't cost a fortune?
A Whether they come in through the letterbox, under the door or around the windows, draughts all add up to a large heating bill.
Simple draughtproofing is relatively inexpensive and the initial cost can usually be recouped in less than two years.
For letterboxes, look out for seals with brushes which will prevent an icy blast when the post is delivered.
The OBO Letter Box Excluder clings around items left through the door.
It costs about £4.27 from DIY stores.
You can also fit a seal, with a bristle or rubber edge, around exterior doors, prices from £2.76.
Heat is also lost through gaps around windows, so use adhesive foam strips, top and bottom, and nylon brush strips on the sides.
However, these strips will not seal large gaps and should be replaced every two years.
Another low-cost way to draughtproof is with a DIY window insulation kit.
The 3M Thermal Seal Kit contains a film that covers the window and shrinks tight and wrinkle free with the heat from a hair dryer.
It's available from selected DIY stores, priced about £5.50.
1 Use the 3M Thermal Kit to stop draughts.
First, stick the special double-sided tape around the frame
2 Cut the film to size and stretch it over the window frame, sticking it to the tape
3 Apply heat with a hair dryer to seal the film — this will shrink so there are no wrinkles
4 Finally, trim away the excess film around the window frame
Q Have you any simple ideas for dressing up a bathroom window?
I want to avoid anything too fussy as my bathroom's tiny.
A As your room is small, a simple window dressing that will allow in lots of light would be the best option.
Avoid ruched styles, such as flouncy festoons or Austrian blinds and curtains, especially if steam is a problem, as excess damp can cause mould and mildew spots.
These marks are difficult to remove from patterned fabrics without ruining them.
If you're after a touch of colour, ‘false’ curtains, which don't draw but hang for decoration only, are one possibility — although you will also need to ventilate the room, opening the window slightly when showering or having a bath.
Sheer fabrics, such as voile or lace, look great in a bathroom setting.
Try draping a narrow length from a curtain pole to produce an attractive crossover effect in front of a plain roller blind.
Excess fabric can be tied back with a ribbon.
The Tudor Cottage Pole by Harrison Drape comes in a choice of five finishes — white, as shown left, as well as natural, untreated, dark walnut and teak.
Prices range from £16.95 to £35.15.
If your window is small or awkwardly shaped, you could consider frosted glass.
This can look rather dull on its own so brighten it up with a row of tall, colourful glassware to decorate the windowsill.
Glass shelves, fitted across the window, also make an excellent alternative to curtains or blinds.
Use the shelves to display ceramics, glass or trailing plants.
Q Although I'd love to fill my home with baskets of potpourri, ornaments, vases, dried-flower arrangements and all the accessories I often read about in Ideal Home, my problem is the children.
With a lively three-year-old and a baby who grabs at everything in reach, it looks like I'll be forced to live in near-empty rooms for some years to come.
Do you have any ideas for finishing touches that are both decorative and safe?
A It's always a problem having tempting ornaments at low levels with children about.
Dried flowers and potpourri are irresistible to small hands but could prove dangerous if sucked or swallowed, so our advice would be to move them out of harm's way or to do without.
Likewise, avoid small breakable ornaments.
Try to put any such displays high up on the wall, on shelves or dressers away from prying fingers.
To compensate, you could make more use of wall space with pictures, mirrors or decorative wall plates.
A shelf for decorative plates running at picture rail height will instantly bring an interior to life.
Picture frames can make striking displays on occasional tables, window sills or other low-level areas.
The padded fabric varieties are well and truly childproof — and look very attractive.
The children will appreciate them and can handle them without too much supervision.
Decorative wooden decoy ducks are also touch enough to be handled by toddlers, although you must make sure the children don't put them in their mouths — the same goes for all painted ornaments.
Make sure children are safe in the home by using fire, socket, kettle and cooker guards; special shields for videos; cupboard and door catches, corner protectors for low tables; and safety film for glass.
To find out who to ring and where to go for items featured here, see our Shopping Director on page 132.
Below: Put shelves high up to keep ornaments away from prying fingers
IDEAL HOME SUBSCRIBERS' CLUB
IDEAL HOME SUBSCRIPTION CLUB
•COMPETITIONS •DISCOUNTS •PRIZES •EXCLUSIVE OFFERS
In October we launched our new Subscribers' Club for the many thousands of readers who take Ideal Home on subscription.
This month we're offering a lucky number prize, some special discounts plus a competition — all of which are exclusive to current UK subscribers.
And in future issues of Ideal Home we hope to bring you lots more offers and discounts.
LUCKY NUMBER PRIZE DRAW
MRS ARCHER FROM NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE WINS AN EDINBURGH CRYSTAL BOWL
This month's lucky number, drawn from our list of subscribers is , which belongs to Mrs M Archer of Newcastle upon Tyne.
She'll receive an Edinburgh Crystal Dunblane bowl, worth about £79.
Dunblane is a new giftware range from Edinburgh Crystal that features a delicate lace cut diamond pattern.
This beautiful flared bowl measures 10 inches in diameter and is part of a whole new Edinburgh Crystal collection of bowls and vases that are available from most major department stores.
Edinburgh Crystal's Dunblane bowl
COLOUR CODES
Forget searching through cupboards and sheds for the right tool for the job.
Spear & Jackson has come up with a new range of screwdrivers, colour-coded for easier identification.
And we have 25 sets to give away, each worth about £17.50.
The set contains six different screwdrivers that are colour-coded at the tip — ideal for DIY enthusiasts.
Send a postcard, with your subscription number, to: Ideal Home Offer, Agenda Ltd,.
Winners will be drawn from all postcards received on 14 December 1992.
15 PER CENT DISCOUNT ON VEGETARIAN COOKERY COURSES
If you have ever wanted to learn the basics of vegetarian cookery, or try your hand at more adventurous recipes, The Vegetarian Society has a course to suit you.
So why not take advantage of the 15 per cent discount offered to all Ideal Home subscribers until May 1993?
All courses are held at The Vegetarian Society Cookery School in beautiful surroundings in Altrincham, 10 miles outside Manchester.
One-day courses, on a variety of cookery themes, include coffee, a three-course lunch and tea-time snack, all for just £38.25.
You can save over £25 on residential weekend courses on a choice of subjects costing £144.50
The Foundation One course, held over two weekends, covers the nutritional principles of vegetarian cooking and offers a thorough introduction to wholefood ingredients.
The normal (residential) cost is £295, but Ideal Home subscribers will pay £250.75.
For further information, tel: or write to .
When making your booking, please quote your subscription number to qualify for the discount.
The Vegetarian Society Cookery School is held in beautiful surroundings
IDEAL HOME SUBSCRIBERS CLUB
Open And Shut Case
The latest luxury product from Swish is the Powerglyde — an electric motor that can be quickly and easily installed on most corded curtain tracks.
Once plugged in, you'll be able to swiftly and quietly open and close your curtains at the touch of a button.
Powerglyde can also be used with a standard plug-in timer to automatically open and close your curtains at certain times of the day, giving you added security whenever you're away from home.
We have 10 Swish Powerglydes to give away to subscribers.
Just send a postcard with your name and address and subscription number to:.
Winners will be drawn from all the entries received before the closing date, 14 December 1992.
FREE FREE FREE
IN THE GARDEN Royal Horticultural Society Address Book
If you've been thinking about taking out a subscription to the Royal Horticultural Society, now's the time to do it.
On taking out an annual subscription (for which the usual fee is £22, plus an additional £5 for the first year enrolment), Ideal Home Subscribers will receive a copy of the Royal Horticultural Society Address Book, worth £8.99, absolutely free.
There are numerous benefits, including free entry to the Society's own gardens, discount on tickets for flower shows almost every month — and you'll be able to obtain free gardening advice from RHS experts.
Just fill in the coupon below, quoting you Ideal Home subscription number, and sent it to:.
This offer ends on 31 January 1993.
ANSWER ONE QUESTION AND WIN £100
To follow on from this month's lucky number prize of an Edinburgh Crystal bowl, we're giving away a £100 cash prize if you can answer the question below correctly.
Send your answer on a postcard, with your name, address and subscription number, to:
QUESTION: What region of Scotland is Edinburgh in?
The winner will be drawn from all correct entries on 14 December 1992.
SPECIAL SUBSCRIBERS' COMPETITION
Win a Moss Security MS2000 Remote Control Burglar Alarm System worth £199.95
The Moss Security MS2000 burglar alarm system incorporates the latest radio frequency technology rather than electric cabling.
It comes ready to fit and is simple to install.
The system has a control centre, an infra-red motion detector, a door and window contact sensor, a portable remote control unit and an external siren.
You can arm or disarm the system as you come in or go out of your home and your will have your own personal access code.
If you'd like to win a MS2000 burglar alarm, ring 0891 909364, quote your subscription number, and answer the following questions:
What do the initials PIR stand for?
A
Person in Residence
B
Passive Infra-red
Latest crime figures reveal that a house is burgled…
A
Every five minutes
B
Every minute
Three winners will be chosen at random from all the correct answers received by us on 14 December 1992.
Calls cost 36p per minute cheap rate and 48p at all other times.
CHRISTMAS CHEER
Have a drink on Warninks this Christmas and they'll even provide the glasses.
We have 15 pairs of Dartington Crystal Irish Coffee glasses to give away to subscribers, along with a 70 cl bottle of Warninks Advocaat.
In addition, all lucky winners will receive a copy of the recipe book Winning Ways with Warninks , filled with plenty of mouthwatering deserts and refreshing drinks.
Send a postcard with your name, address and subscription number to:.
The winners will be drawn on 14 December 1992.
If you'd like to take out a subscription and become a member of our Subscribers' Club, see PAGE 74 for details.
TREAT YOURSELF TO A SUBSCRIPTION
We know you care about your home and family — otherwise you wouldn't be reading Ideal Home.
And that's why, every month, it's packed with all the help and advice you need to make a house a home.
Ideal Home makes the perfect gift — and it lasts a whole year through.
And this month, you can take our a subscription for just £16.80 — a saving of more than £3 on the normal price of £20.
You'll also enjoy all the benefits of being a member of our Subscribers' Club — see page 71 for details.
SAVE £3
12 ISSUES £16.80
OPEN TO NEW UK SUBSCRIBERS ONLY.
OFFER CLOSES 31 DECEMBER 1992
READER SERVICES
For when you need expert planning advice
COLOUR DESIGN
How do you decide on a colour scheme that will transform a cold, dark room into a warm, sunny one?
And how do you make a high, narrow room appear more spacious?
When you're decorating, these are just a few of the problems you're likely to face — and that's when professional advice comes in useful.
Ideal Home is offering you a helping hand.
For £55, our interior designer, Pauline Giddins, will create room scheme exclusively to suit your needs.
All you have to do is write to her at the address below to receive a questionnaire (don't send any money now).
This will give Pauline an idea of the look you're trying to achieve, as well as details about the size of rooms, position of doors, windows, and so on.
Just send back your completed questionnaire with your cheque and in return you'll receive a presentation folder containing full details of Pauline's design.
It will also contain samples of paint, wallcovering, flooring, curtains and upholstery, so you'll see just how the scheme works.
Your presentation folder contains all the samples for your new colour scheme
For your questionnaire, send an sae to .
(Allow 28 days once you have returned your questionnaire to us.)
KITCHEN PLANNING
A well-planned kitchen makes life so much easier.
But installing a kitchen can be expensive — especially if you have to correct mistakes.
Our kitchen planning service will help you get it right first time.
For £60, Roma Jay, our kitchen planner, will design a fantastic new kitchen for you — and all within your stated budget.
Simply write to Roma at the address below for a questionnaire (don't send any money now).
This will help Roma design a practical but stylish kitchen that takes into account all your needs.
Return the completed questionnaire, together with your cheque, and Roma will start planning your new kitchen.
Or you may like to take advantage of our bathroom postal planning service, also £60.
Create the kitchen of your dreams with careful planning
For your questionnaire, send an sae, stating the service you want, to .
FURNISHING
Burning bright
Cast a festive glow over your Christmas dining with the latest candles and candleholders.
Karen Lansdown picks out her favourites
Heaven sent
Look to the skies for stunning accessories.
From smiling solar faces to delicate star-printed fabric, Nel Lintern shows you how to bring a little celestial sparkle to your home
To find out who to ring and where to go for items featured here, see our Shopping Directory on page 132.
Ideal Home DECORATING School
Learn a new skill on one of our courses, exclusive to Ideal Home readers
Do you look through the pages of Ideal Home, admire the houses and the handicrafts and say ‘I wish someone would teach me how to do that’?
Well, now's your chance.
The Ideal Home Decorating School gives you details of exclusive readers' courses that cover everything from paint effects to dried flowers.
All the courses have been tested by Deputy Commissioning Editor Elizabeth Keevill, who says: ‘They're fun and informative and you'll come away with the confidence to try out new skills.’
If you would like to take part in any of the courses, see the booking details on page 86.
COLOUR SCHEMING
Learn how to create stunning effects with fabrics, furnishings and wallcoverings at our one-day colour scheming workshop.
Carolyn Warrender, well-known decorator and author of Carolyn Warrender's Book of Stencilling is bound to bring out the interior designer in you.
She'll show you how to coordinate pattern and colours, explain the importance of effective lighting and how to make the best use of space, and share some of her professional tips.
Bring ideas for a room you would like to decorate — full instructions on what you need for this will be sent with your booking form.
Everyone's plan will be individually discussed and you will be shown how to select fabrics, colours and wallcoverings for a sample board.
You will take home the finished room scheme, a clipboard, decorating folder and signed certificate of attendance.
FACT FILE
Location:At Carolyn's basement studio in London.
Further details of the location will be given when your booking is confirmed.
Dates:Number on each course:Up to 15 people.
Hours:10 am to 4 pm.
Cost:The special price of £55 will include morning coffee, a light lunch (vegetarian food included) and all relevant materials.
Write to:
PAINT EFFECTS
In our one-day workshop, paint effects and stencilling expert Caroline Brown will take you  sponging , dragging, combing, rag rolling, ragging, bagging, marbling, stippling and cracklure and verdigris effects.
You will also try out colour washes and ageing techniques on pine moulding and finish the day by stencilling on the paint effect you've created.
You will take home samples of the finishes and comprehensive course notes.
FACT FILE
Location:A converted barn in the village of South Wheatley, Near Retford, Nottinghamshire.
Dates:Number on each course:Up to 25.
Hours:9.30 a.m. to 4.30 p.m.
Cost:The special price of £50 includes morning coffee, cooked lunch (vegetarian meal available) and tea.
A list of local accommodation can be sent with your booking form.
Write to:.
CURTAIN MAKING
Having curtains made professionally can be costly, so why not make your own?
It's not difficult, once you know how.
Our two one-day curtain-making courses can be taken individually or combined.
The first one teaches you how to make a sample lined and interlined curtain, with heading, mitred corners and weights.
The second shows you how to make a tie-back, rosette, frill and piping.
Your tutors, Helen Metherell and other professional curtain makers, have many tips to share with you.
It will help if you can bring your own sewing machine and basic sewing equipment (details with your booking form).
You take away extensive notes and everything you make.
FACT FILE
Location:The thatched village hall at Grantchester, near Cambridge.
Dates:Number on each course:Up to 16 with two tutors.
Hours:9.45 am to 4.30 pm.
Cost:The special price of £50 for one day or £95 for two days includes coffee, light lunch (vegetarians can be catered for) and all the materials you need.
Local accommodation is available.
Write to:.
ANTIQUE FURNITURE RESTORATION
Old furniture and junk-shop finds can be given a new lease of life with a little tender loving care and a certain amount of practical know-how.
Under the expert guidance of professional furniture restorer Graham Usher you will gain many practical skills on this three-day course including stripping, cleaning and refitting joints, replacing damaged wood and veneers, repairing detail and refitting joints, replacing damaged wood and veneers, repairing detail work, including locks and keys, and replacing leathers on desks and table tops.
You will also receive a brief introduction to staining and French polishing.
Bring a piece of furniture you wish to restore (check suitability when you book) and wear old clothes.
Don't worry if you don't have anything to restore though, a piece can be found for you.
All tools and equipment are supplied.
You will take away on your course notes, a list of suppliers and an optional materials kit, which can be purchased at a competitive price should you wish to put your new-found skills to further use at home.
FACT FILE
Location:A converted barn just off the main A30 in the quiet village of Mitchell, 15 minutes drive from Truro and Newquay in Cornwall.
You can be met at Truro BR station or Newquay airport.
Dates:28 to 30 November and 5 to 7 and 12 to 14 December 1992 and 9 to 11 and 16 to 18 January 1993.
Number on each course:Up to four.
Hours:9 am to 6 pm.
Cost:The special price of £165 includes all reasonable materials, lunch (vegetarians can be catered for), refreshments, tea and coffee.
Accommodation can be arranged in local farmhouses and hotels from £12 per night for bed and breakfast.
Write to:.
DRIED FLOWER ARRANGING
Spend a day creating beautiful displays at our one-day workshop.
All abilities are welcome and tuition is given in small groups by specialists Terence and Susan Moore.
You can work at your own pace and choose from a wide range of flowers from around the world.
You will re-create a display during the morning, then make something of your choice — such as a basket arrangement, candle rings, swags or garlands — during the afternoon.
Use your own container for this if you wish — details of suitable ones will be sent with your booking form.
Of course you take your work away with you.
FACT FILE
Location:A barn workshop in Crawley Down near Gatwick.
Dates:.
Number on each course:Up to 15.
Hours:10 am to 5 pm.
Cost:The special price of £55 includes about £35 worth of materials to take away with you.
You'll need to buy £20 worth of materials for the second project.
The price also includes morning coffee, buffet lunch (vegetarians catered for) and afternoon tea.
Write to:.
STENCILLING
Stencilling is an inexpensive and effective way of adding pattern and personality to your home.
It's not hard to do; half the battle is having the confidence to try.
In our one-day workshop, stencil expert Helen Morris, who runs a successful stencil loan service and shop, will teach you how to cut stencils and then apply them to various materials such as walls, fabrics and furniture, using stencil paint, spray paint and crayons.
As the work tends to be a bit messy you'll need to wear old clothes and bring some overalls or an apron with you.
You will take home a goodie-bag, worth about £20, containing all the materials you have used during the day, including brushes and stencils, along with several helpful leaflets.
FACT FILE
Location:Attractive converted farm buildings in a rural setting, near Stamfordham, about 14 miles from Newcastle-upon-Tyne; the nearest BR station is Corbridge.
Dates:.
Number on each course:Eight to 10.
Hours:9.30 am to 4.30 pm or later.
Cost:The special price of £50 includes all materials, a cooked lunch (all vegetarian food), coffee and refreshments.
Accommodation can be arranged at local bed and breakfasts for about £15 per night.
Write to:.
Please note: Bookings can only be accepted if you cut out the relevant token for the course you're applying for and enclose it with your initial application.
Numbers are limited to one applicant per token.
Please write to the addresses given for the individual courses (NOT to Ideal Home), enclosing an sae for your booking form — applications cannot be processed without one.
Please state your preferred dates and include a daytime telephone number — if these are fully booked you will be sent alternatives.
You may apply for as many different courses as you wish.
THE HOUSE THAT IDEAL HOME BUILT: PART EIGHT
INDEPENDENT LIVING
In the eighth of our special 10-month series in which we build, furnish and decorate a house from scratch, Lynn Barnett takes a tour of the self-contained flat
Over the last eight months, we've covered the progress of our self-build, Potton Milchester house, from its construction to the installation of services.
In recent issues, we have tackled the interior of the house.
We'll be reporting on the progress of the garden and swimming pool over the next two months.
THE FLAT
The first floor of the original house has four bedrooms and a bathroom, a master bedroom suite comprising bedroom, en-suite bathroom, walk-in wardrobe and living room.
Because of the flexibility of the timber-frame construction, we were able to change bedrooms two and three into another master bedroom with en-suite bathroom, while the living room and wardrobe have been turned into a self-contained flat with a kitchen/living room, bedroom and bathroom — all reached from the main part of the house but also via a separate back door.
The flat has its own direct mains hot-water system, as in the main house, and fan-assisted storage heaters, panel heaters and bathroom ceiling heating.
The kitchen/living area also has a thermostatically controlled plinth-mounted fan heater with controls above the work-surface.
And to save lugging a vacuum cleaner upstairs, the flat has an outlet for the Univac Central Vacuum System.
We asked interior designer Judy Smith to ensure the flat was suitable for a nanny or for an elderly person to use as a ‘granny flat’.
She chose a soft blue colour scheme that contrasts well with the warm, earthy tones of the main house and also the Tintawn Town House Blue Heather carpet.
And to emphasise the elegant style of the Milchester house we chose hand-cut Stuart Crystal glassware.
The company, founded over 100 years ago, has a large selection of pieces at a wide range of prices.
Stairs and landing
Bearing in mind that the elderly relative would need a stairlift, Judy arranged for the flat to be fitted with a safe Stannah Stairlift that's equipped with a simple push-button control in the armrest.
The stairway was lit by the Lumiance Giotto Major Circo E emergency light which switches on and off as normal but, during a power failure, a battery pack comes into operation.
The kitchen
Overlooking the back garden, this large room is divided into a kitchen and living area.
In order to make the best use of available space, the kitchen has a peninsula which provides an extra worksurface.
We chose Chippendale's rococo units with elegant blue-grey door detailing and Formica worksurfaces.
All the electrical appliances are by Siemens.
The single oven, including an electronic clock, auto-timer and minute minder, caters for both full-width radiant or economy grilling.
There is a four-plate hob and a hood which removes cooking smells.
The microwave oven features four power levels from 90 W to 700 W.
The refrigerator has been built into the peninsula unit and has a three-star, deep-freeze section, defrosts automatically and uses up very little energy.
Ideal for a small flat, the washer/dryer is as sophisticated as the one in the main house's utility room.
Taking a 5 kg wash load, the washing machine features  the Aqua-Tronic scoop-and-shower system (that uses less water and energy) and has 27 programmes and also tumble dries clothes with reverse action so they don't tangle.
Three Lumiance Ballstar ceiling lights given even lighting, while lights under the wall units illuminate worksurfaces.
The Avignon ceramic wall tiles (in Blue, Rose and Gris) are accentuated by the light grey non-slip ceramic floor file — both by Pilkington's.
The two-seat sofa in blue Damask in the living area provides a link between kitchen and living areas.
Full-length floral curtains by Interior Selection and the blinds, made up by Apollo Interior Selection fabric, also tie in with the colour scheme.
Limed oak dining furniture further enhances the room's bright and airy feel.
The flat has also been equipped with the latest in hi-fi and TV: a 21-inch TV with NICAM stereo and remote control, and a Pioneer N-92T mini system comprising a CD player, radio, cassette deck, 60 W amplifier and speakers.
The bathroom
Designed by Kenneth Grange of Pentagram, again with an elderly person in mind, the bathroom's main feature is the ShowerAge by Ideal-Standard.
Based on normal bath dimensions, the eye-catching shower includes showerheads at different levels, a non-slip floor, a shower seat, support rails and has easy access.
Towels can be stored in a furniture unit within a shower.
On the safety front, the water is thermostatically controlled, the sliding door and panel are glazed with safety glass and ceiling and basin lights come on with the main switch.
The white WC and basin contrast well with the hi-tech look of the shower.
Both are by Ideal-Standard, from the Brasilia range.
The fresh colour scheme is continued with Pilkington's Avignon ceramic tiles, set in a diamond pattern.
The roller blind, made up by  Apollo, is in a blue and white stripe fabric from Christian Fischbacher.
The bedroom
So that the nanny can be on call night and day, the bedroom in the flat connects with the main part of the house and is next to the nursery.
An elegant environment is created in the bedroom by the attractive wallpaper with its fine blue and white stripes, the delicate Chinese hand-embroidered bed linen and the complementary patterned curtains which are by Dorma.
Although small, the room has masses of storage space.
Annabel units from Bernstein's Misty Bedroom Range set up around the bed form an attractive alcove with a dressing table unit and cupboards.
The bed, a Relyon Woolsack, has a pure lambswool filling and pocketed springs for extra comfort and plenty of support.
NEXT MONTH We take a look at the Victorian-style conservatory from Sunrise and the patio an barbecue area
SELF-BUILD VIDEO OFFER
BUILD YOUR OWN IDEAL HOME
If you'd like a sneak preview of the finished result, then here's your chance.
Building Your Ideal Home is an informative video presented by TV personality Peter Purves to take you through our project, step by step.
From buying the land to furnishing the interior, all the stages that will be featured in the magazine are covered.
And once the house is built, Peter has a guided tour to see how Ideal Home's former furnishing editor Judy Smith designed the interior — so you'll even pick up some valuable tips along the way.
If you'd like a copy of the video send £9.99 plus £1 p&p to .
Please make cheques payable to Lifestyle Promotions and allow 14 days for delivery.
For a list of suppliers that helped with building the house, see page 132.
IDEAL HOME OFFER
The Ideal Home Design Sourcebook
just £9.95 delivered to your door
With Barbara Chandler's new book, you'll never be lost for furnishing materials in London and the Southeast
No matter how skilled you are at interior design and DIY, sooner or later you have to go shopping.
Not only do you need to know where to go for the best prices, but you need information on when shops open and how to get there.
You'll also find this in The Ideal Home Design Sourcebook by Barbara Chandler.
‘People want to know where to get everything from high design and radical chic to DIY and cut-price paint and they need a comprehensive directory,’ says Barbara, who started Ideal Home's London Shopping Digest in 1975.
We asked Barbara to write about her favourite and most useful London shops, and readers voted with their feet by flocking to the shops she featured.
Now Barbara has gathered her comprehensive knowledge of the Southeast's furnishing and decorating scene and put it into the second edition of The Ideal Home Design Sourcebook .
Putting you in touch with 4,000 shops and services, the book is divided into 30 subject areas, with a clear index and cross-referencing to help you find your way around.
China, chandeliers, sofas, saucepans, upholstery and uplighters all feature in the book, along with budget kitchens, storage, appliances, terracotta, taps and tented ceilings.
There are even sections on architectural salvage, ethnic crafts and furnishings, auctions and markets.
At just £9.95, it's a must for people who are furnishing or renovating, or who simply like buying things for their home.
It also provides an invaluable reference for professionals in architecture, design, manufacture, marketing, publicity or retailing.
Fill in the order form below so you don't miss out.
Although the London Shopping Digest appears in copies of Ideal Home in London and the Home Counties only, this book will give all readers up and down the country the names and addresses of companies that supply goods by mail order — it's essential reading.
CONSUMER FILE
The great pretenders
Counterfeiting goods, from perfume to canned food, is now a multi-million-pound industry — how can you tell a fake from the real thing?
Plus what an EC an on certain dry-cleaning solvents will mean and the dangers lurking in your local swimming pool.
Gaynor Morgan investigates
When you buy your loved-one a bottle of Chanel perfume or Armani aftershave this Christmas how can you be sure that's the real thing?
Trading standards officers in Hereford and Worcester area recently seized 4,500 bottles fake Calvin Klein Obsession and also Giorgio's Beverly Hills fragrances in one of a series of raids.
In North Yorkshire, a total of £35,000-worth of fake designer sportswear and computer games was seized.
While in Essex, the list of rip-off replicas includes car parts, designerwear — even canned foods.
And recently a store in Germany found its shelves stocked with fake Nivea.
‘You name it, we've fund it,’ says Mike Wadsley, secretary of the Institute of Trading Standards Administration's quality standards committee.
‘Top of the list this year are computer games, designer sportswear, audio and video cassettes, perfume, watches — such as fake Rolex and Gucci — and jeans.’
Counterfeiting is a deliberate attempt to confuse consumers by copying a well-known trademark, generally along with the packaging, to suggest that a product is made by a manufacturer with a good reputation when it is, in fact, inferior.
‘Counterfeiting techniques have become highly sophisticated and in many cases the packaging has been copied to the finest degree so that the ordinary consumer would have absolutely no idea, from the outside, that they weren't buying the genuine article,’ explains Mike Wadsley.
Price is sometimes an indication, but not always.
Often products are sold at, or near to, the price of the genuine article.
There is no such thing as a bargain either.
If you buy a ‘Rolex’ watch for £50, you know it's unlikely to be genuine, but what you wouldn't know is that it may only be worth £5.
Although trading standards officers have the power to seize fake goods — and prosecute both the manufacturer and seller — they admit the ones they catch are only the tip of the iceberg.
The Anti-Counterfeiting Group, a pressure group whose members include some of the major companies suffering at the hands of the fakers, estimates that among those suffering the most are the motorparts industry which loses about £100 million a year; perfume companies which lose £35 million; drug companies which lose £25 million; and the Swiss watch industry which loses £5 million.
FOR SAFETY'S SAKE
For the average person, the most worrying aspect of fake goods is safety.
Counterfeiting gives no guarantee of safety or quality.
Cheap counterfeit copies are not likely to be made to the safety standards of the real thing.
Dangerous products seized in recent years include brake shoes and linings for cars; nuts and bolts supplied to the construction industry that caused parts of a building to collapse during an earthquake in the United States; aircraft brake parts; and eye drops which were made with contaminated water.
‘The problem is worldwide, not just limited to goods from the Far East, and is rife within Europe,’ says Anthea Worsdall, secretary of the Anti-Counterfeiting Group.
And with the EC trade barriers coming down there are worries that counterfeit goods will be able to move into the UK with even greater ease.
In a bid to combat this, some companies are devising ways to identify their goods as genuine — for example, with security stickers or holograms like those on bank and credit cards.
SPOTTING A FAKE
Although well-known shops do occasionally sell fake goods by mistake, it's very rare, according to trading standards officers.
Market stalls, car boot sales and one-day sales are popular selling grounds.
So, too, are the increasing number of so-called closing down sales which often take place for a few days or weeks at the end of a shop lease.
So be on your guard, and if you think you may have been sold a fake, report it to your local trading standards department immediately.
YOUR AND YOUR RIGHTS
I've been saving up towards a Christmas food hamper all year and now it's arrived I'm very disappointed with it.
A lot of the items are different from the ones advertised.
Is there anything I can do?
Mail-order companies selling hampers usually reserve the right to swap items if necessary, but they should be of similar type and value.
If not, you are entitled to return the hamper and ask for your money back.
The company should organise to pick it up or pay for it to be returned to them.
Check if the company is a member of the Hamper Industry Trade Association.
If so, the association may be able to help you.
You can contact it at .
I took my TV to be repaired and the shop asked for a £35 deposit which I paid.
I've now decided to buy a new one.
Will I be able to get my deposit back?
It's unlikely, unless the shop returns it as a gesture of goodwill.
It's quite usual to pay a deposit to show that you intend to go ahead with the deal and if you back out the repairer is entitled to keep the money.
He or she may also be able to claim the cost of any parts already ordered to do the job and any labour charges over the £25 deposit you paid.
I wanted a tin of suitable outdoor paint to coat two new sash windows I'd had fitted.
I went to a local DIY store and picked out a can of own-brand paint which stated it was for exterior decoration.
I double-checked this with the staff who assured me if would be all right to use on my windows.
But, three months later, the paint has started to crack and flake.
Do I have a claim against the shop?
Under the Sale of Goods Act, goods must be fit for their purpose and if they're not you can claim compensation for the full amount of your loss resulting from the breach of contract.
If the decorating has to be done again then the shop should pay.
We booked a table in a restaurant for our office Christmas party but when we arrived they had no record of the booking we made.
The manager said there was no room.
Did we have any rights?
If you've booked, the restaurant should give you a table within a reasonable time.
If this isn't possible, which seems to be the case in your situation, then the restaurant is in breach of contract and you could have a claim for compensation for disappointment, plus any expenses you may have incurred — for example, travelling costs to and from the restaurant.
TAKEN TO THE CLEANERS
Now that the EC is cracking down on the ozone-depleting solvents used in dry-cleaning processes, you could face problems.
Clothes marked with an F in a circle on the care label have to be cleaned with CFC 113, but this is being gradually phases out of use before a complete ban comes into force by the end of 1995.
And there is, at the moment, only one effective alternative — the solvent  perchloroethylene which has, in fact, been around longer than CFC 113.
Already, in some parts of the country, it's difficult to find a cleaner that uses the CFC 113 process because many have installed new equipment in time for the ban, according to the Textile Services Association, and the situation is only likely to get worse.
Most affected are clothes made of synthetic materials.
In future the processes may be ozone friendly but they involve higher temperatures which could damage fabrics containing PVC.
The Consumers' Association says that manufacturers aren't helping the situation by labelling clothes ‘dry-clean only’ to protect themselves when many could be washed with care.
A BREATH OF FRESH AIR
Houseplants not only make our home or office look more cheery but, according to research by NASA (the National Aeronautics and Space Administration) they are also sophisticated weapons against pollution.
NASA has found that between 15 and 20 plants, such as the humble spider plant, can clean and refresh the air in an average-sized room.
In fact, NASA reckons they're so efficient at absorbing air contaminants some will be launched into space as part of the biological life support system aboard future orbiting space stations.
DON'T GO IN THE WATER
Swimming is regarded as one of the best all-round forms of exercise, but a survey by the Institution of Environmental Health Officers shows you could be at risk from stomach upsets and skin rashes if you take a dip in dirty public swimming pools.
Based on reports from 200 environmental health departments in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, it blamed management for giving water quality at pools low priority.
Environmental Health Officers didn't test the water themselves but asked pool operators if they were aware of the Department of the Environmental guidelines and whether they monitored the water.
Nearly half didn't know about the official guidelines and a quarter admitted they had no monitoring procedures.
Pools in the survey included those in schools, colleges, local authority leisure centres, hotels, holiday camps, private clubs and hospitals.
In six per cent of cases the report concluded that there was a high risk to health.
HOUSE CALLS
BT has set up a new free service to deal with all customers' enquiries if they are moving house.
By  dialling 150 a couple of weeks before you move, you can arrange for the phone in your new home to be connected.
If there's already a working phone line at your new address, and you arrange to take over the service on the same day as the old customer disconnects, it will be re-connected free of charge.
For an extra charge T will also provide a recorded message giving your new number to any callers on your old line.
LONDON SHOPPING
BARBARA CHANDLER INTRODUCES SOME OF LONDON'S MOST ORIGINAL SHOPS AND THEIR OWNERS WHO SUGGEST GOOD GIFTS FOR THE FESTIVE SEASON
ANIMAL MAGIC
In 1988, Ruth Barclay teamed up with her niece, Sherrie Bodie, to open Barclay & Bodie which has been so successful they've taken over the shop next door.
‘We choose every item personally as though shopping for ourselves, paying particular attention to practicality and originality.’
Some of their favourite things for Christmas 1992 include wonderful painted wood — zebras or leopards for bowls (£48), salad servers (£12.50), and napkin rings (set of four, £24).
Or a hedgehog soap that sits in its own wooden ridged soap dish, stylishly packed, for £8.95.
Oval pewter boxes have hand-engraved monograms, from £17.95, while prettily embroidered hankies are £5.75.
Burr elm photo frames cost from £32 to £48.
And — most elegant of all — a set of three Swedish-designed chrome candleholders with brass trims in a gift box with a matching lighter, £46.
You'll find cuddly toys, nursery accessories, rag dolls, porcelain dolls, and original gifts for men.
And the animal prints, so popular on Paris catwalks this year, purr all over bedroom accessories at B&B.
There's a gift-wrapping service, plus a new mail-order catalogue.
Barclay & Bodie,.
Above: Barclay & Bodie has original wooden tableware
Left: Leopard and zebra salad servers
EASTERN PROMISE
In a fashionable area now known as Brompton Cross (just a short walk from Harrods, Joseph and The Conran Shop), Linda and Neville Codling run Eastern Accents which they founded nine years ago on their return from the Far East.
Their stock of decorative bowls, plates, boxes, candlesticks and ornaments features cats, pigs, frogs, elephants and fishes.
And new for 1992 are mushrooms: ‘Fungi are very fashionable this year,’ says Linda.
There's also a free gift wrapping service on any purchase over £10.
Eastern Accents,
INTO THE DOLLS HOUSE
‘1992 has been an exciting year,’ says Michael Morse of The Dolls House in Covent Garden.
First, the publication of her book, Build A Doll's House (an inspiring gift at £15.99), and now the 21st birthday of her shop, which was the first specialist of its kind in the country.
‘Who could have imagined doll's house collecting would become such a popular hobby?’ she says.
Over the years, Michael has built up a wide circle of customers and friends worldwide, who visit whenever in London.
Houses come in all architectural style, including kits.
They can be furnished with inexpensive Taiwan furniture and fabric German dolls, or with pricier handmade dolls and fine furniture by skilled English craftsmen.
presents here start at 20p for a small plastic tortoise, with a teddy at 50p.
A jointed teddy is £40.
Attractive dolls with fabric faces in a variety of clothes are from £9 to £14, with Santa Claus at £14.
Handmade dolls with china faces and elegant costumes cost up to £90.
A miniature oak four-poster bed is £30 and a solid silver canteen of cutlery is £44.
Particularly appealing is a range of pine kitchen furniture which can be adorned with miniature jugs and tureens, and even plates of food.
The Dolls House  
Mentions should not be taken as recommendations.
Please check prices before ordering or making a special journey.
Reproduction of photographs/illustrations is prohibited.
All details correct at time of going to press
OUT OF AFRICA
At Art of Africa Deborah Norman offers vibrant African arts and crafts to warm you up this Christmas.
‘I choose everything for my shop, so it's very personal.
All our goods are handmade and we are committed to natural materials.’
Ideas for stocking fillers include miniature beaded Zulu dolls (from £5); earrings in ceramic, wood, brass, or sisal (from £9.50); and stained-glass-effect Swazi candles from £3.
Other gifts include ostrich eggs (£23.90), Kwazulu beads from £35), stone carvings of elephants and hippos (from £36.50).
Leave your purchases for a couple of hours and Deborah will gift wrap them free of charge.
She'll even arrange delivery for very big items within London.
Art of Africa,
VERY ENGLISH STYLE
Joanna Wood is one of Britain's best-known decorators.
Her shop in Pimlico is crammed with accessories and gifts.
Specially for Christmas, there's a brilliant range of ornaments based on themes such as starts, music, gold, silver and fruit and flowers.
Also on display are Joanna's imaginative ideas for festive table settings with ivy plates, ornate candlesticks and baroque decoupage hexagonal mats.
Joanna Wood,
BUY THE BOOK
Making beautiful books by hand is Tessa Fantoni's speciality.
It's reflected in the stock of her delightful shop, where the special attraction is handmade photo albums covered in a choice of decorative papers with elegant buckram bindings.
Prices start at £18, and a mail-order leaflet is available.
‘Besides stationery, my other passions are pottery and pens,’ says Tessa.
So the shop is an interesting mix of wood, paper and ceramics.
It also stocks goods from Czech & Speake, a small range of jewellery, blue and white Polish pottery, and attractive frames.
Affordable presents include Mickey Mouse keyrings for £1.99, a tartan bag of golf tees for £6.95, and a marbled tub of pencils for £4.45.
Silver cufflinks are £49.92, and a Waterman 100 fountain pen is £120.
Along the road her shop for children specialises in ‘traditional favourites — classic books, wooden toys, teddies, and so on’.
Ideal for Christmas are her teddy nursery accessories: laundry bags, cushions, rugs, bookends and lampshades from £3.10 to £13.80, plus a pocket-money section with gifts under £1.
Tessa Fantoni,
AN IDEAL HOME ADVERTISEMENT PROMOTION
VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY
Created by Lyons, luxury instant and ground coffees from around the world make every cup an occasion to celebrate
With plentiful food and drink at Christmas, it's the finishing touches that make a meal memorable — such as a superior cup of coffee at its conclusion.
We have grown used to selecting fine wines according to their origin, and you don't have to be an expert to appreciate that the quality and flavour of different grapes varies from region to region and country to country, as well as in the grape varieties themselves.
Like grapes, the quality and character of the beans is affected by climate and varying soil types in which they grow.
In fact, experienced professional tasters are even able to pinpoint the exact plantation beans are from.
With each coffee sourced from just one country, the Lyons World of Coffees range provides three unique and highly distinctive flavours to suit every mood and occasion — whether entertaining or indulging alone.
Lyons Kenyan is bright and lively, originating in the high plateau around Mount Kenya in Africa.
Regarded by coffee aficionados as among the world's finest, Lyons Kenyan provides a well-earned treat after an exhausting day Christmas shopping.
Grown in the Cordillera mountains, Lyons Costa Rica is dark and strong, reflecting the volcanic character of its origins with a full-bodied flavour and robust aroma, the perfect end to a festive dinner party, especially when accompanied by liqueurs.
Lyons Colombian, made from Arabica beans grown high in the Andes Mountains of South America, is a superbly smooth coffee with a distinctively nutty taste to complete the trio.
But of course, reliance on beans from a single source means they must be of a consistently high standard.
Lyons selects the very finest beans for the World of Coffees range, only after the company's experts can be satisfied that quality is assured.
The skills required to fulfil that promise are every bit as complex as those needed to nurture grapes, not least because the coffee bush requires special conditions in which to thrive.
The altitude of the plantation plays an important part in the final flavour, with the best quality coffee being found at between 3,000 and 6,000 feet above sea level.
The Arabica beans used in Lyons World of Coffees also require rich soil and partial shade.
When it is ready for harvesting, the fruit of the coffee bush looks like a dark cherry.
The bean itself is the seed inside, which is carefully transported to the UK after being hand picked and the outer flesh removed.
Only when they have been roasted at high temperature do the beans turn from green to brown.
The process is an art, requiring precise timing if the characteristics of each variety in the Lyons World of Coffees range are to be retained.
The beans are ground as soon as possible after roasting and either packaged for use in percolators and cafetières or freeze dried to make instant coffee of distinction.
For those who expect the world from their coffee.
Lyons Kenyan, Colombian and Costa Rican can be found at major supermarkets and grocers.
If you would like the chance to try Lyons World of Coffees, please write to Ideal Home /LWOC Offer,.
The first 200 readers to reply will receive a complimentary jar of their choice.
Please specify your preference on your entry — Kenyan, Columbian or Costa Rican.
IDEAL HOME buyers' guide
Choosing a dishwasher
If you're planning to buy a dishwasher, there's no better time to do it than before Christmas.
Jan Orchard takes a look at the models on the market and explains how a dishwasher can save you money as well as time
The great washing-up test
We washed six place settings (one side plate, one dinner plate, one pudding bowl, one dessert plate for each setting, plus one large serving platter and three serving dishes), cutlery (eight pieces for each place setting), six champagne, red wine and white wine glasses, a roasting tin, four saucepans, four serving spoons, a carving knife and fork, six coffee cups and saucers and a cafétière, both by hand and using a Bosch SMS 6032 dishwasher to compare use of water and detergents and the end results.
WATER
Dishwasher Two loads, 44 ltr (one load for plates, cups, saucers, glasses and cutlery, one for roasting tin, pans, cafétière, serving dishes etc).
Water temperature, 65°C.
Sink 114 ltr.
We used four sinkfuls of hot water, made up of 14 ltr of hot, 4 ltr of cold per sinkful, plus one sinkful of cold to rinse glasses and a final sinkful to wipe draining board, clean bowl, etc.
Water temperature, approx 45°C.
DETERGENTS AND OTHER MATERIALS
Dishwasher 50 ml Finish dishwasher powder.
15 ml Bryta rinse aid.
Approx 25 g salt from reservoir.
Sink Four squirts washing-up liquid (approx 60 ml).
Five tea towels.
One sponge scrubber.
One brillo pad.
LABOUR
Dishwasher Five minutes stacking and 10 minutes unstacking/putting away per load: a total of 30 minutes.
Sink It took two people 90 minutes to wash up, dry, clean sink and draining board and put the dishes away.
END RESULTS
Glasses washed in dishwasher were streak free, bright and generally far better than those washed in the sink.
Although there was no visible difference in china, we felt it was cleaner because the water was far hotter than the hand could bear.
Because the dishes were dried in hot air, it was much more hygienic than using a tea towel or leaving the dishes to drip dry.
The kitchen was also easier to tidy up as there were no dishes heaped on the draining board.
RUNNING COSTS
Although the price of a dishwasher may seem expensive, the costs of actually running the machine can work out to be far less than for washing-up by hand.
Dishwashers need detergent for cleaning, rinse aid to give a bright, streak-free finish and regular filling with salt to prevent limescale.
Dishwasher detergent comes in powder, concentrate or liquid form.
Liquids, such as Sun Liquid, and concentrates such as Sun Progress or Fairy Glazeguard, are gentler than basic powder.
Sun Progress is recommended by the British Ceramic Research Association for washing fine china that is marked as dishwasher safe.
Rinse aid is stored in a reservoir inside the machine and dispensed in the final rinse cycle.
It encourages rapid draining and gives a clear, streak-free finish.
Salt is needed for the water-softening unit in the base or side of the machine.
This unit removes calcium and magnesium from the water, preventing limescale from building up in the machine and on your tableware.
Only granular or dendritic salt can be used in a dishwasher — table salt is not suitable.
Dishwasher salt removes the calcium which has been absorbed by the resin, so more calcium can be removed by the unit when the machine is used again.
New dishwasher owners are usually horrified when they find that a 3 kg box of detergent costs anything between £2.59 and £5.93, depending on where you shop and whether you buy a supermarket own brand or one of the well-known names such as Finish or Sun.
Add to this the price of rinse aid (between £1.29 and £3.50 for 500 ml) and salt (about £1.40 for 3 kg of supermarket own brand), and a litre of washing-up liquid seems a bargain.
But, although initial costs seem higher, in the long run dishwashing is the cheaper option.
Very little detergent is needed — a full high-temperature load uses about 60 g of powder to a 3 kg box will give you up to 50 full 12-place setting washes.
Every wash uses about 2 ml of rinse aid, and, in a hard water area, you'll use about 0.5 kg of salt a week.
On average, you'll save two washing-up bowls of water per dishwasher load.
For a family of four, this adds up to about 600 ltr of water in a year.
Then there's the cost of heating the water.
According to recent figures published in ERT (the journal  of the electrical trade), a family of four using a dishwasher will have 30 kWh of electricity in a year.
If you have Economy 7 and can use the lower-price electricity during the night, you may want to choose a machine fitted with a delay button.
According to Lever Brothers, manufacturers of Sun detergents, the average dishwasher load costs 23.3p.
There are no comparable figurers for hand washing, but the German manufacturer AEG claims that hand washing 12 place settings uses 40 ltr of water and 2.6 kWh of energy, compared to 20 ltr of water and 1.6 kWh of energy for a 65°C machine wash with cold fill.
COMPACT MACHINES
Right: A Time and Consumption Reduction wash system minimises detergent, water and energy waste in the eight-place setting freestanding ESF475 slimline dishwasher from Electrolux.
The machine has seven programmes, quick-wash, reversible upper spray arm in the lower basket and a decor frame, so a sheet of laminate can be fitted to the door to match kitchen units.
Price £419.99
Right: This slimline 45-cm wide G450SCi from Miele is an integrated model, built to be fitted with a door to match kitchen units.
It features seven full-wash programmes, including intensive wash, quick-wash and cold rinse, plus an economy half-load facility and takes eight place settings.
A full programme uses on 17 ltr of water and a 1.2 kWh of energy.
The pull-out cutlery drawer can be lifted out for easy unloading.
This gives extra space for pots and pans at the bottom of the machine.
it costs £775
Right: The economically designed Hoover slimline measures just 45 cm wide but holds eight full place settings.
Quiet in use, it features six programmes, economy and light-soil settings.
With an adjustable water softener and top basket, it costs £399.99
Left: The 7801P seven-place setting machine from Hotpoint is very good value at £389.99.
It's 45 cm wide, has five programmes, including cold pre-wash and quick-wash, and uses residual heat to dry the dishes.
Indicator lights show when salt and rinse aid are low and  an overfill protector reduces the risk of flooding.
Hotpoint also offers a German-built integrated slimline model, 6820P, with similar features £599.99
Left: If you want to replace a dishwasher that's over 10 years' old, or want to fit one into a kitchen with imperial size 500 mm wide base units, you'll need a machine that measures 50 cm rather than the usual 60 cm wide.
The 50-cm wide freestanding Ecowash 18531E by Creda holds eight place settings, has eight programmes, including quick-wash, and comes in brown or white, £349.99
Right: Building a compact dishwasher into a tall cupboard saves bending — good new for back sufferers or elderly people.
The SK 23301 compact from Siemens has three programmes (one quick-wash, one normal, one economy 65°C), a triple filter system, low-salt indicator and Eco-dosing system to ensure that exactly the right amount of detergent is used.
It takes four place settings and costs £299.90 (building-in kit extra)
Right Neff's 5721.11 compact dishwasher can be build in or used on the worksurface.
It measures 44.8 cm wide and 54.8 cm deep — about the size of a microwave — will take four place settings and has a choice of normal, economy and quick-wash programmes.
This machine uses only 12 ltr of water, 10 g each of salt and detergent and 0.8 kWh of electricity for a normal 65°C wash.
Available in white only, £423.
Build-in kit, £57.88
Left: Make better use of the space under the sink by fitting a DWB503 eight-place setting dishwasher from Creda.
Simply remove the unit door and the dishwasher slips into place.
Plumbing and drainage work is minimal as connections are close by.
Also available in white, the DWB503 slimline five-programme dishwasher measures 50 cm wide, £349.99
Left: Zanussi's four-place setting Studio Compact DS10 measures 46 cm high, 45 wide and 48 cm deep.
It has five programmes, including quick-wash and pre-wash, salt and rinse-aid indicator lights and a delay-start facility.
A pipe-management system allows you to use this machine on the worksurface.
Available in brown or white, it costs £299.99
HOW MUCH WILL A DISHWASHER HOLD?
Dishwasher manufacturers use a standard place setting as a guide to how much machines will hold.
Each setting consists of:
1 dinner plate
1 saucer
1 soup spoon
1 soup plate
1 tumbler
1 teaspoon
1 dessert dish
1 fork
1 dessert spoon
1 cup
1 knife
In addition to the place settings dishwashers allow for extra cutlery and dishes for serving:
1 large oval plate
2 large serving spoons
2 large serving bowls
1 sauce ladle
1 small serving spoon
As a general rule, large items, such as serving dishes, saucepans, baking trays, dinner plates and heavily soiled items, go at the bottom where they will be in contact with the powerful water pressure from the lower spray arm.
Cups, glasses, small plates and lightly soiled items should be placed on the top rack.
Put cutlery in the basket with the handle down for best results.
CHOOSING A MACHINE
The dishwasher you choose will depend on how much you can afford to spend, the features you want and the space available.
Freestanding or built in?
A standard-size machine measures 60 cm wide, 60 cm deep and 85 cm high.
Freestanding machines are designed to slip under the worksurface and will line up with kitchen units at plinth and drawer level.
They are available from about £320 and some can be fitted with decor panels to match the rest of your kitchen.
Alternatively, you can opt for an integrated or fully-integrated model.
Only the control panel can be seen on an integrated machine — the rest is covered by a door which is made to match the kitchen units — whereas fully-integrated machines are completely hidden behind a cupboard door.
An integrated machine may cost you several hundred pounds more than a freestanding model with the same features — prices start at about £500.
Where space is really tight, or if you don't need a 12-place setting machine, think about a slimline or compact model.
Slimline models take seven or eight place settings and are 45 cm wide.
They are available freestanding or integrated with prices starting at about £350.
Compact models are about the size of a microwave.
They will wash four to six place settings, can stand on the draining board or worksurface, or can be built in below using a kit supplied by the manufacturer.
WHAT IT WON'T WASH
Strong detergent and very hot water can be a powerful combination.
it isn't a good idea to put any of the following in the dishwasher unless the items are marked ‘dishwasher safe’.
Lead crystal glass Hot water and dishwasher detergent can cause pitting or cracking.
Antique or handpainted china Colours are not usually permanently fired and may fade, but this can also happen with hand washing.
A gentle wipe with a damp cloth is the safest course of action.
Wooden items When wood get wet, it absorbs water and expands.
As it dries out, it usually cracks.
Bone, plastic, wood or pearl-handled cutlery Exposure to very hot water can soften the glue holding the handle in place.
Cast-iron saucepans These will rust unless coated with vitreous enamel.
China with overglaze decoration Gold and silver decoration may fade, so it's best to check this with the manufacturer.
Stainless steel cutlery Can discolour and pit if left coated with food, so use the pre-wash cycle.
Keep silver or chrome-plated cutlery away from stainless steel.
Black spots will appear on silver if it comes into contact with dry dishwasher powder.
Plastic Lunch boxes, food storage containers, etc, may melt if stacked close to the heating elements.
PROGRAMME CHOICE
Don't be swayed by a large selection of programmes — as every washing machine owner knows, most people use only a few.
You may find the following features are worth having in addition to the normal wash.
Pre-rinse A short cold rinse, useful if you are likely to fill the machine up in dribs and drabs during the day as it prevents food from drying on to the dishes and cutlery.
Intensive Hot, long wash for pots, pans and heavily soiled items.
Economy Shorter hot wash using less power and less water.
A good idea if you don't often use pans or baking dishes.
Economy 7 delay Holds the wash until lower-price electricity tariff comes in (usually after midnight).
This is only available if you have an Economy 7 meter.
If the kitchen is nearly or directly below your bedroom, or if you live in a flat, you'd be well advised to look for a quiet machine.
The whoosh of water and rattle of crockery isn't everyone's  idea of a soothing bedtime lullaby.
Delicate wash A 40°C wash for glasses and fine china.
Quick-wash Most machines offer a low temperature quick-wash, usually at around 50°C and lasting from 215 to 30 min.
It would be a good idea to check that the time for the quick-wash programmes includes drying.
To find out who to ring and where to go for items featured here, see our Shopping Directory on page 132
OTHER FEATURES
Adjustable baskets A top basket which can be raised or lowered makes stacking easier and means you can wash large plates without restricting the spray arms.
Salt/rinse-aid indicator lights Well worthwhile as you don't have to remember when you last filled it.
Energy saving Most manufacturers now include energy-saving features that reduce the use of water, electricity and detergent.
Performance figures are available for most machines, so it is worth making comparisons before you choose.
You'll see the word Oko, or a green tree or triangle symbol on many German-made dishwashers.
This means that the machine is especially economical in its use of water, detergent and energy, is quiet in use, has a flood-prevention system and many parts that can be recycled.
These features make the machines more expensive, but long-term savings on energy may compensate.
Noise If the kitchen doubles as a family living space, is near the living room or bedrooms, or if you plan to run the machine on Economy 7 during the night, it is worth finding out the decibel rating of the machine — expressed as dB (A)— before buying.
As a guide to noise levels, street traffic measures about 85 dB (A) and a library about 35 dB (A).
Economy detergent dispenser A dispenser with sections for normal and economy washes means you always use just the right amount of powder or liquid.
Water stop Some European-made machines feature an antiflood control system.
A safety valve senses changes in water pressure and cuts off the supply if there is a danger of flooding.
The water level is automatically reduced to normal if the machine over-fills for some reason.
Some systems will drain the machine and switch off the water supply if there is an internal leak.
All well worth thinking about if you live in a flat above ground level.
Half load The half-load facility allows you to wash six place settings using just one basket (usually the bottom one) without wasting detergent, water or energy.
LOOKING AFTER YOUR DISHWASHER
Clear the filter regularly.
Check the spray arms are free from blockages.
Unscrew the spray arms and flush under hot running water once a week.
Wipe around the door seal with disinfectant to prevent a build-up of debris and germs.
If you live in a hard-water area, use a descaler in the machine at least once a month.
Keep the machine clean and free from smells by using a special cleaner, such as the one from Finish, once a month.
Check that the water-hardness regulator (usually next to the rinse-aid reservoir is correctly set for your area to help prevent formation of limescale.
EASY-TO-ENTER READER COMPETITION
CLEAR WINNERS
Three Hoover dishwashers worth £459.99 to be won
Whether it's the everyday hurly-burly of catering for your family, or cooking a special meal, there is always a lot of clearing up afterwards.
So how about a new 12-place setting dishwasher to lighten the load?
The new Hoover Super Crystaljet dishwasher has seven programmes including economy wash, fast wash and a special heat-boost drying cycle.
If you'd like to win a Hoover dishwasher, now's your chance.
Hoover is giving away three Super Crystaljet dishwashers worth £459.99 each to Ideal Home readers.
Just ring  before 14 December 1992 and answer the following questions:
1
How many hours per year does the average household spend washing up by hand? a) 500 hours per year b) 280 hours per year
2
What is the germ count on a day-old dishcloth? a) 250,000 germs b) 620,000 germs
The winners will be selected at random from the correct answers received.
Calls cost 36p per minute cheap rate and 48p per minute at other times.
FULL-SIZE MACHINES
Left: Water and energy saving are an important feature of the freestanding Oko Favorit 875 from AEG.
The machine takes 12 place settings and uses only 20 ltr of water and 1.6 kWh of energy for a normal 65°C including two quick-wash, two economy wash and an extra-intensive wash at 70°C.
Three spray levels give good wash results and a high level of insulation means the machine is quiet.
An Aqua Alarm helps to prevent flooding.
The machine will take a decor panel and costs £599.99
Right: Miele claims that this 12-place setting G5955C integrated dishwasher is the quietest machine on the market.
It has a telescopic top basket cutlery tray, 10 programmes and is controlled by an electronic panel.
Programmes include intensive, gentle and quick washes and a time-delay feature.
Self-diagnostic fault-finding makes servicing fast and simple.
A full wash uses just 20 ltr of water and 1.6 kWh of energy.
It costs £925.
Left: The new 3000 series of dishwashers from Bauknecht features a Clean Controller System which monitors each load and chooses the type of washing programme needed to give perfect results and economical use of water and detergent.
The Thermodry system gives energy-saving, streak-free drying.
Shown here, the 12-place setting freestanding GSF 3174  Thermodry model costs £599.95
Right: The ADP 259 built-in dishwasher from Whirlpool is fitted with Aquasense to give improved wash results.
The system senses when there is a drop in spray pressure, when the foam level is incorrect or the filter is dirty, and makes adjustments automatically.
Aquasense also monitors the water intake and use of detergent, giving useful energy savings.
An improved design means there is more room than usual inside the machine, making loading and unloading easier.
This machine takes 12 place settings, has five programmes and costs £649.99
Left: The Di760SS integrated dishwasher from Zanussi has a sleek, stainless steel panel, making it the perfect match for modern kitchen units.
Fitted with Zanussi's Aquasave water, detergent and energy-reduction system, the machine takes 12 place settings and has seven programmes, a rinse-and-hold facility, quick-wash, wash without drying (to save time) and a low-salt indicator light.
It costs £669.99
Right: New from Creda is the Ecowash 17907E Supaspeed freestanding dishwasher designed to save water, detergent and energy.
The most economical wash uses only 16 ltr of water and 0.45 kWh of energy.
The machine holds 12 place settings and has quick-wash and low-temperature economy wash as two of its eight programmes, £359.99
Left: The new 5226.25i electronic integrated dishwasher from Neff has many sophisticated features including six programmes plus pre-wash, adjustable baskets, 50 dB (A) noise level, choice of drying cycle or residual-heat drying to save energy, delay timer, special canister to protect silver cutlery from tarnishing when washed with stainless steel and a flood-protection system.
The machine takes 12 place settings and costs £857.75
Right: If you have a big family, or entertain frequently, Ariston's new 14-place setting freestanding Supersilent LS1084 would be the ideal machine for you.
The machine has seven programmes which include a 55°C economy wash and can be plumbed for hot or cold fill.
It costs £379
Left: The D3000 freestanding dishwasher from Indesit is excellent value at just £309.99.
With room for 12 place settings and adjustable baskets, the machine has seven programmes, including rapid wash
KITCHEN OF THE MONTH
ALL CHANGE
When Julie Mills moved into her new home she thought all she'd need to do to the kitchen was give it a lick of paint.
But in order to have the kitchen she wanted, she ended up redesigning the ground floor.
Linda Parker found out how she went about it.
Julie Mills moved into her Edwardian town house in London expecting to just give it a lick of paint.
But shortly after settling in, she realised she was going to have to change the whole layout of the ground floor to accommodate a new kitchen.
‘I knew very quickly that to get the kitchen exactly how we wanted it, we'd have to swap rooms around on the ground floor.
This meant installing new plumbing, electrics, draining and the new handpainted pale-coloured units — we didn't realise how much work needed to be done,’ says Julie.
Originally, the kitchen was dark and narrow, but the architect who helped with the structural changes suggested that if the living room and the kitchen swapped places they could have a large kitchen with French windows opening on to the garden.
They could then have a separate dining room with sliding doors between the two rooms.
Now, Julie has a modern kitchen that's been carefully designed to make good use of all the available space, and that blends in with the style of the rest of the house.
The plain white worksurfaces and sinks are all made from Corian, and the classic white flooring with the green Florentine inlay is by Amtico.
One of the few problems Julie and her husband faced was choosing tiles for the splashback.
‘I just couldn't find any that I liked,’ says Julie.
The designer from Mark Wilkinson, Debbie Weston, came to the rescue and suggested custom-painted ones.
The baskets of fruit behind the sink and hob were specially created to match the Villeroy & Boch china that the Mills have collected over the years.
When planning the smaller details, Debbie Weston also had lots of useful suggestions.
For example, she advised Julie to put a small utility sink in the angled island unit.
This is ideal for draining vegetables once they've been taken off the hob.
She also suggested the unit should house in a large slide-out waste bin.
The dishwasher has been tucked away in the central island and is opposite the main sink, so dishes can be quickly rinsed and put out of sight.
The washing machine and tumble dryer have been put under the sink temporarily, but will be moved downstairs into the basement utility room as soon as it's finished.
The Mark Wilkinson team will then install custom-made woven vegetable baskets in that space.
Today, the kitchen is light, bright and spacious.
And it's been made all the more interesting by brightly coloured accessories — many from Julie's home town in Trinidad.
On the walls there are tiny plates and several paintings.
All in all, this is a practical, stylish kitchen, and the Mills can be proud that all their hard work has paid off.
Main picture: French windows opening on to the garden let plenty of light in to the kitchen — where practicality hasn't been sacrificed for style
Above left: Basket china by Villeroy & Boch.
Prices range from £8.25 for a coffee saucer to £55.50 for a salad bowl
Kitchen furniture with single panel and applied moulding by Mark Wilkinson Furniture, handpainted in pale yellow with panel and beading details emphasised in white and green.
From about £300 for 60 cm base unit with door and drawer.
All worksurfaces, sinks and drainer in Corian, from £270.25 per m.
White and Florentine green flooring from the Marble Collection by Amtico, from £53 per sq m.
Splashback tiles handpainted to order, contact Mark Wilkinson Furniture for further details.
Appliances: Gas/electric hob by Neff.
Dishwasher by Bosch.
Multifunction oven, Neff.
Dimension 4 Bake & Grill combination microwave by Panasonic.
Freestanding fridge and freezer by Zanussi, with custom-made decor panels from Mark Wilkinson Furniture.
Left: Flare blue vase by Dartington Crystal, £17.50
Above: Handpainted tiles similar to the ones in Julie's kitchen are available from Castelnau
Right: The microwave is housed conveniently above the oven
Above: The dishwasher is tucked away beneath the island unit while shelves are used to display Julie's china
Left: Julie has made sure the kitchen is a safe place for her son, Henry?
To find out who to ring and where to go for items featured here, see our Shopping Directory on page 132
Tin Mine
Practical and decorative, these tins make super containers after the contents have gone.
Helen Barnett selects her favourites
Above: Tins filled with hand-baked biscuits, shortbread or tea bags, from £7.25, Lakeland Plastics
Right: Chocolate sardines packed into an authentic-style tin, £3.95, The Natural History Museum catalogue
Above: Kiwi shoe-care kit, £7.99, The Silver Crane Company
Above: English Afternoon Tea, £4.49, Elsenham Quality Foods
Above: Set of three empty punched-metal oval tins, £11.95, Heal's
Left: Fruit-designed hexagonal tin filled with a selection of preserves, shortbread, tea and fruit bonbons, £24, Crabtree & Evelyn
Right: Tin with fruit cake, £10.40; caddy with spiced tea, £2.48; from Betty's Café Tea Rooms
Below: Tiny house tins with decorated interiors, £2.99, Hunkydory
Above: Mummy-shaped tins with decorated interiors, in a choice of six designs, £4.50 each, Hunkydory
To find out who to ring and where to go for items featured here, see our Shopping Directory on page 132
PIECES OF SILVER
From bold Art Deco-style to delicate filigrees, silver is beautiful in any form.
Helen Barnett looks at some of the finest pieces in the shops
Above: Christofle talisman pillbox with lacque de Chine blue inset, £81, Lalique
Left: Rialto, nine-cup cafetière, £44.99, Boots
Above: Chrome-plated napkin rings, £22.95 for four, Bodum
Right: Lustre glass perfume bottle decorated with filigree silverwork and amethysts, from a selection at John Lewis
Above: Spiral double candlestick holder, £24.95; beeswax candles.
£3.25 each: Heal's
Left: Pewter Art Deco-style picture frame, £66, The Strong Room at Liberty
Above: Small Hera bullet vase in pewter, £128, The Strong Room at Liberty
Above: Stainless-steel fish spoons: small, £10.95; medium, £11.95; large, £12.95; Heal's
Left: Sterling silver heart-shaped perfume flask, £19.95, from Past Times mail-order catalogue and shops
Left: Miniature round Art Deco-style pewter picture frame, £8.45, The Strong Room at Liberty
Above: Art Deco-style silver-plated tea set, £65, The Conran Shop
To find out who to ring and where to go for items featured here, see our Shopping Directory on page 132
SPECIAL reader competition
£15,000 WORTH OF OLYMPUS BEDROOM FURNITURE TO BE WON
The third part of our competition to win this beautiful bedroom furniture from Olympus — just cut out and keep the special voucher
THE BEDROOM is often the one room in the house you can really put your personal stamp on.
Invest in good-quality furniture and you can turn it into a luxurious haven that will look good for years to come.
The lucky winners of our four-part competition will have a head start, for furniture manufacturer Olympus is giving Ideal Home readers a chance to create a whole new look for their bedroom.
Established in 1912, Olympus has a long tradition of good design, using the finest materials and quality craftsmanship.
And to mark its 80th anniversary, the company has launched Louis Philippe — a collection inspired by the elegant furniture of mid-19th-century France.
The classic design is produced in solid cherry and maple with matched cherry veneers and includes characteristic features such as discreet tulip moulding on concealed drawers and shaped pedestal feet.
Hand-polished, the range includes wardrobes, drawer chests, a dressing table and distinctive Sleigh bed — also known as the Lit Bateau.
The lucky winner will be able to choose £6,000-worth of furniture from any Olympus freestanding range — and there are three runner-up prizes worth £3,000 range.
All you have to do is answer the simple question on the voucher and cut out and keep it, together with your answers to the questions on vouchers 1 and 2 from the October and November issues.
In the next issue — January — there will be the final voucher.
When you have all four vouchers and the answers to the four questions, send them to the address that will be printed in the January issue.
The winners will be drawn from a postbag of correct entries on 22 January 1993.
If you missed the last two issues but want to enter the competition, you can send off for vouchers 1 and 2.
Write, enclosing an sae, to   
Cut out and keep this voucher, together with vouchers 1 and 2 from our previous issues, and look out for the final one next month
Making waves
Microwave ovens have come a long way since they first appeared in our kitchens about 20 years ago, but how do you know which type will suit your style of cooking?
Annette Yates puts some of the latest models to the test
TRIED & TESTED
Will your cooker stand the strain of the festive season and all the extra entertaining that comes with it?
Supposing you run out of hotplates and there's no space to heat up the gravy, or will the sprouts get cold while you're waiting for the potatoes to cook?
A microwave oven could be a lifesaver this Christmas and it means you'll spend less time slaving over a hot stove.
If you're buying a microwave you'll be offered a whole host of features, but are they all worth having?
Naturally you'll want one that slots neatly into your kitchen and copes well with the food you want to cook, but before you part with your money, consider all the options and what features you'll need.
The first decision you'll need to make is whether to buy a basic microwave, a model with a grill, or a combination oven that integrates the speed of a microwave with the browning and crisping of conventional heat.
MICRO FACTS
Controls can be mechanical or touch-control — both are easy to use, but if you think you'll need more accurate timing in seconds (for softening butter, for instance) choose a digital display.
A turntable helps food to cook evenly by raising it off the oven floor so the microwaves can reach underneath, and by turning the food as it cooks.
Wave stirrers (paddles) also encourage even cooking.
Some ovens have a turntable and wave stirrers.
Power output ranges from 500 W to 1,000 W. The higher the wattage, the faster the microwave cooks.
Recipes in magazines and books (and cooking times on many pre-packed foods) are generally based on 600 to 700 W. If you buy a more powerful oven, you'll need to reduce the cooking time by about 25 per cent, or lower the power level to the equivalent of 600 to 700 W and cook for the normal time.
If you buy a 500 W oven, you'll need to lengthen the cooking time by about 30 per cent.
Power levels control the amount of microwave energy entering the oven, so food can be cooked as quickly or  as slowly as you like.
Manufacturers vary in the way they describe power levels.
Some models have up to nine power levels, but the most useful ones for thawing, cooking and heating are: High (100 per cent), medium-high (75 per cent ), medium (50 per cent ) and medium-low (30 per cent ).
A shelf allows more food to be cooked at the same time, though the cooking times will be longer.
An auto-minute button is handy — just press it to cook for one minute on high (100 per cent).
Some have extra programmes with pre-set times (Auto re-heat).
Quick/Rapid/Jet start (or Boost) is designed for quick heating of liquids and drinks in particular.
It works on a higher power than that used for general cooking.
A minute timer (or alarm) can sometimes be used as an automatic timer, with no cooking involved.
Auto-defrost is a useful feature, though most foods can be thawed successfully on medium-low (30 per cent).
Autodefrost is controlled by either time or weight.
Some models have a sensor that weighs the food.
Auto-cook/heat allows you to programme in the type of food and its weight, then the oven does all the rest — some models use an automatic sensor for this.
Hold-warm puts the oven on a low power level to keep food warm for 15 minutes or more.
A grill is good for improving the appearance of microwaved food.
Don't expect it to be as powerful as a conventional grill though, and it's likely to operate only with the door closed.
Some ovens allow grill and microwave to work simultaneously, which saves time.
Grills with radiant elements are similar to conventional grills.
Halogen bulbs give instant heat, while a quartz grill, the latest innovation, is quick and efficient.
If you don't have an efficient grill, or if you want to make toast, choose one with a radiant grill of 1 kW or more.
Auto-repeat recalls the last programme used.
A memory function stores programmes — useful only if you cook the same dishes frequently.
Delay-start/Pre-set/Auto-start delays cooking for several hours, perhaps while you are out.
It is more useful on a combination oven (for conventional or combination cooking) than on a microwave (where cooking times are very short anyway, and food may need turning or stirring).
NEFF COMPACT MICROWAVE 6125.12
PRICE; £287.50
A compact microwave with turntable and a capacity of 0.6 cu ft.
It has a power rating of 600 W and four power levels plus 750 W rapid start, hold-warm button and memory programmes.
Can be hung under a wall cupboard or built in.
Advantages:Quiet in operation.
Even though it's compact the cavity is spacious, taking a whole chicken or a large casserole.
Thawing is excellent — slow and even.
Drawbacks:There are no audible signals when the touch-control panel is programmed, so the display needs checking carefully to make sure it is set correctly.
The pads often require pressure to make them work.
Our verdict:A good basic oven with some handy features — ideal when you're short of space.
Rating:7 out of 10
WHIRLPOOL VIP MICROWAVE AVM602
PRICE: £169.99
A compact microwave with turntable, featuring the Twinwave system (microwaves enter the food from below as well as from above).
Capacity: 0.7 cu ft.
Power rating of 750 W plus 900 W Jet start, auto-weight defrost and memory programs.
Can be built in.
Advantages:Microwave distribution is very good, particularly when two meals are heated together (with one on the rack and one below it).
Jet start operates for 30 seconds at the touch of a button.
Drawbacks:Difficult to see liquids boiling.
Rating:9 out of 10
AEG MICROMAT DUO MICROWAVE AND GRILL 220
PRICE: £229.99
A neat microwave oven and grill with rotary controls.
Capacity: 0.75 cu ′.
Power rating of 850 W with nine power levels and 1.3 kW radiant grill.
Can be built in.
Advantages:Easy to use.
Good all-over browning of food during simultaneous microwaving and grilling (jacket potatoes are particularly good).
Turntable is recessed into oven floor and it can be switched off when grilling or microwaving food in square or rectangular dishes.
Drawbacks:Noisy.
Difficult to see into the oven during cooking.
The top surface gets very hot while grilling.
Our verdict:Easy-to-use, no-frills microwave.
A good choice if you need an efficient grill.
Rating:8 out of 10
TOSHIBA ER8870 DELTAWAVE III
PRICE: £219.99
A high-power, full-size freestanding microwave.
Capacity: 1.1 cu ′ 1,000 W with nine power levels, auto-defrost and weight defrost, weight cook, auto re-heat, auto-repeat, pre-set function and memory key.
Advantages:Easy to use and clean.
Turntable is recessed into oven floor, so it's less likely to be knocked as dishes are put into the oven.
Drawbacks:Difficult to see into the oven during cooking.
The times in the recipe/instruction book are for 850 W microwave so must be adjusted.
Our verdict:A family-size oven which performs well.
Ideal if you already have a conventional grill.
Rating:8 out of 10
ZANUSSI MCE975W STUDIO COMBINATION
PRICE; £329.99
A freestanding combination oven with turntable and low and high racks.
Capacity: 0.9 cu ′ A 700 W microwave with five power levels, fan oven (100 to 150°C) and 1 kW radiant grill.
Five cooking modes — microwave, convection, convection/microwave, grill, grill/microwave.
Minute-timer, auto re-heat, auto-defrost, delay-start and memory pad.
Advantages:Versatile.
Good browning on combination (roast chicken was particularly successful in our tests) and when grilling (great for toast, which is very unusual for a microwave).
Drawbacks:The exterior walls get very hot during combination cooking.
Needs a deep space on the worksurface.
Our verdict:Ideal if you have a conventional oven.
Controls complicated but are simple to use once learned.
Rating:8 out of 10
HITACHI MR8220 TABLE-TOP MICROWAVE WITH GRILL
PRICE: £169.99
A table-top microwave and grill with rotary controls.
Capacity: 0.7 cu ′ Power rating of 800 W with five power levels, plus 900 W boost and 0.95 kW halogen grill.
Advantages:The grill is well positioned in one corner of the roof of the oven and browns food evenly as it turns on the turntable — excellent for cooking dishes such as lasagne and cauliflower cheese.
Drawbacks:The microwave and grill cannot be used simultaneously.
Our verdict:Fine, but you will need another efficient grill for cooking bacon, steaks, and so on.
Rating:7 out of 10
BOSCH COMBINATION MICROWAVE HMG8622
PRICE; £899.90
A top-of-the-range combination oven with drop-down door, glass shelf, metal shelf and grid.
0.95 cu ′ capacity, 700 W microwave with four power levels plus 800 W quick-start, 1.9 kW radiant grill radiant heat from top and bottom of the oven, hot air cooking and fan-assisted grill.
Nine cooking modes.
Automatic defrost and cooking programmes, alarm, delay-start.
Can be integrated into kitchen units.
Advantages:Cooking is efficient and thawing is slow and even.
A good range of oven temperatures (50 to 250°C) gives you more scope in the type of dishes you can cook — some foods, such as meringues, need to be cooked at lower temperatures.
Any combination of conventional heat with microwaves can be used simultaneously.
The grill is efficient and can be operated with the door open so you can keep an eye on the food as it cooks.
Drawbacks:Expensive but, in terms of what it can do, this microwave is good enough to replace a conventional oven (although remember cooking space is limited in that you couldn't, say, do the roast and vegetables at the same time).
heavy to move around.
Browning is sometimes a little uneven.
Our verdict:Versatile, offering a high degree of control, with all the benefits of a well-built conventional oven.
Rating:9 out of 10
Annette Yates is author of several cookery books, four of them on microwave cooking, including the recently updated The Microwave Planner (£2.50, Elliot Right Way Books).
She also helps run Oxo's phone-in Cook Line.
To find out who to ring and where to go for items featured here, see our Shopping Directory on page 132
From left: Boned Stuffed Turkey with Mustard Brussels Sprouts and Vegetable Chips; Chocolate and Chestnut Dessert
Christmas COOKERY
Tradition with a Twist
Surprise your guests this Christmas with Norma Miller's subtle variations on classic seasonable recipes.
Aside from traditional turkey, expand your repertoire of festive favourites with our exciting fish and vegetarian treats and some sumptuous desserts
To make Christmas a truly memorable occasion for you and your guests, I've taken some of the traditional dishes and given them an exciting twist.
Instead of roast potatoes, for example, try my unusual Vegetable Chips made with potatoes, sweet potatoes, carrot and beetroot.
My version of that all-time favourite, turkey, is much easier to carve with all the bones removed.
For vegetarians, there's a mouthwatering Cashew Moussaka.
And as a crowning glory, end the meal with fruity Tangerine Chartreuse, or Chocolate and Chestnut Dessert served with marrons glacés.
CHEESE MERINGUES
Crisp savoury meringues making tempting nibbles — serve with a glass of wine.
1 Whisk the egg whites until very stiff.
2 With a metal spoon, fold in the cheese, mustard powder and seasoning.
3 Pipe or spoon small blobs of the cheese and egg mixture on to greased baking trays.
Bake in a pre-heated oven for 15 to 20 min.
4 To make the filling, mix together the cream cheese, chives and seasoning.
5 Sandwich pairs of the meringues together with the filling.
6 Put the meringues in petit four cases and dust with paprika pepper.
BONED STUFFED TURKEY
A boned turkey is simple to carve and, with a little patience, easy to prepare.
1 Mix together the sausage meat, breadcrumbs, parsley, thyme, egg and seasoning
2 In another bowl, mix the apricots, pistachio nuts, chestnuts and seasoning.
3 Remove giblets from the turkey.
To bone the turkey, put it breast-side down on a chopping board.
With a very sharp knife, cut along the backbone and work along the bones cutting the skin and meat away in one piece.
Leave the bones in the wings and legs.
Lift out the carcass and save for making gravy.
4 Slip the bacon joint open lengthways and fill the cavity with the apricot mixture.
5 Press the sausage meat stuffing around the bacon joint.
6 Season the inside of the bird.
7 Put the stuffed bacon joint in the middle, folding the turkey around it.
Sew with strong thread or secure with skewers
8 Turn the stuffed turkey over and tie with string into a neat shape.
9 Weight the turkey to calculate the cooking time and put into a foil-lined roasting tin.
Spread the butter over the breast, cover with foil and roast in a pre-heated oven for 15 min per 450 g (1 lb) plus 15 min.
Remove the foil for the last 30 min and serve hot or cold.
To freeze: The stuffings can be frozen for one month; thaw before using.
The cooked meat can be frozen for one month.
If you don't think you can manage it yourself, give your butcher plenty of warning and he will bone your turkey for you.
GRAVY
Break the carcass into small pieces and put into a pan with the giblets, bay leaf, a peeled onion and carrot.
Cover with cold water, bring to the boil, simmer for an hour and then strain.
When the turkey is cooked, remove from the pan and drain off all but 4 tbsp fat.
Stir in 3 tbsp plain flour and cook for 1 min.
Stirring continuously, add 600 ml (1 pt) turkey stock.
Bring to the boil and simmer for a few min.
Add 2 tbsp sherry, re-heat and season to taste.
CASHEW MOUSSAKA
A vegetarian treat — layers of aubergine, nuts, courgette and mushroom topped with cheese.
1 slice the aubergines, sprinkle with salt and leave for 30 min.
Drain, wash and dry.
2 Heat the oil, fry aubergine slices until golden.
3 Remove from the pan and fry the courgette slices until golden.
4 Mix together the parsley, tomatoes, onion, mushrooms, seasoning and nuts.
5 In an ovenproof dish, layer the aubergine and courgette slices and tomato mixture, ending with aubergine slices.
6 Put the butter, flour and milk in a saucepan.
Stirring continuously, bring to the boil and cook for 1 min.
7 Remove from the heat.
Stir in the seasoning, mustard powder and eggs.
8 Spoon the sauce over the moussaka and sprinkle over the cheese.
Bake in a pre-heated oven for 40 min until golden.
CRANBERRY AND WALNUT CHUTNEY
A delicious accompaniment for turkey.
1 Put the onion, apples, pear, cranberries and sugar into a large heavy-based pan.
Gently heat until the sugar has dissolved.
2 Stir in the grated orange rind and juice, vinegar, cinnamon, cloves and ginger.
3 Bring to the boil and simmer uncovered for 30 min, or until thick.
4 Add the walnuts and bourbon and cook for a further 5 min.
5 Leave to cool.
Pour the chutney into small sterilised jars, seal, label and give away as presents.
Make up to two weeks before Christmas and store in a covered container in the fridge.
VEGETABLE CHIPS
Colourful root vegetable chips are good with hot or cold roast meats.
1 Peel all the vegetables and cut into  matchstick-sized pieces, keeping the beetroot chips to one side to stop the other vegetables turning pink.
Place the remaining vegetables in a bowl of cold water.
Leave for 15 min, then drain and dry on kitchen paper.
2 Put the flour into a freezer bag, add all the vegetable chips and shake until lightly coated.
3 Deep fry the chips in hot oil, a few at a time, until golden.
Drain and keep warm until they are all cooked.
4 Sprinkle with salt and serve immediately
MUSTARD BRUSSELS SPROUTS
Mustard gives added flavour to a traditional Christmas vegetable.
1 Peel and thinly slice the shallots.
2 Trim and quarter the Brussels sprouts, depending on their size.
3 Plunge the sliced shallots in boiling water for 2 min and drain.
4 Repeat with the sprouts but only for 1 min.
5 Heat the oil in a large pan and add the mustard seeds.
When they begin to pop, add the shallot slices and cook for 1 min.
6 Stir in the sprouts and cook for 2 min.
7 Add the almonds and season to taste.
TROUT WITH STILTON
An unusual combination, yet the Stilton doesn't overwhelm the flavour of the trout.
1 Clean and dry the trout fillets.
2 Place the fillets in a buttered ovenproof dish and sprinkle with the lemon juice, wine, parsley and seasoning.
3 Crumble the Stilton over the fillets, add the chopped hazelnuts and olive oil.
4 Cover with foil and cook in a pre-heated over for 10 min.
Remove the foil and cook for a further 50 to 10 min, until the cheese has melted and the trout is cooked.
Garnish with the sprigs of watercress.
Left: Trout with Stilton is a tasty dish that would make a good seasonal starter
TANGERINE CHARTREUSE
If you find Christmas pudding too heavy this is the perfect alternative.
1 Peel the tangerines, removing the pith as well.
Put a small piece of the peel to one side.
2 Put the milk, cornflour, egg yolk and 40 g (1½ oz) of the sugar into the pan.
Heat and stir until a custard forms, but do not boil.
3 Add the reserved piece of tangerine peel to the custard and leave until cold.
4 Dissolve the jelly in 150 ml (¼ pt) water.
Pour half into a charlotte russe tin or a 15 cm (6 ″) cake tin and leave to set.
Leave the other half of the jelly on one side in a jug.
5 Dip the angelica and almonds into the jug of jelly and arrange on the jelly in the mould.
When the decoration has set, cover with the jelly from the jug (re-heating it if necessary).
6 Sprinkle the gelatine over 4 tbsp hot water and stir until it has dissolved.
7 Process or liquidise one tangerine and put the juice and pulp into a bowl.
Strain the custard over the tangerine pulp and stir in the dissolved gelatine.
Leave until it begins to set.
8 Whisk the cream until it forms soft folds and, in another bowl whisky the egg white until it forms soft peaks.
9 With a metal spoon, fold the beaten cream and egg white into the custard mixture.
Pour on top of the jelly and leave until set.
10 Dissolve the remaining sugar in 300 ml (½ pt) water.
Bring to the boil and boil for 10 min.
Add the remaining tangerines and the      brandy, then simmer for 10 min.
Leave to cool.
11 Dip the tin into hot water for a few seconds and turn on to a serving plate.
Leave the tangerines whole, or slice and pour with the syrup around the pudding.
CHOCOLATE AND CHESTNUT DESSERT
A rich dessert with a festive flavour.
1 Melt the chocolate in a bowl over a pan of hot water.
2 Cream the butter and icing sugar together until light and fluffy.
3 Stir the chocolate, chestnut purée, orange rind and Cointreau into the butter and sugar.
Mix together until smooth.
4 Line a 900 g (2 lb) loaf tin with cling film.
5 Arrange the sponge fingers in the bottom of the lined loaf tin.
Cover the fingers with a third of the chocolate mixture.
Repeat twice and end with a layer of sponge fingers.
6 Cover with cling film or foil and a light weight.
Refrigerate overnight until firm.
7 Turn on to a serving dish and remove the cling film.
Swirl the whipped cream over the dessert and decorate with dragées.
Arrange the marrons glacés around the bottom.
For a stronger flavour, sprinkle the sponge biscuits with orange juice and extra Cointreau.
NUT CRUNCH
Chocolate, honey and nut petit fours served with coffee are the perfect ending to a meal.
1 Put the sugar, butter and honey in a pan.
2 Heat gently until the sugar has melted and bring to the boil.
3 Remove from the heat and stir in 75 g (3 oz) of the chocolate
4 When the chocolate has melted, stir in the oats, almonds, hazelnuts and brazil nuts.
5 Roll teaspoons of the petit four mixture into balls and leave for a while to set.
6 Melt the remaining chocolate in a basin over pan of hot water.
Drizzle over the petits fours from a fork or a small piping bag.
7 Decorate with sweets or cherries.
Leave to set and put into coloured petit four cases.
MICROWAVE MAGIC
Small turkeys can be cooked whole in your microwave.
The bird should weigh between 1.5 kg (3¼lb) and not more than 5 kg (11¼ lb) including stuffing.
It must be completely thawed if frozen, rinsed in cold water and dried.
Don't stuff the body cavity, only the neck with a very light, loosely packed stuffing mixture.
The long cooking time will give a brown skin but you could brush the turkey with brown seasoning or tomato purée to give it more colour.
Cover the wing and leg tips with small pieces of foil to prevent overcooking.
Put the turkey in a roasting bag.
Secure loosely with a piece of string or an elastic band and put on to a microwave-safe roasting rack over a disk containing 3 tbsp stock.
Cook on medium (50 per cent) for 11 to 13 min per 450 g (1 lb), or high (100 per cent ) for 9 to 11 min per 450 g (1 lb).
Cook breast side down for a quarter of the cooking time.
Turn on to a side for the next quarter, then the other side and breast side up for the final cooking time, removing the foil.
Remove from the microwave.
Cover with foil to keep in the heat and stand for 15 to 20 min before carving.
FESTIVE DRINKS
Greet your guests with a glass of Waitrose's Brut non-vintage champagne (£6.95).
Turn it into Buck's Fizz with the addition of chilled orange juice, or try a glass of Crémant de Bourgogne Rosé, Caves de Bailly 1988 (£6.99) from Majestic.
A glass of spicy, wild berry-flavoured Shiraz from Safeway (£3.15) complements the Trout with Stilton and the Cashew Moussaka.
I've found two wines from different price ranges to serve with the Christmas turkey and all its trimmings.
Safeway's Romanian Special Reserve Cabernet Sauvignon Dealul Mare is excellent value at £2.99.
Or for a wonderful Christmas treat, spoil yourself with a vintage claret Chateau Lascombes 1986 Grand Cru Classé Margaux (£18.49) from Augustus Barnett, a delectable fruity claret sure to make your meal a memorable occasion.
Serve dessert wines with a slice of Christmas cake, pudding, or my two desserts.
Safeway's Muscat Cuvée Jose Sala (£3.59) complements the fruitiest of puddings.
Again, if you're feeling generous, a 1985 bottle of Château Lascombes (£24.99) is a powerful claret that makes a superb accompaniment to cheese.
A fitting end to the meal would be a glass of Waitrose's 10-year-old Blandy's Malmsey Madeira (£12.74).
NEXT MONTH: Make your own marmalade and delicious desserts from a selection of fruit 
COOKERY plus
Sauces and preserves as perfect Christmas standbys, chocolates with a difference, plus bottles of Le Piat d'Or to win
CHOCOLATE TREATS
Christmas is a time to indulge in a chocolate feast and Thorntons has a wide range of gifts to suit everyone's taste and pocket.
Look out for its vintage sports car with a difference — a sleek convertible, made with chocolate, which costs only £2.75.
New this Christmas are Whisky Thistle Truffles, each moulded into a thistle shape and filled with real whisky truffle centres.
In a smart purple and green gift box for £2.50, they make a lovely present, or enjoy them with after-dinner coffee.
SAUCY SECRETS
By now you'll have decided what to eat on Christmas and Boxing Day.
But what about all those other meals over the holiday period?
To avoid boring leftovers, try new Discovery sauces, in three spicy varieties, made from authentic recipes.
The Enchilada sauce, from Tijuana, Mexico, will transform a port dish; the Mexican, from the Rio Grande area, will turn minced beef into chilli con carne, and Creole, from New Orleans, will make an easy jambalaya.
All sauces cost £1.29.
CHRISTMAS CHEER
Over the Christmas period, why not enter into the festive spirit by pouring yourself a glass of light and fruity Le Piat d'Or blanc.
This refreshing wine is made by Piat Père et Fils who has been established since 1849 and also produces outstanding Beaujolais and Burgundy wines.
If you'd like to try these wines for free, now's your chance.
One hundred lucky readers will receive a special Christmas Le Piat gift, worth over £20, which not only contains one bottle of Le Piat d'Or blanc, but also one bottle of its limited edition Mâcon Villages 1991 — a traditionally dry wine that's only available in France.
The wines come with a corkscrew/knife and are presented in a pine display box.
Serve them chilled either as an aperitif or try them with white meat, poultry dishes and cheeses.
Le Piat d'Or blanc is especially good served with fish and seafood.
Just send your name and address to Ideal Home Piat Offer  to arrive no later than 10 December 1992.
The first 100 readers whose postcards are drawn out of the bag on 12 December 1992 will each receive a special Le Piat d'Or Christmas Gift Box.
FREE OFFER
BEAN FEAST
A bag of gourmet jelly Wunder beans makes an ideal Christmas stocking filler.
There are 40 varieties to choose from — all containing a soft jelly centre.
Buy them loose for £1.40 per lb and take your pick from such flavours as Peanut Butter, Lemon, Toasted Marshmallow, Just Peachy, Tutti Frutti and Piñ Colada.
The brightly coloured beans are also available in glass-jar, pillbox, rocking-horse or gumball dispensers, and as a special Christmas mix of Wild Cherry Apple and Coconut.
WHISKY GALORE
Anyone who enjoys the smooth taste of Glenfiddich malt whisky is bound to love these delicious peach halves soaked in syrup and Glenfiddich.
We have 250 jars of peach halves, each worth £3.95, to give away to the first readers to write in.
Just send your name and address on a postcard, by 14 December 1992, to: Ideal Home Offer/Conal Walsh,.
FREE OFFER
FUN WITH CAKES
If you haven't yet decorated your Christmas cake you'll find plenty of inventive ideas in Fun Cakes for Special Occasions by Ann Nicol (£10.95, Letts).
This handy book has step-by-step instructions and clear illustrations.
These stylish and funny celebration cakes for adults will appeal to everyone — from computer-game buffs to sailing and gardening addicts.
They're ideal for special occasions like a hen night or retirement party.
And there are also recipes for cakes in unusual shapes — a chocolate bar and even sausage, eggs and chips .
IN STORE
Over the hectic Christmas holidays, your greatest ally in the kitchen could be a reserve of delicious store-cupboard standbys.
Epicure has a wide selection, from fruits and nuts to preserve and biscuits.
And if you're running out of time to make a stuffing for the turkey or goose, try one of Epicure's stuffing mixes — Sage & Onion, Sage & Chestnut, Herb & Garlic or Apricot & Almond.
They cost 79p for 150 g.
Its fruit sauces — Cranberry with Port or Madeira, at £1.29 for 227 g, or Redcurrant Jelly with Port, £1.19 for 227 g — will spice up hot or cold meats.
HANDY HINTS
Quick cake decoration 
1
Put a 20 cm (8″) fruit cake on to a larger silver board.
Warm and sieve 450 g (1 lb) apricot jam.
Brush the cake with the apricot purée.
One a surface dusted with icing sugar, roll out 900 g (2 lb) almond paste.
2
Cut to fit the top and sides of the cake.
Leave for 24 hr before icing.
3
Brush the almond paste with apricot purée.
On a surface dusted with cornflour, roll out 1.1 kg (2½ lb) fondant icing large enough to cover the cake in one piece.
Lift over the cake and smooth with your fingertips.
Trim off any excess icing.
4
Colour 175 g (6 oz) fondant icing green.
Roll and cut out eight Christmas tree shapes with a biscuit cutter.
Press coloured dragées on to the trees.
Colour 125 g (4 oz) fondant icing yellow.
Roll or cut out different-sized star shapes.
5
Brush the back of the shapes with apricot purée, press a tree on to each corner of the cake and put four on top.
Scatter the yellow stars over the top and sides.
GARDENING
WINTER WONDERLAND
A splash of colour against the frosted greens and greys of a winter garden will lift your spirits and add interest to your garden at this time of year.
We show you how
Main picture: The rich colour of evergreen hedges and trees covered with frost (like these at Park Farm, Chelmsford) makes a wonderful sight in midwinter
Add a bright touch of yellow with Hamamelis mollis Pallida
Daphne ordora  Aureomarginata has pretty pink-purple flowers
The hardy Pyracantha Orange Glow gives long-lasting colour
Christmas can be a bleak time in the garden, but there's a whole range of shrubs that will bring warmth and colour long before spring arrives.
One such shrub is Skimmia japonica Foremanii which has a mass of scarlet berries throughout the winter and brightens up a shady corner.
Pieris japonica Variegata is a popular shrub for cutting as the young leaves are lightly tinged with pink.
Ideal for small gardens, the weeping cotoneaster hybridus Pendulus has a striking leaf and outline, and produces a mass of brilliant red fruit.
Mahonia japonica, with its holly-like foliage and racemes of fragrant flowers, is one of the finest ornamental shrubs, while Jasminum nudiflorum will produce masses of cheerful yellow flowers.
Avoid an east-facing situation to prevent frost damage and cut back long growth immediately after flowering.
The pale green flowers of Helleborus corsicus appear between February and April.
With its decorative evergreen leaves, this plant will liven up shaded areas.
Although not in flower before March, Bergenia cordifolia Purpurea is another plant blessed with evergreen foliage that has a reddish-purple tinge during winter.
Cotoneaster hybridus Pendulus
This decorative weeping tree is generally evergreen or semi-evergreen.
It flowers in summer and then the red fruit follows for autumn and winter.
The standard form reaches 2 m
Skimmia japonica Foremanii
This slow-growing evergreen flowers in spring.
Brilliant red berries follow and these will last throughout the winter.
Female, it requires the company of a scented male, S. fragrans, in order to bear fruit.
Plant in semi-shade.
Height 90 to 120 cm
Pieris japonica Variegata
With evergreen foliage edged with cream, it requires a lime-free sheltered site.
Flowers in spring.
Height 1 m
Euonymus fortunei Emerald and Gold
With its foliage tinged with gold and pink in the winter, this shrub is excellent for ground cover and grows to 45 cm in sun or shade 
Mahonia japonica
Attractive foliage, winter flowers and lily-of-the-valley fragrance.
A very tough and tolerant shrub.
Grows to 2 to 3 m
Bergenia cordifolia Purpurea
Leaves tinged with purple in winter, flowers very early spring.
Tolerates most kinds of situation and requires little attention.
Grows to a height of 30 cm
Helleborus corsicus
Preferring shade and well-drained soil, this long-lasting plant reaches 60 cm
Jasminum nudiflorum
This shrub flowers between November and March, and grows above 4 m high.
It needs support and a free-draining soil
Hamamelis mollis Pallida
Heavily scented flower clusters last from December to February, while the large oval leaves are golden yellow in autumn.
Plant this shrub in an open position and mulch with peat or leaf mould.
It grows to 150 to 200 cm 
Above and inset: Before winter arrives it's important to plan for extra colour and warmth in the garden
Add interest using plants with evergreen leaves or bright berries
Helleborus corsicus
Euonymus fortunei Emerald and Gold
Above: Skimmia japonica Foremanii
Left: Cotoneaster hybridus Pendulus
Pieris japonica Variegata
Mahonia japonica
Winter flowers add a welcome touch of colour
Hamamelis mollis Pallida
Bergenia cordifolia Purpurea
Eranthis hyemalis — see page 131
Cheerful yellow flowers from Jasminum nudiflorum
WHAT TO DO IN THE GARDEN THIS MONTH
FIRMLY ROOTED
Check recently planted trees and shrubs — are they securely staked against the winter winds?
After heavy frosts the roots may have lifted or loosened.
If so, press them back into the soil.
CUTTING BACK
Quite a lot of pruning can be done now: repeat-flowering climbing roses, late-flowering clematis, fruit bushes and overgrown deciduous shrubs can all be cut back.
The method will depend on the variety so look out for a good reference book, such as Pruning by Christopher Brickell, £7.99, Mitchell Bleazley — part of The Royal Horticultural Society's  Encyclopaedia of Practical Gardening series.
SLIPPERY PATHS
Ice on steps and pathways is a real danger in winter so sprinkle them with sand.
MENDING FENCES
While climbing shrubs are dormant repair fences and trellises.
INDOORS AND OUT
Most foliage houseplants need a period of rest in mid winter, so keep feeding and watering to a minimum until new growth starts in the spring.
However, plants designed to flower in December and January, such as Cineraria, Gloxinia and Primulas, must be fed and watered regularly as soon as buds begin to develop.
All will flower for longer if you can find them a cool spot away from the dry heat of radiators.
FORWARD PLANNING
Order your seed catalogues now so you can spend the winter evenings planning your borders for next year.
ANIMAL LIFE
If you enjoy seeing birds in your garden, start feeding them now.
Buy packets of seed which have the Bird Food Standards Association seal of approval, or put out scraps of cheese, meat, stale cake or bacon rinds.
However, don't feed your feathered friends very dry bread, desiccated coconut or salty food.
Also make sure there is a supply of unfrozen water for them to drink.
Mid-winter viewpoint
The garden plan this month illustrates the raw winter period when it can seem that nothing much is happening.
Here, the planting is mixed — perennials will transform the garden in summer but at this time of year they're invisible, having been cut back and mulched during the autumn.
The views from the house, though, are by no means dull.
Winter colour and fragrance are provided by the yellow flowers of Mahonia japonica and the witch hazel, Hamamelis mollis Pallida, which forms a small shrub and flowers between January and February.
The evergreen shrub, Garrya elliptica, can be quite stunning in the winter sunshine and will do well even in a city garden.
Daphne odora Aureomarginata ‘Variegata’, a valuable evergreen shrub with variegated leaves, has heavily scented pinky-purple blooms and likes to be sheltered from cold winds.
Its attractive foliage provides a good backdrop to later flowering plants in the border.
Prunus subhirtella Autumnalis forms a spreading canopy which becomes a mass of white blossom tinged with pink from early winter intermittently to March.
It follows on from a fine display of tinted autumn foliage.
The warm terracotta tones of a brick central square surrounded by York paving forms a seating area close to the house and has good views across the rest of the garden.
with its pots and containers, this area can provide constant interest throughout the changing seasons.
Decorative rope-top edgings in terracotta contain the borders and ball-topped corner posts add an extra finishing touch.
In the centre of the lawn, a large decorative tub has been planted with a small leaved variegated ivy with clipped lavender around it.
Come spring this will produce a flurry of white tulips, against the evergreen climbers and shrubs in the end border.
WORKING IN THE GARDEN
If you are an enthusiastic gardener you'll know how valuable a convenient work space is and how it can revitalise your whole approach to gardening throughout the year.
Space Having an area (ideally paved or cemented) where you can prepare containers to replace those on display will help ensure continual colour and interest all year round.
Spring bulbs can replace winter displays, while hanging baskets and summer flowering containers can be established early and introduced into the garden as the flowers are about to break.
Later on, you can introduce pot-grown lilies and flowering shrubs like fuchsias.
Greenhouse/cold frame The scope for successful gardening increases dramatically with a greenhouse.
This allows you to raise your own seeds, over-winter houseplants and propagate.
A mini greenhouse or cold frame would be a good alternative in small gardens.
Compost bins You will be amazed how quickly you can produce valuable humus from garden and household waste.
Bins should be placed over soil to allow the migration of soil organisms and worms.
Nursery beds In the garden plan, the work area includes four small raised beds separated by 30 cm cement paths.
These beds can be used to produce salad crops and fresh herbs or can be used as nursery beds for self-raised perennials and shrubs until they're sufficiently well-established to be planted out.
Flexible alkathene hoops, available from builders' merchants, secured to each side of a bed with a cover of heavy-duty polythene, make a simple cold frame for protecting frost-sensitive shrubs and newly raised annuals.
Strings secured to the timber edgings hold down the polythene cover.
The same method using netting would make effective protection for a bed of a dozen or more high-yielding strawberry plants.
Cordon fruit trees occupy the bed against the garage wall.
Terracotta rope-topped edgings and corner posts — as used in our plan — are available from Agriframes 
At a time when there is very little colour in the garden, a few choice plants and shrubs will create interest until the summer when the garden will be transformed with summer-flowering plants and climbing roses
A 2-m diamond-mesh trellis fences covering with evergreen Clematis armandii Apple Blossom and Clematis cirrhosa Freckles encloses the seating area.
With their glossy green aromatic leaves, two Choisya ternata shrubs either side of the seat make this a pleasant place to sit.
As the year continues pot plants add colour and garden furniture will transform the paved area.
Garrya elliptica This grows 3 m tall and 4 m wide and has long grey/green catkins in winter
Prunus subhirtella Autumnalis A deciduous tree with a wide canopy of semi-double white flowers in winter
Clematis cirrhosa Freckles Evergreen and delicately scented, it flowers from October, reaching 2 to 3 m in height
Clematis armandii Apple Blossom The foliage of this evergreen clematis makes it a useful screening plant in sheltered areas.
Glistening white flowers tinged with pink appear during April and May.
It reaches 3 to 5 m
The separate work area with cold frame and greenhouse is a good practical idea of you have enough space
Next month: Different ways of making an entrance in your garden
SMALL PLANTS FOR WINTER GARDENS
Right: Hybrid Viola (pansy) flowers from autumn to spring provided it doesn't get too cold
Anemone blanda, flowering late winter to mid-spring, needs good drainage
Eranthis hyemalis flowers late winter to early spring and reaches 8 to 10 cm
Hardy winter-flowering Crocus tomasinianus multiplies naturally
Iris reticulata Harmony flowers late winter to early spring and needs the sun
SHOPPING DIRECTORY
Who to ring and where to go for items and services featured in this issue.
Call the manufacturer or supplier on the telephone number given to find your nearest stockist.
Many of them also offer a mail-order service
USEFUL ADDRESSES
If you have a problem with your home or just need some expert advice, the organisations below are a good starting point                       
NEXT MONTH in our January issue
ON SALE 10 DECEMBER
Make sure you get a copy of Ideal Home every month by taking out a subscription.
See page 74 for full details
Shopping by post
Our guide to furnishing your home by mail order
Kitchen of the month
TV chef Raymond Blanc lets us in on the secrets of his kitchen
Border lines
How to use wallpaper borders for contrast and impact
Bread winners
Which toaster gives the best results?
We test them out
Consumer file
Are appliances you buy safe?
We point out the danger signs    