

So you want to fly a kite!
Let's start at the very beginning.
You've seen some kites, they've impressed you and now you want one for yourself.
For the time being, we have to assume that it's a single line kite you want (multi-line stunters come in Chapter Eight) and, without any prior experience, you haven't a clue where to begin.
Keep it simple
The easy option is to visit a kite shop, send for a mail order list or attend a kite meeting where there's a sales stand so that you can buy the whole outfit — handle, line and a ready-to-fly kite with, or perhaps without, a tail.
This first kite has to work if you are to be satisfied, so our first tip is for you to be conservative, and select one of the tried and tested shapes that give least trouble.
In our experience, one's first kite eventually achieves a certain immortality.
It becomes a favourite, always there in reserve whenever you tire of its successors, and for ever regarded as ‘Old Reliable’.
Remember this, and select a Hexagon, a Malay (‘Diamond’) or a lightweight Delta.
Make sure it has been made with ripstop nylon and has good quality spars and reinforced pockets to receive them.
Deltas don't need tails, but the other two types should have one supplied.
The line should be a full 60 metres regulation length, and the handle in robust plastic with extensions to retain the line when wound-in.
You might think that specification too simple.
If so, you'll have to spend more and invest in a Flare or a Roller, which would be our second-stage recommendation.
These are more involved in construction, slightly more complicated to assemble and will inevitably be much larger than the Hexagon or Malay.
They'll cost more because they involve much more material and, in particular, more sewing; but, for all that, the Flare or the Roller are types that can be flown in a wide range of wind strengths, and are remarkably stable.
In any case, go for permanence.
Plastic is bright and colourful but vulnerable, even when it has a glass fibre frame.
If you must, then you can't do better than to buy a plastic ‘Snake’; but we doubt if you'll have the same degree of reverence for it as for our other suggestions in nylon.
Making a ‘quickie’
Perhaps the idea of buying a kite conflicts with your ecologically green view of the kite as being ‘free as a bird’ and therefore free on the  pocket.
Or perhaps, like many of our correspondents who have sought assistance in working with young people at schools or in Community Art Centres, you're seeking a simple do-it-yourself project that brings quick results for minimum outlay.
The answer here is a plastic Diamond.
With variations, this very simple shape is widely used in kite workshops as a project that produces results, both in the flight performance and in the degree of satisfaction it gives to the constructor.
Pat has drawn the basic square, set on edge to make the diamond.
We've also seen Butterfly, Delta and Indian Fighter profiles, each cut from shopping bag plastic with the aid of a hardboard template.
Construction is the same for all — a straight spine, a curved cross-spar and a two-leg bridle.
The tail is an essential, so too is flexibility in the cross-spar.
Start by cutting the square from lightweight plastic.
Because the original dimensions were in imperial measure, either 12in or 15in on each side, we stick to these sizes since they've been tried and tested so many times.
The metric equivalents are rather odd numbers at 305 or 380mm.
Some workshops use white plastic off the roll so that it forms a plain background on which the constructor can sketch with a marker-pen.
Then other marker-pen dyes can be used to fill in with a bright decoration to complete a pattern or cartoon figure.
If the ubiquitous black bin liner is to provide the covering, a decorative option is to cut a pattern out of its centre to suit a contrasting overlay.
This can be taken from a plastic bag with a decorative design, or could be just a piece of plain colour cut into a shape.
The patch is sticky-taped onto the kite blank, over the cutout, then the spine is prepared to a length equal to the corner-to-corner distance of the square.
For imperial measure readers, this is 17in for a 12in sq.
blank.
Both the spine and the cross-spar must be from resilient material.
Split bamboo, shaped to a near round section as possible by scraping with the sharp edge of a piece of glass, or glass fibre rod of 2 or 3mm diameter, would be perfect (GRP rod is best cut using a 3-corner file around its perimeter).
Now clear an area on a hard surface, such as a worktop.
Lay down the kite blank and, using strong parcel tape or similar, stick the spine over the diagonal, and the whole to the work surface.
Above: For regular kite workshop use, templates made in plywood are more permanent.
Note the different shapes, and use of a half profile for assured symmetry.
Left: The Diamond kite, using decoration from a plastic carrier bag.
Prepare the cross-spar to the length indicated (about 60mm longer than the spine) and you will soon see why it is generally called a ‘spreader’, as you stick first one end down with more strong tape, then have to curve it, in order to fit it within the kite shape at the other end and onto the final corner.
Our simple kite is almost complete.
All that is required now is for each tip to be lifted in turn from the worktop, and the strong tape folded over to form a complete pocket at each corner.
Free from the worktop, we make a bridle with 750mm or 30in off the kite line and, with a darning needle, pierce the cover at the intersection of the spine and spreader, and tie with a secure knot (see Chapter Three).
The other end of the bridle has to be tied in a similar way at the rear of the spine, but not at the very tip.
To set the bridle provisionally, lay the kite face down and, with a protractor, arrange the division of the two halves of the bridle so that what will become the top leg is at approximately 75 degrees to the rear face of the kite.
Secure the bridle adjustment with a half-hitch to form a small loop.
Now we need a tail.
Again, coloured plastic shopping bags will offer a wide range of decorative strips which can be tied or glued to a central strip.
Length should be more than 2 metres or 6ft, but is not critical.
The tail aids stability by acting in the same way as a drogue which will keep the kite heading into wind, and its weight ensures that the centre of gravity is well behind the line attachment.
This keeps the kite face at a good angle of attack to the oncoming airstream.
A tailless option
Larger, and involving a spot of heat treatment for the cross-spar, is the design by Eiji Ohashi, an internationally-renowned Kitemaster from Japan.
It has an added attraction in that, if you want to make more than one, they can be joined with an interlinking line and flown in a ‘train’.
Eiji has made extremely long trains to form an arch, the biggest of which he was invited to fly in happier times  at Kuwait.
This one can be made in almost the same way as the Diamond, except that the cross-spar or spreader has to be bent at the centre.
This forms a dihedral angle of about 12.5 degrees either side of the kite.
The upwards and outwards inclination of the kite either side of centre is what provides lateral stability.
Making the bend in a bamboo stick is surprisingly easy over a candle flame or similar, but be careful not to burn it at this vital centre point of the kite!
Being larger (for imperialists, the height is 30in), the spars are much thicker, say 6mm bamboo or 3/16in dowel, and they do not have to flex.
Instead, two much thinner battens are fitted to steady the lower apron and, being left free at the front or upper ends, they are able to maintain the sail shape while the rear end of the kite flexes in the manner of a soaring bird's tail feathers.
Sewing and tying the bridle is a similar exercise to that of the Diamond, and all the attachments of the four spars is by sticky tape.
Of course, although we've said it is tailless, you can add one if you wish.
Assuming that you have acquired some braided nylon line and a suitable handle, we are now ready for flight provided there is enough wind and the direction is favourable for wherever we intend to fly.
For a single line, stable kite, we need to catch the wind where it is constant and reasonably strong, free of turbulence and unaffected by obstructions.
This is apart from considerations of safety.
Wind
While there are some featherweight kites that will rise in calm air on thermal currents, or elevate when the flyer applies tension on the line by pulling as with the Eastern fighting kites, our concern is that there should be adequate wind strength.
Wind provides all the energy we need for an anchored (line held taut by the flyer) kite.
It comes to us by virtue of the ‘Coriolis Effect’ created by changes in atmospheric pressure.
Regular forecasts by meteorologists on TV have taken most of the mystery out of isobars these days, so it should be easy to understand how, when the isobar lines are drawn close together, strong winds can be expected.
Conversely, when the chart shows a large ‘hole’ and numbers like 1025, the high pressure promises calm.
The TV weather experts also tell us wind speeds and direction.
We'll be looking for between 5 and 15 mph (8 to 24 km/h) coming from a warm part of the globe.
The forecasts are given for a height of 10m or 33ft above ground.
Actual speed will vary not only with altitudes but also with local terrain.
As our diagram shows, a theoretical change with height can amount to an increase of six times from ground level to 60 metres or 200ft, or more realistically by 50% from the gust-free level of 10m to 60m.
It is most important to understand the effect of gusts at low levels.
Any obstruction upwind  will develop turbulence, be it a single tree or a block of apartments.
Below: The joy of that first flight with a self-made kite is a treasured memory.
Right: A workshop produces results!
This group of French youngsters show their appreciation.
Trees can be useful indicators of wind variation with height, and the way in which leaves are turned, particularly on the lower branches, shows clearly how turbulent the air can be.
Kite operation becomes educational, as experience gives better appreciation of air movement, and the way in which wind is a resultant from changes in barometric pressure.
So, in summary, we're looking for a clear site, exposed to wind, preferably on rising ground or on beach dunes where there are no buildings to break up the breeze.
The launch
Now we're ready for that first flight.
No matter whether the kite is a simple Diamond in polythene, or a commercial Flare in ripstop nylon, it pays to check that the bridle is set at a reasonable angle before we commit the kite to the air.
Using a fishing snap-link on the end of the flying line, hook it onto the bridle (commercial kites should come with a ring on the bridle) and suspend the kite upside down.
Take note of the angle at which the kite hangs.
It must be with the tail hanging lower than the nose.
The angle can be anywhere between 10 and 25 degrees at this stage, and only a flight test will show whatever change is needed.
The tail need not be fitted for this test, but now's the time to attach it ready for the launch.
Have a helper hold the kite nose up, and walk out at least 15m (50ft) of line directly in-line with the wind — downwind, of course!
When you can feel a steady breeze on your back, pull the line gently and call to the helper to release.
There are all kinds of releases.
Kites need a smooth, upward and forward swing of the arms — not a throw, or a drop, simply a gentle cast-off.
If all is well, the flyer is rewarded with an upward, arcing sweep of the kite through 60 degrees of line angle, and joy begins as it soars aloft, dancing with the elements.
However, some things simply do not work first time out.
The kite might start  to climb, then perform a curving sweep up to about 45 degrees, execute a beautiful turn and point head downwards until it crashes into the ground.
In such a case, we would suspect that the bridle is setting the kite at too steep an angle.
The cure is to untie the hitch, and rearrange with another loop that reduces the front leg and lengthens the rear.
Check again.
Better?
If not, then we add to the tail.
A quick remedy is to tie a light handkerchief to the end of the existing tail.
This will soon prove whether more drag is needed to help stabilise the kite.
A sure sign that a tail is essential is a spinning kite which will not retain any heading and rotates around the line.
Even a long crêpe streamer will straighten a spinning kite.
A kite that climbs, then seems to slip sideways, twitching until it crashes on its side, needs to have a bowstring across the tips of its cross-spar or spreader.
This induces a dihedral angle.
Remember that we built this into the Ohashi by heating the bamboo and bending it?
Trimming a basic single line kite by bridle adjustment to adjust the angle of attack is dependent on the wind strength of the day.
Lower windspeeds will need a longer front leg; stronger wind calls for a shorter front leg.
In the case of the Hexagon, you'll have three legs provided, but one of the delights of this shape is that only rarely does it need bridle adjustment.
Delta kites come with a triangular keel into which an eyelet has been riveted for the line attachment.
Because the Delta design incorporates leading edge spars which are not fixed to the spine, and can therefore flex, they are self-adjusting for a broad variance in wind speeds.
Hence our recommendation for these easy-to-fly types for your first bought kite.
Self-launching
We suggested a 50ft or 15 metre line to start that first launch.
This is to give the kite a chance to clear the rough air close to the ground.
With practice, the self-launch is easy to achieve.
Pay out just enough line to have the kite clear of the ground when holding the handle high and, as the wind fills it out to its proper shape, then lifts, allow the line to unwind from the handle (or reel if you have one).
Each time the line is paid out, the kite will begin to sink as its airspeed is decreased, so only release the line in stages and allow the kite to climb in these steps until you have the final height you want.
2-line Diamonds
There is one kind of kite that does not respond to paying-out the line(s) and that is the basic two-line stunter.
Not to be confused with the swept-wing Delta stunters, the 2-line Diamonds, known generically as Peter Powell types, although not always the size or the quality of Peter's long serving originals, are popular first kites.
They are tolerant in their bridle adjustment (as distinct from the sophisticated 110 degree, swept-delta steerables to be found in Chapter Eight), and the newcomer is unlikely ever to require to alter the settings of the rings on the  bridle legs.
However, this doesn't mean that they are easy to operate!
A common fault is improper assembly.
The front bridle legs have to pass over the cross-spar and be free to run in a straight line from the leading edge to the ring.
The cross-spar has to be above the front face, and the spine below the rear face of the Powell kite when it is laying face up.
The lines must be of equal length, and fully paid-out before launch.
Most important is the  ‘hands together’ technique for those vital first moments of flight.
These are but a few of the self-created problems we've seen around the festivals.
Any of these difficulties can be avoided by a few patient moments of study with the clear and concise instructions that come with the Diamond stunters.
Once airborne, the technique of control comes just as easily as riding the proverbial bicycle…until that is, you fall off!
Hands together, equal lines, and the Diamond is just another kite.
Spread the arms, pull one hand then the other and you'll soon acquire the skill of mastering loops, low — level skimming the surface, or rapid pull-outs from vertical dives.
Peter Powell has flown trains of his kites from a fast launch up the Thames, from a rear-facing pillion seat on a speeding motorcycle, from the sunroof of a car, into the sea and out again, and has demonstrated these stunts all over the world; but do not expect to become a Peter Powell Mk.2 overnight!
What next?
So far we've only touched the basics and, although it's essential in our view to provide this introduction to kite flying and simple DIY designs, now it is time to get into more advanced material for the modern kite.
There is. however.
one critical detail to observe, no matter whether we are raw novice, or long experienced and that is safety Always remember that your lines can conduct electricity, cut skin, trip passers-by, or generally cause mayhem with grass mower blades.
The kite itself can scratch cars, hurt people, and scare horses — so be careful out there; remember…safe flying is no accident 
Who better to teach than Don Dunford, originator of so many designs for steerable kites.
Making your own
Now that we have a little experience in the joys of simple kite flying, it's time to look deeper into the whole subject and to understand more about those ‘Modern Materials’ which have emerged since the 1970s.
Plastic
Man-made fibres and plastic sheeting have long since replaced the porous cambric or fine cotton linen which had been the standard material for sails over seven decades.
In common use for so many domestic purposes,polythene has become part of everyday life.
As well as the inescapable carrier bag, and the rubbish bin liner, either of which can provide large enough pieces for a kite sail, the material is available by the metre or on the roll.
Sold by specialists for packaging or horticulture, the most convenient is the 250 gauge which comes 2 metres wide.
Rolls are 150 metres long — enough for a lifetime — so it is easier to order by the metre.
Being inexpensive, and lightweight, easily seamed and joined by using all-weather adhesive tape, polythene sheeting is fine for group projects where quick results are sought, and longevity is unimportant.
Snags?
As Henry Ford said, you can only have it in black, or in this case, with one option — clear.
So, as far as colour is concerned, sheet polythene is decidedly neutral!
Moreover, polythene will not accept most paints, and, if you want to colour a large area, then you'll have to experiment with whatever plastic paints the local art store can offer.
This is one subject on which we cannot give a firm recommendation.
250g is 63 microns thick, and this stock gauge can be found through mail order suppliers, or at specialist plastics supply houses in larger cities.
The easy way out is to buy a pack of' Bin Bags'.
These refuse sacks come in various gauges, the most suitable being 225g.
Standard size is 16 x 25 x 39in, which is 40 x 63 x100cm, quite enough for a largish kite, and costing only a few pennies.
Although in itself durable, polythene sheet could hardly be regarded as pleasing in the long term, except where it has been colour printed on commercial kites.
Most of the lower-priced Malay, Snake and Delta shapes, as well as the economic 2-line stunters, come with highly-decorated, printed sails that have proved the utility of this material; but, for the home builder, the limitations will now be obvious.
Paper
One material that will accept paints, especially water-based acrylic and polyvinyl acetates, is Tyvek This extraordinarily strong paper-like sheeting is  known as a Spunbonded Olefin.
It comes in several types, as a paper or fabric substitute.
The one in which we are interested is the Type 10 paper which is a white, rather stiff but extremely smooth surfaced bonding of fibres.
Of many practical uses, the most common is that for indestructible envelopes.
Its strength and abrasion resistance have made it ideal for shoe cleaning cloths, as provided by most hotel chains.
Although we have found that white wood glue (Poly Vinyl Acetate) or Aliphatic Resin will hold a seamed joint or hem in Tyvek, the real advantage of the material is its acceptance of sewing.
With synthetic thread, polyester for example, and rather long stitches at 4 to the inch or 6mm each, Tyvek sheet can be treated as a fabric in the sewing machine.
Any increase in the pitch of the stitches will run the risk of setting up a perforated run if that seam is subjected to stress.
Since Tyvek is so impervious as to be virtually waterproof and indestructible, the strength of seams becomes very important if the kite is large and to be flown in high –A, in–
Snags?
Availability is one.
Tyvek is not easy to locate.
Paper stores are the most likely source for small quantities.
As it is supplied in bulk for re-processing in many industrial applications, you may be fortunate to have a local factory or printing establishment with offcuts to spare.
Another problem is its stiffness.
Unlike a true fabric, Tyvek sheet tends to follow straight lines and does not billow, or curve under wind pressure.
As long as this is respected, the rigidity can be used to good purpose.
So Tyvek is better for kites that have outline frames and do not require flapping edges, as say, for a bird kite where unsupported edges are a feature.
A –rain of plastic sailed stunters, with tubular tails trailing to follow the flight path, as that great showman Peter Powell steers them from the sunroof of a moving car.
The scene at Truro when winds fell to zero and Peter decided to create his own airspeed.
Below: Ripstop nylon samples from Carrington Novare and Bainbridge as supplied to kite manufacturers for selection of colour and weight of spinnaker cloth.
Right: Checking the thickness of Ripstop nylon in microns.
Fabric
This leads us to the most widely adopted material for kite sails,Ripstop Nylon 
Developed for spinnaker sails, where tear resistance is critical and the ability to form into an aerodynamic shape is of greatest importance for efficiency, ripstop has become an ideal fabric for all types of kite.
It gets its name from the strengthening threads which run across warp and weft to create small squares in the otherwise close-woven nylon.
So a tear will be arrested, holes limited, and the fabric made infinitely constant in its run off the loom.
We see it in brilliant colours which flow through the whole spectrum, and extend to dayglo; but it starts life in a natural tone, initially floppy until the grippers or stenters pierce the outer edges to stretch it flat as it is heat treated, and dyed.
A polyurethane coating then seals the pores, usually making the surfaces slick and shiny, one more than the other.
At around 50 threads per centimetre (127 per in), it takes a powerful magnifying glass to distinguish the equal warp and weft; but look if you can, and it will give you a better appreciation of the quality of ripstop nylon.
It comes in 92,104, and 137cm (36,41 and 54in) widths as standard at many kite supply shops, and at variable prices.
This is due to offers of ‘seconds’ by specialist brokers.
Such faults as can be detected are of little consequence to the average kite-maker.
Rolls are normally 100 metres and, if in this length the coating blotches, or a ‘squeegee’ effect appears in the dyed colour, or perhaps the ‘picks’form lumpy doubled threads in the weft, then the run has to be sold off on a shorter roll.
The fluorescent colours are susceptible to a variation, hence the occasional arrival of gaudy pink or orange at never-to-be-repeated prices — or, for that matter, repeated availability!
These colours are, in any case, the first to be affected by strong sunlight.
They do not have the resistance to UV effect as found in the stock red, yellow, green, blue or yes, of course, black.
Spinnaker ripstop must not be confused with its near relative,Balloon ripstop which has a stretchy feeling to its touch, comes on 137cm (54in) rolls and does not crease.
Ideal for the ram-air inflatable ‘Soft’ kites which depend on flexibility of the surface  and absolute solidity of the non-porous sail material, it has another great advantage.
This is its acceptance of a paint decoration without risk of ‘show-through’.
Spinnaker nylon is difficult to paint without having smudges where the colour runs through to the under surface.
With the balloon ripstop, one can hold fine lines, and use the colours edge to edge without having to worry about spoiling the decoration with inter-mixing or any blurs.
However, its softness and crease resistance do not make it suitable for kites where the sail is stretched, as on a typical aerobatic type.
Use balloon ripstop on a 110-degree narrow Delta steerable kite, and you will soon discover why the spinnaker nylon is best.
In cases like this, one cannot run the risk of having one side of the kite sail stretch more than the other.
It's bad enough trying to fly with unequal line lengths; having an asymmetric kite can be most frustrating!
Remember that your balloon ripstop was probably made for the parascending sport, and you' ll appreciate why it is so soft and at times stretchy.
Having stated that, the wide roll width, dense colour and crease resistance makes balloon ripstop superior for those artform kites which have become spectacular attractions at all major kite meetings.
These highly specialised ‘Sky Pictures’ as we describe them in Chapter Four, are strictly ‘one-off’types, reflecting the artistic skills of the maker.
In summary, the most likely material you will use for the kite sail is spinnaker ripstop of 43gm/sq. metre or 65gm/sq. metre grade (1.12 or 1.5oz/sq.yd), 65 or 100 microns thick.
It will have been made for the sailcloth trade but, due to some minor fault in manufacture, was released to the kite trade instead, and at an economic advantage.
These faults are rarely detectable so, in turn, the individual kite-maker benefits through being able to purchase quality material in small quantities from the kite shop.
(Lighter fabric weights are quoted in the USA, but they are based on uncoated fabric, e.g. 1/2 or 3/4 oz/yd.)
Statistics on kite manufacturing volumes are not available anywhere.
All we can do is to report observations at national and international meetings where the keenest, most dedicated enthusiasts gather.
We would be quite safe in stating that over 90% of these kite flyers are using ripstop nylon of either type for their kite sails.
With that level of recommendation, there really is no  better option.
However, we have to remind ourselves that we are using a byproduct of other wind sports, and hope that, like kite flying, they too prosper!
Spars, spreaders and stand-offs
The framework of a kite is made of rigid or semi-rigid spars.
Unfortunately for the newcomer, the parts are given a variety of names which frequently creates confusion, so we had better start by clarifying the variations.
Taking a standard Diamond or Malay shape which is formed by two spars at 90 degrees to each other, the ‘spars’ are known variously as ‘sticks’or, the ‘spine’and the ‘spreader’, or the ‘keel’and the ‘cross-spar’.
Similarly, the spars in a Delta can be called the ‘spine’ and the ‘leading edges’.
In a Box kite, the four main spars are some-times called ‘longerons’.
Where a spar has to be flexible, and is bent by a tensioning line, it is often known as a ‘bow’, or ‘bender’.
Aerobatic kites have vertical spars to tension the sail into its shape, and these are known as ‘stand-offs’, or ‘whiskers’, or ‘sail stretchers’.
Confusing isn't it?
Common usage has sifted these terms and left us with the most expressive.
So for our purpose we will refer to all the frame components collectively as spars, and define their applications by calling them as follows:spine, cross-spar, leading edge (I.e), and stand-offs assuming that such terms will be self explanatory.
Wooden dowel has been used for kite spars for as long as we can recall.
It replaced square and rectangular section spar material sometime in the 1930s, and the only changes that have arisen are in the timber used and the sizes.
Pine, Ramin and Obeche are the most common dowels.
Beech is comparatively rare nowadays, and in any case does not match the strength/ weight ratio of Ramin or Obeche.
Sizes are imprecise, as one might suppose any material would be if drawn through a hole with a cutting edge!
In theory at least, the diameters range from 5 to 15mm (0.2 to 0.6in) and lengths are around 2 metres (78 in) which is enough for any kite spar.
When choosing dowel at any place other than a kite store which would have selected its stock, rotate the spar between thumb and forefinger of one hand while resting the dowel in the other hand and check that the spar is straight.
When satisfied, look along the whole length and ensure that the wood grain does not run off the true length.
Pine is weak this way, while the other timbers tend to have straighter grain.
If undecided on the diameter you need, remember that tube joiners will be required somewhere or other and the fit will have to be a good one.
This usually influences your choice.
Light alloy tubing also has its place in kite-making.
Outmoded by the plastics for smaller kites, it comes into its own for the big stuff as, for example, replica Cody man lifters, or the large Baden-Powell ‘Levitor’ where, in turn, it replaces the bamboo spars in the original pioneer designs.
But we are diverting from our purpose — on to the modern!
Glass Reinforced Plastic otherwise known as GRP, or Glass Fibre, is available in solid rod, or as tubes over a broad range of sizes.
Made from glass fibre rovings and polyester resin, it is normal for the rod to be white.
However, by use of dye in the resin, manufacturers can produce pink, green or blue rods for quick identification in the assembly of commercial kites.
No less than 20 different diameter rods, from 1.5mm (1/16in) up to 312.8mm (11/4 in), are listed by the largest manufacturer in the UK, R.B.J. Reinforced Plastics Ltd.
A similarly wide range of 23 sizes, from 0.86mm (1/32in) up to 38mm (11/2 in), is made by Pultrex who were first on the kite scene, and who supplied many of the pioneer manufacturers of aerobatic kites with their white GRP rods.
This company subsequently made and sold pultruding machines to many other plastics specialists, both in the UK and overseas.
So what, you may well ask,is pultruding?
It's a word you are unlikely to find in the dictionary but, if you think of it as the opposite to ‘extrude’, meaning to thrust or push out, then the term becomes more understandable.
Left: Typical of the rigid frame using glass fibre tubing on the earlier steerable deltas is seen on this example.
Below: The range of glass fibre tubing, in this case moulded in various colours.
The Vlieger Op range from Holland uses colour to identify sizes from 5.85mm in blue to 21.8mm in orange, many at constant wall thickness and at 2mm stages so that they are able to fit inside each other.
How the GRP rods are made
The raw material, glass fibre, is drawn from bobbins held at one end of the long pultrusion machine.
There will be five or so such bobbins for each rod, and the pretensioned rovings are directed through guides down into a bath of polyester resin in much the same way as any glass fibre is prepared for setting into its shape by wetting the fibres with resin/hardener mix.
In continuous motion, the now-wetted rovings have lost their natural glass colour and have been thoroughly saturated with the resin, This can be dyed, but is normally white.
As they move along the machine from the bath of resin, all the rovings are pulled together, and they disappear into a block of metal through a single hole which determines the final diameter.
The block is a machined die, electrically heated to 150 degrees centigrade, so that, by the time the glass fibre emerges rather like minced meat from the kitchen grinder, it has already adopted the appearance of the final product.
Still hot, and completing its thermosetting process, the GRP rod continues on its way along the length of the machine in the company of another 24 or so rods which have passed through a parallel course.
The actual number in the batch will vary, but this is a typical process for the popular 3mm size.
All the rods are being pulled by a tension of over 1000kg (about one ton) by means of a moving pressure pad.
This makes contact with the batch of rods, then draws the cooling product along at predetermined speed for about 5m(16ft) before–relaxing the pressure, lifting off, and allowing the machine operator to cut the batch free.
Meanwhile, a second pressure pad has already taken up the tension for the next length of rods.
The whole process is continuous, and the total run will amount to kilometres.
In fact, for some industrial purposes, the rods are reeled on large diameter drums and can be made automatically without supervision.
(A break in mid-run has been known to fill a factory with thrashing plastic like a demented clockspring which has disengaged from its retainer!)
All of this sounds easy.
However, it is a far from simple manufacturing system and depends on the components, temperature, speed and the resin for ultimate quality.
The GRP rod has its best application for kites in the range of diameters from 1.5mm to 10mm (1/16 to 3/8in nominal).
Beyond that, the weight of solid GRP rod, up to 40% of which is resin, is too heavy for our use, and the tube becomes a better proposition.
Tubes
Our description of rod manufacture also stands for the tubes, except that there is a central bullet in the die to form the ultimate wall thickness.
Tube sizes range from 5.5mm up to 22mm (7/32 to 7/8in) for practical use in kites.
Many other sizes are made for an enormous range of industrial uses, but flexibility limits their application for kite spars, and in many cases the wooden dowel is superior.
Single-line kites can tolerate, even use to advantage, the flex of GRP rod  and tube.
Sold in lengths up to 2.5metres (8.2ft), it enables the kite-maker to construct large Delta or similar designs where spar length would otherwise call for joiners.
Steerable or aerobatic kites require a rigid frame for top performance, and a first solution to the problem of obtaining a good stiffness factor against weight was to turn to another outdoor sport, archery.
Carbon fibre
Arrow shafts have for years been made to a very high standard, with spiral-wrapped glass filaments and with aligned fibre composites (AFC) using high modulus carbon.
They are straight, consistent in diameter and have excellent rigidity to meet the demands of the sport.
So they also met the specifications for aerobatic kites.
There were, however, some limitations.
Lengths varied according to source from 76 to 86cm (30 to 34in).
In diameter, the standard is 5.5mm (7/32, or 0.22 in).
Quality, quite naturally, was very good and matched by the high cost, but not really excessive for the job of making stunt kites perform to their best.
For many spines and cross-spars, the stock arrow lengths are adequate.
Leading edges, the critical component for aerobatic kite stability, call for 125cm to 175cm (50 to 69in), preferably in one length to avoid joiners.
So, while a thicker-walled metal joiner sleeve was used, kite manufacturers sought a supply of longer stock from the pultrusion companies.
As a result, kite-makers have carbon tube in lengths of 5 metres from the pultruders, which is then cut as required for commercial designs, or halved to 2.5m (98in) for easier handling by the individual enthusiast.
Top to Bottom: A range of tubes by Pultrex, the ‘Pullwound’ type showing an inner layer; glass fibre tube and rod showing comparatively thicker wall in the tubing, accounting for greater weight; a mix of unidirectional carbon fibre tubes of the most popular type.
The same method of pultrusion as we have described for the GRP rod and tube is applied to carbon.
Instead of glass rovings, the carbon tows are mounted on reels at the start of the process, and these are drawn through vinylester resin which has better wetting characteristics for the carbon.
The tows then form the tube around a bullet or mandrel in the heated die, and the result is a tube of greater strength than the equivalent in steel!
With the carbon fibres running unidirectional end to end, this tube is crushable under pressure but not of any order likely to arise in kiting.
While the arrow diameter of 5.5mm remains a first choice, since so many long established and successful aerobatic kites have been designed around it, two larger sizes were introduced in the same unidirectional carbon tubing.
These are 6.35mm (1/4in) and 8mm (5/16in) and many of the larger narrow Delta designs have taken advantage of the additional strength offered by such sizes in the 2.5metre lengths.
Pultruded tubes with unidirectional fibres have two recognition factors.
A slight ridge can be felt along the length of the otherwise very smooth surface and, much more important, the wall of the tube tends to be thicker than with other production methods.
It is often in ratio with the outside diameter, ranging from 1.2mm to 1.65mm wall thickness.
For most applications, this is of low significance, but there is a more involved method of making the tube which brings the wall to a constant 1mm over the same variation of outside diameters, from 6.35 through 7,7.5 and 8mm.
This is pullwinding as developed by Pultrex Ltd., and the result is a sandwich cross-section of unidirectional inner and outer fibres, with helical windings, clockwise and anti-clockwise between.
Pullwound tubes can be made in glass or carbon fibre, have a high crush strength, and come in any of five colours in glass/polyester.
As with the pultruded tubes, the Pultrex Pullwound is made in adequate lengths, cut off as ordered by their trade customers.
The 8mm has best strength/weight advantage and the 7.5mm is ideal for use as joining ferrules with its 5.5mm inside diameter to accept other tubes, including arrow shafts.
Shafts
Back to the beginning, and the archery shafts which led us into carbon tubes and the generation of so many new designs for steerable aerobatic kites.
While 5.5mm is the most widely adopted diameter for arrows, it is by no means the only thickness.
Arrows come as slender as 4mm and as stout as 8.5mm in many makes.
They range from the spiral wound glass fibre/epoxy type which, being black, are sometimes confused with the carbon shafts.
More often, the carbon types have identifications, such as AFC 0.22in (USA) or Beman (France).
Most easily identified are the Easton carbon/aluminium shafts with the unidirectional carbon fibres bonded to thin wall aluminium tube.
These are claimed to be fatigue-resistant to cope with the high amplitude vibrations that are generated by fast stunters.
Easton also produce ECS tube, an all-carbon shaft with the fibres spirally wound in opposite directions.
The choice will inevitably vary as time progresses and wherever demand exists.
Long lengths are difficult to mail or send by carrier, so the kite-maker with a kite shop within reasonable travelling distance is better off.
But, for the lone hand, those arrow shafts can be mailed by any supplier for a small supplement to cover packing.
Stand-offs
We mentioned rod largely in connection with kite frames.
It has another important use as a support for the sail, either in the decorative sense to form shapes in profile, or more commonly to give depth to the sail for aerodynamic reasons.
Hence the term to –stand-off– or lift the sail away from the plane of the framework on the steerable extended Delta designs.
These stand-offs apply tension, so they have to be strong.
They fit into endcaps attached to the frame and the sail in order to force the sail into its ‘Rogallo’ cones.
In other words, the sail rises from the spine and its trailing edge descends at the tips.
Rob Brasington uses four ‘stand-off’ struts on the Jester, this offers a flat topped cone in the sail.
The frame connection is usually on the rear cross-spar, and the endcap on the sail will be in-line but, depending on the shape of the sail, the stand-off will be either rigid and straight or flexible and curved when in position.
We explain this variation to emphasise the purpose of the stand-offs.
They change the angle of attack from acute within the central delta, to near neutral over the outer triangular sail panel.
Where additional stand-offs are used, either on the front cross-spar to vary the angle, or on the rear cross-spar to extend the Rogallo cone, the tension is just as important.
Where the sail extends behind the cross-spar, it may be necessary to use an over-length and curved stand off in GRP.
When fitted, the glass fibre rod will compress into a curve, forcing the sail both backwards and upwards from the cross-spar.
They can be 2 or 3mm (5/64 or 1 /8in).
If the sail edge is overhead, or nearly overhead, the cross-spar at the point where the stand-off is fitted, then a carbon rod should be used.
This can be thinner, down to 1.5mm (1/16in), so reducing drag.
A further use of carbon rod is for sail battens to control flutter, or to improve sail shape.
In each case, it has to go into a sail pocket and, to avoid wear through abrasion, the rod should have cappings or a Dacron polyester tape reinforcement at each end, or the fabric will soon become pierced.
Putting it together
Plastics come to the aid of the kite-maker when it comes to assembly of the frame.
The marketplace offers a plethora of fittings that have been created for commercial kites and subsequently reach the accessory trays.
They range from the basic spar endcaps we have already mentioned to dihedral joints, three and four way plug-in joiners, sail-clips and, for the carbon tubes, the arrow nocks and tube sleeves for joining.
As well as archery, two other sports — camping and fishing — offer useful bits and pieces to aid assembly.
Grommets and sprays
Tent or ground-sheet screw-through fixings with a plug-on cap can be adapted for holding a spar, and similar screw-fixed grommets have their application on large ram-air kites for bridle attachments.
Look around any good camping emporium and you'll find many worthwhile things to buy for kiting, not least the silicone protective spray-can to revive worn or weather beaten ripstop; or one of those hemispherical shelters to have on the field as a base in which to store your gear.
The nylon material and GRP tube  ‘poles’ will be familiar, so the shelter will not be out of place in the kite bag.
In spite of having a range of injected plastic mouldings, there are always times when there just isn't anything for the size of a spar, the angle of fit, or sufficiently shock-absorbing to accept a crash, or to permit a kite to be folded.
Fittings by Cochrane are sold as accessories and used by other kite manufacturers.
This small sample shows end caps, stand-off caps, clips and grommets.
Plastic tube joints
Transparent fuel pipe, as used on motorcycles and many cars, is easily obtained, economic and fulfils a variety of purposes as a spar joiner.
It comes plain or braid-reinforced with an internal diameter that is a tight fit on 5.5mm (0.22in) carbon shafts.
Similar pipe in black neoprene, polyethylene or rubber can be adapted; in fact, on a carbon frame the neoprene looks all the more professional.
All these pipes will cut with a sharp modelling knife, they can be drilled with care, or punched with a piece of tube that has been sharpened to act as a hole cutter.
Pat has sketched the jig that ought to be used when punching holes.
Note that you can ‘work’ the cutter to pierce only one side of the plastic tube by rotating the cutter.
A wrap of plastic tape is advised to protect the hands while cutting with a screwing action.
It's a good tip to cut some thick ‘washers’ from the same plastic tube material.
These are spaced on the spars to act as bridle stops, so that the bridle connection on, say, a leading edge is retained and the tendency to slip is controlled.
If the washers are sliced on one side at an angle, they are even better for retention of a cross-spar joint.
Study the professionally-made aerobatic kites and you'll find innumerable inspirations for the use of plastic tube joiners.
Pockets and patches
We've only one area of kite assembly left, and that is the means of holding the frame of spars to the sail.
Dacron polyester tape is sold in 25, 50 and 75mm widths, usually in black only.
It is the toughest material you can use for spar pockets, and the heavy sailmakers' webbing, or seatbelt Dacron makes perfect head or nose reinforcements for the stunters.
Always anticipate the abrasive capacity of metal tube, GRP or carbon spars within the pockets at their ends.
Always round off, or preferably cap, the spars with a soft plastic fitting.
Even so, a sudden ‘arrival’ on terra firma will inevitably enable that irritating spar to find a weak point and poke through a hole in the fabric.
For such cases a field repair is soon effected with adhesive-backed sail repair tape, usually 50mm wide and in a heavyweight ripstop that might even be located in a matching colour!
Beware of fibres
One last word on cutting those GRP or carbon rods and tubes.
A small ‘Eclipse’ hacksaw, or a fibre disc in a high-speed motorised modelling tool, will go through it like a knife in butter.
A 3-cornered file is best for small diameters,but beware the fibre dust or shavings!
There are few worse irritants for eyes and hand cuts.
Be careful when cutting fibre!
Sailmaking
We've reached the point of no return!
The ripstop nylon has to be cut and sewn if we are going to reach our goal and have a kite to fly.
Dressmaking and sewing machines are totally foreign to many would-be kite flyers.
Yet, once the bug has bitten, it is amazing how so many home-brewed designs appear, and most of them with excellent stitching in all its variations.
Patterns
First we have to know what we want to make.
Then comes the fun of making the pattern — and do make sure that the dimensions you are going to work to are for the full pattern and not the kite frame shape.
There's a real difference!
Large areas of paper will be required.
Brown parcel paper, the back of wallpaper left over from that last bout of home decorating, or drafting paper would be ideal.
At a pinch, use newsprint: but it will not help you to design a fancy project, nor will it help if the print rubs off onto your light coloured nylon when the ‘plan’ is used as a cutting pattern.
If the paper will not cover the area, then join sheets with masking tape or similar, so that it matches the size of the kite.
Then draw out the kite full-size, marking on the spar positions and planning where the pockets will be needed and the reinforcements.
Depending on the type of kite, you'll now have to plan how the fabric is arranged to fit the shape.
We're being rather glib here.
You may be making a parafoil, or an inflatable animal shape, in which case the paper pattern will be more than just a flat plan.
For basic shapes though, and it is better always to start off at that level, the paper pattern is the right approach.
Bias
Check for colour arrangement, select the fabric and then lay the nylon panels over the plan using the bias and ensuring that the ripstop squares are symmetrical on each half of the kite.
Bias in the fabric allows ripstop to stretch more along the diagonals of the square patterns made by the slightly heavier threads.
So it pays to arrange the squares at right angles to the leading edges or at right angles to the spine.
In other words,do not lay the nylon at random 
With experience you will learn how to use bias to best advantage in allowing the nylon to ‘billow’ with a curvature that helps to create an aerofoil.
Many professional stunters use strips of nylon or panels with the ripstop at different angles to achieve a curve upwards from the leading edge pocket.
In such  cases, all variations are symmetrical either side of the spine, and the whole plan has to be worked out very carefully before any nylon is cut.
An example of good sewing, the single row of stitches becomes a double row on the topside in a Flat Fell seam.
Now to the cutting.
If you want to make more than one kite then now is the time to transfer panel templates from the full-size plan.
Card, plywood, sheet-metal or compressed hardboard are used in turn by all kite manufacturers but, for the independent enthusiast, another piece of stiffish paper will suffice.
The panel pattern template is wanted primarily to enable you to mark the ripstop.
If you feel able to do the same directly from the original plan, then by all means do so: but we're advising a reversible template so that each kite half is the same — and there's no guarantee that the first drawing will achieve that!
With a soft lead pencil, chalk, or dressmaker's marking wheel — but not marker-pen or wax crayon — transfer the panel shape to your ripstop.
Don't cut yet!
If you have the space, tape the ripstop to a flat surface first so that it is flat before the template is applied.
Pockets and hems
Having marked the ripstop, stop to work out how much extra you will need to allow for the leading edge pocket, or any hems, either on unsupported edges or where joining to another panel.
As a general guide, you will need 12 to 20mm (1/2 to 3/ 4in) for a hem or seam, much more for a pocket.
Think in advance about using Dacron tape for a spar pocket, and how it will fit into the plan of the kite, taking the ripstop into the pocket, not outside!
Cutting the patterns
As a man-made fibre, ripstop can benefit from a hot cutter that will seal the edges.
Professionals in sailmaking use a tool that was specially designed for this task.
A hobbyist's substitute would be a 25watt soldering iron with a shaped bit, or a wood burning tool.
Some modelling shops can offer a Pyrograph, designed to reshape moulded polystyrene figures, that operates via a transformer.
In all cases, the tip of the tool must be reshaped like a screwdriver blade, but with the edges rounded.
It isn't at all necessary to use a hot cutter.
We know of one prolific kite-maker, whose kites are marketed everywhere, who uses no more than a sharp knife of the ‘snap-off’ type to cut dozens of panels in a laminated pack around a metal template.
If using scissors, a straight run is best cut by opening the blades a little then drawing the fabric through.
Check with some scraps for practice first!
Around  curves, use small cuts with the tips of the scissors.
Because it is ripstop, and fraying is therefore limited, pinking shears would only be decorative and not at all necessary.
Below: A kite's trailing edge showing the double row of Flat Fell seam stitches plus reinforcements in Dacron for the spine end and the cross-spar support.
Right: An industrial Singer machine, the end opened to reveal the run of thread.
The most satisfactory cutting method for one-off home-built kites is to use a sharp modelling knife or ‘roller-cutter’ against a straight edge on ripstop that is secured to a firm base by tapes.
A half sheet of hard-board from your DIY store can be used over and over as a base, but it does blunt the blade.
A graphic artists' cutting board will cost a lot for the large size required so, unless it is part of your daily function, forget it.
The simplest substitute is corrugated cardboard.
You can only use this once!
Whatever you use, try to retain the template, and don't cut it along with the ripstop.
It is bound to be needed again.
So sew
There are so many machines, and so many good books, to deal with the subject that it would be foolhardy to attempt any detailed sewing instructions here.
But there are sound basic tips to observe where the slippery ripstop is concerned.
It's no good to produce neatly cut panels then spoil them with distorted sewing, so the very first concern must be to understand the adjustments for thread tension.
As the material is synthetic, use a matching thread — 50 denier is ideal and it comes in many colours, although strangely very few kite-makers seem to want other than black.
Cotton thread can produce a pucker in the sewing with shrinkage.
Use a polyester thread.
If in doubt see if it melts with heat, then you are sure you have the right stuff.
The sewing needle is next.
Singer size 14 (90 in continental sizes) is a good general purpose needle but, if you want one finer, then use a 10 (70) or a 12 (80) and, for heavier material an 18 (110) needle size.
You can also use a twin needle on most domestic machines.
This clever device produces a parallel double row on one side and a single row of zigzag stitches on the other.
It makes a stronger seam of two panels and is a trademark of some of the best sewn, professionally-made kites.
A general rule is to use a higher number thread with a lower number needle so, for a 70 needle use 80 denier thread, and for a 110 needle use a 40 thread.
The standard thread used in the UK industry is Polyfil 120.
The needle plate should be matched to the needle.
If the hole in the plate is much larger than the needle shaft, then the needle will tend to push some of the fabric down the hole with it.
The result is a variation in stitch formation.
Thread tension is the key to lockstitching.
The machine manual should go into detail on this but Pat's sketch shows the two possibilities for going wrong, and explains the correct way with notes on adjustment for a typical domestic machine.
Top (needle) thread and bottom (bobbin) threads have to meet in the middle of the materials being sewn.
Some understanding of the internal workings might help here, and we bring in John Clarke whose working life has involved all forms of sewing.
As a well-known London character with a penchant for miniature kites, and a lecturer on sewing standards, his advice supplements what one finds in the manufacturers' manuals.
The underthread for the lockstitch is provided by the bobbin, and the needle thread has to perform a loop to go around the bobbin which is held in a bobbin case under a slide plate.
The speed at which the loop is formed is such that the bobbin is suspended, so eliminating any need for lubrication despite the continuous rotation of the bobbin carrier.
To make a stitch 1/8in (3mm) long, the needle thread has to be drawn from the top spool, through the guides and top tension discs to the eye of the needle.
It is caught by a hook on the bobbin case carrier at a point just above the eye of the needle when on its upward stroke.
Take a moment now to look at the needle.
This remarkable tool, which costs so little, is fashioned with several features other than its point and the flat which locates it in the needle bar.
Hold it to the light, with the eye pointing up and down, and you should observe that the thickness of the shaft is scalloped away by 50% just above the eye on the rear face.
This is called the ‘scarf’.
The purpose of this relief is to permit the bobbin case hook to pass the needle without touching it.
The loop is now formed around the bobbin case, and the thread drawn back through the needle by the take-up lever usually found on the front of the machine.
This forwards and backwards movement of 4in (102mm) of thread occurs no less than 32 times if the stitches are 1/8in (3mm)!
Additionally, the needle has a long groove in its front face.
This is to allow for dispersal of heat — yes, heat!
Sewing imposes very severe conditions for the threads.
In a machine operating at 6000 stitches per minute, the needle thread has to accelerate to a speed close to 100 mph (160kph), stop, and accelerate backwards to the same speed, and all at a cycle rate of up to 100 times per second!
This groove in the needle both guides the thread and, provided it is not too thick, protects it from touching the fabric.
It also has the virtue of dispersing heat from the needle which would otherwise melt the nylon or polyester.
At 400 stitches per minute without thread, a needle can reach 260 degrees centigrade!
This is another  reason why many dressmakers sew through a paper strip on the top surface.
Just feel the heat in the thread when you next do some sewing.
You will be surprised to discover just how hard those needles work.
(Of course, not all of us can, or need to, sew at such a high speed, John!)
Some kite-makers stick edges together for location when sewing.
In such cases use a Blukold needle with phosphated surfaces to avoid gumming up.
A better plan is to use softened soap or ‘balance notches’ every 4in (10m).
This is a term for small vee cuts through both pieces of fabric on the outer edge.
As the fabric is fed through the machine foot, use hands to hold these location notches together.
This method is used throughout industry.
Another method is to pin the seam, especially on a straight run.
The pins must be at right angles to the presser foot, and should be removed before they come into contact with the feed.
Remove the pins as they approach the needle.
When turning a corner always do so with the needle down.
Holding the ripstop at the rear as well as the front of the presser foot helps to keep any location keys together.
If edge stitching, always use a guide made up of layers of coloured tape stuck to the machine base.
Avoid looking at the needle — watch the fabric running along the guide.
It is restful to sit at an angle so that the right arm is in a straight line with the needle and at right angles to the machine so that the wrist is also straight.
Use of the ball-ended or ‘yellow band’ needles is not generally advised.
They can split on impact with the high twist yarns of ripstop nylon, and are really intended for sewing knitting fabrics where the ball forces the yarn apart, stretching and borrowing yarn from adjacent loops in the fabric without cutting through as with the normal pointed needle.
These wise tips come from John Clarke, and Pat's sketches of ideas from Hugh Andrew should help you appreciate the wonders of sewing.
The subject is limitless — we have not touched on applique, edge bindings, attachments for folding hems or the complexity of parafoil sewing.
These are separate topics in their own right, just as sewing itself is a hobby that has its own literature which we commend if you wish to learn more.
Recommended hand positions for accurate sewing as the fabric is fed through the machine.
Flying Lines, bridles, knots and reels
Whatever the design of kite, the one common feature is the line by which it is flown and controlled.
Yet so very often, it is the least considered item when kite flyers shop for new materials.
Many a kite has been lost out to sea from a beach site, or into treetops from the local park, as the result of an over stressed and broken line.
Cheap line is a false economy.
After all, if this hobby is to become a regular habit, maybe bordering on obsession, then the flyer will have invested in good quality reels.
What's the point of loading the reel with an unbranded twist that ‘looked right’, when you can be sure that at some time or other the varying tensions on this material are going to produce lively snarls and inevitably weaken it, so that a line break happens just when you least want it.
Types of line
Kite line can be in any of three forms — Monofilament, Twist or Braid.
These terms are best understood by visualising the monofilament as a solid, circular section flexible rod, while twist is a combination of fine threads, wound together as found in a Hawser.
Braid is similar, except that the threads are interwoven or plaited so that they are unable to unwind or separate.
Line materials
All three of these types of line are obtainable in the variety of man-made synthetic materials available to kite flyers.
These are nylon, polyester,(including Dacron by DuPont), polyethylene (including Spectra by Allied Signal Inc. and Dyneema by DSM), and Aramid (Kevlar, DuPont trade name) and polypropylene.
Other materials, made from natural fibres such as cotton, hemp, flax, and even silk, have played their part in the past, and that is the operative term, for, apart from the traditional and ceremonial kites where authenticity is upheld to the highest degree, such materials are no longer good enough for the modern kite.
Choosing the line
Faced with a rack of up to twenty different spools in the kite shop, you must first consider the three main parameters which govern the suitability of the line.
These values are: tenacity, elasticity and cross-section.
In other, perhaps better understood, terms — strength, stretch and drag.
The second consideration is the purpose to which the line will be applied.
This could range from a small lightweight kite to fly on a single line, through to a four-line aerobatic kite.
Size of the kite is most important.
In general terms, the greater the area of the sail, the higher the tension on the line.
So we have to respect the quoted ‘Breaking Strain'.
This will be stated on the product.
Trust it to 50% of the figure and, as a rough guide, work to 15kg per square metre of sail, or 281b/square yard, and you should be safe…except for accidental line cuts and gust loads, of which more later.
Breaking strains are established by the Quality Control departments of the line manufacturers.
Rigid standards are set by National Standards Institutions and expensive equipment such as the Instrom pneumatic tensionmeter is used to check random samples during manufacture.
However, this is done in the ideal conditions of the laboratory.
Outdoors, on all kinds of surfaces where the lines can be abraded as they are dragged, in a range of temperatures and exposed to ultra-violet rays, and often made wet from dew in the grass, all the lab tests become suspect.
Each of these hazards can reduce the tensile strength by several percent.
Hence the advisability of ‘playing safe’ and allowing a 50% margin on the quoted strain — and we haven't yet mentioned the weakening factor of the knots!
Elasticity
Monofilament is used for fishing.
It reels easily, rarely tangles, has acceptable cross-section for its breaking strain, and it has a lot of ‘give’ so it can handle variations in tension.
It is also used for model glider towlines for these reasons, and in particular, nylon monofilament has enough elasticity to catapult a model glider to greater height than the line length when launched with a strong tension.
Nylon makes a 100% recovery to its original length but does so rather slowly.
When under full tension and stretched, it has a reduced cross-section and consequently a reduced breaking strain.
So, if you don't want rigid control over the kite, and the cushioning effect of monofilament is to advantage as for example with a lightweight thermal-seeking Delta, then fishing line nylon is ideal.
But, for almost any other type of kite, it is unsuitable, even in the other monofilament materials.
Control over the kite is critical and, while a degree of elasticity is desirable for single line types, particularly those with a large surface area, it is not  wanted at all with the multiple line aerobatic kites.
So the choice comes down to twist or braid, and the synthetic material from which it is made.
The range of kite line is vast.
These ‘kops’ of nylon and polyester braid average 122m (400ft) for single line sport kites.
In a way, the selection is made for you if using nylon, as the highest breaking strain in nylon twist is usually 40kg or 861b.
In polyester or Dacron (which have less stretch and a partial recovery of length), you can find higher breaking strain twist but then another factor emerges with these lies.
The term ‘twist’ implies that a degree of torque has been applied to the line during manufacture.
When wound onto a reel from a straight run, the torque is balanced and, when unreeled again, the line will lay straight.
Snarls
But, as every kite flyer discovers early in the hobby, if you wind onto a static reel over its edge, or do a similar action by winding around a handle, then the line becomes ‘lively’ and wraps itself into snarls.
This is due to upsetting the balance of the torque in the twisted line.
The only easy cure is make the winding-on in alternate directions, say ten turns each way.
Of course, the ideal is to invest in a spinning reel, where a swivel in the line connection to the kite is all that is needed to remove any unwanted twist or torque.
These lively snarls occur mostly with low breaking strain twist lines, as supplied with small kites.
Only rarely do they arise with braided line, or in the sophisticated Kevlar or Spectra twist.
Braided line is generally of less cross-sectional area than its equivalent in twist for the same breaking strain.
It does not stretch as much as nylon or polyester twist and it knots easily.
Sometimes a ‘Kop’ or tapered reel of braided line will be labelled ‘100%’.
This means that it is wholly braided as distinct from the type which has a central core of twist.
The Kop is an economic way of purchasing polyester braid, as a half kilo or 18oz reel of 25kg (551 b) breaking strain can provide as much as 920metres or 3000ft to play with!
Although more resilient, and easier to handle as well as coming in a far higher range of breaking strains (up to 200kg or over 400 1 b), braid is still vulnerable to kinks and twists.
Take care with all lines.
If possible, have the line pass through a bare hand slowly these synthetics can burn or cut — and feel for any irregularities.
In most instances, a kink will produce a slight burr on the surface which can be smoothed out.
A worn braid feels rough and is best cut away and the line joined by a blood knot.
Derived from the Indian reel, with extensions to allow the line to run free as it spools out with the ends spinning in the hands, the plastic reel is to be recommended.
The choice
But we are jumping ahead.
Right now we are choosing the line and we've defined the limited use of monofilament, the disadvantages of twist and the advantages of braid, so the next stage is to gauge the material against the type of kite.
In summary, we come to the following conclusion:
i
Nylon or polyester twist is fine for single line kites up to an area of 3 sq.metres or 30 sq.ft which is big enough for any sport kite.
ii
Braided line is superior for kites up to a whopping 12 sq.metres or 120 sq.ft.
Above that, you're into boat chandlers' supplies, and if you are building that big, then you'll know more about the subject than we do!
Newtons and all that
Assuming that by now we've chosen between twist and braid, we now come to the matter of cross-section and the drag it creates.
Mostly, the drag and attendant weight of the line actually improves stability of a single line kite.
As the line is paid out, and the kite ascends on the wind gradient with improving lift as it gains altitude, so the additional weight and drag of the line compensates, rather like the ballast on the keel of a yacht.
So the cross-section of the line is not so critical for the average sport kite.
It is when we get into the high performance area that the ratio of cross-section to strength comes into play.
The manufacturers refer to ‘Newtons/ Decatex’.
We don't really need to know these finer points.
Suffice to have the benefits of their research, which has thus far produced the ultimate in extreme strength for smallest diameter.
We refer of course to Kevlar, Spectra, Dyneema, and derivatives.
Multiple lines
These practically inextensible lines have best application on multiple line aerobatic kites.
They are not cheap, and have their own share of problems; but the advantages greatly outweigh disadvantages and, as a result, they have become indispensable for the competitive stunt kite flyer.
Kevlar (DuPont) has fallen out of favour for reasons of safety.
It can cut badly, either flesh or other lines, even itself!
For the critical ability to slide line-over-line in aerobatic manoeuvres, it should be waxed.
Spectra (Allied Signal Inc) or Dyneema (D.S.M.) comes with a smooth surface, braided or twist, slides with multiple line wraps and is even stronger than Kevlar by up to 50% on equivalent thickness.
No wonder that the thin 40kg (851 b) Spectra has become universal for the plethora of medium-size stunters.
Its low drag offers lines that are taut and straight throughout a broad wind window.
There is one perverse problem.
Spectra has a low melt point.
When it rubs against a ‘foreign’ line, such as a polyester, the result is an instantaneous break.
So steer clear of other kites being flown on single lines.
Conversely, and unlike Kevlar, it has no suicidal self-cutting tendencies and will maintain  good control even in Quad-line team mix-ups where 12 or even 16 lines have been known to wrap together through complicated manoeuvres.
Derivatives with various brand names are Spectraline, Hot-Line, Speed Line, Spiderline and the separately produced Dyneema by the Dutch State Mines, which is marketed in the UK by the Britannia Braiding Company.
They all share the requirement for ‘sleeving’ at line ends, or for that matter over any joint in the line.
We mentioned that most braids are marked' 100%', meaning that they do not have a core.
There is one line with a Kevlar core and a Dacron braid around it, known as Skybond.
Rather thick by comparison, it is not in the top competition class but, by combining the virtue of Kevlar strength with the protection of the polyester Dacron, it is popular for sport flying in the USA.
Sleeving
Spectra or Dyneema lines are slippery and very difficult to knot permanently, so the fishing technique of ‘sleeving’ has been adapted for this and each of the similar materials.
Sleeving kits are sold by the kite shops and consist of a length of Dacron coreless (hollow) braid, a piece of thin wire and basic instructions.
You can cope otherwise with a fine shoe lace, or picture cord and thin piano wire (which must be at least double the length of the lace).
The wire has to be bent back tightly upon itself so that it can be a pull-through to transport the Spectra along the centre of the sleeve.
We have found that a lot of newcomers to Spectra line have been confused by the very term ‘sleeving’.
A simple way to appreciate what it means is to visualise the Spectra line being passed down a hollow tube (the ‘sleeve’) until it appears at the other end.
It is then fused by heat so that the Spectra and the tube or ‘sleeve’ are irretrievably joined as one synthetic material at the extreme end The Spectra is otherwise free within the sleeve.
The tricky part is getting that thin, slippery Spectra line through a 300mm (12in) length of unwilling hollow braid.
The wire ‘pull-through’ is best made from a straight length of.
030in or 0.8mm piano wire.
It must be at least double the length of the sleeve, say 26in or 66cm, so that the shorter end doesn't enter the sleeve and get stuck.
Bend the wire back on itself as close as possible.
Sealing
Now turn to the sleeve material which has to be sealed from fraying at each end.
Use a steel bodkin to probe the central core and hold it open, their swiftly pass a lighted match under the sleeve extremity and you' 11 find that the synthetic has melted into a tiny trumpet-sectioned outlet when the bodkin is withdrawn.
We now have to pass the wire all the way through the sleeve so that its bend or fold emerges at the other end.
A trick here is to bunch the braid.
This opens the weave, shortens the length and opens up the diameter of the  braid.
Work that wire all the way, look upon it as none other than a super-length needle with the eye in the bend of the wire.
Use that ‘eye’ to hold the end of the Spectra line as it is pulled back through the length of the braid until an inch or 25mm emerges.
The matchbox comes into action again, this time to melt the Spectra to the sleeve so that we have the two components fused as one, just as we described earlier.
Why have so much sleeve?
You'll soon find out when you try to prepare two lines of equal length.
Fit the swivel plus connector, and lock the sleeving onto itself with two separated overhand knots.
Another method of securing the connector to the sleeve is by a Lark's Head Hitch; but the loop on the connector has to be large enough to cope.
Whatever you do,be sure to use a swivel for the kite end of the line.
If there isn't a kite shop nearby, try a fishing tackle shop for suitable snaps and swivels.
Use link or lockable connectors, not the ‘squeeze’ type.
Make up each of the two kite ends first, then use a screwdriver, tent peg or skewer or similar stake to hold the extreme ends positively to the park ground.
Few kite flyers have a 50metre or 150ft clear run in their home yards, so this operation has to be completed in public, hence the need for speed and precision.
You will, by now, have had the experience of making at least two sleeves, so the pair for the handle ends of the lines can be made up' in the field' quite easily with just that wire needle and a box of matches to hand.
The bodkin trick should have been completed beforehand to make the sleeve ready.
With the lines stretched out, have a friend apply tension on the ends to be prepared and scissor them to equal length.
Then go through the sleeving procedure and, according to type of handle, apply knots to secure, but no ‘Granny’ knots please as you will possibly have to make adjustments later.
Remember that knots reduce line strength by 20 to 40%.
Bridles
Most kites are dependent on their bridles for performance but, there are exceptions.
Some commercial Diamond shapes have a single connection direct to the spine.
Box kites can be flown without a bridle as can the Malay or Cutter shapes with a ventral keel.
These have direct line connections.
Sometimes the fabric keel is replaced in outline by a pair of bridle lines, shorter at the front, longer at the rear.
Such a twin bridle has the advantage of easy trimming by means of shifting a Lark's Head knot in the attachment ring, fore or aft.
The bridle is a vital contributor to the stability of the kite.
It regulates the relationship of the attachment point to the centre of pressure on the kite sail.
A basic check on bridle settings is to assess the ‘angle of dangle’.
Lift the kite by the attachment ring, let it hang upside down, and the rear, or trailing part   of the kite should ‘dangle’ at an angle of 15 degrees or more along the spine.
This rudimentary check is for a static condition; it has no consideration for the disposition of the surface area of the sail, or the lifting component of any separated sails, as in a Box kite or Roller.
So, while the ‘angle of dangle’ can give one a start in setting up a bridle, it should not be regarded as a universal solution.
On the contrary, there are kites, such as the Barrage with its aeroplane-like wing and tail configuration, that will fly best in trail.
The bridle in this case is a lateral one with lines to either side of the central pick-up point, and all at the very leading edge of the kite which then flies much like a glider on its towline.
This same lateral braced bridling is found on the flexible Parafoils or Stratoscoop types.
Most kite designs specify the bridle line lengths and the attachment points.
What is not always obvious is that the bridle line itself, and its connections to the kite frame, are every bit as important as the kiteline ends over which far greater fuss is made.
Our personal rule is to use braided polyester (Dacron) which offers only moderate stretch and can be knotted positively without risk of slipping.
It can be of higher breaking strain than the kiteline itself, as weight and drag will have only minimal effect on performance.
Additionally, because the bridle will be wrapped in with the kite, and handled frequently, it has to withstand more abuse than the kitelines.
This is specially important for aerobatic types, of which more advice will be found in Chapter Eight.
Reeling it in
Why spend a week's wages on a kite, a lot more on the line(s) then insult the lot by wrapping those lines around an old cocoa tin — or worse, around the handle in a bulky bundle?
We're referring mainly to the 500ft or 150 metre brigade who seem to find the cost of a reel prohibitive.
Reels are an investment.
Get one with a cycle bearing shaft and you'll never regret that purchase.
We regard the reel as an essential tool for single line flying.
It will hold all the excess line you are ever likely to need, and its very concept of reeling will preserve the line from those snarls we mentioned earlier, because the line has little option but to reel back in the same form as it was reeled out.
If the reel is still just beyond the range of the pocket, then make a basic winder from a flat panel, as sketched on page 53.
All you will need  is a piece of plywood, plastic or plain wood about 65mm x 200mm (21/2 x 8in) and a couple of short lengths of dowel.
The latter form handles for winding in the line and the handles can be at opposite ends, or have one central to act as a pivot, rotating in the free hand.
The John Clarke reel–turned from the solid in selected mahogany and remarkably compact.
Stunt handles
As the control lines for aerobatic or steerable kites are rarely longer than 50 metres or 150ft, there is no special requirement for a ‘winding’ reel.
There are several options.
First, and presuming that the lines are going to be completely detached from the handle, you can use a plastic line store of the ‘Yo-Yo’ type.
Spectra or Dyneema is best wound on the spool individually, and not as a pair (or foursome) of lines.
Always treat these lines with the respect that their cost demands!
Wrap them together and wind them in and you'll run the risk of abrasion.
Secondly, if the handle has provision for containing the line, such as the Peter Powell or Shanti Sky-Claw, then keep the line permanently attached to the handle and use the handle as a core for winding-in.
The Sky-Claw has a patented means of retaining a pair of handles on a dowel with locating cross-pegs.
The dowel then becomes a spinning pivot, rotated in the hands, and the lines are wound in straight.
This obviates the risk of inducing twist or torque in the lines with attendant ‘liveliness’ or snarls.
The Peter Powell type of stunt handle has to be used individually.
Although the line can be wrapped overarm onto the handle easily, there is always the risk of generating that ‘twist’.
So we recommend the method of winding in straight by turning the handle over and over.
Wrappers or socks
Line protection is important.
When we first saw Mark Cottrell's fabric wraps around his handles/lines we wondered why no-one else had ever thought of the same idea.
After all, what does the average stunt kite flyer do with his or her lines when packing up for home?
They fling them in with all the other paraphernalia, only to have the line exposed to the hard bits, hooks, swivels and carbon tubes in one glorious fight for survival!
So we invested in one knitted, stretch acrylic waistband as supplied for tracksuits, sweaters or windcheaters.
They come in colours, open out from the doubled width and can be cut into stretchy lengths sufficient to wrap around the combined PP handle and line.
A Velcro strip completes the job and the result is excellent protection of the line.
Later, having made enough sets for all our lines, we discovered a ‘quickie’ alternative.
Discarded socks can be cut off at the ankle bend to make a similar protective sleeve.
All you have to do in this case is to stop the fraying at the cut by zig-zag stitch.
Breaking-in
Even when a set of stunt lines have been very carefully matched to each , it is inevitable that line tension will stretch one more than the other.Our preference is to have the lines so matched that, when the two handles are held together, the stunt kite soars overhead and is as stable as a single line kite.
This also becomes a test for unequal length.
Using a polyester line without sleeving allows easy adjustment by re-tying the knot after shortening a line or, in the case of minor differences, adding an overhand knot or two to take up a couple of centimetres.
With Spectra or Dyneema, we have to adjust in the sleeving, and here a little extra care pays off dividends.
Apart from the satisfaction of being able to combine the handles and hold an otherwise very lively stunt kite up there in reasonably static position, the technique is the best way of finding out exactly how much adjustment is needed.
Take the kite downwind, to the centre of the ‘wind window’, and make a vertical climb.
Then put your hands together.
You' 11 find that after a few accumulated hours of stunting, one handle will have to be held back a little from the other to hold the overhead soaring position of the kite.
Note roughly how much you will have to take up on the longer line.
Then play around some more, pulling some sweeping horizontal passes with lots of back tension from your arms, throw the kite through tight loops, pulling on each line in turn, and resume the overhead check again to reassess the difference in length.
Make 'em equal!
You might say –Why bother, my arms aren't of equal length anyway–.
Well, the short answer to this comes in one word, experience.
If the leading exponents of International Stunt competition follow this practice, there has to be a good reason.
It's because we are not flying in just one direction.
Our unequal arms might well take up the difference in line lengths when flying one way; but the perverse nature of our natural reactions doesn't allow the same correction when flying the other way.
Maybe you will have found that, no matter how well the bridle line lengths have been equated, all your left-hand loops are larger than your right-hand loops.
Or perhaps you've found that you cannot make a square turn to the right like those you find so easy to the left.
Making sure that the flying lines are equal is a good start to perfecting the symmetry of all your manoeuvres.
Hugh Andrew's reels, inspired by John Wilding, the Deep Sky type on a supporting pylon and the Strato-spool with a belly band to hold the bar to the waist and permit a free hand to apply leverage on the end of the bar.
Handy tips
Already we are encroaching on the specialist areas that deserve separate attention in following Chapters.
Suffice to say at this stage that the relative importance of the flying line should never be underestimated.
The line can offer as much fun as the kite to which it is linked.
It is, in its way, the flyer's own symbolic wand of happiness, and we should never dismiss it as just another necessary component.
Two of the Essex Kite Group flyers have a selection of hints and tips to offer.
Better known for his inflatable Dragon kites, Roger Pike, and his clubmate Peter Charlton, show how to make a very simple paradropper, or a twirling hemispherical drogue.
For those who like to fly several kites at a time on tethers, they suggest a simple addition to the standard Goat or Dog corkscrew which provides a cleat to lock the line and winch or reel when sufficient line is paid out.
Pet shops are a source of supply, alternatively try camping or climbing stores.
A classic Delta
It's now time to relax and to put some of the preceding information into practice.
Let's start with a time-proven classic Delta, for which we can use wooden dowels and two metres (yards) of any grade ripstop nylon.
Everything about this Delta is created to be easy to cut out, machine and assemble.
Moreover, as countless makers of this design will confirm, it flies well in a broad range of wind speeds.
It can be decorated or reshaped to taste.
The derivatives are infinite and the joy is that they all fly extremely well.
Stage 1 is to mark and cut out the material for the sail and the keel.
Hem the trailing edge and tip angles, then form the leading edge pockets to take the dowels, leaving the ends open.
Stage 2 is to mark a centreline, and in Stage 3 the kite is folded back on itself and a line of stitches is run 18mm or 3/4in either side of the centreline to form a pocket for the spine dowel.
The keel is similarly doubled back on itself and hemmed on two edges, leaving an opening along what will be its upper edge.
Stage 4 is where the sail is joined to the keel.
Pin temporarily after carefully aligning and with the rear end flush with the trailing edge.
Then run a couple of rows of stitches to secure the keel, but again do not seal the pocket for the dowel.
Now we are ready to prepare the dowels to length, and for the cross-spar, to notch the ends sufficient to engage with a ring.
Stage 5 shows that the leading edge dowels do NOT reach the extreme nose unlike the spine which goes all the way from trailing edge to nose.
An option to the notches in the cross-spar would be a bound hook, as sketched.
A range of swivel links.
That on the right is NOT recommended for stunt kites.
Stage 6 takes us to sealing in the dowels with stitches across the pockets, and the securing straps are added 9 1/2 in or 24cm down from the front end of the leading edge pocket.
These straps can be made of thick tape, sewn through and on either side of the sail with a curtain ring or similar kite ring (the ‘D’ rings are ideal) held fairly close to the edge of the kite.
At the same time, the keel can be reinforced with extra pieces of spare fabric, and eyelets riveted in place.
The cross-spar or spreader should NOT stretch the kite as that would spoil the conical form.
Stage 8 shows the two spreader types, while Stage 9 illustrates the potential for applique, and Stage 10 the prospect of a multiple Delta train!
Painting the sky
A major contribution to public awareness of the modern kite has come from exceptional kite flyers with artistic ability to create multi-coloured artforms.
These bear little relationship to any shape that might be termed traditional, they are generally very large and they have been in demand at seaside beach displays, city-organised festivals and internationally at sponsored functions.
So impressive are these abstract figures that their creators have travelled the world to be part of what almost amounts to an International Circus of skilled performers, all by invitation and with expenses paid!
This really is a well-deserved modern development in kite flying!
An alert artistic temperament is the first requirement for the creation of these so impressive two dimensional figures.
Moreover, to be ‘accepted’ they have to fly, and to fly well, on an anchored line without further attention for hours on end.
Although some of the structures owe a little to the age-old methods of the Chinese, with their curved bamboo spars to form bird frames, the fascinating aspect of these artforms is the introduction of techniques that are absolutely new.
One cannot help but reflect on how much all of this emerging artistry stems back to the exhibitions of Tom Van Sant's work in the USA and UK during 1976.
GF and ripstop
Until the Van Sant collection arrived in London for display in the ICA on Pall Mall, and we were able to see his creations fly by the Round Pond in Kensington Palace Gardens and at the Festival Hall on the River Thames, most of our kite-thinking came in straight lines.
Tom had caught the kite-bug when working in the Far East.
On return to his Californian studio, he determined to make a Centipede just like those he had seen in his travels.
An accomplished sculptor, he sought materials that might be easier to work with than scrape-tapered bamboo and hand-made papers.
He chose to use sailmakers' ripstop nylon and tapered fishing rod units in glass fibre.
So the curvaceous shapes were born.
Tom developed multi-wings, bird shapes, ellipses, all taking the flexibility of the GF rods to extremes.
He laced the sails rather than use pockets, as now preferred, and introduced colour blends that stimulated entirely fresh approaches to kite design.
We owe a lot to Tom who still has a fondness for his kites, although he is better known in the 1990s as the creator of the GeoSphere Project, a spectacular image of the Earth produced from over 2000 satellite images.
Polyblocks and plastic rods
As use of GF rod and tubing expanded rapidly, and ripstop nylon became available off-the-roll through the 1980s, new concepts were fertilized by exponents of the multi-cellular type of kite, such as the Tetrahedral.
However, the simple method of adapting plastic tubing for joints was woefully inadequate where 3 or 4 rods converged.
Enter the HDPE block.
This is High Density PolyEthylene which can be cut, drilled and machined very easily, using average home workshop facilities.
Polyblocks are the solution for any shape that requires multiple spar connections.
Taking this a long step further, André Cassagnes (France) has his own special polyester fittings moulded by a friend M.Minot.
These enable him to create the most spectacular shapes with biplane ‘crowns’ and tetrahedrals.
Inflatables
The Parafoils, created by Canadian Domina Jalbert and subsequently used for parachuting and paragliding, established that a properly-rigged, fully flexible shape would fill with ram air and fly as a kite.
The famous ‘Flexifoil’ is a prime example.
This principle was not lost on the creative.
We were soon to see dragons, fish, giant insects and even trouser legs suspended in mid-air.
Martin Lester's largest set of legs to date are no less than 20 metres (65ft) long!
He has also made the ‘Chorus Line’ of paired sets of dancing legs and even a soccer tackle with contrasting team shorts on the legs plus a suspended ball!
New Zealand's Peter Lynn's fertile mind created a giant octopus with a body 7 metres (22ft) across and tentacles stretching another 20 metres in continuous motion.
It was inevitable that his Ninja mutant turtle followed!
The inflatable kite demands an extra skill.
Marking out and matching the fabric is critical, so too is the internal bracing, as might be required for a whale or shark shape.
Martin Lester of Bristol has produced a Boeing 747 Jumbo jet, a Space Shuttle, countless sharks and even a flying Daedalus.
Venting is important to sustain the shape with an internal airflow.
The vent is sometimes of the kangaroo pouch ventral type, if not realistic at the nose.
Internal baffles or risers restrain the fabric gores to hold shape where practical, otherwise a central spine and spar structure is employed as we show for the Shark.
Martin uses balloon fabric, as it does not crease as easily as spinnaker ripstop.
All patterns are made in paper to try-cut the parts, and each seam is pre-stretched in turn as the shape is built up.
Then comes the rigging.
All of these special shapes require very special bridling to ensure stable flight.
There are no standard procedures, in fact, by now you will have realised that the ‘flying fantasies’ are unique to their creators and, although some sell theirs on a commercial basis, it is a case that, if you want to make one, then you have to devise your own creation.
The ‘Show’ kite can be as diverse in its form, as the inspiration of its creator.
There are no positive guidelines for structure or design, and in that respect there is little that this book can contribute, other than to illustrate those impressive examples we have seen.
Maybe they will trigger some latent talent to encourage even more extensive artforms.
The artists
We've mentioned some of the leading lights in this fascinating development and you will have noted how widespread are their origins — New Zealand, France, Canada, USA and the UK.
It would be unjust if we did not mention other specialists and their particular techniques.
Steve Brockett from Cardiff, South Wales, uses the kite as a flying canvas on which he paints startling picture stories, often based on mythology or the art of the North American Indian.
Each a study in itself, with titles like ‘No two feathers’, ‘Butterflyman’, and ‘Angel and the Dreamer’, they have been flown as an aerial ballet to classical music, wind harps and synthesisers.
Steve's work has done much to erase the stigma of kite flying as a childish diversion.
In much the same way, George Peters of Colorado, USA, has gained acceptance of the kite as contemporary art.
George wanted to obtain shapes that were visually stimulating in the sky and has been so successful that, since his start in Hawaii, he has travelled the world, influencing many other like-minded free spirits.
Two of his very long and colourful kites grace the cover of this book.
Among fellow Americans, Joel Scholz is another outstanding artist/designer best known for his long train of delicately coloured birds, and his flying ‘Geisha Girl’.
It's said that he first traced the outline for his ladylike creation around a tall woman friend.
He then sewed the sail using invisible thread for the appliquéd dress and body colours before he added a frame.
After many trials with cross-spars and bridles, the Geisha flew well enough to win Joel a trip to Japan!
It has since performed around Europe.
Bill Lockhart and Betty Street have also achieved international fame for the quilted effects on their Texan creations, where the sewing skills are admired as much as the medley of geometric colour patterns.
Others, like Scott Skinner, have extended the artform of applique to convey bird pictures, while Tom Casselman has used commercial sign painting techniques to produce superbly intricate pictorial decoration on his Rokkaku kites.
The sky picture kite is just as uniquely individual in Europe.
Silvio Maccherozzi and Franco Guibilini have taken the multi-faceted design to extremes with their Italian shapes.
In Germany, Peter Malinski has done the same, except that, whereas the Italian kites fly in the vertical plane, Peter's are very wide span horizontal designs.
French artistry abounds, as one might well expect.
It ranges from the enormous inflated centipedes and winged insects created by Pierre Fabre to Michel Gressier's aerial sculptures which include gigantic rotating tubes.
By virtue of their size, and with a view to portability, these show kites are mostly ‘soft’ and do not use spars.
The exceptions are the Cassagnes/Malinski types where polyblocks or moulded fittings permit easy assembly with relatively short spar units.
The field of opportunity is wide open for anyone with the gift of originality and an artistic outlook.
On the other hand, if the flying fantasy is out of reach, there is always the wind sail, or windsock, you can make from scrap leftovers to erect on a mast as a bright locator for your base on the field.
Go on, create your own splash of colour!
Three striking heads on George Peters' Flying Colours birdman designs are each 84in (213cm) wide.
Aerial photography from kites
Just over one hundred years ago, a Frenchman, Arthur Batut, established the possibility of aerial photography when his successful experiments were described in La Nature of August 1888.
The concept was quickly taken up by others, notably Emile Wenz, then by William Eddy and Gilbert Totton Woglom who took photographs of the American cities of Boston and New York in 1895/ 6.
Initially a technique for scientific research and surveys, the equipment was heavy due to the use of plate cameras, and the method of mounting, the type of kite and means of triggering the shutter have long since been surpassed.
However, the basic principles remain little changed.
A kite or train of kites is used as an aerial platform to suspend the apparatus.
The camera can be preset or remotely controlled to cover the subject or area to be photographed, and provision made for a sequence of pictures or a single exposure, according to the camera type and its shutter release.
The modern kite, coupled with the vast range of photographic equipment which is available, opens up the prospect of aerial snapshotting for anyone.
Amateur archaeology, agricultural crop survey to check disease, low-level views of landscaped gardens, housing or industrial buildings and souvenir photographs of your local flying site are all possibilities which make the camera-kite combination so attractive.
Getting started in aerial photography is sometimes a formidable hurdle.
At the outset, you must first decide just how serious you want to be.
Is it to be only for fun and general amusement, or are you a perfectionist, seeking impeccable exposures and absolute control over the photography?
Camera
Compact, SLR or larger format?
These cameras come in many variations and consideration of the risk involved may well prove to be a deciding factor.
As we shall describe, provision can be made for camera survival; but for most  kite flyers the camera value, not to mention associated control systems, will be a major consideration.
Weight is important as well as value.
The unit is likely to form a heavy and self-destructive lump in the (unlikely) event of a line break.
There is also the question of camera vulnerability through general usage, swinging around on a line and likely to be the first arrival on the ground when the kite line is reeled down.
So let's appraise the pros and cons of the camera types we have mentioned.
Compact
This is the most popular.
It's a package that can incorporate desirable features like auto-focus, auto-wind, flash, wide-angle lens (28 or 35mm), DX coding for auto film speed setting, and usually has a standard screw thread hole for mounting in the base.
Some of these features are not essential.
A single focal length, fixed-focus is often sufficient.
The flash has to have a manual override to be useful, as it will serve only to tell the operator when a photograph has been taken.
The DX coding may affect aperture, whereas we will need a fast shutter speed of 1/250th or faster for shake-free results.
The disadvantages of the compact are a tendency to overexpose the negative due to reflections from the ground, and the ergonomical designs of the camera bodies, which often place the firing button where it is awkward to arrange a plunger.
They do not have fittings for a flexible shutter release cable.
So beware the curved top compacts.
In summary, a compact with auto-wind, flash manual override, fixed-focus, DX coding and a tripod mount socket would be fine for a basic unit.
SLR
The abbreviation stands for ‘Single Lens Reflex’ which is of no concern to us!
It means that the photographer can actually look through the lens with the aid of mirrors and so view exactly what the photograph will frame.
As we will not be ascending with the kite, such a feature is superfluous.
However, the  average SLR incorporates other advantages when compared in general with the Compacts.
These fall into the category of superior quality in the lens and the shutter operation.
They can be manually set or use automatic sensing for exposure.
Detachable lenses enable you to experiment with various fields of view.
Filters can be used for polarisation, or to cut haze.
They have sockets for flash and remote shutter operation.
Some have auto-exposure compensation.
Lens aperture can be preset on an aperture-priority camera, and auto-wind is a universal feature, even if a supplementary ‘add-on’.
Although not ‘SLR’, there are many other 35mm cameras which have some of these advantages and are lighter; in particular, the clockwork, self winding Ricoh or Lomo types.
Unfortunately they are no longer produced but are to be found in specialist used-camera stores, and their lens quality is often superior.
Above: Doyen of the aerial photographers in Britain is Tom Pratt, seen here using his twin reel system.
Left: Skyview photograph of a social centre, interestingly with a Parafoil in flight by the lowest point of the building.
Large Format
This camera is for the professional operator.
Everything about it spells cost.
Film, camera body, lenses and ultimate processing will add up to several times that of the more commonplace 35mm unit.
This is the tops in quality; but not really within the capacity of our average kite flyer.
However, not to discourage those who seek absolute perfection, we suggest starting with a secondhand camera of 6 x 6cm (2 1/4 X 2 1/4 in) format and roll film.
The carrier
While it is possible to loft the camera within the kite itself, and the earliest experiments were all conducted by use of this system, we thoroughly advise that the deadweight of the equipment be hung, pendulum fashion, at a reasonable distance from the lifting kite.
Only where rigid frame kites are used, for example the Box, Cody or more recent Dunford Flying Machine, have any really practical results been obtained when the camera has been an integral part.
The advantage is that the kite itself is free of the high frequency vibrations which occur naturally in all kite flying lines; but a fast shutter speed takes care of this problem in most instances.
So we recommend that the carrier be secured to the flying line by means of a rigid strip with capstans at each end, and from which a pendulous slat or similar will hold the camera.
Pat has shown the very basic applications.
The steadying windvane is a help, and the alternative triangular frame idea shows a way of using weight itself as a stabilising force.
In each case, the mode of shutter release suggested is by radio control, of which more later.
Tom Pratt's carrier to be pre-adjusted for angles.
The flash unit signals when the shutter has been operated
Right now we are dealing with basics.
To take this further, you might consider the card pocket camera, particularly the ‘Stretch’ or panoramic, ready-loaded holiday camera as a suitable starter.
They produce most satisfactory results, are relatively inexpensive, and can be located on the basic carrier systems shown by little more than a ‘twinstick’ mounting pad.
Firing the shutter can be equally basic, by mounting a lever on the card camera box and even pulling it from the ground by separate line.
The serious aerial photographer will be looking for adjustment through vertical and horizontal axes so that the field of view is precise.
Here the option is either to purchase a ready made carrier or to devise one's own.
In the UK, Greens Kites of Burnley have a well-tried AP system which weighs 360g (13oz) and will accept most SLR cameras or smaller compacts.
Aerial Innovations in the USA produce the ‘Sky Pod’ for compacts or cameras of similar size and weight.
This is a 170g (6oz) unit, also made of flat strip aluminium, and arranged for two axis presetting.
Instructions come with each; but the shutter operation has to be devised.
Otherwise, the prospective aerial photographer must construct the carrier using alloy strip or channel.
The objective must be to keep it simple, yet allow adjustment for up and down inclination of the camera and rotary motion.
These can be preset on the ground, or operated by radio control as in Belgian Raoul Fosset's system.
This is a highly developed carrier for a sophisticated Ricoh XR-X electronic shutter, auto-wind, auto-exposure, auto-focus camera.
Leaving aside these complexities, Raoul's carrier is adaptable for any 35mm camera, SLR or compact, with or without radio control.
A rod or tube, which drops down from the retainer on the kiteline, engages a spindle on the main frame and is locked by a wire split pin.
This enables the unit to be detachable.
The main frame has a secondary ‘U-shaped’ subframe which can pivot by means of bolt bearings.
In Raoul's case, there is a further frame attached to the sub-frame, and this is to hold both camera and radio equipment because, as you can see, he has utilised each of the pivot points as centres for cogwheels.
These are driven direct by gears on the radio-controlled servo output spindles.
Standard modelling parts are used but, for the non-radio kite flyer, the same framework can be adapted but with wingnuts to secure any preset adjustment.
Tom Pratt's stack of four deltas lofts his Pentax unit.
The secondary (vertical) line is used to fire the shutter and also exercises a measure of control over the kite train.
That third frame is unnecessary if radio is not to be carried.
Instead, the sub-frame should be drilled to accept a tripod mount screw so that the SLR or compact is fitted directly onto it.
The purpose of the third frame is to carry the receiver and its battery, which in turn will balance the usually heavy auto-zoom lens.
Tom Pratt favours another form of carrier, made from alloy tube of square section, to hold his Mamiya Press camera.
Tom is very professional in his approach.
Any radial axis setting is by friction fit on the suspension tube that holds the radio-controlled shutter release system, and the camera angle Is similarly preset for each large format exposure before sending aloft.
A final touch is Tom's use of an independent flash unit to indicate that the radio has actually fired the shutter.
The shutter
There are dozens of ways you can fire the shutter, which is pressure sensitive to the finger in normal application; but it is not always easy to arrange a mechanical device to operate at distance.
A lever with an adjustable contact point formed by simple bolt and nuts is a satisfactory method, and it can be actuated by clockwork timer for single shots or radio servo for auto-wind sequences, or by direct pull from the ground via a section of cycle cable anchored somewhere on the carrier.
We've seen so many variations, from a radio servo driving an eccentric cam straight onto the release button, to the remarkable ‘air’ method, suited only to those cameras with cable release sockets.
Ever clever Mark Cottrell of the Kite Store in London suggests using 2mm l.D. electrical sleeving, which is both flexible and reasonably light, to adapt the photo studio pneumatic remote release system to a ‘canned air’ aerosol.
Mark's self-produced book on aerial photography includes this method as used by Mike Miller of Essex KFG among many other gems of his experience.
Radio control is clearly the most attractive means of operating the remote camera, whether as a single channel on the shutter or, as Raoul Fosset uses, three channels for full control to orbit the field of view and fire the shutter.
Many auto-winders have a remote control socket which accepts a polarised ‘jack’ for electrical contact to fire the shutter and transport the film.
It is essential, though, that the correct frequency is used for your country, i.e. 27,35,40 or 72Mcs as applied to control of models and that, when the radio is operated, it is not within interference range of flying models or cars which might run dangerously amok if there is a clash of spot frequencies.
Raoul Fosset's fully articulated carrier, actuated by radio control.
Getting it up there
We have already mentioned the simplest method is to tie a stripwood header to the kite line after the kite has been launched and is then able to lift the weight; that is to say, after about 20m or 65ft of line has been paid out, and the kite is free of ground level turbulence.
A variant of this basic system is to attach a pulley to the kiteline, and to hoist the camera unit by a second line via the pulley.
This offers the opportunity to fire the shutter by having a trip rod to act as a plunger on the shutter button when contact is made with the pulley.
Similarly a ‘messenger’ or transporter (see Chapter Six) could loft the unit up to a stop on the line which is used to fire the shutter.
This is fine for a lightweight camera unit, such as a 110 format Disc camera, or a Polaroid.
The messenger descends quickly enough when its  propellant vanes collapse, so provision must be made for a soft landing of any weighty camera unit.
We have seen the transported Polaroid used this way for beachside crowd shots, with results good enough to create a demand for continuous operation, and steady sales of the prints, each of which displayed a sea of upturned faces.
A more practical method of transporting the unit up the line is to utilise a second kiteline.
This is paid out until the unit reaches a stop on the main line and the shutter is fired, either single shot or sequential if the camera is a motor wind type.
To return the unit for reloading, or resetting the film by manual wind-on, the second kite is brought down.
Such a system calls for kites with similar stability characteristics, otherwise there is a risk of tangling the two kitelines, as the shared weight draws them together when the unit nears the stop,
Far better control over the movement of the camera is obtained by the pulley and continuous loop method devised by Tom Pratt.
The main kiteline terminates with a pulley through which the loop passes.
A ground-based winch then winds the loop and camera unit to which it is attached, up to the pulley if that is to be used as a trip or, as in most instances, remote control of the shutter is used when adequate height is achieved.
Here, the essential is a good lifting kite or train of kites.
Tom Pratt's developed system offers the ultimate approach for the really serious aerial photographer.
It doubles the winch reels so that the continuous loop is wound in and out simultaneously, and the camera held firm at any altitude.
The carrier itself has a safety link across the suspension points (a parachute can be used, also, to obviate disaster) and the pulley on the main line carries a steadying vane to retain loop separation, instead of having it twist with variations of line tension — braid line of generous breaking strain is recommended.
A Delta messenger hoisting a Polaroid camera for crowd shots.
As the camera descends, processing is completed so that onlookers can see themselves from on high within minutes of launch.
Getting the view.
Wide-angle lenses are advised.
A glance at the inscription around the front face of the lens will tell you the focal length and the maximum f, or aperture number.
For example, a typical compact will show 1:2.8 f= 32mm 0.6m-00.
This is interpreted as: maximum aperture 2.8, focal length 32mm and the range of focusing is from a minimum of 0.6 metre to infinity.
The camera is an auto-focus and the aperture is adjusted by the internal meter.
A normal focal length is 50mm, so 32mm is a wide angle, and conversely 80,135 or 200mm lenses are progressively narrower angle or long focus lenses.
Aside from 32mm; 35mm and 28mm lenses are found in single lens compacts, so all are suitable.
SLR cameras with detachable lenses will have similar inscriptions.
The point is to use one marked f=35 or f=28mm, if available.
Aperture setting on any aperture priority auto camera should be at least f8.
The higher the number, then the slower the shutter speed.
We should not want to go slower than 1/200th second because of camera movement and, for a bright day, f8 at 1/200th with ASA 200 rated film will give a result.
Exactly how good a result will depend on many other factors.
Haze, position of the sun, ground reflection and ranging of the field of view are the most critical.
The all-auto compact offers only one means of control through the DX film cassette coding.
The bars on the cassette will adjust the camera to the film speed.
So use ASA 200 or faster film.
Other than the camera technique, which is a subject quite apart from this book on kites, we are now left with that vital question of setting the field of view.
Thus far, we have reached a ‘hit or miss’ situation and, by using the wide-angle lens, have minimised the risk of having a print full of the cows in the next field or a horizon just above the baseline.
Some would say that it is the greatest part of the fun in aerial photography to achieve positive results by covering the target area with some precision.
Adjustment of the two axes, even by radio control, in the air will not guarantee precision unless the flyer takes time to consider the camera angles.
Even when using binoculars, it is difficult to sight the lens angle in reverse, but there are general rules that provide a start towards success through experience.
The direct downward view is dull unless it contains another subject at an interim level, such as a kite.
At 10 degrees off the vertical, shadows and a degree of ‘depth’ convey a bird's eye view impression, and the surrounding activity begins to contribute interest to the photograph.
Mix a lateral rotation with the downward angle, and inevitably the horizon will tilt due to the divergent wind direction and its effect on the kiteline.
This adds further interest in the picture, but you should be careful not to have any more than a corner of sky in the final print.
Simon Kidd's system for a Pentax unit under his Parafoil.
The camera can be ranged around by radio control.
What kite?
Fortunately, we can draw on all the experience of professional photographers and archaeologists in any decision on the ideal kite or kites.
The first requirement is stability with adequate lifting capacity.
So it will be a large kite and will inevitably fall into the category of a Delta, a Parafoil, a Stratoscoop or a Box kite.
The Delta is the easiest to make and it will need to have a base span of 8ft (2500mm) or more.
Both the late Don Dunford and Tom Pratt have used delta shapes, Don with a smaller ‘pilot’ delta about 30 metres above the main litter, and Tom with a stack of up to four deltas closely stacked barely a semi-span apart.
Each has had magnificent results.
Tom called his the ‘Quadriplane’ and, when the individual kites were only 40cm (16in) apart and flying as one, they would lift 10kg  (221b)in a moderate-to-fresh breeze.
The Jalbert Parafoil is an air-inflated aerofoil.
Fully flexible or ‘soft’, it has excellent lifting power, taking air in at the leading edge to assume a wing section which is retained by multiple shroud lines.
There are several commercial sources, of which Hagaman of Westport, Washington State has the highest reputation.
It is not an easy kite to reproduce!
Simon Kidd uses a kite with 6sq.m (60 sq.ft) area.
Greens Kites of Burnley, Lancashire, produce their ‘Stratoscoop’ which is similar but not the same as the Parafoil.
These have been used for surveys of ruined areas in North Africa with, in the view of the archaeologists, a success rate better than could be achieved by any other aerial platform.
The Stratoscoop we advise is the 180 x 150cm (70 x 59in) ST3, which is measured to lift an average of 4.5kg (10lb).
This is more than adequate for an SLR unit.
Our final recommendation is a kite that is classified as a ‘Box’ type but, due to its multi-triangulated panels, is not always recognised as such.
Designed by the internationally famous Peter Lynn of New Zealand (whose Octopus appears on the cover of this book), it is popularly known as the Peter Lynn Tri-D and it can be made using square cells based on 90-degree Isosceles triangles as Pat has drawn, or with equilateral triangles.
With the dimensions given, the result is a 1.52 x 1.84m (5 x 6ft) Tri-D capable of lifting 2.5kg (51/21 b) dependent on wind strength.
The Tri-D offers excellent stability, as innumerable constructors around the world would verity, and it has the advantage of the traditional Box kite in that it does not need a bridle, and flies very w–from a directly attached line.
Quite definitely the ideal mate for your new camera unit.
Simon Kidd's parafoil being tested on the Isle of Wight.
The line, and other precautions
It almost goes without saying that the camera lifter does not have to soar to great heights, and it will perforce have to fly in a steady breeze of 10 knots or more.
So play safe — use a braided line of limited stretch, say Dacron, and with an added safety factor of high breaking strain.
Greens suggest 170 kilo (3751 b) line for their ST3 and this is sound advice for a 2.75sq.m (30sq.ft) kite and attendant dangling weights.
Then, take care that the photography does not invade the privacy of the neighbourhood.
We're not referring to discreet overviews of the local naturists either!
Some people object to having their property scanned by an airborne eye, so ensure that proper permission is obtained before snapping at random.
Lastly, do observe national limits.
Many air regulations stipulate a maximum flying height of 60m (196ft), which can be exceeded by permit (Chapter Ten).
Overall, exercise common sense.
Flying in open spaces is ideal, but among buildings can be horrific.
Always be sure that the lifting kite is stable before thinking about lofting the camera.
Left: Lifting power of the Peter Lynn triangular cell ‘Tri-D’ is as impressive as its stability.
Here one is supporting two large windsocks.
Below: Skyview of Pembury in Kent use this delightful view of a local church as their business card.
Paradrops, skydivers and bearly made it squads
As kite rallies began to get into the full swing of a tightly packed annual diary of events from the early 1980s, so a new trend developed.
In reality, it was a resumption of the age-old practice of sending up ‘messengers’ along the kiteline which carried a parachute.
On hitting a stop, the messenger released the parachute which was made of lightweight tissue paper, ballasted by a piece of card.
That was the ‘Atalanta’ accessory, popular among British kite flyers of the 1930s.
However the ‘new’ paradroppers weighed many times that of their predecessors.
Additionally, they had character.
The passenger was far removed from an anonymous piece of card, and the parachutes correspondingly larger to slow the descent speed.
In the USA Will Yolen coined the term ‘Dropniks’ for paras with names like ‘Fearless Fosdick’and ‘One-jump Waldo’as made by AKA Executive Secretary and ‘Kite Tales’founder, Bob Ingraham.
The principle was exactly the same and, because of its delightful simplicity, it was rapidly adopted.
Edward O'Bear
The principle was one thing, the passenger quite another element in the rapid growth of what has become an international craze.
For John Barker, a founding member of the British kite flying movement, and a prime mover among the paradropping enthusiasts like Jim Whitehouse and Greg Locke before him, there was no other possible passenger to harness into a parachute than that childhood and perennial favourite, the ‘Teddy Bear’.
The universal appeal of the ‘Teddy’ knows no bounds.
We are, as we write, immersed in Bearaphanalia.
The Top-selling hardback in the British book trade leading up to Christmas 1991 was Pauline Cockrill's The Ultimate Teddy Bear Book and it had held its position among the top ten hardbacks for over two months.
It is but one of a plethora of bearable books on the ever lovable cuddly toy which has imprinted itself in the imagination of young and old alike, and always with a name by which to identity the original.
Bearing in mind the Roosevelt connection, Theo was an obvious appellation far too obvious for John Barker's active creativity as he launched the dropniks' own newsletter, complete with its own unique cockney bear vernacular.
The skydive squad
Roman Candle became the official publication of the UK Ted Devils.
It was the mouthpiece of the Chairbear of the Bearly-Made-It Skydive Squad, otherwise known as BMISS with the password ‘Geronimo’ exhorted by an excited Fredbear who appeared in various guises near the masthead.
As the bearer of good tidings reached foreign parts, enthusiasm expanded rapidly and the International Brotherhood of Parachuting Fauna (IBPF) brought to bear many fellow dropniks.
The Dutch formed a ‘Spring Team KNDST’.
In Chicago, they even included a lookalike ‘Bear and Hume’ event.
Helped enormously by the continuous flow of Teddies from the toy trade, which even includes ready-made flyers in mock leather overalls, complete to the goggles and neck scarf, it was no wonder that BMISS should take-off (and drop down) so rapidly.
Ethnic minorities crept into the scene, and fauna variety extended to pandas and gorillas.
Bearmail brought together a broad range of bear shapes and sizes, each individually christened with the same affection as bestowed on the childhood comforter.
So ‘Rasta’, ‘Rusty’ and ‘Camley’featured in the first Roman Candle Their adventures were related in the first person, so giving a ‘hume’character to the otherwise mute and very much stuffed fluffy playthings.
Avoiding the copyright-protected names of bears that have been British National newspaper features for decades was quite easy for innovative owners of the new skydiving brood.
Just as Teddy itself was a diminutive of Theodore as in Roosevelt (or was it Edward, King of England?), so we began to hear of Charles Lindbear and Wilbear Wright the pioneer bearaviators.
In the beargardens that became a feature of almost every major kite flying meeting, a parade of well-dressed bears took on the role of chairbears, observing in silence the antics of crazy ‘humes’ as they lounged in their designer suits, awaiting the call to elevation.
Opposite: Chief ‘Hume’ of BMISS, John Barker and Fred Bear the fearless one!
Left: Harnessed and on his way, Ted is hauled aloft, in this instance without a carrier.
On reaching the stop on the kite line pulley, his ripcord is tripped and bingo — the chute opens for a perfect descent.
Up the line
So much for the way in which our furry fauna have captivated so many kite flyers; now to the practical aspects of how to take the skydiver up to a safe release height.
The previous Chapter described the means of approaching a similar task; but now we do not have any intention of launching a camera!
The fauna can be elevated and released with far greater ease.
Simplest of the systems is to attach the bear to the kiteline using a soft wire pipe cleaner.
When the kite is launched on a fully paid-out line, it will soar to height where a few diligent shakes ought to detach our little friend, not forgetting the golden rule of anchoring the static line somehow so that the parachute deploys!
Such a ‘Hi-Start’ is however, making the launch a random ‘will-it, won't it’affair.
It is far better to determine the moment of release by positive control from the ground.
The kite can be sent up with a carrier attached.
A separate pull line is joined to a release pin or spring-loaded wire hanger so that the fauna can be dropped at will.
An option is to use a clockwork timer, as for a camera or model aircraft dethermaliser, which can be set for specific time delay in minutes and seconds.
Either way, this is a single drop system, and the kite will have to be walked down using a pulley, or similar, each time a reloading is wanted.
Much more satisfactory is the method of lofting a pulley at the end of the main kiteline and passing a continuous loop of secondary line through the pulley.
This loop is then paid out fully, and spread at the groundbase to form a triangle which is securely anchored at two points.
A carrier is fixed by knots or capstan windings to the line, and it can be raised or lowered simply by rotating the secondary kiteline around the triangle.
The system uses a lot of line, and pulleys plus tough gloves are suggested for operation of the ‘loop’.
As the lifting kite is going to be large enough to carry the weight of line, carrier and passenger(s), there will be quite a pull, so it pays to use good quality braided Dacron of adequate breaking strain.
John Barker prepares a lightweight Ted for a ride on the messenger.
Carriers
Ideally, the carrier should be easy to attach to the kiteline, either by capstan fitting, as shown for the camera carrier on page 75, or held by a stop on the line with pigs' tail wire wound links that allow the line to be worked into the central core.
Remember that knots weaken line so avoid undue stress.
The easiest convertible material for a carrier is an alloy tube.
The sketches on pages 108 and 109 demonstrate two popular types, one with a spring-loaded hanger which is retained internally by a  split pin anchor, the other with a pull-through which is not spring-loaded but comes right through the tube after releasing a bear squad in any multiple drop.
Remember always to attach that static line!
Multi-drops are spectacular.
The most we've heard of thus far is a drop of thirty-nine at once(Greg Locke, May 1987) but just four can be exciting, as so far we have not mentioned the influence of the weather on our skydivers.
It's an anomaly that a) we want the parabear to descend safely and not too far distant, while b) we have to rely on a fair breeze to elevate the lifting kite and carry the droppable load.
Life is all compromise, so a first consideration when siting the launch pad is to ensure that the DZ (drop zone) is clear of hazards like forests, cliffs and rivers likely to cause much grief to the fauna.
In actual fact, some well-worn pioneer parabears have survived tramlines, television aerials and town markets, though not without the concern of fire brigades and other uniformed services!
Transporters
The arrival of lightweight, plastic, foam-filled bears sparked off the use of ferry transporters to carry the fauna along the kiteline.
This eliminates many of the previously described tasks of arranging a pulley and triangular secondary kiteline system and, in one single action, offers automatic release and return down the line for the next lift.
A complete parabear outfit comprising ferry, 25cm (10in) Teddy and a 64cm (25in) diameter parachute was soon marketed by Greens of Burnley (should that now be Bearnley?) to satisfy demand from those who preferred not to make their own, and to lift the unit they suggested their 2 metre span (79in) Delta and upwards.
For the more serious, a twin-sailed transporter had already been devised that was capable of taking loads of around a kilo (2.21 b).
Page 91 illustrates the general principle as used by both John Barker in the UK and Jan Fischer, the leading light among bear (also panda and even certain Disney characters) drops, in Holland.
As in other carriers, a tube incorporates a wire hanger, only in this case the release of the bear takes place when the wire hits a line stop with its forward end, and is pushed clear of a slotted tube at the aft end.
The main tube has to run freely while suspended on the kiteline, so pulleys are used at each of its ends.
To propel the transporter up the line, two sails are suspended from the tube.
These are tensioned in the ‘down’ position by an elastic or bungee, one end of which is hooked on the bowsprit, and the other linked to a trip line which runs through the two sails to the slotted tube at the rear, where it is retained by the release pin.
The sails have mainspars in their upper edges, and these act as pivots where they pass through the tube.
Thus, when tensioned and at 90 degrees to the kiteline, the sails catch the wind and will quickly carry the load up to the line stop.
On hitting the stop, the wire trip is forced back in relation to the tube and, at the other end of a dowel pushrod, the release pin allows the parabear to fall away and its static line is pulled from the parachute pack.
At the same time, the release ring falls free of the slotted tube and the sails collapse  forward, so permitting the transporter to dump its effective lift, and then descend to the ground along the kiteline.
As well as the need to make the transporter as light as possible, commensurate with the strength required in the mainspars of the sails and the rigidity of the tube, you can employ a wide variety of materials in the transporter.
John Barker based his on a discarded first joint of a fishing rod, stripping off the cork handle and ferrules for the main tube, and trying both wooden dowels and glass fibre for the sail spars.
Simplest of all is the Brookite ‘Paraman’ unit which comes in pairs for a small outlay and is adaptable for dropping light loads.
Jan Fischer produced a transporter that might well have come from a professional machine shop.
They each work extremely well.
A visit to the DIY store will suggest everyday accessories that will be easily adapted to the tube and its pulleys, while the sailspars are best made from carbon fibre tube.
Typical sail dimensions to lift up to one kilo (2.21b) would be a span or width across the mainspar of 125cm (49in) and a depth of 85cm (33in) so that the triangle is an included angle of 73 degrees approximately at the apex; however, this is not critical.
Much depends on the wind strength of the day.
These dimensions will offer just over a square metre or 11 sq ft of sail, more than enough for a kilobear.
Best-dressed Ted
Like his big brother paratroopers, our favourite Teddy deserves a decent flying outfit, if only to give extra comfort on the occasion of that terrifying first drop into the void.
The parachute has to be packed into a realistic pack — no self-respecting dropnik could be expected to cast itself off with a bundle of nylon in its arms.
Then the pack should have a harness, with over-arm and under-crotch straps linked to a waistband with quick release fastener.
A white scarf, preferably ex-real parachute, will show firm intent and act as a morale booster, and goggles are a must if our Teddy is at all myopic and wears specs or contact lenses.
Even so, a perfectly-sighted Ted can suffer with streaming eyes for several reasons during the fall, so best play safe and make him some goggles from a pop bottle, as shown opposite.
They could be ready tinted!
Cheap swimming goggles fit Whopperbears but don't let it be tempted to go sub-aqua!
Then there is that essential helmet.
Take a suitably sized plastic beach ball, cutaway for the face from nape of neck to forehead with nice curvy lines, and carefully estimate where the fluffy ears will have to project and trim the earholes tight.
They're going to help keep the helmet in place, at the same time exposing the aurii to the full.
They will act as stabilisers, beside being handy handles for recovery from bushes, marshland or similar enemy territory outside the DZ.
Ted devils on parade after a spectacular descent.
'Orace has yet to recover, and his companion's Pilot's wings have slipped to tummy level!
The 'chute
We will want our fauna to enjoy his fall (well, at least after that first moment of terror!) and eventual arrival on terra firma must be reasonably safe and soft.
So the size of the parachute will have to be determined against the weight of Ted and the attendant equipment.
We can draw upon the experience of Hugh Andrew to work out the theoretical ‘flat’ size of the ‘chute.
We all know that parachutes form themselves into a hemispherical shape as they fill with air; but, for simplicity, it is better if we follow Hugh's example and assume that we are dealing with a flat disc.
Our concern will be the disc-loading.
Experience shows that a 230g fauna (8oz) should have a parachute of about 1 square metre (10¾sq ft).
The disc-loading is, therefore, 230g/sq m or 0.75oz/sq ft.
To obtain this loading, we need a ‘flat’ size of 113cm diameter (44½ in).
This is for a moderate rate of descent.
By increasing the parachute diameter, the disc-loading is reduced, and the rate of descent is slower.
Conversely, for faster descent, the area is reduced.
We emphasise that the figures quoted are not in any way critical.
It would take a lot of variation to show serious differences in performance, in fact one could ‘round down’ the basic diameter to one metre (39in) and, with a given 230g or 8oz load, the loading will only vary to 294g/sq m or 0.95oz/sq ft which in any circumstances is very light loading indeed.
Similarly, the nominal 230g or 8 ounces can vary by 30g or an ounce or so, and only affect the loading by one-tenth.
So it will be obvious that we have considerable flexibility in determining the size of parachute.
As a general guide for other weights, using tables produced by Hugh Andrew, we arrive at the following:
All of these sizes are theoretical and err on the generous side to ensure a safe and floating descent, but they cannot take into account any climatic influence.
Take them as a sea-level baseline.
In hot and high areas where air density is much lower, performance will be different, with faster descents.
On the other hand, thermal conditions can apply, and at light loadings as prescribed, a powerful thermal can take over and give Teddy an extra thrill of going up instead of down.
They luv their bears!
Two intrepid enthusiasts after recovery from a drop at Old Warden.
The considerable flexibility mentioned earlier could not be better illustrated than through one of John Barker's much-used parachutes.
This results in a ‘chute with 14 ‘gores’(see below) and a diameter of between 115cm (45in) and 123cm (48in).
We say ‘between’ because there will always be a.
variation in the hem widths of the 14 gores when they are sewn together.
Reference to Hugh Andrew's tables will show that such a size of ‘chute will give a fast descent when carrying 350g or 12.3oz, yet John Barker regularly operates with 450g (15.8oz) fauna, arriving at his parachute size by good old eyeball engineering.
So for starters, John's standard BMISS canopy is a fine practical size that suits a wide range of parabear weights.
Scaling up or down on the ‘chute diameter now raises another question, the number of gores to use.
Gores
To form the hemispherical shape of the traditional cupped parachute, the surface is divided into what are known as gores.
Each will be of equal width and length and the shape is created by a curved taper which will be directly related to the circumference of the ‘chute at each stage as it progresses from the open mouth to the crown.
To obtain the cupped or hemispherical shape with fairly smooth lines, the number of gores should be increased with the diameter.
Starting with the smallest at say 65cm (25½in) diameter we should have at least 10 gores, and for the huge 204cm (80in)‘chute 18 or even 20 gores.
Alternating the colour of the gores is an added attraction; but beware having too many hems, as each overlap and its stitching will add weight.
So far, we have carefully avoided any suggestion of calculation, and we can still stay away from arithmetic by using tables for gore heights as they apply to a range of ‘chute diameters.
To obtain the base width of the gores (minus any hem), the circumference (3.1412 x diameter) must be divided by the number of gores.
So, a 1 metre (39in) parachute has a circumference of 314cm (123in) and, if we are to use 14 gores, then each must be 22.4cm (8¾in) wide at the base plus the hem which will be about 1 cm or 0.4in.
There are ways of plotting the profile of the gore, and the mathematically minded will no doubt enjoy a computer exercise of setting up the progressively  diminishing diameters, and the calculation of gore width at 10% stages from base to apex.
As long as one allows a snub-ended top of 2cm (0.8in) on smaller and 3cm (1.2in) for larger ‘chutes so that an air bleed hole appears in the top, then it is simple to sketch a curved profile.
The easiest approach is to plan the gore as one half only on a folded sheet of paper, then to cut out the pattern through the two leaves, open out flat and transfer to a piece of stout card or hardboard, With an average of 14 to cut, did you remember to include the hem width?
It will pay to have a tough template for cutting by scalpel, hot iron or roller-cutter.
Material is best if un-proofed nylon or silk.
They do not have to be bears!
Jan Fischer in Holland drops cartoon characters — even that Turtle!
Shrouds
No parachute will deploy satisfactorily unless it has a set of equal length shroud lines of adequate length, and divided into two hanks for attachment to the harness.
When the gores have been sewn together, shroud loops are added at each hem, that is, one for each hem.
On the BMISS standard ‘chute, the lines are trimmed to 119cm (47in) length before sewing, or gluing with epoxy to the harness.
On a smaller, 65cm (25½ in) parachute the shrouds can be 90cm (36in), and for a 2 metre (78in)‘chute, up to the same dimensions, 2m or 78in.
The central vent is important, so make it neat by trimming to a circle and reinforce with stitching which will help the overall strength.
Pack and harness
Khaki, or at least dark brown ripstop offcuts, makes a nostalgic parachute pack and harness.
This is the ‘scale’ colour, as first used by ‘hume’paras; in fact, the whole pack is a scaled-down version of the real thing, even to the  eyeleted flaps for the quick release pin to secure.
Nowadays, parapacks come in all colours.
There are a couple of changes made necessary because our fauna have to be tagged to a carrier and use a static line for opening the pack, unlike ‘hume’ paras who can cast themselves off and tug at their own ripcords.
So we have an extra strap on the harness, running vertically upwards, with a suspension ring at the end.
For several reasons, one being to make sure our Ted hangs vertically from the carrier, it is best to pass this dropper strap through a couple of slots, in and out of the helmet.
The other parafauna necessity is the static line which is clipped to the carrier or transporter and stays there This carries the release pin and, from that, a second line which we will explain later.
Study of Pat's sketches will readily show how the lower flap has a loop permanently attached to it.
The release pin holds the pack closed as it passes through this loop after securing the eyelets.
On the ground, while Ted awaits the launch, a safety pin with warning flag is passed through the loop to prevent any premature opening.
Turtle!
Parapacking
Two elasticated loops, made of shirring elastic or similar — but certainly not tight across the inner eyelets — are used to retain the zig-zag of folded shroud lines over the shoulder risers.
The ‘chute is then pulled into a sausage, with that extra line from the release pin passing through the vent and down the parachute, leaving a few inches of line to spare.
By folding the chute concertina fashion, it can be packed relatively tightly under the pack flaps in the order of bottom, sides, then top, before the release pin is secured through the cord loop, after passing through the other three flap eyelets.
A few ground tests will be advisable, even at the risk of stretching patience with consequent repacking.
Freedom of release pin movement and careful fitting of that cord extension which helps pull out the canopy will benefit from practice.
Parafoils
Round ‘chutes have all but disappeared, except for supply drops and emergencies in the big world outside bearland, so it is only natural that the popular Parafoil should emerge as a fauna canopy.
This is for the really keen  seamstresses , as it calls for some tricky work assembling five risers or ribs within the top and bottom panels, and two combined riser/keels at either side.
There's also the little matter of thirty-three shroud lines loops!
The dimensions are correct to give a nose-down angle with anhedralled under surface.
All the details are shown on page 104.
Again, we advise un-proofed material in order to obtain fastest deployment.
Light silk is the best, as it compresses well and then expands rapidly on release.
Packing a parafoil ‘chute is a little different.
It is best collapsed sideways so that  it is the shape of one airfoil end.
Then fold in a concertina from the rear, keeping all the shrouds straight.
These are, in turn, packed as for a round parachute.
Sometimes it is better to make the parafoil and fold it before the pack is made; then create a paper pattern around it.
The lifter
As with the camera units, we need a stable platform, so a Stratoscoop, Tri-D, or large Delta would be satisfactory.
Ted Fleming, a founder of the Great Ouse Kite Flyers, centred on the river of that name, developed his concept of a super-stable Delta which he called a ‘Double Ram Delta’.
Brookite's extremely simple plastic carrier for dropping small ‘chutes that in turn act as a messenger to pull the unit up the line.
Its real advantage is performance through a range of wind speeds, the battened tips on its 214cm (841/4 in) span contributing to the lateral stability while the traditionally flexing leading edges of the Delta shape pivot about the cross-spar.
A tail adds to the bird-like configuration and, to effect the double ram feature, Ted introduced two additional layers of ripstop nylon at the centre section.
These form open-fronted pockets, held by a run of stitches on their outer sides to a symmetrical pattern.
The bottom ram is part of the spine assembly, so that it creates two ‘nostrils’ beneath the top ram.
Ted Fleming's original has been copied many times, always with appreciated success, so we have no hesitation in recommending it as a lifter for any parafauna that is within reasonable weight limits.
Which brings us to one vital and final point on the matter of taking our fauna aloft and then casting them off to the winds not knowing exactly where they are going to land.
If there is enough wind strength to take the lifting kite to almost any height, there will be a temptation to make a high release.
Don ‘t There's no reason for launches higher than 200 metres (650ft) and then only for a parafoil type which needs the initial fall to take in air and inflate.
Any standard round canopy will drift at wind speed as soon as that release pin opens the pack, and that means a chase if you take the carrier to any great height.
If the wind at a meteorological height of 10 metres (33ft) is gusting up to 32kmh (20mph), it will be 48kmh (30mph) at 60 metres (200ft) and pro-rata, so be satisfied with drops from moderate heights.
Above: Ted Fleming of Great Ouse Kite Flyers, Bedfordshire, devised the double ram Delta which has excellent lifting power.
Left: The Parafoils made by Doug Hagaman of Westport, Washington State, are very large and can lift considerable weights.
This one is used by the White Horse group, here at Weymouth.
Rokkaku fighting kites into battle!
This Chapter provides an exception to our deliberate omission of the historical aspects of kite flying, because we are about to describe an incredible revival of an age-old practice.
For, with the use of modern materials and construction techniques, the long established Sanjo Rokkaku fighting kite from Shirone, Japan, has, since 1983, become adopted as a cult by the Western kite world.
The Sanjo Rokkaku is a hexagonal ‘flat’ kite, flown on a single line as a kenka-dako or ‘fighting kite’at the annual kite festival held on the banks of the Nakanokuchi canal near the small town of Shirone.
It is flown there as the alternative to the massive O-dako or rectangular Edo kites, largely because its three-spar construction enables it to be rolled up when the spine is removed.
It is also infinitely more manageable in the air and, unlike the diamond-shaped Nagasaki hata fighting kite (similar to those found in India, Malaysia and many other Eastern nations), it is reasonably stable and large enough to carry distinctive decoration.
Dedicated kite flyers had been aware of the Sanjo Rokkaku for ages, largely through Tal Streeter's excellent book The Art of the Japanese Kite (Weatherhill, New York 1974) in which he vividly described a visit to Toranosuke Watanabe, the Shirone kite maker who specialised, as did generations of his family before him, in making these hexagonal Rokkaku fighters.
However, the giant O-dako Edo kites of the Hamamatsu festival, as flown by teams of exuberant Japanese enthusiasts in their emblazoned happi coats, had gained greater publicity through international coverage in the media.
These massive constructions of bamboo and paper, often passed down from year to year and re-covered for the next May festival by a new team, were far beyond the capacity of any individual flyer.
Yet the spirit of excitement which came through each TV showing of the battles between happi-coated teams was an inspiration that called out for adoption.
The Mama-Sans
A group of veteran kite flyers, led by past-President of the American Kitefliers Association Bevan Brown and his wife Margo, made the first move.
A challenge was issued to the AKA membership in their February 1983 issue of AKA News It gave dimensions for an 80 x 96in (203 x 244cm) Rokkaku and  described how teams of two or more could fly against each other as in the traditional Japanese events.
Forecasting ‘more of a melee than a contest’ Bevan stated that awards may be given to recognise outstanding kites, team uniforms and accessories, team spirit etc.
The challenge was taken up by no less than 23 teams during the AKA Convention that year at Columbus, Ohio, all of them fulfilling the specification of being colourful, distinctive and exciting.
With names like ‘Moon dance’, ‘Black dragon’, ‘Plain white delight’ and ‘Grand butterfly’, they provided a boisterous outlet for the conventioneers.
Eileen Kinnaird, whose husband Rick was a prime mover of the event, led an all-girl team soon to be known as the ‘Mama-Sans’ which made its mark by beating the men on a disqualification.
This, and other attention-getting highlights, was to spark off widespread interest.
In 1984 and 1985, the Rokkaku challenge, as it was to become known, was a feature of the AKA conventions; though it was regarded more as a participant than a spectator event.
This was to change as the ‘Mama-Sans’ made an international impact in Europe in June 1985.
At the beach sites of Scheveningen (Netherlands) and Cervia (Italy), the girls demonstrated and fought with valour.
They were narrowly beaten by a four-nation, eight-man team of elite males in Italy in a spectacle that proved you didn't have to be one of the team to enjoy the fun.
The die was cast.
Within the year, both the International and the UK Rokkaku Challenges became established.
Rules
Martin Lester had seen the American all-girls team in action and recognised the potential of Rokkaku fighting, both as a sport and a spectator event.
Through the Kite Society of Great Britain and its Kite flier quarterly newsletter, Martin proposed standard rules to apply for his International Challenge.
They have been adopted by the Kite Society who undertook to organise a Rokkaku League for 1987 in the UK, coupled with a supplementary challenge for solo flyers using a smaller Sanjo.
The simple rules are:
Kite Sanjo Rokkaku shape and style.
Int'l: Minimum sail height 2metres (783/4 in) Solo: Minimum 1 m (39.37in) Maximum I.5m (59in)
Line A suggested maximum length 60metres (200ft) was made but is not adhered to in practice.
Kevlar, abrasive and cutting lines are strictly prohibited.
Above: Traditional Rokkaku using nine bridle lines.
Note the curved spine and cross-spars under wind pressure.
Left: Jostling for position, a group of Rokkaku kites at Blackheath, London.
Designs are similar but the decorations are distinctive.
Team Minimum of two persons.
Objective Teams or Solo flyers will endeavour to cause other Rokkaku kites being flown simultaneously to make contact with the ground.
This may be by direct knockdown or by severing the opponents' kiteline.
Procedure All teams and kites are spread across an arena with lines extended downwind.
They are then launched at a signal.
After one minute, a second signal is given to start fighting.
As soon as any kite touches the ground it is eliminated.
Judges will note the sequence of landings.
A third signal to terminate the round is given after twenty minutes have elapsed since the second signal.
There shall be no intentional physical contact between teams.
There shall be no catching of kites.
Scoring Each event will consist of 3 rounds.
The last kite flying in each round is considered the winner.
Points will be awarded in descending order for duration of survival in the round, to 5th place that is: 1st place 6 points 2nd place 4 points 3rd place 3 points 4th place 2 points 5th place 1 point
On the conclusion of the third round, scores will be added.
In the case of a draw, the team with the highest number of cutdowns as distinct from knockdowns will be considered the winner.
For the UK League, the highest total from any two events will count.
Since the British challenge made its start in 1987 at four locations, it has blossomed into a major feature of up to six kite meetings each year.
The international challenge did not meet Martin Lester's target in full, largely due to the fact that, wherever international representatives attend the major rallies, they do so for the very purpose of demonstrating their national speciality and no other.
Nevertheless, the Rokkaku cult spread from the USA and UK into Australia, Tasmania, New Zealand, Italy, Belgium and Germany, such that it became  the ideal barrier-breaker that brought flyers together.
At the same time it offered great entertainment for the onlookers.
Setting-up
Ideally, the arena should be marked by a rope, or similar.
All flyers should be encouraged to wear a team identity, such as a coloured jacket, cap or sash.
They should wear gloves and soft shoes, avoid physical contact and use whistles to express their fervour.
The line should be at least 100kg (2201 b) braided and low-stretch, although there is no rule for this.
The organisers should brief teams on safety.
They should warn offenders guilty of so-called ‘dirty-tricks’ by loud hailer, and equally disqualify passive participants who hover outside the battle zone.
A commentator is the most important component of any major Rokkaku challenge.
Kite and team identity must be relayed to the spectators with live-wire intensity.
This is a cut-and-thrust spectacle where as many as 24 kites out of 25 have been cast off, their lines to float down in defeat within twenty minutes.
The contest demands physical energy and not a little skill from the flyers.
It should never be mute and matter of fact.
This is the one kite event that benefits from noise!
Tactics
Imagine the scene.
Lined along the windward side of the roped-off area are the teams.
They are spaced only a few metres apart, each wearing the garish colours of their clan, two on the kiteline, others as reel carriers, coaches or vociferous fans.
All are eager to do battle.
The line stretches across to the leeward side where two other assistants are poised, their brightly-marked Sanjo Rokkaku supported vertically, all bridle lines in tension awaiting the signal to launch.
The airhorn blows.
In seconds the air is filled with hexagons, their Dacron lines shining bright white against the azure sky.
They sag again, some tilt momentarily before the slack line is hauled taut by the agile crew.
Like oriental flowers on fragile weaving stalks, the Rokkaku flock is impatiently ready for the next signal.
The airhorn blows again.
To shouts of ‘Wasshoi-Wasshoi’(Forward-Forward) the battle is ‘on’.
Darting teams zig-zag across the arena, their 
Rokkakus turning, dropping then soaring vertically as the line is tugged vigorously.
‘Katsuru’ yells the first team to make a cut.
The victim settles horizontally, floating downwind as it waddles side to side, then gently descends to the earth.
Gordon Ellis of the Vectis Flyers, Isle of Wight, uses marker pens to apply his Dragon decor, though not always enough to ward off the evil intent of competitors!
In the centre of the melee (Bevan brown was right!) a trio of kites is twirling, their lines irretrievably wrapped, and the bunch comes down as one.
Meanwhile, our heroes of the first encounter have dashed across to challenge another.
their kite is rocking as though on a pendulum as the line is relaxed, tugged, and relaxed again.
Now it swoops across and underneath its target.
The running line saws its way through the strands of the opposition and once again the katsuru cry announces victory.
By now the field is narrowed to the more experienced.
The fight is less cut-and-thrust, much more a game of patient positioning.
The first knockdown shows us how one Rokkaku can bear down on another, its cross-spars pushing at the other's sail in its vulnerable side where shape is vital.
Distorted, the vanquished falls as the victor is pulled aloft at the last moment.
How long is twenty minutes?
The judges must have forgotten their watches.Truth is, the battle is so absorbing it always extends until an obvious champion is emerges; the last lonely Rokkaku deserves its 6 points as it descends unscathed.
The victims are gathered for quick repairs before another round.
Control
When introducing the Sanjo Rokkaku we were exaggerating a little in stating that it was a flat ‘kite’, and that it is reasonably stable.
In truth it is neither.
The surface may be bowed into a curve by tensioning the two cross-spars and, while this contributes a lot to stability, the Rokkaku is still a single line fighting kite.
By this, we mean that it will ascend perfectly when the sail is under pressure, and the line tension applies a driving force; but it will tumble or spin off to the right or left if the line tension is relaxed.
So this characteristic is put to use.
The initial ascent with a ‘tuned’ Rokkaku is straight up, following the line of the spine.
When the tension is relaxed, the kite will tilt.
Pull hard, and it will resume its climb.
Move laterally, and the manoeuvre can be converted to a sweeping move across the field.
Make irregular pulls, and the kite will respond with similar jerky movements.
With experience, the flyer soon learns how to steer by allowing the kite to determine its direction as it terns from the vertical, then, with a combination of ground movements and line pull, it is controlled with precision.
You'll be working in three dimensions, in the air, and on the ground.
The difference between the lightweight, diamond-shaped fighter and the Sanjo Rokkaku is speed.
Whereas the typical Indian fighter flits like a demented moth around a light bulb, the Rokkaku allows its flyers time to think.
Given a good breeze, the 3¾ square metres (40 sq ft) of a standard Rokkaku can be allowed to hover close to ground effect where wind speed is lower.
It is then in the ideal position to attack from below.As the kite is pulled up, so  the line is fast moving as it contacts the victim's line and tension quickly severs the strands.
Selection of the line breaking strain and thickness is another tactical element.
You can use a stronger line which is less likely to be cut; but, inevitably its extra weight and drag will put you at a disadvantage in terms of manoeuvrability.
Thicker lines are no guarantee of invulnerability, as they can be weakened by a partial cut and snap at the next pull; equally, they are more expensive!
Knots are another taboo.
Not only are they a natural weak point, they also entrap any intersecting line and form an unwelcome hazard.
Hence the number of discarded lines after any bout — another very good reason for balancing cost against breaking strain and thickness!
The Rokkaku itself
There is but one restraint on design and that is that the sail height should be greater than 2 metres or 78¾ inches.
From earliest days, the proportion of the hexagon was recommended to be 5 units deep, 4 units wide with the cross-spars 3 units apart and this simple formula with units at 500mm (19¾in) has sufficed adequately.
Sometimes the proportions have to be modified by a small margin because materials for the spars and spine, or the central rectangle of the sail, are not available to the ideal dimension.
As kite-makers and everyday enthusiasts for kite flying, the Peacock family of St.Albans had also been the winners over the first two years of the Kite Society's Rokkaku Challenge.
Who better then, to provide a well-proven Rokkaku design for this Chapter?
As we were to discover, Alan Peacock's aeromodelling experience had obviously influenced the detail in his fighter.
Model aircraft demand preparation for many eventualities, most of them concerned with crashing.
So Alan must have had well in mind the fact that any Rokkaku bout is going to offer short odds on a kite crash!
First, the frame size — 13mm (½in) Ramin dowel is used throughout for spars and spine.
It comes in lengths that tend to vary around 2440mm (8ft).
Allowing for rough ends on the dowel's random overall length, plus the short extensions at each end of the spar, the sail height is set at 2220mm (87½in) and the spine cut to 2300 (90½in).
Similarly, the cross-spars have extensions, and the sail width is set at 1900mm (74¾in) so the cross-spars are cut to 1980mm (78in) lengths.
Toronto Kitefliers team at the AKA convention, Columbus Ohio, flew as jolly sailors, led by the Hinchcliffe and Woodcock families.
All six of the spine and cross-spar ends have 2mm or 1/16in saw cuts about 10mm or 3/8in deep across the centre.
These have to accept the tensioner loops at each of the ‘points’ of the hexagonal shape, and should have a smooth interior.
Use sand-paper to clean the sawcuts and also to radius off the edges of the spar ends.
Now comes the crash protection.
We have to bind the spar and spine ends to prevent splitting on impact.
Equally they have to sustain sail tension and, in the case of the cross-spars, must anchor the tensioners which create the bow in the sail.
Copper wire is best for the job — 16 swg is ideal.
This is near to 1.5mm, and it is soft enough to wrap tightly around the dowel, and accepts soft soldering for a neat fix.
On the spine, these bindings are positioned at the bottom of the sawcuts and do not have any protrusions; but, on the cross-spars, an extra triangular form extension (it isn't critical though appointed shape is best) for the bow tensioner has to be made.
Make sure that these extensions are on the same side of the spar.
That's the woodwork finished.
Or is it?
Better to make extras while in the mood.
If you watch the Peacocks, you'll find they have spare parts for every eventuality!
Carole is the sail expert.
She is also the applique decoration ace as those who have seen her ‘Disney’ Rokkaku would agree.
So, for starters, we actually have a six-piece sail to take advantage of the ripstop nylon.
While the centre rectangle has the ‘grain' in-line with the edges, each of the triangles which will be joined to make the head and foot will have their ‘grain' running at right angles (and parallel to) the edges.
This is not much of a problem, as colours can be varied if a simple identification is sought.
As we have advised before, allow for the hems and, especially in the case of a Rokkaku, for reinforcement with a cotton tape all around the sail.
It is very important that the sail edges are stressed taut on the spars and that the degree of tautness is equal from side-to-side.
You will quickly discover on the first launch, if otherwise.
To obtain the tensions, we resort to the copper wire again and make up rectangular loops which are sealed by soldering.
Six are needed, each to fit firmly into those sawcuts.
They are then retained on the sail by tape made into double thickness tags.
Tailor the sail over the frame for a fit, then sew the tags secure in their positions.
With a trial fit, we now have a flat Rokkaku and must position the bridle eyelets.
Danish graphic artist, Jurgen Muller-Hansen, has a style of his own, using applique panels of random shapes.
Bridle
You can use four point or six point bridling, the latter bring preferred by the majority, and advised here.
Reverting to that basic unit proportion which for convenience is 500mm (19¾in), the outer eyelets are positioned this distance from the central eyelets and over the cross-spar in all cases.
Symmetry is critical.
The eyelets have to accept 100kg (2201b) breaking strain braided polyester line for the bridles.
The bridle lengths must also be symmetrical, and by general standards are long.
Pat's sketch offers the dimensions used on Carole and Alan's winning kite.
Note that the lower bridles are longer to start with, and that each set of three is fixed from the cross-spar to a swivel so that these are permanent.
Then the two sets are joined by a single line, swivel to swivel.
Using a Lark's Head knot for adjustment, the ring on this connecting bridle line then links to the flying line via a strong clip and another swivel.
Spare connecting bridles are always carried!
The final part of assembly is the bow tensioning.
The same line material is used for this.
Four pieces are tied permanently to those triangular extensions on the cross-spar end bindings.
Two will carry rings on their other ends; the other two must be fitted with wire or strong plastic (GRP or CF rod) pegs after trial and error fit to obtain the suggested bow.
Note that the upper bow is 15% less than the lower.
As the Rokkaku is a ‘roll-up’ kite, the spine should be detachable although, once the quick-release bow tensioners are disconnected, the cross-spars can be left in place on the sail.
If this is the plan for carriage, then extra tapes will be needed to tie the spars to the spine.
They can be left free or sewn to the back of the sail.
Ensure that there is no interference with the centre bridles.
Ideally, the spine ought to be next to the sail and at the intersections, the loop on the centre bridle made large enough to permit the spine to slip through.
A sleeve as used for the Aramid lines, Spectra and Dyneema would help, but don't think of using this material for the flying line!
Trimming
Most Rokkakus will soar straight off, holding a reasonably stable position as long as the flying line is under tension and the wind speed is steady.
There is enough area there to call for a two-person crew, so launching is rarely a problem.
An out-of-balance Rokkaku is, however, a taskmaster.
The balance must be aerodynamic and dynamic.
The cross-spars should flex equally either side of centre and their weight be evenly disposed.
It is not unknown to have ballast on a spar tip to even out the dynamic balance, and, if you are as well prepared as the Peacocks, you'll have spare spars handy which will have different flexibility to try against the breeze of the day.
Carole Peacock's Disney Special is an eye catcher of a Rokkaku, not flown in the melee of competition.
Two adjustments are possible.
The first is that, if the Rokkaku is a real handful and pitches over from the vertical even when a steady pull is made on the flying line, then extend the upper section of the single line bridle connector by slipping the Lark's Head knot down You will then have lowered the towing point relative to the sail.
The other adjustment is in those tensioner bows.
By increasing the curve or bow on the kite face, the dihedral angle is increased, the turbulence at the sail edges is reduced (but not eliminated by any means) and stability is improved.
Between the curving cross-spars, the sail adopts a vee form not unlike that on a Malay or triangular kite.
By keeping the lower vee steeper than the other, we introduce what might be called a ‘tail-effect’, so keep this in mind when you are practising for that first Rokkaku Challenge.
Painting in ripstop nylon has been taken to extremes by Tom Casselman.
On this Rokkaku he combines Chinese traditional artform with a sepia arch depicting early flight.
The steerable revolution
Nothing new
Although a very great proportion of the revival in kite flying is attributed to the growth in popularity of the ‘Stunt’ kite, one should not run away with the idea that controlled flight is a new discovery.
The traditional Diamond fighter kite as flown all over Eastern nations is remarkably controllable even on a single line, though its flight path is limited to a narrow sector of the downwind area.
Use of more than one line to steer a kite dates back as far as the 1820s when George Peacock pioneered use of kites for traction of carriages and a boat.He utilised variable tension on two lines to elevate or depress peg-top kites successfully enough to transport as many as 16 lads to a cricket match, including his grandson, W.G.Grace the famous cricketer.
An amusing description of the system appeared in Model Aeroplanes and Airships circa 1910, with claims that the Char-Volant could travel at up to 42km/h or 26mph (in gale force winds!).
Pocock's method of ‘shifting the belly band’ or adjusting the bridle link position was not what we currently accept as a 2-line system.That described by J.Woodbridge Davis in Aeronautics of August 1894 for his method of steering a life-saving device undoubtedly was a progenitor of what we use today.
Separated bridles linked to two lines enabled this American invention to be positioned within reasonable accuracy over any likely shipwreck victim.The kite was star shaped and would thus lack the refinement of current designs; but nevertheless, it must be credited as the first of the steerables.
Refinements
One of the earliest patent applications for a stunt kite was that filed in December 1928 for H.De Haven in the USA and eventually sold as the ‘Air-o-bian’ fighting kite, with claims for ‘loops dives and climbs.
In reality it was a basic Box kite with a pulley at the normal line attachment, over which the two lines passed.
As the lines were alternately pulled so the pulley actuated a semi-circular rudder hinged across the diagonal  of the rearmost box.One does not need to have much imagination to see how the rudder deflection might send the Box kite into limited stunts, given a strong wind; but we doubt if the rigid stability of a Box kite could be persuaded to perform over a wide range of movement.
Reproduction of a 1930's advertisement for the Air-o-bian controllable Box kite.
Paul E.Garber
Also using a rudder control but coupled to a spreader bar in the bridle, was the Target kite developed by Paul Garber assisted by Lloyd Reicher and Stanley Potter.This was a kite for the specific purpose of training small calibre gunners and on the Eddy-shaped sail, an outline of the Japanese Zero fighter appeared in silhouette.
Flying on 180m (200 yards) of line, the operator moved a control bar to send the kite through radial manoeuvres as the gunners took aim (or tried to!) in an effort to destroy it.
Thousands were made for the US Navy and Paul Garber filed his patent in August 1944 to pre-date all the subsequent claims to be ‘first’ with the present day concept of the steerable kite.
In fact 125,000 were made by the sports goods specialists, A.G.Spalding and although heavy and bulky even for its 1.5 x 1.5m (5 ft.sq.) dimensions, any survivors are treated with great reverence and are highly valued by their collectors.
Above:Paul E Garber at his roll-top desk in the Smithsonian Institute.
No man has ever done so much to popularise the kite as an educational instrument.
Left: Paul Garber's Target kite, one of the first to use two-line control as known today.
Francis Melvin Rogallo
In 1948, Francis Rogallo and his wife Gertrude were granted their patent for the flexible kite that has been credited so often as the origin of the ‘modern’ species.
It was a diamond shape, flown as the Flexi-kite for some years before the patent application was made, and it heralded the concept of a lifting surface with two cones which could be controlled as a parachute or kite.
Strangely we find that its diamond shape was less like the present day Delta with its rigid leading edge spars than the design by George D. Wanner of Dayton as filed 11 months prior in January 1948, as against November 1948 for Rogallo.
But that is not to take anything away from Rogallo whose researches with NACA at the Langley Research Center into Parawings were well known, and had been picked up by several inventive minds in the kite world.
In our view it was Charles H. Cleveland's ‘Glite’ for the North Pacific Products Co. which took the conical cambered diamond into the mass marketplace and stimulated the two-line variation of its basic single line operation; but there was yet one other little known patent that pre-dated almost all these attempts to obtain control by rudder or lateral tension in the bridles.
Wilhelm H. Hatecke of Dornbusch filed a patent in Germany in July 1949 for an aeroplane-shaped kite to be flown on two lines.
It was not so much the kite design, rather, the principle of moving the centre of lift as the lines were pulled that made this early application a forecast of today's steering methods.
Hatecke had recognised that it was possible to obtain control even in diving flight by using the lift force itself instead of any mechanical rudder system.
Don Dunford and Peter Powell
If anyone is ever to be held responsible for the steerable revolution, it has to be one of these two eccentric personalities.
Working on entirely different design principles, each successfully publicised their stunters to capture public attention in the mid 1970s and open up a new wave of enthusiasm.
The late Don Dunford's ‘Flying Machine’ was more like a Conyne winged Box kite and in consequence was relatively heavy with its four spars and a spreader plus stout plastic tube and cambric sail.
It called for strong winds in order to execute the full range of manoeuvres; but it also had sufficient lifting power for Don to go on television and demonstrate its use as a crop sprayer, photo-ship or bird scarer!
Made with glass fibre spars and using a ripstop nylon sail, the ‘Flying Machine’ has been improved in many ways for the 1990s.
Don had been experimenting for years before he took out the patent in 1970 and significantly stated that ‘The difference in camber and relative incidence on the central fore and aft sections serves to stabilise the kite in pitch’.
It is this same difference of angles that makes the current stunt kite so stable and controllable, though Don used the Conyne planform.
The Delta employs the same principle with its reflex on the swept-back tips.
Current  Dunford ‘Flying Machines’ have ripstop nylon, CF spars and unique venting to improve performance way above that of the originals.
Its long life is a credit to the designer.
Peter Powell's adventures with kites had already put him into the headlines when he ‘flew’ his grandmother, long before he perfected the diamond-shaped stunter that made him a worldwide name from 1974.
The plastic sail, stressed over an aluminium tube frame, with a deep bow formed into the spine was frequently misnamed a Rogallo.
Still popular, and made in new materials with plastic or nylon sail, the Peter Powell kite has introduced millions to the sight of its long tube tails following the looping flight pattern, and still, after over 15 years of its production when all else around has seen so much change, is a firm recommendation for anyone wishing to take up stunt flying for the first time.
Flexifoils
Andrew Jones and Ray Merry experimented with air-filled kite shapes as students and after many frustrations, evolved the Flexifoil which like the Powell, has stood the test of time and is still in production now in five sizes, from 122cm(48in) up to 393cm (154.5 in) span and in many colours.
It introduced entirely new aerodynamic principles to kiting which we shall describe under ‘Foils’ later, and because of its efficiency, it has been applied to power-kiting with some astonishing results, not least being measured speeds approaching 195km/h (120mph) in horizontal flight.
Irreverently called the flying mattress or airbed, the Flexifoils are unique.
They have no bridles, the main and only spar is at the extreme leading edge and improved efficiency as it curves in flight.
Moreover, the aerofoil section of the Flexifoil seems upside down!
As a stunt kite it excels in smooth, sweeping manoeuvres and when ‘stacked’ in train they make a spectacular sight, as well as offering a considerable physical challenge for the operator.
These patent protected designs by Dunford, Powell, Merry and Jones created the initial wave and still survive.
Other Diamond kites — the Ace, Trlby , Zig-Zag, Rainbow, Hyperkites Ghostie, Blazer, Brookite Stunters and Dunford Stingray — have carried on that first generation with low-cost products that perform impressively for any novice and have served over the years to bring so many into the kite fraternity.
Similarly, the delta form Skynasaur F36, like the surviving Diamonds, now equipped with latest technology glass fibre rod spars and braces, comes into the first stage bracket of starter-stunters with honours.
Flexifoil principle explained — by the designers R–y Merry & Andrew Jones
Second generation — the narrow delta
No sooner had ‘Red’ Braswell, then President of AKA, publicised in 1978 a conversion of the simple plastic-sailed Gayla ‘Baby Bat’from single to two-line for what was then christened Figurekiting, than the inventive kiters in America applied new thought to open up a new phase.
Richard Radcliffe's re-bridled ‘Bat’ was a typical 90-degree Delta.
Its leading edges were free to articulate, the central keel was retained simply because short of cutting it away, there was no choice, and there was but one forward cross-spar.
But it flew well enough to confound the sceptics and won first place at the April 1978 Maryland Kite Festival.
Precisely who first devised the conical form of the sail on the special stunters that followed out of California and Hawaii is not recorded.The camber of the sail was natural anyway, the Radcliffe bridle had established the bridle points, but the new designers (Tony Cyphert and Don Tabor are often credited) added the rear cross-spar and this permitted the trihedron bridle which also absorbed the strain on glass fibre spars.
In one move, there was a new generation and it adopted the generic term of ‘Hawaiian’.
The real Hawaiian, still a favourite for team aerobatics, is the indented and battened type, since regarded as relatively heavy, but very precise in control, with plenty of ‘pull’ in strong winds.
Rigid frames
Unlike the single line delta with its articulating leading edges that pivot about the cross-spar joint, the second generation stunters with cross-spars fore and aft introduced the rigid frame.As the spine retained the sail on the neutral datum centreline, the sail pattern was made larger than the actual frame plan in order to obtain the conical camber which is the characteristic of the Rogallo design.
The ‘billow’ or cone shape which develops in the sail under air flow couples with sweep back on the leading edges to offer a natural washout.
In other words, the angle of attack relative to the airflow is steep at the centre of the sail, and neutral or even negative at the tips.
In the Hawaiian, glass fibre tube battens stretch the sail across its chord, front to rear and in flight they form an angular camber so that there is a deep vee centre body, while the outer panels could be described as flat.
When  observed from the rear, the trailing edge is gull shaped and from the side, the angle of attack created by the bridle is very steep over the central delta and shallow over the outer panels.
What had been devised was a swept wing with reflex (washout) at the tips as found in the majority of free-flying tailless aeroplanes.
A Hawaiian at low level, holding position at the edge of the window.
Flying the Hawaiians in Californian events, the ‘Top of The Line’ demonstrators created a wave of interest that was not far short of being explosive.
Many variations in shape quickly emerged to explore the potential.
Extended tails as in the Dart series showed that by using indents in the outer trailing edge, the conical camber of the sail could be varied span wise.
This has since been employed in the wide variety of commercial designs that have arrived following the introduction of the Hawaiian; but for a simple and long-standing development one need look no further than Top of The Line's own ‘Spin-Off’.
This narrow angle swept wing with the leading edges at 105 degrees and corresponding sweepback on the trailing edge was a weight-saving exercise that established a standard by which most others are judged.
Originally 254cm (100in) and since made at 3/4 size 198cm (78in), the Spinoff also contributed to the arrival of what we might call third generation stunters by its eventual introduction of stand-off struts.
Use of carbon fibre reinforced tube and rod not only added to frame rigidity, it enabled lighter and smaller designs to be created such as described already in Chapter Two, and it led eventually to sail designs with multiple stand-offs for improved aerodynamic characteristics.
Third generation
Competition breeds improvement.
In the case of steerable kites, skill of the operator is paramount; but anything that could make the kite fly to a tighter turning radius, open its radius of action in the ‘wind window’ or launch and land more easily was a critical element.
Similarly the detail design of swept-wing kites contributes to a consistent performance.
Improved handling has resulted from a series of innovations most of which have been related to aerodynamic efficiency.
Leading edge profiles have been improved with the use of stiff Dacron tape sleeves which primarily reinforce the sail but equally important, they offer a ‘Tear Drop’ entry to the aerofoil as on yacht sails or hang glider wings.
Sail camber has been formed by use of battens, either flat or of round section in sleeves from leading to trailing edge.Tensioned into compression, the battens become curved and the degree of camber is controlled by vertical stand-offs from the forward cross-spar.
Sail curvature has been induced by clever tailoring of multiple panels.
By changing direction of the bias in the ripstop and cutting patterns with curved edges, the sail balloons into a better cone form.
A lot can be learned from yacht sails.
Leading edges have been pulled into parabolic curves by a combination of tailoring the sail and strong tension on long and unsupported leading edge spars.This is both cosmetic and practical, as it can convert the conical camber to cylindrical camber.
Trailing edge vibration has been dampened by reinforcement with thin glass fibre rod inserts or mylar overlays, so eliminating excessive noise.
Tail shapes have been added to extend the central vee and improve stability in pitch.
These vary in shape from the curved ‘Bustle’ adopted from the full-size Burgess-Dunne flying wings of 1911 to the divided Tern shaped forked tails and the vented ‘Air Fin’which converts the extended delta into twin stabilisers.
Wing tips can be warped into a negative or ‘washed-out’ angle by sail stretchers.
Use of open mesh material here can reduce the turbulence at the finely tapered trailing edge, and improve performance in strong winds.
Airflow over the upper surface at the centre section where the chord is broadest has been improved by open mesh close to the leading edge spar.
Top of the line demonstration team, who won all honours in a 1991 UK tour, L to R: Dan Tabor (the originator) Ron Reich (the outstanding individual performer) Pam Kirk and Michael Dennis.
This converts the leading edge into a turbulator, behind which the airflow has a better transition over the top of the kite.
All of these design developments have been used to gain a commercial advantage by offering that ‘extra something’ to be different in a very competitive field.
It is difficult to differentiate between flight performances of many of the third generation designs, particularly when one cannot  expect a constant windspeed.
Selection of a purchase could well depend upon the standard of manufacture.
Neat sewing, balloon seams or double stitched ripstop edges, reinforced spar pockets, tight vinyl or rubber fittings, non-slip bridle attachment points, robust spar caps and strong elastic sail tensioners should all be examined on purchase of what amounts to the most expensive division of the whole commercial kite spectrum.
In summary, what we term the ‘third generation’ of swept wings, are those with the myriad gimmicks and fancy names among the hundreds of stunters that emerged so quickly when common availability of carbon tubes made the rigid frame possible.
Simultaneous with the emergence of the swept wing shape and its cambered sails stretched either side of a central spine, there were other innovations which arrived during the same development period.
Above: Tim Benson's Swallow Tail has extra leading edges for the tail section.
Very attractive in flight.
Below: The ‘Rare-Air’ King Cheetah C70 design by Zbys Kaczmarek of St Ives, Cornwall, using battens and a tensioned leading edge.
Top left: Mesh in the tip section of Rare-Air's Flash Angel enables fast turns.
Top right: Leading edge mesh on the innovative Flash Angel design by Zbys Kaczmarek.
Centre left: Open mesh (mosquito netting) provides a slot on this leading edge.
Centre right: Fine mesh slot on a Powerhouse kite — there are two slots on each leading edge.
Bottom left: Mosquito net on this tail is not quite as effective in the central open area as on Flash Angel (bottom right).
scoops
Quite apart from the desire for steady and precise steering qualities as offered by the conical camber of the Rogallo sail forms, there always have been kite flyers who were less interested in ‘Figurekiting’ and more inclined to the spectacular fast flying trains of smaller kites with linked bridles.
These generally took the form of Deltas with a spine and single cross-spar.
Two points on the spine were used as bridle attachments and a third at the cross-spar connection to the leading edge.
Some variations had extended trailing edges and consequently longer spines.
They performed well — many have sustained their popularity for years mainly because they give excellent performance for low cost.
Then the ‘Scoop’, or single cone kite emerged in 1988.
The spine was omitted, and a ‘cats-cradle’ bridle cross-linked the trihedron arrangement of the bridle lines so that each end of the cross-spar and the leading edge nose joint carried two of the lines.
Patented in Germany and the USA by Edmund Heid of Berlin, the concept was not entirely new to British kite flyers.
Refined  as the ‘Speedwing’ in production with a variation on the patent, it has become very popular worldwide.
Simplicity is possibly its greatest feature, and with the use of a doubled line link from the nose to the bridle on the production Speedwing to give adjustment for wind strength, the advantages are emphasised all the more.
It flies best when coupled in pairs or triples.
The language of the patent, ambiguous as it always is, emphasised how elimination of the spine could remove the risk of distortion and subsequent uneven distribution of pressure.
It was referring only to the single cross-spar stunter where two bridle points are used fore and aft on the spine.
The real advantage of the single cone lies in its lighter weight for its area, and the deeper cone in the sail which generates significant lift and is capable of very fast rotation when the centre of pressure is displaced either side of centre.
For some it is too fast, particularly in stronger winds, hence the trend to ‘stack’ in pairs or triples to slow them.
The pull of a triple demands 80kg (2001b) breaking strain line.
There is one penalty — noise!
The full length of unsupported trailing edge on the comparatively deep cone will vibrate at considerable amplitude.
As the kites are designed to be flown with verve and pulled through sharp manoeuvres, they buzz like a horde of hornets.
All great fun for the flyer but not for those inclined to complain about noise pollution.
A larger version, called the Super-Speedwing was introduced for 1992 with extra panels, a deeper cone and a trailing edge hem, all of which combined to reduce the noise element to claims of ‘near silent’.
These findings were subsequently applied to the standard size kite.
Top: Train of Speedwing scoops, a simple though very entertaining kite.
Above: Cat's Cradle on a typical scoop kite links leading edge and the cross-spar with two triple bridles.
Silence is golden?
Coincident with the attention to reduce noise on the German Speedwing, David Clarke of Windy Kites in the UK had been toying with the concept of a kite with a rigid trailing edge.
Choosing to follow the Rogallo principle to the letter, he evolved a near perfect conical camber design with conventional structure of leading edges, cross-spar and spine in carbon tube.
The difference came in the trailing edge where 3mm glass fibre rod was retained in a hemmed sleeve.
Shaped as a parallelogram with equal length sides inclined at 60 degrees the sail was pulled into two deep cones by controlling the length of the cross-spar.
Being in compression, the trailing edge hoops retained a natural shape.
To distribute compression loads on the spars and spine, the bridle trihedrons went direct to each extremity.What could be more simple?
Flying this kite among the otherwise conventional swept wings on a breezy day was initially eerie.
It was absolutely silent.
In strong wind it was as nimble as one might wish and had exceptional stability at the extreme sides of the  wind window.
Calmer conditions limited the stunts one could perform; but here at last was a totally Silent K(n)ite!
Other designers were also on the track of trailing edge resonance.
Extra sail stretchers either in the form of rigid stand-offs made of carbon fibre rod, or flexible glass fibre rods forced by compression into a curve which push the sail upwards and backwards, have become regular features.These serve to dampen the flutter, and to hold the sail form during the critical launch stage in low wind speeds.Trailing edge stiffening with mylar film or mesh overlay is used on some designs.
David Clarke of Windy Kites with his ‘Silent K(n)ite’ creation using trailing edge stiffening.
Flying wings
Similarity with flying wing aircraft had become apparent as the rigid frame evolved.
In aircraft ranging from the Lippisch deltas to Horten sailplanes and the more recent hang gliders, the wing profile or aerofoil is twisted from a positive angle at the centreline to negative at the wingtips.
As we have already explained, such a change in angle of attack is formed naturally by the conical sailform on a delta, but it needs to be held in place on sharply tapered types.
Among the third generation of swept wings, many had an included leading edge or nose angle greater than the basic 90 degrees — more usually 105 degrees.
The shallower angle meant that the aspect ratio of chord to span was higher.
Additionally the spine lengths were reduced and sweepback on the trailing edge made the tip panels narrow and very pointed.
This was intended to make the turn radius smaller and It worked as long as there was a strong wind.
Otherwise, a tip would stall, lose lift, and the kite flipped over and fell.
So to ensure that the tip panels were reflexed, and the trailing edge was taut, extra stand-offs or stretchers (Flexifoil called theirs ‘Flexors’ on the Scorpion) came into vogue.
Apart from improving efficiency and reducing noise nuisance, the twist on a swept wing harks back to Don Dunford's original statement concerning relative incidence fore and aft making his kite so stable and controllable.
The tips of a swept wing are well aft of the centre of lift, and have to be negative in relation to the centre body forward of the bridle points.
The scoop-type single cone kite is an exception to this, but Messrs Hoffrei of Herford in Germany introduced a novel ‘X’ shaped cross-spar on the Vision 11 which enabled sail tension and a taut spinal form to be maintained with a single stand-off.
This also permitted a closer coupling of the leading edge bridle attachments, while at the same time the ‘cat's cradle’ cross-linking of  the inner bridle lines served under flight tensions to restrain the leading edges from spreading apart.
The result was a 150g (5.25oz) kite of 110cm (43.3in) span with 32dm2 (3.4 sq ft) of sail area.
With such a light loading the Vision 11 would have a sparkling performance in a broad range of wind speeds; but its inverted vee form is a bit of a paradox after all we have stated in favour of the twist in a swept wing!
Silent K(n)ite being held at the edge of the wind window, displays its Rogallo form.
Foils
Another contradiction of the twisted wing theory is the air-filled steerable soft kite, as originated by the Flexifoil mentioned earlier.
Having a double surface which is held to an aerofoil section by the risers sewn into the body, the foils are quite different to the otherwise flat plate single surface Deltas.
In the case of the Flexifoil, the wing section or aerofoil is one with a distinct reflex.
In other words, the undersurface curves upwards as it approaches the trailing edge.In fact this is so prominent in the Flexifoil that the section could be said to be upside down!
The foil is straight, it is a rectangular shape without sweep, and the reflex is adopted from ‘Flying Plank’ aircraft technique to provide stability.
The Flexifoil also has its only spar in a low set leading edge, above which there is first a narrow open mesh air intake slot, and then a steeply cambered upper surface.
This curvature is contained in the first quarter of the wing so that the centre of lift is also well forward while the stabilising reflex on the underside provides a down force at the trailing edge.
As a result of this arrangement, the Flexifoil does not require a bridle — the lines are connected directly to the spar ends, and therein lies another unusual feature.As the inflated Flexifoil is launched and airloads take effect with movement, the spar which is tapered in its end components flexes into a curve to create a ‘channel wing’ like an inverted ‘U’with the control lines at each of the cusped ends.
In this form, the Flexifoil acquires its own optimum angle of attack to the ‘apparent’ airflow (more on this later under ‘The Flight Envelope’) and achieves speeds far greater than actual wind strengths.This is a resultant of the thrust component derived from a forward centre of pressure together with the efficiency of the developed aerofoil section.
Just  as with the Rogallo wing, or the single cone scoops, any lateral shift of the Flexifoil will steer the kite; but there is a difference in that the single line attachment point allows the Flexifoil to adopt its own twist, and the angle of attack is reduced on the inside of the turn.
By sweeping back and forth through figures of eight, a Flexifoil will build up speed even when wind strength is such that without movement or being flown as though on a single line, it will just hover with the spar nearly straight.
Flexifoil sizes vary from the 122cm (48in) Hot Shot with an aspect ratio of 2.7 to the 393cm (154.5in) Hyper 12 of 5.7 aspect ratio.
The higher the AR (aspect ratio) or span-over-chord, then in theory, the greater the efficiency.
In their mid range, Flexifoil have four kites with the same 61cm (24in) chord.
The Stacker and Splitz are similar at 2.9 AR with 178cm (70in) span and the Pro-Team extends to 249cm (98in) for 4.1 AR while the Super-10 goes to 286cm (112.5in) and 4.7 AR.
Although the same in chord (width), the Stacker and Super-10 thus have a difference of 108cm(42.5in)in span or 62% in area; but in terms of efficiency in lift the increase is nearer to 400%.
No small wonder the Super-10 is emphasised as not suitable for children!
Collectively known as ‘Power Kites’, the Flexifoils have a wide repertoire, from individual and team ballet performances to sprint flying through a speed trap, man-lifting power-kiting, beach skiing, buggy towing, cable riding and establishing a world sailing speed record of 25.03 knots (46km/h or 29mph) with fifteen Super-10s towing a catamaran.
Created in Germany and made in the USA, this fun-fly soft kite comes in Snoopy and Red Baron variations.
Sparless foils
The air-filled Parafoil has long been established as a stable single line kite so its development as a steerable stunter for two (or more as we shall see) lines came initially as a surprise knowing only too well how difficult it is sometimes to get a Parafoil started.
The ‘Sparless Stunter’ is a–cell foil with an AR of less than one.
It is longer than it is wide, and it is modelled directly on the Parafoils.
Another US product is the ‘Skynasaur Stuntfoil’ which comes in various sizes and incorporates an air-filled leading edge chamber to aid lateral rigidity.
This has an AR of two and upwards, and is not at all like the Flexifoil in concept.
Nearer to the shape of the Flexi, though sparless and using a multiple line bridle system, is the Wolkensturmer Paraflex with a span of 240cm (94½in) and sixteen cells which give it exceptional lifting power.
It maintains the rectangular format, with the square tips carrying keels for the outer bridles.
One wonders how long this shape will persist in the face of rapid changes that have revolutionised the Paragliding and Parapenting sports.
In very few seasons, the practice of jumping off mountains with a ram-air parachute in tow, and prolonged descents with steerable harness has accelerated design at a rapid rate.
The man-carrying steerable parachute has adopted elliptical shapes with down-turned tips.
Collectively known as ‘canopies’, they have utilised brilliant colours in ripstop nylon to add to the attraction of their shapes, and just as with  our kites, have created flash names to compete in a crowded marketplace.
Taboo, Magic Kiss, Amour, Elan, Apex, Typhoon, Voodoo, Cobra, Firebird and The Twist are typical.
Designed for glide ratio rather than aerobatics, the paragliders nevertheless can teach the foil-kite designer something, just as we strongly suspect they in turn, had already learned from the Flexifoil.
The ubiquitous Peter Lynn was first to apply the tapered planform to a foil for steerable aerobatics.
In deference to its similarity to a piece of an orange it was dubbed the ‘Peel’ and like the man-carrying paragliders of similar shape, it was immediately adopted by the kite fraternity worldwide.
With bridle lines cross-linked and adjusted in length to hold a curved form and also to distribute the lift loads, the Peel comes in two sizes both of which are comparatively large for stunters.
The 3.6 metre (142in) has a surface area of 2.5 sq m(27 sq ft ) and its larger variant with 5 metres span (16½ ft.) has 5 sq m area or 54 sq ft !
No wonder it tows the Peter Lynn Buggy (with himself steering on board) all over wherever land surfing and similar buggy racing is permitted.
Let's go flying!
You've been to the kite shop and bought your first steerable.
One of the first discoveries will most likely be the paucity of instructions!
Despite the high cost of these kites, due mainly to the involved sail, carbon spar and a fair chunk of distribution costs through the marketing chain, the fact remains that few of them are fully supported by adequate instruction on how to assemble or fly the device.
It is as though steerable kites are regarded like bicycles, to be controlled by intuitive and natural reaction, therefore no need for instruction.
Let nature take its course!
It could well be said that once the ‘feel’ of control is acquired then all you need is practice, and just like riding the bicycle, all the arm movements become a spontaneous impulse.But life isn't that easy, and in our experience, the ‘prangs’have to be suffered before the ‘knack’of dexterous control is accomplished.
Maybe you've found the cost of a sophisticated stunt or sport kite too expensive and want to make your own.
In that case we firmly say make it simple and don't aim for the moon at first try.
Something like the 80-degree Japanese ‘ARK’ shape with straightforward plain panels, glass fibre tube spars with basic joints, no stand-offs or stretchers and bridle points that will permit a wide range of trimming is an ideal introduction.
Peter Lynn, the New Zealander who features at many international festivals, in action on his buggy towed by a ‘Peel’ kite at Weymouth.
Dimensions of the ‘Cygnus’ version are given on the drawing and there is also a smaller ‘Eagle’of scaled down proportions made by the Daisen Company.
Each has proven ideal as a starter design, capable of all the intricate manoeuvres sufficient to satisfy the novice but obviously not the demanding competition flyer.
Of course, if carbon tubes are used instead of glass fibre, and the sail is extended into angular camber by fitting a pair of vertical stand-offs from the rear cross-spar to the sail trailing edge, then performance will be enhanced.This is a good design which accepts experiment but still offers all the novice seeks, as it comes.
Whatever the situation, with the ready-to-fly or the home-built sport kite, there still remains a set sequence of assembly, common to almost every type.
Getting it together
When the kite is removed from its bag, it is most likely to be folded short.
The rearmost sections of the leading edges might be detached from the joining ferrules.
The first clue to this is to find that the bag itself is folded over and much longer than its contents.
Spread the sail and lay it flat as possible with the underside uppermost.
The bridle lines should be straightened and laid so that the connector rings fall evenly either side of the spine.
Assembly should be in the sequence of 1) leading edges 2) front cross-spar3) rear cross-spars 4) stand-offs and stretchers.
At each stage, ensure that the bridle lines are free of the spars, but secure at their proper anchor points.
The tangled bridle is a common mistake.
Starting with the leading edges, push the loose rear section forwards in its sleeve with one hand while holding the tubular end of the joining ferrule in the other.
This enables you to guide the rear section home without catching the inner surface of the Dacron sleeve and helps to make sure that the sections are fully joined.
The rearmost ends will project beyond the sleeve and may have arrow: nocks fitted.
In such a case, the tube must be rotated before the elastic sail tensioner is stretched into position in the nock slot.
It has to be aligned properly, otherwise the tensioned sleeve can be affected by the torsion of the elastic.
Some kites avoid this by using  wide elastic pockets, or plastic end caps on the tensioners.
Nocks are vulnerable when landing; but can themselves be capped with a length of vinyl tube.
When pushing the leading edges into place, it is inevitable that some movement will displace the plastic tube, rubber or vinyl joints for the cross-spars.
Locate these fittings central in each of the sail cutouts, and check that they are horizontal once the sail is tensioned.
The front or upper cross-spar is normally one-piece.
It may carry fittings for stand-offs, in which case the cross-spar must be rotated so that the fittings point In the correct direction, then the spar can be inserted into the vinyls.
Now fit the rear or lower cross-spars.
It is usual for them to come in two equal length pieces to fit a central ferrule.
This is part of a tee piece projecting vertically from the spine, located according to the sail shape at the end of the spine or within the profile of the extended ‘bustle’ tail.
Early short spine kites had horizontal tee pieces.
An alternative to the tee piece is the clever use in Tim Benson designs of an ‘O’ ring to hold the ferrule or socket directly against the spine, then polyethylene rubber or vinyl tubes form combined stops and securing sockets for the cross-spars (see ‘Scorcher 2’drawing on previous page).
Whichever the centre fixing, there are two vital precautions to observe before the cross-spars are fitted, First, check the positions of the stand-off fittings.
It is almost certain that they will not be central on the spar halves so there will be a right way around.
Align the spar half with the sail (not forgetting to bring the tip closer to the spine to simulated the sail form in flight) and check the stand-off junction with the sail.
When there are more than one stand-off per side, there is little doubt as to which way round the spars are fitted.
The second precaution is to pull each of the bridle rings up and away from the sail before positioning the cross-spar first into the centre ferrule with the spar beneath all the bridle lines It is most important that the lines which we will call ‘B’ and ‘C’as in the drawings, are free and not in any way tangled with either the leading, edge vinyl, spine fitting or the cross-spar Otherwise the bridle setting and consequent flight performance will be sadly deformed!
Having made sure that the rear cross-spars are correctly located, the bridle is clear and the stand-off sockets in their right places, push the spar ends well into the leading edge vinyls.
In some instances where sail stretchers are in flexible glass fibre (as distinct from the rigid carbon fibre rod used for stand-offs) it may be necessary to fit the stretchers before the spar is pushed into the leading edge vinyl in order to get the correct sail deflection.
In all cases, do not alter the position of any fittings on the cross-spars — they should be a very tight fit for the very purpose of staying where set!
All that now remains is to fit the stand-offs and stretchers (also called whiskers or whiskas in some kites) which enable the kite to adopt its conical shape, and as described earlier, to Induce ‘washout’ or reflex angle at the tips.
Stand-offs on the forward cross spar provide positive if angular camber to form an aerofoil, but if used to force a batten into such a profile, the effect of further stand-offs from the rear cross-spars on the same batten is to form a  gentle reflex, not unlike the wing section of a soaring bird.
Mark Cottrell's ‘Radial’ was among the first to have this feature.
With all the pieces in place, we suggest that the bridle should now claim full attention as its symmetry and adjustment will be critical for best performance.
Tail ends of leading edges, L to R, the Liteflite elastic pocket, Scorcher rubber bungee cord and knock, Jester elastic cord and knock, Eolo-Gayla Wind-walker bungee and end cap, Scorpion bungee with pull cord and knock.
Each used to stretch the sail.
Centre point — keep bridle lines clear of the cross-spar.
Bridle check
The most common bridle on narrow angle swept-wing sport kites has three lines, which we will refer to as a Trihedron.
There are variations, the most distinctive being the addition of a fourth line to the leading edge, midway between the two cross-spars.
This is to relieve the compression loads which are considerable.
When glass fibre tubular spars were standard practice, leading edge distortion would form an otherwise straight line into a swan-neck shape!
Similarly, the spine would distort under air loads, hence the rather short spines of earlier designs.
Carbon fibre tubes have cured much of this; but the fourth bridle line is used on larger sport kites even though it requires accurate adjustment to balance with the other lines.
Manufacturers set the bridles with a secure knotted loop at each of the spar attachments.
Check to see that they are secure and looped the same way on each half of the kite.
Some have a loop around the spat, between stops, others have loops which are intended to go around the spar and the extension of the vinyl sockets.
The latter relax annoyingly when not in use and tend to slide out of place.
So check thoroughly-there is no point in our going further to describe how small adjustments on the connecting ring can affect performance when the bridle loops to the leading edge are allowed to slide out of position!
Leaving bridle line ‘C’ slack, pull on the connector ring (sometimes a snap and swivel is fitted instead) so that lines ‘A’and ‘B’are taut and the ring is held down at the level of the rear cross-spar.
The two rings, either side of the spine, should be at the same distance below the cross-spar, and symmetrical either side of the kite centreline (spine)
If they are not, then the manufacturer set-up might be wrong.
However this is most unlikely.
Before making any alterations, let line ‘B’ be slack and pull ‘A’and ‘C’for a second check on symmetry.
This will quickly identify which line is short, or possibly too long, and the loop connection to the leading edge on that line should be examined.
It may have slipped.
If so, the cure will be obvious; but there is still one other possibility.
The ‘Lark's Head’ may have slipped the connector ring.
Top pic: The WRONG way to link the bridle to the leading edge, not connecting with the cross-spar as in the lower pic where the bridle wraps both leading edge and cross-spar.
Lark's Head adjustment
The connector ring is in almost every case, attached to two of the bridle lines by a slip knot (Lark's Head) so that the ring can be moved towards either end of the continuous line.
The majority of kites are supplied with lines ‘A’ and ‘B’continuous and line ‘C’of fixed length.
Among exceptions are Mark Cottrell's ‘Liteflite’ series and Terry Crumpler's Windwalker/Gayla ‘Wasps’which have lines ‘A’and ‘C’continuous and line ‘B’of fixed length.
There is a distinct difference as we will detail; but for the moment we have to return to the basic check for symmetry.
The slip knot should be marked with a spot of colour on the line.
If the rings do not align symmetrically, look for a mark on either bridle.
One should be on or very near the Lark's Head itself so that will be the correct trihedron.
The other must be adjusted by slipping the ring after slackening the knot.
If both have identical mark positions but are still asymmetric then the fault can only be  analysed by measuring line lengths to determine which is wrong.
A simple test of any sport kite bridle is to take the connector rings in each hand and lift the assembled kite off a level surface.
The spine will be suspended horizontally or at most slightly nose-down, unlike the 15-degree ‘angle of dangle’ described for single line kites in Chapters 1 and 3.
This is a handy tip for setting a home-built kite bridle.
There is always the old technique of adjusting bridle length with an overhand hitch to shorten the line; but for sport kites, the knot itself takes up a lot of line.
One solution is to have long bridles, so reducing the effect and in a way de-sensitising the bridle changes.
This is counter productive, and until someone invents a simple method of adjusting the trihedron in small increments of say, 1 /4in or 6.5mm around, the Lark's Head will have to suffice.
There are systems of fitting a bead on one line into any of a series of keyholes on another but to date only for light loads on small kites.
Why adjust the bridle?
Why adjust anyway?
Some solo flyers claim never to change bridle settings.
The reason is more likely to be that they only fly in ideal wind conditions.
To be able to perform a full schedule of aerobatics in a range of winds from 8 to 40 km/h (5–25mph), some bridle adjustment is essential for ‘tuning’.
We mentioned that the fixed length line was commonly ‘C’.
Study the triangular pattern of a  vertical projection and consider line C as a fixed radius.
(See drawing of Japanese ARK kite on page 145).
Movement of the connecting ring ‘upwards’ will shorten ‘A’and lengthen ‘B’.
At the same time the ring will move inwards 
Now consider the alternative, with line ‘B’ fixed, and the ring moved ‘upwards’to shorten ‘A’and lengthen ‘C’.
The ring will then move outwards, away from the spine.
The opposite will happen in each case when the ring is moved ‘down’ the continuous line, i.e. outwards when line ‘C’is fixed and inwards when line ‘B’is fixed.
For lower wind speeds, the ring has to be moved ‘down’ the line.
This will increase the angle of the bridle and load the sail.
In strong winds, the reverse is the case.
The angle of the kite to the relative or ‘apparent’ wind is best reduced, so the ring is moved ‘up’and this reduces the load on the sail, enabling better control.
In normal wind strengths, this would slow up reaction.
Left: Using two connecting rings on a short loop of bridle from the upper cross-spur, it is possible to adjust the bridle more accurately.
The line to be held in place is pinched between the rings.
Bottom: Derived from linkage used by Peter Powell for kite trains, many stunters are beginning to eliminate metal links and use a Lark's Head knot to join flying line to a cord loop on the connecting ring.
Pitch and yaw
When the connecting ring is moved ‘upwards’, we are reducing the pitch.
In simple terms, making the angle of the kite shallower when in flight.
When the ring is moved ‘outwards’, we are able to increase the yaw, or sideways angle of the kite.
The result of this is that when line ‘C’ is fixed, the rate of turn brought about by the lateral position of the connecting ring is reduced when the ring is moved up, and increased when the ring is moved down.
When line ‘B’ is fixed, the opposite happens and the rate of turn is faster when the ring is moved up, and vice versa.
Mark Cottrell's Liteflite Radial makes use of this feature in a bridle where line ‘A’ is continuous–from side to side.
This permits the ring to move down on the line under greater tension, and up on the opposite side which would be on the outside of a turn.
This increases the rate of turn and reduces the risk of stalling.
The effect of relative line lengths in the bridle will also depend   on the actual length of the lines and the positions of the cross-spars.
One thing is certain and that is the better tolerance of having line ‘B’ as the fixed line in a standard trihedron rig.
We prefer to generalise and to treat the three lines independently.
Shortening line ‘A’ reduces pitch and offers slower reaction.
(There is a good case for making all adjustments on this line only.)
Making line ‘B’ shorter will enable faster turns until you reach the stage where the tip which is inboard of the turn will stall.
Shortening line ‘C’ will make the kite sensitive in direction because the moment arm is reduced and your own arm movements will have greater effect.
Right: A range of stunters in the authors' collection shows how varied are the shapes of kites in the 1990s.
Opposite: A spin-off kite ‘at the ready’ for launch with bridle lines clear of the spurs and pre-checked for symmetry.
All of these generalisations depend of course on a constant wind speed sufficient to fly the kite within its designed wind window.
The launch
We discussed preparation of the lines in Chapter Three, so all we want to emphasise now is that you remember to take a stake (preferably fitted with a brightly coloured flag so that you do not lose it, or tread on it) and that the line ends have swivel connections of adequate strength.
It's of no use to have 70kg (1501b) lines and links of lower strength values.
Ideally, you should have an assistant.
if only to reduce the number of 100 metre (330 ft) round trips up and down a fully paid-out set of lines, which always seems to happen when you are on your own!
The most important pre-flight check is to ensure that you pick up the handles so that right and left align with the correct bridles.
If not, then that first flight is going to be a short one.
An assistant can hold the kite vertically by the leading edges, and as a ground level breeze fills the sail, releases rather than throws the kite, with the lines kept taut.
Flexifoils and similar foil types have to fill out their shapes by taking in air.
This happens rapidly in a steady wind but can be helped by shaking the kite.
This separates the surfaces and opens the intake mesh.
Some experienced foilers hold onto the spar end of a Flexifoil, shaking it while nearly vertical then when air-filled, it is brought down to the horizontal for the assisted launch.
Solo launches are easy to perform once you have a little experience.
Rigid frame steerables can stand vertically on the frame ends, and be held in that attitude by line tension if the handles are pegged to the ground by a stake.
All you have to do then is to take up the handles maintaining line tension, and either take two steps backwards smartly or pull the arms backwards and downwards in a smooth tugging action to set the kite aloft.
The Golden Rule is to ensure that you have Mother Nature on your side, or rather, on your back.
No wind — no fly.
This applies equally to the choice of flying site.
If there are obstructions upwind to turbulate the airflow, then even the perfectly bridled stunter will have difficulty in breaking through the rough air at low level.
Steady wind in an open area is what you should be seeking long before the lines are laid out.
Take off
Our advice for the first launch is — hands together, arms outstretched (but never above your head as is so often attempted by first time flyers ) and as the kite rises, sustain an even line tension.
If the kite turns either way left or right, then increase the pull on the opposite side, right for turning to the right and left for a left turn.
Be content with small movements at first.
Maybe the kite rose reluctantly, then rotated rapidly and fell.
Try again before making any changes, the kite will have stalled in most cases; but it might be necessary to adjust the bridle by moving the ring up the continuous line.
Check the colour mark on the bridle line and by slipping the Lark's Head knot and pulling on the lower line ('B') bring the mark no more than 6mm (1/ 4in) below the ring.
Try again, the decreased angle of the kite ought to cure the launch problem but as future experience will show you, the original trim set by the manufacturer will have been the ideal compromise for rate of turn and sensitivity.
Ensure that you know the location of the bridle mark and are familiar with its movement around the rim of the connecting ring at any stage of adjustment.
It's a good idea to use fine electrical tie-wraps to lock the Lark's Head in position.
Initially you will adopt a tense stance, concentrating the mind on which action brings about what result.
The first loop, or sideways circle will be erratic and recovery somewhat haphazard: but just as with riding a bicycle, all the reactions begin to come naturally and in no time at all, even as early as the third flight, you will be diving and climbing at will.
Most of the expert stunt flyers operate with hands at waist level pulling back from extended arms to hips, and this range of push and pull enables them to fly through an incredible range of manoeuvres.
Totally relaxed, but never still on their feet, the experts make full use of the wind window from self launch to controlled landing.
The flight envelope
Before you feel brave enough to steer the kite around fanciful shapes, it is best to understand what is meant by the ‘edge of the wind’ because in effect, this is the limit line within which the kite will fly.
You have first to appreciate that although wind will be flowing in a straight direction from behind the flyer, the kite is  limited to a radius of action, horizontally and vertically.
It will be flying in half a hemisphere, or less.
It is the ‘less’ bit that concerns us.
As the kite climbs up vertically from a launch, it starts with a steep angle to the wind, and at the peak of its climb is at a shallow angle.
Mean while the lift and drag forces are at work, and the kite has achieved the point of no further progress.
It will hover, and dependent on wind strength, the lines will be at 85 degrees or so to the ground, the kite stationary nearly overhead if it is a good performer.
Take the kite down to ground level and at either side, it will again reach a point where the aerodynamic forces are balanced, and it hovers nose into wind, the spine horizontal and cross-spars vertical.
It will be short of being directly at right angles to the flyer by up to 30 degrees due to the contribution of gravity working at 90 degrees to the lift force; but never mind about that, the demonstration illustrates how the flight envelope embraces a wide band of air.
Within that band the kite will move from steep to shallow angles against the oncoming wind.
Since the kite has a lift component to enable it to accelerate at certain positions around the hemisphere it also has what is known as an ‘apparent wind’ and it is this which sustains the motion within the flight envelope.
Pat has sketched the band of usable airspace for light or strong wind conditions.
The design of the kite plays its part in determining the size of the flight envelope just as much as does wind strength.
Kites with good lift coefficients have a broader envelope, and are often more difficult to control into a landing.
Others with higher sail loadings and lower lift coefficients are generally faster in acceleration and yet when line tension is relaxed, will for example, make controlled landings at will.
It is very much a case of selecting your kite for the conditions.
That is why the keenest kite flyers carry a variety of stunt kites to the meetings.
Basic movements
Now that we have a better understanding of the flight envelope it is time to explored Take the kite straight up, pull to make a 180-degree turn and you've turned the kite nose-down into vertical dive.
Halfway to the ground pull again for horizontal flight.
Hold it!
Let the kite zoom around the circuit and find that ‘edge’.
Now try to keep the kite in hover.
If at first you don't succeed, then try and try again.
These basic movements plus the complete 360-degree circle or loop will  lead you into the lazy eight.
This is a most satisfying stunt when you can make each half of the eight equal in diameter.
Start from a vertical climb directly downwind.
Pull right and hold until the kite is heading at 45 degrees downwards, then check with hands level and pull left to start the second half of the figure.
Three-quarters of the way around, check with hands level again, and then pull right to complete the eight.
As you can see from the drawing, this and the ‘square’ eight make simple yet testing manoeuvres.
Now go and try to execute them as precisely as drawn!
It follows that the vertical eight will be next in the practice schedule followed by an intentional landing as distinct from those earlier arrivals.
This is made all the easier after first experiencing the hover at the ‘edge’.
Take the kite around the circuit, and hold a hover then walk towards the kite, allowing the lines to slacken and if it is a relatively standard steerable kite, it will land.
There are some very light kites which float for ever, never land but eventually flop.
These are the high performance light wind kites with large sail area.
In contrast, the smaller and faster stunters with higher sail loading can be pirouetted over a designated spot and dropped onto their tails with little more than a quick lunge forwards by the flyer.
Above: Padded straps are comfortable to grip this way — note arms extended, NOT raised.
Opposite: The Peter Powell heavy duty handle.
End o–the Spectra line is sleeved, in this case with fine shoe lace.
Line breaks
We've already designated Spectra or Dyneema line for your stunter and for the good reason that this material is not only lightest for its strength, but that it also has the property of sliding on itself even with as many as fifteen twists between flyer and kite.
There is a disadvantage.
If these lines come into contact with others of ‘foreign’ material such as a polyester, then they melt through in a trice and your kite is away, floating down on the breeze leaving you with two rather expensive short ends.
For this there is only one solution.
Avoid others, find your own space and keep clear.
The other possibility is a single line failure, or more likely, a single line clip failure.
Here we have a dangerous situation of a kite flailing on one line, possibly towards onlookers and certainly not under control.
If the way is clear, run towards the kite and relieve the tension on the single line.
This way, it is possible to make a sort of controlled flop and avoid any damage to kite or third party (see page 164).
No wind flying
We mentioned the ‘unlandable’ lightweight kites and have explained how the lift component can enable a kite to fly faster than the wind speed.
A combination of the two features can result in the remarkable ability to fly in near zero wind conditions.
Using shorter (24 m or 80 ft) and lightest lines, with a light 240cm (96in) kite it is possible to fly right around 360 degrees in horizontal flight and throw in a loop or two for good measure.
This is made possible by whipping up speed with a continuous pull on the lines by the flyer.
At the same time he or she is  backing up in an eccentric centre circle so that the flight pattern resembles that of the snail design.
The stunt makes those frustrating windless days tolerable.
Lee Sedgwick's party piece involves self-launching a quad-line ‘Revolution’ javelin fashion, snatching the lines into tension and flying a routine largely through sheer manpower, then concluding in the reverse of the opening by catching the kite from a stall!
He calls it ‘3-D’.
Lee also pioneered ground hook flying, as seen at the Wildwood New Jersey Championships in 1987.
First he flew on a full radius but with the lines passing through a ground hook.
As the flight progressed he walked towards the kite so that he was underneath it.
then flew to the tune of Lady in Red stroking the kite in the sand and with his hand as the song reached the ‘cheek to cheek’ section.
Changing over handles is a solution to the reversal of control caused by the ground hook system.
Like all other unusual accomplishments, it only nears perfection after hours of determined practice: but once the technique is acquired, the potential for a stunning showpiece is obvious.
STACK
What began as a London UK-based co-ordinating body for organisation of stunt kite competitions has grown into a worldwide association known as Stunt, Team And Competitive Kiting (or STACK) with representatives in over 14 nations.
It runs a League, and is involved in establishing criteria for judging standards for a series of compulsory figures.
Their diagrams have become the official guide for events everywhere, both individual and for team flying.
All serious sport kite flyers are advised to join and so keep up to date with their official manual.
The manual is the nearest one could get to an International Code Sportif or Sporting Code which enables all competitively minded flyers of steerable or stunt kites to operate on identical standards.
It includes basic information for the newcomer either as a solo performer or as a team flyer.
Diagrams cover a vast range of figures and general rules cover the requirements for various competition classes.
These are divided into Junior and Senior sections  for Individual or Team precision flying plus the same divisions for Ballet to musical accompaniment.
It is the latter which has greatest popular appeal, rather akin to the following for ice dancing where choreography and style in tempo with the rhythm offer great opportunities for graceful interpretation.
Even if not in any way competitive, STACK membership is advantageous for the individual stunt flyer, not only for the informative manual, but also for its newsletter with a regular calendar of activities worldwide and tips on team flying.
This implies two, three or four kites being flown in formation — a daunting challenge for anyone, especially those who feel they have their hands full when trying to control a solo kite!
Ron Reich demo's the ground loop system st Dieppe, passing his Top-of-the-Line kite behind him!
Team flying
Team flying offers a thrilling extension of excitement to the participants, but only after hours of practice.
Co-ordination with the other flyers through a schedule of figures can only be achieved with full understanding, and a strong team leader who acts as a caller to signal all the changes of movement.
Practice with ‘sticks’(miniature kites on the end of a I metre (39in) dowel) forms a good start for understanding both the figures and the jargon which has developed to describe the shapes.
Unfortunately this is the least standardised aspect of team flying.
There is as yet no official glossary and to the outsider, the terms bear little relationship to the shapes, much more to the flip lingo of rock music.
Nothing wrong in that — it is a reflection on the lively approach of a youthful new generation of kite enthusiasts.
Quite apart from the vernacular which ranges from ‘circle’ for a loop or ‘infinity’for a figure of eight, to ‘the rug’for expanding loops around a constant centre — or two of these for a ‘Gautier brassiere’there are varied modes of command from the team leaders.
Synchronised movement is critical, so the command has to be brief and so timed by a delayed ‘one-and- pull sort of order.
This gives the kite flyers a  precise notice of timing for making any change of direction.
Warming-up figures like the infinity or horizontal figure of eight, and straight passes in trail are the introductory manoeuvres which involve least complication and yet teach the flyers the arts of timing and speed control.
‘Laddering’ or a series of ascending (or descending) passes in trail to form a stepping sequence is another basic stunt which tests the degree of compatibility of each flyer and the kite.
Speed control is exercised by body movement.
Experienced teams are constantly moving back and forth, speeding up by pulling hard on the lines or conversely running forward to slow the kites.
They cover a lot of ground so the designated flight area has to include very generous margins of up to an extra 50% over the line lengths and, most important, this area has to be clear of all spectators and especially other kites.
Team kites fall into several categories, chosen for precision flying or ballet and to suit the wind conditions.
So for smooth open stunts, the Flexifoil has been used, and for team precision, the quad-line Revolutions.
In between and by far the most popular are the range of 245–275 cm (8–9 ft) swept-wing Delta shapes, and in some cases the 3/4 scaled down variants.
The Delta kites are selected for their consistency rather than extreme rates of turn or agility as would be the case for a sport kite flown solo.
Obviously, all the team kites should be of identical design for aesthetic and performance reasons.
They should also be of a type that has simple and quickly altered bridle trimming.
This ought to harmonise the general flight speed of the 3 or 4 kites in the team, and their rate of turn.
What is not readily appreciated by the newcomer is the stagger of the line lengths.
A variance of 1–2m (3–6ft) is typical between each of the flyers.
This reduces the risk of airflow interference from kite to kite which at close quarters can have surprising effects!
A similar and perhaps better appreciated situation can happen in yacht racing where it is possible to ‘take the wind’ out of another's sail.
This is in fact a deliberate tactic which is frequently exercised.
So there is an advantage in using handles of the Peter Powell heavy duty type to allow for adjustment on the flying field.
Many of the expert demonstration teams use wrist straps with pre-set line lengths.
They are said to relieve cramp In the forearm which can arise from long periods of practice flying: but here another caution should be observed.
Any sign of tingling fingers or  triggering motion in the thumb or fingers must be taken as a warning.
Perfect spacing, identical speeds, absolute harmony in the Top-of-the-Line team display at Bristol.
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome is a latter day symptom that has affected keyboard operators and kite flyers alike.
Basically it means that the nervous system which passes through the wrist in the carpal tunnel has been stressed and the best cure is rest, or in the case of trigger finger, an injection or even an operation.
This situation is best avoided by arranging the straps over the back of the hand and not around the wrist.
Pass the straps between the forefinger and the thumb, then by closing the hand, the loop is gripped firm, and one retains full sensitivity as though the line were to be connected directly to the arm.
If the straps are padded with foam plastic, especially in the area that comes across the back of the hand, then so much the better.
It goes without saying that the strap loops must be large enough to enable them to be cast off the hands quickly in any emergency.
All of this applies to kites flown on two lines, for solo sport, individual precision aerobatics or team flying.
When flying on four lines where wrist action is part of the control system, the handles will be entirely different in their shape and operation.