

MÜNCHEBERG'S GRIM SHADOW
Oblt.
Joachim Müncheberg, outstanding commander of 7 Staffel, Jagdgeschwader 26, who led his little unit to Sicily in February 1941, to operate over Malta; these were the first Messerschmitt Bf109E fighters to operate anywhere in the Mediterranean war zone.
Müncheberg, already credited with 23 victories before coming to Sicily, wears his recently-awarded Knights' Cross at the throat.
His Messerschmitts all featured yellow-painted noses on which was superimposed a red heart; they also carried the script S emblem of the Geschwader.
(Bundesarchiv )
9/2/41
Further naval action marked this day when Force ‘H’ attacked Genoa on the Italian north-west coast.
While three Swordfish directed the gunfire of the ships (Italian sources reported 76 killed and 226 injured in this attack on Genoa), and  Fulmars and Skuas patrolled protectively above, sixteen more Swordfish bombed and mined Livorne and La Spezia; Italian Dicat gunners claimed one Swordfish shot down and in fact Midspmn.
N.G. Attenborough and his crew were killed, although it was believed that they had flown into a balloon barrage.
Italian maritime aircraft were soon out in force searching for the British Fleet, but not until after midday was it at last spotted.
Sottoten.
Diego Dobrilla of the 287 a Squadriglia R.M. had taken off from his base at Elmas with a Naval tenente aboard his Z.506B as observer.
Flying north from the island they spotted the vessels at 1215, but almost at once were attacked by patrolling fighters, three Fulmars of 808 Squadron and three Skuas of 800, reporting one of each type on their tail, which remained there for some twenty minutes.
P.O. (A) Jopling and his TAG, L/A Glen, were in the Skua (L3007), they and the Fulmar firing from long range but only achieving a single hit on the dorsal turret, but both then closed in and after further firing the much-damaged floatplane came down on the sea, the engineer breaking an arm during the crash-landing.
Six fighters then passed over but made no attempt to strafe.
The crew remained with their stricken aircraft until evening, when they were rescued by the motor torpedo boat ‘La Marsa’
Meanwhile a Cant Z.1007bis bomber of the 51 o Stormo B.T. was in transit from Vicenzo to Alghero in Sardinia.
At Pisa, where they landed to refuel, the crew were ordered to undertake a reconnaissance patrol searching for the British ships.
Landing briefly at Sarzana to take aboard a Regia Marina observer, they set off on their mission, but at 1520 were intercepted by seven fighters which they identified as Hurricanes, but were in fact Fulmars of 808 Squadron.
Lt. Taylour's Blue Section attacked and the bomber was badly hit, and five of the six men aboard were wounded.
A crash-landing on the surface of the sea was carried out, during which the one unwounded member of the crew was injured, but all were safely picked up by the destroyer ‘Camicia Nere’.
For Malta however an event of much lesser magnitude was soon to have an effect infinitely greater on the immediate concern of the defenders.
During the day 7 Staffel of Jagdgeschwader 26 ‘Schlageter’ landed at Gela, Sicily, on completion of the long flight from Germany.
Equipped with Messerschmitt Bf109E fighters, the unit was composed of battle-hardened veterans who had seen much action during the fighting over England during the previous summer.
The unit commander, Oberleutnant Joachim Müncheberg, was one of the Luftwaffe's outstanding fighter pilots at this time.
Already awarded the Ritterkreuz (Knights' Cross) during September 1940, he had twenty-three victories to his credit.
His little unit — never more than nine aircraft strong — were to play a part quite disproportionate to its small size during the next four months.
Already however, the Luftwaffe had been reduced in strength in Sicily as units began moving over to Libya to support the new German Afrika Korps, which was being assembled in the Tripoli area.
During late January and early February the Bf110s of III/ZG 26, Ju87s of I/St.G 1 and Ju88s of II and III/LG 1 and 1(F)/121, moved to this new area.
Before February was out they would be joined by II/St.G 2, and by the whole of Stukageschwader 3 direct from North-West Europe.
Bf110 of 5/ZG26 visiting Palermo's Boccadifalco airfield in North-West Sicily (N. Malizia )
10/2/41
During the night of 10 February the eight Whitleys at Luqa took off to drop their paratroops over Italy for the ‘Colossus’ venture.
This, the first such mission by Britain's new airborne units, was aimed to demolish one of two viaducts over the Tragino river in Southern Italy.
Six of the Whitleys were to carry the men — thirty five paratroops of No. 2 Commando — and the other two to bomb Foggia to create a diversion.
One was late starting, that carrying the officer in charge of demolitions.
However those from the other five landed safely, but found that the viaduct chosen had its supports constructed of reinforced concrete, rather than masonry, as had been presumed.
Explosives were therefore concentrated on one pier, while the balance were used to blow up a small bridge over the Ginestra, a tributary of the Tragino, over which repair traffic would have to come.
Their mission complete the men divided into three parties to march to the coast, where it was planned that a submarine would pick them up.
At daybreak they went into hiding, but were found due to their tracks being seen in the snow which lay about.
To avoid the risk of injury to the many civilians who gathered, the force was obliged to surrender, together with their Italian-born guide, Fortunato Picchi.
Picchi, having served in the Italian Army during the First War, settled in England about 1920.
A former Soho waiter and later assistant  banqueting manager at the Savoy Hotel, he was interned when the war with Italy broke out, but was later released to join the Pioneer Corps.
He then trained as a parachutist and volunteered as guide for this ill-fated raid.
After capture he was arraigned on a charge of sabotage, and was shot in Rome.
One of the two bomber Whitleys, N1456 skippered by Plt.Off.
Jack Wotherspoon, experienced  engine problems, the crew being ordered to bale-out but the pilot force-landing the aircraft at the mouth of the River Sele; all were captured.
During that same night Plt.Off.
Eliot and Sgt. Bamberger of 261 Squadron were on a night readiness and were both ordered off.
Bamberger  orbited over Filfla for some time.
He was just beginning to worry about his fuel situation when he was called into the searchlight area, only to be fired on by A.A. He advised Control that he was coming in to land and requested that the flare path be lit, but was advised that there was still an alert in force and therefore no flare path could be employed.
A second request brought a blank refusal, but fortunately for him it was a bright moonlit night, and he was able to make a perfect landing on a grass slope near Rabat.
12/2/41
Malta's Wellingtons were also out again during the night of 10/11th., seventeen H.E.
bombs and thirty incendiaries hitting Comiso airfield where five of KG26's He111s were damaged.
On 12th.
Flg.Off.
Warburton of 69 Squadron undertook a reconnaissance over Southern Italy to seek the results of Operation ‘Colossus’, but this day was marked by the first appearance over the island of 7/JG 26.
During the afternoon ‘B’ Flight of 261 Squadron was ordered to scramble after three Ju88s reported approaching at 20,000 feet.
As they climbed after their quarry the Hurricanes were suddenly ‘bounced’ by the Bf109Es, Oblt.
Müncheberg, Lt. Klaus Mietusch and Fw.
Johannsen claiming one shot down each in quick succession between 1641 and 1645.
Flt.Lt.
G. Watson in N2715 and Plt.Off.
D.J.
Thacker in P3733 were both shot down into the sea, while Flt.Lt.
H.F.R. Bradbury in V7768 was badly shot up.
Wounded, and with his aircraft riddled with cannon and machine gun fire which stripped all the fabric from one side of the fuselage and almost completely severed the rudder control, Bradbury managed to reach the airfield and force-land.
Thacker, who had also been wounded, managed to bale out into St. Paul's Bay.
One of the first Hurricane pilots to fall victim to Müncheberg's 7/JG26 Bf109s was Plt.Off.
D.J.
Thacker.
He was wounded on 12 February 1941, baling out of P37333 into the sea.
(J.V. Marshall 
‘Jock’ Barber recalled: ‘…
Watson and Thacker shot down — informed that all was clear but continued weaving — just as well as I then saw a red spinner in my mirror.
Couple of tight turns and had almost turned inside the 109 when it made off.
I then circled over Thacker until he was picked up.’
John Pain also had vivid memories of this occasion: ‘Once again the loss of a pilot could be laid at the door of the A.V.M. He was still insisting that the most senior officer led the flight.
Watson was a Wimpey pilot who had been press-ganged onto fighters while awaiting a replacement aircraft.
He had little knowledge of Hurricanes and none of air fighting.
He led us out to sea after four 88s in a long stern chase — always deadly, particularly over Malta — when I saw we were actually overtaking the 88s, I realised they were acting as decoys.
I pulled out to starboard and went through the gate (boosted the engine to the maximum).
Watson, Thacker and Bradbury maintained their position and speed.
As I banked to port to make a full beam attack on the nearest 88 I sighted the 109s coming down on the other three.
I shouted a warning over the R/T and raked my 88 from nose to tail.
One 109 closed with Watson who made no effort to evade, despite further calls from me.
Thacker and Bradbury broke away and into the attackers.
Watson rolled straight over on his back and went straight in.
Thacker was set on fire and I'm not sure what happened to Bradbury.
I got the 109 which got Watson and he crashed into the drink about 200 yards from Watty.
I got two more bursts into two other 109s before running out of ammunition and, thank God, targets.
I have no idea what happened to the 88.’
(The aircraft, from e(F)/121, got back to Sicily in damaged condition and with a mortally wounded gunner.)
‘Thacker, who was the sort of swimmer who needed a Mae West to stay afloat in his bath, battled his burning Hurricane back over the Maltese coast at about 6,000 feet, he then pulled his hood back, rolled her and baled out.
I was in company, but not formation.
I followed him down.
Unfortunately for Thacker the wind was offshore and instead of drifting over the island he went the opposite direction out to sea.
By now I was low on petrol and flew back to Takali after Thacker hit the water.
I refuelled and re-armed and went back to keep an eye on Thacker who was about three miles out in the channel.
To my surprise this man who could not swim a stroke had covered a quarter of a mile towards Malta, judging by the fluorescine trail.’
David Thacker recalls a slightly different version: ‘When I was shot down it was my first encounter with the enemy.
Details of the number of Hurricanes scrambled or my position in the formation escape me.
Similarly, I don't recall any organised attack.
About 15,000 feet presumably someone called ‘Tally Ho!’ because I suddenly saw three Ju88s, which were at the same height, slightly to my left, range about 1,000 yards, and heading away from Malta.
I pulled the boost over-ride, but to my surprise was unable to close the range.
The only other Hurricane of which I was aware at this time was flown by Hamish Hamilton, which was ahead and to my left.
This aircraft was firing at the Ju88s from astern.
I did not hear any calls warning of the presence of the 109s, and  very soon after first sighting the Ju88s I became aware that my aircraft was being hit.
I executed a hard right turn, but could not see any other aircraft in my vicinity.
The instruments were shattered, but the controls and engine were functioning except the latter was spewing coolant vapour.
I headed back to Malta, well throttled  back and losing height.
About 5,000 feet, when over St. Paul's Bay, the engine cut; the vapour and smoke had now increased, so I baled out.
Soon after hitting the water, I saw a Hurricane above me which I discovered later was Barber.
I made violent splashes to attract his attention; he circled until a rescue launch picked me up, some 30 to 45 minutes later.
Contrary to John Pain's comment, I have always been a reasonable swimmer, and was convinced I would be able to reach the coast which I could see.
I suffered shrapnel wounds in the buttocks and one arm.
I was in hospital and convalescent for about a month.
In retrospect, the Luftwaffe's planning and execution of his combat is hard to fault, whereas the least said about our own efforts the better!’
A Sunderland of 228 Squadron had been sent out at once to search for Thacker and he was soon spotted, being fished out of the water an hour later by a speedboat from Kalafrana.
Plt.Off.
Pain was credited with a ‘probable’ for the German fighter he had claimed shot down, but in fact the Luftwaffe suffered no loss or serious damage to any of its fighters on this day.
One of 69 Squadron's Marylands on Takali airfield, with Hurricanes of 261 Squadron in the background.
(via J.V. Marshall )
A further raid appeared next day, ‘A’ Flight making the scramble for 261 Squadron on this occasion.
Flt.Lt.
MacLachlan led the Hurricanes up to 22,000 feet to the South of Comino where four Messerschmitts were seen coming straight at them.
These broke away sharply on seeing the British fighters which gave chase but were unable to catch them.
During this day the A.A. defences claimed a Ju88 shot down, while on 14th. on another scramble, 7/JG 26 was again encountered, Sgt. Len Davies having his Hurricane, V7771, slightly damaged by the Messerschmitts.
The appearance of the dreaded ‘One Oh Nines’ had seriously affected the squadron's morale.
Reported Wg.Cdr.
Jonas: ‘Day after day the sirens would scream dismally, and already our Hurricanes would be wearily climbing their way up into the sun.
And more often than not, out of the sun would come the yellow-nosed Messerschmitts, long before our fighters had had sufficient time in which to gain their best operational height.
To anyone interested in psychology, the effect of the Messerschmitts on the Hurricane pilots was obvious.
For here was an ordinary average crowd of Air Force youngsters, neither better nor worse than their compatriots in squadrons all over the world.
Many of them by now had been in Malta for several months…and ever since Italy had entered into the war, these boys, often in obsolete aircraft, had carried out bravely and unquestioning, any task that they had been called upon to perform.
Then more Hurricanes had arrived, and encouraged by successes, morale had risen, fiery and inspired, to almost unbelievable heights.
By now, not only were many of the Hurricanes tired and scarred, but the pilots themselves were tired.
No new fighters ever seemed to come now, no fresh and eager faces appeared in the Takali mess.
Instead there were empty places at the table, empty beds, cars for sale and dogs that needed masters…’
The diary kept by Flt.Lt.
Whittingham also gives an insight into the lives of the fighter pilots at this time- and to some of their off-duty pursuits.
‘February 10 — I have been given a dog — a mongrel pup called ‘Lady’, and I have bought a wizard little pony and trap for £70 — a trim grey called ‘Lucky’.
He is one of the best ponies on the island.
It's an excellent thing to have a hobby here.
It's such a dangerous sort of life that one can't help thinking about it a bit.
So it's a good thing to get one's mind off in one's spare time.
February 15 — P. and I drove  ‘Lucky’ to Valetta this morning.
An air raid took place when we got there.
The people rushing to the shelters upset ‘Lucky’ a bit.
We stopped with him.
The A.A. guns did not worry him much, nor did a bit of shrapnel that whistled down near him.
What with continual air raids (seven times a day) and the presence of 109's about the place it is a logical conclusion that our chances of survival are not very high.
But one simply must not think about this; at any rate, I am enjoying myself while it lasts.
February 18 — now that the risk of death is so much more increased I've been doing a spot of philosophising.
My attitude is that somebody has to do the job and if I get bumped off, I have experienced much more than the average bloke.
February 23 — I am to be made flight lieutenant and given command of ‘B’ flight.
This will please mother.’
15–16/2/41
7/LG 1 reported the loss of a Ju88 — Ll + JR flown by Lt. Wilhelm Gretz — over the island on 15th., probably shot down by A.A. fire, and two others from 4th Staffel returned to Sicily badly damaged, but next day came another severe blow to the defenders.
‘A’ Flight Hurricanes scrambled at 0915, Flt.Lt.
MacLachlan leading in V7731.
Recorded MacLachlan in his diary: ‘As ‘A’ Flight were on the 9 o'clock watch John decided to have all the blood-thirsty pilots on, in the hopes of getting a 109.
We arranged that if we were attacked we would break away and form a defensive circle.’
About half an hour later, when the formation was patrolling over Luqa at 20,000 feet, they were suddenly attacked from above and astern by six Bf109Es.
The flight at once broke to the right and formed a defensive circle, the Messerschmitts overshooting them — and probably climbing back to higher altitude.
Sgt. Bamberger then spotted four more coming down out of the sun (these were likely to have been four of the original six, making their second swoop).
He warned MacLachlan, who recorded: ‘Just as I took my place in the circle I saw four more Messerschmitts coming down out of the sun.
I turned back under them, and they all overshot me.
I looked round very carefully but could see nothing, so I turned back on the tail of the nearest Hun, who was chasing some Hurricanes in front of him.
We were all turning gently to port as I cut the corner and was slowly closing on the Hun.
I was determined to get him, and must have been concentrating so intently on his movements that, like a fool, I forgot to look in the mirror until it was too late.
Suddenly there was a crash in my cockpit — bits and pieces seemed to fly everywhere.
Instinctively I went into a steep spiral dive, furiously angry that I had been beaten at my own game.
My left arm was dripping with blood, and when I tried to raise it only the top part moved, the rest hung limply by my side.
Everything happened so quickly that I have no very clear recollection of what actually took place.
I remember opening my hood, disconnecting my oxygen and R/T connections and standing up in the cockpit.
The next thing I saw was my kite diving away from me, the roar of its engine gradually fading as it plunged earthwards.
It was a marvellous feeling to be safely out of it, everything seemed so quiet and peaceful.
I could clearly hear the roar of engines above me, and distinctly heard one long burst of cannon fire.
I could not see what was happening as I was falling upsidedown and my legs  obscured all view of the aircraft above me.
My arm was beginning to hurt pretty badly, so I decided to pull my chute straight away in case I fainted from loss of blood.
I reached round for my ripcord but could not find it.
For some unknown reason I thought my chute must have been torn off me while I was getting out of my kite, and almost gave up making any further efforts to save myself.
I remember thinking that the whole process of being shot down and being killed seemed very much simpler and less horrible than I had always imagined.
There was just going to be one big thud when I hit the deck and then all would be over — my arm would stop hurting and no more 109s could make dirty passes at me behind my back.
I think I must have been gradually going off into a faint when I suddenly thought of mother reading the telegram saying that I had been killed in action.
I made one last effort to see if my parachute was still there, and to my amazement and relief found it had not been torn off after all.
With another supreme effort I reached round and pulled the ripcord.
There was a sickening lurch as my chute opened and my harness tightened round me so that I could hardly breathe.
I felt horribly ill and faint.
Blood from my arm came streaming back into my face, in spite of the fact that I was holding the stump as tightly as I could.
I was able to breathe only with the utmost difficulty, and my arm hurt like hell.
I could see Malta spread out like a map 15,000 feet below me, and I longed to be down there — just to lie still and die peacefully.
I was woken from this stupor by the roar of an engine, and naturally thought some bloodthirsty Jerry had come to finish me off.
I don't think I really minded what happened, though certainly the thought of a few more cannon shells flying past me didn't exactly cheer me up.
To my joy, however, I saw that my escort was a Hurricane, piloted, as I later learned, by ‘Eric’ Taylor.
He had quite rightly decided that he could do no good by playing with the Huns at 20,000 feet, so came down to see that none of them got me.’
Meanwhile the other Hurricanes had all returned to base, although Plt.Off.
McAdam's aircraft had been virtually shot to pieces during the combat, while Flg.Off.
Peacock-Edwards landed V7072 with numerous shell and bullet holes and with starboard aileron shot away, but neither pilot was hurt.
It seems fairly certain that MacLachlan had been shot down by Oblt.
Müncheberg, who claimed one Hurricane from which the pilot baled out at 0945 (1045 C.E.T.).
In the first pass he had already claimed one at 0938, Uffz.
Liebing claiming a second; it is likely that these were the two damaged Hurricanes.
MacLachlan, victor of eight combats over the island, was fortunate to come down on Malta itself, rather than in the sea: ‘For what seemed like hours I hung there, apparently motionless, with Malta still as far away as ever.
Once or twice I started swinging very badly, but as I was using my only hand to stop myself bleeding to death, I was unable to do anything about it.
At approximately 1,500 feet I opened my eyes again and to my joy realised that I was very much lower down.
For a little while I was afraid I was going to land in the middle of a town, but I mercifully drifted to the edge of this.
For the last 100 feet I seemed to drop out of the sky — the flat roof of a house came rushing up at me, and just as I was about to land on it, it dodged to one side and I ended up in a little patch of green wheat.
I hit the ground with a terrific thud, rolled over once or twice, and then lay back intending to die quietly.
This, however, was not to be.
Scarcely had I got myself fairly comfortable and closed my eyes when I heard the sound of people running  I hurriedly tried to think up some famous last words to give my public, but never had a chance to utter them.
I was surrounded by a crowd of shouting, gesticulating Malts, who pulled at my parachute, lifted my head and drove me so furious that I had to give up the dying idea in order to concentrate completely on kicking every Malt who came within range.
(From what the soldiers told me after, I believe I registered some rather effective shots.)
Eventually two very dim stretcher bearers arrived with a first aid outfit.
I told them to put a tourniquet on my arm and give me some morphia, whereupon one of them started to bandage my wrist and the other went off to ask what morphia was.
In the end I got them to give me the first aid outfit and fixed myself up.
At last a doctor arrived who actually knew what to do.
He put me on a stretcher, had me carried about half a mile across fields to an ambulance, which in turn took me down to the local advanced dressing station.
Here they filled me with morphia, gave me ether, and put my arm in a rough splint.
When I came round they gave me a large tot of whisky, another injection of morphia and sent me off to Imtarfa, as drunk as a lord.
When I eventually arrived at the hospital I was feeling in the best of spirits and apparently shook the sisters by asking them to bring on the dancing girls.’
‘They wasted no time in getting me up to the theatre, and after making the General promise not to take my arm off I gave a running commentary as the ether took effect.
When I came round I was back in M.3 surrounded by screens, with Sister Dempsey sitting in a chair beside me.
After a quick glance I was delighted to see that my arm was still there, so went off to sleep again, feeling very cheerful about the whole thing.
The next two days were pretty average mental and physical hell — thank God I cannot remember very much about them.
I was having a saline transfusion day and night, and unfortunately my blood kept clotting, which necessitated making fresh holes in my arm and legs.
I remember watching the saline solution dripping down the glass tube from the container — terrified that the drips were becoming less frequent and would eventually stop again.
Everyone was simply wizard to me, especially Sister Dempsey.
She used to sit by my bed for hours when she was off duty.
I got a lot of secret amusement telling her to leave me as I wanted to die.
She would get really worried and stroke my forehead and plead with me not to talk about dying.
Had she but known it I had already made up my mind to get better, and nothing in the world was further from my thoughts than death.’
‘As these first two days dragged on I began to realise that there was no hope of saving my arm.
The blood circulation was alright, but my finger movement was scarcely visible, and I could hardly feel anything in my hand.
My whole arm began to smell positively revolting, and the pain was almost unbearable.
Davidson and the General kept hinting that I would be much better off without it, but I was terrified that without it I should never be able to fly again, so refused to let them touch it.
By the third morning, however, I was so weak and the pain so unbearable that they had little difficulty in taking me up to the theatre and performing the necessary operation.
When I came to I was in the cabin at the end of M.3 and still having a saline transfusion.
As I can remember very little about the rest of the day I presume that I must have been unconscious most of the time.
‘This morning (20 February) I was moved back into the ward as I am now off the danger list.
Just before lunch today a Macchi pilot whom I shot down on 9 January was wheeled in, and is now in the next bed to me.
His arm is still very bad though the bullet wound in his thigh has healed.
I think he was even more surprised to see me than I was to see him.
It certainly is a crazy war!’
Despite the amputation, the indomitable ‘Mac’ was not out of the air for long.
As soon as he was up and about he insisted on taking up a Magister and flying it one-handed, and before long he was back on operations with an artificial arm.
He was to become a leading exponent of night intruding later in the war, bringing his personal score to 162 before being shot down over France by Flak, and dying of his injuries from the crash which followed, in July 1943.
He was not to fly operationally on Malta again however, for on release from hospital in March, he was despatched to Middle East Headquarters in Cairo.
He followed the wounded Flt.Lt.
Bradbury, who had also been sent off to this destination on 24 February, in company with Sqn.Ldr.
Trumble, who was being rested.
However, in the event Trumble was posted to Crete as commanding officer of Heraklion, but was captured during the invasion in May.
261 Squadron was taken over by Sqn.Ldr.
Lambert, whilst ‘A’ Flight passed to Flt.Lt.
Peacock-Edwards and ‘B’ Flight to Flg.Off.
Whittingham.
Around this time Flg.Off.
Gerald Bellamy was posted to the squadron, having previously served with 3 A.A.C.U. He recalls: ‘I was posted off to Takali and given cockpit drill in a Hurricane.
The only monoplane I had flown was a few hours in the 3 A.A.C.U. Magister.
This was supposed to make me fit to fly a Hurricane!’
Sgt. Ashbury, who had been one of the early Gladiator pilots, was posted to 148 Squadron.
However he remained with the Wellington unit only for a short time before being posted to Control Office duties at Luqa.
By 16 February A.H.Q. Malta noted that 261 Squadron had thirty pilots available from forty-three on strength, with nineteen serviceable Hurricanes to hand, nine more being in repair.
The fate of all too many Malta aircraft in early 1941: a shattered Maryland of 69 Squadron.
17–23/2/41
A Bf110D night fighter of the newly arrived 1/NJG 3 was lost over the island on 17th but it is uncertain whether this fell to the A.A. guns or was shot down by Plt.Off.
Hamilton, who claimed an aircraft identified as a ‘DO215’ round about this time.
However, few engagements were noted for the fighters for several days, although Sgt. Robertson saw three Bf109s above him on 20th., but was unable to reach their altitude.
On this same day 148 Squadron was reinforced by the arrival at Luqa of two Wellingtons (T2816 and T2891) and their crews from 70 Squadron, on detachment from Kabrit.
Three days later, on 23rd., the Stukas returned to the skies over Malta, and on this occasion the defences were able to engage them without undue fighter interference, although Plt.Off.
Hamilton claimed one shot down, probably the aircraft (J9+JH) of Ill/St.G I flown by Ofhr.
Roman Heil, whilst a second aircraft from this Gruppe, Fw.
Erwin Diekwisch's 9th.
Staffel machine, was hit in the engine by A.A. shrapnel.
He managed to reach the coast of Sicily before he and his gunner were forced to bale out.
The guns claimed three Ju87s shot down.
24/2/41
The Messerschmitts were back on 24th., four of them attacking a flight of patrolling Hurricanes over Imtarfa.
As they opened fire the British formation broke up, Sgt. Bamberger going into a spin as the 109s disappeared back up into the sun.
Sgt. Davies's Hurricane became separated and one Messerschmitt closed to 50 yards before opening fire — and missed!
No losses were suffered on this occasion, although that night one of nine 148 Squadron Wellingtons failed to return from a raid on Tripoli, Flg.Off.
G.H. Green and his crew being reported missing in T2891, one of the attached 70 Squadron aircraft.
25/2/41
Frequently during this period the British fighter pilots recorded combats and claims against aircraft identified as Dorniers — usually Do215s, but occasionally also Do17s.
The Do215 saw only  extremely limited service with the Luftwaffe as a reconnaissance aircraft, and no Do17 units seem to have served in Sicily or Italy.
It is surmised therefore that such claims generally relate to Bf110s, which were of generally similar appearance.
Such seems to have been the case on 25 February when eight of the Hurricanes were sent up after four aircraft reported as Do215s at 6,000 feet over the St. Paul's Bay area.
One of the intruders was straggling some half mile behind the rest, so this was attacked by the newly-promoted Flt.Lt.
Whittingham, who fired a three second burst from astern and then broke away.
The rear gunner returned fire, but the aircraft then dived into the sea in flames, this being confirmed by A.A. gunners at a coastal battery.
The other pilots all attacked the remaining three and a multiplicity of claims were made, Plt.Off.
Hamilton and Flg.Off.
Jock' Hilton Barber (in V7102) each claiming one shot down, while Plt.Off.
Walsh and Sgt. Davies claimed one damaged between them, although Davies' V7771 was damaged by return fire.
Sgt. Robertson in V7116 claimed a damaged, but identified      his victim as a Do17, while Plt.Off.
Pain in V7670 made a similar claim, but against a Bf110.
Yet another claim for one damaged was submitted by the A.A. gunners.
The British pilots reported that the German aircraft were accompanied by nine Bf109s, but these did not come down ‘to play’.
No German records relating to such a formation have so far been found, but it is possible that they were aircraft of III/ZG 26.
If so, then it was a case of sweet revenge for Whittingham, who had been shot down by this unit over England during 1940!
However, the reconnaissance unit, 2(F)/123, lost a Bf110 in this area, Fw.
Karl Bernhard and his gunner posted missing.
That afternoon 7/JG 26 was over St. Paul's Bay, Oblt.
Müncheberg and Lt. Mietusch each claiming Hurricanes shot down at 1545.
It is possible that they may have shot down Plt.Off.
Walsh, who was in the air again on a high patrol with Sgt. Davies.
John Pain wrote home to his mother: ‘I note that a Canadian (Walsh) sprang a glycol leak at 27,000 feet and he was forced to bale out.
He landed about 300 yards from a destroyer and was picked up with a leg broken in four places and a broken arm.
Presumably he had hit the tailplane.
He died in hospital of pneumonia.’
(Presumably his fatal illness was brought on by severe shock.)
148 Squadron suffered such an attrition rate to its Wellingtons during attacks on Malta's airfields early in 1941. that immediately after the end of February the unit was withdrawn to Egypt.
On 26 February six of the bombers were destroyed and seven badly damaged in a single day.
This selection of photographs shows a number of this unit s aircraft wrecked, burning.
or damaged at this time.
26/2/41
On the following day, 26 February, the Axis launched one of the biggest ‘Blitzes’ to date — certainly the heaviest raid since that of 19 January.
The attack came in at around 1300, with Luqa as the main target, the attacking force being identified as comprising thirty-eight Ju87s, twelve Ju88s, ten Do1 7s or 215s ten He111s and twenty to thirty fighters.
The latter included the Bf109Es of 7/JG 26 with MC200s of 6° Gruppo and 12 CR 42s of 156° Gruppo, led by Magg.
Mezzetti and Cap.
Filippi respectively.
Flg.Off.
Taylor led off eight Hurricanes in V7671, climbing to 28,000 feet, when many Ju87s were seen below at about 10,000 feet just as the A.A. barrage opened up against them.
The Hurricanes dived on them, but at once the escorting fighters were on their tails; at least two ‘convoys’ were noted of Ju87, Hurricane, Bf109E in line astern, all firing.
Plt.Off.
‘Chubby’ Eliot made his first claim on Malta for one shot down — a Ju87 in flames — and a second of these as a probable.
Flg.Off.
‘Terry’ Foxton also claimed one Ju87 and a probable, but his Hurricane was then hit by a fighter, and with the radiator destroyed his engine soon seized; he crash-landed the smoking aircraft safely.
The main force of level bombers passed over to 6 8,000 feet virtually unchallenged, their bombs crashing down on Luqa where six Wellingtons were burnt out (R1247, 1381, 1382, 1383, 1384 of 148 Squadron, plus the sole remaining aircraft of 70 Squadron detachment, T2816) and seven more badly damaged, as were several Marylands.
The devastation was tremendous, hangars and workshops being badly smashed.
One bomber — reportedly a Ju88 — was seen to be hit by A.A. and went vertically into the sea with a great howl of engines.
Losses amongst the defending fighters were severe; Plt.Off.
Kearsey in   V7121 and Plt.Off.
Langdon in V7474 were both shot down and killed.
‘Eric’ Taylor, Malta's current leading ‘ace’with over seven victories, was last seen on the tail of a Stuka with a Bf109E on his own tail; he did not return either, and was reported dead when his ‘Mae West’was washed ashore with a cannon shell hole in the centre of the chest.
Again it seems probable that this experienced pilot had fallen victim to Müncheberg, who claimed one Hurricane at 1306, reporting ‘the fighting spirit of the British pilot was fantastic; he tried, although very badly hit, to still attack a Ju88 (sic).’
Müncheberg claimed a second Hurricane four minutes later, Uffz.
Ehlen also claiming one at this time, while Fw.Kestel had opened the scoring with one at 1305.
Four further claims for Hurricanes were made by all 12 pilots of the 156° Gruppo jointly, two confirmed and two probables.
The authorities credited the missing Taylor with a Ju87 probable; Plt.Off.
Pain in V7114 claimed a Do215 probable and a Bf109 damaged, while other pilots were credited with two more probables — a Do215 and a Ju88.
Although reported that the A.A. crews had shot down a Ju88, their claims for the day were for five Ju87s shot down, four probables and one damaged.
It may be that a further Hurricane was also lost, some sources recording R.A.F. fighter losses for this day as five Hurricanes and three pilots.
After the fight had ended John Pain went out in a Magister to look for survivors and found two German aircrew hanging onto a lifebuoy off Ghajn Tuffieha.
They were picked up by a Kalafrana H.S.L. (High Speed Launch) and proved to be the crew of a Ju87.
Eyewitnesses stated that one Ju87 crashed at Ras Hanzir in the inner part of Grand Harbour, beneath Corradino Heights.
Another came down near the Leprosy Hospital, St. Bartholomew's, and pieces of wreckage from these two aircraft are still currently on display in the Malta War Museum.
II/St.G 1 in fact lost three Ju87s, two 4th Staffel aircraft flown by Fw.
Johannes Braun (6G+PR) and Uffz.
Heinz Langreder (6G+ER) being reported missing, while Oblt.
Kurt Reumann, commander of 6th.
Staffel, was seen to be shot down in 6G + GT by Hurricanes.
Another aircraft, this one from 5th.
Staffel, was also hit and damaged by Hurricanes, the gunner, Uffz.
Robert Kolland, being wounded.
One Ju87 of Ill/St.G 1, flown by Hpt.
Helmut Mahlke, was hit in the starboard wing by an A.A. burst, and only by luck and much skill was he able to regain Sicily and land safely.
28/2/ — 2/3/41
Few interceptions took place over the next few days as the R.A.F. licked its wounds.
‘A’ Flight encountered four Bf110s over the island on 28th., but despite a general mix-up, heavy cloud allowed any pilot who felt threatened a quick avenue of retreat, and no claims resulted.
During this time, despite the rapidly deteriorating availability of Hurricanes, the few remaining Fulmars were taking a ‘low key’ role.
The policy was for them to remain around the fringes of a raid and try and pick off stragglers, leaving the ‘infighting’ to the Hurricanes.
Little success had been achieved as they were too slow to have much chance of catching a fleeing Ju88 or Bf110.
On 2 March however, they were called upon to play a more central part in the defence, as Desmond Vincent-Jones relates: ‘The day started  auspiciously when an Heinkel 111 suddenly appeared out of the dawn mist with undercarriage down and started to make an approach to the main runway, presumably mistaking Hal Far for its own base airfield in Sicily.
The aircraft was just about to touch down when the pilot found himself in unfamiliar surroundings and opened his throttle in time for his wheels to clear the cliff-edge at the end of the runway.
He had achieved total surprise and there was complete silence until the first Bofors opened up when he was out to sea and on his way back to the mainland.’
‘At about 1100 hours a smallish raid was detected leaving Sicily on course for Malta.
For some good reason no Hurricanes were available and orders were telephoned through for the Fulmars to get airborne and gain altitude over Hal Far.
Bill Barnes took off with two others, one I believe was Orr, and had climbed to about 2,000 feet after making contact with the Malta Tower who told them the raid was coming in low and very fast.’
Müncheberg and his Kette from 7/JG 26 were on their way out on another hunting expedition.
‘Most of us were standing by the control tower when the Fortress guns opened up to the Northward, and coming through the Flak we saw a series of black dots approaching directly towards us and as they closed we recognised them as yellow-nosed Me109s.
The Fulmars above US continued to circle totally oblivious, and we on the ground were powerless to warn them.
We watched in horror as the enemy opened fire and chunks of metal could be seen falling off the luckless victim's wings and fuselage.
The Me109s swept away out to sea and made no attempt to turn for a further attack.
When we looked upwards again, we were amazed to see all three Fulmars still flying but firing emergency landing signals.
By some miracle all three aircraft landed safely and by an even greater miracle none of the three pilots were wounded.
It had seemed to us like certain death from the beginning of this hideous drama we had just witnessed.
It was the end of daylight flying over Malta for the Fulmars.
Barnes was laughing as he climbed out of his cockpit, and pointed at the huge hole in one wing-root made by a cannon shell and another through the opposite wing.
The other two aircraft had been damaged but got off with bullet holes only.’
This does not tie up entirely with the records of Hal Far, which noted that three Fulmars went up, and that one was damaged and the pilot slightly wounded.
It also seems that at least one Hurricane had got into the air, for Sgt. ‘Jock’ Norwell of 261 Squadron noted in his logbook that he too was attacked by a Messerschmitt on this date, and his aircraft was damaged.
Müncheberg and Fw.
Johannsen each claimed a Hurricane shot down at 1045, both in the same location-obviously the Fulmars.
It seems that official confirmation may not have been forthcoming, for the German O.K.W. records noted only a single Hurricane shot down during this day, while Müncheberg's claim was apparently classed as a ‘probable’, although it remained on his personal list of successes.
Vincent-Jones continues: ‘We decided that some sort of celebration would not be out of order on the occasion of this remarkable escape.
‘Ginger’ Hale, who had led 819 Squadron into Taranto harbour and had recently been appointed to command the Naval Section at Hal Far, suggested he should drive some of us, including the three lucky pilots into Valetta for dinner at the Union Club.
This  sounded a good idea.
Malta was on short rations and the menu was sparse but we must have consumed most of the champagne remaining in the club cellars.
At about midnight we set off on our way back to Hal Far.
‘Ginger’ Hale was driving and Barnes was sitting between Robert Henley and myself in the back seat.
As we were crossing the plain of Birzebbugia nearing the air station, we were surprised to hear a sharp report.
Someone said ‘We've had a blow-out rear tyre’ and Hale pulled to the side of the road.
My arm was along the top of the back seat and I felt Barnes's head fall back.
I at once thought that the poor fellow had had a pretty rough day and had gone to sleep as he hadn't made a sound.
There was a bright moon and on looking closer I saw a dark smear coming from his mouth.
Getting alarmed I pushed my hand under his jacket and withdrew it covered with blood.
He was stone dead.
Seldom can fate have played a stranger trick.
Having saved him from almost certain death in the morning at the hands of the enemy, fate had collected him the same evening by a stray bullet fired in error by a Maltese Army recruit.
Barnes was undoubtedly one of the finest officers and most courageous aviators that the Royal Navy has ever produced.’
‘It was afterwards discovered that the young Maltese soldier was on his first night as a sentry, with instructions to stop any passing car with his lamp and if the car didn't stop to fire his rifle over the top of it.
His lamp had gone out and while he was relighting it, our car must have passed and he fired his rifle vaguely in our direction.
The bullet  ricocheted off a stone in the road and then passed exactly through the centre of the rear seat.
5/3/41
The next sizeable raid occurred on 5 March, and on this occasion 7/JG 26 was to enjoy some reinforcement for the first of two occasions.
Some Bf109Es from l/JG 27 had reached Sicily on their way to Libya, and while on the island undertook one or two flights over Malta in company with the resident unit.
On this afternoon at about 1700 an estimated sixty bombers approached the island, Hurricanes being scrambled to intercept.
Flt.Lt.
Whittingham led the interceptors, attacking a Ju88 and a Ju87, but seeing no result to his fire.
Returning towards the island he saw five Ju88s heading out to sea and although he now had little ammunition left, attacked and thought that he had managed to damage one.
Shortly after this he was attacked by a Bf110, but as this approached to about 100 yards it received a direct hit from an anti-aircraft shell and blew up.
Sgt. Fred Robertson had gone off with seven other Hurricanes in V7116.
At 1735 he spotted about sixty to seventy Ju88s, Bf109s and other types to the south of Luqa at 10,000 feet.
Selecting a Ju88 — an aircraft of 4/LG I (L1+CM) flown by Lt. Reinhold Krause — he attacked from astern with three burst, seeing the starboard wing and engine catch fire.
He followed the bomber down until it dived into the sea off Filfla, three survivors being seen in the water.
At that point he was attacked by twelve Bf109s, but evaded and got in a good burst at one that overshot him.
He saw this diving towards Filfla trailing clouds of black and white smoke, but was then chased by another Messerschmitt and failed to see what happened to it.
A.A. personnel reported seeing it crash, and Robertson was credited with its destruction.
Meanwhile Sgt. Harry Ayre recorded that he was shot down after ten minutes in the air.
but crash-landed unhurt and was soon up again in a new aircraft.
On this occasion he claimed a Ju88 shot down, then shared with Plt.Off.
Rippon and Plt.Off.
Pain in shooting down a Do215; Rippon also shot down a Ju87, while Sgt. McDougal was seen to get another of these, but was then shot down himself by a Bf109.
His Hurricane, V7102, crashed on land and he was killed.
Pain also claimed a Bf110 probably shot down, and other pilots claimed damage to three Ju87s.
The anti-aircraft gunners kept up a steady fire, claiming nine aircraft shot down, including the Bf110 which crashed near Takali, and four other aircraft damaged.
Meanwhile the German fighter pilots were making their own claims; Lt.Willi Kothmann of I/JG 27 claimed one Hurricane at 1700 (probably Ayre), the only claim to be made by pilots of this unit over Malta during 1941. 7/JG 26 then arrived and Fw.
Wagner claimed one Hurricane at 1730, Oblt.
Müncheberg getting another two minutes later, while Gefr.
Laub claimed a third at 1735.
A pair of Messerschmitts made a strafing attack on St. Paul's Bay where a Sunderland flyingboat and the Loire 130 were slightly damaged at their moorings.
March 1941 brought more reinforcement Hurricanes for Malta.
Five new in on 6th.. two of them piloted by Plt.Off.
P.A. Mortimer (1) and Plt.Off.
D.M. Whitney.
Both sides had again overclaimed substantially; only two Hurricanes had been lost — probably at least one Messerschmitt pilot thought that he had shot down Fred Robertson's aircraft.
On the other side 4/LG I lost the Ju88 while St.G 1  had two Ju87s brought down, one (J9+CH) from 7th.
Staffel, flown by Uffz.
Wilhelm Singer, going into the sea, while a 9th.
Staffel aircraft (6G+KR), piloted by Fw.
Georg Latzelberger, was destroyed in a forced-landing having been hit by both fighters and A.A. fire.
A third aircraft from III Gruppe returned with a wounded gunner.
The Stab/St.G I lost two Bf110Es in the Hal Far area, one (DB+NO) flown by the Geschwader Adjutant, Hptm.
Erich M¨ller, was shot down by A.A. fire, the other (KB+NC), piloted by the Staffel Kapitan, Oblt.
Rudolf Gunther, was shot down by fighters, this probably the ‘Do215’ claimed jointly by Rippon, Pain and Ayre.
No Bf109s were lost.
It is likely that the majority of the A.A. claims related to aircraft shot down by the fighters but also fired on by the guns — possibly including some of the Hurricanes!
Flg.
Off.
Gerald Bellamy recalls a rather macabre incident following this raid.
The two Bf110s had crashed nearby, and ‘…they were scattered over a wide area — we all went out to view the wrecks.
At luncheon, Bradbury's  Alsatian dog was found to have retrieved a boot of a German airman and was chewing it under the table.
Unfortunately it still contained the foot!’
261 Squadron received some welcome reinforcements next day when five Hurricanes flew in from Egypt, led by two 148 Squadron Wellingtons, which carried two additional fighter pilots as passengers.
Most of these new arrivals had reached the area with the deliveries of Hurricanes by H.M.S. ‘Furious’ as already recounted, and had thus been languishing in the Pilots' Pool at Ismailia, awaiting posting to a unit.
Of the five who flew in the Hurricanes, three officers had previously gained operational experience in England.
Plt.Off.
C.K.
Gray from 43 Squadron already had two victories to his credit, while Plt.Off.
P.A. Mortimer, ex 257 Squadron, had one and one shared; Plt.Off.
D.M. Whitney, a New Zealander, had served with 17 Squadron.
The other members of the group were Sgts.
A. Livingston, a Scot, and F.J. Jessop; flying in the Wellingtons were Sgts.
H.J. Kelly and J.T. Hitching.
Plt Off.
Doug Whitney, a New Zealand pilot with 261 Squadron.
7/3/41
For some the stay was to be very brief; next morning (7th.)
Flg.Off.
Boys-Stones took off in one of 69 Squadron's Marylands (AR706) for a reconnaissance over the Fliegerkorps X headquarters area at Taormina.
He was chased by fighters, but escaped, and during his return flight attacked and damaged a Z.506B floatplane.
As the Bf109s were known to be about, Hurricanes were sent up to cover its return to base, but one of these-P2645 flown by Sgt. Jessop on his first local flight — was shot down by Fw.
Kestel of 7/JG 26, the pilot being wounded.
At the same time Lt. Mietusch attacked the Maryland, mistaking it for a Blenheim.
Wg.Cdr.
Jonas recalls: ‘…just as the Maryland crossed the coast preparatory to landing at Luqa, it was set upon by six Messerschmitts.
In spite of the fact that one brave Hurricane came to the rescue (Jessop), the Maryland was soon on fire in one engine, and the rear gunner (Sgt. J. Levy) killed by a cannon shell in the chest.
The navigator (Sgt. Alexander), in spite of being wedged within the narrow confines of the glass nose, managed to scramble out, and descended safely by parachute.
And at barely 250 feet (after holding the aircraft steady to allow Alexander to get out), the pilot himself went head first over the side.
But to bale out at 250 feet was tempting Fate too much — and although the parachute had just time to spring out of its canvas cover before the pilot hit the ground, no time remained for the canopy to open and check his fall.
Freddie Moore had    watched the attack by the fighters, and ten minutes later, after a hectic cross-country drive in his little sports car, he was kneeling beside the pilot.
Incredible to believe, although he had fallen unchecked for over 200 feet, onto solid rock below, the pilot was still alive, although dying from multiple injuries.
‘I think I must have left things a bit late’, was all he said.
The flaming Maryland had crashed a mile or so North of Dingli.
Sunderland L2164 of 228 Squadron was shot up on the water in St. Paul's Bay on 7 March by Bf109Es of 7/JG26.
A second attack on 10th set the aircraft on fire.
She is seen here, well ablaze.
L2164 with the fire quenched.
The aircraft sank when efforts were made to tow it ashore.
During this combat a second Hurricane was claimed by Fw.
Kühdorf, but this appears not to have been confirmed; 261 Squadron recorded however that several other Hurricanes were damaged during the engagement.
Two Messerschmitts then again strafed St. Paul's Bay where Sunderland L2164 of 228 Squadron was badly damaged.
Sgt. A.S.
Jones got one of the Vickers ‘K’ guns into action from the midships position, but was killed at his post by the fire from the fighters.
The anti-aircraft defences claimed one Bf109 shot down and an unidentified aircraft as a probable, but again the German fighters suffered no loss.
On this same date Flg.Off.
Adrian Warburton took another of 69 Squadron's Marylands out to photograph Taranto.
He was chased out over the Adriatic by fighters and was obliged to come down at Tatoi airport near Athens.
He flew back to Malta from Greece next day.
9/3/41
With few Luftwaffe bombers now left in Sicily, raids were desultory and of nuisance value during most of March, the main torment for the defenders  remaining the ever-present Bf109Es of 7/JG 26.
During 9 March numerous single aircraft appeared overhead to strafe Takali airfield.
Here one Hurricane was burned out and two others slightly damaged during a morning attack by a single Ju88 escorted by four Bf110s.
One of the Bf110s crashed at Nadur on Gozo Island, the crew being killed; the reason for this has not been discovered.
During the afternoon a single reconnaissance Ju88 was intercepted by four Hurricanes flown by Plt.Off.
Rippon, Sgt. Pickering and two others.
Jim Pickering recorded: ‘…
I pulled up underneath the e/a and gave him two bursts…the e/a was last seen at sea level eight miles away heading towards Sicily with some speed but apparently little concern.’
Pickering's own aircraft was hit twice in the starboard mainplane by return fire.
10/3/41
Next day the Bf109s were back, strafing the flyingboat anchorage again, where Sunderlands T9046 and L2164 of 228 Squadron were both hit.
L2164 was set on fire, having already been damaged during the previous attack on 7th., and was ultimately sunk after efforts had been made to tow it ashore.
That night an unidentified pilot believed to be Plt.Off.
Tony Rippon, claimed a Do215 shot down, and this was almost certainly a Bf110C night fighter of 1 NJG3 reported lost over Malta, Oblt.
Horst von Weegmann and his gunner missing in L1+BH; a second aircraft was claimed damaged.
On this date a Bf110E of Ill/ZG26 was also reported lost, having crashed on Pantelleria island, Lt. Arnold Hadlich and his gunner being killed.
This may have been due to an accident, but two Ju88s of 5/LG 1 were badly damaged over Malta, presumably hit by A.A. fire and force-landed at Catania on their return.
Unusual visitor (1).
A Focke-Wulf Fw200C of I/KG 40 lands at Comiso during a routine visit to Sicily from its base in Brittany.
The date was also marked by the announcement of the award of the D.F.M. to the veteran fighter pilot Sgt. Fred Robertson, whose personal score over the island now stood at eight.
Away to the East the Mediterranean Fleet at Alexandria was greatly strengthened by the arrival of the Fleet carrier H.M.S. ‘Formidable’ as a replacement for ‘Illustrious’.
Aboard the vessel were the Fulmars of 803 Squadron and the Fairey Albacores — biplane torpedo-bombers of 826 and 829 Squadrons.
Earlier in the month 806 Squadron's three remaining serviceable Fulmars had been flown from Malta to Egypt via El Adem, each aircraft carrying three aircrew; the ground party sailed for the same destination in a destroyer.
Now the squadron, brought up to a strength of six Fulmars, went aboard ‘Formidable’ to reinforce that vessel's meagre fighter component.
Unusual visitor (2).
A Dornier Do215 strategic reconnaissance aircraft seen at an airfield in Sicily, taxi-ing past a line of Savoia S.82 transports.
15–16/3/41
Reinforcement of the heavy bomber force in Egypt was still continuing during this period, and during the night of 14th/15th. four Wellingtons from the Reserve Flight, Stradishall (Suffolk), and a Maryland, were despatched from England, approaching the Malta zone early in the morning.
One Wellington (W5644) did not arrive; a radio message was intercepted which stated merely ‘Being attacked’, but nothing further was heard.
The bomber had been caught a little to the North-West of Gozo by 7/JG 26 at 0750, and shot down by Oblt.
Müncheberg; the crew were seen by him to be getting into a dinghy.
Next day the Staffel was again over Malta, Gefr.
Laub and Uffz.
Leibing each claiming a Hurricane shot down, although apparently one was not confirmed, only one claim being recorded by  O.K.W. No Hurricanes were actually lost on this occasion, but A.H.Q. Malta confirmed that one Hurricane had been slightly damaged.
This however would appear to have been in combat with Bf110s, rather than Bf109s.
Flg.
Off.
Barber had led four Hurricanes off to patrol South of Malta, and these met four Bf110s head-on.
Recalls ‘Jock’ Barber: ‘…
I did three head-on attacks on four Bf110s — they just missed my radiator and shot away my controls.
This happened South of the island at about 1,000 feet.
However I managed to get back and land alright.’
Sgt. Robertson claimed one of the Messerschmitts damaged.
On 17 March 1941 a flight of Hurricanes were detached from 274 Squadron in the Western Desert to reinforce 261 Squadron on Malta.
One of the pilots involved was Flg.Off.
Charles Laubscher, a South African.
He is seen here a year later with his Tomahawk fighter when once more serving in North Africa.
17/3/41
A convoy was safely escorted to the island from the Eastern Mediterranean during this period, following which ‘Formidable's’ air group launched an attack on Tripoli on 17th.
During this operation Fulmars shot down two shadowers.
Further efforts were made to strengthen the defences at this time by the despatch of one flight of Hurricanes from 274 Squadron in North Africa.
This unit had played a major part in the successful First Libyan Campaign, and included a number of experienced fighter pilots in its ranks.
Seven Hurricanes and eight pilots were to be sent, but at El Abqar, where refuelling took place, Plt.Off.
T.B.
Garland crashed and suffered slight burns.
Against advice he continued the journey aboard the Wellington which navigated the aircraft in.
The other pilots involved were Flg.Off.
E.M.
Mason, D.F.C., Flg.Offs.
C.J. Laubscher (a South African from the Transvaal), J.S. Southwell, Plt.Off.
D.F.
Knight, and Sgts.
T.A.
Quinn, M.P.
Davies and R.J. Goode.
‘Imshi’ Mason was at this time the leading  ‘ace’of the Middle East theatre, having been credited with over 15 victories by the end of January 1941.
Southwell and Davies were recent reinforcements, the former having gained two victories with 245 Squadron over Dunkirk, while the latter had served during the Battle of Britain with 1 and 213 Squadrons.
These new reinforcements arrived only just before a resumption of activities which were swiftly to thin their ranks to an alarming extent.
Charles Laubscher recalls: ‘My feelings were mixed at this news (of the move to Malta).
On the one hand there was at last the opportunity of some concentrated action and, with ‘Imshi’ leading us, one could feel reasonably confident.
On the other there was the undoubted fact that we would be on the receiving end.
The ‘Illustrious’ had been subjected to vicious bombing only a short time previously, and the defending fighters had been battered by swarms of Me109s and Macchis.
There was one compensating factor, however.
We were to fly across, which suited me, as I had a morbid fear of being torpedoed at sea.
Long-range tanks were fitted and tested, guns were checked and the Hurricanes generally prepared for the flight from Benina (near Benghazi) to Malta.
We set off from Amriyah on 13 March, and spent the night with 73 Squadron, as El Adem was unsafe due to the unfriendly attention it was receiving from enemy dive-bombers.
Our escorting Wellington was delayed due to phenomenal sandstorms in the Delta area, and it was only on 18 March that it arrived and we set off for Benina to refuel before the sea leg to Malta.
Micky Garland crashed on landing, and journeyed to Hal Far as a passenger aboard the Wimpey.
It was a pity that he was not left with his aircraft, as he was put on standby as soon as we arrived at Takali, and killed on his first operation in Malta…’
Another of the 274 Squadron pilots sent to Malta on 17 March 1941 was Flg.Off.
Johnny Southwell.
He was killed five days later when his Hurricane.
V7799, was one of five shot down by 7/JG26.
18/3/41
Meanwhile on 18th. the Hurricanes were scrambled again, this time meeting Italian fighters.
John Pain (flying P3731): ‘This was a brawl with some 15 CR 42s in which the entire flight got mixed up some miles out to sea at about 18,000 feet between St. Paul's Bay and Sliema.
This was the usual madhouse performance the Italians always seemed to put on — a real World War I-style dogfight.
I got my first into the sea close off Sliema and the second was on the way out some miles further out and he went in without a top wing.
The last one was not confirmed, but Whittingham, I think, confirmed the first.’
No details of any other claims by 261 Squadron pilots are available, but their opponents are believed to have been aircraft on the 23° Gruppo C.T., which had just returned from Libya.
On arrival the 156° Gruppo Autonomo was disbanded to reinforce this unit.
That night nine Swordfish from 830 Squadron raided Tripoli; K5939 flown by Sub Lt. W E. Grant failed to return, he and L/A W.E.J. Thompson being reported prisoners.
22/3/41
22 March was to prove a disastrous day for 261 Squadron.
It began when four Hurricanes were scrambled at 0830 after a reported five Ju88s at 21,000 feet.
Jim Pickering was one of the four: ‘I was Red 2 in company with Red I and Green Section when I saw a Ju88 engaged by A.A. about 1,000 feet above us…he saw me at this height and turned in a circle onto my tail.
I pulled round inside onto his tail and he dived away towards Sicily.
I gave one deflection burst from port beam at about 350 yards and one careful stern burst from the same distance, but could not even keep pace with this shallow dive.
Some of the A.A. was either poor shooting at the bandit or very accurate shooting at me!’
However a He111 of 5/KG26 was hit over Valetta, the pilot and Staffelkapitän, Hptm.
Teske and one of his crew being wounded.
Sgt. Richard Spyer. one of the pilots to survive the flight to Malta with the ill-fated Operation ‘White’ on 17 November, 1940, was lost on 22 March in Hurricane V7672, shot down by Bf109Es.
Ten more Ju88s were reported approaching Grand Harbour during the afternoon with an escort of twelve Bf109s, and eight Hurricanes were sent up in two formations.
‘Jock’ Hilton Barber was not flying on this date, and saw what happened from the ground: ‘I was swimming when a battle started overhead.
Suddenly a Hurricane came down in a screaming dive and splashed into the sea.
This turned out to be P2653, the aircraft I had ferried to Malta in June of the previous year.
Terry Foxton was killed.’
Plt.Off.
Doug Whitney was in the air and was credited with shooting down one Bf109 which had just shot down one of the Hurricanes.
He adds: ‘I certainly recall Garland being shot down with Southwell.
…It was in fact on this very flight that they (the 109s) bagged five of our eight…
‘Chubby’ Eliot and self had a bit of a dogfight for a while trying to get on each others' tails as we were not certain the other was not a 109 until we saw the roundels.’
Five Hurricanes had indeed gone down, one of them last being seen chasing a German aircraft out to sea.
Apart from Flg.Off.
Foxton, Plt.Off.
Garland (V7493), Flg.Off.
Southwell (V7799), Plt.Off.
Knight (V7358) and Sgt. Spyer (V7672) were all reported missing.
O.K.W. subsequently claimed that German fighters had shot down seven Hurricanes without loss, yet strangely only three claims can be found for 7/JG 26, one of which may not even have been confirmed.
Fw.
Kestel, Uffz.
Ehlen and Fw.
Kühdorf each claimed one Hurricane; again no Messerschmitts were actually lost.
It is  notable that at this time R.A.F. Intelligence, which was frequently very accurate, reported the presence of two Staffeln of Bf109Es in Sicily, one from JG 26 and one from JG 3.
It seems possible that such a latter unit may well have served briefly on the island at this time, and been involved in this particular combat.
It was a sad and disillusioning blow for 261 Squadron, as John Pain relates: ‘This was the one day when we thought we had the edge.
It was the first time we had managed to get eight aircraft into the air in one formation in the nearly two months I had been on the island.
Of the eight pilots only three returned.
Hamish Hamilton and I went on search for survivors but found nothing, except sea marks of crashed aircraft.’
23/3/41
Next day — possibly anticipating that the fighter defences had been crippled by the attrition of the 22nd., the Axis appeared in force for the first time in some days as a further convoy reached the island.
Just before 1500, Ju87s of Ill/St.G 1 left Sicily escorted by fifteen MC200s of the 6° Gruppo C.T.
As they approached the island some 30 minutes later fourteen Hurricanes were scrambled and a savage melee developed over the island.
Sqn.
Ldr.
Lambert who was leading on this occasion, ordered the formation to go into line astern for the attack.
He attacked one Ju87 from behind, breaking away as the tail broke off his victim and it crashed into the sea.
Sgt. Robertson, who was flying about fifth in the line of Hurricanes (in V7495), and who recorded that the success of the attack owed much to Lambert's leadership and positioning of the squadron, attacked another Stuka from astern, setting fire to the starboard wingroot.
He then broke away as Lambert was also firing at this aircraft, and watched it crash into the sea.
Robertson then attacked another Ju87 from dead ahead, a bullet from the dive-bomber's  forward guns hitting his aircraft and puncturing the main fuel tank in the port wing.
He followed the dive-bomber round in a very tight turn and shot it down into the sea, but found that his own aircraft was by then burning fiercely.
Climbing to 200 feet above the sea, he baled out about one mile south of Rabat, landing in a field between Zebbug and Luqa.
Villagers from the former location soon reached him and carried him shoulder-high in a triumphal procession.
Meanwhile overhead the battle raged.
Apart from Lambert's one and Robertson's two victories, Flt.
Lt. Peacock-Edwards claimed two Ju87s shot down and one damaged, Plt.Off.
Rippon two shot down, Plt.Off.
Whitney and Sgt. Ayre one apiece, while others claimed one probable and one more damaged.
Recorded Peacock-Edwards: ‘Very good sport.
The Ju87s were picked off like flies.’
Blazing away below, the gunners claimed a further four shot down and one damaged.
The escorting Macchi pilots attacked the Hurricanes, claiming four shot down, one by all the pilots jointly, and one each by Magg.
Mezzetti, Mar.
Daffarra and Serg.Magg.
Stabile, but on this occasion Robertson's Hurricane was the only British casualty.
‘Charles Laubscher and I were on standby,’ relates Gerald Bellamy, ‘and for some reason did not hear the scramble.
Ju87s were dive-bombing the aerodrome.
Charles dashed past my aircraft — I followed in haste but was too far from the slit trench to make it.
I heard/saw a large bomb leave the Ju87 and was certain that it was coming straight at me.
I threw myself flat and heard a ‘whompf’ and felt a mild warm blast of air.
I was completely unharmed!
Apparently I was on the edge of the crater and the main blast had gone over me.
Had I been a few feet nearer the bomb I should have been blown to pieces — had I been a few feet further away I should have been cut to pieces by shrapnel.
The only effect on me however, was a slight deafness for a few hours!’
Wg.Cdr.
Jonas witnessed the whole attack from the ground at Luqa, and wrote: ‘…and then we saw them: vic following vic of small grey forms, 15,000 feet, 16,000 feet, perhaps even higher.
The guns were firing now…little grey puffs miraculously appearing around the bombers, above, below, behind, before, rapidly increasing in size as the wind caught them.
Still they came on…the leaders were beginning to dive now.
Sticks against the dashboards, diving, brakes on, down, down, down…the more reckless pilots dived down through the barrage, but those with more vivid imaginations pulled out of their dives several hundred feet above the shellbursts.
But the ground defences were already hitting…a Ju87 disintegrated in front of us from a direct hit, while two others failed to pull out of their dives, disappearing vertically into the sea off the harbour entrance.’
‘Two eyes were not enough.
There was so much to see.
Quite clearly the bombs could be seen leaving the aircraft; sometimes one, sometimes two, sometimes even a salvo of four — small grey forms.
Almost immediately, as they disappeared behind the buildings of Valetta, we saw the flash followed by the crump of bursting, and the black clouds of smoke rising vertically into the still air.
Clustered in the doorway of the stone hut, intent and fascinated by the spectacle before us, we had forgotten our own fighters.
Now was the time to attack the bombers, as they pulled out of their dives, snaking low over the water, slow and cumbersome.
Then they came, diving out of the sun to our right, each picking up a Ju87.
Now they were firing; short rattling bursts.
The rear gunner in the Ju87 just in front of us was also firing.
One watched the tracer and wondered if bullets ever struck each other in the air.’
‘All our fighters were coming in now — the noise was tremendous — bombs, guns and engines mingled in discordant sound.
Out to sea a Ju87 zig-zagged at 500 feet, followed by a relentless Hurricane.
Suddenly, the Junkers belched a long tongue of red flame, straightened out for a moment and then spun down into the water.
At the same time, a second Junkers glided past us, its airscrew slowly turning.
It disappeared behind the rocky spur way to our left, to crash out of sight in some tiny stone-walled field.
For a few minutes we slipped into the hut.
The shrapnel and spent machine gun bullets pattered down among the cactus like rain.
The strange medley of sounds continued outside — inviting and too exciting to miss.’
‘We clustered at the narrow doorway, resting our useless hands upon our heads as substitutes for steel helmets.
There we watched the rout of the dive-bombers, but the shrapnel pattered down again, and we drew back into the doorway.
But we soon emerged again, for curiosity overcame caution.
A black pall of smoke hung over Valetta.
The raid was over.
How many bombers had been brought down?
How many fighters had we lost?
What damage had been done?
We did not know the answers.’
Actual German losses in fact seem to have been much lighter than were claimed; two Ju87Bs of the Gruppenstab were lost over Valetta, returning crews reporting that both Oblt.
Walter Preis's aircraft (J9 +JK) and that of Lt. Leopold Jarosch (J9+BH) had been shot down by fighters, while one Ju87R (J9+YL) of 9/St.G 1 flown by Stfw.
Hans Ries fell to A.A. fire.
A further Ju87R of 8th Staffel was badly hit but got to within ten kilometres of the Sicilian coast before Uffz.
Erich Kaubitzsch was forced to ditch in the sea.
During the day a Cant Z.501 flyingboat of the 184 a Squadriglia R.M. was also lost, apparently to Malta fighters, and probably while searching for the downed German aircrew; the crew of this aircraft were rescued near the Sicilian coast.
A group of Italian fighter pilots of the 23° Gruppo Aut.
C.T., all wearing kapok-filled life jackets.
24–25/13/41
6° Gruppo was back over the island on 24th., this time seven MC200s escorting He111 s of II/KG 26.
Because the attack was a high level bombing raid the British identified all the raiders as Italian.
Seven Hurricanes were sent off but made no contact.
Despite this one Macchi of the 79 a Squadriglia was seen to go into the sea between Gozo and Cap Scalambria possibly due to oxygen starvation of the pilot, Serg.Magg.
Arnaldo Gandais, who was killed.
No fighter interceptions could be made again on 25th., but the A.A. was able to claim one Ju88 probable and two damaged — no actual losses being recorded by the Luftwaffe.
On this date 228 Squadron left the island, which was no longer considered really safe for the flyingboats following the recent strafing.
One of the aircrew leaving with the unit was Plt.Off.
Nigel Maynard, son of the Malta A.O.C. The unit now moved to Alexandria, although a small servicing detachment was to be left at Kalafrana for several more weeks in order that Sunderlands might land there as a forward base.
28/3/41
The marauding Messerschmitts appeared over Malta again in the afternoon of 28 March, Lt. Mietusch claiming one Hurricane shot down at 1730, and Oblt.
Müncheberg a second two minutes later, this crashing South of Gozo.
Another of the 274 Squadron detachment, Sgt. Reg Goode, was shot down in V7340 and severely wounded, while Sgt. Livingston's aircraft was badly shot up, although he managed to force-land near Luqa.
Maryland AR739 of 69 Squadron at Takali.
29/3/41
During the previous day a major naval battle had ensued a few miles to the east, and had continued into the night — the ‘Battle of Matapan’; a resounding defeat for the Italian Fleet.
The first major victory for ‘Ultra’.
Although air units from Malta had not participated in the action, this day (29th.) a 69 Squadron Maryland was despatched from Luqa to reconnoitre the area.
It failed to return.
The then commanding officer of the reconnaissance unit recalled: ‘The naval battle off Cape Matapan occurred on 28th.
In Malta the Navy knew little or nothing about what was happening — probably because of radio silence in the British Fleet.
About midday on 29th. the Navy in Malta suddenly asked me whether I could search along the Greek coast for the remnants of the Italian Fleet which was believed to be escaping northwards.
I despatched the standby crew — Flg.Off.
F.R. Ainley with Sgt. G. Brown as navigator and Sgt. A.E.
White as WOP/AG in AR727.
They did not return.’
Pilots of 23° Gruppo Aut.
C.T.
at Comiso airfield in Spring 1941 in front of their CR 42s.
L. to r.
Serg.
Felice Papini, Ten.
Carlo Moruzzi.
Mar.
Augusto Brini.
‘A few days later Athens advised that the aircraft had crashed in the sea close to an island — Zante.
The pilot was killed.
The navigator had survived with head injuries but the third crew member was O.K. I signalled to Athens asking them to designate the nearest airfield where I could pick up Brown and White in a Maryland.
We never received a reply.
By 6 April Greece was also being attacked by the Germans, and heavily blitzed.
I was therefore delighted when one day in May they suddenly reported to me at Luqa.
Brown still had some head bandages underneath a large Greek Air Force cap which, with reduced bandaging, lay  almost around his neck.
‘Sorry we are late back, Sir…
I expect you thought you had got rid of your two bad pennies!'’
‘Apparently Ainley had told them he would try to force-land on a beach just after they flew near some naval ships.
I assume the aircraft had been hit.
It flipped over onto its back in shallow water.
White had rescued Brown from the nose but Ainley was dead when they managed to get him out.
The local Greek people were magnificent.
They were taken to Athens, then to Southern Greece as the Germans advanced.
Thence they escaped to Crete with White looking after Brown all the way.
From Crete they escaped to Alexandria.
Then they cadged a ride back to Malta on a ship — an  ammunition ship.
They survived the bombing en route and reported to me as cheeky as ever.
And of course wanting to be back on ops.’
30/3/41
The end of March brought a fighter-bomber attack by aircraft of III/ZG 26.
John Pain noted in his diary for 30th.: ‘First 110s bombed dispersal and lobbed three unexploded bombs between parked aircraft.
Stones from one bomb damaged one Hurricane.
Flg.Off.
Bellamy, Flt.Lt.
Peacock-Edwards and myself, all on tiptoe, moved the three Hurricanes to safety.
Later the bomb disposal squad found that all three bombs were duds!’
Despite such raids, A.H.Q. Malta was still able to record next day that 261 Squadron had 34 Hurricanes on strength.
REINFORCEMENTS ARRIVE!
Operation ‘Winch’, ' 3 April 1941. the first Hurricane IIA aircraft to be delivered to Malta are seen here on the dock of H.M.S. Ark Royal'.
Just about to depart from Gibraltar for the island.
3/4/41
Early in April ‘Ark Royal’ again headed towards Malta, carrying aboard twelve new Hurricane IIAs which had been delivered to Gibraltar on Argus'.
Operation ‘Winch’ was launched on 3 April when two Skuas led off the Hurricanes in two flights of six each.
One flight was led by Flt.L.t.
P.W.O. ‘Boy’ Mould, D.F.C., the other by Flg.Off.
I.B. Westmacott (in Z303).
‘Boy’ Mould had served in France with 1 Squadron in 1939/40, where he had shot down the first German  aircraft to be claimed by R.A.F. fighters over the Western Front; he had over eight victories to his credit at this time.
Innes Westmacott had flown with 56 Squadron during the Battle of Britain.
claiming two and two shared victories before being shot down in flames and burned.
The other ten pilots were Plt.Offs.
H.F. Auger —(French-Canadian), J.V. Marshall and P. Kennett, and Sgts.
P.H. Waghorn, J.K. Pollard, E.R.
Jessop, G. Lockwood, B.J. Vardy, H.H. Jennings and G.A.
Walker.
The flight was successfully undertaken to the area of Kerkenah Island, where two 22X Squadron Sunderlands met the Hurricanes and led them on the last leg to the island.
Innes Westmacott recorded in his diary: ‘Was called at 0400hrs. and got out of bed with great effort…
‘We eventually took off at about 0620 hrs. and everything went according to plan.
The only snag was that Auger made a bad take-off and punctured one of his  auxiliary tanks and broke off his tailwheel.
He was very naturally scared stiff of using up all his remaining petrol and making a bad landing.
However all was well.
He landed at the first aerodrome he saw.
…Most unfortunately, one of our Sgt. Pilots crashed on landing.
He came in too fast and had to swing to avoid something at the end of his run — the undercarriage collapsed.
It really is sickening to have an aeroplane, which is worth its weight in gold out here, broken through damned bad handling.’
This  Hurricane was badly damaged, and ran into a parked aircraft; fortunately the latter suffered only minor damage.
These first Mark IIs to reach Malta were a most welcome reinforcement, arriving at a time when Axis operations had fallen off, pending the German invasion of Yugoslavia and Greece.
Soon after his arrival at Malta, Innes Westmacott confided his first impressions of his diary: ‘The main trouble here is transport.
The bus service is not very convenient and there is a curfew at 2100, not that it worries us much!
Only two private cars are  allowed per squadron and motor bikes are scarce and expensive.’
More seriously, he noted: ‘From observations with one or two people I find that some of them are very scared of the 109s and morale could be better.
I hope we shall be able to change all that.’
During the day ‘Ark Royal's’ own fighters were active as the carriers headed back towards Gibraltar.
At 0840 patrolling Yellow Section of 808 Squadron, led by Lt. Tillard, was advised of a ‘shadower’ in the heavily clouded skies, the three Fulmars separating to carry out individual searches.
The Fulmar crewed by P.O. (A) D.E.
Taylor/L, A G.C. O'Nion intercepted a Z.506B which made off on seeing the fighter and attempted to evade by making steep turns, but Taylor was quickly onto its tail and forced it down into the sea.
The crew, with the exception of the apparently dead rear gunner, were seen inflating their dinghy and O'Nion took photographs of them and the sinking Cant as the Fulmar circled the scene.
The Italians were later rescued by a Royal Navy destroyer.
Twenty minutes after Taylor's combat the other two Fulmar pilots, Lts.
Tillard and Royal Marine Lt. R.C. Hay, spotted another Z.506B as they were heading back towards the carrier, and attacked.
This too made a number of very steep turns and made for nearby cloud, though its port engine was believed damaged, and possibly the rear gunner killed.
The Fulmars continued searching for it and came across it (or the aircraft forced down by Taylor) floating on the sea; there were no signs of life.
At least one Z.506B from the 287 a Squadriglia was reported lost.
Hurricane IIAs ranged on ‘Ark Royal’ ready for take-off on 3 April 1941.
6–9/4/41
7/JG 26 had left Sicily for Taranto during this period, operating over southern Yugoslavia on 6th., the day of the invasion of that country.
Here Müncheberg shot down a Hawker Fury biplane of the Royal Yugoslav Air Force, destroying a second on the ground five minutes later.
The Staffel returned to Sicily late on 8th.
69 Squadron's stripped photo-reconnaissance Hurricane I (V7101) in its pen ground crew.
Although the tail of this aircraft is still camouflaged. the rest of it has already been painted blue overall.
Meanwhile the arrival of the new Hurricanes and their pilots had allowed a number of the old ‘workhorses’ to be relieved.
On 7th.
Sgts.
‘Jock’ Norwell, Jim Pickering, Harry Ayre and ‘Drac’Bowerman were flown from Luqa to Egypt in a Wellington piloted by newly-promoted and decorated Plt.Off.
Lewin, G.C. Next day Flt.Lt.
John Waters and Plt.Off.
McAdam left for Gibraltar in a Sunderland on the first leg of the long journey home.
On 9 April a Wellington on its way from Gibraltar was reported missing.
This aircraft, W5677, flown by Plt.Off.
J. Bridger, was carrying General Carton de Wiart, VC, newly-appointed head of the British Military Mission to Yugoslavia.
The Wellington was obliged to ditch in the sea off the North African coast due to technical problems, the General and the crew being taken prisoners by the Italians.
During the night of 10/11 April Innes Westmacott undertook his first stint of night duty.
He recorded: ‘Spent last night sleeping on a stretcher in the bus at dispersal point.
There was no raid so we did not have to go up.
Usually the two pilots who are on night duty sleep in the ambulance but the driver and medical orderly who also sleep in it had worked up a terrific ‘fug’—‘Imshi’ Mason and I felt we could not cope with the smell of unwashed feet, etc., so we dragged the two stretchers out.’
11/4/41
A relatively strong force of fighters approached Malta on 11 April, apparently as cover for a Luftwaffe reconnaissance aircraft.
Twelve MC200s of the 17° Gruppo under the command of Magg.
Bruno Brambilla, covered by six CR 42s from the 23° Gruppo led by Ten.Col.
Falconi, swept over the island, while the Bf109Es of 7/JG 26 also made for the same location.
Numbers of Hurricanes were scrambled at various times during the mid-morning.
Sgt. Deacon made his first sortie in V3978, seeing five CR 42s, but being unable to engage these.
A little later two of the new Hurricane IIs, flown by Plt.Off.
Peter Kennett and Sgt. Waghorn, intercepted a Ju88 and were reported to have shot it down.
At that moment both were bounced by Bf109s, and were shot down.
Their aircraft, Z3036 and Z2904, both crashed into the sea; Kennett got out and was seen by Sqn.Ldr.
Lambert swimming and waving vigorously.
However there was a long delay in sending out a rescue launch as the raid was still on, and he was dead when eventually picked up; Waghorn was also killed.
Recorded Westmacott that evening: ‘Plt.Off.
Kennett and Sgt. Waghorn killed.
…It is the same old story — no one was looking behind.
It is frightfully difficult to make inexperienced pilots realise the necessity of even so small a formation as two aircraft keeping one up above looking out while the other is attacking the Hun.
…Not very long ago he (Kennett) told me he was sure he was going to be killed.’
Meanwhile at 1130 eight more Hurricanes had taken off from Takali, Sgt. Deacon included, making his second sortie of the day in P3978.
About ten minutes after take off Deacon had reached a position eight miles East of Filfla and a height of 10,000 feet.
At that point he was attacked from behind and looking round, spotted two formations of Bf109s and MC200s, totalling an estimated twenty aircraft.
Deacon had taken over the head of the formation as  the leader's R/T was not working, and calling a warning to the other pilots, he swung into the attack on one Messerschmitt from the quarter position, breaking away to attack a second similarly, though in neither case did he observe any results.
He then attacked a third which went down in a vertical dive, apparently into the sea.
As he circled to watch this, he was attacked by two more Messerschmitts and his Hurricane was hit, the windscreen being smashed and the cockpit filling with smoke.
Thinking that the aircraft was on fire, he tried to land at once at Takali, but was driven off by the ground defences, heading instead for Hal Far.
Here.
after running 50 yards, the undercarriage of his damaged aircraft collapsed and he was slightly injured in the resultant crash.
Another of the Hurricane Is, V7116, was also badly shot-up and Pit.Off.
Mortimer crash-landed this, also being slightly injured.
Plt.Off: Doug Whitney also crash-landed in V7418. but was unhurt.
He claimed one Bf109 shot down, but recorded of his own aircraft in his logbook: ‘Left me with one strand of rudder wire.’
On 11 April 1941 five Hurricanes were shot down in combat.
Sgt. A.H.
Deacon was shot-up by Bf109Es and stood P3978 on its nose when the undercarriage collapsed on landing, Note the 806 Squadron Fulmar in the back ground.
(note panel in cock pit canopy smashed by a bullet.)
Wg.Cdr.
J.E.
Allen, the Hal Far station commander, reported seeing Deacon's combat and confirmed observing one Messerschmitt crash into the sea; Deacon was subsequently credited with one destroyed as a result.
Again however, no Bf109Es were lost, although a reconnaissance Bf110C (4U +ZK of 2(F)/123 flown by Lt. Johann Scharringhausen, was reported shot down by fighters 40 kilometres from Gozo.
This may well have been the aircraft seen to crash, and although Kennett and Waghorn were credited posthumously with a Ju88 probably destroyed, this could well have been their victim, no Ju88s being reported missing on this date.
Other pilots were credited with two CR 42s probably shot down, and Deacon with two more Bf109s damaged.
The Italians reported no losses, their pilots seeing three Hurricanes, but not engaging them.
They strafed one of the airfields, claiming one bomber destroyed and several damaged.
The German fighters made three claims only, Joachim Müncheberg shooting down one Hurricane south-east of the island at 1130, and a second near St. Paul's Bay at 1153, while Fw.
Johannsen also claimed one in the latter area at 1150.
Müncheberg's second victim crashed near a crossroads at Wardia with the pilot apparently dead; this may have been Mortimer's aircraft.
At the close of hostilities that evening A.H.Q. Malta issued a communique stating that since the beginning of the fighting over the island, Malta's defences had been credited with 132 destroyed, 44 probably destroyed and 58 damaged for the loss of 29 fighters, ten of the pilots having been saved.
11–12/4/41
During the night of 11th. /12th.
Plt.Off.
Hamilton was scrambled soon after midnight, still wearing his pyjamas, and soon spotted a Ju87, an aircraft of 9/St.G I flown by Lt. Werner Zühlke, which he attacked and claimed shot down.
A similar claim was submitted by the guns.
Lt. Zühlke's aircraft (J9 + BL) crashed just behind the hangars at Takali, he and his gunner losing their lives.
The next night it was the turn of 830 Squadron's Swordfish to strike at the enemy.
During the day a Maryland of 69 Squadron, flown by Sqn.Ldr.
Whiteley, had sighted a convoy of five freighters escorted by three destroyers to the south-west of Pantelleria.
A Swordfish was despatched to shadow while seven others were readied and armed (six with torpedoes, one with bombs) in preparation for a night strike.
Just before 2100 the attack commenced in the face of intense A.A. fire and two Swordfish (L7689 and P4065) were hit, both force-landing on the Tunisian coast near Hammamet.
Sub Lt. R.N. Dawson, P.O. (A) C.H. Wines and their TAGs were captured.
13/4/41
Four raids were made on Malta on Sunday 13th., but the Hurricanes were involved in escorting four destroyers into harbour much of the day, and only two interceptions were made.
On one of these Flt.Lt.
‘Imshi’ Mason was up in Z2838 with Flg.Off.
Westmacott acting as ‘weaver’ above and behind to cover him.
As Westmacott turned into one leg of his weave' Mason saw below him four Bf109s, and being well-positioned up-sun, dropped like a hawk onto them, his departure  not being noticed by Westmacott, who remained aloft wondering where the other Hurricane had gone.
Mason meanwhile attacked one Messerschmitt which at once went straight down, but the others attacked him and one got three hits on his aircraft, which shattered the windscreen and wounded him in the hand as he broke away.
He was now 15 miles from land, so had to fight his way back.
With instrument panel shattered and the cockpit full of bullet holes, he was forced down to sea level where the engine stopped and the aircraft started to burn on its left side.
Unfortunately he made the mistake of undoing his straps before force-landing in the water and was thrown forward, breaking his nose on the remnants of the windscreen as one of the Messerschmitts passed low overhead.
He started to swim, but was picked up 50 minutes later and returned to land and hospital.
It was the end of his flying on Malta.
Witnesses reported that both he and the Bf109 he had first attacked had been seen to come down, and he was credited with one victory.
Another Bf109 was claimed shot down during this particular raid by Flt.Lt.
Peacock-Edwards, but despite these two claims, again no Messerschmitts were lost.
Peacock-Edwards' V7472 was badly hit and he crash-landed at Hal Far; the aircraft broke its back and was a write-off.
Gefr.
Laub and Fw.
Wagner of 7:JG 26 both submitted claims for Hurricanes shot down, but O.K.W. recorded only one confirmed.
Leader of the 274 Squadron flight sent to Malta, Flg.Off.
E.M.
‘Imshi’ Mason.
D.F.C., was shot down on 13 April 1941 by a Bf109E, and forced to ditch into the sea.
He is seen here after rescue and medical treatment, with a broken nose and bullet wound in his right hand.
This date also saw the departure from the Middle East of the old carrier ‘Eagle’, which left via the Suez Canal, whilst the headquarters of Fliegerkorps X moved from Sicily to direct operations over the Eastern Mediterranean and Aegean.
However Malta welcomed the arrival of the 10th.
Submarine Flotilla — the offensive striking power of the island was being gradually built up again.
14/4/41
Next morning, 14th, Flg.Off.
Westmacott and Sgt. Deacon were scrambled before dawn as an unidentified ‘plot’ had appeared on the radar, approaching St. Paul's Bay fast and low.
Westmacott saw tracer at low level in the direction of Luqa and thought it was fire from an enemy aircraft — in fact it was the airfield's own machine guns engaging the intruder.
Deacon heard over the radio that a Bf110 was attacking Luqa, and going to investigate, shot at the aircraft without obvious effect.
Westmacott had headed for Kalafrana where he saw a large twin-engined aircraft below and under fire, which appeared to be a Ju88.
He fired, but at once saw that it was a Maryland, banking away as it dived vertically for the sea.
It was a fact Adrian Warburton was out on an early air test prior to a sortie in AR735.
He had to belly-land his aircraft on return to land, as it had been damaged in the starboard engine and undercarriage!
However a Ju88 of 7/KG 30 was hit over Malta and crash-landed on return to Catania.
During the day Flg.Off.
‘Jock’ Barber left 261 Squadron on posting to A.H.Q. The last of the original Hurricane pilots still with the squadron, during his almost ten months of operations he had flown over 90 sorties, claimed three and one shared shot down and at least three damaged.
After a brief rest he would join 69 Squadron and fly 28 reconnaissance sorties during the next three months.
15/4/41
Another 69 Squadron Maryland went out on 15 April, Sqn.Ldr.
Whiteley at the controls.
Leaving at midday he headed for the Tunisian coast in bad weather.
As he approached the coastline he passed over a merchant ship.
Having made landfall and fixed his position, he returned to the location, spotting a convoy of five merchant vessels and three escorting destroyers.
Staying in the clouds, he radioed the position, course and speed, continuing to shadow the vessels until obliged to return, when Flg.Off.
J.R.
Bloxham took over.
That night Capt. P.J. Mack's destroyer flotilla sailed from Malta, catching the Italian vessels and sinking them all, for the loss of H.M.S. ‘Mohawk’.
This latter vessel was hit by two torpedoes fired from the damaged Italian destroyer ‘Tarigo’, which had been taken over by Sottotenente di Vascello Ettore Bisagno, the only surviving officer, after the commander had been killed; the British ship went down near Kerkenah Island, but all the crew were rescued.
Italian losses included the destroyers ‘Tarigo’, ‘Lampo’ and ‘Baleno’, and the merchant vessels ‘Sabaudia’, ‘Aegina’, ‘Adana’, ‘Iserlohn’and ‘Arta’.
This was to be the last major action by the 14th.
Destroyer Flotilla before the arrival on 29 April of the 5th.
Destroyer Flotilla, which was commanded by Capt. Lord Louis Mountbatten in H.M.S. ‘Kelly’.
There followed some weeks of relative quiet over the island, with only   desultory engagements, many of which can be listed briefly: On 17th. an unidentified Hurricane pilot claimed a Bf110 damaged; a Bf110C of I/NJG 3 force-landed in the sea off Malta, Fw.
Wolfgang Goldecker and his gunner being rescued by their own air/sea/rescue unit.
A Ju88 of 7/KG 30 was lost over the island the same night, Uffz.
Arthur Paproski and his crew in 4D + ER perishing.
Two days later two Ju87s of III/St.G 1 flown by Lt. Klaus Steeg (J9+ZL) and Ofhr.
Teutloff (J9+CK) were shot down by A.A. fire, the crews being reported missing.
Other Stukas were successful in sinking the Panama-registered freighter ‘Margit’, which was caught in harbour.
20/4/41
On 20 April nine CR 42s of 23° Gruppo and 15 MC200s of 17° Gruppo escorted three S.79s of the 87° Gruppo B.T. over Valetta.
Two Hurricanes intercepted, led by Flg.Off.
Charles Laubscher, who recalls: ‘I was detailed with ‘Tiger’ Pain to give top cover to the squadron on the 20th. and we were allotted two of the new machines (Mark IIs).
Operations reported that a big raid was building up over Sicily and shortly afterwards all aircraft were scrambled.
We took off towards Rabat hill as usual and, as we wheeled to the south-west, it was evident how well the Mark IIs climbed.
Although laterally we were little more than abreast of the squadron we were already six or seven hundred feet above them.
We held our climb at full throttle, ‘Tiger’ on my starboard flank, and searched the sky for enemy fighters while trying to keep an eye on the squadron to port and soon well below us.’
‘I think we had reached about 11,000 feet when the barrage opened up over Valetta and, against the white puffs, I saw seven biplanes heading directly towards us in a shallow vic formation.
CR 42s!
This was literally Manna from Heaven!
For once we had height advantage, possibly only 300 or 400 feet, but sufficient, I believe, for their top mainplanes to conceal us from their pilots’ sight.
I wheeled left towards them and called ‘Tiger’ on the R/T to take the outside man on their port flank while I took the leader.
We closed rapidly and I opened fire at about 800 yards sighting a little high at first to allow for the distance and then dropping my bead to centre on the machine.
Things happen fast in a head-on attack and in two or three seconds we had passed directly over them.
I immediately went into a steep turn to port to attack them again.
I saw to my great satisfaction that the centre of the vic was empty and there were only two planes on their left, which probably meant that ‘Tiger's’ target had also gone down.
At the same moment two Bf109s which had obviously stationed themselves too high to catch us in our initial attack, flashed past in a steep dive and then I was within range of the remaining Italian pilots once again.’
‘The five survivors in the CR 42 formation were swinging to their right towards and below me, which made it difficult to attack the three planes nearest me, so I chose the outer of the two planes on their left, laid off a deflection and opened fire again.
My tracer passed in line with the machine but behind it, and rather than stop firing, I pulled back steadily on my control column until the tracers crept along the rear of the machine and into the cockpit.
I knew  immediately that the pilot was finished and stopped firing.
The CR 42 hung on its side for a moment and then slipped gently into a dive.
I did not watch him all the way but looked for another target.
The sky now suddenly seemed clear except for a CR 42 going down in a spin ahead of me.
I gave him a full deflection burst for good measure and then my ammunition ran out.
It was time to return home so I jerked the machine into a spiral dive, just in case the remaining CR 42s or the two 109s were still in the vicinity, flattened out at about 800 feet and jinked my way back to Takali.
It was a wonderful feeling to put up an affirmative two fingers as the mechanic helped me taxi in.
That night Operations confirmed my claim for two CR 42s shot down.
‘Tiger’ also had his victory confirmed and the A.A. batteries claimed another — four out of seven destroyed not a bad effort, we felt, particularly as the squadron had spent their time in a defensive circle!’
John Pain, who had flown Z3032, adds: ‘I got one confirmed and one unconfirmed.
I was then attacked by six 109s and diced with them without anything firm being achieved other then preserving my own neck.
When I got clear of them I went down almost to sea level and there were two holes in the water about where my two would have gone in.
There was no other sign of wreckage of any other aircraft.
I did not see Laubscher's two get hit, probably because I was busy myself.
He said later he saw the 109s and took off for home.
He was down and refuelled and re-armed when I got back.’
Italian records show only one CR 42 missing on this date, Serg.
Giuseppe Sanguettoli of the 74 a Squadriglia being killed; the pilots of the 23° Gruppo claimed one Hurricane shot down between them.
An MC200 pilot claimed one Hurricane damaged, and it is probable that it was these fighters, rather than Bf109s, which attacked Laubscher and/or Pain subsequent to their fight with the biplanes.
261 Squadron Sergeant Pilot sat Takali late in April 1941.
L. to r., rear; T.A.
Quinn, L.J.
Dexter, P.L.Jordan; middle; L.Davies, M.P.
Davies, R.J. Goode, E.R.Jessop, A. Livingston, E.L.
Lawrence, A.W.
Jolly; front; D.C. Smith.
22/4/41
There was a further skirmish between 261 Squadron and 7/JG26 this day during which a Hurricane pilot, believed to have been Sgt. Hyde, claimed a Bf109 shot down and one damaged.
No losses were reported by the German unit, but Lt. Klaus Mietusch claimed one Hurricane shot down for his eighth victory.
His victim was Flg.Off.
Charles Laubscher, who remembers: ‘We were flying across the southern end of the island when Control came on the air with the warning that two bogeys were in our area.
The R/T was bad and I thought he said ‘below you’ so I concentrated on that section of the sky almost exclusively, leaving it to Dick to watch above us.
Suddenly he swung up close to my port side, waggling his wings frantically and pointing downwards.
I thought he had seen the enemy aircraft and, as he winged over into a steep dive I followed him without question.
Our speed built up rapidly and the inside of my cockpit started to mist up.
I tried to pull the canopy back but it was impossible against the dive so I flattened out and throttled back.
As my speed dropped I again tried to open the hood, fortunately with my left hand.
Suddenly there was an ominous popping of cannon fire behind me and little white balls seemed to float past on both sides of the cockpit.
I dropped my right wing suddenly as if I were turning into the cloud and immediately swung over into a steep left hand turn.
There was a split second of violent clattering as cannon shells hit the machine and then I was clear, and in a 270° turn which took me back across my flight path and into the safety of that wonderful cloud.
Even then I jinked from side to side as I pulled the hood back.
I gave myself a minute or two to get my nerves under control and ventured outside the cloud, briefly at first then more confidently when it was apparent that the danger had passed.
for the sky was clear of aircraft.
I looked at my port wing to judge the extent of the damage and saw some nasty holes there while my instrument panel had also taken a slight hammering.
It was obvious that my aircraft was not in a condition for any further fighting and I flew a zig-zag course back to the 'drome keeping a very watchful eye on the sky around me.
When I landed and taxied to the dispersal point an awed group of aircraftsmen crowded around the machine to examine the damage.
I was told later by the Flight Sergeant that they counted five cannon and thirty 7.62mm holes in the machine.
One of the light calibre bullets had missed the top of my head by an inch and a half!’
Also during this day as He111P bomber of 5/KG 4, one of several units passing through Sicily following action during the early stages of the Balkan Campaign, force-landed in the sea after a raid on Valetta.
The crew were later rescued.
A returning Heinkel of 6/KG 26 reported that its gunner had baled out over Malta for unknown reasons — there is no record of him landing safely.
Next evening the Bf109s of 7/JG 26 escorted a photo-reconnaissance aircraft over Malta, and here at 1807 Oblt.
Müncheberg shot down Flg.Off.
Auger in Hurricane Z3032 south-east of Hal Far.
The pilot baled out into the sea, while the aircraft crashed some distance off Delimara Point.
John Pain: ‘He landed safely in the drink between Filfla and the main island only a short distance from the cliff.
He was seen to wave that he was O.K. to one of the other aircraft.
He was not picked up by  A.S.R. largely due to the delay in allowing them to put to sea.
We were given to understand that the A.S.R. boats did not put out on the express orders of the A.O.C. that they would be too vulnerable to air attack.
This incident caused a very serious morale problem with all pilots and a number of letters were written to the A.O.C., stating our anger at the loss of Auger.’
Hurricanes subsequently searched until it was too dark to see, but no sign of the missing Auger could be found.
25 April: a night raid destroyed a Maryland (AR705) and a Magister at Luqa.
26 April: Plt.Off.
Doug Whitney recorded in his logbook: ‘Takali blitzed. 44 bombs on 'drome.
Took off at dawn, bomb craters and all!’
27 April: Sgt. Len Davies noted in his logbook: ‘Dawn patrol.
Leading Sgt. Quinn.
Had a slight argument with a Sunderland but left it O.K.’
28 April: a Sunderland (P9600) of 10 R.A.A.F. Squadron on detachment at Gibraltar, flown to Malta by Sqn.Ldr.
Podger to deliver maintenance crews for a Beaufighter unit.
27/4/41
Meanwhile on 27th. further welcome reinforcements were again on their way to the island.
Under the codename Operation ‘Dunlop’ twenty-four Hurricanes and twenty-six pilots were carried towards the island on ‘Ark Royal’.
In charge of flying off on the carrier was Wg.Cdr.
P.J.H. ‘Bull’ Halahan, D.F.C., a Battle of France veteran.
He despatched the Hurricanes in three flights, each led by a Fulmar, while from Malta three Marylands and a Sunderland set out to meet the incoming formation and lead them in.
A He111 appeared over the Fleet soon after the Hurricanes had departed and this was chased by the Fulmar patrol but managed to evade them and escape.
Flg.Off.
N.P.W. Hancock was leading the first seven Hurricanes, this flight meeting Sunderland L5807 of 228 Squadron as planned, and reaching the island without any problems.
As they approached from the South, the pilots watched the flyingboat go down and land at Kalafrana, but at that moment Hancock saw two Bf109Es approaching, and thought for a moment that they were about to attack the Hurricanes.
Instead the Kette, led by the intrepid Müncheberg, dived after the Sunderland strafing it as it taxied to its moorings, and sinking it.
Flt.Lt.
L.G.M. Rees, the pilot of the Sunderland reported: ‘My aircraft was launched at last light the evening before the sortie since it was dangerous at that time to leave an aircraft on moorings in daylight where it could be easy prey to enemy aircraft.
I took off at the first light and made the rendezvous as planned and found the fighters had just become airborne.
They formated on me and I led the formation back to the island.
The Hurricanes were to land at Hal Far aerodrome and I circled that aerodrome until I had seen them all land safely.
I then took my own aircraft to Kalafrana, landed and moored onto the slipway buoy.
Almost before the mooring was completed the beaching party were towing out the beaching legs in order to get the aircraft into the hangar as soon as possible.
I left the aircraft in order to go for de-briefing but I got as far only as the jetty when an attack was made on the Sunderland by three Me109 aircraft.
They dived down from out of the sun to the south and in view of the short space of time that had elapsed since the aircraft had landed it is almost certain that the enemy aircraft must have seen the Sunderland in the air.
A fuel tank in the port wingroot was holed by the attack and a fire started.
This fire grew very rapidly and in a short time the port wing was burnt away.
The fire spread to the rest of the aircraft and was only extinguished by the aircraft sinking.’
‘One member of my crew was hit between the legs and although he got ashore and was able to walk he was a very worried man until the M.O.
assured him that his marriage prospects were in no way diminished’.
The Sunderland's midship gunner, L.A.C. D.A.J. Taylor (later a Sqn.
Ldr.) continues: ‘When the Sunderland started to burn it started to drift towards a crane, which was, together with the surrounding area, the responsibility of the Royal Navy, and was used for torpedo storage.
A power boat attempted to tow the burning wreck out into the bay but the flyingboat sunk before there was any further calamity.’
The reader will have noticed interesting and contradictory differences of detail between the accounts of Hancock and Rees, which have not been resolved — typical of the problems facing the latter-day historian!
This however, was the only unscheduled interruption, and twenty-three of the twenty-four Hurricanes landed safely on the island.
The arrival of this strong reinforcement, following so soon on the heels of the ‘Winch’ arrivals on 3 April, now presented the beginnings of an overcrowding problem at Luqa and Hal Far.
The decision was therefore taken to again begin basing some of the fighters on the third airfield at Takali on a permanent basis.
The new pilots were:
Several of the new arrivals were experienced fighter pilots.
Flt.Lt.
Jeffries had gained some three victories with 3 Squadron in France; Flg.Off.
Hancock had flown in France and the Battle of Britain with I Squadron, while Plt.Off.
P.D.
Thompson had flown in 32 and 605 Squadrons, claiming three and one shared victories.
Innes, Dredge and Graves were all ex-253 Squadron, having gained respectively two and two shared, two and one shared, and one victory.
Sgt. Sheppard was an Australian, while Sgt. Peter Jordan was from New Zealand.
He provides further insight into Operation ‘Dunlop’: ‘In April Ted Lawrence and myself were flown to Hendon (from Elgin, Scotland, where 232 Squadron was based) and, under strict security arrangements, did 130 hours practising take offs before reaching a white line across the strip, seemingly only a few yards ahead of us.
The Hurricanes were fitted with the (then) new-fangled 45 gal.
long-range tanks, non-jettisonable and fitted under the mainplanes with  auxiliary pumps to  pump fuel into the main tanks.
We were told to use 15° of flap for take off, something completely new to us then.’
228 Squadron's Sunderland L5807 comes under fire at Kalafrana on 27 April 1941, bullet splashes from Oblt.
Müncheberg's fire kicking up the water and gaining hits on the starboard inner engine.
‘On 16 April we left Greenock on the old aircraft carrier ‘Argus’ with twenty-four Hurricanes, twenty-five pilots and an appropriate number of fitters and riggers for Gibraltar (although we did not know our precise destination at the time, of course.
As far as I know, we were originally bound for Greece/Crete but it was too late for that.
I remember that we were quite concerned that we might be expected to take off from ‘Argus’ as even the resident Swordfish seemed to have difficulty.
Our aircraft (with mainplanes detached) overflowed from the hangar deck onto the quarter deck and it was one of the latter which was rendered u/s during bad weather experienced in the Atlantic.’
The fire starts to get a hold, and the wing, weakened by cannon shell hits, begins to buckle.
‘On arrival in Gibraltar, the aircraft were off-loaded onto the quay-side and the mainplanes and long-range tanks fitted by the ground staff, with the doubtful assistance of the pilots to whom the particular aircraft had been allocated.
They were then hoisted by crane onto the after end of ‘Ark Royal’ and with little delay off we went into the Mediterranean.
We were supposed to take off for Malta about 12   hours after leaving Gibraltar but, because of bad weather and (I think) intelligence reports about enemy activity around Sardinia and Sicily, we retraced our course and eventually took off about 36 hours from Gibraltar.
We left in three flights, each led by a Fulmar for navigational purposes, some 500 nautical miles from Malta (my logbook shows the flight took three hours and 20 minutes).
We passed Cap Bon (in the distance) and Pantelleria, the latter at sea level — which was just as well as it was raining at the time, otherwise we might have missed it and also because we were told afterwards that there was an airfield there with Bf110s.
We were held off Malta for a while because of air raids (so what's new!) before landing at Hal Far.
Later we flew to Takali where we joined 261 Squadron.’
The Hurricanes were not the only reinforcements for the island to arrive on this date however.
In London it had been decided to station detachments of Blenheim IV bombers from 2 Group, Bomber Command, on Malta.
These could provide a day striking force for anti-shipping and coastal operations of a more flexible nature than the night-only Wellingtons.
Consequently the remaining seven Wellingtons of 148 Squadron left for Egypt, making room for the first detachment of six Blenheims from 21 Squadron.
which arrived safely from England via Gibraltar.
The arrival of the substantial numbers of new fighter pilots allowed some more of the old stalwarts to be rested, notably Sgt. Robertson, D.F.M., and Sgt. Hyde.
Fred Robertson's record was outstanding; he had taken part in 189 interception sorties, and been credited with ten confirmed, three probables and seven damaged while on the island; his assessment as a fighter pilot endorsed in his logbook by Sqn.Ldr.
Lambert read ‘Exceptional’.
The New Zealander Reg Hyde is also believed to have done well.
According to one source he was credited with five shot down and seven others damaged.
More postings and changes followed.
Sqn.Ldr.
Lambert was now tired, and Flt.Lt.
Whittingham was invited by the A.O.C. to take over 261 Squadron from him, which he did at the start of May.
Lambert was then flown out to Gibraltar in Sqn.Ldr.
Podger's 10 R.A.A.F. Squadron Sunderland, and later flew on to England.
At the same time 261 Squadron's earlier C.O., Sqn.Ldr.
Balden, was posted to Luqa as Station Commander.
28/4/41
Following Oblt.
Müncheberg's successful strafe of the Sunderland at Kalafrana on 27th., O.K.W. claimed that fighters destroyed two more of these flying boats in similar circumstances next day.
No record of such a loss has been found.
On this date (28 April) however Flg.Off.
Innes Westmacott and a Sergeant Pilot were scrambled, seeing a number of high flying Bf109s about.
Two of these they spotted as the German pilots began diving onto the Hurricanes tails, and at the right moment Westmacott carried out a hard climbing turn, coming out behind one of the Messerschmitts as it began to pull up.
He fired and believed that it had gone down.
Looking around for his wingman, who had lost him in the manoeuvre and headed for base, he saw another Messerschmitt about to attack him, so repeated  the same trick.
This time the German fighter dived away and headed off north.
Although he was credited with one Bf109 confirmed, again no loss was suffered by 7/JG 26.
29/4/41
This latter Staffel was back on 29th., providing escort for raiding Ju88s of LG 1 during another early evening attack.
Lt. Mietusch reported engaging eight Hurricanes, one of which he claimed shot down at 1845, the pilot baling out.
Two minutes later Müncheberg claimed another over St. Paul's Bay, the pilot of this also taking to his parachute.
Finally at 1850 Uffz.
Kühdorf claimed a third Hurricane in the same area, although this claim does not appear to have been confirmed.
9/LG 1 reported the loss of one Ju88 (L1 +BT) over Valetta, Fw.
Rudolf Lenzner and his crew baling out to be taken prisoner when the bomber crashed at Bur Marrad.
According to German records the aircraft fell victim to A.A. fire; it was in fact claimed as a probable by the guns, but was also attacked by Plt.Off.
Rippon and newly-arrived Plt.Off.
Hall, who were actually credited with its destruction.
Baling out over Malta had now become a somewhat risky business, as Doug Whitney recalls: ‘They (the Maltese) were so bitter about the bombing that they inclined to treat anyone baling out as an enemy and this became so bad we all carried revolvers to protect ourselves until we could convince them otherwise.
I remember a Rhodesian in our squadron writing a long letter to the ‘Malta Times’ about this very subject, but I don't think it was ever published.’
30/4/41
On the last day of the month two flights of S.79s from the 87° Gruppo B.T., escorted by twenty-seven 1° Stormo C.T.
MC200s, attacked Valetta.
Hurricanes were seen by the Italian crews, but failed to intercept.
However five bombers were damaged by shell splinters from the A.A. barrage.
The gunners claimed two Ju88s shot down, one of which may in fact have been an He111H of 6/KG 26, which failed to return to base on this date.
1/5/41
The Messerschmitts were back in full cry early on 1 May, attacking Hurricanes over the Hal Far area.
Oblt.
Müncheberg fired at one at about 6,000 feet over St. Paul's Bay at 0753, his wingman — Fw.
Johannsen — hitting a second at 0754 without observed results.
Diving down to a few hundred feet over Hal Far, Müncheberg then claimed another at 0754 as it was landing, but having no witness of this was credited only with a probable, although it was subsequently included in his score.
It seems likely that his victims were two Hurricane IIs of ‘C’ Flight, 261 Squadron, which were operating under Flt.Lt.
Mould at Hal Far; on this date Plt.Off.
R.A. Innes and Sgt. B.C. Walmsley were shot down in Z2900 and Z3061 respectively, and were both wounded.
Müncheberg's Staffel returned in the early evening as escorts to Italian  bombers, engaging six Hurricanes over Luqa.
Müncheberg shot one of these down at 1715, seeing the aircraft crash about a mile north-east of the airfield.
German records reported that the pilot had been killed, and noted that one of Müncheberg's victims on this date was a Plt.Off.
Ted Winters', on his 13th. sortie over the island.
At 1720 Uffz.
Kühdorf claimed another Hurricane over Luqa, but again this does not seem to have been confirmed.
The identity of ‘Ted Winters’ has not been established, but despite the definite identification of only two of the Hurricanes claimed by 7/JG 26 in the period 28 April — 1 May, A.H.Q. Malta reported that actual R.A.F. losses in these four days amounted to six Hurricanes — closely in line with the claims — four by Müncheberg, one of which was not confirmed, one by Mietusch, two by Kühdorf — apparently neither of which were confirmed — and possibly one by Johannsen.
On the credit side the A.H.Q. also announced that during April the fighters had claimed 11 destroyed, nine probables and three damaged.
1 May also saw the first operational sorties by the 21 Squadron Blenheims from Luqa, together with another claim for the Ju88 by the anti-aircraft defences.
No loss is recorded.
Further strengthening of both sides continued during this period.
On 30 April 10° Stormo B.T.'s other Gruppo, the 32° (57 a and 58 a Squadriglia) arrived at Chinisia airfield near Trapani with S.79s, while on 1 May thirteen Bristol Beaufighter IFs of 252 Squadron reached Malta.
Fifteen had left St. Eval, Cornwall, on 27 April led by Sqn.Ldr.
R.G. Yaxley, M.C.; one (T3629), flown by Sub Lt. R.D.B. Hopkins, F.A.A., had force-landed at Casablanca on the way, and been interned.
When the remaining fourteen left Gibraltar for Malta, the aircraft piloted by Flg.Off.
J.B. Holgate had suffered engine trouble and been forced to return.
A replacement Beaufighter (pilot Flg.Off.
G.J. Lemar) was sent out from England, this reaching Malta in company with Holgate's aircraft two days later.
The other pilots were Flt.Lt.
W. Riley, Flt.Lt.
R.E.
Jay, and Flt.Lt.
J.J. Lowe (flight commanders), Flg.Offs.
J.W. Blennerhassett, C.S.H. MacDonald, N.E.H. Virgin, P.S. Hirst and H. Verity, Plt.Off.
J.C.
Davidson and three Fleet Air Arm Sub Lts., I.F.
Fraser, V.B. Crane and K. Holme.
The most colourful character amongst these was William Riley, who had a varied and successful operational career.
During the Norwegian Campaign of early 1940 he had been a member of 263 Squadron flying Gladiators, and had claimed one victory and a share in another before being wounded.
On recovery he had helped form 302 Polish Squadron during the Battle of Britain, claiming two victories and a third shared plus two probables while with this unit.
By the end of the year he had converted to twin-engined fighters, joining 252 Squadron to fly Blenheim IVFs and Beaufighters.
Shortly before the posting to Malta he had claimed the unit's first victory over a four-engined Fw200.
His D.F.C.
would follow shortly.
It was of course, this unit for which the maintenance crews had been flown to the island by the 10 R.A.A.F. Squadron Sunderland a few days earlier.
The specific reason for the arrival of 252 Squadron was to provide long-range protection for a fast merchant vessel — the S.S. ‘Parracombe’— on its way from Gibraltar, unescorted, carrying 21 crated Hurricanes and much needed cargo for the island, and also for a convoy of five fast freighters for Alexandria (‘Tiger’ convoy) due to pass the island several days hence.
Sadly the ‘Parracombe’ failed in its gallant attempt to  reach Malta when it struck a mine off Cap Bon.
Meanwhile the end of the German campaign in Yugoslavia and Greece meant that many of the Luftwaffe units employed there were now being posted elsewhere, some of these stopping off in Sicily for a few days on their way back to Germany and undertaking a few missions over Malta.
 Notable amongst these units was III Gruppe of Jagdgeschwader 27, whose Bf109Es provided a welcome reinforcement for the busy pilots of 7/JG 26.
One of the first Bristol Beaufighters to operate from Malta, T3317 of 252 Squadron is seen here in early May 1941.
2–3/5/41
On Malta two losses were suffered during early May which were not the result of enemy activity.
On 2nd.
Sgt. Ottey was killed when his Hurricane (Z3054) crashed from a great height — probably due to oxygen starvation.
Next day one of 252 Squadron's newly-arrived Beaufighters (T3237) was mistaken for a Ju88 while on a local flight.
It was attacked and badly damaged by a patrolling  Hurricane, Flt.Lt.
Riley crash-landed on Luqa airfield having been slightly wounded.
5/5/41
The A.A. defences continued to take toll of attackers, 9/St.G 1 having a Ju87B so badly damaged over Valetta that the crew were forced to bale out on return to Sicily, while a second aircraft from this Staffel failed to return, Uffz.
Heinrich Becker and his gunner perishing in J9+CL.
During the morning two Hurricanes flown by Flt.Lt.
Jeffries and Plt.Off.
Hall (Z2904) were patrolling over Kalafrana Bay at 29,000 feet when a Ju88 was spotted below.
Hall reported:’…when I saw a vapour trail and warned my Section Leader who manoeuvred for position, scanning the sky for enemy fighters.
The section then dived down to attack, Yellow I (Jeffries) going in on the starboard quarter and I dived down and made a quarter-astern attack from below, opening fire at 400 yards and closing to 50 yards, giving the e/a three bursts of three seconds each.
I then broke away because I saw two fighters above on the port side.
On hearing ‘Go to it Rose Section — go to it’ I decided it was Rose Section although the section was too far off to be identified  definitely .
On turning back to finish my ammunition on the Ju88, which was pouring smoke from the starboard engine, my aircraft was hit by return fire from the e/a in both self-sealing tanks.
During the engagement A.A. bursts were exploding all round me, my port plane received a near miss which made a large hole and spattered the aircraft with splinters, which injured my left elbow.’
Sgt. Jolly of Rose Section claimed a share in shooting down the Ju88, but his aircraft was also hit by A.A. splinters, whilst Jeffries aircraft was hit in the port wing by return fire.
The bomber attacked would seem to have been an aircraft (4D+CT) of 9/KG 30 which crashed on return, Lt. Albrecht Irion and all his crew being reported lost.
4 May also saw the first sortie by 69 Squadron's latest addition — a photo-reconnaissance Hurricane.
This aircraft, V7101, had been stripped of all possible equipment and guns, and had been painted blue overall.
In this condition, and with much-increased fuel tankage, it could usually reach at least 30,000 feet, and on one occasion was taken up to 36,000 feet by George Burges — although he reported that at this height it was very unstable.
6/5/41
The Mediterranean area sprung to life from end to end on 6 May.
In Africa Rommel's forces had driven the weakened British units right back across Cyrenaica into Egypt, while the Balkans were firmly in German hands following the fall of Yugoslavia and Greece, and an invasion of Crete seemed imminent.
To allow the army in Egypt to deliver an early riposte to the Axis forces facing them, before these could be built up to any really dangerous strength, a fast convoy carrying 295 tanks, 180 motor vehicles, and 53 crated Hurricanes had been despatched from England, leaving Gibraltar on the morning of 6th. with Force ‘H’ in attendance.
To meet this Operation ‘Tiger’ convoy, the Mediterranean Fleet also steamed out of Alexandria, heading for a planned rendezvous south of  Malta.
Meanwhile Malta's reconnaissance aircraft were out looking for Axis convoys bound for Tripoli or Benghazi so that the island's bombers might strike at them and disrupt the flow of supplies and reinforcements to Rommel's command.
At the same time a fairly substantial Luftwaffe attack was launched against Malta by the units briefly based in Sicily, and this led to some severe fighting over the island on 6 May.
7/JG 26 and elements of III/JG 27 escorted four He111s of II/KG 26 over the island at midday, this formation being intercepted by ‘C’ Flight Hurricane IIs from Hal Far.
Flg.Off.
Westmacott, although under fire from the Messerschmitts, attacked one Heinkel and shot it up.
The bomber dropped from formation with smoke pouring from it and disappeared slowly out to sea.
Westmacott could not follow as he was under attack by the Bf109s, but the Controller later reported that the bomber's ‘plot’ had disappeared from the radar screen halfway to Sicily, and Westmacott was awarded a probable.
He subsequently received a personal letter from the A.O.C. congratulating him on his persistence in continuing to attack the bomber when under attack himself.
II/KG 26 reported that one He111H of 4th.
Staffel (1H+FM) crashed on return, reportedly due to engine trouble, and was destroyed, Lt. Eberhard Möller and his crew of four all being killed.
This may well have been the aircraft attacked by Westmacott.
Meanwhile however, the rest of the Hurricanes had been suffering badly at the hands of the German fighters.
Plt.Off.
Dredge crashed Z3057 on the airfield in flames and suffered severe burns; Plt.Off.
Gray baled out of his shattered Z3060, wounded in the left thigh; Sgt. Branson baled out of Z3059 with slight burns to the right leg, while Plt.Off.
P.D.
Thompson got the damaged Z3034 down safely, having suffered a minor splinter wound in his leg.
This execution had been the work of just two pilots; Müncheberg shot down one Hurricane at 1222, this falling into the sea near Valetta, the pilot baling out.
Four minutes later he claimed a second near Hal Far, but did not see it crash and had no witness, although he believed that the pilot of this aircraft also baled out.
It seems likely that Gray was his first victim and Branson the second.
Dredge's victor was probably III/JG 27's leading pilot, Oblt.
Erbo Graf von Kageneck, who claimed one Hurricane over the Luqa area for his 14th. victory, and first over Malta.
During the day a Beaufighter (T3294) was badly damaged on the ground at Luqa and was subsequently written-off; a further eight were slightly damaged during the same raid.
As darkness fell another raid developed, Sqn.Ldr.
Whittingham and another pilot going up to intercept.
Whittingham fired at four different aircraft during this sortie, being credited with one destroyed, one probable and one damaged; these would seem to have been an He111 and two Ju88s respectively.
Actual German losses on this date were recorded as one Ju88A of 8/KG 30 (4D+FS) flown by Uffz.
Werner Gerhardt, which was believed to have been the victim of A.A. fire by the Germans, but was probably shot down by Whittingham, and another He111 from 4/KG 26 which crash-landed on return with a dead gunner.
This same night saw three Swordfish of 830 Squadron out continuing a series  of mine-laying sorties to Tripoli harbour.
However on this occasion a Swordfish (P4232 ‘A’) was lost when Lt. N.K. Cambell's aircraft was hit by A.A. fire and he was forced to ditch just off the coast; he and his observer managed to swim ashore, and were subsequently captured, but the TAG, P.O. (A) W.G.T. Welsh succumbed to injuries sustained.
Plt.Off.
A.S.
Dredge was shot down in flames in Hurricane Z3057 on 6 May, only ten days after arriving on Malta; he baled out, badly burned, and was probably the first victim claimed over the island by Ritterkreuzträger Oblt.
Erbo Graf von Kageneck of III/JG27.
Dredge is seen here (I) later in the war with Flt.Lt.
N.L.D. Kemp, D.F.C., who served on the island later in 1941 with 242 Squadron.
An Axis supply convoy was now spotted by a Maryland, and on 7 May an attack was laid on.
Three of 252 Squadron's Beaufighters escorted five Blenheims of 21 Squadron to attack the ships near Lampedusa.
While so engaged an Italian transport aircraft, variously identified as a Caproni Ca310 or a Savoia S.81, was intercepted and was shot down by the three Beaufighter pilots, Sqn.Ldr.
Yaxley, Flt.Lt.
Riley and Sub Lt. Fraser.
Meanwhile one Blenheim flown by Plt.Off.
D.F.
Dennis attacked a merchant ship of some 5,000 tons, gaining hits as a result of which the vessel was believed to have foundered.
Sgt. W. Mc.Osborne pressed home an attack on a destroyer, gaining a direct hit.
Later reconnaissance indicated that this had sunk.
Next day Dennis and Osborne participated in a further attack on another convoy.
This time Dennis claimed hits on a destroyer while Osborne inflicted damage on a supply ship.
A few days later they would both again be involved in an attack on a convoy, where one merchantman was seen to list and pour black smoke after suffering hits from Dennis' bombs.
Both pilots received immediate decorations, a D.F.C.
for Dennis and a D.F.M. for Osborne.
7/5/41
Over Malta on 7th. little had been seen, although the A.A. claimed two Ju88s shot down.
On one patrol two of 261 Squadron's pilots collided, Hurricanes  V7365 and V7548 both being lost, while Sgt. Jennings was killed and Sgt. Walker slightly injured.
More Italian bomber reinforcements reached Sicily, the 99° Gruppo (242 a and 243 a Squadriglia) of the 43° Stormo B.T. arriving at Gerbini under Ten.Co.
Nello Brambilla, equipped with twin-engined Fiat BR 20Ms.
8/5/41
The ‘Tiger’ convoy came within range of air attack on 8th., and for the next four days most activity in the air tended to centre here.
The convoy had escaped discovery until now due to bad weather and poor visibility, but this was not to continue, and a series of hard-fought combats now ensued.
‘Ark Royal’ had embarked a second squadron of Fulmars — 807 Squadron under Lt.Cdr.
J. Sholto Douglas, replacing the low-performanced Skuas of 800 Squadron, and to assist the resident Fulmars of 808 Squadron (Lt. Tillard), but a total of only twelve aircraft were fully serviceable this morning.
The early morning patrol had been vectored towards a ‘shadower’ and although spotted could not be intercepted, so all now knew that the assault would soon commence.
The first incoming raid appeared on the radar screens at about 1345, still 32 miles from the ships.
Two sections (four aircraft) of 807 Squadron were scrambled to join the four Fulmars of 808 Squadron on patrol, these latter aircraft intercepting sixteen S.79s of 38° Gruppo from Sardinia, but as Lt. Tillard led the attack they were themselves ‘bounced’ by a dozen escorting CR 42s of the 3° Gruppo C.T.
Almost immediately Tillard's Fulmar was shot down, he and his observer, Lt. Somerville, being killed.
The three other Fulmars were also hit, the aircraft of both Lt. G.C. McE.
Guthrie and P.O. (A) R.E.
Dubber sustaining damage to their tail units, while in Lt. Taylour's aircraft the TAG, P.O. (A) L.G.J. Howard received a severe leg wound, an explosive bullet shattering both tibia and fibula.
One CR 42 overshot their aircraft and Taylour managed to score hits on it, forcing it into a spin from which he considered it would not be able to recover.
Having evaded the other Fiats, Taylour headed for the carrier with his wounded TAG, where only prompt and skilful action by the ‘Ark's, surgeon prevented the loss of Howard's leg.
The Italian pilots claimed five Fulmars shot down, one of these being credited to Cap.
Giorgio Tugnoli.
By now the four 807 Squadron Fulmars had made contact with the S.79s, Lt. N.G. Hallett and his No. 2 — P.O. (A) A.G. Johnson — hitting one bomber but the gunner of which in return hit Hallett's engine, forcing him to ditch; both he and his Australian observer, Lt. V.A.
Smith, managed to scramble out and were soon picked up by the destroyer ‘Foresight’.
Meanwhile the two Blue Section aircraft flown by Lt. R.E.
Gardner and South African Lt. K. Firth attacked the same Savoia, flown by Cap.
Armando Boetto, commanding officer of the 49 a Squadriglia, Blue 1 getting in the final burst before it disintegrated and fell into the sea.
Eight of the bombers broke through the defences to launch torpedoes at the ‘Ark’ and at the battlecruiser ‘Renown’, but without obtaining hits.
There followed a short lull, but from 1620 onwards a succession of attacks by small formations of S.79s commenced but all were successfully beaten off, mainly by the intense gunfire of the ships, although Yellow Section of 808 Squadron, two  Fulmars flown by Lt. A.T.J. Kindersley and Lt. Hay, R.M., caught one bomber at 1710 and claimed it shot down.
Just before dusk, at 1930, a further raid was detected when a full 70 miles distant.
Three Fulmars were already up — Red Section of 807 Squadron — and four more (all that were now immediately available) were scrambled, the incoming attack proving to comprise twenty-eight Ju87s of l/St.G 1 from Cagliari, in two formations, with a top cover of six Bf110s of 9/ZG26, these led by Hpt.
Thomas Steinberger.
The three Fulmars of Red Section engaged the escort, while the other four, two each from 807 and 808, attacked the two formations of dive-bombers and broke them up.
Lt.Cdr.
Sholto Douglas engaged two Bf110s, but these turned on the Fulmar, gaining hits on both its wings which caused damage to the hydraulic system.
Red 2, P.O. (A) R.T.
Leggott, dived to attack a Ju87 but was himself attacked by a Bf110.
He managed to turn inside his assailant and opened fire from 200 yards, seeing white vapour trail from the Messerschmitt as it pulled away.
Lt. Taylour, flying as Yellow 1 and now with P.O. (A) F.A.
Barnes in the rear seat, claimed one Ju87 shot down, but they too were then attacked by a Bf110, the starboard wing and hydraulic system therein being hit, with the result that the undercarriage leg on this side dropped down.
Blue Leader, Lt. ‘Jimmie’ Gardner (who had previously flown on attachment to the RAF and had claimed five victories whilst with Sqn.Ldr.
Douglas Bader's 242 Squadron) claimed another Ju87 shot down with a second as probably destroyed — the latter subsequently being confirmed by cine gun-camera.
However the windscreen of his aircraft was shattered by crossfire from other Stukas, and with the radiator damaged, he crash-landed the badly-damaged Fulmar on the carrier's deck; neither he nor his TAG, P.O. (A) R. Carlisle, suffered injuries.
One other Fulmar pilot, Sub Lt. R.F. Walker flying No. 2 to Gardner, reported seeing his fire hit a Bf110, following which he attacked a Ju87 which disappeared into cloud pouring smoke.
All seven Fulmars had landed back on the carrier by 2015 but two were again scrambled almost immediately on the approach of three more S.79s.
Lts.
Guthrie and Hay were unable to prevent the attack, two of the Savoias releasing torpedoes at ‘Ark Royal’ and ‘Renown’, narrowly missing the carrier.
The returning Zerstörer pilots of 9/ZG 26 claimed three of the Fulmars shot down, identifying their victims as ‘Hurricanes’, the first of these claims was made by Oblt.
Bergfleth — probably Lt.Cdr.
Sholto Douglas' aircraft — the subsequent two by Hptm.
Steinberger.
However the Messerschmitts did not get away unscathed — indeed Fw.
Hans Hufnagel and his gunner were both wounded and crash-landed their badly damaged aircraft at Comiso, a second badly damaged Bf110 crash-landing at Trapani, whilst a third returned with minor damage.
At least one Ju87 was damaged during the attack, both Lt. Neuberg and his gunner returning to Cagliari wounded.
At last darkness arrived and with it respite for the Fleet and convoy, and welcomed rest for the aircrews.
However at midnight one of the convoy — the ‘New Zealand Star’— was slightly damaged by a mine exploding in its paravane, then the ‘Empire Song’ hit two mines.
A fire broke out in her ammunition hold and the crew were taken off by an attendant destroyer.
At 0400 she blew up with  the loss of fifty-seven of the precious tanks and ten of the even more precious Hurricanes.
During the hours of darkness a lone torpedo-bomber attempted a daring attack on the battleship ‘Queen Elizabeth’, which was sailing with Force ‘H’ but was destined as reinforcement for the Mediterranean Fleet.
The torpedo was only narrowly avoided.
To the east the Mediterranean Fleet had also come under air attack during 8th. from Rhodes-based Axis aircraft, and heavy air fighting had ensued with six of the attackers being claimed shot down by the defending Fulmars from the carrier ‘Formidable’.
9/5/41
From Malta ten of 252 Squadron's Beaufighters were now able to provide good cover for the Fleet and convoy, and on one of these patrols Plt.Off.
Davidson intercepted a Ju88 ‘snooper’, Lt. Eduard Gessler and his crew of 4U + LK losing their lives when their 2(F)/123 aircraft went down between Lampedusa and Malta.
At 0800 the ‘Tiger’ convoy was still some 90 miles to the west of Malta, while the Mediterranean Fleet was 120 miles to the south, but by 1515 the two west-bound Malta-destined convoys, for which the Mediterranean Fleet had also provided cover, had arrived at Malta.
At this same time Force ‘H’ discharged its responsibilities for the ‘Tiger’convoy to Admiral Cunningham's force, the two fleets meeting some 40 miles south of Malta.
The poor weather, with many fog patches restricting visibility to less than two miles, prevented the warships and their respective convoys from being discovered, although another ‘snooper’, this time a Ju88 from 1(F)/121 was intercepted by a pair of Fulmars from ‘Formidable's’ 806 Squadron flown by Lts.
Henley and P.D.J. Sparke, and claimed shot down.
The badly damaged aircraft limped back to Sicily where it crashed whilst attempting to land and was destroyed.
The crew survived but presumably they had not sighted the ships before being attacked as no attacks developed, to everyone's surprise.
During this period three Fulmars, on patrol from ‘Formidable’, landed at Hal Far to refuel.
Meanwhile, Malta's fighters were in action during the day when Ju87s from both II and III Gruppe of St.G 1 carried out an attack on Grand Harbour, presumably the newly-arriving convoy having been spotted by reconnaissance aircraft.
Two Hurricanes of ‘B’ Flight were on patrol and were vectored towards the Stukas, while other Hurricanes were hurriedly scrambled.
Flg.Off.
Laubscher, now in command of ‘B’ Flight, recalls: ‘I was leading Sgt. Peter Jordan on a patrol when we were vectored onto a flight of Ju87s which had attacked the Grand Harbour.
They had turned back to Sicily and I couldn't see a formation but spotted a straggler who, curiously enough, was flying diagonally across our line of approach and not heading pell-mell for home.
He was only 100 or so feet above the sea and we closed on him rapidly.
I instructed Peter to keep a sharp lookout for enemy fighters and then to follow me.
I started a quarter stern attack and had the unpleasant experience of flying down the middle of a cone of tracer from the rear gunner.
I held my fire until the enemy was within range.
When I pressed the button there was the ripping noise that was characteristic of the  Hurricane's eight guns and I saw strikes on the fuselage of the Stuka.
The rear gunner was killed by that burst, as his gun swung up to a vertical position as he slumped down.
I tried to turn in behind him but found that I was going to overshoot and pulled away to starboard.
I swung in a wide circle around the machine climbing slightly to loose speed and came in at him again from dead ahead and slightly above.
The pilot of the Stuka had plenty of courage and pulled up his nose to have a crack at me with his forward firing guns.
I was so surprised that I involuntarily pulled up slightly and I passed over him before I could get him in my gunsight again.
At that moment Peter came in from the port quarter, misjudged his deflection by a fraction and blew off the Stuka's tail.
When I turned I saw a long patch of the fluorescent dye that the Germans carried staining the sea a light yellow-green but could not pick out the pilot.
Nevertheless we circled the spot and radioed Control to get a radar fix on us and send out a crash boat.
They never found him and I often wondered whether he went in with his machine and dead gunner or whether he managed to bale out and was picked up by the flyingboat they had stationed in Sicily for sea rescue work.’
Sgt. Peter Jordan added: ‘One of the crew baled out — nearly hitting me in the process — but I don't think his parachute would have opened properly from that height.’
His judgement of the situation would appear to have been correct, for this was undoubtedly Oblt.
Ulrich Heinz's aircraft (J9+GL) of 9/St.G 1 lost with both members of the crew.
A second Ju87 was claimed by Sgt. Len Davies (in Z4261), shared with an unidentified pilot, Davies recording: ‘Attempted raid on convoy by Ju87s.
Ju87 shot down by Blue 1 — I finished it off.’
4/St.G 1 reported that one of its Ju87s crash-landed at Comiso suffering 70% damage, and this may well have been the victim of their attack.
10/5/41
Throughout the day Axis reconnaissance aircraft searched for the convoy in variable visibility, Beaufighters from Malta continuing to provide cover and frequently heard making reports but experiencing difficulty in maintaining contact.
Two Beaufighters were vectored onto one ‘snooper’ 70 kilometres southwest of the island, an aircraft of 2(F)/123.
Following an exchange of fire the Ju88 flew back to Sicily in a damaged condition and with one crewman wounded, but one Beaufighter — T3239 ‘B’ crewed by Flt.Lt.
J.J. Lowe and F/Sgt.
J.H. Tranter — failed to return, presumably shot down by return fire from the Junkers.
Fulmars from ‘Formidable’ were also flying patrols and on one such sortie Lt. R. MacDonald-Hall, with L/A Harry Phillips in rear seat, sighted a He111 but were unable to catch it before it disappeared into the fog.
During this period single Sunderlands from the Australian squadron were regular visitors to the island, carrying supplies and personnel from Gibraltar.
N9049, flown by Flg.Off.
Thurston, had arrived with a load of ammunition for the Beaufighters on 7th, but had been delayed three days in leaving again due to a heavy swell on the sea.
During the afternoon of 10th. a number of Bf109s from 7/JG 26 appeared and became engaged in a dogfight with intercepting Hurricanes.
After five minutes or so, one  Messerschmitt — flown by ‘Jochen’ Müncheberg — was seen suddenly to break away and dive out of the sun onto the moored Sunderland in Marsaxlokk Bay.
He fired one short burst which at once set the port wing on fire, and although efforts were made to tow the flyingboat ashore, the flames spread rapidly and it sank, still blazing furiously.
Fortunately no one was aboard at the time.
To reduce Axis activity, nine 252 Squadron Beaufighters made a low level strafing attack on Catania and Comiso airfields with some effect.
At Catania Italian records show that an MC200, a Savoia S.82 transport, a Caproni Cal33 and a Cal64 were damaged, while at Comiso two Ju52/3ms were destroyed, two 23° Gruppo CR 42s badly damaged, one MC200, one S.81 and one Bf110 damaged.
Six Italian servicemen, three Germans and three civilian workmen were killed.
However at 2100 air attacks on the departing Fleet and convoy began and lasted for the next one and a half hours — torpedo-bombers attempted to attack down moon but were greeted by intense A.A. fire and were forced to turn away.
No damage was caused to any of the warships or merchantmen.
No further attacks developed but five escorting destroyers of Capt. Lord Louis Mountbatten's 5th Destroyer Flotilla were detached to carry out a bombardment of Benghazi just after midnight.
They claimed a hit by a vessel in the harbour but were then attacked by Ju87s of II/St.G 2, which also machine-gunned the destroyers but without any serious effects.
The Flotilla then returned to Malta.
That night Swordfish from 830 Squadron laid mines in Tripoli harbour, while four Wellingtons from 148 Squadron, with three further Egypt-based aircraft, attacked the port as a diversion.
11/5/41
This was the last day during which the ‘Tiger’ convoy remained in reach of Axis air attack, and still bad visibility hampered both attackers and defenders.
During the afternoon nine Ju88s appeared, and were intercepted by a patrolling Fulmar section, Lt. Henley chasing an aircraft of 5/LG 1, his fire wounding the gunner before the bomber disappeared into the murk.
Meanwhile Lt. Sparke latched onto Ofw.
Otto Engel's 7th Staffel aircraft (L1 + IR), but collided with it, he and his TAG, L/A A.S.
Rush, and the crew of the Junkers all perishing.
12/5/41
The four remaining ships of the ‘Tiger’ convoy reached Alexandria safely this morning.
238 tanks and 43 crated Hurricanes would be an invaluable reinforcement for Wavell's forces.
‘Formidable’ was left with only four serviceable Fulmars, with no immediate replacements available.
This would delay the carrier's involvement in the imminent air and sea battle for Crete.
However the ‘unsinkable aircraft carrier’ Malta now had about 50 Hurricanes — mainly Mark IIa and IIb models — and some reorganization was due.
Consequently on 12th. a new unit was formed at Hal Far to be known as 185 Squadron.
This number had previously been given to a liaison unit with the R.A.F. contingent in France in early 1940, and before that to a Bomber Command training unit.
The nucleus of the new squadron was provided mainly by ‘C’ Flight of 261 Squadron, the unit's  ground component being provided by the latter unit and by 1430 Flight, an army co-operation unit which had been operating in Italian East Africa until the previous month, when the main campaign there had been satisfactorily completed.
The pilots of 1430 Flight were currently flying with 112 Squadron in the defence of Crete.
Command of the new squadron was vested in newly-promoted Sqn.Ldr.
P.W.O. Mould, D.F.C., with as his flight commanders, Flt.Lts.
C.G.St.D.
Jeffries ('A' Flight) and I.B. Westmacott ('B' Flight).
Other pilots were a mixture of new arrivals and seasoned veterans:(at the same time Plt.Off.
D.J.
Hammond was posted from 261 Squadron to the Middle East due to ill health.)
185 Squadron was formed on 12 May 1941 from ‘C’ Flight of 261 Squadron and some spare pilots.
Some of the squadron's initial complement of pilots are seen here — l. to r., back Flt.Lt.
C.G.St.D.
Jeffries, Sgt. C.S. Bamberger, Plt.Off.
C.E. ‘Hamish’ Hamilton, Plt.Off.
H.W. ‘Chubby’ Eliot, Sgt. B.J. Vardy; front; Sgt. A.W.
Jolly, Sgt. C.G. Hodson, Sgt. F.G.
Sheppard.
More of 185 Squadron in May 1941: l. to r., back; Plt.Off.
G.G. Bailey, Sqn.Ldr.
P.W.O. ‘Boy’ Mould, Sgt. Bamberger (on wing) Sgt. Vardy, Sgt. Sheppard.
Flg.Off.
Eliot, Sgt. Hodson, L.A.C. W. Hartill; front; Sgt. Jolly and two groundcrew.
13/5/41
Initial operations by the new unit did not  open an unauspicious note.
Next day, 13th., four of the squadron's Hurricanes were led off at 1330 by Flt.Lt.
Westmacott, climbing above other fighters from 261 Squadron.
At 8,000 feet numerous Bf109s attacked but were evaded in cloud, and the section broke up.
Westmacott then saw two ‘red noses’ coming up and thought they were from his own flight, as he called his pilots to rendezvous over Takali, going down through cloud to wait for them.
Those behind him were not Hurricanes however — they were Bf109Es of III/JG 27.
Suddenly he heard a clattering noise and his cockpit filled with smoke, the controls going dead — he had been shot down by Oblt.
Graf von Kageneck.
Out of control, the Hurricane (Z2837) went into a forward bunt, so he undid his seat straps, opened the hood and was thrown out.
His parachute opened, but as he reached the ground a 25 m.p.h. wind pulled him over backwards and he was knocked out.
He came round to find a hostile Maltese crowd around him, but when he made it clear that he was English the mood changed.
He now discovered that he had been wounded in the elbow, and was taken to hospital where a piece of bullet casing was removed.
During the raid two Hurricanes were claimed by the Germans, the second victor not being identified; Plt.Off.
P.J.A. Thompson of 261 Squadron was shot down and killed in V7115.
On this occasion some of the Messerschmitts had  carried bombs for the first time — not a new role for III/JG 27, which had operated in this manner over the Balkans during the previous month.
Several members of 185 Squadron were shot down immediately after formation of the unit by Oblt.
Erbo Graf von Kageneck, the leading pilot of III/JG27. which was briefly operating over Malta at this time.
14/5/41
Next afternoon at 1620 four 185 Squadron Hurricanes were again scrambled to provide top cover for 261 Squadron.
Once again they were attacked by III/JG27 Messerschmitts, on this occasion the successful Plt.Off.
Hamilton in Z2901 being shot down and critically wounded by Graf von Kageneck; he died shortly afterwards.
Sgt. Wynne attacked one Bf109 from below, but without observed results.
‘Hamish’ Hamilton, a Scot, had already spent six months on the island but had volunteered to stay on until the new squadron (185) was settled in.
Sqn.Ldr.
Whittingham wrote of him: ‘One of the finest characters I have met.
It was he who always took extra watches when things were hottest.
…Dear old ‘Hamish’, you could almost smell the heather of Scotland when you spoke to  him.’
John Pain adds:’ Hamish's D.F.C.
was reputed to have come through three days later.’
It is believed that before his death Claud ‘Hamish’ Hamilton had shot down at least five aircraft over Malta.
Two more Hurricanes were claimed by O.K.W. on this date.
Uffz.
Kühdorf of 7/JG 26 claiming one which again seems not to have been confirmed.
Z4087 of 261 Squadron was hit, and Plt.Off.
B.M. Cavan was slightly injured.
During the day's raid three Marylands were damaged on the ground at Luqa.
Oblt.
Graf von Kageneck is helped into his parachute harness by his ground crew on a Sicilian airfield in May 1941.
Note his Bf109E with victory bars on the rudder in the background.
15/5/41
Again on 15 May two 185 Squadron Hurricanes took off to cover 261 Squadron, Sgts.
Bamberger and Wynne getting off at 1200 and climbing to 12,000 feet.
As Bf109s were reported they stayed well above the other squadron, but to no avail.
Suddenly Bf109s attacked and Wynne went down in Z3035 to crash at high speed to his death; his victor was Hpt.
Max Dobislav of III/JG 27, claiming his ninth victory of the war in this combat.
On landing the shattered Bamberger, who had now survived many weeks of combat, announced: ‘I'm not taking off from this bloody island again!’
He did not fly operationally again with the squadron, being posted temporarily to A.H.Q. Malta at Safi as a test pilot until 12 June, when he was flown out to Gibraltar in a Sunderland.
His 100 sorties over Malta had brought him two confirmed victories and three damaged.
Later in the war he  would return to action in Italy, becoming a flight commander with D.F.C.
and Bar, and six confirmed victories to his credit.
Meanwhile three S.79s from 10° and 30° Stormo B.T. had also operated over Malta on 15th., one aircraft of 32° Gruppo being lost.
Four more S.79s were sent out from Sicily to search for it but one ran out of fuel and had to ditch, the crew being picked up by an Italian hospital ship.
The missing aircraft may possibly have fallen foul of Plt.Off.
John Pain in Z4060, who claimed an aircraft shot down which he identified as an He111.
‘This was on the morning pre-dawn patrol when I was scrambled for an unusual low early morning recce.
I chased him west along the south coast of the island and closed off Gozo.
He went into the drink well out to sea off the island, by which time I was light on fuel and out of ammo.
There was no doubt he crashed into the sea as I watched him hit, but I did not get a confirmation of this as there was no one else to see it and R.D.F. didn't seem to have much coverage up that way.’
The day's attacks resulted in one Wellington being hit and burnt out on the ground at Luqa, while three Beaufighters were damaged.
16/5/41
More changes were now taking place and further pilots were rested.
Sgt. Deacon left on 13 May for Mersa Matruh in Hurricane V7771, the same aircraft he had flown to the island on 29 January.
At Takali Gp.
Capt. O'Sullivan, newly-promoted, was posted to Luqa, the new C.O. being Wg.Cdr.
J. Warfield.
Sqn.Ldr.
Martin, one of the remaining 1940 Fighter Flight pilots, took command of Hal Far.
16 May saw the arrival of five Blenheims of 139 Squadron from England via Gibraltar, while five days later five more 82 Squadron aircraft arrived; one had been lost en route, Sgt. L.H. Wrightson and his crew perishing.
Losses during the period 12–15 May had been rather heavy, the total of aircraft destroyed or damaged in the air or on the ground being recorded as:
German units were now leaving Sicily in a steady trickle as the Luftwaffe began regrouping for the forthcoming attack on Russia.
The Regia Aeronautica was quick to reclaim its airfields on the island, and by mid May the force assembled there was once more quite impressive:(*the Reggiane Re 2000s were a test batch of the first pre-production examples of this little monoplane fighter.)
16–17/5/41
On Malta meanwhile the Beaufighters of 252 Squadron were now fast approaching the need for major servicing.
On 16th however eight of them were despatched to Maleme airfield, Crete, from where next morning they were to carry out a strafe of airfields in southern Greece at first light.
These bases — Hassani, Argos and Molai — were in use by the Luftwaffe for attacks on Crete, which were reaching their climax at this time.
Long lines of aircraft parked wingtip to wingtip were attacked, and much damage was believed to have been done; in fact many Bf110s and Ju52s were damaged, some seriously, but these attacks did little to stem the assault on the island.
One Beaufighter, T3228 crewed by Flg.Off.
Hirst and Sgt. E.R.
Payton, failed to return and was shot down by the A.A. defences at Hassani.
One more important duty awaited the Beaufighters on their return to Malta, as Sqn.Ldr.
Whiteley, C.O. of 69 Squadron, recalled: ‘It was about this time that we were stood by to intercept transport aircraft proceeding from Italy to North Africa.
A.H.Q. expected to detect these transports east of Malta at extreme range and by that time I could spare some Marylands while still meeting the P.R.
tasks.
I remember sitting in the cockpit and being cooked by the sun for a few hours, but we were never scrambled.’
Further reinforcements were on the way aboard a big convoy sailing from Gibraltar.
This included the carriers ‘Ark Royal’, ‘Eagle’ and ‘Furious’, two battleships and a strong force of cruisers and destroyers.
Aboard the carriers were forty-eight Hurricanes and six Fulmars to be flown off, although on this occasion not all the fighters were for Malta.
For the first time existing established squadrons were aboard.
213, 229 and 249 Squadrons had all been ordered to prepare for service in the Middle East, as was the special Fulmar flight which was to lead them, under the command of Lt.Cdr.
G. Hare, D.S.C., who takes up the story of the preparations: ‘In mid April 1941 I was called to London for a secret verbal appointment and interviewed by Rear-Admiral Clement Moody, the Fifth Sea Lord (he had been my Captain in ‘Eagle’).
I was told that I was being sent as C.O. 800X Squadron which was then forming with Fulmars at Donibristle.
Our job was to act as navigational escort for about seventy Hurricanes which would be transported to the Med in ‘Furious’ and flown off at maximum range as reinforcements for Malta which was under heavy air attack.
I went straight to Donibristle where I found Lt. R.M. Smeeton (later Vice-Admiral Sir Richard) had already made great strides in equipping the new Fulmar IIs.
I can't remember whether there were six or eight at this distance of time.
I believe Smeeton was then serving at the Admiralty, he was not a member of 800X Squadron.’
‘About the beginning of May 800X flew to Speke R.A.F. station where the Hurricanes were being prepared for embarkation.
Visibility was very poor and  having been warned that barrage balloons were hoisted over the Liverpool area which had very recently suffered heavily in bombing raids, we went well out to sea before turning in to Speke, only to get entangled in a coastal convoy flying balloons.
Luckily no Fulmar was lost.
We were at Speke only three days or so before we got our orders for embarkation.
One night the Mersey tunnel was closed to all traffic, approach roads sealed off so that the long column of Fulmars and Hurricanes could be towed to Gladstone Dock where ‘Furious’ was berthed.
The Hurricanes had to be shorn of their wings to get through the tunnel but the Fulmars went through with wings folded.
‘Furious’ then sailed for Tail o' the Bank to pick up our Atlantic anti-submarine escort.
The date must have been about 12 May.’
One of the 800X Squadron Fulmars which new off H.M.S.'Furious' on 21 May 1941 to lead new Hurricanes to Malta.
They then remained on the island to undertake night intruder sorties over Sicily.
The escort comprised a  heterogeneous collection of vessels including the old battleship ‘Centurion’ disguised with phoney wooden guns to look like H.M.S. ‘King George V’, the cruiser ‘London’and a bevy of destroyers.
Hare continues: ‘The passage was without incident.
The Operations Officer of ‘Furious’(Cdr.
A.H.T. Fleming) and I carefully prepared diagrammatic charts for each Hurricane pilot of probable times, courses and distances to that they would not be lost should they become detached.
This turned out to be a very wise precaution.’
‘The day before we arrived in Gibraltar we received a signal from Admiral Sir  James Somerville of Force ‘H’ who was in command of the operation, saying that on arrival in harbour we were to berth stern to stern to ‘Ark Royal’so that some of our Hurricanes could be transferred to her and rolled off ‘Furious’direct onto ‘Ark Royal’.
He also required all 800X Squadron's Fulmar IIs to be transferred to ‘Ark’ and they would be replaced as navigational escort to the Hurricanes by her Fulmar Is which were teased out and no longer suitable as fighters.
I protested, as C.O. of 800X, to Cdr.
Miles Cursham of ‘Furious’, the Commander Flying, that the object of the operation was the safe delivery of the Hurricanes to Malta but my protest went unheeded.’
‘During the night of 18–19 May ‘Furious’ arrived at Gib and the exchange of aircraft took place; then both ships sailed in company.’
It was the aircraft of 249 Squadron that had been transferred to ‘Ark Royal’; meanwhile the groundcrews of all three squadrons were on their way round the Cape of Good Hope, bound via the Suez Canal for Egypt.
‘Next morning my senior pilot, Lt. P.J. Connolly, reported that the four Fulmar Is transferred to us were indeed in a very  ropy condition but maintenance crews were working on them.
He later reported that they were in worse condition than he had first thought and doubted whether they were fit for the job.
I then went again to Cdr.
Cursham and said I wished to report the fact to the Captain (A.G. Talbot).
He advised me not to do so, as, he said, the Captain was a difficult man, and he had no intention of telling him himself.
However, I insisted and he ushered me into the Captain's sea cabin.
I didn't stay there long; I was told very forcibly that the job had to be done and to get the hell out of his cabin.
I said I fully realised the job had to be done but I wished to protest against the shabby trick ‘Ark Royal’ had played on us.
This incensed the Captain even more and out of that cabin I got!’
20–21/5/41
As the warships steadily ploughed eastwards, operations over Malta continued.
On 20 May Oblt.
Graf von Kageneck claimed III/JG 27's last victory over the island when he shot down Hurricane N2673 of 261 Squadron, Plt.Off.
A.J. Reeves baling out with slight injuries.
Flt.
Lt. Hancock, who had taken over ‘B’ Flight of 185 Squadron after Innes Westmacott was wounded, crash-landed when his engine failed due to fuel starvation; a fault had prevented his being able to switch over tanks.
Luqa was again hit, one Beaufighter being burnt out on the ground here.
Next day in a further raid on this airfield another Beaufighter was to be slightly damaged, as was a Maryland, while a Wellington and a Blenheim were so badly hit that they had to be written off.
It was on this day-21 May — that Operation ‘Splice’ got underway — though with so many mishaps that disaster was only narrowly avoided.
The aircraft were ranged on the decks before dawn, but on ‘Furious’ the first Fulmar failed to start and had to be put below.
213 Squadron was led off in sections, each headed by a Fulmar, but that leading Flt.Lt.
Lockhart's flight became lost and returned to the carrier, then set off again with two hours' fuel already gone.
Near Pantelleria the formation was fired on, so dived down to low level where Plt.Off.
N.C. Downie's aircraft hit the sea and crashed.
(He was later picked up by the Italians and made a prisoner.)
The rest  made Malta where on landing one aircraft's engine stopped at once as all its fuel had gone.
Six 229 Squadron aircraft also reached Malta from ‘Furious’, but the remaining aircraft of this unit stayed aboard as the carriers had by then been as long in hostile water as was safe to allow.
Geoffrey Hare, who was incidentally an observer, not a pilot, was in one of the Fulmars which had got off.
He continues: ‘Pat Connolly and I were in the third Fulmar (N1994) and we joined up our range of Hurricanes with some left from the second range which had returned.
In all I expect we were about a dozen strong before taking departure for Malta from a point to the South of the Balearics.
After going comfortably for nearly an hour Pat Connolly reported that he was losing engine pressure.
At that time we were flying about 4,000 feet about 40 miles off the North African coast.
A minute or two later Pat said he couldn't keep height for lack of power and we would have to ditch.
I immediately gestured to the Hurricanes to carry on to Malta by themselves as we were ditching and we turned for the coast ourselves, losing height all the way.
The morning was fine and the sea calm.
Connolly told me over the intercom to stand clear as he was about to press the button of the destructor switch for the I.F.P. gear.
Nothing happened.
I then burrowed into the cockpit to wrench the gear from its housing but in so doing I became unplugged and did not hear the pilot shouting that we were about to ditch.’
Hurricanes of 213, 229 and 238 Squadron aboard H.M.S. ‘Furious’ on 21 May 1941 ready to fly off to the Middle East via Malta on Operation ‘Splice’.
‘I struck the I.F.F.
gear with my forehead with such force that my goggles, which I was wearing luckily, were shattered and my face badly bruised and bleeding profusely.
I was scarcely conscious but Pat helped me out of the machine and as the dinghy hadn't emerged after the ditching we had to swim  about 250 yards to the beach.
Thank God for a Mae West!
A reception party of Arabs and French gendarmes were there to greet us and put us under arrest.
We were then taken by boat about ten miles to Bone where an armed Army escort awaited us for interrogation and we were kept in a locked room in the barracks.
I can remember very little of what happened until we were transferred to Algiers.
Pat Connolly was led away to incarceration and I was offered treatment for my facial injuries and an operation on my flattened nose.
The French surgeon was very good.
The U.S. Consul became responsible for our wellbeing but it was fourteen days or more before my parents got word of my survival after being reported missing on 21 May.’
Meanwhile on Malta after a quick lunch the 213 and 229 Squadron aircraft took off again to fly on to Mersa Matruh, lead by four of 252 Squadron's Beaufighters.
Seven of the 213 Squadron aircraft lost their Beaufighter and returned to the island.
(The Beaufighter pilots reaching Africa were Wg.Cdr.
Yaxley, Flg.Off.
Virgin, Sub Lt. Fraser and Plt.Off Davidson).
Four of 252's Beaufighters had been destroyed on the ground during air raids while on Malta and the remaining four left on the same day for Gibraltar on the first leg of the flight back to England, each carrying three aboard instead of the usual crew of two.
On the second leg of the journey one Beaufighter force-landed in Eire, where Flg.Off.
Holgate, Flg.Off.
Verity and Sgt. Barnett were interned.
A second crashed into the sea off Mount's Bay, Flg.Off.
MacDonald, Flg.Off.
Lemar and Sgt. Booth being rescued safely.
Flt.Lt.
Riley remained on the island — he was in hospital recovering from injuries.
Newly-arrived tropicalized Hurricane IIA (Z4544) immediately after arrival on Malta.
Note one of 252 Squadron's Beaufighters in the background undergoing major repair.
While all this had been happening, 249 Squadron had also been launched from ‘Ark Royal’, also led by Fulmars.
The first group, headed by Sqn.Ldr.
R.A. Barton, had to turn back when the oil tank of the guiding Fulmar split.
A relief guide was flown off and the flight reached Malta without further mishap.
The second, with Flt.Lt.
T.F.
‘Ginger’ Neil at its head, seemed doomed from the start.
No sooner was Neil in the air than the left gun panel in the upper wing surface came loose and stuck up in the air.
At the same time wind scooped all his maps out of the cockpit, which was still open.
Finding that the aircraft would still fly, he formed up behind the Fulmar and they set course for Malta.
After about an hour the Fulmar suddenly accelerated and climbed away.
The Hurricane lost it and flew round for five minutes, going down to 400 feet above the water to avoid appearing on the radar screens on nearby Italian-occupied islands.
Finally in despair they turned back for the fleet, but on approaching this, the ships all scattered under the impression that an enemy torpedo raid was coming in.
The Hurricanes flew around overhead for 15 20 minutes until their predicament became clear, when ‘Ark Royal's’ deck was cleared and another Fulmar sent off.
They were now nearer to 550 miles from Malta than the 450 intended, and the Fulmar crew announced over the radio that they could not make it, breaking away to land on the carrier again.
Neil did not hear this broadcast however, and headed for Malta with his followers, seeing a Ju88 and several other types of aircraft in the distance as they went.
After five hours and 35 minutes in the air they were all desperately short of fuel, but at that moment Malta appeared dead ahead.
They went straight in to land at Luqa, but as they approached saw bombs bursting on the runway — they had arrived in the middle of a raid!
Opening up, most managed to complete a circuit, although several ran out of fuel at that point and went down to land at once, while others landed at Hal Far.
Despite everything, all got down safely.
Another group was led by a Fulmar flown by Pty Off.
(A) Albert Sabey with Sub Lt. Bernard Furlong as navigator.
Immediately after take off they discovered that their undercarriage would not retract, and as this reduced speed and increased fuel consumption —— due to the drag created — they led the flight back to the carrier, signalled their predicament, and again a further Fulmar was launched.
Unfortunately for them, some of the Hurricane pilots failed to see this and stuck to their Fulmar, ignoring all signals to break away.
Aware that it would be difficult and dangerous for the Hurricanes to attempt to land back aboard, Sabey set off towards Malta, hoping to meet one of the aircraft despatched from the island to lead in any lost aircraft, before their fuel ran out.
This in fact transpired, and the Naval crew were further fortunate in being picked up safely after ditching in the sea; they were transported to the island.
Now it was that 249 Squadron received the news that it was to stay on the island.
The pilots were dismayed, for they had no kit with them, all being aboard ship with the ground party, bound for Egypt.
No kit or ground crew were seen again by the majority of the pilots.
Worse was to follow, for they were taken by bus to Takali where 261 Squadron had been ordered to prepare for departure to the Middle East, 249 being the unit's relief- and they were ordered to take 249's new Hurricanes with them, leaving most of their own well-worn machines behind.
‘Ginger’ Neil was not impressed with what he saw, and described 261 as ‘the  most  motley crowd of goons you ever saw in your life — ferry pilots who had been formed into a squadron.’
The Hurricanes were ‘a poor crowd of battered Mark Is — no squadron markings, some with Vokes filters, some not.
A variety of propellers, etc.
Morale of the pilots dreadful.’
His description of the aircraft was not far out; John Pain reported: ‘By the time we left, aircraft were being repaired with dope-painted linen or cloth from anywhere and metal repairs were made with the aid of Players 50s tins.
And of course, cannibalisation where practicable.’
One eyewitness noted seeing tailwheel tyres stuffed with straw due to lack of spares, and a pilot with the ripcord pull-ring on his parachute replaced with a piece of bent wire!
261 Squadron was indeed tired — it had taken a terrible beating from Müncheberg and his men.
It had never been fully constituted or trained as a squadron, but it had achieved most creditable results nonetheless, with over 100 victories plus many more probables and damaged.
The pilots were not sorry to go; Doug Whitney entered in his logbook of the flight out: ‘The finest sight of Malta I've seen…’ which, he adds, no doubt expressed his feelings at the time.
(See Appendix IV for a summary of 261 Squadron's achievements, the subsequent careers of its pilots, etc.)
On leaving the squadron did take at least two of its old Hurricane Is with it.
P3731 (which had arrived from ‘Argus’ with 418 Flight in August 1940) and V7370 (which had arrived during the ill-fated second reinforcement flight in November of that year) reached Palestine, and were later taken on charge by the newly-formed 127 Squadron.
Both were shot down over Syria by Vichy French Dewoitine 520s of GC III/6 on 5 July 1941.
249 Squadron was by contrast an experienced and successful team.
It had a good record during the later stages of the Battle of Britain, where it had produced Fighter Command's only Victoria Cross of the war — Flt.Lt.
J.B. Nicholson.
Several of the pilots from that period were still with the squadron, including the tough Canadian C.O., Sqd.Ldr.
‘Butch’ Barton, D.F.C.
(8½ victories and 6 damaged) and flight commander ‘Ginger’ Neil, D.F.C.
and Bar (11 victories plus two shares).
Others were:
The other flight commander was Flt.Lt.
F.V. ‘Tony’ Morello, who had gained one shared victory with 501 Squadron.
The balance of the squadron was made up as follows:
To take 261 Squadron's place on Malta came 249 Squadron, which flew in from H.M.S. ‘Ark Royal’ on 21 May 1941.
L. to r.; front; Flt.L.
H.J.S. Beazley, Sqn.Ldr.
R.A. Barton, D.F.C., Fig.Off.
E.F.J. Harrington, Flg.Off.
P.G.
Leggett; rear: Plt.Off.
D.A.
Tedford, Plt.Off.
G.C.C.
Palliser, Sgt. R. Rist, Plt.Off.
R.H. Matthews, Sgt. Branch, Sgt. J.G. Parker, Plt.Off.
F.C.
Hill, Sgt. D. Owen, Flg.Off.
C.C.H. Davis; far rear: Sgt. Smith.
Also arriving on the island at this time for Fighter Control duties was Wg.Cdr.
Halahan, who had been despatcher aboard ‘Ark Royal’ during the previous flight.
The remaining five Fulmars which had led the Hurricanes in were to stay on the island, although the original plan called for them to fly on to Maleme (Crete), where they were to assist the Fulmars of 805 Squadron in the defence of that island.
However Crete was invaded the day before the arrival of 800X at Malta, where they were now to remain, attached to 830 Squadron, and were to play the role of night intruders, attacking airfields in Sicily with 20 lb. bombs.
With few spares and no reserve aircraft, their service was not expected to be sustained.
In the event it was to continue for longer than could possibly have been envisaged.
Next day 249 Squadron was split into two sections, one half commanded by Barton and one by Neil.
Each half was to operate for half of each day, allowing 50% of the pilots to be off duty at any one time.
185 Squadron now moved to Takali alongside the newly-arrived unit with its own remaining ten Mark Is and two Mark IIs, leaving Luqa and Hal Far free for the time being for use as staging airfields to Egypt, and as bases for the bombers and reconnaissance aircraft.
During 23rd. the remaining aircraft of 213 Squadron set off to complete their journey to the African mainland.
25/5/41
For 249 Squadron the first introduction to real action on Malta came as something of a shock.
About ten Hurricanes were gathered round the dispersal hut at Takali on the afternoon of 25 May when just before 1400 the sirens went, but the squadron was not ordered off, although the pilots were ready strapped into their cockpits.
Suddenly Bf109Es of 7/JG/26 arrived with a crackle of gunfire, shooting-up the airfield.
Flg.Off.
Pat Wells was wounded in the leg, while Flg.Off.
Harrington's aircraft was hit by a cannon shell in the forward fuel tank, another hitting his parachute pack; he was unhurt, but his Hurricane was a total write-off.
Sgt. MacVean leapt from his cockpit in such a hurry that he broke both legs.
The full results of the attack included two Hurricanes burnt out and three damaged, plus three groundcrew wounded.
Pat Wells describes the attack: ‘This was our first readiness at Malta and whilst sitting in the crew room were astonished to hear the air-raid sirens howling — in the U.K. we had always been airborne before the sirens sounded.
We rushed out to the aircraft and got ready for the scramble which never came.
I noticed Flt.Lt.
Neil get out of his aircraft obviously to go to the telephone.
I am fundamentally lazy and decided that we would inevitably be scrambled so it was less effort to remain in my aircraft and wait for it, helmet on and listening to the R T. The next thing I saw was people running — I still could not hear anything due to my helmet — and on looking round saw the 109s starting their dive on the field.
I tried to start the engine but the airman on the starter battery trailer had fled so I could not do a thing except huddle in the cockpit, waiting for the sensation of being hit.
The aircraft was burning well and this, plus exploding ammunition, drove me out.
It was only when I got on the ground and tried to walk did I realise that I had a bullet through the top of my right ankle.
The ambulance came and I was filled with delicious brandy but was instantly sick when I got to Imtarfa Hospital.
Here I had the most devoted treatment from an Army Surgeon, Major C.S. Salisbury, an Australian who was ex-Chief Surgeon on the ‘Queen Mary’.
I can thank Charles Salisbury for still having that foot today.’
Two of 249 Squadron's Hurricanes ablaze after being strafed by Müncheberg and his pilots at Takali on 25 May 1941.
249 Squadron personnel glumly inspect the damage.
The German pilots involved in the attack claimed four Hurricanes destroyed, two by Müncheberg and one each by Lt. Johannsen and Obfw.
Laub; they believed that six had been hit in all from an estimated fifteen.
This debacle came as a great blow to the confident pilots of 249, epitomised by its effect on Flg.Off.
Harrington.
A few days later a 69 Squadron Maryland approached the airfield, looking for all the world like a Ju88.
Harrington at once leapt into a slit trench in great haste, only to find it full of barbed wire which inflicted severe lacerations on him.
Despite this bad start, this was to be the only meeting the unit was to have with Müncheberg's Messerschmitts, for their time in Sicily was almost at an end.
It was a bad week for the British in the Middle East generally however, for in Crete evacuation was now beginning.
The first shock over, a member of the ground crew poses with his dog before one of 249 Squadron's shattered fighters.
Luqa's battered control tower, partially protected by a wall of sandbags.
The tower had just suffered further damage on 25 May 1941 when this photo was taken.
27–29/5/41
On Malta the reduced Axis air activity as the last of the German aircraft departed Sicily allowed more offensive action to be put in hand.
On 27 May, as 249 Squadron moved across to Hal Far for further operations, six Blenheims from 82 and 139 Squadrons were out attacking a convoy escorted by six destroyers.
Heavy defensive fire sent two of the bombers into the water, Flt.Lt.
G.M. Fairbairn ('H', V6427), Sgt. E.B. Inman ('J', V6460), and their crews being lost — a grim indicator of what lay ahead for the anti-shipping units.
Their attack had however left the steamer ‘Foscarini’ on fire, and she was subsequently towed into Tripoli.
By night Malta suffered its first raid by the recently-arrived BR 20Ms of the 43° Stormo B.T., ten of these bombers operating.
Next day two more of 139 Squadron's Blenheims flew south to Sfax harbour, where they bombed a ship which was seen to blow up 12.
BR20Ms returned that night to attack Valetta and Hal Far, but Hurricanes were up on this occasion, preventing half of the attacking force from reaching their targets and forcing them to return with their bombs.
On 29 May anti-aircraft gunners submitted claims for a Ju88 probably destroyed, but it seems likely that they had in fact been firing at one of the Italian Fiats.
249 Squadron's top-scoring pilot when they arrived on Malta was Flt.Lt.
T.F.
‘Ginger’ Neil, D.F.C.
& Bar (r), who had been credited with shooting down 11 German aircraft and sharing in the destruction of two more.
He is seen here with Flg.Off.
J.T. Crossey (l) and Plt.Off.
G.C.C.Palliser.
More Italian units were continuing to flow into Sicily, 7° Gruppo C.T.
of the 54° Stormo arriving at Comiso with MC 200s.
Commanded by Magg.
Alberto Beneforti, this unit included the 76 a , 86 a and 98 a Squadriglia.
It was followed by the 101° Gruppo Tuffatori (ex B.a'T) with the 208 a and 238 a Squadriglia, which flew their Ju87s in to Gerbini, while on I June the 85° Gruppo R.M. was formed at Stagnone, Marsala, from the 144 a and 197 a Squadriglia with Z.506B floatplanes.
Eleven days later the other Gruppo of the 43° Stormo B.T., the 31° under Ten.Col.
Giuseppe Bordin (65 a and 66 a Squadriglia) would reach Catania with more BR 20Ms.
Another 249 Squadron ‘ notable ’ in May 1941 was Flg.Off.
Pat Wells.
He is seen here later in the year after posting to East Africa, with a Curtiss Mahawk in the background.
1/6/41
1 June however saw the departure of 7/JG 26 for North Africa.
During its four months in Sicily the little unit — and particularly its brilliant commanding officer — had been the scourge of Malta's Hurricanes.
The Staffel had claimed at least 42 victories, of which 20 (including one over Yugoslavia) had been credited to Müncheberg, whose score now stood at 43.
Substantial numbers of aircraft had also been claimed destroyed on the ground (or water).
During this whole period not a single operational loss had been sustained; no better example of the supremacy of experience, good training, proper tactics, high morale and suitable equipment can be found anywhere.
Yet despite their apparent invulnerability, few of the German pilots would survive the tribulations which would later confront the fighter pilots of the Luftwaffe.
Müncheberg himself, promoted and highly-decorated, would fall in combat with American fighters over Tunisia during March 1943 after his 135th. victory.
His second in command in 7 Staffel, Klaus Mietusch, was to rise to the rank of Major, gaining the Knights' Cross and a credited 72 victories before he too fell to U.S. fighter pilots in September 1944.
Of the others, Hans Johannsen was killed in March 1942 with his score at eight; Karl-Heinz Ehlen died a month later with seven victories.
Melchior Kestel was also killed in combat in June 1943, while Karl Laub, also with seven victories, was finally killed in December 1944.
Karl Kühdorf survived, the only one of the more successful pilots to see the war out; his final score stood at 19 in April 1945, when he was shot down by Russian anti-aircraft fire and became a prisoner.
Soon to depart from Sicily, the Luftwaffe's most successful fighter pilots over Malta during the Spring of 1941 pose with Italian friends.
L. to r. unidentified Italian pilot; Lt. Wenzel (JG27); Oblt.
Joachim Müncheberg; the Italian base commander; Oblt.
Erbo Graf von Kageneck; and unidentified Italian and German pilots.
For Malta's defenders the tide had turned.
A new period was about to begin during which they would regain some of their earlier superiority over the base, and bend their efforts even more towards the offensive.
This change was marked by the arrival on 1 June of Air Commodore Hugh Pughe Lloyd, M.C., D.F.C., to take over as A.O.C. from A.V.M. Maynard, A.F.C. Newly-promoted from the rank of Group Captain, Lloyd had been serving as Senior Air Staff Officer with No.2 Group of Bomber Command.
Now with the recent arrival of detachments from his old Group on Malta, he arrived with a directive that his main task was to organise the offensive against the Axis supply shipping plying between Europe and Africa.
His promotion to Air Vice-Marshal soon followed.
His arrival coincided with a change of command at Luqa, Gp.Capt.
C.A. Cahill, D.F.C., A.F.C., taking over from Gp.Capt.
O'Sullivan.
Ju52/3ms in night from Comiso Catania in May 1941, beginning another supply mission to Tripoli.
By now a number of Italian and German aircrew prisoners had accumulated on the island, the unwounded amongst them being housed at Kordin Military Detention Camp.
The story goes that whilst the Governor General was paying a visit to the camp certain Luftwaffe officers complained of, amongst other grievances, inadequate seating — the lack of chairs.
Within days a number of voluminous, ornately-carved armchairs arrived from His Excellency's residence!