

Little Weirwold
Willie gave a short start and opened his eyes.
In a chair opposite sat Tom who was drinking tea and looking at a book.
Sammy, who had been watching the slight twitching movements that Willie had made in his sleep, now stood at his feet.
Tom looked up.
‘You feelin' better?’ he asked.
‘You'se lookin' better.’
He poured him out a mug of hot, sweet tea and handed it to him.
‘'Ere, you git that down you.’
Willie looked apprehensively at his feet which were now being sniffed by Sammy.
‘'E won't harm you,’ said Tom.
‘'E's a spry ole thing, but he's as soft as butter, ent you, ole boy?’ and he knelt down and ruffled his fur.
Sammy snuggled up between his knees and licked his face.
‘See,’ said Tom, ‘e's very friendly.’
Willie tried to smile.
‘You want to learn somethin' wot'll make him happy?’
He nodded.
‘Hold one of yer hands out, palm up, like that,’ and he showed the inside of his rough brown hand.
Willie copied him.
‘That's so he knows you ent going to harm him, see.
Now, hold it out towards him and tickle his chest.’
Willie leaned nervously forward and touched Sammy's fur.
‘That's the idea.
You jest keep doin' that.’
Willie stroked him.
His fur felt silky and soft.
Sammy gave his fingers a long lick.
‘'E likes you, see.
When he licks you that's his way of sayin' ‘I likes you and you makes me happy’.’
Willie held his hand out stiffly while Sammy lathered it with his tongue.
‘Why does he sniff?’ he asked, as Sammy crawled under the blanket to get to his legs.
‘'E likes to know what everythin' smells like so's he knows who to say hello to and who not.’
‘Stop it!’ said Willie as Sammy put his nose into his crutch.
‘Naughty dog.’
Immediately Tom dragged him from under the blanket and he began barking and chasing his tail.
‘You'm gettin' over excited, Sam.
‘'E needs a good romp in the fields,’ and he looked at Willie, and I reckon you do an' all, he thought.
Willie pushed the blanket to one side, wormed his way to the end of the armchair and slid onto the floor.
‘Smells like rain,’ said Tom leaning out of the front window.
‘You got gumboots?’
Willie shook his head.
‘No, mister.’
‘Best put yer mackintosh on, anyways.’
The three of them trooped out into the hallway.
Willie stared at the ladder.
‘That's your room up there.
Sort of attic.’
‘Mine?’
He didn't understand.
Did Mr Oakley mean he was going to have a room to himself?
Tom handed him his mackintosh and nodded.
Sammy leapt up excitedly.
‘Hang on a minute, Sam.
We'se jest goin'.’
Tom looked at Willie's mac on the way out and noticed how thin it was.
They walked down the pathway and out of the gate, Sammy leading, Tom striding after him and Willie running to keep up with them.
It was late afternoon now.
The sun hung in a fiery ball above the trees.
A mild breeze shook the leaves and a few dark clouds scudded across the sky.
Sammy ran backwards and forwards barking ecstatically.
‘That dog's half mad,’ Tom said to Willie but found that he was talking to the air for Willie was several yards behind, still trying to keep up, his cheeks flushed with the effort.
‘You're a quiet 'un.
Why didn't you tell me I was goin' too fast?’
But Willie could not answer and only gasped  incoherently.
Tom slowed down and Willie walked more easily beside him.
He stared up at the gruff old man who was so kind to him.
It was all very bewildering.
He looked down at Tom's heavy brown ankle boots, his thick navy overcoat and the green corduroy cap with the tufts of white hair sticking out at either side.
A small empty haversack dangled over his shoulder.
‘Mister,’ he panted.
‘Mister!’
Tom looked down.
‘Can I carry your bag, mister?’
Tom mumbled something to himself and handed it to him.
Willie hung on to it tightly with both hands.
The narrow road sloped gently upwards.
Willie could just make out, in all the speed of their walking, the wild hedgerows flashing in low green lines beside him.
It felt very unreal, like a muddled dream.
When they reached the top of the hill Willie saw a row of small thatched cottages standing on either side of the road ahead.
He tugged at Tom's sleeve.
‘Mister,’ he gasped, ‘they got straw roofs.’
‘That's thatch,’ said Tom.
‘Wot's…’ but he bit his lip and kept silent.
Tom glanced down.
‘I got some pictures of them at home.
We'll have a look at them tonight.’
Willie squeezed the bag more tightly.
Across the road a plump, middle-aged woman with greying auburn hair was peering out of a window.
She disappeared for an instant and opened her front door.
‘'Ello, Tom,’ she said, looking with curiosity at Willie.
He grunted.
‘Evening, Mrs Fletcher.
How are the boys, then?’
‘Boys are doin' nicely.’
‘William,’ said Tom, ‘go and keep an eye on Sam.
I'll be with you in a minute.’
Willie nodded shyly and went after Sammy who was eyeing the flowers in someone's window box.
‘Skinny ole scrap, ent he?’ said the woman, sticking a loose grip firmly into her bun.
Tom gave another grunt.
‘I didn't believe it was true when I heard,’ she continued.
‘I ent got room meself but Mrs Butcher got two to contend with.
Girls, mind you, but they're regular tearaways and Mrs Henley, she had three last week and they keep runnin' away.
Homesick, like,’ and she sighed and patted her chest.
‘How's the knittin' coming on?’ said Tom, changing the subject.
‘What you on about?’ she said, leaning back and looking at him.
‘Since when have you been interested in my knittin'?’
‘Since now,’ he replied shortly.
He pushed his hands into his pockets and scraped one of his boots against a piece of stone.
‘Busy, are you?’ he asked.
‘No more 'n usual.’
‘Could do with a thick jersey.
Not fer me mind,’ and he looked at Willie trundling on ahead.
‘You ent gotta clothe 'em, you know.
They shoulda brought that with them.’
‘Well, he haven't,’ said Tom gruffly.
‘Can you knit me a jersey or can you not, that's what I'm askin'?’
‘If that's what you want.’
‘And,’ he continued, ‘you don't know where I can get some good stout boots, small-like, and I don't want no commentary, jest want to know.’
‘I'll ask around.’
He mumbled his thanks and strode on up the road.
Mrs Fletcher stood quite motionless and stared after him, until she was sure he was out of earshot.
‘Madge,’ she cried, running into the next cottage, ‘Madge, you'll die when I tell you….’
The road leading through the row of cottages extended into a long stretch of open country with lanes leading off it.
A small shop inside the last cottage stood at the corner.
‘Won't be long,’ said Tom, and he took the haversack from Willie and left him and Sammy sitting on the stone steps.
Willie stared in amazement at the fields, his thin woollen socks heaped around his ankles.
As Tom came out he became conscious of them again and quickly pulled them up.
Sammy sniffed at the food in the bag and Tom tapped him tenderly on the nose and slung it on his back.
‘If I start gettin' me stride up agin,’ he said to Willie, ‘you jest call out.’
It was a long, quiet road, the silence broken only by the whirring of a tractor in the distance.
They turned to the right and walked down a tiny lane.
Willie's attention was drawn to a small brown bird in one of the hedgerows.
Tom stopped and put his finger to his lips and they stood and watched it hopping in and out among the changing leaves.
‘That's a hedge-sparrow,’ he whispered.
‘See its beak.
Very dainty.’
The bird looked up and flew away.
‘And shy.’
They carried on down the lane towards a farm.
Sammy was already sitting waiting for them, his tail thumping the ground impatiently from side to side.
They pushed open the long wooden gate where he sat.
It squeaked and jingled on its hinges as they swung it behind them.
Tom led Willie round the back of a large, cream-coloured stone house towards a wooden shed.
A middle-aged man with corn-coloured hair and the bluest eyes Willie had ever seen was sitting on a stool milking one of a handful of cows.
Willie gazed at the gentle way he fingered the udders and at the warm white liquid spurting down into a bucket underneath.
‘Mister,’ he said, tugging at Tom's coat sleeve.
‘Mister, what's that?’
Tom was astounded.
‘Ent you never seen a cow?’ but Willie didn't answer.
He was too absorbed in watching the swollen udders decrease in size.
‘I'll be wantin' extra milk from now on, Ivor,’ he said.
Ivor nodded and glanced at Willie.
‘One of them London lot?’ he asked.
Tom grunted.
‘You'd best take a jug with you.
Roe's inside.’
Tom tramped across the yard to the back of the house and up the steps.
He carried Sammy in his arms as he had a habit of yapping at cows.
Willie stayed to watch the milking.
A fresh-faced brunette woman in her thirties, wearing a flowery apron, opened the back door.
‘Come in,’ she said.
‘You'll be wantin' extra milk.’
‘How d'you know?’ said Tom.
‘Lucy saw you comin' up the yard with him.’
A chubby six-year-old with brown curly hair, earth smudged over two enormous pink cheeks, was standing at her side, holding on to her skirt.
‘Don't be so daft, gel,’ she said.
‘Go on, say hello to him.
I got things to do.’
She clomped down the steps in her ankle boots and blue woollen dress, and stood shyly beside Willie, twisting the hem of her dress in her hand till her knickers came into view.
‘There ent much difference in size between them two,’ said Tom, observing them together.
‘I dunno what they do with little 'uns in that ole city,’ and he disappeared into the warmth of the kitchen.
After calling Willie several times and getting no response, he eventually gave up and tapped him on the shoulder.
‘'Ere, dreamer, you carry that,’ he said handing him a tin jug.
‘You can take a look if you've a mind.’
Willie lifted the lid and peered in.
Fresh milk.
Lucy stared at him.
She'd never seen a boy so thin and pale-looking.
She still hadn't spoken and had only just, so she thought, heard his name.
‘Bye, dreema,’ she said suddenly and turned and fled  into the house.
‘Where's that ole thing?’ said Tom, looking round for Sammy.
He caught sight of his black-and-white fur at the gate.
He was sitting waiting for them with a bone in his mouth.
Willie looked at the front of the house.
The woman called Roe was putting up some black material at the front window.
‘What's she doin'?’
Willie asked.
‘Puttin' her blackouts up, boy.
We all got to do it from tonight.’
Willie was about to ask why: but he knew that was rude, so he kept silent.
‘It's so planes don't see where to bomb,’ continued Tom, as if he had read his thoughts.
‘Waste of time if you asks me.
Reckon it'll all be over be Christmas, and anyways who'd want to bomb lil' Weirwold.
That's the name of this village,’ he added, ‘Little Weirwold.’
He looked up at the sky.
It had suddenly become darker.
‘Best be movin,’ he said and they swung open the gate and set off at a jaunty pace back up the lane towards the main road.
They had walked past the cottages and were half-way down the hill when the first drop of rain fell.
As they neared the foot of the hill the sky opened and a heavy torrent fell mercilessly down.
It blinded Willie and trickled down inside the collar of his mackintosh.
Tom buttoned his overcoat up to his neck and raised his collar.
He looked down at the drenched figures of the boy and dog.
Willie had to run to keep up with them.
His plimsolls were now caked in heavy clods of wet earth and his jersey was already wet from his soaked mackintosh.
The sky rumbled loudly above them and the rain continued to pour down, bouncing on the lane and running into little streams.
Tom swung the graveyard gate to one side and Sammy shot through jumping and barking in the puddles.
He shut the gate behind Willie and the wetness from the top splashed into his face.
Willie ran up the pathway towards the cottage, through the graves and under the oak tree, his shoes squelching.
They ran into the hall, Tom's boots clattering on the tiles.
He shook the rain from his overcoat and cap and proceeded to undo his boots.
Sammy stood on the mat shaking his fur by the open door and looking out at the sheets of rain that were now whipping across the graveyard.
Willie struggled with his mackintosh.
His fingers were mauve with the cold.
‘You're soaked through,’ said Tom.
He pointed to his bespattered plimsolls.
‘Take them ole canvas things off.
Stay here while I put some newspapers down.’
Willie pulled off the weighted shoes and stood in the dark hallway shivering helplessly, his teeth rattling inside his clamped jaw.
After much shuffling from the living room Tom opened the door.
He had laid newspaper in front of the range and was putting up blackouts at the windows so that, but for the glow of embers in the fire, there was almost total darkness.
He lit a gas lamp which hung from the ceiling, and an oil lamp on the table.
‘Stay on them newspapers.
You too,’ he said to Sammy who was panting rapidly and sending out a constant spray of water with his tail.
He added some coke to the fire and left the room.
Willie hopped on one leg and then on the other in front of it.
Steam began to rise from his jersey and shorts.
He heard the front door being closed and Tom returned with his brown paper bag.
He placed it on the table and took out the contents.
There was one small towel, a piece of soap, a toothbrush, an old Bible, and an envelope with ‘To whom it may concern’ written on it.
He looked under the towel for some night clothes but there were none.
He opened the envelope.
Willie heard the paper being torn and turned to watch him.
He knew the letter was from his Mum.
He checked again that his wet socks were pulled up and stood very still.
‘Dear Sir or Madam,’ it read, ‘I asked if Willie could go and stay with God-fearing people so I hope he is.
Like most  boys he's full of sin but he's promised to be good.
I can't visit him.
I'm a widow and I haven't got the money.
The war and that.
I've put the belt in for when he's bad and I've sewn him in for the winter.
I usually keep him in when I wash his clothes and I got them special for the cold weather so he should be all right.
Tell him his Mum said he'd better be good.
Mrs Beech.’
Tom folded the letter and put it into his pocket.
He found the belt at the bottom of the bag.
It was a brown leather one with a steel buckle.
He put it back in the bag and took out the towel, soap and toothbrush.
Willie stood with his back to the fire and stared uneasily up at him.
Tom was angry.
‘While you're in my house,’ he said in a choked voice, ‘you'll live by my rules.
I ent ever hit a child and if I ever do it'll be with the skin of me hand.
You got that?’
Willie nodded.
‘So we can forget that ole belt,’ and he lifted the bag from the table and took it out of the room.
Willie turned to face the fire, his head bowed over the range.
His shoulders felt tense and the top of the range hissed as a tear escaped from his eyes.
He heard the door close behind him and hurriedly wiped his cheeks.
Tom put a bundle on the armchair.
‘Best get out of them wet things,’ he said, kneeling down beside him, ‘so's I can dry them for tomorrow.’
Willie sniffed.
Tom peeled off his wet jersey and shorts.
‘And them socks,’ he said as Willie clung to the tops of them.
He pulled them off.
Tom said nothing.
There was no need.
Willie's arms and legs were covered in bruises, weals and sores.
Tom went to pull off his vest.
Willie flinched and touched the top of his arm.
‘New one, eh?’ he asked quietly.
Willie nodded and blushed.
‘Best be careful then,’ and he tugged gently at the vest.
‘It won't come off, mister,’ said Willie, and then Tom  understood what his mother had written in the letter.
His vest had been sewn to the waist of his undershorts.
‘Soon settle that,’ said Tom, picking up a pair of scissors from the bookcase.
Willie shrunk backwards.
‘I'll sew them back when you goes home.
I promise.’
Still Willie didn't move.
‘I promise,’ he repeated.
He stepped forward and allowed him to snip away at the stitching.
He dried Willie's thin, bruised body, wrapped him up in a towel and sat him in the armchair.
Taking an old flannel nightshirt from the bundle he cut the body and sleeves in half.
He stood Willie on the armchair, took the towel away and placed the nightshirt over his head, cutting more away from the hem until Willie's toes and hands came into view.
He handed him a thick pair of woollen socks.
The heels almost reached the back of Willie's knees.
He gave a small, tense smile and watched Tom hang his clothes over a horse near the fire.
‘You can dry Sammy with that ole towel,’ said Tom, indicating one lying on the armchair.
Willie knelt down on the newspapers and began to dry him.
Sammy stuck his nose in the air, delighted at such attention.
Tom unpacked the haversack and wandered round the room putting the groceries away on shelves and into small cupboards.
He cracked some eggs into a saucepan, adding milk and butter.
Slicing a few large pieces of bread, he put one on the end of a long fork.
‘You toasted bread afore?’ he asked.
Willie looked up at him and shook his head.
‘'Ere, have a go,’ said Tom handing him the fork.
Willie sat on the stool holding it in front of the fire, his long socks trailing across the floor.
Tom placed a bowl beside his feet, which was filled with scraps of meat and biscuits for Sammy who had already started chewing the end of one of the socks.
Willie placed the toasted bread on plates while Tom  spooned a large quantity of steaming scrambled eggs on them.
A bowl of hot, buttered, boiled potatoes stood in the middle of the table.
‘You can sit down now,’ said Tom.
Willie picked up a potato in his hands, gasped and dropped it onto his plate.
Feverishly he attacked the meal.
His small elbows stuck out at the sides as he cut and ate food in a frenzy.
When the meal was eaten Tom unwrapped a small brown package which contained four pieces of dark, home-made ginger cake.
‘One fer tonight; one fer tomorrow,’ said Tom, handing him a piece.
Willie had never eaten cake before.
When he had finished it, he leaned back in his chair and, resting his hands on his stomach, he watched Sammy who was making a series of strange noises in his food while his tail continued to wag from side to side.
Tom heated up some water on the range for the dirty dishes.
‘You can look through them books if you like,’ he said, indicating the shelves under the side window.
Willie got up from the table excitedly and moved towards them.
Then he stopped and frowned.
‘I got to read the Bible,’ he said miserably.
Tom gave a grunt.
‘I'll tell you a Bible story meself In me own way.
That do you?’
‘Yeh, thanks, mister.’
‘Pull out that pouffe to sit on.’
‘Pouffe?’ said Willie.
Tom pointed to a low round cushiony type of seat, next to the armchair.
Willie squatted down in front of the shelves and chose three books.
He pulled out the pouffe and sat on it with them propped on his knees.
‘Ent you goin' to open one then?’ asked Tom.
‘After me Bible.’
Tom sat down in the armchair, and lit his pipe.
He leaned back puffing at it wondering which one to tell.
Willie watched him and pulled his strange sack-like garment over his feet.
‘Noah's Ark ,’ exclaimed Tom.
‘That's a good 'un.’
He looked at the books Willie had chosen and picked some others from the bookcase with animal pictures in them.
‘Once, long ago,’ began Tom, and Willie leaned forward to listen until finally he stood up and leaned on the arm of the armchair to get a closer look at the pictures.
Tom mumbled on in his own way, a little flattered at the rapt attention he was receiving.
The gas lamp hissed gently above them and the coke stirred softly in the range.
Even the rain outside seemed to cease falling so heavily.
When Tom had finished, he found Willie gazing at him with adoration.
Feeling a little embarrassed, he quickly cleared his throat and glanced up at the clock.
He made Willie cocoa and left him with Sammy to look at the ‘straw roofs’ while he went upstairs to put up more blackouts.
Willie sat back on the pouffe and traced his finger over the pictures.
He blew over his cocoa and gave Sammy some of the skin, feeling rather important at doing so.
Tom appeared at the door with a lamp and Sammy began to crawl through his legs.
‘Thought you was being too good for it to last,’ Tom said as Sammy tugged at his trouser leg.
‘Give me the cocoa, William, and you carry the book.’
Willie climbed up the ladder but the enormous socks kept making him slip.
After much balancing and juggling with cocoa, book and dog they all three eventually reached the attic.
It was a tiny room, shaped rather like a ridge tent.
The ceiling sloped downwards at both sides with a straight piece in the centre.
The wooden floor was covered by two mats.
A small bed lay under one eave and blackouts were pinned on the slanting window beside it.
Tom had swept the room  clean and had fixed a lamp to a hook on the white plaster ceiling.
It was hanging there alight.
Beside the bed was a low wooden table.
‘For yer books and such,’ said Tom.
He pointed to a china chamber-pot on the floor at the end of the bed.
‘That's so's you don't have to go outside if you wants to go to the toilet,’ he explained.
The heat from the front room rose up through the floorboards so that the room, although bare, was warm.
Willie crawled under the bed and curled up into a ball.
‘What you doin'?’ asked Tom.
‘You gets into it, not under it.’
‘Wot, right inside?’ exclaimed Willie.
Tom drew back the sheets and Willie climbed in between them.
He stroked the blankets with his hands.
Sammy, meanwhile, was standing impatiently at Tom's side, wagging his tail in lunatic fashion.
‘Go on, you daft dog,’ said Tom, and he leapt on to the bed between Willie's arms and licked his face.
Slowly Willie put his arms around him, gave a small cry and burst into tears.
‘Sorry, mister,’ he blurted out and he buried his head into the dog's fur.
Tom sat on the edge of the bed until the crying had subsided a little.
‘'Ere,’ he said, handing him a large white handkerchief.
‘'Ave a blow in that.’
Willie looked up shamefacedly.
‘I ain't ungrateful, mister, honest.
I'm happy,’ and with that he gave another sob.
Tom nodded and Sammy licked one of the tears from his face.
‘You can have the lamp lit fer ten minutes,’ he said, patting the dog, ‘but mind you behave yerself, Samuel.’
He made his way downstairs to the front room and turned Willie's damp clothes around.
His pipe was on the table.
He picked it up and tapped the old tobacco out onto the range.
‘Best not get fond of the boy, Thomas,’ he muttered to  himself.
He sat back in the armchair and watched the smoke drifting upwards from his pipe towards the gas lamp.
He glanced at Willie's thin grey clothes.
S'pose another pair of socks and one of them balaclava things wouldn't come amiss, he thought, sinking into a quiet reverie of jerseys and boots.
It was interrupted by sounds of scrabbling from upstairs.
He climbed up the steps, pipe in mouth, grunted out a few words as he entered the attic and blew the lamp out, plunging them all into total darkness.
‘Take them blacks down now,’ he mumbled, removing them from the window.
‘You warm enough?’
Willie raised his head.
‘Yeh,’ he answered, and he sank happily back into the soft white pillow.
Tom stared out of the window and chewed the end of his pipe.
He gave a little tap on the floor with his foot and then moved towards the bed and gently ruffled Willie's hair.
He was half-way down the hatch with Sammy in his arms when he remembered something.
‘Don't forget them ole prayers.’
‘No, mister,’ said Willie.
He paused for an instant.
‘And you'd best call me Tom.
Good night and God bless,’ and with that he descended from view closing the trap door behind him.
‘Good night, Mister Tom,’ Willie whispered.
He listened to the door downstairs close and slipped out of bed to look through the window.
A dark cloud floated across the moon.
The sky thundered, followed quickly by a crack of lightning that lit up the whole sky.
‘Not much use, these blackouts,’ Tom had said earlier in the evening.
Still, it was fine, thought Willie, standing in the moonlight.
He could just make out the two rows of cottages and the fields beyond them.
A dog howled in the distance.
Underneath the attic, Tom sat in his armchair with Sammy collapsed across his feet.
He held a large black  wooden paint-box on his lap.
He raised the lid, gazed for an instant at the contents and quietly blew away the dust from the tops of the brightly coloured pots.
Saturday Morning
When Willie awoke it was still very dark.
Straining his eyes, he could just make out the two boxes which were stacked in the far corner of the room and a picture frame which was propped up against them.
He raised his arm and touched the sloping ceiling above his head.
The pain that had brought him sharply back to consciousness seared violently through his stomach.
He held his breath and pushed his hand down the bed to touch his night-gown.
It was soaking.
It was then that he became aware that he was lying in between sheets.
That's what they did to people after they had died, they laid them out in a bed.
He sat up quickly and hit his head on the eave.
Crawling out of bed, doubled over with the pain in his gut he hobbled over to the window and let out a frightened cry.
He was in a graveyard.
He was going to be buried alive!
The pain grew in intensity.
He gave a loud moan and with a sudden retch, vomited all over the floor.
In the morning Tom found him huddled under the bed.
The sheets were drenched in urine.
He stripped them off the mattress and carried Willie down to the living room.
It was a hot, sultry day.
The windows were wide open but no breeze entered the cottage.
Willie stood in front of the range.
Through the side window he could see his grey garments and underwear hanging on a small washing line outside.
Tom pulled the voluminous nightshirt over his head and threw it into a copper tub with the sheets.
He sluiced Willie's body tenderly with cold water and soap.
The weals stuck out mauve against his protruding ribs and swollen stomach.
He could hardly stand.
‘Sorry, mister,’ he kept repeating, fearfully, ‘sorry, Mister Tom.’
Tom just grunted in his usual manner.
He pulled Willie's clothes from off the line and handed them to him.
‘Too hot for socks,’ he muttered.
‘Leave them off.’
‘I can't go aht wivout me socks,’ cried Willie in alarm.
‘Please, Mister Tom, I can't.’
‘Why?’
Tom snorted.
‘Me legs,’ he whispered.
He didn't want everyone to see the marks of his sins.
Tom sighed and threw the socks on the table.
They had breakfast by the open window.
Tom sat with his shirt-sleeves rolled up, the beads of sweat trickling down the sides of his ruddy face while Willie continued to shiver, managing only to drink half a cup of tea and eat a small piece of bread.
‘Blimmin' blue,’ muttered Tom to himself as he observed Willie's face.
He cleared the breakfast things and left him with the small addressed postcard that he had been provided with to write a message on for his mother.
Willie sat dejectedly at the table and watched Tom drag his small mattress past the window.
He could hear him scrubbing away at it.
He lowered his head.
He was so ashamed.
Everyone who came near the church would see it and realize how wicked he had been.
They'd know what a baby he was.
He hadn't meant to wet himself.
He didn't even remember doing it.
He stared at the small postcard in front of him.
Clasping a pencil impotently between his fingers he clenched his free hand into a fist and dug his knuckles into the table so that he wouldn't cry.
‘How you gettin' on?’ asked Tom leaning through the window.
Willie jumped and flushed hotly.
‘Can't think of what to say, that it?’
He took the pencil from Willie's hand and turned the postcard towards him.
‘Not much room, eh?’
Willie tugged at his hair in embarrassment.
‘Lost yer voice?’
‘No, Mister Tom,’ he answered quietly.
‘What d'you want to say, then?’
He shrugged his shoulders and looked dumbly at the grain on the wooden table.
‘Are you happy here?’
He looked up quickly and nodded.
‘Yeh.’
‘Arrived safely, is happy and…’
‘Mister, Mister Tom,’ said Willie, interrupting him.
‘You goin' to tell her I was bad?’
‘No,’ he said, and carried on writing.
‘Here, listen to this.
‘Dear Mrs Beech, William…’’
‘She don't call me that.
She calls me Willie.’
He altered the word.
‘Willie,’’ he continued, ‘‘has arrived safely, is happy and good.
Yours sincerely, Mr Thomas Oakley.’
There.’
He handed the postcard and pencil back to him.
‘Now write yer name.’
Willie paled.
‘I can't.’
‘Didn't they have school in London?’
‘Yeh, but…’ and he trailed off.
‘How about readin'?’ asked Tom.
‘You can read, can't you?’
‘No.’
‘But you was lookin' at them books last night.’
‘I was lookin' at the pichers.’
Tom scratched his head.
The village children were reading at least some words by the time they were six.
This boy was eight, so he said.
He glanced down at the label on the table to check.
‘William Beech.
Born Sept. 7th 1930.’
‘Nine on Thursdee,’ he remarked.
‘Your birthday's in five days' time.’
Willie didn't understand what was so particularly special about that.
‘You're nine on Thursdee,’ Tom repeated but Willie couldn't think of anything to say.
‘Anyways,’ he continued.
‘About this here schoolin', didn't yer teacher help you?’
‘Yeh, but….’
He hesitated.
‘'E didn't like me.
The others all called me Sillie Sissie Willie.’
What others?’
‘At school.’
‘What about yer friends?’
He whispered something.
‘I can't hear you, boy.’
Willie cleared his throat.
‘I ain't got no friends.’
Tom gave a snort and signed the postcard.
He noticed Willie looking at the black box on the stool.
‘Blimmin' heat,’ he grumbled, wiping his forehead with a handkerchief.
‘Pick up that box, William, and bring it over here.’
Willie did so and placed it carefully on the table.
‘Lift the lid, then.’
Willie stared at it.
‘Go on, cloth ears, open it.’
He raised the lid and gazed at the brightly coloured pots.
‘Paints?’ he inquired.
Tom grunted in the affirmative.
‘Bit old but the pots'll do.
You paint?’
Willie's face fell.
He longed to paint.
‘Nah, 'cos I can't read….’
‘The ones that can read and write gits the paint, that it?’
‘Yeh.’
He touched one of the pots gently with his hand and then hastily took it away.
‘I done drawin' with bits of chalk and crayon, on me own.’
Tom straightened himself.
‘We'd best post yer card.
Mustn't worry yer Mum.
Climb out,’ and he helped Willie through the window.
‘Where's that ole thing?’ he mumbled.
‘Sammy,’ he shouted, ‘Sammy.’
Willie shaded his eyes and looked around for him.
He caught sight of a mound of black and white fur slumped under the oak tree.
‘Mister Tom,’ he said pointing to the dog, ‘look.’
Sammy lifted his head.
Heaving his body up to his feet he left his cool sanctuary and ambled over towards them.
They walked round to the back garden of the cottage, past the little wooden outhouse that was the toilet.
On top of its roof lay Willie's mattress.
‘Don't worry, boy,’ said Tom, ‘it'll be dry by tonight.’
They carried on to the foot of the garden where there was a small neat wooden gate with a hedgerow on either side.
They turned left down a road and after a few paces Tom opened another gate into the field next to the graveyard.
A large carthorse stood drowsily eating something in the grass.
Willie hung back.
‘Come on,’ said Tom impatiently.
Sammy bounded on ahead and gave a loud bark at the nag.
She lifted her eyes for an instant, shook her head and resumed eating.
‘She won't 'urt you,’ said Tom.
‘You walk alongside of me,’ and he gave him a gentle push into the field, and swung the gate behind him.
Willie hung on to Tom's left trouser leg and peered gingerly round at the mare as they walked past it.
‘She won't hurt you,’ he repeated, but he could feel Willie trembling so he decided not to pursue the matter.
To Willie's relief, they eventually reached the safety of the gate at the other end of the field.
Tom unhitched it and Willie darted through into a small lane.
‘Sam,’ called Tom, ‘here, boy.’
Sammy had been flopped over one of Dobbs' hooves, enjoying the shade of her large head.
He rose obediently and lolloped towards them.
‘Let's see you shut it now, William.
You must always remember to shut every gate.’
Willie hurriedly closed it with a crash.
‘Put the bolt through.’
He did so.
‘Good.’
Willie stood stunned for a moment for he had never been praised by anyone ever.
The lane they were standing in was bordered by two rows of trees.
Their overhanging branches formed a tunnel and, although their leaves were already falling, there was still enough clothed archway to cool them.
Willie had never walked through so many leaves.
They clustered around his ankles, hiding his plimsolls entirely from view.
They walked by a large gate and an enormous, neatly-kept garden.
A middle-aged man was bending over one of the beds, sadly digging up clusters of gold and russet dahlias.
Sammy had already bounded on ahead and was now sitting lazily by an old wooden gate, waiting for them.
‘Blimmin' mind reader,’ exclaimed Tom to himself.
He pushed at the gate and after a struggle it creaked and groaned open on its one rusty hinge.
The tangled hedgerows that grew on either side had almost strangled it into being permanently closed.
Willie closed it carefully behind them and they walked into a wild and unkempt garden.
The grass reached Willie's knees.
Tom knocked at the front door but there was no reply.
He could hear the sound of a wireless so he knew someone must be in.
After several attempts at attracting attention with the knocker he walked round the side of the cottage to the back garden.
Leaning back in a wicker chair sat Doctor Oswald Little, a plump, red-faced man who was attempting vainly to wipe the steam from his spectacles.
His wife, Nancy, a tall, thin, freckled woman with closely cropped iron-grey hair was digging a large trench in the garden.
A cigarette dangled in her mouth.
The wireless was blaring out light organ music through the kitchen window.
‘Doctor Little!’ repeated Tom loudly for the third time.
The Doctor looked up and put on his spectacles which immediately slid down the perspiration on his nose.
‘Hello, Tom.
This is a surprise.
You can't be ill.’
‘No.’
He glanced briefly down at Willie who was now retreating rapidly on hearing the tubby man being called ‘Doctor’.
Nancy, noticing how scared he was, sat down at the side of the trench and took the cigarette out of her mouth.
‘I'm Mrs Little,’ she said hoarsely.
‘I expect you'd like an orange juice while Mr Oakley and the Doctor have a chat.
Yes?’
He nodded and followed her through the back door into the kitchen.
Tom sat down.
‘What's the problem?’ asked the Doctor.
‘The boy, is it?’
‘Bin sick twice already.
He had a good tuck in last night but brung it up.’
‘Malnutrition,’ the Doctor remarked.
‘Probably used to chips.
All that good food might have been too much of an assault on his stomach.
Clear broth, rest, exercise and milk to begin with and maybe a tonic.
Try some Virol and Cod Liver Oil.
I expect he's bed-wetting too,’ he added.
Tom looked surprised.
‘It's quite common,’ he continued.
‘Especially if they're small.
Give him a month or two to settle.
How old is he?
Five, six?’
‘Eight, goin' on nine.’
It was the Doctor's turn to look surprised.
‘Like a frightened rabbit he is,’ said Tom.
‘Yes,’ said Doctor Little thoughtfully.
‘He's obviously been brought up to look on the doctor as the bogey man.’
‘There's somethin' else.
The boy's had a bit of a whippin', like.
He got bruises and sores all over him.
Done with a belt buckle mostly.
He's too ashamed to let folks see.
If you could manage to have a look.’
‘This,’ croaked a refined voice from behind, ‘and warm salt water.’
It was Mrs Little.
She was standing with a tray of cool drinks.
She placed a bottle of witch-hazel by his feet.
‘We exchanged battle-scars,’ she explained.
‘I noticed his before we went indoors.
I've given him a couple of garters for his socks.
You'd think I'd given him the moon.’
‘The children in Little Weirwold have been quite spoilt, it seems,’ commented the Doctor.
‘I was up at the Grange last night treating ingrowing toenails.
There are two large families up there, nineteen children in all.
Nancy and the maid had to de-louse half of them.
Bag of bones, aren't they, dear?’
Nancy nodded.
‘Thank you for yer advice,’ said Tom, standing up.
‘I won't keep you from yer work any longer.’
Mrs Little gave a loud laugh which deteriorated into a spasm of coughing.
She took another drag of her cigarette.
‘I'm the one that's doing the work!’ she exclaimed.
‘Well, I am supposed to be semi-retired,’ protested the Doctor lightly.
‘Anyway, it's too damned hot to be digging.’
Nancy shrugged helplessly at Tom.
‘Is it fer an air-raid shelter?’ he inquired.
‘Yes.
And when those bombs start falling he'll be the first to dive into it.’
‘If there are any, I shall remain in bed,’ retorted the Doctor, wiping the sweat through the only two remaining tufts of white hair above his ears.
‘I might as well die in comfort.
Don't you agree, Tom?’
Tom had until now pooh-poohed the whole idea of building a shelter.
After all, they were in the country, but with the extra responsibilities of Willie living with him…
‘There's the boy to think of,’ he said.
He picked up the witch-hazel.
‘How much do I owe you?’
‘On the house,’ said Nancy.
Tom called Willie and Sam.
After another battle with the gate they carried on to the end of the lane and walked on to the road and into the sunlight.
Willie was perspiring heavily.
Tom touched his cheek and found it was cold.
They passed a small, red-brick house with a tiled roof.
It had a playground and was backed by a field.
‘That's your school, William.’
Willie glanced at the row of pot plants on the window sills.
The school was quite unlike the dark grey building he had attended in London.
The road brought them to the centre of the two rows of thatched cottages.
Mrs Fletcher and a neighbour were standing outside one with a huge sunflower growing in front of it.
It was one of the few cottages which housed a  wireless.
A small crowd were gathered in and around the garden listening to it.
‘You go and post yer card,’ said Tom.
‘The Post Office is near the shop.
I'll meet you there,’ and he left Willie and headed towards the group of listeners with Sammy at his heels.
Willie walked slowly past the cottages.
All the windows had been flung open.
‘Mornin', William,’ chorused two voices behind him.
An elderly couple were leaning over their garden gate.
Their cottage stood immediately opposite where Willie was standing.
‘We knows yer name from Mrs Fletcher,’ said the old man.
He wore a crisp white collarless shirt with the sleeves well rolled up and his baggy grey trousers were held up with a piece of string.
His wife was in a flowery cotton dress with a lilac-coloured apron over it.
Their skin was as wrinkled and brown as an old football and on their heads were perched steel air-raid helmets.
Both carried gas-mask boxes over their shoulders.
‘Lookin' fer the Post Office, dear?’ said the old lady.
‘You be standin' right at it.’
‘You go in, boy.
Be all right,’ added the old man.
‘We hope you'll be very happy here,’ chimed in the old lady, ‘don't we, Walter?’
‘Yes,’ he agreed.
‘We do.’
‘We're the Birds,’ she said.
‘You go on in,’ he said.
‘Go on.’
Willie knocked on the door.
‘Go on in, dear,’ they chorused.
Willie opened the door and stepped in.
He found himself in a room, at the end of which was a small counter with a piece of netting above it.
To his right were stacked stationery and pens, jigsaws, and wool, needles, scissors and assorted oddments and to his left sweets and bottles of pop.
Standing next to the netted window was a young boy.
He  was leaning on a wooden sill, writing intently.
A young man in his twenties, with short cropped hair and glasses was sitting behind the netting talking to him.
‘They'll never read that,’ he said.
‘Yes, they will,’ the boy replied.
Willie edged forward to see what was happening.
The boy was holding a magnifying glass over a postcard and writing on it in the tiniest hand.
‘Mother's got one of these, too,’ he said, waving the glass vaguely in the direction of the postmaster.
It was the boy's appearance more than anything which attracted Willie's attention.
He was taller than him but at a guess about nine years old.
His body was wiry and tanned and he had a thick crop of black curly hair which looked badly in need of cutting.
All he wore was a baggy pair of red corduroy shorts held up by braces, and a pair of battered leather sandals.
Several coloured patches were sewn neatly round the seat of his pants.
Apart from these, his back and legs were completely bare.
Willie could not take his eyes off him.
‘Can I help you, son?’ said the postmaster.
Willie blushed and slid his card across the counter.
The man glanced down at it.
‘Stayin' with Mr Oakley, eh?
You'll have to watch yer Ps and Qs there.’
Did everyone know that he couldn't read?
He glanced across at the strange boy again.
His nose was practically touching the card, he was so close to it.
He smacked his lips.
With a flourish he drew a line at the bottom, screwed on the top of his fountain pen and hooked it into a buckle on his braces.
‘Have you a blotter, sir?’
The postmaster slid a piece over to him.
‘Anything else?’ he remarked wryly.
The boy gave a small frown.
‘No, I don't think so, thank you.’
He blotted the card and slid them both under the counter.
‘When will it arrive, do  you think?‘
‘Tuesdee, mebbe.’
‘That's ages,’ he moaned.
‘Should a' sent it sooner, then,’ said the postmaster.
The boy looked aside at Willie.
His white teeth and brown oval eyes stood out in stark contrast against his dark tanned skin.
He smiled, taking in Willie's crumpled grey shorts and jersey.
Willie turned quickly away and walked out of the door, his ears smarting.
Tom was standing on the stone steps of the shop at the corner, waiting for him.
‘There you are,’ he muttered.
‘Comin' in or not?’
He nodded and walked towards the shop past three women who were talking outside.
He looked inside the door and stepped in.
Boxes, bags, sacks and coloured packets were piled along the right side of the store.
On the left was a long wooden counter with weighing scales at one end and a large wicker basket filled with loaves of bread.
Crates of fruit and vegetables were stacked at the other end.
Above the boxes and sacks on the right were shelves with cups, plates, saucepans, bowls, nails, and an assortment of coloured tins on them.
Willie peered gingerly outside to see if he could catch a glimpse of the strange boy from the Post Office.
‘Thanks, Mrs M,’ said Tom to a middle-aged couple behind the counter.
‘I'll drop in that baccy for you tonight, Mr Miller.
Tea, sugar, torch batteries and elastic, you reckon?‘
‘Sure as eggs is eggs,’ said the man.
He caught sight of Willie standing by a sack of flour.
‘'Ere, wot you want?’ he cried angrily.
‘Eh?’
‘Don't be too 'arsh,’ said his wife.
‘Be soft with this London lot and they take you for a ride.
I had cigarettes, chocolate, fruit, allsorts stolen when that last batch of kids come in.’
Willie blushed and backed into the sack.
‘Boy's with me,’ said Tom.
‘Oh,’ said Mr Miller, taken aback.
‘Oh, sorry, Mr Oakley.
That's different then.’
‘William, come over here and meet Mr and Mrs Miller.’
‘Pleased to meet you, dear,’ said Mrs Miller, who was endowed with so many rolls of fat that her stomach almost prevented her from reaching the counter.
She leaned over.
Taking hold of Willie's hand in her soft pudgy one she shook it.
Mr Miller, a short, stocky man with thinning mouse-coloured hair, leaned over and did the same.
As Tom and Willie were leaving Mrs Miller lumbered towards them, polishing a large apple in her apron.
‘'Ere you are, me dear,’ she said to Willie.
‘This is fer you.’
Willie gazed at it, dumbfounded.
‘Go on, take it, boy, and say thank you to Mrs M.’
‘Thank you,’ he whispered.
They left the shop and headed back along the road, Sammy crawling miserably along behind them.
They were outside Mrs Fletcher's cottage when someone began shouting at them.
‘Mr Oakley!
Mr Oakley!‘
A short ancient gentleman with a droopy moustache was running towards them.
He was wearing an A.R.P.
uniform.
‘That's Charlie Ruddles,’ muttered Tom.
‘He thinks he's goin' to win the war.’
The old man came puffing up to them.
‘Where's yer gas-masks then?
Yous'll be in trouble if you don't carry one.
Don't you know war's goin' to be declared any second,’ and he waved at Willie.
‘He should have one, too.’
‘All right, all right ,’ said Tom, and continued to walk up the road with Charlie still shouting after them.
‘Yous'll wake up one of these mornin's and find yerself gassed to death,’ he yelled.
‘All right,’ shouted back Tom over his shoulder.
‘I said I'll get one.’
They walked past the cottage with the sunflower.
People were still standing outside talking intently.
Willie stared at them puzzled.
Why did they appear so anxious?
‘Come on, William,’ called Tom sharply.
‘Don't dither!
We'se got to go into town.’
Equipped
Dobbs clopped slowly past cornfields and cottages, bees and cream-coloured butterflies.
Tom and Willie sat in the front of the cart.
They had left Sammy behind to collapse in the cool darkness of the tiled hallway.
Willie clutched on to the long wooden seat and, as they jolted over the rough cobbled road, his eyelids drooped and he became drowsy.
Suddenly he gave a frightened start, for he had nearly fallen asleep and the ground below seemed a long distance away.
Tom squeezed on the reins and they came to a halt.
‘Here,’ he said, ‘you hop in the cart and take a nap.’
He helped Willie into the back and threw him an old rug to cover himself with for he still looked terribly pale.
As soon as the rhythmic motion of the cart began Willie fell into a disjointed sleep.
His thin elbows and shoulder blades hit the sides of the cart at frequent intervals so that he would wake suddenly, only to fall back exhausted into a chaotically dream-filled sleep.
He was just about to be attacked by a horde of anxious faces when he felt himself being gently shaken.
‘We'se comin' into it, boy.
Raise yerself.’
Willie staggered to his feet and hung on to the side of the cart.
They jogged past a river that was sheltered by overhanging trees.
It curved and disappeared from view behind some old buildings.
‘Remember any of this?’
Willie shook his head.
‘No.’
They halted at a blacksmith's.
Tom stepped down and lifted Willie after him.
He untied Dobbs and led her into a  large dark shed.
Willie heard him talking to someone inside.
It wasn't long before he reappeared and swiftly removed his haversack, bags and boxes from the back of the cart.
He placed a hand on Willie's shoulder.
‘We got a lot to do, boy.
You reckon you can keep up?’
Willie nodded.
Tom handed him one of the two small buff-coloured boxes and they both slung them over their shoulders and set off.
They passed a bicycle shop and a cobbler's and turned a corner into the main street.
It curved round a large square.
‘On market days that be filled with all kinds of stalls,’ said Tom.
In the centre of the square was a stone archway with a clock in its wall and on the ground below, surrounding it on four sides, were wooden benches.
They stopped outside a newsagent's shop.
Two placards were leaning up against the walls.
‘Poland Invaded!’ read one and ‘Turn your wireless low.
Remember, someone might be on duty,’ read the other.
The door of.the shop was already propped wide open.
‘Hot, ent it?’ said a tiny old lady from behind the counter.
‘Your usual is it, Mr Oakley?’ she added.
Tom nodded.
She reached up to a yellow tin of tobacco on one of the shelves.
A pile of comics caught Willie's eye.
Tom glanced at him.
‘One sweet and one comic,’ he said sharply.
‘Choose.’
Willie was stunned.
‘Don't you hurry, sonny,’ said the old lady kindly.
‘You jest takes yer time.’
She pointed up at some of the many jars.
‘We got boiled ones, fruit drops, farthin' chews, mint humbugs, there's lollies, of course.
They'se popular.
There's strawberry, lemon, lime and orange.’
Tom was annoyed at the long silence that followed and was just about to say something when he caught sight of Willie's face.
Willie swallowed hard.
He'd never been asked to choose anything ever.
‘A lolly, please, Miss,’ he said at last.
‘What flavour?’
He frowned and panicked for a moment.
‘Strawberry,’ he answered huskily.
The old lady opened the jar and handed one to him.
It was wrapped up in black-and-white striped paper and twisted like a unicorn's horn.
‘Now what comic would you like, dear?’
Willie felt hopeless.
What use would a comic be to him, he wouldn't be able to understand the words.
He loved the colours, though, and the pictures looked so funny and exciting.
He glanced up at Tom.
‘I can't read, Mister Tom.’
‘I know that,’ he replied shortly, ‘but I can, after yer Bible.’
Willie turned back to look at the comics so that he missed the surprised expression on his face.
The words had leapt out of Tom's mouth before he had had a chance to stop them.
He felt a mixture of astonishment at himself and irritation that his rigid daily routine was going to be broken after forty undisturbed years.
Willie at last chose a comic with his sweet and Tom paid for them.
It was his first comic.
His hands shook as he held it.
‘Get movin', boy,’ barked Tom's voice behind him.
‘Are you deaf?’
Willie jumped.
‘Come on,’ he repeated.
Willie followed him next door into a chemist's shop and then into a grocery shop.
They stopped outside Lyons' tea house where there was a selection of cakes in the window.
A man in uniform sat at a table near by, with a young, weeping girl.
Willie looked up at the shadow that the man's body was casting across her face.
‘Later, perhaps,’ said Tom, thinking that Willie was eyeing the buns.
As they were crossing the square, Willie tugged at  Tom's sleeve.
‘Mister Tom,’ he said urgently.
‘Mister Tom, I knows this place.
I remember.
That's where I were yesterday.’
They looked across at the railway station.
A group of young soldiers were standing outside talking excitedly, their bulging kit-bags leaning up against their legs.
A batch of children accompanied by a young woman and the billeting officer who had brought Willie had walked past them and were heading towards the Town Hall.
They shuffled forward in a dazed manner holding hands, their labels hanging round their necks.
They were a motley bunch.
Some with rosy cheeks in brand new coats and sandals, some thin and jaundiced, wearing clothes that were either too small or too large.
‘Come on, William,’ said Tom.
‘I got a list of things a mile long fer the drapers.’
The drapers' shop stood on the pavement opposite.
Next to it was a toy shop.
‘You want to look at the toys while I go in here?’
Willie shook his head.
He didn't want to be left on his own.
‘As you please,’ said Tom, and they stepped into the darkness of the drapers.
The shop was piled high with rolls of materials.
Tom and Willie inched their way between them.
At the end of a roofless tunnel they found themselves standing in front of a long, high wooden counter.
A smartly-dressed, middle-aged man with a gleaming set of new false teeth, and a moustache that twirled into a curl at either side of his mouth, was cutting a piece of cloth.
‘Good morning, Mr Hoakley,’ he said cheerfully.
‘Blacks hall right, hare they?’
Tom grunted in the affirmative.
A sound of light organ music came from a large wireless at the end of the counter.
‘For the latest news,’ the draper explained.
‘I must say, this waiting is getting hon my nerves.
That Chamberlain's so slow.
We're ready for 'itler.
I ses let's get on with it and stop this shilly-shallying.’
‘I bin hearing that blessed organ music on and off all blimmin' day,’ said Tom grumpily.
‘Can't he play no other instrument?’
‘That's Sandy Macpherson,’ said the draper.
‘Wonderful man.
Holding the B.B.C. together hin this national time hof stress, Mr Hoakley.’
‘Sure he ent causin it?’ retorted Tom.
‘Oh, Mr Hoakley,’ said the draper.
‘I'm sure you don't mean….’
His words were cut short at the sight of Willie's dull, sandy hair on the other side of the counter.
‘He's with me,’ said Tom quickly.
‘I brung a list from Mrs Fletcher for materials.’
He pushed a list across the counter.
‘Boy's only got what he's standing up in.’
The draper beamed.
‘A pleasure, Mr Hoakley.
I'll ‘ave to measure ‘im myself.
I'm a bit short-staffed hat present.’
He flicked the long tape measure from around his neck and eyed Willie.
‘There's not a lot of ‘im, his there?’ he remarked disappointedly.
Willie craned his head over the counter and watched him measuring and cutting two rolls of grey and navy flannel.
A roll of corduroy lay at the end of the counter.
He reached out and touched it.
It felt soft and firm.
He let his fingers drift gently over the ridges.
Tom caught sight of him.
‘Might as well bring out several colours of that cordeeroy,’ he said.
The draper looked surprised.
‘Really.
Oh well, if you say so, Mr Hoakley.’
‘Two colours you can have, William.
Takes yer choice.’
The draper laid out rolls of green, brown, rust, navy, grey and red.
Willie eyed Tom's green trousers.
He pointed to the green roll and after a pause to the navy.
‘Good,’ muttered Tom.
The boy's beginning to think for  himself, he thought.
Willie smiled nervously and leaned with his back against the counter to look at the other materials.
There were crimsons and ambers, turquoises and sea greens, materials of every shade and texture.
Tom leaned down and Willie found himself being fitted for braces.
‘I'll have these,’ he said, placing them on the counter.
Willie continued to gaze at the materials.
He loved the reds but Mum said red was a sinful colour.
‘I've to go to the bank,’ he heard Mister Tom say, ‘so I'll give you a deposit, like.’
‘No ‘urry, Mr Hoakley, I'll be ‘ere hall day.’
The draper chatted about rising prices, 'itler and the price of butter while Tom grunted in acknowledgement.
‘Called hup this morning,’ Willie heard him say, ‘so if you know anyone who'd be looking for a job let me know.
I'll heeven take a young girl,’ he said, ‘if she's bright….’
He wrapped the material in sheets of brown paper.
Willie longed to touch it but it was put under the counter and he quickly followed Tom back through the dark tunnel of materials and out into the daylight.
Next door was a shoe shop.
It was packed with people buying up stout shoes.
After a wait in the queue Tom at last managed to get served.
‘Boots,’ he said, indicating Willie's feet.
Willie sat on a chair as his feet were placed into a measuring gauge.
‘Leather's a bit stiff at first,’ said Tom as Willie stood up in a solid pair of brown ankle-boots.
‘But we'll get some linseed oil to soften them up.’
A huge lump seemed to burn Willie's chest.
It slowly rose into his throat.
‘Are they fer me?’ he asked.
‘Well, they ent fer me,’ answered Tom shortly.
The assistant put them in a paper bag and Tom handed  them to him.
They stepped off the pavement outside and crossed over to another group of shops that curved around the square.
Two men were building a warden's post with sandbags by a shop selling corsets and combinations.
A large poster hung above them advertising A.R.P.
outfits.
Tom stopped at the corner where the shop stood and looked across at the Fire Station.
It stood next to the Town Hall.
A queue of men were standing outside, soberly reporting for duty.
A trickle of sweat rolled down the side of Tom's face.
He mopped it with his handkerchief.
The heat was stifling.
There was no hint of a breeze anywhere.
He felt a tug at his trouser leg.
‘What is it?’ he grunted.
Willie was pointing to a tiny shop down the small road they had just crossed.
It was on the corner of a cobbled alleyway off the road.
The front of the shop was unpainted varnished wood with faded gold lettering above it.
In the front window was a display of paint-brushes which were arranged in a fan.
Tubes and coloured pots and boxes were scattered below.
Tom's heart sank.
He hadn't been in the shop since the day after Rachel had died.
It was her favourite place.
For forty years he hadn't been able to bring himself to venture into it again.
There had been no reason anyway.
He didn't paint.
He remembered how pleased she would be at the mere thought of a visit.
‘Paint has a lovely smell, ent it?’ she'd say, ‘and a lovely feel,’and he would laugh at her soft, nonsensical way of talking.
‘What about it, William?’ asked Tom quietly.
‘You wants to take a look?’
Willie nodded feverishly.
‘Only in the window, mind.
I ent got time to dally inside.’
Willie gazed at the shop dreamily as he crossed the road.
A car hooted at him.
‘Mind where you'se goin'!’ yelled the angry driver.
‘Boy's in a daze,’ murmured Tom.
Willie peered in the window and wiped away the mist his breath was making on the glass.
There were boxes of coloured crayons and wax, lead pencils and paints in colours he never knew existed.
Large empty pads of white paper lay waiting to be filled in.
He looked lovingly at the paint-brushes.
There were thin elegant ones for the most delicate of lines ranging out to thick ones you could grip hard and slosh around in bold, creamy-coloured strokes.
Tom stood behind him and stared over his head into the shop.
He remembered how Rachel used to spin with delight in there.
Her long black hair, which was always tied back in a knot at the nape of her neck, would spring constantly outwards in a curly disarray whenever she was suddenly excited.
She could look at a row of colours for hours and never be bored.
‘If I painted the sky,’ she had said one day, ‘I could go through life paintin' nothin' else for it's always changin'.
It never stays still.’
He looked down at Willie, who was making shapes with his finger on the misted window.
‘What you doin'?’
‘Drawrin',’ said Willie.
‘It's one of them brushes.’
Tom peered at it.
‘Humph!’ he retorted, ‘Is it?’
He turned abruptly away and Willie followed him up the lane and back on to the main street.
They passed the corset shop, a butcher's and a hardware store and stopped outside a library.
‘Best join,’ said Tom, ‘if you'se goin' to stay, that is.’
They opened the door and entered a large expanse of silence.
Someone coughed.
Willie tugged at Tom's trouser leg.
‘What is it?’ he whispered in irritation.
‘Mister Tom,’ he hissed quietly, ‘why is it so quiet?’
Tom sighed in exasperation.
‘So's people can hear theirselves read.’
They walked up to a large wooden table covered at each end with a pile of books.
A tall, thin angular woman in her thirties sat behind it, her long legs stretching out from under it.
She wore spectacles and had fine auburn hair that was swept back untidily into a bun.
She looked up at them and allowed her glasses to fall from her nose.
They dangled on a piece of string around her neck.
‘I've come to join him up,’ said Tom indicating Willie.
‘He's with me.’
Miss Emilia Thorne gazed at Willie, stared at Tom and then took another look at Willie.
‘With you?’ she asked in astonishment.
She seemed to articulate every consonant as she spoke.
‘With you!’ she repeated.
‘But you're….
‘She was about to say, a bad-tempered, frosty old…but she stopped herself.
‘I'm what?’ asked Tom.
‘You're…so busy.’
Too busy, she thought.
He never helped or joined in any of the village activities and had ignored all the signs that a war was approaching.
She leaned over the table and gasped.
They were both carrying their gas-masks.
She blinked and looked again.
There was no mistaking it.
The buff-coloured boxes were hanging over their shoulders.
Mr Oakley, of all people, was carrying a gas-mask!
‘We ent got all day,’ said Tom sharply.
‘I'll leave the boy here.
I got shoppin' to do.’
Willie paled.
Tom took a look at his face and groaned inwardly.
How had he allowed himself to be landed with such a sickly, dependent boy, but Willie was sick with excitement, not fear.
Even though he couldn't read, the sight of books thrilled him.
‘Ow many's he allowed to have?’
‘Three,’ answered Miss Thorne.
‘Let him choose two with pictures and….’
He paused for an instant.
He never liked asking anyone favours.
‘Yes?’ said Miss Thorne.
‘Choose one that you think would be suitable for me to read to him, like.
He ent learnt yet.
And I've forgotten what young 'uns like, see.’
He cleared his throat awkwardly.
‘One has to do one's dooty, don't one?’
‘Yes, of course, Mr Oakley,’ she replied hastily.
She watched Tom leave the library.
‘Now,’ she said, producing a pale blue card, ‘What's your name?
Your address I know,’ and she beamed wickedly at him.
Meanwhile, Tom stepped out of the coolness of the bank.
It was ominously close.
People were still huddled in groups in the square, talking anxiously.
Out of the corner of his eye he saw some wirelesses in a shop window.
He paused in front of them.
‘Echo,’ he read, ‘Bakelite.’
There, on display, was a small ten-by-four-inch wireless.
It was run on batteries that had to be recharged.
Ideal for someone like him who had no electricity.
It was made of light wood with two large circular openings, one with a fretted front, the other fitted with a dial.
Something to think about if he had to leave the boy on his own like.
Lot of money, though.
‘I must remember to get some Number Eights,’ he muttered to himself.
Torch batteries were being bought up at an alarming rate.
‘And some underwear for the boy.’
He peered down at Mrs Fletcher's crumpled list.
‘Wool,’ he read.
Tom stopped at the corner of the small road near the corset shop and glanced down at the tiny alleyway where the artist's shop stood.
He hadn't time, he thought, and he set off briskly towards the blacksmith's, his rucksack and his bags already bulging.
He had also a box of groceries to  pick up and some wooden and cardboard boxes that he thought would be useful for Willie's room.
Within half an hour he was back at the library.
He peered through the glass at the top of the door.
Willie was kneeling on a chair absorbed in books, his elbows resting on a long wooden table.
Miss Thorne towered beside him, pointing at something on one of the pages.
Tom hesitated for a moment and then walked hurriedly on to the small road back towards the artist's shop.
‘Forty-odd years,’ he muttered, staring into its window.
‘Is that how long it is?’
He pushed the door ajar.
It gave a loud tinkle.
Even the same bell, he thought.
He paused for an instant and then stepped inside.
Willie felt a hand touch his shoulder.
It was Tom.
He was carrying a parcel.
‘Ready to go now,’ he said quietly.
Willie had his finger on a large letter.
‘That's an ‘O’, ain't it, mister?’
Tom bent down to look.
The book was filled with pictures of a marmalade coloured cat.
‘That's right,’ said Tom.
‘You knows yer alphabet then?’
‘I nearly knows it.’
He looked up quickly.
‘Mister Tom,’ he asked timidly,'will you help me?’
He looked down at the book, clenched his hands and held.
his breath.
Now he'd be for it.
Don't ask help from anyone, his mum had said.
He waited for the cuff around the ear.
‘Yes,’ said Tom.
‘I expect I can talk to Mrs Hartridge or whoever's your teacher and ask what you need to practise.’
Miss Thorne interrupted him.
‘Don't go working him too hard.
Looks like he could do with some of our country air.’
‘He'll git plenty of that,’ snapped Tom.
‘There's veg to plant and Dobbs to look after, and weeding.’
Miss Thorne said no more.
Poor boy, she thought, away from his loving home and now dumped with an irritable old man.
Tom picked up Willie's three books and gave them to him to carry.
The one Miss Thorne had chosen was Rudyard Kipling's Just So Stories .
‘It's not very educational, I'm afraid, Mr Oakley.’
‘Did I say I wanted somethin' educational?’
‘No, Mr Oakley.’
‘Then don't put words in my mouth.’
‘No, Mr Oakley,’ and she suppressed a smile.
After they had left, she stood in the doorway and watched them walking down the main street past the square.
‘What an odd couple,’ she whispered to herself.
‘Wait till I tell May!’
‘Run,’ roared Tom, and he and Willie tore down the pathway to the cottage.
They were only just in time.
The sky gave one almighty shake and split open.
Rain and hail bounced on the tiled roof with such venom that Tom and Willie were quite deafened.
They had to shout to make themselves heard.
Sam growled and barked out of the front window.
Tom put the blacks up, lit the lamps and began unpacking the parcels.
‘These are pyjamas, William,’ he said, lifting up two blue-and-white striped garments.
‘You wear them in bed.’
‘Pie-jarmers,’ repeated Willie copying Tom's way of speaking.
‘That's right.
Now,’ he said, ‘you going to sleep in the bed tonight?’
Willie looked startled.
‘Bed's for dead people, ain't it?’
Tom stood up.
‘Come with me.’
Willie followed him across the passage to Tom's bedroom.
He hovered in the doorway.
‘Come in,’ he said.
‘Don't dally.’
Willie took a step in.
‘See this here bed.
I've slept in it fer forty yer or more and I ent dead yet, and that basket at the end is Sammy's bed, when he's a mind.’
They returned to the front room and, after a light tea of eggs and toast, Willie changed for bed and positioned himself by the armchair, next to Tom.
The rain continued to fall heavily outside rattling the windows unceasingly.
‘I'll have to fairly shout this story,’ yelled Tom above the noise.
Willie sat in his crisp new pyjamas.
It had felt strange the previous night going to bed without wearing his underpants; but this odd suit felt even stranger.
‘Mister Tom,’ he said.
‘Ain't you goin' to read from the Bible?‘
‘Didn't you like it from me head then, like last night?’
‘Yeh,’ said Willie, ‘yeh, I did.’
‘I shouldn't think you'd understand all them long words anyways.‘
‘No, Mister Tom,’ said Willie, feeling deeply relieved at not having to pretend any more.
‘Can I have Noah's Ark again?‘
Tom related the tale for the second time and followed it with the daring exploits of Pecos Bill from the comic Willie had chosen.
After a cup of cocoa Willie brushed his teeth over an aluminium bowl and then dashed out into the garden to the little wooden outhouse, wearing his mackintosh and a new pair of gumboots while Tom sheltered him with an umbrella.
They carried the mattress upstairs between them.
Tom placed a rubber sheet on it and made the bed over it, Willie helping him when he was able.
‘There,’ he said when they had finished.
‘You can wet the bed till Kingdom come.’
‘Mister Tom,’ whispered Willie.
‘Ain't you angry wiv me?’
‘No,’ he grunted.
‘When I first had Sammy he peed all over the blimmin' place.
Takes time to settle into a new place and its ways.’
He turned down the blankets and Willie climbed in between the sheets.
Sammy sat on the bump where his feet were.
‘I put yer comic and library books on yer table.’
‘Thanks, Mister Tom,’ and he bent down to pick up the book with the marmalade cat in it.
Tom watched him tracing words with his fingers.
‘Ten minutes.’
But Willie didn't hear.
He was lost in the coloured pictures.
A loud knocking came from downstairs.
Sammy leapt off the bed and started barking.
Tom quickly checked that the blacks were firmly on Willie's window and disappeared down the ladder, holding a squirming Sammy in his arms.
Willie raised his head for a moment to listen.
‘Good evenin', Mrs Fletcher,’ he heard Tom say in a surprised tone.
‘Come in.’
He turned back to his book and soon Tom reappeared to blow the lamp out.
The room was blanketed in darkness until the blacks were removed.
‘Goodnight, William,’ he said, tousling Willie's hair.
‘Pot's by the bed if you wants it.’
Willie was exhausted.
His head whirled with the names and faces of all the people he had met that day.
He was just thinking about the boy in the Post Office when he fell instantly into a deep sleep.
‘Chamberlain Announces'
‘Mornin',’ said Tom, appearing at the trap-door.
Willie opened his eyes and looked around.
The sun was gliding in long flickering beams across the wooden floor.
‘Mornin',’ he answered.
‘So you slept in the bed last night.
Good.’
Willie gave a tight smile which faded rapidly when he realized that the trousers of his new striped suit were soaking.
Tom strode across the room.
‘Come and take a good sniff of this day,’ he said, pushing open the window.
Willie blushed and clung on to the top of the blankets.
‘Never mind about them sheets and jarmers.
I got a tub of hot water waitin' for them downstairs.’
Willie climbed out of bed and joined him at the window.
‘Reckon that storm's washed a few cobwebs away.’
They rested their elbows on the sill and leaned out.
It was a tight squeeze.
Beyond the little road at the end of the graveyard stretched green and yellow fields and on the horizon stood a clump of woods.
Tom pointed to some trees to the right of it.
‘The big Grange is over there.
Nope, can't see it.
When the leaves fall from the trees you'll jest be able to make it out.
And over there,’ he said pointing to the left of the fields to where a small road wound its way up a hill, ‘is where one of yer teachers lives.
Mrs Hartridge's her name.’
‘Mister Tom, how many teachers is there?’ asked Willie.
‘Two.
Mrs Hartridge teaches the young 'uns and Mr Bush the old 'uns.’
‘How old's old?’
‘Eleven, twelve up to fourteen.
Sometimes a clever one goes to the Grammar in the town.
See them woods,’ he said.
‘There's a small river flows through there to where the Grange is. 'TIS popular with the children round here.’
They stared silently out at the gentle panorama until their reveries were interrupted by loud barking from the graveyard.
Sammy was running up and down the pathway and yelping up at them.
‘Wants attention, he does,’ murmured Tom, drawing himself away from the window.
‘We'se got another busy day, William.
Got to start diggin' a trench fer the Anderson this afternoon.
That'll put muscles on you.’
They stripped the bed between them and carried the sheets downstairs.
Tom gently washed Willie's body again and smoothed witch-hazel onto the sore spots.
An assortment of clothes were lying on the table.
Mrs Fletcher had brought them round the previous night.
David, her youngest, had grown out of them and although he was younger than Willie he was a head taller.
Tom handed him a white shirt from the pile and tied one of his own ties, a brown tweedy affair, around his neck.
Willie's grey trousers seemed more crumpled than ever, but with the braces attached to them they at least felt comfortable.
He tucked the long tie into them.
Tom handed him a new pair of grey woollen socks and Willie pulled the garters over them.
‘I put some oil on them boots last night,’ he said as Willie stood, his feet encased in them.
‘Yous'll have to do them yerself tonight.’
Tom had to be in the church early, to see Mr Peters, the vicar.
He went on ahead while Willie staggered on after him.
It was difficult for him to move in his new boots.
They cut into his ankles and he couldn't bend his feet to walk in them, but apart from the slight discomfort, he felt very protected and supported in them.
They clattered on the  flagstoned pathway and it pleased him to hear himself so clearly.
His bony legs, which usually felt as if they would collapse beneath him, felt firmer, stronger.
He found the back door of the church already open and Mister Tom talking to a tall, lanky man with piebald black and grey hair.
‘Ah, William,’ he exclaimed, turning towards him.
‘Mr Oakley tells me that you're going to give us a hand.
Those are the hymn books,’ he continued, indicating a pile of red books on a table by the main door.
‘Put four on each bench and if there are any over, spread them across the rows of chairs at the front and at the back.
Do you think you can do that?’
Willie nodded.
‘Good.’
He turned back to Tom.
‘Now, where's the best place acoustically for this wireless of mine?’
Willie walked over to the table and picked up some books, feeling totally bewildered.
Mum had said red was an evil colour but the vicar had told him to put them out so it couldn't be a sin.
He had also said that he was good.
Mum had told him that whenever he was good she liked him but that when he was bad, she didn't.
Neither did God or anyone else for that matter.
It was very lonely being bad.
He touched the worn, shiny wood at the back of one of the pews.
It smelled comfortable.
He glanced at the main door.
Like the back door, it was flung open revealing a tiny arched porch outside.
Sunlight streamed into the church and through the stained glass windows, and a smell of grass and flowers permeated the air.
A bird chirruped intermittently outside.
P'raps heaven is like this, thought Willie to himself.
He laid each book out neatly on the benches, his new boots echoing and reverberating noisily around him, but the vicar made no comment and carried on talking quite loudly, for someone who was in a church.
He was arranging the books in the back row so that they were exactly parallel to each other, when two boys entered.
They were both three or four years older than him.
They sat on the second row of choir benches to the left of the altar.
Suddenly it occurred to Willie that the church would soon be filled with people.
He hated crowds and dreaded the Sunday service and its aftermath, which was usually a good whipping.
He felt a hand on his shoulder.
It was Mister Tom.
‘Stay with me, boy,’ he said in a low voice and Willie gratefully followed him into one of the pews.
Within minutes, the tiny church was flooded with men, women and children.
Four more boys sat by the altar.
On the right of the altar were three men.
Willie recognized Mr Miller from the corner shop and the young man behind the mesh in the Post Office.
In the pew opposite Willie were two ginger-haired girls trying to smother their giggles.
Their long carrot-coloured hair had been fought into plaits while the remainder stuck out in frizzy uncontrollable waves.
They wore pale lemon and green summer dresses with short puffed sleeves and a cross stitching of embroidery round their chests.
Their faces and arms were covered with the biggest freckles Willie had ever seen.
Like him, they too carried their gas-masks over their shoulders.
A lady at their side glared down at them.
She must be their mother, Willie thought.
Sitting next to her was a tall man with bright red hair and a young, dark-haired girl.
Mr Peters and his wife stood by the main entrance greeting the congregation as they entered.
Their three teenage daughters, cook and assortment of evacuees filled two of the pews in the front.
A hacking cough from the porch heralded the arrival of Nancy Little and the Doctor.
Willie gave a short gasp.
She was wearing trousers to church!
He watched the vicar's face waiting for the thunderous ‘thou shalt be cast into the eternal fires’ glare but he only smiled and shook her hand.
He was surprised to see Miss Thorne behind them.
‘Mister Tom,’ he whispered urgently, tugging at his sleeve.
‘Does that book lady live here?’
Tom nodded.
A short dumpy woman in her forties accompanied her.
‘That's her sister, Miss May,’ he said in a low voice.
‘They lives in one of them cottages with the straw rooves.
Thatched, that is.
They got a wireless.’
Willie turned to find the Fletchers with two of their sons moving into their pew.
Mrs Fletcher leaned towards them.
‘Mr Oakley,’ she whispered.
‘I begun the balaclava.’
Tom frowned her into silence.
It was Willie's birthday on Thursday and he wanted it to be a surprise.
The wireless stood on a small table below the pulpit.
The vicar fiddled with one of the knobs and the church was deafened with ‘How to make the most of Tinned Foods’, before it was hurriedly turned off.
The twins had caught the eye of one of the boys sitting in the front row of the choir.
He was a stocky boy of about eleven with thick straight brown hair.
With heads bent and shaking shoulders the three of them buried their laughter in their hands.
Mrs Hartridge and her uniformed husband entered.
Willie gazed at her, quite spellbound.
She was beautiful, he thought, so plump and fair, standing in the sunlight, her eyes creased with laughter.
‘Them be the Barnes family,’ whispered Tom as a group of men and women came on in behind them.
‘They own Hillbrook Farm.
Biggest round here fer miles.’
Mr Fred Barnes was a brick-faced, middle-aged man whose starched white collar seemed to be causing him an obstruction in breathing.
Three healthy-looking youths and two red-cheeked young women were with him.
His wife, a short, stocky woman, was accompanying two evacuees, a boy and a girl.
‘Trust ole Barnes to pick a strong-lookin' pair,’ muttered Tom to himself.
Lucy and her parents sat in front of Tom and Willie.
She  turned and smiled at them but Willie was staring at the colours in the stained glass windows and didn't notice her.
When everyone was reasonably settled Mr Peters stood in front of the congregation and clasped his hands.
‘Good morning,’ he began.
‘Now I know we have several denominations gathered here today, especially amongst our new visitors who I hope will be happy and safe inside our homes.
If anyone of you is troubled or needs help please don't hesitate to contact me or my wife.
And now if you would all open your hymn books at number eighty-five we shall sing ‘Lead thou me on’.’
Mr Bush, the young headmaster of the village school, was seated behind the pulpit at the organ.
He gave an introductory chord.
Willie didn't know the tune and as he couldn't read he couldn't even follow the words.
He glanced aside at the ginger-haired twins.
They were sharing a hymn book and singing.
He envied them.
‘Lah it,’ he heard Tom whisper.
‘Go on, lah it.’
Willie did so and soon picked up the melody until he almost began to enjoy it.
The hymn was followed by a passage from the New Testament, another hymn from the choir and some simple prayers.
The vicar looked at his watch and walked towards the wireless.
All eyes were riveted on him, and anyone who had seating space sat down quietly.
The wireless crackled for a few moments until, after much jiggling with the knobs, the voice of Mr Chamberlain became clear.
‘I am speaking to you,’ he said, ‘from the Cabinet Room at 10 Downing Street.
This morning the British Ambassador in Berlin handed the German Government a final note stating that unless we heard from them by eleven o'clock that they were prepared at once to withdraw their troops from Poland, a state of war would exist between us.
‘I have to tell you now that no such undertaking has been received and that consequently this country is at war  with Germany.’
A few people gave a cry.
The rest remained frozen into silence, while others took out their  handkerchieves .
A loud whisper was heard from the brown-haired choirboy, ‘Does that mean no school?’
He was silenced very quickly by a frown from Mr Bush, and Mr Chamberlain's message was allowed to continue undisturbed.
‘I know that you will all play your part with calmness and courage,’ he said.
‘…Report for duty in accordance with the instructions you have received….
It is of vital importance that you should carry on with your jobs.
Now may God bless you all.
May He defend the right.
It is the evil things that we shall be fighting against — brute force, bad faith, injustice, oppression and persecution — and against them I am certain that the right will prevail.’
Mr Peters turned the wireless off.
After what seemed an interminable silence he spoke, ‘Let us pray.’
Everyone sank to their knees.
Willie peered over his clasped hands in the direction of the choir.
The brown-haired boy had caught the eyes of the twins again and was desperately attempting to relay some kind of message to them.
After prayers, various announcements were made from the pulpit.
Volunteers and those already involved with the A.R.P.
or Civil Defence work were asked to meet at the village hall.
Women and children were to report at the school in the morning to make arrangements for the care and education of the evacuees.
After the service, when everyone had filed outside, Willie looked around for the strange curly-haired boy that he had seen at the Post Office.
The brown-haired choirboy was already in deep discussion with the twins.
He was joined by several other children, but there was no sign of the Post Office boy anywhere.
He felt a hand tugging at his shirtsleeve.
It was Lucy.
She gazed shyly at him, her large red  cheeks and wide bulging lips spreading out beneath two round blue eyes.
‘Ulloo,’ she said.
Willie shuffled in his boots and dug a toe into the grass.
‘Hello,’ he said in return.
An awkward silence came between them and he was more than grateful when Mister Tom called out to him.
‘Go and put the kettle on,’ he yelled.
‘I got to see the vicar.‘
Willie turned quickly and stumbled hurriedly down the path leaving Lucy to stare silently after him until he had disappeared into the cottage.
The lid of the kettle rattled continuously, causing the living room to be enveloped in clouds of dense steam.
Willie had tried vainly to lift the kettle from off the range and, having only succeeded in burning his hand, he waited anxiously for Mister Tom's return.
Tom didn't bat an eyelid at the warm fog.
He strode into the room and picking up the kettle with an old cloth he proceeded to make a pot of tea.
It wasn't till he had put three mugs on the table that Willie realized that there was a third person in the room.
A short, stocky middle-aged man with thinning brown hair, a ruddy face and a twinkle in his eyes was standing at the doorway eyeing him.
He blushed.
‘Come on in, Mr Fletcher,’ said Tom brusquely.
He and Mr Fletcher sat at the table and Willie took one of the mugs and perched himself on the stool in front of the range.
He felt very self-conscious and stayed gazing at the fire while the two men talked about widths of trenches.
He pricked up his ears at one point for he knew that they were talking about him.
‘Oh yes, he'll manage all right,’ he heard Tom say.
‘Have to muck in like the rest of us.’
He glanced in his direction.
‘William,’ he said, ‘yous'll have to get yer hands dirty today.
You don't mind a bit of muck and earth, I don't s'pose?’
‘No, Mister Tom,’ said Willie.
This was a different world altogether.
For a start his mother had always taught him that it was a sin to work or play on the Sabbath.
Sundays were for sitting silently with a bible in front of you.
And, for another thing, if he got any dirt on his clothes he'd get a beating.
His classmates had called him a sissie because he had never dared to dirty himself by climbing a wall or joining in any of their rough-and-tumble games.
And, in addition to having to keep his clothes clean, his body was often too bruised and painful to play apart from the fact that he didn't know how to.
‘Mister Tom?’ he asked after Mr Fletcher had left.
‘Wot about me clothes gettin' dirty?’
‘You can take yer shirt off.
'TIS a good hot day.’
Willie shuffled nervously on the stool.
‘What's up now?’ he said curtly.
‘Them bruises is it?’
He nodded.
‘Wear yer grey jersey then.
Mind,’ he added, ‘you'll be drippin'.
And put yer old socks on.’
After a meal of meat and potato stew of which Willie only managed a few mouthfuls, Mr Fletcher returned accompanied by his two teenage sons.
They were carrying spades and measuring sticks.
Tom pointed sadly to a patch of grass in the back garden.
‘Best start there,’ he said.
‘Tis a reasonable distance from the latrine.’
They cut and stripped the turf away in small neat squares and then after measuring the ground they slowly and laboriously began to dig.
Willie was given a small spade and after an hour of removing a tiny section of earth he began to forget that he was surrounded by strangers and gradually became absorbed in his digging.
Mister Tom had told him not to be afraid of the earth, but it was still wet from the previous night's rain and occasionally he let out an involuntary squeal when his spade contacted a worm.
This made the others laugh and yell ‘townee’, but they carried on digging and Willie realized that there was no malice in  their laughter.
In the middle of digging they all sat down for a mug of tea.
Willie helped hand the mugs around.
The two youths, he had learned, were called Michael and Edward.
Michael was the elder.
He was dark-haired with a few strands of hair on his upper lip.
Edward, the younger, was stockier.
He had brown wavy hair and a hoarse voice that was in the process of breaking.
Willie sat at the edge of the shallow trench and clung tightly to his mug.
The inside of his hands smarted under the heat of it.
Suddenly he gave a start.
Footsteps and the sound of a boy's voice were approaching the hedge.
Maybe it.was the Post Office boy.
He turned sharply to look.
Two boys leaned over the small gate.
They were Michael and Edward's younger brothers.
One of them was the brown-haired choirboy and his younger brother was a smaller dark-haired version of him.
Tom gave his usual frown at the appearance of uninvited intrusion.
‘May I has yer worms, Mr Oakley?’ inquired the choirboy.
Tom grunted and the smallest fled immediately.
‘Dare say you can, George.
Come on in.’
‘Thanks, Mr Oakley,’ he said enthusiastically and he swung the gate open.
In his hands was a large tin.
He walked over to the trench and began scrutinizing the piles of earth.
Willie watched him in horror as he picked up the wriggling worms and put them inside the tin.
Within minutes he was helping with the digging.
He turned shortly to discover Willie staring at him.
‘You'se one of them townees, ent you?'he said.
Willie nodded.
‘Ent you hot in that jersey?’
He had stripped off his shirt as soon as he had joined in.
Willie shook his head, but the tell-tale beads of sweat that ran down his flushed face belied him.
His jersey clung to his chest in large damp patches.
‘You looks hot, why don't you peel off?’
Willie grew more reticent and mumbled out something that George couldn't hear.
‘What?’ he said.
‘What did you say?’
‘Boy's got a temperature,’ interrupted Tom curtly.
‘Best to sweat it off.’
Willie didn't look at George any more after that, but carried on digging with extra fervour.
Later in the afternoon, Mrs Fletcher appeared with lemonade and cakes for everyone, and George left, soon after, with a bulging tin of worms.
Sammy watched them digging from a corner of the garden.
He was miserable at being left out.
He had tried to help earlier but was only yelled at angrily for filling the hole with earth.
When the trench was completed Willie sat on the grass to watch the others fix the Anderson shelter inside it.
Sammy lay by his feet.
The six steel sheets were inserted into the two widest sides of the trench and bolted together at the top, forming a curved tunnel.
Michael and Edward placed one of the flat pieces of steel at one end and Tom and Mr Fletcher fixed it into place.
This was the back of the shelter.
It had an emergency exit which they all had a go at unbolting.
Willie was so absorbed that he didn't notice that his knees were being licked and unconsciously he rested his hand on the back of Sammy's neck.
Tom and Mr Fletcher fixed the next flat piece onto the front of the shelter.
Cut inside it was a hole which was at ground level.
This acted as a doorway.
‘William,’ said Tom turning, and being surprised to see him sitting with Sammy in a fairly relaxed manner, ‘like to have a try out of this doorway?’
Willie rose and wandered over towards the entrance.
He put his head cautiously through the hole and stepped gingerly inside.
It was dark and smelt of damp earth.
Tom joined him.
The shelter curved well above his head so that they could both stand quite comfortably inside.
Tom crawled back out into the sun and pulled Willie out after him.
He thanked Mr Fletcher and his sons for their help and shook their hands.
‘Pleasure,’ said Mr Fletcher.
‘We must all help one another now.’
‘William, said Tom after the Fletchers had left.
‘I'm afraid we ent quite finished yet.
We jest got to cover this with earth.
Got any strength left?’
Willie felt exhausted but he was determined to keep going.
He nodded.
Between them they started to cover the shelter until it was time tor Tom to leave for a meeting in the village hall.
‘Don't carry on fer long,’ he said as he swung the back gate behind him, but Willie continued to pile the earth on, levelling it down with his hands.
It was exciting to see the glinting steel slowly disappear under its damp camouflage.
He was so absorbed in his task that he didn't notice dusk approaching.
His hands and fingernails were filthy, his face and legs were covered in muck, his clothes were sodden and he was glorying in the wetness of it all.
He was in the middle of smoothing one piece of earth when a shadow fell across his hands.
He looked up quickly and there, half silhouetted in the twilight, stood the wiry, curly-haired boy he had seen at the Post Office.
Zach
‘Hello!’ he said brightly, grasping Willie's hand.
There was a loud squelching of mud as he shook it.
‘Sorry!’ gasped Willie in embarrassment.
The strange boy grinned and wiped it on the seat of his shorts.
‘You're William Beech, aren't you?’
Willie nodded.
‘Pleased to meet you.
I'm Zacharias Wrench.’
‘Oh,’ said Willie.
‘Yes, I know.
It's a mouthful, isn't it.
My parents have a cruel sense of humour.
I'm called Zach for short.’
The strange boy's eyes seemed to penetrate so deeply into Willie's that he felt sure he could read his thoughts.
He averted his gaze, and began hurriedly to cover the Anderson again.
‘I say, can I help?
I'd like to.’
Willie was quite taken aback at being asked.
‘I'm rather good at it, actually,’ he continued proudly.
‘I've given a hand at the creation of several.
I wouldn't mess it up.’
‘Yeh,’ replied Willie quietly, ‘if you want.’
‘Thanks.
I say,’ he said as he dumped a handful of earth on the side of the shelter.
‘I'll show you around.
Do you like exploring?‘
Willie shrugged his shoulders.
‘I dunno.’
‘Is it your first visit to the country?’
But before Willie could reply the boy was already chattering on.
‘It's not mine exactly.
I've had odd holidays with friends and my parents but this is the first time I've actually sort of lived in the country.
I've read books that are set in the country and, of course, poems, and I've lived in towns near the country and gone into the country on Sundays or when there was no school.’
He stopped and there was a moment of silence as they carried on working.
‘You've not been here long, have you?’ he asked after a while.
Willie shook his head.
‘Else I'm sure I would have seen you around.
You're different.’
Willie raised his head nervously.
‘Am I?’
‘Yes, I sensed that as soon as I saw you.
There's someone who's a bit of a loner, I thought, an independent sort of a soul like myself, perhaps.’
Willie glanced quickly at him.
He felt quite tongue-tied.
‘You're living with Mr Oakley, aren't you?’
He nodded.
‘He's a bit of a recluse, I believe.’
‘Wot?’ said Willie.
‘A recluse.
You know, keeps himself to himself.’
‘Oh.’
‘I say,’ said Zach suddenly.
‘We'll be at school together, won't we?’
He shrugged his shoulders again.
‘I dunno.’
He felt somewhat bewildered.
He couldn't understand this exuberant friendliness in a boy he'd only had a glimpse of twice.
It was all too fast for him to take in.
‘I expect you think I'm a bit forward,’ remarked Zach.
‘Wot?’
‘Forward.
You know.
But you see my parents work in the theatre and I'm so used to moving from town to town that I can't afford to waste time.
As soon as I see someone I like, I talk to them.’
Willie almost dropped the clod of earth he was holding.
No one had ever said that they liked him.
He'd always accepted that no one did.
Even his Mum said she only liked him when he was quiet and still.
For her to like him he had to make himself invisible.
He hurriedly put the earth on to the shelter.
‘I say,’ said Zach after a while.
‘I can't reach the top.
Is there a ladder indoors?’
Willie nodded.
‘Where is it?’
‘In the hall.
It's Mister Tom's.’
‘He won't mind, will he?’
‘I dunno,’ whispered Willie, a little panic-stricken.
‘I'll take the blame if there's any trouble,’ said Zach.
‘I say, maybe we can finish it and put the ladder back before he returns.
It'll be a surprise then, won't it?’
Willie nodded dumbly.
‘Lead the way, then,’ cried Zach.
‘On, on, on,’ and with that they made their way towards the back door.
Meanwhile, after walking in almost total darkness with no lights to guide him save the fast-darkening sky, Tom reached the village hall.
It came as quite a shock to enter the brightly-lit building.
He shaded his eyes and blinked for a few seconds until he had adjusted to the change.
There were far more people than he had anticipated and the buzz of excited chatter was quite deafening.
He tried to slip in unnoticed but it was too late.
He had already been spotted by Mrs Miller.
‘Well, Mr Oakley,’ she burbled.
‘This is a surprise!’
He turned to frown her into silence.
She was decked out in her Sunday best.
A pink pillar-box hat was perched precariously on her head, and pinned to its side was a large artificial purple flower.
It hung half-suspended over her mottled pudgy cheeks.
The hat could have been a continuation of her face, Tom thought, the colours were so similar.
He cleared his throat.
‘Vicar called the meeting, so here I am.’
‘Yes, of course,’ said Mrs Miller.
He glanced quickly round the hall.
Some of the older boys were already in uniform, their buff-coloured boxes slung over their shoulders.
Mr Peters, Charlie Ruddles and Mr Bush were seated in the front with Mr Thatcher and Mr Butcher.
He slipped quietly to the back of the hall, catching sight of Nancy and Dr Little and acknowledged their presence with a slight gesture of his hand.
He attempted to stand inconspicuously in a corner but it was useless, for most of the villagers nudged one another and turned to stare in his direction.
Tom, as Zach said, kept himself to himself.
He didn't hold with meetings or village functions.
Since his wife's, Rachel's, death he hadn't joined in any of the social activities in Little Weirwold.
In his grief he had cut himself off from people and when he had recovered he had lost the habit of socializing.
‘Evenin', Mr Oakley,’ said Mrs Fletcher, who was busy knitting in the back row.
‘Left the boy, has you?’
‘With Sam,’ he added, by way of defence.
He had been surprised at Sam's willingness to stay, and had even felt a flicker of jealousy when he had flopped contentedly down in the grass beside the boy's feet.
Although most wireless owners had opened their doors so that people could listen to the King's message, Mr Peters talked about it for those who had missed it.
He mentioned the regulations regarding the blackout and the carrying of gas-masks, and Mr Thatcher, the tall ginger-haired father of the twin girls and their dark-haired sister, spoke about the procedure of action during an air raid.
Gumboots and oilskins were given out and ordered for volunteers.
It was decided that the First Aid Post would be at Doctor and Nancy Little's cottage and that the village hall was to be the Rest Centre.
Mrs Miller threw her puffy arm into the air and volunteered to run a canteen for any troops that might pass through.
This suggestion was greeted with howls of laughter at the idea of anyone bothering to take a route that included Little Weirwold.
However, Lilian Peters, seeing how hurt Mrs Miller was, said that she thought that it was a good idea and after suggesting that a weekly gathering of the evacuated mothers and their infants would also be an excellent idea, Mrs Miller sat down beaming, because she believed she had thought of it herself.
Mr Bush announced that Mrs Black had agreed to help at the school as there would be an extra seventy children  attending.
She was a quietly-spoken old lady who had been retired for seven years.
‘Goin’ to have her hands full with some of that town lot,’Tom remarked to himself.
Several people volunteered for being special constables but Tom remained silent.
His life had been well-ordered and reasonably happy, he thought, by minding his own business.
The last thing he wanted was to turn himself into a do-gooder, but he realized very quickly that most of the volunteers were genuinely and sincerely opening their hearts and homes.
Mr Thatcher stood up to talk about fire-watching duties.
‘No one is allowed to do more than forty-eight hours a month,’ he said.
‘Just a couple of hours a day.’
Tom raised his arm.
Mr Peters looked towards the back of the hall in surprise.
‘Yes, Tom?’ he asked.
‘Did you wish to say something?’
‘I'm volunteering, like,’ he said.
‘I beg yer pardon,’ said Mr Thatcher in amazement.
‘I'll do the two hours a day.
Early in the mornin' like, or tea-time.
Can't leave the boy alone at night.’
‘No, no, of course not,’ and his name was hurriedly put down.
There was a murmur of surprise and enthusiasm in the hall.
A tall, angular figure stood up.
It was Emilia Thorne.
‘Put mine there too,’ she said, ‘and while I'm about it, anyone who would like to join our Amateur Dramatics Group is very welcome.
Meetings now on Thursdays, which means you can still attend practices at the First Aid Post on Wednesdays.’
Soon a dozen or so hands were raised and after their names had been written down and details of what their duties would involve the meeting was brought to a close.
It was dark when Tom stepped out of the hall.
He strode away towards the arched lane while the sound of chatter  and laughter behind him gradually faded.
He recollected, in his mild stupor, that Mrs Fletcher and Emilia Thorne had spoken to him and that the Doctor had asked after William and had said something about their boy being over at his place.
It was pitch black under the overhanging branches and it wasn't until he reached the gate of Dobbs' field that he was able, at last, to distinguish the shapes of the trees, and Dobbs and the wall by the churchyard.
He swung open the gate and shut it firmly behind him.
‘Bet Rachel's ‘avin’ a good laugh,’he muttered wryly to himself for not only had he volunteered for fire-watching duties, but he had also volunteered the services of Dobbs and the cart since there was news of petrol rationing.
He strolled over to the nag and slapped her gently.
‘I'll has to get you a gas-mask, and all, eh ole girl.
Seems we're both up to our necks in it now.’
The stars were scattered in fragments across the sky.
Tom stared up at them.
It didn't seem possible that there was a war.
The night was so still and peaceful.
He suddenly remembered Willie.
‘Hope he's had the sense to go inside,’ he mumbled and he headed in the direction of home.
He opened the little back gate and peered around in the dark for the shelter.
He would have bumped into it if he hadn't heard voices.
‘William!
William!
Where is you?’
‘'Ere, Mister Tom,’ said a voice by his side.
Tom squinted down at him.
‘Ent you got sense enuff to go indoors.
Yous'll catch cold in that wet jersey.’
A loud scrabbling came from inside the Anderson and Sam leapt out of the entrance and tugged excitedly at his trousers.
Tom picked him up, secretly delighted that he hadn't been deserted in affection.
Sam licked his face, panting and barking.
‘It was my idea,’ said a cultured voice.
‘To keep at it.’
‘Who's that?’ asked Tom sharply.
‘Me, Mr Oakley,’ and he felt a hand touch his shirtsleeve.
Tom screwed up his eyes to look at Zach.
He could make out what looked like a girl in the darkness.
‘I just thought it was a shame to go inside on such a night as this,’ he continued, ‘so I persuaded Will to partake of my company for a while.’
‘Who's Will?’ asked Tom, bluntly.
‘My name for William.
He told me he was called Willie, but I though that was a jolly awful thing to do to anyone.
Willie just cries out for ridicule, don't you think?
I mean,’ he went on, ‘it's almost as bad as Zacharias Wrench.’
‘What?’ said Tom.
‘Zacharias Wrench.
That's me.
Zach for short.’
‘Oh.’
Willie stared at their silent silhouettes in the darkness, for what seemed an eternity.
He could hear only the sound of Sam's tongue lathering Tom's face and a gentle breeze gliding through the trees.
‘Best come in,’ said Tom at last.
They clattered into the hallway.
Tom put the blacks up in the front room, crashed around in the darkness and lit the gas and oil lamps.
After he had made a pot of tea they sat near the range and surveyed each other.
Willie's face, hair and clothes were covered in earth.
His filthy hands showed up starkly against the white mug he was holding.
Zach, Tom discovered, was a voluble, curly-haired boy a few months older than Willie, only taller and in bad need, so he thought, of a haircut.
A red jersey was draped around his bare shoulders and a pair of frayed, rather colourful, men's braces held up some well-darned green shorts.
Apart from his sandals, his legs were bare.
‘You finished the shelter then?’ said Tom.
Willie nodded and glanced in Zach's direction.
‘He helped.’
‘By the feel of it, you done a good job.
How'd you reach  the top?’
There was a pause.
‘Wiv the ladder,’ said Willie huskily.
‘Yes,’ interspersed Zach, ‘that was my idea.’
‘Oh, was it now?’
‘Yes.‘
‘You put it back then?’
‘Oh yes.
It might be a bit earth-stained, though.’
Tom poked some tobacco in his pipe and relit it.
‘Where you stayin then?
You ent from round here.’
‘With Doctor and Mrs Little.
I've been here for about a week now.’
‘Oh,’ said Tom.
‘I haven't seen you around.’
‘I haven't seen you around either,’ said Zach.
Willie choked on a mouthful of tea and Zach slapped his back.
He flinched.
His skin was still bruised and sore.
‘I say,’ blurted out Zach with concern.
‘You're not one of those delicate mortals, are you?’
‘No, he ent,’ said Tom sharply.
‘Least ways, not for long.‘
Zach glanced at the clock on the bookcase and stood up.
‘I say,’ he exclaimed, ‘it's nine o'clock.
Thanks awfully for the tea, Mr Oakley.
May I come round tomorrow and see Will?’
‘Up to William, ask him.’
Willie was so exhausted from the day's labours that he didn't know whether he had dreamt the last remark or not.
‘Can I?’ said Zach earnestly.
‘I've a marvellous idea for a game.’
‘Yeh.‘
‘Wizard!
Caloo Callay!’
With a great effort he attempted to pull his jersey on over his head.
He tugged and pulled at it until it eventually moved over his nose and ears, causing his hair to spring up in all directions like soft wire.
‘Phew!’ he gasped, ‘I did it.
Mother says I mustn't grow  any more till she's collected enough wool to knit me a bigger one.
'He tugged the sleeves of the jersey down but they slid stubbornly back to between his wrists and elbows.
‘Goodnight, Sam,’ he said, giving him a pat.
‘William,’ said Tom, ‘see yer friend out.’
Willie stood sleepily to his feet and followed Zach into the hall, closing the door behind them.
‘Ow!’ cried Zach as his knee hit the step ladder.
Willie opened the front door.
The sky was still starry and a cool breeze shook the grass between the gravestones.
He shivered.
‘Your jersey's awfully damp,’ said Zach feeling it.
‘Don't go catching pneumonia.’
He glanced cautiously round the graveyard.
‘Just looking for spies,’ he explained.
‘Look, about my idea.
You know Captain McBlaid?’
‘D'you mean Charlie Ruddles?’
‘No,’ said Zach excitedly, ‘Captain McBlaid of the Air police.‘
‘Is he the prime minister or somethin'?’
‘No!’
He took another look around.
‘I'll tell you more about it tomorrow.
Roger, Wilco and out.’
Willie watched him walk down the path and towards the church.
He pulled himself up over the wall and disappeared.
Who was Roger Wilco and what did he mean by out, he thought.
He stepped back into the hall and felt his way back to the living room.
In front of the range stood the large copper tub.
Tom was pouring hot water into it while Sam was hiding under the table and eyeing it suspiciously.
‘Don't worry, Sam.
It ent fer you.’
He looked down at Willie.
‘You'll be stiff tomorrer.
Best have a good soak.’
Willie stared in horror at the bubbling water and backed towards the table.
He watched Tom lift two more saucepans from the range and empty them together with a handful of salt into the tub.
‘Come on then,’ he said.
‘Is it fer me clothes, Mister Tom?’
‘It's fer you.’
Willie swallowed.
‘Please, mister.
I can't swim.
I'll drown.’
‘Ent you never…’ but he stopped himself.
It was a stupid question.
‘You don't put yer head under.
You sit in it, washes yerself and has a little lean back.’
It took some time before Willie allowed himself to relax in the water.
Tom handed him a large square bar of soap and showed him how to use it.
He then proceeded to wash Willie's hair several times with such vigour that Willie thought his head would fall off.
A drop of soap trickled into his eyes and he rubbed it only to find that he had created more pain.
After this ordeal Tom left him to have a soak and slowly Willie began to unwind.
He held onto the sides of the tub and let his legs float gently to the surface.
The gas lamp flickered and spluttered above him, sending moving shadows across the walls.
He gave a start for he had been so relaxed that he had nearly fallen asleep.
Tom handed him a towel and after he had dried himself and had his hair rubbed and combed and had put his pyjamas on, he sat down on the pouffe by the armchair while Tom sat ready to tell him a story.
Sam spread himself out on the rug between them.
‘I'm goin' to look at the story first and then tells it in me own way, like what I done with Noah.
That suit you?’
Willie nodded and hugged his knees.
‘This is the story of how God created the world,’ and he began to talk about the light and the darkness, the coming of the sky and the sea, the fish and the animals and of Adam and Eve.
After this he made them both some cocoa and began the first of the Just So stories.
‘I haven't read these for years,’ he said, leaning over to  Willie.
‘Come and look at these pictures.’
Willie rested against the arm of the armchair and listened to ‘How the Whale got his Throat’.
This was a slow process, for Tom had to keep stopping to explain what the words meant, and several times had to look them up in a dictionary.
Willie lay in bed that night, tired and aching, but the aches were very pleasant ones and as he slept he dreamt that Adam and Eve were being chased by a large whale and that he stood in the garden of Eden wondering if God was nubbly and ate infinite sauce and sagacity.
An Encounter over Blackberries
They slung the rubber sheet and pyjamas over the washing line and peered into the shelter.
‘Water,’ murmured Tom, ‘I might have known.
We'll have to keep a stirrup pump close by.’
He patted the side of the strange earthy mound.
‘I'll put some more earth on today and then we can plant a few turnips and such in it.
Ever growed anything afore?’ he said, turning to Willie.
He shook his head.
‘Always a first time.
Come with me.
I'll show you somethin'.’
Willie followed him out of the back gate and across the tiny road, Sam scampering after them.
Instead of turning left towards the village they carried on to the right.
They hadn't walked very far when they came to a tiny dirt track off the road.
The aching that Willie had first felt on waking was beginning to ease up, apart from his ankles, which were still a little sore from his boots.
A sudden burst of energy rose up inside him.
It excited and frightened him.
He had always been good at keeping still.
It was wicked not to, he knew that, but now he felt a desperate desire to leap and jump.
He pressed his lips together and, clenching his fists and frowning, he tried to numb the strange new feelings away.
Tom caught sight of the flush of excitement burning in his cheeks.
‘Race Sammy to the gate,’ he said, pointing to one a hundred yards ahead of them.
‘I'll hold him to give you a head start.’
‘Run, d'you mean?’
‘Well, I don't mean fly.
Now when I ses go, you jest go.’
He whistled for Sam and held him squirming and wriggling in his arms.
‘You got rabbit and bone fever, ent you, my boy?’ he said, as he struggled to hold him.
Willie fixed his eyes on to the gate and held his breath.
‘Right,’ said Tom.
‘On yer marks, get set, go!!’
Willie shot forth, half running, half stumbling.
He clenched his fists even tighter.
Bang!
He fell with a hard thud on to his knees.
Pushing himself up, he staggered on, feeling angry and desperate inside.
In his heart he wanted to run properly but his stupid legs were letting him down.
He heard Sam barking behind him.
‘Go it,’ shouted Tom.
‘Go on, William!’ and, before he realized what he was doing, he was running too.
Willie propped himself up against the gate gasping for breath while Sam sat nonchalantly by his feet, an easy winner.
‘Cheer up, boy,’ said Tom.
‘It ent the end of the world.’
But to Willie it was.
He was a sissie after all.
It was true what his classmates called him.
He was a Willie Weakling.
A huge lump of misery welled up into his throat and he stiffened his jaw so that he wouldn't disgrace himself by crying.
‘What's up then?’ asked Tom.
‘Miserable because Sam beat you, eh?’
Willie nodded and stared at the ground.
‘Can't expect to be good first time.
Takes practice.
Sam's had more'n you.
Anyways, you beat me, didn't you?’
Willie looked up and gave a brief smile.
‘Yeh, yeh, I did!’
‘You needn't look so pleased about it,’ said Tom in a disgruntled manner.
He swung the gate open.
‘Well, what do you think?’
Willie found himself standing in a large field.
On one side  were rows and rows of furrowed earth with tufts of green leaves sticking out of them and on the other, far side, stood a large cluster of trees dripping with apples and pears.
‘There's taters, cabbage, beans, peas, sprouts, turnips, all sorts!
We'll have to pick them all pretty sharpish.
You can help me when it's time.’
He closed the gate and they set off back down the dirt track towards the cottage.
They were leaning over the shelter putting more earth round the walls when Zach arrived.
‘You walk through Dobbs's field?’ asked Tom sharply.
‘Yes, and I shut both gates.’
Tom gave a grunt.
‘Can Will come out and play?’
‘He's out already, ent he?’
‘Yes, I s'pose he is,’ said Zach thoughtfully.
‘It's a figurative expression that I haven't really given a lot of thought to.’
‘Where'd you git all yer queer words from.?’
‘Are they queer?’
‘Well, they ent normal.’
‘So I've been told often and oft,’ and he gave a sigh.
‘I say, Will, what on earth have you done to your hair?’
Willie looked blankly back at him, and pushed his fingers through it.
His scalp didn't itch any more.
It tingled.
‘Wot's wrong wiv it?’
‘Nothing.
It's just a different colour, that's all.
I didn't realize you were so fair.’
It was true.
The lank look had disappeared and it did look lighter.
‘Go and play, William,’ said Tom.
‘Play?‘
‘Yes, play.’
‘Excuse me, Mr Oakley,’ interposed Zach.
‘Before we go, may I have a dekko inside the shelter.
I'd like to see what it looks like in daylight.’
‘Please yerself,’ answered Tom, but before he could warn Zach about the waterlogged floor he had already leapt down inside.
There followed a loud squelching sound and his feet sunk as if in quicksand.
‘Don't you never look before you leap?’
‘Occasionally.
Didn't this time though, did I?’
Tom turned at the sound of the back gate opening.
A rather disgruntled-looking George walked towards them, his hands stuffed into his pockets.
‘Mr Oakley,’ he said.
‘Me and the twins is goin' blackberryin', like, and takin' a picnic.’
He glanced quickly at Willie.
‘Would William like to come with us?
Mum ses, she's makin' enuff fer us all.’
‘I say,’ said Zach, poking his head out into the sunlight.
‘Can I come?
I'd bring some food too.’
George stared at him in horror.
He sighed inwardly.
These townees were queer folk, he thought.
They talked different.
Their ways were odd.
It was bad enough having to ask the one called William to come.
He was intrusion enough.
Drat his mum.
‘Please,’ pleaded Zach earnestly.
‘All right.’
What else could he say?
He felt irritated.
He knew the twins would be furious with him.
‘There's just one small problem,’ said Zach.
‘I'm afraid I'm a bit like Buster Keaton at the moment.’
George looked at him blankly.
He's a queer one, he thought, no doubt about that.
‘Yes.
Look at me.’
He pressed his arms to his side and leaned forward on a diagonal without falling over.
‘I say,’ he said, after having created no response.
‘You do know who Buster Keaton is, don't you?’
‘Are you goin' to stay down there all day?’ grunted Tom.
‘That's what I'm trying to tell you.
I'm stuck.
I need a pull.
’ They all grabbed hold of him and, after a lot of yelling  from Zach and one almighty heave, they yanked him out and fell backwards in the grass on top of a yelping Sammy.
‘Thank you,’ said Zach, struggling back to his feet.
He looked down at them.
His sandals were encased in a large quantity of glutinous mud.
He lifted one foot up and placed it heavily in front of the other, making a slow progression to the gate.
‘I say,’ he said, twisting his body round.
‘Where shall I meet you?’
‘Outside the shop,’ grunted George.
‘In an hour's time.’
‘Right-ho!’ and he slowly squelched his way through the gate and out of sight.
An hour later the twins and George were waiting on the corner with their baskets, bags and gas-masks.
Willie caught sight of them as he turned the corner.
He stopped for a moment and looked around for Zach.
He caught sight of a dark-haired boy in a bright red shirt and green shorts coming out of the shop.
He gave a sigh of relief and started walking again.
Zach had seen him and was waving frantically.
George and the twins turned to look at them.
Willie felt painfully self-conscious.
Zach ran down the road to meet him.
His sandals had been scraped clean but they still looked pretty dingy.
From the moment they joined the others outside the shop, it was obvious that the twins were sulking.
George mumbled incoherently to them.
‘This is Will,’ said Zach, introducing him to the two girls.
‘I've forgotten which one of you is Carrie and which one is Ginnie.’
‘I'm Carrie,’ said the one in the sky blue dress.
‘And I'm Ginnie,’ said the one in the lemon colour.
‘Hello,’ said Willie huskily.
This was followed by a long and tense silence.
George stood in the middle of the two pairs, feeling very awkward and uncomfortable.
He had guessed right.
The twins had been furious with him for inviting the two evacuees.
In their  opinion, from the little they had seen and heard, one of them spoke too little and the other too much.
It was rotten of George to ask them.
George cleared his throat.
‘Well,’ he said, ‘s'pose we'd best get started.’
They turned and headed down the lane towards Ivor's farm.
Willie held an empty bucket and a small bag, while Zach carried a basket and satchel.
They walked on behind the others.
‘I say,’ he said excitedly to Willie.
‘You should have seen Mrs Little's face when I walked in.
She threatened to plant potatoes in my feet.’
He nudged Willie and glanced at George and the twins walking ahead.
‘They're a bit stuffy, aren't they?’ he whispered.
‘Stuffy?’ said Willie.
‘Wot d'you mean?’
‘Unfriendly.‘
‘But they asked us to go on a picnic wiv 'em.’
‘M'm.
I suppose so.’
He nudged a sore spot on Willie's arm.
‘Anyway,’ he confided.
‘We'll have a bit of fun, eh?’
Willie was unsure about that.
He wished his tongue wasn't quite so dry and that the skin round his neck didn't feel so very tight.
They came to Ivor's farm.
Lucy and her friend Grace Bush were playing in front of the house.
They ran up to the gate and climbed up on to it.
Mrs Padfield was hanging out washing.
‘Hello!’ she said.
‘Where are you all off to?’
‘Blackberryin',’ said George.
Lucy caught sight of Willie.
Her eyes slowly expanded.
‘Ullo,’ she said shyly to him.
Willie shuffled with embarrassment and avoided her large gaze.
Stupid girls, he thought angrily to himself.
Stupid, stupid girls.
‘Fred and Harry are doin' a bit this afternoon.
They'se helpin' their Dad at the moment seein' as there's no school fer a bit.
Best not to go to your patch.
Be nothin' left,’ and she smiled and carried on with her work.
‘We'll drop some into you,’ said Carrie, ‘won't we, Ginnie?’
Ginnie nodded.
‘Have a good day then.’
Lucy watched them going down the lane.
She would dearly have loved to have joined them but they were all older.
They wouldn't want someone as little as her.
She felt a tug at her dress.
‘Come on,’ said Grace impatiently.
‘I want to play.’
The others veered round a corner and came to a large field.
The girls walked off in one direction to some hedges on the far side, leaving George with Willie and Zach.
‘Who's in the doghouse, then?’ asked Zach.
‘You or us?’
George gave a smile.
‘Come with me,’ he said.
‘I'll find you a good spot.’
He pointed to some bushes.
‘See them red berries?’
‘Rather,’ said Zach.
‘They look delumptious.’
‘De-what?’
‘Delumptious.
That's a mixture of delicious and scrumptious.‘
‘Well, anyways,’ continued George, undaunted by Zach's interruption, ‘if you eats any of them you'll die.
Them's poisonous.
Don't eat nothin' till you've shown me.
Look, there's a good 'un,’ he said, pointing to a hedgerow dripping with blackberries.
‘You pick there.
I'm off to find a patch of me own.’
An hour later, after scratching their arms and legs and staining their hands and mouths with juice, they sat down in the grass and passed a bottle of lemonade around.
The girls looked a little less sulky and stared at the two townees.
Willie was embarrassed.
Zach, however, enjoyed the attention.
‘How'd you do that?’ asked Carrie, pointing to Willie's leg.
He paled for an instant, thinking perhaps that his socks had slid down, but they hadn't.
She was referring to the graze on his knee.
‘I fell,’ he whispered.
‘Looks nasty,’ said Ginnie.
Willie glanced at her and looked hurriedly away.
When they had quenched their thirst a little, they returned to the bushes to pick more berries, staying a little closer to each other .
Slowly, they started to talk, except for Willie who only listened.
Mum had said that if he made himself invisible people would like him and he wanted that very much.
He learnt that Carrie liked reading books, climbing trees and exploring, that Ginnie liked naming and pressing wild flowers, knitting and sewing, and that they both liked swimming.
George was keen on fishing and his mother had, on three occasions, cooked fish that he had caught.
If they were tiddlers he always threw them back.
He liked swimming too and in the summer had built a raft, but it had disintegrated in the middle of the river while he and the twins had been sitting on it.
He also played cricket, and had already earned himself a bad reputation by smashing two windows in the village.
Zach said he liked acting, and reading adventure books and poetry.
He also liked swimming and cycling.
He said that he wrote stories, though he had to admit that he had never got further than the first two pages.
Willie, meanwhile, not only remained silent during these conversations, but picked his berries slowly so that they might forget that he was there, but he reckoned without Zach.
‘Will!’ he said, suddenly entering into his silence.
‘What do you like?’
He was just about to shrug off the question with ‘I dunno’ when he noticed that George and the twins were  looking at him for an answer.
He sucked a bit of juice from one of his fingers and tried to think of something to say.
He couldn't read or write.
He couldn't swim or ride a bicycle.
He had never made anything and he couldn't tell the difference between one flower and another.
He couldn't play cricket or any other game for that matter and he had never been fishing.
He began to panic.
The others would get bored with waiting and go off on their own without him.
He swallowed hard and looked up at their faces.
They didn't look bored.
He relaxed a little and then he remembered something.
‘I likes drawin'.’
‘I'm hopeless at it,’ said George.
‘All my people have tiny heads and huge arms and legs.’
‘Like you,’ said Carrie.
Ginnie laughed.
‘Get on with you,’ retorted George.
‘That's not true!’
‘Could you draw me?’ asked Zach.
‘I dunno.
I could have a go.’
‘I'm starvin',’ said George, interrupting the conversation.
‘Let's eat.’
They gathered together under a tree and spread the food out.
There were scones that had been spread with butter and jam, spam sandwiches, marmalade sandwiches and egg sandwiches.
After they had consumed these they each had a slab of apple-and-blackcurrant pie and some chocolate cake.
This was followed by more lemonade.
For Willie it was his first taste of chocolate cake, scones and fruit pie.
He couldn't manage half his share, but he was helped by the others, especially George, whose appetite was bottomless.
After they had eaten and sunbathed a little, they cleared everything away and moved to another hedge to pick more berries.
Their baskets were soon full and feeling tired they made their way home.
Willie felt as if his arms would surely come out of his  sockets with the weight.
His bucket and bag were overflowing.
He puffed and panted behind the others, gritting his teeth with the effort of trying to keep up with them.
After George had left his basket at home he gave Willie a hand.
He felt so ashamed of his weakness, but George didn't ridicule him at all.
He seemed pleased to help.
They walked down under the archway of trees to the Littles' cottage, stood outside the gate chatting to Zach and carried on down the lane.
As they came to the rectory George stopped.
‘Look!’ he said, gazing up through the trees.
‘Look!
There's a swallow.’
Willie screwed up his eyes and peered upwards.
All he could see was a bird.
A swallow to him was something you did when you ate food or you did to stop yourself from crying.
He couldn't see how that could be in the sky.
They opened the gate into Dobbs' field.
George put down the bucket and strode over to her to give her a pat.
Willie hovered behind him.
He took a few steps towards her and raised his hand to touch her neck, but she gave a little shake of her head and that set him stumbling backwards.
He'd wait till he was with Mister Tom again.
George climbed over the gate while Willie opened and shut it neatly behind him.
They walked through the garden to the back door when a voice called to them from behind.
It was Tom.
He was leaning out of the shelter.
‘Afternoon, Mr Oakley,’ said George.
‘Afternoon, George.’
They came over to where he stood and peered inside.
The earthen floor was covered with planks and on either side were two rough bunk beds.
A tin with one side cut out of it hung from a hook at the back.
Fixed inside was a candle.
Underneath it stood an orange box on top of which were two flower pots.
One was placed like a lid on the other and had a hole in the base.
Inside this was another candle.
Above their heads over the entrance was a rolled piece of  dark canvas.
A potted plant hung in a near-by corner.
‘Cor!’ gasped Willie.
‘Ain't it fine!’
‘Best to be comfortable,’ said Tom, and he gave a short cough to hide his pleasure.
‘Proper job,’ agreed George.
They took turns to walk around inside and sit on the bunks and then George left to go home for tea.
Willie spent the evening with Tom, washing and bottling the blackberries and eating some of them for supper.
He sank into an even deeper sleep that night with the knowledge that he, Willie Beech, had survived a whole day with four other people of his own age and he had made jam.
School
Willie sat down to breakfast in a clean grey shirt and jersey, pressed grey shorts and polished boots.
He stared out at the graveyard.
It was a dull day.
‘Eat up, boy.
Soon be time to go to school,’ said Tom, placing a paper bag on the table.
Inside were two apples and a thick egg sandwich.
‘You can come back here for dinner if you wants, or have it with the others.
Best take yer cap and mackintosh.
Looks like rain.’
He picked up Willie's label from the top of the bookcase and handed it to him.
They walked together through Dobbs's field and Tom stood by the gate and let him walk on his own up the lane.
Zach was sitting on the Littles' dilapidated gate waiting for him.
Willie met him and turned to look at Tom.
They waved to each other and Sammy immediately shot forwards.
‘Samuel,’ said Tom firmly.
‘Here!’
He stopped, glanced at his master and then bounded back to him.
Tom picked him up and watched the two boys disappear round the corner.
George and the twins were standing in a crowd outside the village hall.
Two old cars drew up with eight children and two anxious-looking mothers inside.
‘I say,’ said Zach.
‘It's awfully crowded, isn't it?’
‘It ent usually like this,’ said Carrie.
‘They've had to get an extra teacher,’ added her sister.
‘And,’ said George, 'we have to share the school with some Catholics.
We're havin' it in turns.
Look!’ and he  pointed in the direction of two nuns surrounded by a horde of children.
‘If it stays like this we ent goin' to have much school at all,’ and he grinned with pleasure.
The five of them went into the hall together.
The black-out curtains which were rolled neatly above the windows stood out starkly against the light green walls and wooden skirting boards.
Mr Bush was seating the small children cross-legged on the polished wooden floor.
The older children were to sit in the back half of the hall which was filled with rows of chairs.
At the front end was a small raised platform with curtains on either side.
‘I say,’ said Zach excitedly.
‘There's a stage!!’
‘Quickly,’ said George, tugging at one of Zach's well-darned sleeves, ‘let's grab them chairs afore the big 'uns get them.’
They ran towards them, Willie following as fast as he could, climbing over several small children on the way.
Everyone else had grabbed seats at the back and, when it was too late, George suddenly realized why the particular seats they had chosen had been left empty.
They were sitting in the front line of chairs.
The rest of the children were seated on the ground so that all five of them were now very exposed.
‘Drat it,’ cursed George.
‘I got some humbugs I was goin' to slip in me mouth.’
Mr Bush and Mrs Hartridge were talking to an elderly lady.
‘That's Mrs Black,’ whispered Ginnie.
‘She must be the extra teacher.’
Mr Bush dealt with the older children first and placed a few evacuees with them at the back.
It was very noisy.
There was a lot of shouting and shuffling amongst the newcomers, most of whom were feeling bored and restless and had spent too long in the country already.
Mr Bush announced the times when the older ones were next needed and dismissed them.
George, Carrie and Ginnie were to be in Mrs Hartridge's class again.
She was taking the eight-to eleven-year-olds.
The twins had had their tenth birthday in the holidays and George was eleven.
Mrs Black was to have all the local children and non-Catholic evacuees from five years old to eight.
Willie watched Mrs Hartridge approach him and Zach.
Zach told her his age, which was nine, and spelt out his name, apologizing for it at the same time.
She smiled.
Willie handed her his label and said nothing.
Her long flaxen hair was coiled up in a thick plait at the top of her head.
Willie gazed with pleasure at her soft, pink-cheeked face and then suddenly his heart fell.
She leaned over to Zach and said, ‘Now, Zacharias.’
‘You can call me Zach if it's too much of a mouthful.’
‘I think I can manage, thank you.
Now tell me, what were you doing at your last school?
You can read and write, can't you?’
At this juncture, Willie's ears filled up.
Zach's chattering was only a faint rumbling echo in the distance.
He felt her hand on his shoulder.
‘Now, William,’ she said.
‘How about you?
Can you read and write?’
He remained silent.
He didn't dare look at the others.
What would they think of him?
‘What did you say, William?’
‘No,’ he answered, and he picked at one of the nails on his fingers and stared at the floorboards wishing he could disappear into them.
‘Oh, I'm sorry about that, William.
I would have liked you in my class.
You'll have to go and sit with Mrs Black's class,’ and she pointed to the little ones seated on the floor.
Willie looked up in anguish and quickly down again.
The burning inside his ears seemed to spread into his jaw.
He rose as if in a daze, found a space on the floor and sat down.
He clasped his hands tightly together and bowed  his head.
He felt utterly humiliated.
Mrs Hartridge's class were dismissed.
They were to have school in the afternoons and wouldn't be starting until Friday.
Willie was left with Mrs Black and she and the remaining children filed over to the school.
There were two girls even older than him who also couldn't read, but it didn't make him feel any better.
One of them ignored everyone including Mrs Black and just filed her nails and stared out of the window.
Tom was weeding the graveyard when Willie returned.
He watched his dejected figure walk past him into the cottage and, after allowing a few minutes to elapse, followed him in and discovered him sitting at the table in the living room, his bag of apples and sandwich lying untouched.
‘I could just do with a cuppa,’ he said brightly.
‘You too, William?’
Willie gave a nod.
He pushed a mug of tea towards him.
‘How was it then?‘
Willie scraped the toes of his boots together.
‘Bad, was it?’
Willie nodded.
‘Best tell me then.’
He raised his head.
It was difficult to look at Tom without his lips trembling.
‘I'm with the babies.’
‘Oh, and whose class is Zacharias in then?’
‘Mrs Hartridge's.’
‘Why ent you?
You're near enuff the same age, ent you?’
‘Yeh, but he can read.’
He paused.
‘And write.’
‘And the ones that can't are with Mrs Black, that it?’
‘Yeh.’
‘I see.’
Tom stood up and looked out at the freshly-weeded graveyard.
‘Mrs Black'll teach you to read.
Did you learn anythin' today?‘
‘Gas drill,’ he mumbled.
‘What's that?’
‘Gas drill,’ he repeated, only louder.
‘We did gas-mask drill.’
He blew the top of his tea and sipped it.
‘There ain't even enuff pencils.’
Tom had seen some of the roughnecks that gentle old Mrs Black would have to deal with.
Most of her time, he reckoned, would be taken up trying to keep discipline.
‘We'll begin this evenin',’ he said sharply.
‘That do?’
‘Wot?’
‘Learnin' to read and write.
I'll teach you to write yer own name fer a beginnin'.’
Willie's eyes stung as the ground moved in a gentle haze beneath him.
He beamed.
‘Aw, mister,’ was all he could manage to say.
Tom was surprised to find a lump in his own throat.
‘Go and have a run with Sammy,’ he growled huskily.
‘I'll get supper.’
Sammy, who had sensed Willie's misery and had until now remained motionless, began to bark and run after his tail.
‘Go on with you, boy,’ said Tom.
Willie rose and clattered down the hallway.
He ran through the gate, down the lane and across to the dirt track faster and faster, leaping and jumping.
He wanted to yell for joy but when he tried he couldn't get any sound out.
He felt annoyed at first but then he realized that he was running far better than he had been the previous day and that he wasn't even trying.
It takes time and practice, that's what Mister Tom had said.
After supper had been cleared Tom put a piece of paper and a pencil in front of him.
On the paper were several straight lines and in between each pair was a series of dots.
‘Now, William,’ said Tom.
‘You jest join up the dots from the top downwards and when you done that, yous'll have written yer name.
Now jest takes yer own time.’
Willie held the pencil nervously and then pressed it hard onto the paper.
The lead snapped.
Tom sharpened it again.
‘Easy now,’ he said, handing him back the pencil.
‘You got plenty of time.’
Willie stared frantically at the paper.
‘I can't,’ he said, ‘I can't.’
Tom looked sharply at him.
Willie was frightened.
His face had turned quite pale and beads of perspiration had broken out across his forehead.
‘I won't beat you, if that's what's bothering you.
Come on, let's have a go,’ he added reassuringly.
‘I'll sit beside you and tell you how yer doin'.’
Willie placed the lead on to the paper and slowly followed the dots down and up, down and up, making the letter W.
He sat back and looked at it.
‘It's bad, ain't it?
Ain't it, Mister Tom?’
Tom peered at it.
He was surprised.
‘No,’ he said with honesty.
‘No, it ent,’ and Willie knew by the certainty in his voice that he was telling the truth.
‘Ain't it?’ he queried.
‘No,'he repeated.
‘It certainly ent.
You carry on.
You'se doin' fine.’
Willie returned to the dots and apart from the occasional wobble he wrote ‘William’ in a remarkably smooth hand.
‘That's good,’ said Tom.
‘Is it?’
‘Do it again.’
Willie carried on following the dots between the lines and then stopped.
‘Mister Tom,’ he said.
‘I can look at my name and draw it.
Is writin' like drawin'?’
‘I don't think so.
Show me what you mean.’
Willie found a clean unlined space, looked at what he'd done, drew two straight lines and wrote William in between them.
‘Those lines are almost straight,’ gasped Tom.
‘Where you learn to do that?’
‘Nowhere,’ said Willie.
‘I jest looked at 'em and done it.’
Tom was speechless for a moment.
When he had recovered, he picked up a pencil and ruler, drew two straight lines, wrote ‘Beech' in between them and handed the pencil to Willie.
Willie drew the two lines again and, while carefully scrutinizing the new word, copied it.
‘That's very good,’ remarked Tom.
‘Is it?’
‘Don't you know?’
He shook his head.
‘You've jest written yer name, boy.’
‘Have I?’ and he stared down at the letters.
He couldn't understand why those shapes were his name.
Tom took his hand and made him point to the letters, going from left to right, sounding out each one.
Willie joined in the second time round.
‘Good,’ said Tom.
He was about to suggest that he had a break when Willie pointed to the letters and sounded them out on his own.
He became stuck at the double ee sound.
‘Wot was that one agin, Mister Tom?’
‘ee.’
‘B…ee….’
‘Wot's that?’
‘ch.’
He started again and succeeded in sounding all the letters through.
‘You picked that up very quick,’ said Tom.
‘Very quick.’
‘It's copyin', though, ain't it?’
‘Yes, I suppose so.’
‘Mister Tom,’ said Willie after some thought, ‘ain't that bad?‘
‘Copyin'?’
‘Yeh.’
‘Not when yer learnin',’ said Tom, ‘only if yer bein' tested, like.’
‘Oh,’ he said, ‘I thought it were bad.’
There was a knock on the front door.
Sam started barking.
‘Now who can that be?’ said Tom.
‘Mister Tom?’ said Willie.
‘Does that mean that, if I copy, I won't go to hell?’
‘Hell!!’ said Tom in amazement as he strode out of the room.
‘Don't be daft, boy.
Whatever put such a thought in yer head.’
Willie felt enormously relieved and returned to his writing.
He was interrupted by voices in the hallway.
He turned, and George and the twins walked in.
‘Before you ses anythin',’ said Carrie as Willie stood up, crimson, ‘we've jest come to tell you that we're miserable about you not being in our class and that we still wants you to come round with us like.’
‘Yes,’ interjected Ginnie.
‘And,’ said George, ‘yer not to feel bad about not bein' able to read and that.
Anyway, it ent all that good when you can.
You jest gits given more lessons.’
Carrie, at this juncture, gave him a poke.
‘What we wanted to tell you,’ she continued, ‘was that we'se goin' up the woods on Saturdee and we was wonderin' if you'd come with us like.’
Willie opened his mouth to speak but was interrupted by another loud knock.
Tom was hardly out into the hallway when in burst Zach.
‘Will,’ he said breathlessly and stopped in midstream.
‘I say, what's going on here?
Is this a party?’
Tom closed the door and was about speak when a further  rally of knocks was hammered on it and Charlie Ruddles, the warden, strode angrily in.
‘The front door wuz open, Mr Oakley, and I saw a definite chink of light from where I wuz situated.’
‘Oh, and where would that be, Mr Ruddles?’ asked Tom, a little perturbed at so many dramatic entrances in one evening.
‘Would that be from lying on the hall floor with yer nose under the door?’
The twins at this point turned hurriedly away and bit their lips.
Charlie stood back aghast.
‘I won't go into the legalities, Mr Oakley.
There were a definite chink.
Don't you know there's a war on!’ and with that he slammed the door and everyone except for Willie, who was feeling somewhat stunned, erupted into gales of laughter.
Birthday Boy
Willie leapt out of bed.
It was the beginning of his sixth day in Little Weirwold.
He pulled back the blankets, peeled back the cotton and rubber sheets and struggled down the ladder with them in his arms.
Sammy was yapping and jumping up and down, waiting for him at the bottom.
‘Mornin',’ said Tom, appearing at the back door.
‘Happy Birthday!’
He expected Willie to ask if there had been any post but there was no response.
Willie dressed and helped Tom wash his sheets and pyjama trousers.
They had decided, the previous evening, after Cain and Abel and How the Camel Got his Hump , that every day Willie would get up a little earlier than usual to practise writing and reading before leaving for school.
When he had finished his chores he sat down at the table and copied out ‘I am William Beech’ over and over again until Tom, after much effort, finally persuaded him to go for a run and exercise Sammy.
He had only just disappeared down the graveyard path and out of sight when the postman arrived at the back gate.
‘A birthdee boy, is it?’ said young Matthew Parfitt.
‘Anything from London?’ asked Tom.
Matthew shook his head.
‘'Fraid not.
I got parcels though and cards and this.’
It was a basket with fresh eggs, a newly-baked loaf of bread, a pat of butter and some rashers of bacon inside.
‘Tis a birthdee breakfast from the Padfields.’
Tom took the cards and parcels, together with the basket, indoors.
It was a shame that there was nothing from the  boy's mother, but then it was only Thursday and perhaps since war had been declared the post was being delayed.
He hurried into the front room.
Willie returned flushed and breathless, followed by Sammy.
He flung open the door and was about to say something when he caught sight of the table.
On top of a red-and-white checkered tablecloth were two of the best plates, cups and saucers.
In the centre stood a jam jar with flowers in it and surrounding Willie's place were parcels and envelopes.
‘Happy birthdee,’ said Tom.
‘Are they fer me?’ he asked in astonishment.
‘Tis where you usually sit, ent it?
Go on, open them.
I'll read out who they're from.’
Willie picked up a soft brown-paper package and with trembling fingers slowly untied the string.
Inside lay a green woollen balaclava, a green sleeveless pullover and a pair of navy blue corduroy shorts.
‘Like to try them on?’ said Tom.
Willie climbed out of his thin grey ones and stepped into the navy pair.
Tom fixed the braces on to them.
The shorts were a little loose round the waist.
‘Soon fill out, though,’ said Tom.
He put the pullover on over Willie's shirt.
‘Stand back and let's have a look at you.‘
The top was also a little long, but not so that it looked foolish.
The shorts hung comfortably down to the base of his knees.
He beamed.
‘Feel good, do they?’
‘Yeh.
They got pockets too,’ he said, plunging his hands deep into them.
He glanced at the balaclava.
‘Wot's that?’
‘Tis a balaclava.
Keeps yer head and ears warm when the wind's nippy.’
‘Can I put it on now?’
‘If you want.’
‘Who give it me?’ he asked as he pulled it over his head.
‘I did, but Mrs Fletcher made it.’
‘Ta,’ said Willie gratefully and he touched the soft wool of the pullover.
‘Ent you goin' to open the rest?’
The next parcel contained some Chiliprufe underwear from May Thorne, who Willie had never even met.
Emilia, her sister, had given him an illustrated copy of The Wind in the Willows .
Inside she had written ‘To William on his ninth birthday.
For Mr Oakley to read to you until you can read it yourself.’
Willie held it tightly to his chest.
‘Is it fer me to keep?’
Tom nodded.
His own book.
His very own book.
The only other book he owned was the Bible and that was old and dusty and had previously belonged to someone else.
This book was new.
The pages were crisp and white and were filled with the most marvellous pictures of animals wearing clothes.
He placed the book carefully to one side and continued to open the other parcels.
There was a white china egg-cup with a gold rim from Connie and Walter Bird,.
a boy's comic annual with lots of pictures and games in it from Doctor and Nancy Little, and a game of snap from the vicar and his wife.
In addition to the parcels were seven birthday cards.
Willie was completely overcome.
He sat down and stared at the gifts quite speechless.
Tom, meanwhile, took a large parcel out of the cupboard and placed it in front of him.
‘That's me present from me to you.’
‘But you give me this,’ he said, indicating his pullover, ‘and these shorts.’
‘This is something different like.’
Willie unwrapped the parcel and gave a start.
There, before his eyes, lay one large and one small sketch pad.
Pages and pages of untouched paper.
There were two paintbrushes and three pots of paint.
One brush was a medium-sized one, the other was thin and delicate.
The paints were red, yellow and blue.
‘If you mix them,’ said Tom, ‘you can also git orange, green and brown.’
Wrapped up in tissue paper were a pencil, a rubber and a sharpener.
Something was carved at the end of the pencil.
It looked familiar.
He traced it slowly with his finger.
‘William Beech’.
He looked lovingly at the paints and brushes and swallowed a pain that had risen at the back of his throat.
‘I take it you like them,’ murmured Tom.
‘I chose them meself, like.’
He glanced out at the window at the oak tree where Rachel and his son were buried.
She used to hug and kiss him when he gave her presents.
She loved painting, wild flowers and pretty lace, sweet jams, freshly brewed beer.
Since her death he had never wanted to touch anything that might remind him of her.
Trust a strange boy to soften him up.
The odd thing was that, after he had entered the paint shop, he had felt as if a heavy wave of sadness had suddenly been lifted from out of him.
Memories of her didn't seem as painful as he had imagined.
‘Thanks, Mister Tom,’ said Willie huskily.
‘I'll look after them real proper.’
After a birthday egg-and-bacon fry up, Willie ran off to school.
Tom met him outside at lunchtime as there were no classes for him in the afternoon.
They visited the people who had given him presents so that he could thank them personally.
It would save the agony of trying to write letters and Tom thought it would be a good opportunity for Willie to meet them.
As for Tom, everyone was very surprised to see him, for he rarely visited anyone.
They strolled back home down the tunnelled lane and called in at the Littles' cottage and the Vicarage on the way.
Willie had looked around for the twins and George, but they were nowhere to be seen.
Even at the Littles there was no sight of Zach.
P'raps they've gone blackberryin', he thought and for a fleeting moment he wished that he was with them.
‘How about stayin' outside this afternoon?’ suggested Tom suddenly.
‘It's a fine day.’
His words were immediately contradicted by the appearance of a dark shadow across the sky.
‘Drat them blimmin' clouds,’ he muttered.
Sam scampered on ahead of them and waited at Dobbs' field.
Willie couldn't wait to begin drawing.
He'd start with the gnarled old oak tree in the graveyard.
That would be fine.
But before they had reached the back gate a few drops of rain had already plopped warningly on their heads.
‘I'll have to draw inside,’ said Willie to himself.
Tom grunted and then suddenly hit on an idea.
‘How about the church?’ he exclaimed.
‘Of course, you could draw in there.’
‘Yeh,’ agreed Willie.
‘Yeh, I could.’
He wrapped his mackintosh carefully round the small sketch-pad and fled down the pathway to the church, arriving in the nick of time, for as he closed the heavy arched door behind him, a slow drizzle of rain swept across the village and surrounding fields.
He stood quite still for a moment.
It felt odd to be alone in a church.
He would have felt nervous if it hadn't been raining.
The sound it made rustling outside in the trees made him feel comfortable and protected.
He stared up at the windows and then caught sight of the pulpit.
Slinging his mac over the back of a pew he sat down and rested his feet on the one in front.
He placed the sketch-pad on his knees, flicked open the first page and began to draw.
He didn't hear the rain suddenly stop.
He was conscious only of the pulpit and his sketch-pad.
The rest of the church had ceased to exist for him.
Neither did he hear Zach repeatedly calling him from outside or the sound of his footsteps running up the tiny pathway to the back door.
The door opened slowly and Zach peeped in.
He had never seen the interior of a church before.
He slipped quietly in and glanced up at the windows and walls until his attention was drawn to a mop of fair hair sticking out from  behind one of the back pews.
He was just about to speak when he became aware that Willie was absorbed in some task.
He took a few paces forward and leaned over Willie's small thin shoulders.
His shadow fell across the pad.
Willie jumped and turned round hurriedly placing his arm over the picture, but it was too late.
Zach had already seen it.
‘I say,’ he gasped, full of admiration, ‘that's magnificent.’
Willie shyly flapped the cover of the pad over the drawing.
‘You must show the…’ but he checked himself.
‘Didn't you hear me call you.
I practically tore my throat out yelling for you.’
Willie shook his head.
‘Er…’ said Zach thoughtfully, feeling a little stumped for words, ‘Er, Mr Oakley says that he'd like to er…converse with you.
Er…talk about the time of day.
That sort of thing.
He's waiting for you now.’
‘Is he?’ said Willie in surprise and he picked up his mackintosh.
‘Is it still rainin'?’
‘It finished an age ago,’ groaned Zach.
‘Hurry up or the…’ he stopped.
‘er…or…it might start again.’
They stepped outside.
Pink clouds with white tipped edges were gliding across the sky.
Willie stopped and gazed up at them.
‘Come on!’ said Zach impatiently.
They walked down the path towards the front door.
Blacks are up early, thought Willie, as he approached the cottage.
He heard Sammy give an excited bark from the front room and then it immediately sounded muffled.
Odd, thought Willie, but he shrugged it off and hung his mackintosh on his peg.
‘Oh, do hurry,’ said Zach who was standing waiting at the door.
Willie looked at him.
‘Wot you waitin' for?’ he asked.
‘You go in first,’ and with that Zach pushed open the  door and immediately the whole room erupted into:
‘Happy Birthday to you,
Happy Birthday to you,
Happy Birthday, dear William,
Happy Birthday to you.’
The twins, George, their mothers, Lucy and her mother and Tom were all standing in the front room singing, while Sammy sat in the middle and howled.
A large banner with ‘Happy Birthday William’ on it hung above and across the range.
On the table stood two jellies, one red and one green.
There was a plate of chocolate wafers, a plate of potted meat and fishpaste sandwiches and a plate of fairy cakes.
In the centre of the table was an iced cake with nine lighted candles on it.
So that was why the blacks were up, thought Willie.
Zach was the first to break the ensuing silence.
‘Was it a surprise?’ he burst out.
‘Was it a real surprise?
Did you guess?’
It was obvious from Willie's astounded expression that he had had no idea at all.
So this was what a birthday party was like.
He had heard people at school talking about them.
He looked towards Tom for help.
‘You gotta blow the candles out, boy.’
‘And if you manages to blow them all out at once you can make a wish,’ said Carrie.
Willie leaned over, took a deep breath and blew.
Six candles went out the first time, the remaining three the second time.
Everyone applauded.
‘You can still have a wish,’ said Zach, ‘when you cut the cake, only you mustn't talk till after you've made it and it must remain a secret else it won't come true and….’
‘We'll be ‘ere till doomsday if you go bletherin' on,’ said Tom.
Willie held the knife above the cake, screwed up his face till he had thought of a wish and then plunged the knife into the icing.
Mrs Fletcher, Roe Padfield and Mrs Thatcher sat on the low cupboard by the door and Tom pulled the table out so that everyone could squeeze round on three chairs, a stool and the arm of the armchair.
They had just sat down when Zach suddenly let out a cry.
‘I nearly forgot.
You haven't seen Will's picture.’
Willie was still holding his sketch-pad tightly under his arm.
His face turned pink.
‘You drawn a picture?’ asked Tom.
‘I'll say.’
‘You never stop saying,’ said Tom abruptly.
‘Can we see it?’ said Carrie.
‘Please,’ added Ginnie.
He lifted the cover up shyly.
George came and stood by his side and gave a low whistle.
‘I told you, didn't I?’ said Zach.
Tom leaned over their heads and peered down.
It was a copy of the carved eagle on the pulpit.
Its strong stubborn wings were swept back in a magnificent curve.
Around it Willie had added rain so that it appeared to be flying against a great wind.
‘That's a fine hand you have there, William,’ said Tom quietly.
‘A fine hand.’
Willie blushed crimson.
‘When I'm a famous author will you do my illustrations?’ said Zach.
‘I thought you was goin' to be a famous pilot this mornin',’ retorted George.
‘Well,’ said Zach, a bit put out, ‘I can write about my daredevil air exploits, can't I?’
They all settled down to eating while Willie, amidst all the chatter and laughter, found himself an object of praise.
After tea, there were more presents.
A jigsaw from the  twins, coloured pencils from Zach, sweets from George and some small cakes from Lucy.
‘She baked them herself,’ said her mother.
Lucy gazed up at him.
She was bursting with adoration.
Willie didn't know how to treat her.
The cakes were lovely, though.
‘Ta,’ he said awkwardly, and she gave him one of her voluminous smiles.
After playing several party games, everyone finally returned home.
Tom and Willie stood outside and watched them leaving.
They turned back into the sitting room and closed the door.
‘Mister Tom,’ said Willie touching his sleeve.
‘It's the best…it's the best,’ but he never finished.
The excitement and food simply welled up inside him and he gave a short gasp and vomited all over the carpet.
The Case
During the next seven weeks the leaves floated and twirled from the trees, and a light hoar frost covered the fields in the early mornings.
Matthew Parfitt, who was in the reserves, had been called up and May Thorne, to the surprise of everyone, volunteered to deliver the post.
She unearthed an ancient bicycle from some forgotten shed corner and proceeded to ride it from cottage to cottage, her sackful of letters stuffed compactly into a basket in the front.
‘I thought that they were extinct,’ Zach had said on first seeing her riding it.
‘Looks like a fossil on wheels.
I am, of course, referring to the bicycle frame and not Miss May,’ he added.
Michael Fletcher, who had signed up in September, had, at last, after much impatient waiting, also been called up.
He and John Barnes travelled into Weirwold together to catch the train.
Mrs Miller had been rushed into hospital with concussion after having walked into a tree in the pitch dark.
When news of the event reached the graveyard cottage Willie had overheard Tom muttering something to the effect that it was a wonder the tree didn't have to be taken too.
Meanwhile, the Government had asked for a money contribution from the parents of evacuees.
Since many parents were miserable at being separated from their offspring and it would be a struggle for some to pay money for their misery, they finally decided to have them home again.
Half of the evacuees in Little Weirwold and the  surrounding area had already left.
This meant that the classrooms were not so crowded, but there was still a shortage of paper and pencils.
Willie longed desperately to be in Mrs Hartridge's class even though he had since grown quite fond of Mrs Black.
Every day before and after school he faithfully practised reading and writing and occasionally when Emilia Thorne returned from the library she would pop round, when Tom was out on Fire Duty, and sit with him.
She soon discovered that he had a remarkable aptitude for learning words, especially if he liked them.
She started to teach him rhymes and poems and then she would write them down on scraps of paper so that he could follow the letters through when he was on his own.
By now Tom had related the whole of Genesis to him and had read the Just So Stories twice.
He and Willie were now in the middle of Exodus and had just begun Grimm's Fairy Tales .
Willie and Zach managed to see each other every day as well as weekends and odd evenings and they, the twins and George would walk and play in the fields together.
One dull afternoon, on the last day of October, he and Willie were kneeling on the window ledge in the sitting room of the Littles' cottage.
A slow icy drizzle of rain splattered and ran in tiny rivulets down the window.
Zach squinted through the glass and wiped his breath away from the pane.
‘Where is he?’ he moaned.
‘He's taking an age.’
He turned despondently from the window.
‘It'll soon be dark and then we won't be able to see him coming at all.’
He was cut short by a loud knocking at the front door.
‘Yippee!
Wizzo!’ yelled Zach, leaping up and running out of the kitchen, ‘Calloo, calloo, calloo, callay.’
He switched the hall light off, stumbled to the front door and flung it open.
His face fell.
It was George and the twins.
‘There's a welcome,’ said Carrie.
‘It ent arrived, has it?’ said George as they stepped into the dark hall.
Zach slammed the door behind them in a disgruntled manner and turned the light on.
‘We can only stay for an hour,’ said Ginnie.
Mrs Little leaned against the kitchen doorway, a freshly-lit cigarette in her hand.
‘You'll have to take them upstairs, Zach.
First Aid begins in fifteen minutes.’
Zach groaned.
‘Unless, of course, you want to volunteer to be a body.’
‘No, thanks,’ said Zach hurriedly.
‘Quick, let's go.’
The five of them scrambled up the narrow carpeted stairway.
‘And don't forget to put up the blacks,’ yelled Mrs Little after them.
‘I don't want Charlie Ruddles wagging his finger at me again.’
‘I won't,’ answered Zach.
Zach's room seemed more like a study than a bedroom.
One wall was filled to overflowing with medical books and against the back window overlooking the Littles' straggled but unsuspectingly organized garden stood a large rolled-top desk and chair.
Along the wall opposite the bookcase was a bed and under the front window which looked out over the tiny arched lane and fields, was a small table with a photograph of a young dark-haired woman and a slightly older man with large penetrating eyes and a broad grin.
They had an arm around each other.
On the floor besides Zach's bed was a small pile of books.
The twins perched themselves on the bed, Zach sat on the chair by the desk and George and Willie sat cross-legged with their backs leaning against the bookcase.
Carrie picked up some of the books.
‘To Save His Chum ,’ she read aloud, ‘Stalky and Co, The Golden Treasury of Verse, Great Actors I have Known , what an odd mixture!‘
‘Not at all,’ exclaimed Zach.
‘Well, I think it's odd.’
There was another loud knocking from downstairs.
Zach leapt from his chair.
‘It's Mister Tom,’ said Willie suddenly, and he flushed at having betrayed his excitement so openly.
Zach gave out a yell, threw the bedroom door open and almost flung himself down the stairs.
The others clattered on behind him.
Tom was standing in the hallway, his cap and overcoat covered in a thin layer of drizzle.
‘I've tried to keep it dry,’ he said, indicating a large battered suitcase by his feet.
‘Best to wipe it, though.’
He looked at Willie.
‘S'pose you'll be wantin' to stay fer a bit, eh?’
‘Yeh, can I?’
‘I'll collect you in thirty minutes.
Mind you come immediate, like.’
Zach and George dragged the case up to the bedroom and laid it on one side.
It was a brown leather case with two straps that buckled upon either side of the handle.
The leather was soft and faded with age.
Both sides of it were covered in labels of all colours and shapes with the names of towns and countries on them.
Two thick pieces of cord were tied horizontally and vertically around it.
‘Has you bin to all them countries?’ asked George.
‘My parents mostly.
They used this when they were one-night-standing and eventually they gave it to me.’
‘One-night-standin'?’ repeated Willie.
‘Yes.
There are some companies that perform in a different venue every night.’
‘Venyew?
What's that?’
‘A place.
A place where a show is going to be performed.
Usually the show is already booked in advance.
Anyway,’ continued Zach,'my parents kept their ordinary clothes in one suitcase and their costumes and make-up in another.’
‘Does your father wear make-up?’ asked George.
‘Sometimes,’ answered Zach, still struggling with the cords.
‘Gosh, they certainly did a good job on this.’
‘Do you mean like a lady?’ said Willie.
Carrie burst out laughing.
‘Here,’ said Ginnie, ‘I'll help you,’and she knelt by Zach who was by now hot with frustration.
He leaned back on his heels and looked at Willie.
‘Haven't you ever seen a show?’
Willie shook his head.
‘Me Mum ses that theatres and pitcher houses are dens of sin.’
‘Rot,’ exclaimed Zach.
‘I was practically born in the theatre.
I was breast-fed in theatre dressing-rooms.’
Willie blushed.
‘That's swearing,’ he said.
‘I learnt to walk and talk in theatres,’ said Zach.
‘And I'm not sinful, am l?’
‘You're just an angel, ent you,’ said Carrie, her hands clasped.
‘And you're cracked,’ said Zach.
‘Come on, let's open this beastly case.’
At last the stiff damp straps were unbuckled and the two large clips unfastened.
Zach threw back the lid in triumph and the twins and George gathered round to look at the contents.
Willie hesitated.
‘Come on, Will,’ said Zach, seeing him hang back.
‘I want to show off to everyone.’
‘When do you stop?’ remarked Carrie.
Zach gave her a withering glance but it was so overdramatic she and the others burst out laughing.
He gave up and looked inside the case.
An envelope with Zach written on it in bold lettering was stuck to the inside of the lid.
He tore it off and ripped open the envelope.
‘It's from Mummy and Daddy,’ he yelled.
‘Surprise, surprise,’ said George.
‘Come on.
We've to go  home soon.
You can read that later.’
‘Oh, all right,’ said Zach, stuffing it into his pocket.
The case was packed very tightly.
He peeled off a large piece of newspaper from the top and unwrapped five small parcels, inside which lay several home-baked cakes.
‘I ent never seen cakes like that afore,’ said George.
‘My grandmother taught my mother to make these when she was a girl.’
Underneath were two jars of pickled herrings and three bars of chocolate.
‘Wizzo!’ he yelled, pulling out an assortment of much-loved and battered objects.
‘Books!’
‘What you want with those?’ said George.
‘Thought you'd have enuff of that at school.’
Carrie began to flick through them.
Willie tapped Zach's shoulder but he had already read his mind and he handed him a couple.
The words were laid out in a strange manner.
‘It's all talkin',’ said Carrie.
‘There ent no description.’
‘There's some in the dialogue,’ explained Zach.
‘The words have to set the atmosphere, you see.
They're plays.’
‘How d'you play wiv 'em?’ asked Willie, his curiosity aroused.
‘You are an ass, Will.
They're theatre plays.
Scripts,’ and he pointed to the lines.
‘See here, that's that character's lines and that's the other person answering.
Actors learn them off by heart and then they rehearse them masses and masses of times until it sounds as if they've just thought of them.’
George held up one thick battered tome.
‘The Complete Works of William Shakespeare .
Ugh!’ and he dropped it in disgust.
‘How dare you!’ cried Zach, picking it up hastily.
He looked at Willie, sensing that he wouldn't have heard of him.
‘William Shakespeare was one of our greatest play-wrights.
A playwright is a man who writes plays like the one  in your hand, only he wrote plays nearly four hundred years ago and people still go and see them being performed.’
‘William Shakey,’ said Willie quietly to himself.
‘Shakespeare!’ hooted Carrie.
‘William Shakespeare,’ he repeated, ‘William.’
So he had the first name of somebody famous.
The next article that Zach dragged out was a stiff black circular object.
He shook it and in one second it became a shiny top hat.
He placed it on his thick wiry hair and cocked it slightly to one.side.
Everyone was terribly impressed.
He then pulled out a small black suit.
The jacket of the suit curved in at the waist and at the back were two buttons above a pair of tails.
There was a stiff white object called a dicky.
I t was a collar and bow tie and the front of a shirt.
Dangling from it were two thin cords to be tied at the back.
Zach put it on and when the jacket was done up it looked as if he was wearing a proper dress shirt.
Imitation white cuffs were attached to the ends of the jacket sleeves..
‘Proper job,’ remarked George.
Ginnie examined the whole suit very closely.
She turned back the sleeves to see exactly how the cuffs had been sewn in.
Zach unwrapped a pair of objects wrapped in newspaper.
‘My taps!‘
He held up a pair of shiny black patent shoes.
On each sole were two pieces of metal, one at the tip and one at the heel.
‘What kind of shoes is they?’ asked George, puzzled.
‘Tap shoes.
You've seen Fred Astaire dance, haven't you?
Well it's….’
He stopped.
The others were all shaking their heads from side to side.
‘I've heard of Fred Barnes,’ said George.
‘He owns the Big Farm up at…’
‘Will.
You're a Londoner.
You must have seen him at the  pictures.‘
‘I ain't allowed,’ emphasized Willie.
‘I don't do that sort of thing.’
Zach was astounded.
He thought the whole world had heard of Fred Astaire.
‘Well, there's only one way to explain tap.’
He moved the case to one side, rolled back the carpet and told the others to sit by the bookcase.
He then put the shoes on and laced them up.
He did look strange in the elegant black shoes, darned woollen socks, threadbare shorts, top hat and tails.
‘Now this is what's called a tap spring,’ and he lightly tapped his right foot along the floor boards and hopped neatly onto it, leaving his left leg raised slightly behind him.
Carrie smothered a giggle.
He glared at her.
‘If you don't want to see what it's like I shan't bother wasting my time.’
Ginnie gave her sister a dig in the ribs.
‘Come on,’ said George.
‘Take no notice of her.’
If it hadn't been for Willie's attentive expression he would have stopped.
‘All right,’ he said.
‘Here goes.
And a one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight,’ and with that he danced around the room, his shoes tapping rhythmically on the floor springing and twirling around and, as he tapped and stamped, he yelled out, ‘Shuffle hop, Cramp roll, Buffalo.’
He concluded the dance with a double spin, springing sideways in the air and kicking his feet sharply together and as he did so he landed in a heap on the bed.
George, the twins and Willie broke out into applause.
Zach collapsed on the bed and grinned sheepishly at them.
They were interrupted by the entrance of Mrs Little.
She stood and glared at them, brandishing a hefty piece of ceiling plaster in her hand.
‘Zach,’ she said, looking directly at him, ‘I presume you are responsible for this.’
He looked up at her from the bed, his cheeks flushed with the exertions of his performance, the taps on his shoes exposed to her scrutiny.
‘Sorry, Aunt Nance,’ he began earnestly.
‘I know it's difficult,’ interrupted Mrs Little, ‘but we don't want to treat real casualties just yet so keep the noise down, will you?’
Zach nodded and she opened the door out on to the landing and closed it behind her.
They sat silently and listened to her footsteps fading away down the staircase.
Zach undid his shoes.
‘Never mind,’ said Ginnie quietly.
‘You can show us again, another time.’
‘Not if this wretched drizzle continues and we have to stay indoors,’ he said.
‘It's awful having to creep around all the time.’
‘You was fine,’ broke in Willie.
‘You was real fine.’
Zach beamed.
‘Come on, slowcoach,’ urged George.
Zach hurriedly unpacked a soft flat parcel.
With a flourish he pulled out a jersey of many colours.
The body and sleeves were knitted in coloured squares, red, yellow, green, black and orange.
He struggled out of his old jersey and put it on.
He even had to turn up the sleeves.
‘Wonderful, isn't it?’ he remarked.
But the others could only stare at him in speechless amazement.
‘You ent goin' to wear that, is you?’ said George.
‘Why ever not?’
‘Well, ‘tis a bit bright, ent it?’
‘You'll have Charlie Ruddles after you with blackout curtains,’ said Carrie.
Ginnie giggled.
Zach turned to Willie.
The jersey had a polo-neck collar in red.
The cuffs and the waistband were ribbed in the same colour.
Willie thought that next to Zach's deep complexion and black hair the red looked pleasing.
‘I think it's fine,’ he said quietly, and Zach knew he was speaking truthfully.
There were socks in the case, a scarf, cape and coloured tights, scraps of material and a pair of old black ankle boots with a label hanging on them.
It read ‘Found these in the theatre wardrobe.
No use to them.
Too small.
Have had them re-soled.
Hope they fit you.
If too big you can always stuff the toes.
Love, Mummy.’
He closed the case and passed the cakes around.
‘Where shall we meet tomorrow night?’ he asked.
‘What's wrong with here?’ said Carrie.
Zach pointed his thumb downwards.
‘There's always something going on here in the evenings.
If it's not First Aid it's the Knitting Socks for Icelandic Seamen Club.’
‘Well, there ent much room in our place,’ said George.
‘I share with David an’ he's bound to keep comin' in to see what we'se doin' and Edward hasn't had a room of his own ever.
Now that Mike's gone he guards it like it were a blimmin' gold mine.’
Zach turned to the twins.
‘How about your place?’
The twins looked at each other.
‘We've a room between us,’ said Ginnie, ‘but there's Sophie.’
Sophie was their eight-year-old sister.
‘She'd be nosin' in on us,’ said Carrie.
Willie remained silent.
He had a room.
It was terribly private and precious, though.
Dare he risk inviting them and asking Mister Tom's permission?
After all, he was still wetting his bed.
He would hate the others to find out.
‘Zach,’ he began huskily.
He cleared his throat.
‘There's my room.’
‘Of course,’ he cried.
‘I'd forgotten.
Could we meet at your place?’
‘I'll ask Mister Tom,’ he said flushing slightly.
‘Well, that's that settled,’ said Zach with finality.
Willie was not so sure.
‘What's the next game to be?’
‘Not Tarzan again,’ said George.
‘I've had enuff of bein' an ape.’
‘Actually,’ said Zach, ‘I've got another idea brewing.
How about Sherlock Holmes?
You could be Moriarty, George.’
‘The arch enemy?’
‘Yes,’ said Zach, surprised.
‘How did you know?’
George raised his eyes.
He was always the arch enemy and Carrie was invariably his evil assistant.
‘Does that mean I has to die or be rescued again?’ said Ginnie.
‘Well, not exactly,’ said Zach, a little perturbed.
‘Anyway, as I was saying, Will, you could be….’
‘Dr Watson,’ chorused George and the twins.
Willie was always Zach's faithful assistant and it was quite obvious, as soon as Sherlock Holmes was mentioned, that Zach would be the famous deerstalkered detective.
‘How about sittin' in a tree waitin' for badgers,’ suggested George.
‘Or seein' if Spooky Cott is really haunted?‘
Spooky Cott was the name given to a deserted cottage.
It was surrounded by an undergrowth of tangled bushes and trees.
Over the years, several people had reported hearing strange sounds emanating from it.
George and the twins dared not venture near it except in the broadest of daylight and even then they usually fled at first sight of it.
‘At night?’ asked Ginnie, and she shivered.
‘Yes, with a torch.’
‘Blackout regulations.’
‘Drat,’ said George.
‘What about a show?’ suggested Zach.
‘We've got the school Nativity play,’ said George, ‘and Miss Thorne is already producing something for the Women's Guild.’
They sat in silence, racking their brains for an idea.
Suddenly Zach yelled.
‘I say, we could have a newspaper, a sort of Gazette!’
‘Yeh,’ said Willie, who really liked the idea, but the others thought he was only supporting Zach because he was his special friend.
Carrie glanced at Ginnie, and George looked at Carrie and back to Zach.
‘Come to think of it, it ent a bad idea.
I could do the animal bits.’
‘And I could do news from abroad and about the war,’ said Carrie.
‘Some war,’ groaned George.
‘It don't seem like it's even begun.’
‘And I could do a cookery and household tips column,’ piped in Ginnie.
‘What'll you do, Zach?’ asked Carrie.
‘I'll think of something, even if I have to put on a show myself.‘
‘Village news,’ she cried.
‘Extraordinary events in Little Weirwold.’
‘Willie can do the illustrations and I think you'd better be Editor, Carrie,’ suggested Zach.
‘Me?’ she said.
‘Why me?’
‘Cos you're the brainy one,’ said George.
‘Let's vote for it then,’ said Zach, and immediately everyone raised their arms.
‘Goodness,’ gasped Ginnie, catching sight of the clock.
‘We'll have to go.
We'll be in trouble if we don't run for it.’
She, Carrie, and George grabbed their coats and fled out of the room and down the stairs.
‘When shall we meet?’ whispered Zach urgently after them.
‘Can't tomorrer,’ said Carrie.
‘We's babysittin',’ said Ginnie.
‘Sophie sittin',’ they added in unison.
‘How about Thursday then?’
‘Choir practice,’ said George.
‘Friday?’
Friday was agreed.
They hurriedly whispered their good-byes to each other and after the front door had been closed Willie followed Zach back into his bedroom.
‘Now,’ said Zach, jumping onto the bed, ‘I can read my letter,’and he pulled out the crumpled envelope from his shorts.
‘You don't mind, do you?’ he said, glancing at Willie who had sat down beside him.
‘No,’ answered Willie, ‘course not.’
He wriggled back further on the bed till he was leaning up against the wall.
He could hardly believe that Zach was his special friend.
Zach said he was a good listener and that he was a sensitive being.
Willie had thought being sensitive was being a sissie.
Zach didn't think so.
He admired him for it.
Admired him!
He glanced over at Zach.
He was lying sprawled across the pillow leaning on his elbow, his head propped to one side, reading the letter.
There seemed to be pages.
His own mother had written to Little Weirwold only once since his arrival eight weeks ago, and the letter had been addressed to Mister Tom.
He had read it out to him but he knew that he'd missed out bits.
He had actually written a letter of his own to her.
His first ever.
He'd even addressed the envelope, bought the stamp by himself and posted it.
I expect she's been too busy to answer, he thought, what with the war and everything.
For a brief moment he thought of his home in London and brushed the memory aside.
There was a knock on the front door downstairs and the sound of Mrs Little opening it.
‘That's Mister Tom,’ said Willie, moving off the bed.
Mrs Little called up to him.
‘I got to go.’
‘Bother,’ said Zach.
They were at the top of the stairs when Zach touched his shoulder.
‘Don't forget about the room, will you,’ he whispered.
Willie shook his head and ran down the stairs.
Tom was waiting for him at the bottom.
Willie put his gaberdine and cap on and slung his gas-mask box over his shoulder.
The sky was almost black when he and Tom stepped outside.
A strong wind tore through the trees whipping the branches fiercely to one side while the rain swept across their faces.
Tom put up the umbrella.
‘Best hang tight to my arm, boy,’ he yelled and together they leaned forward and tramped through the long wet grass to wrestle with the Littles' gate.
Willie clung firmly to him.
He pulled his cap down over his eyes but the wind whistled bitterly through his ears.
They passed the Bush family's cottage and struggled by the Vicarage.
The leaves flew and scattered around in fragments, brushing their bodies and sticking to their wet cheeks.
They fought with the long gate into Dobbs' field and Tom checked that she was sheltered.
The wind tried to wrench the umbrella from his hands.
He hung grimly on and wrestled with it until he could lower it in front of them.
Half running, half walking, they fled through the back garden, narrowly missing the Anderson, and threw themselves into the passage-way, the leaves swirling in after them.
They slammed the door behind them and panted and smiled in the darkness.
It was as if someone had suddenly turned off the sound.
Tom opened the sitting-room door and the silence was broken by Sammy as he came bounding out, leaping up at the pair of them barking excitedly.
Willie hung his gaberdine and cap on his peg while Sammy stood on his hind legs and placed his paws on his stomach.
Willie ruffled his fur.
‘Has he bin fed?’ he asked.
‘No lad, I left it fer you.’
Willie grinned happily.
It was one of his jobs to feed Sammy in the evenings.
After he had fed him he wiped his boots dry with an old rag, put the kettle on and sat down at the table with pencil and paper.
‘Tis late fer that,’ said Tom.
‘Just ten minutes,’ pleaded Willie.
‘Mrs Black ses if I can do me letters and me capitals better, I can start joined up writin' soon.’
‘No longer, though.’
‘Ta,’ and with that he began writing.
Tom made the tea and took down two large white mugs from hooks hanging by the window.
One had a letter T on it, the other a letter W.
Since Willie was so desperate to be accepted in Mrs Hartridge's class Tom had been helping in every possible way.
He had stuck labels in various places so that Willie would associate an object with a word, until after a time Willie labelled them himself.
He glanced at all the bits of paper hanging higgledy-piggledy on the furniture and walls.
He hoped that Willie would manage to get into Mrs Hartridge's class before she left.
It had been announced only a month ago that she was expecting her first child and would probably be leaving after the spring term.
He glanced at Willie who had now finished writing.
He was sitting quietly, drinking his tea.
It wasn't until after he had gone to bed that Willie asked about the room.
He had remained subdued for the rest of the evening, glancing at Tom and looking away.
It was Tom who finally eked it out of him.
He had gone up as usual to turn Willie's lamp down and had found him sitting up in bed with one of his library books lying open on his knees.
Instead of tracing the pages with his finger as he usually did, he was staring vacantly  into space.
He came over to him, closed the book and put it on his table.
‘Now then,’ he said, crouching under the eave and seating himself comfortably at the foot of his bed, ‘what's it all about, eh?’
Willie looked at him, startled.
‘What's eatin' you?
You bin in a brown cloud ever since supper.‘
Willie took a deep breath.
‘You see,’ he began, ‘Edward won't let George in his room 'cos of the war and Zach ses they're knittin' boots in the sittin' room and the twins ses they might, only…’
‘Slow down,’ said Tom, ‘and gets to the point.’
‘Mister Tom,’ he said breathlessly, ‘could I have George and Zach and Carrie and Ginnie up here in this room?’
‘Don't see why not.
They bin thrown out of their homes?’
‘No.
It's jes there ain't much room at George's and Zach ses…’
‘No need to explain.
This is your room.
You does what you like, only…’ he warned pointing his pipe in Willie's direction,'if there's any mess you has to clear it up.
Understand?‘
‘Yeh.
Course,’ said Willie.
‘When is they wantin' to come?’
‘Fridee.‘
‘Frideh ‘tis then.’
He stood up and kissed his forehead.
‘Night, lad,’ he said quietly.
‘Mister Tom,’ said Willie, as he turned to turn the lamp down.
‘Yis?’
‘They don't know about, you know,’ and he patted the blankets with his hands.
‘The bed-wettin'?
You ent ashamed of that, is you?’
Willie nodded.
‘Ent no need to mention it.
I'll makes yer bed up before  the evenin' so's they won't see the rubber.
That do?’
‘Yeh.
Ta.‘
The room was blanketed in darkness until Tom removed the blackout curtain.
‘Night,’ he said again and he disappeared down the steps, closing the trap-door after him.
Willie leaned his head back on his upraised hands.
He glanced at the slanting window pane.
The rain was running down the glass in tiny sparkling rivulets.
He snuggled down into the warm blankets.
He never thought that he would ever come to love the rain, but he did now.
The last thing he remembered before falling asleep was the patter, patter, patter of it gently and rhythmically hitting the tiled roof above his head.
Friday
Mrs Fletcher was bending over the last of a bed of weeds, hoping finally to rid herself of them before her husband returned from the potato harvesting.
Her thoughts were interrupted by the sound of heavy footsteps and loud barking.
She looked up vacantly.
It was Tom Oakley.
Easing herself gently to her feet she leaned slowly backwards.
Her spine gave a soft cracking sound.
‘Back early, ent you?’ she remarked.
‘You'se ent finished, has you?
I ent started tea fer Ben yet.’
‘He's stayin' on,’ said Tom.
‘I decided I'd come home early tonight.
Boy's got friends comin' round.
Your George fer one.’
‘So he said.’
Tom grunted.
‘I jest thought I'd be around like, in case he needs anythin'.
Tends to git over-excited.’
A strand of auburn hair fell across Mrs Fletcher's eyes.
She brushed it aside.
‘Don't seem so long since his birthdee, do it?’
‘Two months,’ commented Tom absently, and he gazed down the road remembering how he watched Willie's thin little hunched body stumbling after Sammy on that first day.
‘You heard from his mother yet?’
‘I had a letter last week.
Mostly about him bein' bad and me watchin' him, like.
I wish he would be bad.
He says ‘Yes’ or ‘dunno’to every blessed thing I ses.’
Mrs Fletcher laughed.
‘I wish George would.’
She picked up a bucket filled with weeds.
‘What about this six shilluns contribution then?’
‘That's what she wrote about.
Ses she can't pay yet but it'll be on its way.
Ses it means she won't be comin' to see the boy fer Christmas.’
‘Shame on ‘er,’ tutted Mrs Fletcher.
‘Oh, I dunno,’ said Tom.
‘He's changed quite a bit in these last few weeks.’
So has you and all, thought Mrs Fletcher.
‘Yes,’ he went on, ‘I almost fancy he's grown a bit.
It won't do him no harm to be out of his mother's apron-strings fer a bit longer.
She puts the fear of the divvil into him anyways.’
He leaned across the gate in a confidential manner.
‘Do you know, Mrs Fletcher, last week he laughed.
It were a bit of a nervous one like, but he actually laughed.
It were the first time I ever heard him do it.
Didn't think he had a sense of humour in him.’
Mrs Fletcher looked steadily into his eyes.
His forehead had lost its old furrowed look.
The deep pitted wrinkles above his eyes had softened outwards.
Behind his scowling manner was a kindly old man and if it hadn't been for the arrival of a rather insipid little boy, she might never have known, nor might anyone else for that matter.
A breeze shook a half-naked tree, causing a handful of leaves to cascade into the garden.
‘Well,’ said Mrs Fletcher, 'now that you're here you might as well take the jersey and socks.
I finished them last night.’
After Tom had collected the woollens he walked home feeling remarkably relaxed.
Sammy scampered leisurely in front of him while he stopped intermittently to pick up sweet chestnuts on the way.
Willie had scraped the potatoes, chopped up carrots and turnips, buttered a few slices of oddly-cut bread and filled  Sammy's bowls with fresh water and scraps.
His boots were laid out on a newspaper, and had been scraped and polished.
He was sitting cross-legged on the floor giving a finishing touch to them when Tom walked in.
He looked up, and rubbed his forehead excitedly leaving another smudge of brown shoe polish above his nose.
‘I finished me readin' book today and I starts the last one on Mondee.
And Mrs Black ses I can do joined-up writin',’ he added, scrambling to his feet.
‘By half term I might have finished the last one.
Then I can read good enuff fer Mrs Hartridge.‘
‘Good.
You've worked hard fer it and you're bright.’
‘Bright?‘
‘Got it up here,’ said Tom, tapping his head with his hand.
It was after they had cleared supper and were sitting by the range with a cup of tea that the first person to arrive knocked at the front door.
Willie, whose stomach had been steadily growing tighter, almost spilt his tea over his shorts.
He was wearing the new jersey that Tom had collected from Mrs Fletcher.
It was navy blue with a rolled-topped neck.
The cuffs were well turned back and the jersey came halfway down his shorts.
‘Ent you goin' to answer it then?’ said Tom.
Willie placed the mug carefully on to the table and made his way nervously out of the door and down the small dark passageway.
It was Zach.
Willie was glad that he had come first.
He showed him into the living room where Sammy greeted him, wagging his tail.
‘Unusual jersey, that,’ commented Tom.
It was the first time he had seen Zach's ‘Joseph’ jersey.
‘Unique, I'd say,’ replied Zach.
‘I'll go put the blacks up and light the lamp,’ said Tom.
Willie and Zach waited at the foot of the ladder while Sammy scrabbled around the first rung.
A square of amber light shone down on them from the open hatch.
‘I say, it's magnificent!’ gasped Zach.
‘Like rays from Heaven.‘
Tom climbed down the ladder.
‘All yours,’ he said.
Sammy by now had wormed his way up to the third rung where he was floundering and panting breathlessly.
‘You want Sam with you?’
‘Won't you be lonely without him, Mr Oakley?’ asked Zach.
Tom was a little taken aback at this candid question.
‘No.
I can do some jobs that he gits in the way of.
But if he becomes a nuisance, William,’ he added, ‘you bang on the floor and I'll pick him up.’
‘Ta,’ said Willie gratefully and between him and Zach they carried Sammy up the ladder.
Willie had grown used to the changes in his room so that he was pleasantly surprised at Zach's excitement over it.
Two of the walls were covered with his drawings and paintings and on one wall were shelves that Tom had fixed up for his clothes and treasures.
Zach gazed round at the tiny wooden bed under the eaves.
The flickering lamp above their heads and the patches of colour round the walls gave the room a cosy lived-in air.
After a brief glance at the two boxes of apples which were stacked in the corner, he sat on the end of the bed with Willie and talked about the poem he was writing.
It was in ‘the epic vein' which for him meant a long rhyming poem about knights in armour.
Sammy, who had been sitting quietly by their feet, jumped up and began barking.
There was a loud knock on the open trap-door and Carrie and Ginnie's heads came into view.
‘Ent it beautiful,’ commented Ginnie.
‘Like a workroom of one's own,’ sighed Carrie enviously.
They were interrupted by an impatient voice from below.
‘Stop spoonin'.
I want to see.
Hurry up.’
They clambered up onto the floor, followed eagerly by George who practically fell over them in his clumsy desire to get in.
All three of them stared silently at the walls.
‘You never done these, did you?’ said George.
There was a drawing of the oak tree, two brave attempts at Sammy, a painting of five children blackberrying, one of a library with people sitting and walking round and several sketches of boots and flowers and half-eaten sandwiches.
‘Sheer genius, aren't they?’ said Zach thrusting his nose upwards.
‘Wizard choice of friends I have, don't you think?‘
‘Why has you got all them words written under them?’ asked George.
Willie flushed.
‘Is it fer learnin' to read?’ said Carrie.
He nodded.
‘I starts the last readin' book on Mondee,.
and joined-up writing.‘
‘I say, well done,’ exclaimed Zach.
‘Don't know why yer botherin',’ grunted George.
‘You gits to mess around more in your class.
Anyways, if I could draw like you, I wouldn't bother about nothin' else.’
‘Anythin' else,’ corrected Carrie.
‘And you don't bother about anythin', anyways.’
‘I does.
They jest don't teach interestin' things at school.
Who wants to read books?
Books ent no good.
They don't feed animals and plough fields, does ‘ey?’
Carrie groaned.
‘You'm jest pig ignorant.’
‘Good,’ said George.
‘I likes pigs and pigs is useful.’
‘Are you two going to spend this evening ranting again?’ interrupted Zach.
‘Yes, come on,’ said Ginnie.
‘Let's talk about the Gazette.’
It was obvious to everyone from the moment they sat down that Zach was bursting to tell them something.
‘Come on, reveal all,’ said Carrie, imitating his theatrical way of speaking.
‘Guess what!’ he half squeaked.
‘Miss Thorne is producing a children's Christmas show for the war effort and she needs all the help she can get.’
Ginnie gasped.
‘I couldn't go on stage.
I'd hate it.’
‘You needn't act in it.
You could help backstage.’
‘You could do your sewin',’ suggested George.
Ginnie's face lit up.
‘I could make costumes.’
‘Well spoken, that man,’ said Zach.
‘That's a wizard idea.’
George cleared his throat and beamed.
‘I does have the odd unbeatable one,’ he said smarmily.
‘I'm glad to hear that,’ said Zach, ‘because I'm going to ask you for another good suggestion.’
George visibly preened himself.
‘Go ahead,’ he said.
‘What are you going to do in the show?’
His face fell.
‘Me!’ he spluttered.
‘Me!
I ent doin' no fancy theatricals with ole corny thorny.
She's nutty as a fruitcake.’
‘Coward,’ said Carrie.
‘I ent goin' to do it,’ he protested.
‘And that's a fact.’
‘I vote we bring this meeting to order,’ said Ginnie sharply.
Zach looked at George.
‘Well,’ he said.
‘Are you going to be courageous or not?’
‘Coward,’ repeated Carrie.
‘Oh, all right,’ said George crossly.
‘I'll do it.’
‘Wizzo.
That's two.’
‘What about you, Zach?’ asked Carrie.
‘Oh, I expect I'll volunteer for one of the leads,’ he said, leaning back and crossing his long brown legs nonchalantly.
He turned to Willie.
‘I ain't bin near a theatre.
Me Mum ses…’
‘It isn't exactly a theatre,’ interrupted Zach earnestly.
‘It's the hall.
It's just that we're going to make it into a theatre.’
‘Yeh, but…’
‘You needn't perform.
You could help with the scenery.’
‘Paintin', like,’ said Carrie.
He smiled nervously.
‘Yeh, all right.’
‘I'll volunteer too,’ said Carrie.
‘I don't mind what I do so long as I don't have too many lines to learn.’
‘Wizzo,’ yelled Zach.
‘That's the five of us.’
He studied Sammy who was chewing the toe of one of his large stuffed boots.
‘No,’ said George and the twins in unison.
He looked at Willie.
‘You'll have to ask Mister Tom,’ he said.
‘Three against two,’ said Carrie.
‘Oh, all right,’ he sighed wearily, ‘I give.in.’
‘My turn now for news,’ said George.
‘We'se goin' to have a big Carol Service in the church on Christmas Eve.
Mr Bush started rehearsin' us last night and he could do with some extra voices, like.’
Carrie opened her mouth.
‘Boys only,’ he added.
‘Ent it a blimmin' cheek,’ she exclaimed angrily.
‘Boys gits all the chances.
The grammar school in Weirwold only takes boys,’ she said in protest to Zach, ‘and they never bother to put girls in fer the high school.
And here's me dyin' to go and him,’ she said waving a finger at George, ‘havin' all the chances, and him hating books.’
‘Mebbe now there's a war on,’ said Ginnie, gently touching her sister's arm, ‘it'll be different for girls.’
She knew how much learning meant to her.
‘I hope so.
But it don't seem no different being at war really, do it?
‘Cept there's more goin' on in the evenin's  with First Aid and the like.’
There was a short silence.
‘Well,’ said George, glancing at Willie and Zach, ‘you two interested?’
‘I'd like to,’ said Zach, ' but I never go to church so it'd be a bit strange if I sing in it, won't it, me not even being a Christian.‘
‘Ain't you a Christian?’ asked Willie in alarm.
He shook his head.
‘No.
I thought you knew that.’
Willie expected at any moment to see the tips of two red horns slowly emerging from under his hair, but they didn't.
‘You could always ask the Vicar,’ suggested George.
‘But what if I had to say your prayers.
I might have to say things I didn't believe in.
It leaves me in a bit of a dilemma, don't you see.’
‘Di-what?’ said George.
‘Quagmire,’ said Zach, and he gave a sigh and threw his hands up in the air.
‘I mean I'd really like to, but I've already been shouldered out of the Nativity play.
It's rotten, rotten luck.
I know the story quite well too.
I mean your Jesus that you believe was God was Jewish, wasn't he?
Joseph, his father, was Jewish and so was his mother.
And here's me dying to act and I can't be in it because I'm Jewish.’
‘Now you know how I feel about the high school,’ said Carrie.
‘Oh, git the hankerchiefs out fer a weep,’ groaned George, pretending to play the violin.
‘I'll do it,’ said Willie suddenly.
‘I'll s…s…sing.’
George beamed.
‘Rehearsals every Thursdee.
I'll give you a hand in the readin' if you gits stuck.’
‘That's two bits of news for the Gazette,’ said Ginnie.
‘We need to do somethin' a bit more excitin', like,’ said George impatiently.
‘Let's go lookin' fer badgers or even  their holes.
How about it?
Who's for goin'?’
‘I'd like to,’ blurted out Willie.
They all stared at him in surprise.
It was unusual for him to volunteer without persuasion.
‘I'll come too,’ said Zach.
‘I don't know anything about badgers, but it might be useful.
Who knows, perhaps one day I may have to play one.’
Carrie and Ginnie looked at each other.
‘We'll come too,’ they sighed in a tone of resignation.
‘I ent forcin' you,’ said George.
‘I say,’ said Zach.
‘What was that mysterious place you were talking about at Aunt Nance's?’
Ginnie paled.
‘Spooky Cott,’ she whispered.
‘Couldn't we go and look at that as well?’
George and the twins gave no answer and Willie felt a cold prickle crawl up his back and into his hair.
‘Oh come on,’ cried Zach.
‘It can't be that frightening, can it?’
All three of them nodded silently.
‘We ent bin there for two years now,’ said George.
‘I say, what happened?’
‘Nothin' you could exactly put yer finger on, like,’ said Carrie ominously.
‘But there was a strange eery feeling in the air.
The trees,’ she swallowed, ' the trees, they seemed to groan and wave their arms about.’
‘Let's go.
I mean, if we all go together we can protect each other.’
‘When was you thinkin'?’ asked George in an unusually timid voice.
‘How about tonight!’ whispered Zach.
Ginnie gave a shiver.
‘Or,’ he continued, ‘Halloween!’and he gave a shrieking imitation of a cackling witch.
George and the twins yelled and Willie clutched Sammy who had started barking.
Zach gave a long ghostly moan and raised his hands.
With wide, blank eyes he shuffled towards them.
They stumbled backwards.
Willie tried to calm Sammy who was jumping about excitedly.
‘That's enuff,’ said Ginnie crossly.
‘Oh, all right, spoilsports,’ he said, feeling disgruntled, and he sat down, missed his cushion and landed with a painful thump on the floor.
This time it was the others who laughed.
He rubbed his bottom vigorously, looking very hurt.
They were interrupted by a knocking on the hatch.
‘Blimmin' heck,’ said Carrie.
‘Now we're for it,’ whispered her sister.
‘I told you we was makin' too much noise,’ and she glared at Zach.
‘Don't foist all the blame on I,’ he retorted.
Willie lifted it up to find Tom standing on the steps, with a large tray in his hands.
On it was a jug of lemonade, five cups, a plate of ginger snaps and a bowl of nuts.
Beside it was a small saucer of salt.
‘Hot chestnuts,’ yelled Willie.
‘They has them in London when it's Christmas.
I see'd them sell them in the streets lots of times but I ain't never tasted them like.’
‘Thought mebbe you could use them.’
‘Rather,’ cried Zach.
‘Mister Tom, you're a real brick.’
‘Am I?’ he mumbled.
‘Humph!’
He looked around at their delighted faces and began to feel embarrassed.
‘You'd best eat them afore they gits cold.’
Sammy wriggled into his arms and pushed his head underneath Tom's chin.
‘Ad enuff have you, boy?’ he said picking him up and with that he gave them all a brisk wave and disappeared down the steps, closing the hatch quickly behind him.
‘He's a real decent sort, Will,’ said Zach.
‘You're awfully lucky being landed on someone like him.’
Willie smiled.
He'd known that since that first  bewildering day.
‘I'm lucky too,’ he went on, ‘with the Doctor and Aunt Nance.‘
‘That's a cos they're daft like you,’ said George through a mouthful of ginger biscuit.
‘I don't think Christine and Robert King are very happy,’ said Ginnie.
‘They'se stayin' at one of the tied cottages at Hillbrook Farm and they has to earn their keep.
Specially now that John's gone.’
‘Robert fell asleep in History on Monday,’ said Carrie.
‘Don't blame him,’ said George.
‘And Christine told me,’ continued Ginnie, ‘that Mr Barnes threatened to have their dog put down if they didn't work hard enuff.’
‘Here, have a chestnut,’ said Carrie flinging one into her sister's hands.
‘Yes, let's eat,’ added George.
After they had devoured the nuts and drunk the lemonade they discussed who would write what for the Gazette.
It was unanimously decided that any drawings or illustrations would be done by Willie.
Zach was to finish his epic poem and write a report on the Christmas Show.
Carrie would put in a bit of news regarding how the war was affecting the supply of sweets.
Ginnie was to write about the wonders of the First Aid Group and George about his beloved badgers.
The meeting had ended, with everyone feeling very satisfied.
They scrambled down the ladder, yelling their good-byes.
Willie watched them as they ran through the graveyard and climbed over the wall to the lane.
He closed the door, walked into the living room and sank happily into the armchair.
Tom glanced at him.
The last time Willie had had so many children at the cottage he had been sick.
Tonight he looked healthily tired.
‘Let's have a look at that ole arm of yours,’ he said.
Willie sleepily pulled his jersey and shirt off and slid to the edge of the armchair.
Tom squatted down in front of him.
Very gently he cleaned a sore and put some ointment on it.
It was the last one.
‘This time next week, should be gone,’ he muttered, but Willie didn't hear him.
His eyelids were already fluttering into sleep.
Tom helped him into his pyjamas, carried him up the ladder on his back and put him to bed.
When Willie woke the next day, there was something altogether unusual about the morning.
He lay in bed, for some time, and stared up at the ceiling trying to puzzle it out.
Finally he gave up and clambered out of bed.
It was only when he started automatically to strip it that he realized what it was that was so different.
There was no need for the sheets to be washed that day.
They were dry.
The Show Must Go On
November had been a damp and drizzly month, bringing shorter days and causing aggravation to those people who found it increasingly difficult to travel in the blackout.
Tom had meanwhile dug up his turnips, and set to work hedging, digging ditches and helping out with the other farms, when the extra labour was needed.
Willie would return from school to find the living room filled with the musky perfume of freshly-cut branches burning in the range.
All evacuees had left the village and outlying countryside, except Willie and Zach, Robert and Christine King up at Hillbrook Farm, and the four Browne children at the Vicarage.
David Hartridge had become a fully-fledged pilot and was looked upon as a hero.
His few short visits to the village caused great excitement.
While Little Weirwold was returning to normality, events in the larger world continued to escalate.
Hitler had escaped a bomb blast-in a Munich beer-cellar.
German aircraft had parachuted mines into the Thames estuary.
A British merchant cruiser had been sunk by German battle cruisers.
Finland had been invaded and Helsinki had been bombed.
But these events of war didn't really disturb Little Weirwold except for Miss Emilia Thorne who had to recast the Christmas show as each evacuee left for home.
It was now the first week in December.
The last of the swallows had gone long ago and now the black outline of  rooks could be seen flying around the ploughed fields looking for grubs.
Cold icy winds swept under the gaps of cottage doors rattling them fiercely.
It looked as though it would be a hard winter.
Willie had completed the last of the ‘Learning to Read’ books.
His reading was up to standard for Mrs Hartridge's class and his writing was progressing well.
He now needed to learn his tables up to six times and also be able to do multiplication, addition, subtraction and division, tens and units, shillings and pence and have a basic knowledge of simple weights and lengths.
It all seemed quite endless.
Tom thought that once Willie had finished his final Reading Book he wouldn't want him to read to him any more, but Willie loved to sit back and listen to his voice and so the stories continued.
They had now almost finished Exodus and were in the middle of The Wind in the Willows .
Meanwhile, the first Gazette had been completed but Carrie and Willie were the only two with any staying power which meant that two-thirds of it were filled with Carrie's words and Willie's pictures.
The remaining third consisted of some jokes from Zach, a few sentences about animals from George and a patriotic essay from Ginnie about how collecting salvage was helping to win the war.
There was only one copy and this was passed around the village for a farthing a read.
Most of the money collected was given to the war effort and a bag of gobstoppers and aniseed balls was bought with the rest.
Once the first Gazette was completed they decided to move on to something else.
With Christmas only three weeks away their days were hectically filled, making presents, hanging up decorations and rehearsing.
The show that Miss Thorne was producing was an adaptation of A Christmas Carol by Charles Dickens.
Zach was playing Bob Cratchit, Mr Fezziwig, the ghost of Christmas present and the Ghost of what might be.
Carrie was cast to play Mrs Fezziwig and the young woman  who had fallen in love with the youthful Scrooge while Ginnie hid in the school happily making costumes with Miss Thorne's older sister.
George had been tried out in a variety of parts, but each time he stepped on the stage he would stand with his legs and arms splayed out and drone monotonously.
Miss Thorne suddenly hit upon the idea of casting him as the ghost of Marley, Scrooge's ex-partner.
It would need no acting ability from George.
One winter afternoon, while they were rehearsing, something happened which stunned everyone involved in the play.
Willie had already helped paint the scenery but had been asked to take over as prompter when Matthew Browne had been suddenly whisked off to boarding school.
He usually sat with the prompt book, next to Miss Thorne.
His head still spun slightly as he followed the words and looked upwards intermittently to see by the expression of a face if someone had forgotten their lines.
But after a while he soon knew large chunks of the play off by heart and could occasionally prompt without looking at the book.
It was difficult at first.
Initially he whispered the line, but it was embarrassing to have to continually repeat himself after a series of ‘pardons’ and ‘whats?’and he soon discovered that if he spoke a line clearly and loudly he wasn't noticed as much.
On this particular afternoon Willie sat as usual with the prompt book resting on his knees, his forehead frowned into a tense concentration.
The blackouts were already pulled down over the hall windows.
Willie liked it that way.
It gave an air of mystery and excitement to the rehearsals.
Carrie was the only one on stage.
She stood with her hands clasped tightly together and stared frantically at the curtain rail, her face racked with pain.
‘Carrie, dear,’ said Miss Thorne, ‘you look as though you've got wind.’
‘It ent fair,’ she retorted, scowling fiercely.
‘Isn't,’ corrected Miss Thorne.
‘It isn't fair,’ said Carrie, ‘I feels daft pretendin' to speak to someone who ent,isn't , there.’
Miss Thorne gave a sigh.
Her long willowy legs splayed outwards into a balletic second.
Although she was terribly fond of the children she found that working with them was like banging her head against a brick wall.
Zach was the only one who showed any real talent and he was more of a performer than an actor.
He played himself all the time, using his characters to display his many theatrical talents.
He was still trying to persuade her to have a tap routine in the play.
She stared up at Carrie, slapping her forehead with the palm of her hand.
‘Has anyone seen Christine or Robert King?’ she asked, turning to the others who were sitting at the back of the hall.
‘No, Miss,’ piped Lucy.
Robert was playing Scrooge.
‘We'll do the crone scene then.’
‘Christine's in that,’ chorused three at the back.
‘So she is,’ said Miss Thorne.
‘This really is too bad.
We've two weeks to go and we are nowhere near being ready.’
She glanced at Willie.
‘William, stand in for Christine.’
‘But it's a girl's part,’ said George.
‘Well, we'll just have to have a male crone for today,’ replied Miss Thorne in a dangerously quiet voice.
Willie crept nervously on stage with the prompt book in his hand and was joined by the others.
‘Begin!‘
He read out Christine's part, giving an imitation of all the inflections in her voice, at the same time prompting those around him when they forgot their lines.
‘No, no, no!’ cried Miss Thorne.
She looked around.
‘Someone else prompt.’
‘But then he won't be able to say his lines,’ said Carrie.
‘Er, will he?’ she added nervously as Miss Thorne glared threateningly at her.
‘I'll prompt,’ said Zach.
Miss Thorne didn't think this was too good an idea but time was precious, so she agreed.
‘Now, William,’ she said.
‘Do you think you can remember the moves?’
He shrugged helplessly.
‘Well, let's try, shall we.
And William?’
‘Yes, Miss?’
‘Imagine that it's very cold and dark, that you're old and hungry and that you love stealing and making trouble for people.‘
Willie looked at her dreamily.
‘Did you hear that?’
He nodded.
‘Good.
You have the first line.
Start when you're ready.’
‘Ready?’ he asked, feeling a little puzzled.
‘When you feel that you're that horrible old man.’
Willie withdrew into himself.
He remembered an old tramp he used to watch down by the tube station near where he lived.
He was hunched and he dragged his feet when he walked.
He also remembered times when he himself was so hungry that he couldn't stand straight for the cramps in his stomach.
Miss Thorne watched him grow visibly older.
His shoulders were pushed up by his neck and his stomach caved in.
He looked cold and miserable and bad-tempered.
Zach found himself totally mesmerized and placed his finger on the page so that he wouldn't lose his place.
Then Willie began speaking.
His voice was harsh and mean.
The others on stage stared at him and someone giggled.
‘Carry on,’ interrupted Miss Thorne firmly.
The three on stage with Willie joined in as best they could, but they sounded as if they were reading out lines from a school book.
Willie carried on imagining that his dirty feet were wrapped in rags and newspapers and when the scene came to an end he shuffled slowly off the stage.
‘I say,’ whispered Zach.
‘You'll say nothing for the moment,’ said Miss Thorne.
‘Let's do that scene again.
You're beginning to get the idea, William.’
They rehearsed the scene over and over again and as they repeated it Willie believed more than ever that he was the old man.
He found himself suddenly reaching out and touching someone or making some wild arm movement without thinking.
He didn't understand what Miss Thorne meant when she told him to keep a gesture.
How could he keep something that just happened?
When Miss Thorne finished working on the scene he heard his companions sigh with relief.
‘I'm fair done in,’ one of them said.
How strange, he thought, I'm not tired at all.
I could easily have gone on.
He came down the tiny steps at the side of the stage and sat beside Zach.
‘You're good,’ whispered Zach.
‘Good?
How d'you mean?’
‘You're a good actor.’
Willie didn't understand.
He thought that being an actor was tap dancing and playing the fool.
All he'd done was to make a picture of someone in his head and worm his way inside it.
He took the prompt book back from Zach and began his old job again.
For the next half hour the rehearsals took on a sudden lift and everyone began to dare to try things out without feeling foolish.
The only thing that spoilt it was the absence of Robert.
He was in nearly all the scenes.
Finally Miss  Thorne refused to wait any longer and told them to take a short break while she left the hall to make a phone call to Hillbrook Farm.
Willie found himself immediately surrounded.
Lucy slipped her hand into his.
He flushed and pulled it away.
‘Dunno what you're on about,’ he said quietly in response to their praise.
‘I jest pretended I was someone else, that's all.
‘I really believed you was that horrible old man,’ said Carrie in admiration.
But so did I, thought Willie.
He was puzzled.
He didn't understand why they were making so much fuss.
‘You're a natural,’ said Zach.
‘When you talked it was like you'd just thought of it.
How did you do it?’
‘I jest listened to what someone said and answered them, like.’
All the sudden admiration unnerved him.
He felt lonely being so different.
To hide his fear he asked Zach to tell a joke and do his funny buffalo step.
Zach hesitated at first, but luckily someone who hadn't seen him do any tap dancing egged him on.
Willie was soon forgotten, and became mixed into the group again.
Zach stopped.
He heard Miss Thorne open the outer door of the hall.
She flung the inside door to one side, was about to slam it but changed her mind and closed it behind her in a quiet and controlled manner.
Her face was pale and she was wringing her hands in agitation.
‘Sit down everyone, please.’
They did so immediately.
She walked slowly towards her chair, sat down, folded one leg over the other and placed her clasped hands over her knee.
‘I'm afraid I've just had some rather bad news.
Robert and Christine's mother came early this morning and took them back to London.
It seems she felt they were being used as unpaid labour.
This means that we have no Scrooge.’
‘Oh no!’ cried Zach amidst the loud wails of disappointment.
‘Does that mean we can't do it?’ asked Carrie.
There were only two weeks till the performance.
They had all helped with scenery and costumes.
Did this mean that all their hard work was wasted?
Miss Thorne turned to Willie.
‘William,’ she said quietly.
‘I'd like you to play the part of Scrooge.’
Willie felt an intense tingle pass from his toes to the roots of his hair.
He looked up at her.
Everyone's face was turned to him as if he was their last chance.
‘Will you?’
He nodded.
‘Oh, well done,’ cried Zach.
‘Hip, hip, hurray!’
‘That's enough,’ interrupted Miss Thorne firmly.
‘We have a lot of work to do.
We'll start with Act 1, Scene 1.
Those not in the scene will have to take turns prompting.
We must all pull together and help.’
She turned to face Willie.
He was standing quite still, feeling both paralysed and yet at the same time filled with a flood of energy.
Don't hurry,’ she said.
‘Everythin' has its own time,’ he whispered and he blushed.
‘That's what Mister Tom ses.’
‘That's right,’ and she gave him a warm smile.
‘We'll go through the blocking first.
Take my script and pencil for now.‘
The blocking was all the various moves which made up the pattern of each scene.
This was to give it movement and life and to ensure that the focus of attention was never blurred tor the audience.
Willie half mumbled and half read the script as he pencilled little letters around the sentences.
Miss Thorne had taught them all the names of the different stage areas.
There was down stage right and left and upstage right and  left, up centre, down centre and of course centre plus many others such as‘left of so and so’.
To the ones who were watching, Willie seemed very bad.
He stumbled and droned and scribbled in his book like someone half asleep, but Miss Thorne knew that as soon as he had got rid of the book and started working on the character of Scrooge he would be very different.
It was strange that she had never thought of him before, for she now remembered how quickly he had learnt poetry when she was helping him learn to read.
But then hardly anyone noticed him when he was around.
They only noticed his absence.
She stopped rehearsing when they reached the end of Act One.
‘Well done, William,’ she said encouragingly.
‘Well done, everyone.
You've all worked very hard.’
Willie looked up a little bewildered and then back down at his script.
The words were beginning to cease being just shapes and pictures.
There was something else in them.
He felt breathlessly excited.
‘William,’ said Miss Thorne interrupting his thoughts.
‘Keep my script and look over the scene we've blocked.
The next rehearsal will be on Monday night after school.
We'll block Act Two then.’
Willie walked shakily out of the inner door to the porch.
Zach had already put on his coat and cap and was waiting to tell him something when Ginnie and Miss Thorne's elder sister burst in.
‘Whatever's the matter, May?’ asked Miss Thorne.
‘Haven't you heard the news yet?’
‘About the Kings?’
‘No.
About Mr Bush.’
‘What about him.
Has he had an accident?’
‘Worse.
He's been called up!’
‘But he's a teacher.
They aren't calling them up, surely?’
‘It's his own fault.
He's on reserves and they say that we  already have more than our quota per pupil than most other places.’
‘Who's going to teach the seniors?’
‘I don't know.
The Vicar, I suppose.’
‘What about the Carol Concert?’ interrupted George.
‘It's on in three weeks’ time.’
May Thorne turned to her sister.
‘What's this about the Kings, then?’
‘It's all sorted out.
I'll explain later.’
‘What's bin goin' on?’ burst out Ginnie.
Zach and Willie slipped out into the darkness
‘I say, Will,’ said Zach, taking Willie's arm, exciting night, eh?’
‘Yeh,’ replied Willie, still dazed.
‘I think you're, how do you say it?
Fine.
Yes, I think you're fine.’
Willie smiled.
‘We're both jolly jolly fine,’ he yelled and he dragged Willie on behind him.
They stumbled and laughed down the tiny lane to the Littles' cottage where they parted.
Willie walked quickly towards Tom's cottage.
He clutched the script tightly under his arm.
It felt so good tucked there, so snug and firm under his armpit like it was a part of him.
He ran into the cottage, flinging his cap and coat on to his peg.
Tom was sitting at the table, glueing coloured paper chains together.
He'd hung the clusters of holly that Willie had painted silver, on to the walls.
Willie looked up at them.
‘Pretty, ent they?’ he remarked.
‘You's beginnin' to sound like me,’ Tom said.
Willie stood by the table, holding the script in his hand.
Pushing a chair gently to one side, he placed it on the table and sat down.
Tom was unusually quiet.
He put the chains down and stood up.
Sammy followed him, tugging at his trouser legs.
He lifted him up absently, sat in the armchair and stared into the open range.
‘Shall I make us some tea?’ suggested Willie.
‘H'm,’ grunted Tom, a little startled.
‘What?’
Willie walked over to the kettle and filled it with water from the pitcher.
‘I'll make us some.’
‘Yes, that's right, boy, you do that.’
Willie suddenly became aware of how pale Tom looked and he felt alarmed for a moment.
Perhaps he was ill.
Sammy was sitting on his lap panting in a bewildered fashion.
He gave a small whine.
Tom looked up and caught Willie's worried gaze.
‘Is you all right?’ asked Willie, sitting on the stool.
‘Just had a bit of a wake-up, so to speak.’
‘Wake-up?’
‘You heard about Mr Bush?’
He nodded.
‘I bin asked to take over the choir like, for the concert, play the organ….’
‘Can you play?’
‘Used to when Rachel was alive.’
‘Who's Rachel?’
‘A gentle-hearted wild young girl I once loved.’
‘Where's she now?’
Tom pointed to the window behind him with his thumb.
‘She's the one under the oak tree.
Died after she had a baby.
She had scarlatina, see….’
‘What happened to the baby?’
‘Died soon after.
Buried together.’
He glanced at Willie.
‘Same name as yours too.’
‘William?’
He nodded and gave a deep sigh.
‘It's a long time since I touched that organ.
It'll take a good bit of practice.’
‘You goin' to do it then?’
He leant back and paused for a moment.
‘Yes,’ he said  at last and he glanced across at the table.
‘What's that then?’ he asked.
‘A new book?’
‘It's the script of Christmas Carol .’
‘Oh?
What you doin' with it then?’
‘I've bin asked to be in the play.’
‘As you?’ said Tom, leaning forward.
‘Yeh.’
‘I take it you'se goin' to do it then?’
Willie smiled, his cheeks burning with excitement.
‘Yeh.’
‘Reckon we'll both be needin' that tea extra sweet tonight, eh, boy?’