

B
Baal
It was among the Phoenicians that the great god Baal originated.
Literally meaning ‘lord’, he was the god of storms and rain, and also of fecundity.
Baal battled the spirits of the seas and trees for supremacy, emerging as their master and controller of the tides, seasons and resultant crops.
At one time, he even dominated Mot, the surly god of death, and banished him to exile in the desert.
Baal was typically depicted wearing a conical cap, decorated with a red band and bull's horns.
He was said to mate with cows when strengthening himself for battle.
Trapped by drought, he was eventually bested by Mot, who ripped the weakened god to pieces with a sharp knife and scattered pieces of his body ‘with a winnowing fan’ before scorching and grinding the remains to a powder.
Baal's name was latterly adopted as a title of honour, both by other gods and mortal kings and leaders, such as Hanni-bal.
Ba-Bird
One of the forms assumed by OSIRIS, the Egyptian god of creation who was exiled to the Underworld by HORUS the falcon.
Although his body never left the dark realm, the ba-bird's soul wandered daily amongst men and was often seen perched on the steps of the temple near the busy market-place, the better to observe mankind's activities.
Its feathers were turquoise and tipped with crimson, and towards sunset each day its beaked profile became that of Osiris, looking towards the Nile.
Bad Lord
The rowdy GHOST of a certain English nobleman, Lord Lonsdale.
A notorious drinker and womaniser, he flogged his workers and extorted high taxes.
Not content with being a thoroughly unpleasant fellow in life, he attempted to bully  Death in the life to come, first sitting bolt upright in his coffin in the church service, screaming and terrifying the minister.
His ghost became known as the Bad Lord, it being a noxious POLTERGEIST who irritates the family's descendants more as time goes by — roaring in the cellars, splintering furniture and frightening maidservants.
Badb
A fearsome giantess, the Irish goddess of war.
Battlefields were called the Lands of Badb, and her appearance was anxiously sought to determine omens.
Sometimes she took the form of a crow, sitting quietly by as the soldiers went into the fray.
More often, Badb was seen striding to a river on her great legs to wash clothes.
Woe betide any man who recognised one of these garments as his own, for it meant he would not survive the day.
Badb's cry was also to be feared as a death omen, it having been she who taught the BANSHEES to keen and wail.
Baka
An awesome GHOUL, native to the voodoo island of Haiti.
After death, members of a certain tribe return to earth as bakas, skeleton-like spirits who maim victims before attempting to eat their flesh.
They have been known to tire of tormenting their poor victims, often leaving them by the roadside, mortally wounded but still alive.
Balder
The son of ODIN and Frigga (see AESIR), Balder was the embodiment of all graces and virtues and, as such, was loved by Aesir and adored by mortals.
His name meant courageous, or bold.
Perhaps a personification of the sun, Balder was described in the Edda (a play about Scandinavian mythology) as being handsome, brave and of ‘shining’ appearance.
His flesh was thought inviolable, but Balder was killed by the blind war-god Hoder at the instigation of the eternal trouble-maker LOKI, by a mere sprig of mistletoe.
The whole world mourned him and the Aesir petitioned HEL, the goddess of the Underworld, to allow him to return.
The goddess agreed, on condition that all living things wept in unison to prove their grief.
This duly occurred, with one exception — an evil old crone named Thaukt (who  some say was Loki in disguise) who refused to weep for the god.
As a result, Balder was only allowed to return for a certain period of time, only to disappear and return again.
This pattern is repeated in the route of the sun's progress in the northern hemisphere today.
Balor
An ancient Celtic myth explained the puzzle of creation through the story of Balor.
This was a wicked demon who lived beneath a primordial swamp, in which seethed evil beings and spirits.
Balor's eyes were poisonous and he had succeeded in destroying all warmth and living things by staring at them.
However, one day as he dozed, the god of Spring (Lugh) flung a bright stone named Tathlum, which had escaped Balor's evil gaze, through his eye socket and succeeded in blinding him.
Thus it is explained why the sun reigns supreme for six months of the year, followed by deadly winter until such time as the god of Spring blinds him again.
Banshee
Also known as the ‘bean si’, this word is derived from the Celtic ‘Bean Seidh’(Woman of the Fairies).
To see a banshee, said the Irish, meant to foresee one's own death.
It is nearly always female and her voice is usually heard wailing near the family's ancestral home just prior to a person's death.
Many tales have been recorded of descendants of Irish families who have died far across the seas, just as a banshee has been heard to wail outside their birthplace in Ireland.
The banshee's lamentations are in a language no-one can understand, and her cry is an appalling blend of a wild goose's screech, the screams of an abandoned child and the howl of a wolf.
The banshee sometimes appears as a horrific woman with straggling black hair, one nostril, protruding front teeth, and eyes red from weeping.
Other traditions claim she is a pale and beautiful young woman wearing a grey cloak and green gown, or a HAG in a winding sheet, though most often she is attired in loose white drapery, ‘putting forward her mournful wail’ with the coming of dusk.
The Scots have a form of banshee, known as the Bean-Nighe  or Little Washer by the Ford.
This sad harbinger of death is the GHOST of a woman who died in childbirth, eternally washing grave-clothes of those who are about to die.
Anyone brave enough to approach her and suckle one of her wizened breasts will gain a wish, though they are more likely to be struck down in terror.
According to Lady Wilde:
…flying past in the moonlight, crying bitterly…this spirit is mournful beyond all other sounds on earth and betokens certain death…whenever it is heard in the silence of the night.
Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms and Superstitions of Ireland
When several banshee keen together, it means the death of some very great or holy person is imminent.
Baobhan Sith
An evil spirit found in the Highlands of Scotland.
It is rather like a BANSHEE, with wails like those of a woman and which pierce the countryside for miles around.
However, Baobhan Sith is far more dangerous, taking the form of a succubus and drinking the blood of young men who are abroad at night.
The spirit appears first as a raven or a crow, then as a beautiful maid in a green dress and plaid sash.
Wary men should attempt a glimpse of such a girl's feet, should she appear by their fireside, for if they take the form of hooves it is wiser to flee.
Barguest
A species of BOGEY-BEAST or mischievous HOBGOBLIN which has horns, claws, pointed fangs and blood-red eyes.
They are particularly disposed to frighten or harm a wicked child; a well-behaved one is less at risk.
Most common in the north of England, they pass along streets at night, making horrid shrieks and scaring folk from their slumbers.
Barnacle Geese
For centuries, European people ate the Solan goose on Fridays, believing it to be more fish than bird.
The filaments on the underside of barnacles were found to resemble the bird's feathers, so it was assumed the goose emerged half-grown from the barnacles clustered on floating logs.
Gerard, the  sixteenth-century herbalist, speaks of:
broken pieces of old ships on which is found certain spume or froth, which in time breedeth into shells, and the fish which is hatched therefrom is in shape and habit like a bird…
The Herball (1597)
Basilisk
This native of the Libyan deserts derives its name from the Greek basileus (king), for it is the deadliest and most formidable of serpents.
Also known as the COCKATRICE it has a cock's comb on its head and it is born from an egg laid by a rooster and hatched by a snake.
Although its body was serpentine it moved, not by slithering along the ground, but by rearing the forward half of its body along in a coil.
Pliny said, ‘all other serpents do flee from it and are afraid’.
One baleful glance from its enormous eyes could kill, as would its touch, while its breath would kill even birds which flew far overhead.
Beaumont speaks of the ‘basilisk's death-dealing eye’ in The Woman Hater , and in Christian art it was the absolute symbol of evil and sin:
…like a boar
Plunging his tusk in mastiff's gore,
Or basilisk, when roused, whose breath
Teeth, sting and eyeballs are all death.
KING The Art of Love 
This monster may only be killed by sighting its own horrid reflection, though weasels have been known to best it in battle.
Other protective measures include rue — no basilisk can come near a patch of this herb — and a cock's crow, at the sound of which a basilisk will perish.
Bast
Also known as Bastet, this was the daughter of ISIS and the supreme fertility goddess of Egypt.
She controlled the sun's rays and adopted the cat or lion as her emblem.
In art, she is often depicted with a cat's head while carrying a shield and rattle, to frighten away thunder-storms, and a basket to carry grain.
The patroness of musicians and dancers, marvellous festivals  were held in Bast's honour.
Cats and cat statues were worshipped, and mummified cats were buried with much ceremony in the goddess' sanctuary at Bubastis.
The classical author and traveller, Herodotus (c.480–c.425BC), was much astonished by the devotion shown to Bast's chosen animals, and wrote:
When a fire breaks out, very strange things happen to the cats.
The Egyptians gather in a line, thinking more of the cats than of putting out the flames, but the cats dart through or leap over the men and spring into the fire.
Then there is a great mourning…dwellers in a house where a cat has died…shave their eyebrows…
During the festivals of Bast, hunting lions, a favourite sport at other times, was a crime punishable by death.
Bayard
An enchanted horse of medieval folklore which was incredibly swift.
Originally stolen by a wizard from a DRAGON's cave, the Emperor Charlemagne gave it to the four sons of Aymon.
If only one son mounted, the horse was an ordinary size; but, as all four mounted, the beast's body elongated to accommodate them all.
Even today, the name is used to describe any valuable horse or other animal.
Bayard sometimes appears as a cloud, scudding across the sky on Midsummer's Day.
Bean-Nighe
see BANSHEE
Behemoth
A Hebrew monster described as The Lord of the Mammals.
So enormous was it that the behemoth was believed to drink whole rivers and consume one-thousand mountains a day.
God realised that this creature could not exist alongside the giant fish, LEVIATHAN, else the world would be entirely destroyed.
He therefore decreed that before either could reproduce they must fight to the death, with the flesh from the loser being fed to deserving men.
At this edict, the leviathan disappeared to the depths of the oceans, while the behemoth lay down to sleep, the mighty folds of his body becoming the  Himalayan mountains.
Rather more realistically, perhaps, the behemoth has been latterly identified as either the hippopotamus or rhinoceros.
The poet James Thomson described it thus:
Behold!
In plaited mail,
Behemoth rears his head…
Bellerophon
The grandson of ATLAS, Bellerophon was a beautiful if rather arrogant youth.
Being handsome, he had enjoyed only good fortune and fine adventures in his life, not the least of which included slaying the CHIMERA and defeating the AMAZONS.
HERA gave him a golden bridle with which he tamed the splendid horse, PEGASUS.
He then decided to ride his winged steed to the top of Mount Olympus and take his place with the throng of gods and goddesses.
ZEUS was, however, unimpressed by Bellerophon's temerity and sent a gadfly to sting Pegasus on the rump.
As the horse buckled, Bellerophon was unseated and fell to earth.
Although he did not die, his handsome face was shattered and he was condemned to wander the world in poverty, begging for alms.
Bergmonck
According to many legends, caches of treasure are usually guarded from meddlesome mortals by a spirit or god.
In Germany, this spirit often takes the form of a ‘bergmonck’ or huge, pale monk who wards off travellers venturing too close to a mine rich with lodes of gold.
He is thought to be the GHOST of a good friar who hid golden candlesticks and chalices from marauding heathen tribes during the religious wars.
Bicorn
surely a creature of some wry medieval imagination, the bicorn was a hybrid of a panther and a cow.
It was said to dine exclusively on the bodies of hen-pecked husbands.
The two-horned creature's plump and well-fed appearance was attributed to the fact that its prey was so plentiful.
Big Ears
The name of the green-eyed demon cat of Scotland  which would materialise as part of the occult ceremony called Taghairn.
A gruesome ritual undertaken by the sorcerer-in-charge was to roast cats on spits until Big Ears was goaded into appearing.
Grudgingly, he would grant all requests so as to cease the torture inflicted on his friends.
Even today, tourists may see the claw-marks on a stone where Big Ears was said to have appeared the last time this ceremony was performed.
Black Annis
Described by Milton as a ‘blew, meager hag’, Black Annis was a hideous, cannibalistic spirit with a blue face, a single, piercing eye and iron claws.
She was thought to haunt the Dane Hills of Leicestershire in England, and to live in a cave she had dug out of the rock with her own hands.
It was her habit to hide behind a nearby oak tree until dark, leap out and catch children in the vicinity, and then devour them.
Only the grinding of her teeth alerted her prey, though other reports said Black Annis gave away her whereabouts with a trail of bones.
Black Annis was sometimes associated with the Celtic goddess, Danu, who was responsible for calling up storms.
Other tales claim she was the GHOST of a monstrous and savage cat that once prowled the area.
The latter gave rise to the custom of ‘baiting Black Annis’, with a dead cat soaked in aniseed, every Easter in an attempt to make her show herself so the priest could exorcise this malevolent spirit.
As recently as the second World War, Ruth Tongue quoted a child as saying:
When Black Annis howled, you could hear her five miles away and then even the poor people in their huts fastened skins across the window and put witch-herbs above it to keep her away safe.
Forgotten Folk Tales of the English Counties
Black Baroness
A well-known German GHOST, the Black Baroness is the spirit of Marianna, wife of the Grand Duke Ferdinand.
She appears only to male descendants of the family who slaughtered her own long ago, dumping their bodies in Lake Darmstadt.
Although her black garments and veil are a  sure omen of death, the Black Baroness's charming laugh and exquisitely beautiful face ensure she always traps her victim.
Her favourite method is to seduce the fellow at a ball, then lead him to the garden between dances — the gardener will later find the body which appears, strangely, to have been immersed in lake-water for many weeks.
Black Dogs
Also known as Black Hounds, these dangerous animals are about the size of a pony, and menace the Devonshire roads of south-western England at dusk.
They have fiery red eyes and some say they are the Devil's own pets, roaming the countryside with him each evening in search of the newly dead.
Their howl will make the blood run cold, their footfalls make no sound and they leave a spoor like black gunpowder on the ground.
Folklorists attribute various behaviours to Black Dogs; most usually, those who have the misfortune of seeing one will die in the coming year.
However, some have been known to guide travellers and one, known as the Church Grim, was buried in a graveyard to deter thieves and evil GHOSTS.
Black Dogs themselves may be the unhappy ghosts of humans, dead untimely, who are doomed to haunt their old homes.
They may be laid to rest by ringing a bell which has been blessed in church when they are sighted, then burying the bell in one stretch of water and the clapper in another.
The Black Dog will only be able to resume its hauntings if the two items are re-united.
Invariably jet-black and headless (though sometimes having the heads of human beings) Black Dogs have been reported for centuries as loping along lanes by ancient churchyards.
Two of the most famous Black Dogs in the British Isles include Moddy Dhu and Black Shuck.
Moddy Dhu was the PHANTOM dog of the Isle of Man, and the sight of it caused immediate death.
Black Shuck, or Old Shuck, was so named from the Anglo-Saxon scucca (demon).
His appearance warned of a death in the family, and, as this old poem suggests, the beast usually manifested itself standing in a graveyard, howling:
Grisly ghosts have leave to play
And dead men's souls with courage brave
Skip from out each several grave
And walk around when the Black Shuck comes.
A fearsome Black Dog from Lancashire in northern England is Skriker, who has large feet and huge, green saucer-shaped eyes which hypnotise its victim.
Another is Padfoot, a creature with long, smooth hair who will creep unheard alongside a traveller, then suddenly rattle a chain, much to that person's consternation.
Blue Cap
An industrious GHOST thought to haunt Scottish mines.
He expected to be offered wages that would have been paid to any other miner; on receipt of them, he would undertake tasks with great speed and strength.
His name was derived from his habit of wearing a blue hood of coarsely woven cloth which masked his face.
If any foolish mine-owner tried to cheat Blue Cap of his rightful wages, the ghost would assume the form of a blue flame and scorch the inside of the mine-shaft, weakening the pylons which supported the roof.
This recriminatory behaviour was typical of the nature of Scottish soldiers, who would not countenance any breach of fair play, as sir Walter Scott testified:
England shall many a day
Tell of the bloody fray
When the blue bonnets came over the border…
Blue Hag
of the Highlands see CAILLEACH BHEUR
Blue Men
Also known as Minch Men or Blue Men of the Minch, these are evil-natured, blue-skinned mermen (see MERMAID), often considered to be fallen angels.
They possess enormous strength and enjoy tormenting sailors.
Their favourite sport entails swimming the straits in northern Scotland to better waylay and wreck passing freighters.
Fortunately, their mischief can be thwarted by the ship's captain if he is adept with rhyming banter and riddles, for the Blue Men  love to be entertained and leave a ship with good grace if they are bested in a game of wits.
Boa
This beast was a cross between an enormous DRAGON and a snake, having great purple and green scales, a forked tail and long fangs.
According to Pliny, the name was derived from bos (cow), and referred to the supposition that boas slithered between farms, sucking whole herds of cattle dry before eating them.
Edward Topsell described this phenomenon in his seventeenth-century Histories of Serpents , the boa being:
…a kind of dragone which Italy doth breed
Men say, and upon the milk of cows doth feed…
Bogadjimbri
Northern Australian Aborigines attribute all things in creation to twin boy gods named Bogadjimbri.
Born of Dilga, the Earth Mother, they fashioned the first genitals from the magic fungus for the hitherto sexless and infertile humans who had aimlessly wandered the earth.
They also taught man the rite of circumcision and the secret languages of birds and animals so that he was able to trap or befriend them, and showed him how to divine water.
The brothers Bogadjimbri grew like giant trees until they reached the sky; there, one day, their youthful laughter annoyed the wild cat, Ngariman, who slashed at the pair with its powerful claws and killed them.
This so enraged their mother Dilga that she drowned all the Cat-people in a river of milk and reincarnated her sons, one as a giant water-snake, the other as a placid white cloud.
Bogey-beast
A mischievous HOBGOBLIN who preys on disobedient children and keeps them away from harm; hence water bogies frighten children from pools, garden bogies deter them from trampling flower-beds.
A well-known Yorkshire bogey-beast is Awd Coggie, who haunts woods and orchards, protecting the fruit and nuts from being damaged or stolen.
similarly the Gooseberry Wife, found on the Isle of Wight, assumes the form of a large, hairy caterpillar who guards the gooseberry crop.
Also known as a boogeyman or bogeyman, one can only have an effect if its victim pays heed to it.
Thus, the best antidote is to whistle and concentrate on thinking of something completely different.
Boggart
Boggarts are particularly mischievous BROWNIES who are mostly found in Lancashire in the north of England.
Unlike most denizens of Fairyland, they tend to travel alone.
With their ragged appearance, long yellow teeth and simple intelligence, they rank quite low on the social register.
They delight in playing tricks on mortals, though they will cease to give trouble if politely requested to do so.
If they have been upset or ill-treated, however, they can become very unpleasant and will creep into a bedroom at night, place a clammy hand on the unsuspecting victim's face, then snatch all the blankets away.
Bogie
Bogie is a general term for a mischievous or evil-natured GOBLIN.
They were once thought to be very dangerous indeed and believed to steal infants for the Devil to torment in Hell.
The Scots say they can only be driven away by holding up an open Bible in their face.
All have the ability to change shape at will, most assuming icy fingers and yellow eyes that glow in the dark.
sometimes they take the shape of a huge black dog, lurking by lonely roads or in tree trunks.
They are most malicious when they prey on liars, murderers and thieves, for they hate to see injustice.
Spenser in The Faerie Queene referred to:
a ghastly bogye, which doth them greatly affear.
A favourite method of torment sees the bogie leap on its victim's back as they travel alone at night on a country road, clasping hard hands over the person's eyes so they cannot see.
In the case of a thief, he will find he has been relieved of his own purse when he finally manages to jettison his passenger.
In a more mellow mood, the bogie will simply play practical jokes.
For example, the Hedley Kow from Northumberland in England will assume the form of a beautiful girl and beckon a gullible lad  her way, only to disappear.
similarly, farmers in the area will struggle fruitlessly with bales of hay, only To hear raucous laughter when they tumble over as the weight is suddenly lifted.
Boneless
A shapeless GHOST who was said to frighten travellers and naughty children.
It could possibly have been an animal, for witnesses have described it as being ‘woolly’ and having a stale smell, rather like a sheep.
Ruth Tongue quotes an Oxford person describing Boneless as:
A shapeless summat as slides behind and alongside in the dark night.
Many's have died of fright through his following on.
They can't never tell about him, except he's a big shadow and shapeless.
Forgotten Folk Tales of the English Counties
Boobrie
The comical appearance of the Scottish boobrie belies its bloodthirsty nature.
Rather like a gigantic duck, it has webbed feet which leave prints the length of a house, and a loud honking cry.
Eye-witnesses claim it dives beneath the surface of Loch Argyll, and its footprints may be seen on the muddy shore each dawn.
The scourge of shepherds and farmers, the boobrie is greedy and will gobble up a whole flock of sheep in just one night.
Boogey
see BUGABOO
Booka
see BWCA
Brag
A mischievous kind of GOBLIN from the north of England and Scotland, with the ability to change its shape.
Most often it resembles a horse, though sometimes it looks like a calf with a white flag around its neck, or an ass.
In a particularly perverse mood it may assume the shape of a naked man flapping a white sheet, or a chanting girl, or a giant, singing white cat.
The brag lives in rivers or lakes and the object of all his eccentric ploys is to lure an unwary passer-by into the water for amusement.
Brahma
The Creator of the World in Indian mythology, his four faces contemplate the four far comers of the world he has made.
He is depicted seated on a swan, or goose.
In his four hands he holds a sceptre, a string of beads, a bow and a book of scripture.
Brahma was thought to have sprung from a golden egg floating in primeval waters, or ‘brahman’.
Along with VISHNU the preserver, and SHIVA the Destroyer, he constituted the Vedic Triad.
As supreme god of the Devas, Brahma was responsible for the giant god-serpent, ANANTA, churning the ocean so it produced the milk of immortality for the gods to drink each day.
He also created the first man, Purusha, from the navel of Vishnu.
Brahma was, by and large, faithful to his beautiful consort, Sarasvati; however, an incestuous lapse with his daughter Vak resulted in the creation of mis-shapen godlings named Asuras, whom he ultimately had to destroy.
The Brahmin priests are the highest caste in the system of Hinduism and they worship Brahma as the founder of their religious system.
Camoens wrote in the Lusiad that:
Whate'er in India holds the sacred name
Of piety or lore, the Brahmins claim:
In wildest rituals, vain and painful, lost,
Brahma, their founder, as a god they boast.
Brahmadaitya
A benign Indian GHOST, thought to be the spirit of a gentle Brahmin priest.
Like BRAHMA, the divine Creator of the Universe, these ghostly acolytes feature four faces and four hands.
Thus they may observe the whole earth and guard their master against SHIVA.
Brahmadaitya are kind to humans, though should one be foolish enough to chop down the palm tree where this spirit lives, the offender's neck will be snapped, like a twig.
BRAN
A fabled god-giant of Irish myth, Bran was a prince and younger brother of King Lyr.
Story-tellers gave him the title The Blessed, in reference to his many artistic talents, for Bran was a gifted harpist and poet.
He was also considered blessed by the  gods for the extraordinary good fortune he experienced on his travels.
A brave adventurer amidst both mortal and fairy worlds, Bran was best remembered for his voyage to the Island of Joy, a delightful place where sorrow, sickness and death were unknown.
On his return, Bran penned many lovely ballads describing his experiences, and taught his countrymen how to create sweet music and beautiful lyrics.
Bran was also a zealous patriot and served his country well as a warrior.
When he was finally slain in battle, he asked that his severed head be buried facing the ocean so that no foreign armies could set foot in Ireland without him knowing it.
Brollachan
A Scottish type of BROWNIE.
Gentle natured and helpful around the house, this fairy is very dark with long, strong arms and a shapeless body covered in hair.
It rarely speaks, though if frightened it may bleat like a goat.
some occasionally have goats' shanks and hooves as well.
Brown Men
Also known as Brown Men of the Moors or Muirs, these DWARVES have red hair, brown skin and twinkling brown eyes.
They are loved as the protectors of all beasts and birds.
Brown Men only eat nuts, berries and apples, and use their bows and arrows to chase hunters away from innocent game.
Anyone who kills or traps an animal after being warned away by a Brown Man will become very dizzy and lose all sense of direction.
The angered Brown Man will then push the miscreant into a nearby stream or pool, pelt him with leaves and twigs, and abandon him to contemplate his crime.
Brownie
The best-known and most industrious of all HOBGOBLINS, being found throughout most of Europe and the United Kingdom.
Typically, brownies are small and shaggy haired, with a brown, wrinkled face.
About the height of a small child and dressed in ragged brown clothes, they are very wiry and strong, despite having no fingers or toes and, in the case of Scottish brownies, no nose.
When a brownie adopts a house he happily takes responsibility for many household tasks, which he  performs at night.
He will cook meals, wash floors, run errands, reap and mow crops and tend animals.
He particularly cherishes bees and will sing to them.
If there are other servants, he will expose their laziness — in fact, it was once said that brownies were originally created to help relieve men of the burden caused by Adam.
Martin wrote:
It was not long since every family of considerable substance was haunted by a spirit they called Browny, which did several sorts of work and this was the reason why they gave him offerings on what was called Browny's stone.
Scotland
This Browny's stone was helpful when the householder was brewing beer, for it hastened the fermentation process with its fairy magic.
For their work, brownies are traditionally rewarded with honey-cakes and cream.
The most famous brownie was a swiss house-spirit called Jack O'Bowl, so named from the custom of placing a bowl of fresh, sweet cream outside the cow byre every evening, for, by morning, the bowl would be empty.
such gifts must appear to be left ‘by accident’.
If the brownies think they are being bribed, they will leave and never return.
This happened when a gift of clothes was left for one brownie, who cried:
What have we here, hempen, hampen!
Here will I never more tread nor stampen!
TRADITIONAL
Brownies are very temperamental.
One whose mowing and threshing of a corn crop was criticised threw the whole harvest over a cliff, saying:
It's ne'er to be mowed by me again
I'll scatter it o'er the Raven Stane
They'll hae some wark ere it's mowed again!
TRADITIONAL
Bucephalus
The mighty steed ridden by Alexander the Great, bought from a Thessalian merchant for thirteen talents.
The  name Bucephalus means ‘bull-headed’, a reference to the beast's mighty strength.
It was also very beautiful, possessing an ivory horn like a unicorn's and a peacock's tail.
Alexander was said to be the only mortal Bucephalus would ever respect and the only one who was successful in saddling and mounting him; with all other men, Bucephalus had sensed their greed and weakness and had spurned them.
so loyal was he that he rejected his cousins, the UNICORNS, when Alexander's men attacked them for their horns.
When he eventually died, Alexander built a city in Bucephalus' honour and died himself shortly afterwards.
Bugaboo
Known also as Boogey, this was originally a monstrous GOBLIN introduced in the tales of the Italian romancers, specifically The Bug Bear , a play of 1565 about magicians.
And in Shakespeare's Hamlet ‘bugs and goblins’ were feared.
The word ‘bugaboo’ is Indian in origin, describing friendly male and female spirits who guarded children against other, more evil-intentioned entities.
The Russians refer to ‘buka’, the Welsh ‘barog’ means spiteful, while the Scots usher forward ‘boggle-bos’, ‘bucca-bos’, ‘bodachs’and ‘bugbears’as the solution for misbehaviour in very small children, especially if they refuse to go to sleep when they should.
Large, hairy and gruff-voiced, with an ugly, grinning face, these bear-like creatures come down the chimney to the nursery.
Unlike the mischievous and often unpleasant BOGIE, however, their appearance belies their nature for they are quite harmless, having neither claws nor teeth.
As such, they are part of an extremely ancient tradition for Assyrian mothers who used to scare recalcitrant children with the scarecrow Narses; and a warning widely repeated today is very similar: ‘You'd better do as I say, or the boogeyman will get you.’
Bunyip
Variously known amongst Aboriginal tribes as Moolgewante, Wowee Wowee and Kine Pratie, bunyips are curious and often bloodthirsty beings.
The far-off booming or barking  sound heard near swamps and billabongs during rainfall periods is ascribed to the bunyip, and the Aboriginals think it causes rheumatism in those who hear it.
Horrific to behold, with a matted crop of weeds for hair and feet turned backwards, the bunyip has a crocodile's tail and the head and torso of either an emu, bandicoot or malevolent man.
A relic from the Dreamtime, when giant goannas and kangaroos were to be seen on the horizon, the bunyip captures women and children to eat.
They hibernate during the dry season by burrowing deep into the damp sand.
Buttery spirits
There was a strong moral belief in old England that evil spirits only had power over ill-gotten goods, thus explaining why ABBEY LUBBERS could only wreak havoc amongst monks once corrupt behaviour had been evidenced.
similarly, the Buttery spirits were to be found haunting inns where the proprietor was dishonest or greedy.
An old tale tells of a holy priest who visited his nephew, a scurrilous tavern-keeper.
This man used cheap tricks in his work, serving rotten meat and watered-down ale to customers, yet could not understand why he was not malting a profit.
His uncle pointed out the presence of a gross Buttery spirit, swilling the rancid contents of the larder, and chastised the tavern-keeper for his wicked ways.
When he again came to visit he found a very different situation, with the starving Buttery spirit stretching out in vain for the wholesome food on the larder shelves.
The tavern-keeper had found honesty to be the best policy and, in addition to ceasing to use shoddy ingredients, had marked all dishes and food with crosses.
Bwca
A Welsh variety of BROWNIE, also known as Bwciod of Booka.
They have dark skin, long noses and wear shabby farmers' smocks.
The bwca dislike teetotallers, preferring the warmth and comfort of an inn.
If humoured and treated with respect the bwca can be very helpful.
He will churn the butter if the kitchen is clean and tidy and a bowl of cream has been set out for him.
However, if mistreated the bwca will create havoc in  the household by smashing crockery, pinching children, tearing clothes, telling secrets out loud, even tossing babies out of their cradles.
Once this occurs, the bwca will not regain his earlier good humour, so the householder will have to enlist the help of a soothsayer to banish the sprite.
An old folktale tells of a bwca who was tricked by a servant girl into drinking urine instead of the customary cream.
He promptly left the farm and went to another, where he helped the maid with her spinning, though refused to divulge his name.
she pretended to leave the bwca alone one evening, only to creep to his door and eavesdrop on his singing:
How she would laugh, did she know
That Gwarwyn-a-throt is my name!
TRADITIONAL
The maid mocked him for his name, and so angry was the sprite that, as he left, fire irons were thrown through walls, dogs howled, doors slammed and all the household fires were extinguished forever.
C
Cailleach Bheur
A nature spirit who often appears as a wild boar or a old crone (Cailleach Bheur, meaning ‘old woman’).
Also known as The Blue Hag of the Highlands, due to the colour of her skin and hair, she personifies the spirit of winter and can freeze the ground with her staff.
During this period she herds stray animals to her seashore cave, where she feeds them during the cold months.
The Cailleach Bheur fights the oncoming Spring with her staff, but will always lose the battle, hiding beneath a holly bush where green grass never grows, until the seasons change again.
Cairn Maiden
The Cairn Maiden was a beautiful, golden-haired girl who appeared at harvest time.
She may have originated with the notion of human sacrifice to ensure plentiful crops, for her actions were often bloodthirsty.
She would watch the harvesters swinging their scythes through the open corn and, towards the close of day, she would appear in the path of the lad who looked strongest and most virile.
On and on she would lure him, enticing him to cut every sheaf left in the meadow, until midnight came and he was faint with exhaustion.
She would then face him and, saying her own sickle needed sharpening, neatly slice off his head.
Caith Sith
The most magical of all fairy cats, found in the Scottish Highlands.
It was large and black with a round white patch on its chest.
While BIG EARS was a demon cat, Caith Sith was more benevolent, having been known to mind children and bar the doorway to intruders.
Caladrius
A noble bird with the neck of a swan and strange  green eyes, believed to have the power of foretelling the future.
Well-known in medieval Europe, the caladrius was said to herald the death and birth of kings.
It would sit at the foot of the sick-bed and, if it gazed at the patient, its eyes would magically absorb the malaise so the man had a renewed chance of life.
If, however, the bird looked the other way, death was inevitable.
Camazotz
The ancient Mayan Indians worshipped Camazotz, the god of hunting and fate.
Usually portrayed as a bat with two curled fangs, Camazotz was also the Lord of the Wind, and controlled thunder, rain and lightning.
He jealously guarded the secrets of the future and Afterworld, though he would offer warriors the chance to play dice, gambling for the gift of immortality.
If they failed at the game, Camazotz would swiftly behead them, and their spirits appeared as stars in the eastern sky.
If the god was feeling generous towards the victim, he would instead be turned into a fruit bat, to serve Camazotz and his court.
Camel-lepard
Also known as the Camel Leopardel, or the lybbarde, this beast was believed to be the offspring of a panther or leopard and a camel.
It had the neck and head of a camel with two long horns curved backward, and the dappled body of a leopard.
Much noted for its courage, the camel-lepard was widely reproduced in early English heraldry to communicate the virtues of diligence and bravery.
It is also believed to have been the word used by Romans when they were attempting to describe the giraffe.
However, more recent sightings by Archbishop Trench in the sixteenth century suggest it was a beast in its own right:
It is…a creature combining, though with infinitely more grace, yet some of the height and even the proportions of a camel, with the spotted skin of the pard.
Catoplebas
A huge, buffalo-like creature, thought by the Greeks to dwell in Ethiopia.
Its name in Greek means ‘that which looks downwards’, a reference to its head being so heavy  that it would only loll lazily in the hot sand, waiting for a victim to walk by.
Its sluggish habit was not a hindrance, though, for it could kill with a mere glance or whiff of its breath, as it fed on poisonous herbs whose odour was fatal to man.
If the catoplebas was especially peckish it would gnaw on its own forelegs.
Cauld Lad
Also known as the Cold Lad, a sad little GHOST of a stable-boy who was murdered by his lord.
He was locked in a chilly room as punishment for some misdemeanour and there he froze to death.
His ghost wandered the Essex farmhouse in eastern England ever after, its teeth chattering and little body trembling.
Sometimes he would make himself useful in the kitchen by cleaning and tidying; however, if accidentally locked in any room the Cauld lad would make a fearful mess, overturning furniture and scrabbling at the lock.
If he wandered into a room where an ill person lay, and touched them, saying:
Cold, cold, forever cold
You shall be cold forever more
the patient would surely die.
Ceasg
As with most water fairies, this Scottish MERMAID combines the qualities of beauty and treachery.
She has the head and breasts of a lovely woman and a salmon's tail.
Her hair changes from dark green in the water to bright gold when she emerges, and she dresses it with fine jewelled ornaments from her underwater palace.
If netted, she will grant her captor three wishes or gifts, though she will turn the spell against the mortal if possible.
The Ceasg is known to be dangerous and will swallow a man whole, possibly in memory of a fish-tailed god to whom human sacrifices were made.
Centaur
A lusty race giving allegiance only to EROS, god of love, and DIONYSIUS, god of wine.
possessing the head and torso of a man and the body and legs of a potent stallion, centaurs were  the offspring of the first King of Thessaly and the cloud Nephele.
They are extremely handsome and sensual, and glory in a drunken brawl.
Witness their behaviour at the Lapithae wedding feast when the centaur Eurythion tried to rape the bride.
His extraordinary behaviour was immortalised in sculpture in the Temple of ZEUS.
The guests fell upon the centaurs and drove them out of the country, so they are now a rare sight indeed.
Sometimes called ‘sagittary’:
The dreadful Sagittary appals our numbers…
Shakespeare Troilus & Cressida 
Centaurs are often depicted in art as warlike creatures, brandishing clubs made from young pine trees, spears or arrows.
Cerberus
The grim, three-headed dog of Greek mythology, Cerberus was the guardian of HADES.
His three heads represent the past, present and future; his spittle poisons and burns the earth; he has a mane of snakes and a serpent's tail; his eyes are watchful and his ears are constantly pricked, listening for newcomers as he admits the dead and devours the still-living.
Cerberus is nonetheless fallible, for HERCULES managed to overpower him in his Twelfth Labour with his bare hands while Orpheus lulled him to sleep with soft music.
The Greeks would attempt to placate Cerberus by placing gifts of honey and cake in the coffins of the newly dead.
Cernunnos
An ancient Celtic god who features on coins and pottery ware, possibly because his association with fertility was thought to bring a plenitude of wealth or food.
Cernunnos is portrayed as an interesting amalgam of various cultures, his one-shouldered tunic being reminiscent of a Roman toga and his cross-legged position being rather like that of Buddha.
Cernunnos is most often described as The Homed One, for his head is adorned with reindeer antlers.
Festivals held in his honour were attended by priests carrying reindeer pelts, and devotees of his cult would drink a beverage of the powdered  ‘velvet’ from the tips of the antlers, said to produce visions and act as an aphrodisiac.
Chagrin
A strong belief in the supernatural characterises communities of Romany gypsies.
A particularly evil GHOST is the chagrin, also known as the ‘cogrino’ or ‘nargirin’, who assumes the shape of a large yellow hedgehog.
Chagrin is an omen of death and a messenger of the devil, ‘o'Beugh’.
It delights in startling the horses which pull gypsy caravans; to protect them, therefore, horses wore bridles hung with small, holed stones, the breast-bones of blue jays and kingfishers, and four-leaf clovers.
Changeling
Fairies greatly value human babies as a means of introducing new blood to their dwindling race, so have been known to steal them and leave a useless object behind.
This may be a sickly, peevish fairy child, an aged fairy no longer of value, or even a piece of wood carved to resemble the stolen child.
Characterised by a swollen head, unearthly howling and a nasty temper, these misfits were, oddly, known as Children of the Quiet Folk.
Shakespeare, in Henry IV , probably echoed the sentiments of many parents of changelings when he wrote:
Oh, that it could be proved
That some night-tripping fairy had exchanged
In cradle-clothes, our children as they lay
And called mine Percy, his Plantagenet!
Then would I have his Harry, and he mine.
Changelings were sometimes said to have been afflicted with ‘elf-shot’, that is, shot with an elfin arrow and afflicted with an unknown disease.
Tangled hair was another indication of fairy interference, for one of Queen Mab's favourite amusements was to tie people's hair in knots, or ‘elf-locks’, as Shakespeare averred in Romeo and Juliet :
This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night
And bakes the elf-locks in foul, sluttish hairs.
Often, ill or retarded babies were thought to be changelings and were miserably tortured in an attempt to force them to revert to fairy form.
One method was to trick the changeling into revealing its great age; another was to burn the changeling on a hot shovel and throw it on the fire.
The fairy would then fly up the chimney and the human baby would be found at the door.
As a precaution, since cold iron is repulsive to fairies, scissors or nails could be suspended over the crib to keep the baby safe.
Chimera
The chimera was born of the half-serpent, half-woman ECHIDNA and the giant TYPHON.
Homer described it as a monster with the body of a goat, tail of a DRAGON and head of a lion, belching flames.
Virgil commented similarly in The  Aeneid  :
Amid the troops, and like the leading god,
High o'er the rest in arms the graceful Turnus rode —
A triple pile of plumes his crest adorned,
On which with belching flames Chimera burned:
The more the kindled combat rises higher,
The more with fury burns the blazing fire.
Some sources claim the chimera was an allegory of a mountain in ancient Lycia, with a volcano on top, the middle affording pasture for goats and the foothills being infested with snakes.
Chimera was said to have been eventually slain by BELLEROPHON, riding the flying horse PEGASUS, who was able to fly through the air and dodge the monster's blasts of flame.
In latter times, Philip II of Spain adopted the heraldic device of Bellerophon attacking the chimera, saying it represented the heretical England which he, also, intended to destroy.
Chiron
Also known as Cheiron, this was a CENTAUR whose sober and studious character was very different from the rest of his race.
Famous for his wisdom and knowledge of medicine, Chiron educated many Greek heroes and scholars, including Homer, AESCULAPIUS and Heracles.
He was also a great friend of ACHILLES, whom he taught music and hunting; according to ancient myth, Chiron taught Achilles to run so swiftly by setting him to chase wild deer and eat their raw flesh.
When Chiron died, JUPITER placed him amongst the stars where this fabled beast, holding an arrow upon bended bow, is now known as the zodiacal sign of Sagittarius.
Chiveface
An unusual, cow-like creature found exclusively in Britain, although its name is derived from the French chive-vache (sorry-cow).
It was said to prey solely on virtuous and obedient women and, because its food was so scarce, the chiveface was always hungry and appeared to be only skin and bone.
Chaucer, in The Merchant's Tale , had this to say:
O noble wyves, ful of heigh prudence
Let noon humilitie your tonges nayle:
Ne lat no clerk have cause or diligence
To write of you a story of such mervayle
As of Griseldes, pacient and kynde
Lest chichi-vache you swolwe in hir entraile.
Circe
The powerful Queen of the Aegean, Circe assumed otherworldly status through her extraordinary abilities as an enchantress.
The hawk was sacred to her, and was used to depict her symbolically in art.
The daughter of a sea-NYMPH and HELIOS the sun god, Circe was a powerful sorceress who despised men and would poison and trick them whenever she could.
For instance, when Odysseus and his men landed on her island, she transformed them into pigs, an exploit referred to by Milton in Comus thus:
Who knows not Circe
The daughter of the Sun, whose charmed cup
Whoever tasted lost his upright shape
And downward fell into a grovelling swine?
Odysseus was able to escape her wiles by virtue of a magic herb, moly, given him by HERMES.
He further conquered her by ensuring she fell in love with him, and she bore him three sons.
Cluricaun
Also known as clurican, these merry folk are closely related to the Irish LEPRECHAUN.
They usually appear as wrinkled old men, and have knowledge of leather purses of gold coins, usually hidden in the roots of trees or in ruined castles.
It is no surprise they all have bright red noses, for their two great loves are tobacco and whisky; they rarely appear without a pipe and are known to raid cellars, particularly favouring homemade ale.
When uproariously drunk, they will ride sheep by moonlight, throwing their hats in the air and whooping with glee as they drive the confused flock in circles.
Coatlique
The earth mother-goddess of the Aztecs.
Of rather grim appearance, she wore a tunic of writhing snakes.
Her head was made up of two snakeheads and her sagging breasts bore witness to her eternal fertility.
0 n her back hung thirteen leather thongs, studded with emerald snails, which signified the planets in the sky.
Coatlique was thought to feed upon corpses buried within the soil, and wore a necklace of the skulls.
She was, however, a generous goddess, and would give freely of her magic to that same soil so it could support the next generation with crops; she was, therefore, both a grave and a womb at once.
Coatlique is often depicted with a child in her arms, and the first man was thought to have sprung from her as a result of divine conception.
The story goes that, one day, the goddess was dusting and picked up a ball of lint dropped by a blue humming-bird, placing it inside her apron.
As a result, she gave birth to the first mortal man ‘without sin’.
Coblynau
Also known as Koblernigh, these Welsh mining fairies are cousins of the Cornish KNOCKERS.
Ugly but friendly, they are about eighteen inches high, always dirty and wear red handkerchiefs with yellow spots round about their heads.
They are blessed with good humour and bring luck to mortal miners by knocking at spots behind the seam faces where rich ore lodes may be found.
Although they carry mining tools and appear to be working industriously, they never actually do any digging  themselves, preferring instead to dance a wild version of a Morris dance.
Never neglect to thank a coblynau for indicating the whereabouts of ore deposits, else the next time you visit that tunnel it will be barred with mounds of stones.
Cockatrice
Very like the BASILISK in appearance, the cockatrice is a monster with the wings of a fowl, tail of a DRAGON with a deadly sting at its tip, and the head of a cock.
This chimerical creature was hatched by a serpent, or toad, from a cock's egg.
With its livid, dangling wattles and its ability to kill with a glance, the cockatrice was referred to in the Bible as typifying evil.
Witness Jeremiah viii.
17:
For behold, I will send serpents, cockatrices among you which will not be charmed and they shall bite you, saith the Lord.
According to legend, England was once infested with cockatrices, until a knight dressed himself with mirrors and walked the countryside thus attired.
The cockatrices were destroyed by the reflections from their own eyes.
The word is still used to describe a treacherous person with evil intent, as instanced by Shakespeare in Twelfth Night :
They will kill each other by the look,
Like cockatrices.
Colt Pixy
A fairy, guardian of orchards and vegetable gardens throughout England.
Most often, it takes the form of a white colt who will nip the heels of would-be thieves, and chase them from the trees.
Corpse Bird
Many birds are regarded as being evil omens and portents of death, notably the magpie and the raven who are both thought of as the Devil's own pets.
In Wales, the ‘derwyn corp’, is the name given to a large, ghostly bird which flies around a house where there is sickness, stopping only to tap loudly at a window if the patient is to die.
Crodh Mara
Fairy cattle, or sea-cattle, which frequent the  Scottish waterways.
They are usually hornless and have round ears.
Fairies often bestow them as gifts upon favoured mortals for, when they mate with mortal stock, the offspring will enjoy superior stamina and strength.
However, Crodh Mara cattle need to be closely penned in at night, else they will head for the nearest loch and dive in, followed by the rest of the herd.
These cattle are much less domesticated than their mortal counterparts although, unlike the malignant fairy water-horse EACH-UISGE, they will remain loyal to humans if treated well.
A story is told of a water bull who valiantly fought an Each-Uisge to the death in order to save the life of a servant girl who tended the needs of fairy cattle.
Cronus
A Titan and the son of Uranus and GAEA, Cronus castrated his father and assumed domination of Olympus and the world.
He was frightened by a prophecy that his downfall would be similarly brought about by one of his own children, so he ate them all at birth — HERA, POSEIDON, Hestia, DEMETER and HADES.
His youngest son ZEUS was saved this fate, being raised in a secret cave and suckled by a she-goat.
Ultimately, Zeus overcame his father and chained him to a rock midway between the earth and sea.
There he ordered Cronus to vomit up the other children, who then became the gods of Olympus.
According to myth, Cronus was placed in the heavens, where he may be seen as the planet SATURN.
Cughtagh
A rather disagreeable type of GHOST found in the Highlands of Scotland.
The cughtagh was once admired as a handsome and benevolent giant who distributed gifts to the needy folk in hill villages.
However, he became embittered with age, losing his fine looks and noble habits, and becoming a surly, cob-webbed ghost who lived in dark caves.
The cughtagh's presence is marked by a far-off tumble of pebbles and gravel as you stand at the opening to his cave.
If you venture inside, be aware that the cold puff of air which comes to greet you is actually his sigh of exasperation, as he moves further inside the cave.
Cu Sith
Scottish fairies may claim an enormous shaggy dark-green dog for their own.
Thus was Cu Sith, and he differed from other dogs in having paws that left prints the size of a man's, and a long tail plaited in a flat braid which lay coiled upon his back.
Cu Sith usually moved in complete silence, though would bark loudly three times when hunting his prey.
His special task was to kidnap mortal women and take them back to the fairy mound where they would be employed as wet-nurses for fairy children.
Cybele
Originally designated as a Phrygian nature-goddess of caves and waterways, Cybele was later thought to be RHEA, the wife of CRONUS and therefore the mother of the Olympian gods.
Many fertility rituals were held in her name, and oak and pine trees were planted near her forest sanctuaries.
Cybele was usually depicted in a chariot drawn by lions, with a crown on her head and a drum or set of cymbals in her hand.
Cyclops
The name comes from the Greek for ‘eye as big as the full moon’.
Cyclops were giants with only one eye, like a lantern, in the centre of their forehead.
Addison in Milton Imitated wrote:
of the mighty family
Of one-eyed brothers hasten to the shore
And gather round the bellowing Polypheme…
Polypheme was their king, later slain by Odysseus.
The cyclops were charged with the business of forging iron for Vulcan and working the underground quarries, where their singular eye cast light.
Although dull-witted, they were fierce and cannibalistic warriors, their preferred weapon being the thunderbolt.
Cyclops may have originated with the Arimaspians, a one-eyed race from Scythia who coveted gold and were constantly fighting gryphons for access to their caches of treasure.
Milton in Paradise Lost wrote:
when a gryphon through the wilderness…
Pursues the Arimaspian, who by stealth
Had from his wakeful custody purloined the guarded gold.
Cyclops were not unique to Greek mythology; appearing to Sinbad in The Arabian Nights was a huge monster:
as tall as a palm tree and perfectly black [with]one eye which flamed like a burning coal in the middle of his forehead.
Cyoeraeth
Also known as Cyhyraeth, the Welsh version of the BANSHEE.
A horrible weeping woman with an emaciated face and black teeth, the cyoeraeth's wail announces the approach of death.
This dreadful cry was described by Coslet as:
a doleful…sound heard before the deaths of may and most likely to be heard before foul weather.
The voice resembles the groaning of sick persons who are to die…
It begins strong, and louder than a sick person could make; the second cry is lower, but not less doleful but rather more so; the third yet lower, and soft, like the groan of a sick man almost spent and dying.
The Welsh also believed the cyoeraeth was wont to amble along beaches on lonely, stormy nights, carrying a small inextinguishable candle and crying into the wind.
Her appearance here would presage a shipwreck, the candle lighting the way for pall bearers who would follow.
Strangely, she was also thought to appear by streams and lakes at night, and to splash loudly, thus warming any passers-by of the danger, with no thought to trap them.
D
Dagan
The chief god of the philistines, Dagan (or Dagon) is represented with the face and hands of a man or woman and the tail of a fish.
Being a sea-faring folk, it was natural that the philistines should idolise such a form, as Milton commented in Paradise Lost :
Dagon his name; sea-monster, upward man
And downward fish; yet had his temple high
Rear'd in Azotus, dreaded through the coast
Of Palestine, in Gath and Ascalon,
And Accaron and Gaza's frontier hounds.
According to the Bible,Samuel 1:5, the Ark was desecrated by being placed in the Temple of Dagan, and Samson destroyed both the temple and the statue of the god in retribution before dying there himself.
Dagda
An ancient Irish deity, Dagda literally translates as ‘the good god’.
He was the chief deity of the mighty fairy race, the TUATHA DE DANAAN, and therefore the father of both mortal and immortal folk, hence his epithet All Father.
Among his sacred possessions were an enormous club which could raise the slain to life again; a magic harp whose music made its listeners forget sorrow; an inexhaustible cauldron from which no-one is turned away hungry; and two marvellous sheep — one eternally roasting, the other forever feeding in readiness for slaughter.
Dagda's generous nature was inherited by his daughter, Brigid, who was made a saint for her many good works.
For instance, on St Brigid's Day in Ireland, she once filled a great lake with ale for the poor to enjoy.
Dando Dogs
These ferocious beasts figure in a famous Cornish legend of an evil priest, named Dando.
He enjoyed nothing so much as sensual pleasures, and drank and womanised to excess.
One Sunday, he went hunting with his fierce black mastiffs, stopping only to swig at a flask of strong drink.
As he finished, he smacked his lips and swore to spend Eternity in Hell, if only there was a ready supply of the drink.
The Devil promptly granted his wish, and encouraged Dando and his dogs to terrorise the countryside in an attempt to snare other foolhardy souls.
Demeter
The Greek goddess of vegetation and fruitfulness, Demeter gave the first seeds of wheat to mankind and taught him how to cultivate the soil and make bread from the grain.
She had various consorts and was noteworthy for attempting to refuse the mighty ZEUS when she was engaged in seeking her abducted daughter, PERSEPHONE.
While she wandered the earth all the crops withered, and Zeus, so that men would not starve, arranged for Persephone to return to her.
However, since the girl had eaten six pomegranate seeds during her stay in the Underworld, she had to return there for six months every year.
During this time, Demeter mourns her absence and the earth grows cold and barren.
Demeter's symbol is the ear of corn and she is also linked to the bee in Classical literature, due to her industrious nature and nourishing function.
Fertility rites were held for her, from which men were excluded, and phallic symbols such as piglets, snakes and pine cones were used to decorate her shrine and thus encourage the generation of seed in the earth.
Demogorgon
Also known as The Most High One; a terrible deity of ancient Greece, mentioning his very name was thought to result in abject disaster, as referred to by Nicholas Rowe (Poet Laureate, 1715) in Lucan's Pharsalia VI :
Must I call your master to my aid
At whose dread name the trembling furies quake
Hell stands abashed and earth's foundations shake?
The Roman epic poet Statius, in the first century AD, claimed it was unlawful to know this god even existed.
The Demogorgon's powers of wizardry were unequalled:
When the moon arises [then]
Cruel Demogorgon walks his round
And if he finds a fairy lag in light
He drives the wretch before and lashes into night.
Dryden The Flower and the Leaf 
He was believed to live atop the Himalayan mountains, attended by elves and evil fays.
Every five years he called all souls to judgement to determine whether they were worthy to continue their lives on earth.
Given that the Greek root of the word is gorgo (devil), the Demogorgon was probably a manifestation of Satan.
Demon Drummer
The GHOST of a musician, hanged in 1660 in England for a misdemeanour.
After his death, his family were plagued by POLTERGEIST-like pranks — hair and clothing were tugged at, doors slammed and china smashed.
Far more wearing for the community at large was the incessant drumming which emanated from the jail-house.
It is said that this ghost still beats his eerie tattoo during times of war.
Devi
The great goddess of the Hindus, Devi is the consort of VISHNU and a two-fold personality, as demonstrated by her prime manifestations.
In one, she is a proud and noble warrior maiden, astride a lion.
She uses her twelve (or eighteen) arms and all available weapons to dispense and destroy evil, although she did not relish inflicting pain or death.
Devi was thought very beautiful and to ‘hold the universe in her womb’.
More shocking is the goddess's manifestation as the horrific KALI, who wears a girdle of severed human heads and arms.
Describing the fierce power of Devi in this form, Sarkara wrote:
Your hands hold both delight and pain.
The shadow of death and the elixir of immortal life are [both]…yours!
Devourer
An awesome beast who figured in Egyptian legend, the Devourer sported the mane of a lion, the body of a hippopotamus and the jaws of a golden crocodile.
Rather like the three-headed CERBERUS who guarded HADES, the Devourer attended MAAT, the Egyptian goddess of Truth, who assessed the dead before they were admitted to the afterlife.
If the person's heart was heavy with misdeeds, the Devourer would consume the victim and they would never find peace.
Diana
The Roman counterpart of ARTEMIS, a goddess of the moon, a virgin and a huntress, Diana was also the patroness of women and assisted mothers in childbirth.
Her name was derived from ‘diviana’(the shining one), and glittering shrines of gold and silver were made for her temple at Ephesus.
Dierach
see FACHAN
Dionysius
The god of fertility, wine and drunkenness in Greek mythology, Dionysius was known as Bacchus to the Romans.
Thomas Parnell described the latter thus:
…
Jolly Bacchus, god of pleasure
[who]charmed the world with drink and dances
and all his thousand airy fancies…
Dionysius means ‘son of Zeus’, a reference to the tale surrounding his birth.
ZEUS was the lover of a mortal maid, Semele, who foolishly asked the god to appear before her so she might identify him.
Being the god of lightning his appearance resulted in Semele being charred to ashes, so Zeus plucked the infant from her remains and sewed it up in his own thigh.
HERA, Zeus' wife, was jealous of the child and cursed him to travel the earth, bestowing the gift of wine-making on those who were kind to him and sending insane those who treated him badly.
The rollicking god made more friends than foes, and his cult was very popular indeed, characterised by devotees being freed of their inhibitions and enjoying wild, frenzied orgies.
His  female attendants were known as Maenads, and they danced riotously through the woods.
Such was their passion that they tore the hapless Pentheus to shreds in an orgiastic fury.
Dionysius' male followers were the SATYRS and, in procession to honour their god, they carried phallic staffs mined with ivy and grape vines and tipped with green pine cones.
Dionysius was usually depicted with the flanks of a goat or bull to symbolise his fertility aspect.
Djinn
A type of spirit in Arabian folklore.
They are most often described as the offspring of fire, though some sources claim they first arose from man's shadow.
Djinn are governed by a race of kings named Suleyman, one of whom is believed to have erected the pyramids.
They live on Kaf Mountain, in the desert wastelands.
A good djinn often takes the form of a lovely woman, while a bad one appears as a monster with the head of a hyena and hind-quarters of a wolf.
Quite often, the djinn are simply invisible, and may only be identified by a whiff of cinnamon in the air.
They are much prized as servants, for their ability to turn onion skins into gold leaf and many other magical spells, and were imprisoned in brass bottles or finger-ring compartments from whence they were summoned to do the bidding of their captor.
Dobies
Rather silly and stupid BROWNIES, found in England and Scotland.
Very sincere and always willing to help a human, dobies are nonetheless inept at most tasks.
Asked to stand guard over good or treasure, they would good-naturedly hand everything over to a perfect stranger.
Similarly, they would clown their way through even simple household chores leaving chaos behind with spilled milk, broken eggs and unfed chickens.
Country folklore has it that dobies were actually the sad little GHOSTS of unwanted or plain women, who would fumble around the house trying to be useful until their spirits had been exorcised.
Dog Men
Dog-headed tribes of India were first mentioned in  the Italian romance Guerino Meschino , as a result of Marco Polo's tales of his travels.
Polo maintained that these people enjoyed a peaceful existence on the Isle of Andaman, engaging in the trade of nuts, apples and rice with India.
Somewhat more sophisticated was the dog-headed tribe of the Isle of Macumeran described by fourteenth-century English traveller and writer Sir John Mandeville.
Their king sported an enormous ruby pendant, carved in the shape of the tribe's deity — the ox — and his subjects wore head-dresses shaped like oxen.
Domovoi
The popular Russian word for GHOST.
Slavonic legend has it that at the time of the Creation of the World a group of malignant spirits staged a revolt against Svarog, the sky god.
As punishment they were turned into leaves and blown hither and thither — some down chimneys, some into stables, others into newly turned earth.
In time, these became domestic spirits and usually appeared as a rather homely married couple.
The male domovoi traditionally lived by the front step and the female in the cellar, where she could best supervise the family's food supply.
They were quite approachable and appreciated hearing their names mentioned or receiving gifts of wine and rice on festival days.
Domovoi would cheerfully undertake household chores while the family slept, if they were treated with respect and gratitude.
However, they would become noisy if ignored or neglected and downright troublesome if the family itself became lazy or rude.
Doppelganger
The German term for a GHOST which is actually the ‘double’ or identical likeness of someone who is about to die.
Sometimes, the doppelganger appears to friends or relatives of the dying, and their mimicry is so convincing that they are usually taken for the person involved.
More often, however, they haunt that person alone and by so doing indicate some terrible tragedy is imminent.
A doppelganger is invisible except to its owner and is not reflected in a mirror.
Robert Kirk described one in Secret Commonwealth of Elves, Fauns and Fairies (1691) as follows:
…in every way like the man, as a twin brother and companion, haunting him as his shadow, both before and after the original is dead; and was also often seen of old to enter a Hous, by which the People knew that the Person of that Liknes wes to Visite them within a few days.
This Copy, Echo or living picture, goes att laste to his own Herd.
The doppelganger stands right behind its owner and always moves swiftly to dodge out of sight.
Cats and dogs can see doppelgangers, and if one looks wide-eyed over your shoulder this is the likely cause.
Dragon
Huge, scaly monsters of the reptile kingdom, variously described as being red, green or black, with flaming eyes, clawed feet and a snake's tail.
Generally savage in nature, they were believed to have bred underground in the beginning of the world, their twisting movements resulting in a network of caverns and catacombs which led to the sea.
Dragons are thought to have appeared above ground in China and Japan before moving to Europe.
Some say that when dragons moved above ground, fairies assumed ownership of many of the caves and mounds and the treasure therein.
The Greek draca (sharp vision) is a characteristic referred to by the Greek epic poet Hesiod (eighth century BC) in The Shield of Hercules :
The scaly monster of a dragon, coil'd full in the central field — unspeakable, with eyes oblique retorted that aslant shot gleaming fire…
In Ireland the word ‘drag’ meant ‘fire’, and the Welsh ‘dreigiaw’referred to ‘silent meteors’.
Hence Shakespeare says in Cymbeline :
Swift, swift ye dragons of the night!
That dawning may bare the raven's eye.
To the ancients, dragons represented malignant and destructive power.
In Africa they were the hybrid offspring of an eagle and a wolf, and were usually the guardians of a fortune in gems, hidden in mountain caves or underground tunnels.
Similarly, in Greek legend, dragons stood watch over the Golden Fleece and the Golden Apples of the HESPERIDES.
Other cultures claimed that planting dragon's teeth would cause a fierce army to burst forth from the soil, or that dragons were the form assumed by the cursed dead.
To early Christians dragons symbolised paganism and sin, witness Psalms xci:13, where saints are said to ‘trample the dragon under their feet’.
The many allegorical stories about saints vanquishing dragons and freeing captive virgins, such as St George, arose at this time, and dragons were hunted mercilessly.
In particular, the English dragons, known as Worms, were a menace to the countryside for they attacked stock and laid waste to villages by poisoning the water supply.
They could only be killed with a spear through one small spot on their back, or in their mouth, that was not protected by scales.
The huntsman could then claim the dragon's treasure hoard, and it is said that many of the noble houses of England were thus financed.
In China, however, dragons were perceived as benevolent.
Their appearance in the sky was an omen of good fortune.
These dragons were usually bright red, with golden-tipped scales and sheer, membranous wings.
They were intimately connected with the elements and could be petitioned to control rain and wind on mortals' behalf.
Oriental dragons were not bloodthirsty like the Worms in England, and a pretty story tells us that the beautiful colours of autumn leaves are a result of a nearby dragon yawning and tinging them with his warm breath, before settling down to his winter hibernation.
Duergar
Scandinavian folklore describes the ‘dwergar’ as a demi-god who controlled echoes and shadows, thus creating a world of trickery and illusion.
Similarly, the duergar is a malicious type of GOBLIN who dwells in the hills and rocks of Northumberland in northern England.
They are noted for their strength, tenacity, magical powers and skills in metallurgy.
According to ancient Gothic legend, duergars sprang from the maggots eating the flesh of the giant YMIR, and fled into the ground when the first light broke.
Since then, they have  represented the darker, subterranean forces of nature.
Their evil habits are illustrated in the following tale: a traveller, lost and alone at night on a craggy moor, was invited by a duergar to sit by his fire and warm himself.
As the fire burnt down, the duergar got up and took a log lying to the right of the fire and placed it amongst the embers.
As this burnt down, the DWARF asked his guest to fetch another log, this time lying to the left of where they sat.
Sensing a trick, the traveller refused and instantly the duergar and his fire vanished.
The traveller then saw that he was sitting right on the edge of a cliff, and if he had leaned over to get the log he would have fallen to his death.
Dumuzi
Sumerian monarchs received their authority from Dumuzi, the god of male fertility and strength.
His mother was a dragon-headed cloud and his wife was INANNA.
Their happy union ensured prosperity for the city and its people.
Dumuzi was principally responsible for the country's agriculture, and he controlled the natural forces on earth, rather than the celestial powers of moon and stars.
His periodic descent to the Underworld — as a result of quarrels with Inanna — and his return from there, symbolise the constant cycle of death and rebirth in nature.
Dunnie
A mischievous fairy-beast who, like the COLT PIXY, most usually takes the form of a horse, although also as an old man or woman.
The dunnie, or doonie, most especially delights in taking an unsuspecting victim for a wild ride and then tossing him into a pile of mud or manure.
It does have a benevolent side to its nature, though, and will guide lost children home and rescue sick or trapped forest animals.
Dunter
A rather vicious English GHOST which haunts ancient sites of keeps and cases along the Scottish border.
In days of yore, such places were spattered with the blood of sacrificial victims to ensure good fortune in battle, and dunters are thought to be the spirits of these unhappy people.
They make a constant rhythmic noise, described as the grinding of seed in a  hollow stone mill, to warn away intruders.
Should this noise become louder suddenly and be heard in the nearby town, it was an evil omen.
Duppy
A type of voodoo GHOST found in the West Indies who is usually summonsed by villagers to undertake some act of revenge.
This is done by pouring a glass of rum on the grave of a person newly dead, then calling their name until they appear.
The duppy is the personification of evil and only capable of malicious acts; at the very least its fetid breath will cause a victim to vomit violently, though it is more often asked to kill via its pernicious touch.
The duppy can only operate at night and will expect a reward on returning to its grave.
Those who feared attack from a duppy would sprinkle tobacco seed in its path as a sure method of repulsion.
Dwarf
Dwarves are powerfully built little people who live underground or in mountain caves throughout Europe, particularly Scandinavia.
The menfolk have an aged, craggy appearance, being hunch-backed from their hard labour, and wear a long grey beard.
Standing no more than a foot high, they seldom leave their subterranean homes, for exposure to sunlight will turn them to stone.
They are usually dressed in long grey tunics and scarlet aprons that touch the ground, being extremely sensitive about showing their feet to anyone.
This is because they are often deformed, either pointing backwards or shaped like those of a goat, or goose.
Those looking for dwarves may sprinkle soft flour near a likely place at twilight, so as to study the footprints found there in the morning.
According to some accounts, dwarves appear as toads during the day.
Dwarves mine for precious metals and work them into beautiful ornaments and jewellery.
Among their many magical artefacts are Miolnir (the Hammer of THOR), Gram (Siegfried's sword), Brisingamen (FREYA's necklace) and the ship Skidbladnir, large enough to ferry all the Norse gods across the skies, yet small enough to be kept in ODIN's pocket.
Dwarves were well-versed in all magical matters — witness RUMPELSTILTSKIN, who  could spin gold from straw, and King Albrich, who could restrain an angry giant with an enchanted coat-thread.
The keepers of all precious stones and gems, dwarves are chary of speaking to humans for fear their treasures will be stolen.
However, those wishing to learn the dwarves' skill in metallurgy or wood-carving should offer gifts of money or gold in exchange.
When leaving the dwarves' lair, be quite sure to take nothing away, not even a pebble, for the dwarves will sense the theft and bring misfortune upon the offender.
Dybbuk
The name given to a demonic or maniacal GHOST of someone who had been evil during his lifetime.
Typically a dybbuk was not satisfied with life beyond the grave and would return to take possession of another person, changing their character and using them to wreak havoc.
An old story of an exorcism of a dybbuk seems closely associated with Christian legend.
It was said that a talented and gentle boy, named Israel, led his classmates into the forest to admire the birds and flowers, talking all the while of the holy scriptures.
Suddenly, they were attacked by a dybbuk in the form of a hitherto placid woodsman who now wanted to eat the band of travellers.
Israel proceeded to walk directly into the dybbuk's slavering jaws, down to where its horrible heart was.
Unafraid, he plucked the heart and made his exit.
Then, with a clap of thunder, the  dybbuk crumpled and resumed the form of the placid woodsman, the evil black heart having disappeared.
E
Each-Uisge
A fierce and dangerous fairy water-horse found in Scotland.
Very similar to the AUGHISKY of Ireland, it is treacherous to its rider, carrying a victim into the water to be devoured.
Its skin is sticky and the rider cannot jump off.
It preys on children in particular, one gruesome tale relating that an Each-Uisge made off with seven children, the only remains being their discarded livers when they washed ashore.
As with all fairy animals, the Each-Uisge has the ability to change its shape at will.
A well-known story tells of a handsome young man who made love to a village girl on a river bank before they dozed together in the sun; as she combed his hair she found weeds and shells, thus identifying the dreaded creature.
Stealthily, she drew away and began to run.
As she neared her home, she heard the thunder of hooves behind her and turning saw the water-horse coming for her.
She was saved by her aunt, who released the tame water-bull, the latter being a loyal servant, which chased the Each-Uisge towards the loch and battled with it (see also CRODH MARA).
Eale
Also known as yale, an odd-looking creature found in the south of India.
It had an elephant's tail and a boar's head which was bearded, goat-fashion.
It also had two spiralling horns which could be pointed independently in any direction — a tremendous advantage in a battle.
For this reason, eales were used as temple guardians to ward off evil spirits and looters.
Echidna
In Greek mythology, Echidna was the wife of TYPHON, the hurricane deity.
She was a horrific type of MERMAID, with the tail of a serpent and the torso of a beautiful woman.
Her nature was most malevolent and her cursed offspring brought chaos  and hardship to the world; they included the CHIMERA, the SPHINX, the GORGONS, the hell-hound CERBERUS and the hundred-headed dragon of the HESPERIDES.
Living in damp caves beneath the earth, Echidna shunned the light of day; her presence could be tracked by rank, marshy patches, or cracks in the soil's surface.
El
Also known as The First One and The Master of Time; El was the father of gods and men amongst ancient Syrians and Canaanites.
He was omnipotent and instrumental in the fertilisation of the earth, having divinely bestowed the first rain.
As a result, one of his sacred titles was ‘He who causes the springs to flow’.
El was usually depicted as a seated figure wearing bull's horns, the symbol of strength and fertility.
Elemental
A supernatural spirit which haunts places or people without being the GHOST of a person himself.
Elementals often appear as a moving light or a change in temperature, or they may take the form of an animal or bird and make it behave oddly for a period of time.
They are drawn to places of power, often appearing at the site of some great battle or murder, or frequenting ancient shrines to nature spirits.
Elf
Among the most ancient of fairy people.
In The Faerie Queene , Spenser wrote of the first man and woman as ‘Elfe…and Fay…[of]whom all Fayres spring’:
Of these a mighty people shortly grew
And puissant kings which all the world warray'd
And to themselves all nations did subdue.
Originating in Scandinavian mythology, elves are capricious sprites that dance on the grass, or sit in the leaves of trees and bask in the light of the full moon.
They may be divided into two classes: the good Light Elves and the more powerful Dark Elves.
Light Elves have fair, golden hair, sweet musical voices and magic harps.
Unlike many fairy folk elves move about at will during the day, the young females taking particular delight in  riding sunbeams through keyholes.
They are invisible to humans, although a child born on a Sunday may glimpse them if he puts one foot inside a fairy ring.
Dark Elves, however, are slightly more sinister.
Short, ugly, long-nosed with dirty brown clothes, they also love to dance, but their feet poison and blacken the grass, making it unfit for animals to graze there.
A single whiff of their breath will cause sickness or death, and the music from their demented fiddling will drive a man mad.
Sick cattle or children are thought to have been harmed by a Dark Elf's arrow, as Collins wrote:
There every herd by sad experience knows
How, winged with fate, their elf-shot arrows fly
When the sick ewe her summer food forgoes
Or Stretched on earth the heart-smit heifers lie.
Popular Superstitions
Birthmarks, or other natural defects, were thought to be marks or bruises left by elves, and Queen Margaret insulted Shakespeare's Richard III accordingly:
…thou elvish-marked, abortive, rooting hog!
The word ‘elf’ was later applied only to small fairy boys; witness Titania's decision ‘to make my small elves…coats’.
The elves themselves disliked the name as a result, seeing it as patronising, and preferred to be called ‘good neighbour’ instead.
Elle Folk
Usually considered to be a type of Danish ELF, although the story of their origin sets them apart, for they are believed to be the descendants of Adam and his first wife, Lilith.
Elle Folk are great thieves of dough and other food, and are strange-looking indeed.
Elle-women are beautiful and alluring from the front, though from behind they sport hollow backs and cows' tails.
The Elle-men are stooped and old, and are happiest when lying in a pool of sunlight to warm their withered limbs.
Also known as Huldre Folk, these elves are sensitive about their defects and should be treated with tact by mortals, else their cattle will die.
Ellyon
A Welsh ELF.
Dear little folk, tiny, with thin high-pitched voices, they sup on toadstools and ‘fairy butter’, the latter being a yellow fungus found in the roots of old trees.
Ellyon are well-intentioned towards mortals and will sweep and clean the kitchen and tidy the shelves cheerfully each evening, dancing and talking the while.
Their only condition is that their privacy be respected; if the householder spies on them as they work, they will vanish and never return.
Emma-Hoo
Also known as Emm-O, he is the chief of Jigoku, the Underground Hell of Japanese myth.
Emma-Hoo is depicted as riding on a water-buffalo and parading past lines of men to pass judgement upon them, reflecting their sentence back to them by means of a giant bronze mirror on his breast.
A harsh judgement would occasionally be reprieved by intervention from his sister, who sat by his side where she judged the women.
On the strength of a prayer from a loving soul, she would suggest an unfortunate soul be reborn and given a chance to reform, rather than be doomed to purgatory.
Empusae
Menacing creatures of Greek mythology who took the form of beautiful maidens, the better to seduce and murder lone male travellers.
In their natural state, empusae had the head and breasts of a lovely girl and the body and legs of a donkey.
They would wait silently by the roadside for a victim and could only he identified if forced to speak, for then they would emit a loud bray.
Endymion
Once a beautiful mortal youth, a shepherd who tended his flock on Mount Latmos, Endymion was beloved by the moon, Silene.
Legend has it that ZEUS granted the boy immortality on condition that he remain forever slumbering.
Thus each evening Silene bathes her white body in the ocean, then sets off across the skies to caress her sleeping lover.
In The Merchant of Venice Shakespeare writes:
…the moon sleeps with Endymion,
And would fain be disturbed.
Enlil
The Sumerian god of wind and air.
Strongly associated with industry and growth, his gift to the people was said to have been the pick-axe, and his likeness was often placed by a new roadway or building.
Enlil had an ambivalent attitude to mankind.
On the one hand he smiled upon human endeavours; however, if irritated he enlisted the aid of the monster Labbu and wrought tempests, specifically floods or hail.
In a particularly devastating tantrum, it was Enlil who was responsible for engendering the Great Flood, having first saved the moon and set her adrift in a boat.
He held the ‘tupismati’(tablets of destiny) and could be petitioned to determine the course of the world.
Eos
In Greek mythology, the goddess of the dawn, also called the Dawn Maiden; to the Romans, she was Aurora.
Sister to HELIOS the sun, and Silene the moon, Eos is described as ever-youthful and lovely.
Homer called her ‘rosy-fingered’.
She sets out before the sun, driving a team of horses which pull her soft blue chariot up from the depths of the ocean, and shows her brother the way to rise.
James Thomson, in his poem Castle of Indolence , wrote:
You cannot shut the windows of the sky
Through which Eos shows her brightening eye.
Eos abducted ORION to be her lover, and later wed Astareus the Titan and bore the Four Winds, Boreas, Eurus, Notus and Zephyrus.
Both gods and mortal men found her captivating, and by her first husband Tithonius she became the mother of Memnon, King of Ethiopia and one of the Egyptian gods.
Memnon was slain by ACHILLES at Troy and Eos has mourned her son ever since, her daily tears forming the morning dew.
Another well-known story about Eos concerns her mortal husband Tithonius.
For him she begged the gift of immortality from her fellow gods, but neglected to specify eternal youth as well.
As a result her handsome husband shrank into a shrivelled old man until he was so deformed the gods took pity on him and turned him into a cicada — one of the first creatures to excitedly greet the dawn on a warm summer's day.
Epona
Originally a Celtic nature-goddess, depicted as a woman astride a mare, or a woman's torso with a horse's head.
Epona was adopted by the Romans as a goddess of horses and mules.
In Roman art she was shown with a cornucopia of grain, while in Eastern Europe and England huge horses were carved into chalky hillsides by devotees of her cult.
 Erinnyes 
Also known as the Furies, Daughters of the Night, or the Angry Ones, these were avenging goddesses of the Underworld in Greek mythology.
They sprang from blood spilled by the mutilated Uranus and were horrible indeed to behold, with snakes in their hair and bat-like wings.
Their names bore apt testimony to their fearful nature — Allekto (she who is unremitting), Teisiphone (she who avenges murder), and Megaira (she who is envious).
Each carried a whip and flaming torch with which to chivy both mortal offenders and recalcitrant gods.
They were charged with dispensing justice and avenging violations of the natural order.
For instance, they prohibited HERA from endowing her horse with speech, for they considered this unnatural; they would also return the sun to its true course, whenever it deviated for any reason.
Eros
The Greek god of love who inspired physical attraction between the sexes and thus ensured the continuity of life.
Eros was known as Cupid to the Romans.
The son of APHRODITE and ARES, this mischievous god was married to the beautiful mortal maid psyche, and liked nothing better than to meddle in human affairs.
He carried a bow and a quiver full of arrows — golden ones which caused their victims to fall in love, and leaden ones which resulted in disinterest.
Hesiod, the eighth-century Greek poet, in his Theogony , described him as ‘the most beautiful and wanton of gods’ bearing a quiver ‘full of arous'd desires’.
Eros was usually depicted in conjunction with Hymen, the god of marriage.
The ancient Spartan cult paid Eros great homage, regarding him as a great creative force in men's lives, the builder of dynasties and the establisher of friendships, as well as the  creator of sexual desire.
At one time, the Orphic cult of extremists regarded him as the Creator of the world.
Erymanthian Boar
The capture of this hideous wild animal was one of the labours of HERCULES.
Black as night, with flaming red eyes and tusks as long as a man's arm, the Erymanthian Boar had killed many people.
However, its brain was minuscule and Hercules managed to trap it by pretending to be an army and getting the animal confused and tangled in foliage.
Once trapped, the boar was delivered to the city of Mycenae, which it had long terrorised, and there it was ceremonially disposed of.
Estrie
The medieval Hebrew version of a VAMPIRE.
Travelling by night she took the form of a mortal nurse, the better to prey on children and suck their blood.
In her normal state she had the head and teeth of a savage wolf and the wings of a bat, although she would endeavour not to allow any mortal to see her thus.
To avoid being seen or attacked, she would clutch at bread or salt belonging to her victim's family and attempt to eat it quickly.
If the mortal was able to stop her doing this, the estrie would die.
To ensure she remained this way, her mouth would be packed with earth, thus assuaging her hunger in the Afterworld.
Etain
The most romantic legend in the realm of fairies is the Irish tale of Midhir, King of the Fairy Hill, and Etain (or Edain) of the TUATHA DE DANAAN.
A jealous rival turned the lovely Etain into a fly and she was carried away by the winds.
After seven years the insect was blown into the Great Hall of Inver Cechmaine and was accidentally swallowed by the wife of that nobleman; she was reborn nine months later, again given the name Etain and growing to be an exquisitely beautiful woman.
All the while, Midhir knew where she was and eventually came to reclaim his lost bride with the aid of fairy magic and wisdom.
F
Fachan
Also known as Fachen, Fachin, or the Diereach, this evil monster from Scotland is so ugly that simply looking upon one could result in death from heart failure.
J.F. Campbell, in Popular Tales of the West Highlands , described one thus:
…one hand out of its chest, one leg out of its haunch and one eye out of the front of its face.
Other reports claim the fachan sported a tuft of dark blue feathers from its head, like a cock's comb, which it ruffled before attacking.
Its sole gnarled arm was exceptionally strong and, wielding a flail of iron chain or leather thonging, he could destroy an orchard overnight.
Fafnir
According to Wagner's opera The Ring of the Nibelung , Fafnir was an evil and ruthless giant who killed both his brother and father to obtain their gold.
He then turned himself into an enormous DRAGON and settled down on top of the cache.
The only mortal who was able to slay Fafnir was the hero Siegfried, who, by eating another dragon's heart and bathing in blood Fafnir spilled from his wounds, was endowed with supernatural strength.
Fairy Godmother
A generic term for any good-natured fairy who performs kind acts for mortals, particularly babies and women, so they are always made very welcome at christenings.
In classical literature, certain fairies acted as guardians for different gods.
For instance, Tasso (1544–95) tells of Lucina, who was the protectress of Alidoro and his lady-love, the maiden warrior Mirinda, and of Urganda, the guardian fairy of Amadigi.
Various other tales account for the origin of the fairy  godmother — one has it that, like the Italian witch Befana, a fairy godmother was actually looking endlessly for the Christ Child.
The Bulgarians sombrely suggest that she is a dead mother looking for her own baby, while the Spanish say she is the GHOST of an aunt or grandmother, looking to make a gift to her descendants.
With the arrival of Christianity, the Virgin Mary was combined with most versions of the story and popularised as a spiritual benefactor, and guardian or ‘godmother’ to everyone.
Fairy Rade
Since the days of the legendary TUATHA DE DANAAN, Irish fairies have enjoyed aristocratic entertainments — music, feasting, tournaments of skill, and literature.
Another time-honoured pursuit is embarking upon a stately procession or ‘rade’.
This magnificent sight was described by Lady Wilde in her Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms and Superstitions of Ireland :
Seven score steeds, each with a jewel in his forehead like a star, and seven-score horsemen all the sons of kings, in their green mantles fringed with gold, and golden helmets on their heads and golden greaves on their limbs and each knight having in his hand a golden spear.
No servant was allowed to ride a fairy steed; indeed, so proud were these beasts that ‘a base-born churl [would be]thrown violently to the ground and killed on the spot.’
These processions or rades are common to many aristocratic fairy families throughout the world.
Fates
Also known as the Moirae, three goddesses whom the Greeks and Romans believed to arbitrarily control the birth, life events and death of every man.
The daughters of the night, they were Clotho, who spun the thread of life; Lachesis, who would often add that little touch of luck to change a person's destiny; and Atropos, The Unchangeable, who used her ‘abhorred shears’ to cut the thread of life at death.
The Fates were thought cruel, for they paid no heed to human suffering and were usually depicted as old and ugly women attended by the shadowy Nemesis, goddess of the inevitable.
The Albanians  tended to a more charitable view, describing the Three Fates as fairy-like creatures with butterflies' wings.
Faunus
The grandson of SATURN, Faunus was worshipped by the Romans as a fertility god.
He was also adopted by shepherds and herdsmen as a protector of forests and animals.
He came to be identified with the Greek PAN and was depicted with horns and the legs of a goat or wolf.
His attendants, the mythological fauns, were the patrons of wild animals and gave their name to the animal kingdoms in different countries — the fauna.
Fee
A passionate and mysterious ELF, native to France.
Few men have been able to resist their strength and beauty, and at one time would congregate at the base of the zigzag path which led to the French village of Faye, hoping for a glimpse.
Francois Rabelais (c .
1494- c .
1553) accordingly wrote that ‘they go to Paradise as the way is to Faye' (from Gargantua and Pantagruel ).
Also known as WHITE LADIES they dress in pure white and live by streams, so they may meticulously rinse their gowns clean every evening.
To dry them, they don the clothes and embark on a wild, abandoned dance by the river-shore.
Should any fellow be passing by, he must refuse their invitation or else they will dance him to a watery grave.
Fees have beautiful faces with hypnotic eyes, though they may be identified by a physical flaw, such as a snake's tail or bird's feet.
Originally nature spirits, fees would metamorphose into fog or cloud, mountain stones or moss at will.
They would also mingle with unwary humans for spite, selling jewellery and magic cloth at the village fete — when the purchaser leant to pick up the item, the fee would twist his arm and fling him to the ground.
Feng-Huang
A marvellous bird, sometimes called the Chinese Phoenix, which dwelt in ancient China.
It was the sun's messenger and therefore acted as a herald of peace and prosperity, always to be seen flying overhead when a new Emperor ascended the throne.
Its feathers were long, silken and of every imaginable colour, and were said to be infused with the  glow of Paradise.
The feng-huang's voice was also beautiful, and its song consisted of five perfect notes which echoed in the mountains as the bird soared the skies before returning to its home in the clouds with the gods.
Fenoderee
Variously spelled Fenodyree or Phynoderee, the fenoderee is a hairy BROWNIE found on the Isle of Man.
He is tall, with twisted, ugly features and a body covered in black hair.
Tradition has it that the first fenoderee was actually a handsome prince from the proud fairy tribe of the Ferrishyn.
His ill-looks are a punishment received when he failed to appear at a fairy festival, preferring to spend his time with a mortal maiden.
The fenoderee possess phenomenal strength and are favoured by farmers for helping with heavy agricultural tasks, in particular they are famous for their skill and thoroughness in harvesting crops, and have been known to thresh a barnful of corn in one night.
When seeking mischief, the fenoderee will offer to shake hands, for easily crushing the bones of his victim's hand amuses him greatly.
His strength is not matched by his intelligence, however, and humans wishing to avenge their broken or bruised fingers will instruct the fenoderee to fetch water with a sieve, or to round up a hare, using a flock of sheep.
Having helped the farmer with his labours, the fenoderee, like all brownies, should not be thanked or offered any gifts, for he will be greatly offended and leave at once.
Nor will he tolerate criticism.
John Rhys tells of a fenoderee who was given a suit of clothes; so disgusted was he with this ‘bribe’ that he placed a curse on the family for each item.
Fenrir
A giant demon wolf, Fenrir was the brother of HEL, the Scandinavian god of the dead.
He was exceedingly malicious and the gods had to restrain him with a magic chain, named Gleipnir, forged from:
…the sound of a cat's footsteps, the roots of a mountain, the breath of a fish, the beard of a woman and the spittle of a bird.
This chain successfully bound Fenrir until Ragnarok, the Day of Judgement, when he broke loose and ran amok in the heavens, swallowing ODIN whole.
For this crime, Fenrir was sent into exile forever more, though his leering face and slavering jaws may still be seen in rosy cloud formations at sunset.
Fetch
A WRAITH, the disembodied GHOST of a living person, fetch is the common name used in England to describe a double (see DOPPELGANGER), and is inevitably a portent of death.
It is similar to the Norse ‘fylgia’, the spirit follower who accompanied every man and woman through life and died with them.
Queen Elizabeth I is said to have died after seeing her fetch ‘pallid, shrivelled and wan’.
John Aubrey, in his Miscellanies (1696) vividly describes a fetch's appearance:
The beautiful lady Diana Rich, daughter of the Earl of Holland, as she was walking in her father's garden at Kensington, to take the fresh air before dinner, about eleven o'clock, being then very well, met with her own apparition, habit and everything, as in a looking-glass.
About a month after, she died of the smallpox.
And it is said that her sister, the Lady Isabella Thynne, saw the like of herself also, before she died.
This account I had from a person of honour.
While the English waited patiently for a fetch to appear, as a summons for mortals to proceed to the grave, it is interesting to note that the word was adapted by the Portuguese as fetisso (magician or oracle), and involved a concentrated worship of idols to determine the future, including the time of death.
Finn
Originally known as Fionn MacCumal, this Irish mortal achieved divine status.
As a child he touched the god's magic salmon and, upon sucking his thumb, became possessor of all knowledge.
Finn and his son Oisin were heroes of the cycle of epic tales,The Fianna , which celebrated all the gods and kings of Ireland.
Together they founded a band of tried warriors, known as Fenians or Finn's people.
Few soldiers passed the entrance test: the candidate stood in a hole in the ground up to his waist, wearing no armour.
Then, said The Fianna :
…must nine warriors, having nine spears, with a ten furrows' Width between them and him, assail him and at the same time let fly at him.
If the would-be Finian was wounded he was not accepted.
Finn married a witch called Saar, who usually manifested herself as a deer.
Finn, in turn, often appeared in the guise of a hind or a hunting dog, and his children took the form of fauns (see FAUNUS) when wishing to escape danger.
Finvarra
The High King of the Irish fairies.
He headed the tribe of the Daoine Sidhe, originally the TUATHA DE DANAAN, who lived in the Hollow Hills.
The palace court, called Finvarra's Rath, existed beneath the Hill of Knochma.
Originally gigantic in stature, Finvarra and his court became, with the coming of Christianity, far smaller, and they regarded their ancient armaments and helmets with awe at their size.
However, Finvarra's looks and virility were not impaired.
Although he was married to OONAGH, the most beautiful woman to have ever lived, he frequently gave chase to pretty mortal maids and carried them off to his royal chambers.
Only rarely, as in the case of Ethna the Bride, did these women ever wish to return home to their mere mortal husbands after a night with the Fairy King.
Finvarra possessed great intelligence and was a famed chess-player.
Many mortals lost all they owned — including their own lives — in a game with him.
This resulted in Finvarra often being regarded as the King of the Underworld and his court as the Company of the Dead.
In Lady Wilde's tale November Eve (from Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms and Superstitions of Ireland ), she tells of a lad who was lured to a fairy revel where he met Finvarra and Oonagh.
On sitting at the table to enjoy marvellous victuals and music, he saw that a servant was actually the GHOST of his recently dead neighbour.
Resisting the blandishments of his host, he fell senseless to the ground, and:
when he awoke, he was lying in a stone circle and his arms were black and blue with the marks of fairy fingers.
Fir Darrig
Also known as Fear Dearg, this odd little fairy with the blue nose and red coat is a native to Ireland.
For a fee of whisky he will help mortals caught in Fairyland to escape, or show them antidotes to spells and curses.
He is, however, not a trustworthy sprite, and delights in practical jokes of a bizarre and sometimes gruesome nature.
He is the unchallenged master of ‘pishogue’, the art of bemusing a man's sense, and can cast spells turning day into night, men into women, food into dust — in fact, everything to its opposite.
Firebird
A gentle and benevolent bird fabled in Russia for its habit of appearing when mortals need its help.
Storytellers described its eyes as flashing crystal, and its glistening feathers to be made of pure gold — a single one could light up a darkened room.
The firebird dined exclusively upon golden apples and its powerful wings created strong winds when the bird took to the air; as he flew, all the other birds would fall silent in awe at his grace.
Stravinsky's ballet The Firebird re-tells the most famous tale of this creature, who carried a prince to a land that had long lain asleep, there to rescue a princess and help her dispose of the witch who had enchanted her countrymen.
Flying Dutchman
Immortalised in Richard Wagner's opera Der Fliegende Hollander (1843) and Captain Marryat's stirring The Phantom Ship (1839), this is probably the most famous GHOST ship of all.
It is frequently seen in stormy weather off the Cape of Good Hope and considered an omen of ill fortune.
King George V witnessed the spectral ship in 1881, making the following entry in his journal:
July 11 1881: During the middle watch, the so-called ‘Flying Dutchman’ crossed our bows.
She first appeared as a strange red light, as of a ship all a-glow, in the midst of which light her masts, spars and sails, seemingly those of a normal brig., some 200 yards distant from us, stood out in strong relief as she came up.
Our lookout man on the forecastle reported her as close to our port bow, where also the officer of the watch from the bridge clearly saw her as did our quarter-deck midshipman, who was sent forward at once to the forecastle to report back.
But, on  reaching there, no vestige nor any sign of any material ship was to be seen either near or away to the horizon.
True to tradition, this sighting was followed swiftly by one of the crew suffering a fatal accident.
There are several versions of the tale explaining why The Flying Dutchman is accursed.
One is that the captain of the original vessel, caught in a shocking storm, cursed God and endangered his men.
For his blasphemy and irresponsible behaviour, he was doomed to wander about like a sea-tossed ghost, never to rest again.
Another story, from Sir Walter Scott, says the vessel was originally laden with precious jewels, then violent murder took place, followed by plague.
As a result, no port would offer the boat shelter, and it ceaselessly traverses the Cape, seeking safe harbour.
Formorians
Also known as Fomorians, hideous demons in Ireland made up of a motley of twisted beast and human flesh, who pre-existed the Great Flood.
A quarrelsome tribe, they were led by King Conan and his malignant deputy, BALOR, into battle armed with clubs and stones.
Balor had two eyes, one being invested with so much evil power that it took four men to lift the eye-lid.
In Scotland the Fomors were a race of giants, also skilled in enchantment and cruel rulers.
In both countries the Fomors were defeated by warriors of a brave new race armed with golden spears and helmets, who were variously referred to as the Partholan or the TUATHA DE DANAAN.
Symbolically, the Fomorians were thought to represent the old pagan beliefs that entailed human and animal sacrifices being submerged by a new age of enlightenment.
Fossegrim
The name given to a plaintive GHOST of a young man who haunts European rivers, playing his flute and desultorily throwing pebbles into still water.
He likes to admire pretty girls and will seldom harm them, sitting on a rock in the centre of the river to see them as they punt past.
However, if one maiden is foolish or churlish enough to become upset by the sight of Fossegrim, he could well overturn the boat from spite.
An old  French tradition, that each boat should carry an unsheathed knife in its prow to combat the Fossegrim, is still adhered to.
Freya
An extremely lovely VALKYRIE, Freya became one of the wives of ODIN.
She was the German goddess of love, fertility and childbirth, the Norse equivalent of APHRODITE.
Freya is usually depicted wearing a magic necklace forged in the sun called Brisingamen, and a cloak made of falcon's wings.
She travelled in a chariot drawn by cats, the latter being her sacred animal symbol and familiars.
Despite her many affairs — one of her immortal duties being to entertain heroes slain on the battle field — she loved Odin dearly and wept tears of gold when she lost him.
Fridean
A form of Scottish ELF who lived by roadways.
Travellers would offer them bread and milk to be sure of a safe journey.
Fuath
A Scottish term referring to a group of fairies and fairy beasts which can be dangerous, or at least mischievous.
They include the SHELLYCOAT and the URISK.
Often male, fuath may assume the shape of a stallion; they always live near the water.
Fudu-myoo
The guardian of wisdom, according to Japanese lore.
He is usually portrayed with an exaggeratedly high forehead and awarded the title The Unshakeable Spirit.
Fudu-myoo is single-minded in his pursuit of the truth, and his wrathful wielding of the Sword of Knowledge in his battle with human greed and ignorance is a fearsome sight to behold.
Furies
see ERINNYES 
G
Gabriel Hounds
Also known as Gabriel Ratchet's Hounds, or Sky Yelpers, these were ghostly wolves with human heads who roamed the skies during storms.
Sometimes thought to be the souls of unbaptised children and unrepentant sinners, their bloodcurdling howls were an omen of death to all who heard them.
English country folk once believed these beasts would hover over a house as a warning to the inmates to mend their ways.
It is now more widely accepted that the hounds are, in fact, night-flying geese.
The flapping of their wings and the strange cries they make would indeed have been eerie for those who Mew nothing of bird migration.
Gaea
Also known as Gaeia, the Great Earth Mother and fertility goddess of Greek mythology.
The most popular story concerning her conception was that a golden egg tumbled out of Chaos in the beginning of the world.
When this split open, one half revealed Gaea, the other Uranus.
From her union with Uranus were born Pontus the sea god, and the mountains.
She also gave birth to CRONUS, the first ruler of Olympus, the Titans and the Cyclops.
More unfortunate offspring included the monster TYPHON, as a result of her mating with the king of the Underworld, Tartarus.
Gaea was, ultimately, the source of all life; hence the ancient custom of placing a newborn child on the ground, that it might draw from her strength.
In early religion she was worshipped as the patroness of marriage, her fecundity being petitioned with gifts of fruit and seeds.
Gallybeggar
A headless GHOST which frequents Somerset in south-western England.
The old word ‘galley’, from whence the  ghost's name derived, means to scare or frighten.
This would appear well-chosen, for the galleybeggar's main purpose seems to be to terrify anyone who sees it.
Witness Ruth Tongue's story of the galleybeggar who would tuck his head firmly under his arm and then slide on a toboggan through the main street of a village, shrieking with laughter the while (from Forgotten Tales of English Counties).
The galleybeggar appears to have no malice as motive, just mischief.
Galleytrot
A GHOST which appears in the north of England.
It usually takes the form of a huge, shaggy white dog, about the size of a bull-calf, which will pursue anyone it sees.
Alasdair A. MacGregor in The Ghost Book (1955) speculated that the name ‘galleytrot’ came from the French gardez le tresor (to look after treasure).
This could well be true, for most sightings of a ‘galley’ have been near the sites of ancient monasteries or graveyards, where coins or gold plate could be buried.
Ganconer
Also known as the Irish Cancanagh, or Love Talker, an extremely handsome and dashing — though rather unprincipled — fairy.
He wanders lonely valleys and isolated copses, where he plays enticing music on his flute.
The Love Talker preys upon unaccompanied young women, such as shepherdesses or milkmaids, seduces them and then disappears.
The girl having once experienced a fairy lovemaking is no longer contented in this world, and will pine and die for her fairy lover.
Girls wishing to avoid such a fate should shun wearing or passing near fairy flowers, such as clumps of harebells or love-in-idleness.
Most dangerous of all is the May bush — witness the old song:
O my love wore a garland of May
O my love wore a garland of May
And she looked so nice and neat
To her pretty little feet
When she met her false lover in the dew.
Ganesa
Also addressed as the Lord of the Host, Ganesa was the  god of wisdom and success in Hindu mythology.
He was the elephant-headed son of SHIVA, and usually portrayed as plump and amiable, no doubt resulting from his fondness for fruit and sweet rice cakes offered by his followers.
He rides a rat, and is of a yellow colour, with four hands which hold a shell, a discus, a waterlily and a club.
A legend explains his elephant's head as follows: when his mother, Parvati, was bathing, Ganesa was assigned as guardian for her privacy.
Unfortunately he even refused entry to his father, Shiva, who sliced off his son's head in a fit of anger.
So remorseful was Shiva that he took the head of the first creature he encountered and placed it on the boy's shoulders.
By acquiring an elephant's head, Ganesa also assumed the elephant's sagacity and became the patron of literature.
Even today, Indian students invoke a prayer to Ganesa when they start a new term at school.
Gans
Spirits invoked by the American Apache Indian tribe.
The SHAMAN who is offering prayers to the gans wears a black mask and a high head-dress made of wooden slats.
The dancing takes place in ceremonial houses known as ‘kivas’.
Although early white settlers thought these were evil dances and that the gans were devils, in fact the purpose of the ceremonies was to drive evil spirits away from the tribe's vicinity.
If the gans were sufficiently propitiated, they would use their considerable powers to attract good fortune.
Ganymede
The extremely beautiful son of the King of Troy.
Lustful travellers came from all over the world to watch him dance, naked except for a silk cap atop his curls.
Ganymede was beloved by ZEUS, who assumed the guise of an eagle so as to spirit him up to Olympus; there he was given immortality and became the gods' cup-bearer, responsible for giving them their daily draught of the Elixir of Life.
Holle wrote in his Ariosto of:
…when Ganymede above
His service ministers to mighty Jove.
Eventually he was rewarded for his long and faithful service by being placed in the heavens as the constellation of Aquarius.
Gargoyle
We know this to refer to a decorated water-spout, usually found in church architecture.
Early gargoyles were in the form of iron heads shaped like demons, and were found on temples in both Eastern and Western cultures.
The Chinese specifically placed gargoyles over doors and windows to bar evil spirits from entering.
These grotesque figures are usually half-human and half-bird or animal.
A popular style is a fantastic dragon's head, with water flowing out of its mouth.
This is a reference to Gargouille, the great French DRAGON who ransacked Rouen in the seventh century.
Garkain
According to Aboriginal mythology in Australia, Garkain was an horrific spirit who haunted the thick northern rainforests.
Most commonly, he assumed the form of a giant fruit-bat, with enormous wings and long, pointed teeth and a harsh cry.
His horrible wont was to envelop his victim with his wings and suffocate him to death.
VAMPIRE-like, the Garkain would then suck the victim's blood.
In turn, the victim's GHOST would haunt the Garkain's jungle, attending the needs of its master and unable to warn away other folk who ventured too near.
Garuda
The sacred god-prince of birds in Sanskrit mythology, Garuda is the enemy of snakes and loyal servant of VISHNU and LAKSHMI, his wife, who both ride upon his back.
Its head, talons, beak and wings were all those of an eagle, or vulture; its limbs and torso were human.
Garuda was believed to be enormous in size and, as it flew, the beating of its wings caused the earth to topple and monsoons to follow in its wake.
Garuda was not only a devotee of Vishnu, but a divinity in its own right.
Its mission was to skim low over the earth's surface and search out sinners, devouring them with a snap of its mighty beak.
Garuda's golden colour meant it was also regarded as a sun-symbol.
Ghede
In Haiti, the voodoo island of the West Indies, this god of death appears as a lean figure in black top hat, long black tailcoat and dark glasses.
Ghede will live by the village crossroads, where the souls of the dead or enchanted pass by.
Along with his female counterpart, Mamn Brigitte, Ghede will guard the local cemetery.
H e most often appears as a ghostly mosquito who will suck the blood of any white child living nearby and use this life-force to resurrect the dead.
Along with Erzulie, the goddess of erotic love, Ghede is noted for his unpredictable obscenity, behaviour which his acolytes imitate at secret rites where they raise the dead, fly through the air and supply love potions and death spells to those who desire them.
Ghede has an enormous propensity for rum, and his whereabouts are usually marked by a number of bottles, along with phalluses carved on nearby trees or fences.
Ghillie Dhu
A sweet-natured and docile wood-sprite from Scotland, the ghillie dhu is extremely shy.
He lives alone in birch trees, clad in moss and leaves.
The ghillie dhu is kind to children and will help those who are lost or frightened to find their way home, and show the hungry which berries and nuts are safe to eat.
The Scots word ‘gillie’, referring to a stable-boy whose job it is to settle a pony and hold it for a child to ride, is derived from the fey and solitary ghillie dhu.
Sir Walter Scott called barefoot and ragged wild mountain Scots lads ‘gillie wetfoots’, saying he could not tell them apart from the fairies who ‘beat the bushes’.
Ghost
The spirit of the deceased, appearing in a variety of different forms.
The traditional ghost appears in a hazy white form, popularly believed to be ectoplasm.
Others have taken the form of warriors, children, headless women, PHANTOM coaches, monks and many more.
Usually, what all the ghosts have in common is a tragedy suffered during their life on earth, and they will reappear to a family descendant in the attempt to resolve what could not be resolved in life.
For instance, those who experience a violent death (self-inflicted or otherwise) or  are denied proper burial must remain earth-bound until they are exorcised.
Similarly, desecrated shrines or graves are doomed to suffer from continued hauntings, and the ghosts of murdered lovers or deserted children assail the living in their quest for post-mortem justice.
Even people who have lived a normal and contented life are likely to see ghosts, sometimes called ‘crisis ghosts’, which appear to the living to warn of some imminent danger.
Most unlucky are those ghosts of people who were violent or cruel during their lifetime.
Their sins deny them rest and they will continue their nefarious behaviour beyond the grave unless formally exorcised.
Ghost Owl
An eerie nocturnal predator who flew on silent wings, feared throughout the world as a supernatural bird of ill-omen.
In Scotland the owl was called ‘cailleach oidhche’(night hag), and in Wales ‘aderyn y corff’(corpse bird).
Its hooting was thought to presage death, for owls were the personification of restless spirits returning to earth to seek revenge.
Anyone who kept a pet owl was suspected of being a magician, and farmers would nail an owl's body to a front door, with its wings outstretched, to avert thunder and hail.
American Indians had more respect for the owl.
They believed that, if beheaded or shot, poison-tipped gems and beads pour from the bird's body, killing the greedy hunter; they leave owls well alone.
Ghoul
An evil GHOST who originated in Arabia.
Ghouls have horrific faces and, despite being composed of vague grey matter, possess enormous strength which they use to disinter corpses and plunder grave-sites.
Ghouls feed on the flesh of the dead and the living, usually frequenting churchyards and other deserted places.
They are attracted to funerals where a great deal of wealth is displayed, and will stand by the graveside, invisible, biding their time until the mourners have departed.
Then the ghoul will rob the corpse of the interred jewellery and devour the newly dead flesh with its sharp fangs.
For this reason it is best to carry out funerals with a minimum of pomp and fuss.
Gilgamesh
Once the King of Sumer in ancient Babylonia, Gilgamesh's many exploits were lauded in the important Epic of Gilgamesh written c.2000BC.
Described as ‘two-thirds a god and one-third a mortal’, Gilgamesh attempted to achieve immortality by seeking and harvesting a briar plant which grew beneath the ocean.
On returning to the surface, he carelessly looked away from where he had placed the briar and a snake ate it, whole.
This is why snakes can shed their skins and pursue a new start in life, while men are condemned to the one covering which must eventually wither and die.
Although Gilgamesh failed in his attempt to be a true god, the other gods took pity on his situation and appeared to comfort him with the news that he would live honoured forever as a shadow in the Underworld.
Glaistig
A female water-sprite, with the face and torso of a most beautiful and seductive woman.
Wearing a long, green, embroidered gown and cloak she is, however, hostile and dangerous and will lure men to dance with her by highland lochs before feeding, VAMPIRE-like, on their blood.
The glaistig will occasionally assume the appearance of a kind BROWNIE, showing benign tenderness to children or old women and helping farmers to tend their cattle.
She may be identified by the fact she has hairy haunches and cloven hooves, like a goat, concealed under her gown.
Like the pipe-playing, nymph-ravaging PAN whom she resembles, the glaistig loves music and travels on the wind as well as by water.
Glam
The name given to an Icelandic shepherd who worked for a farmer named Thorwall.
A lonely and gruff soul, Glam was exceedingly ugly with rough hair and skin, though very loyal to his employer.
One night, in the depths of winter, Thorwall demanded Glam go outside to settle the livestock who had been frightened by a WRAITH, or ‘walker after death’.
Unfortunately Glam was himself bested by the GHOST and he, too, became a surly and violent ‘walker after death’.
Glam returned to torment his employer whom he blamed for his death; Thorwall, however, was determined to exorcise Glam and attacked the  wraith most savagely, stabbing it with daggers and throwing flaming torches through it.
Although Glam was finally banished it was not before he had cursed his employer, saying he would ‘see with a ghost's sight’.
Thorwall died soon after, tormented by visions of GHOULS and PHANTOMS.
Glamis Castle
A vision of stony dignity, with its mist-shrouded battlements, Glamis Castle in Tayside is probably the most haunted spot in Scotland.
Secret chambers abound within, one of which is said to contain the skeleton of the Monster of Glamis.
This is variously thought to have been a half-man, a half-beast, or a deformed child of one of the Earls of Strathmore.
Many other GHOST sightings have been reported at Glamis Castle, including a Grey Lady who haunts the chapel, thought to be the sixth Lady Glamis who was wrongly burned alive as a witch; a tongueless woman wandering the grounds frantically trying to speak; a tiny page hovering by the gate; and the wicked first Lord Glamis, a rake who continues to raise merry hell with his drinking and gambling.
Glamis Castle is most famous for its association with Macbeth , and Shakespeare's hero is said to still bemoan the murder of King Duncan, appearing to walk on the roof, taking a route known as The Mad Earl's Walk.
Glashans
ELEMENTAL spirits found on the Isle of Man, they have a malicious habit of magnetising stones which mark the road's edges; these then exert a strong pull on passing motor cars, causing them to swerve off the road despite the driver's efforts.
Glastyn
Also known as Glashtyn, a field sprite who frequents farmhouses on the Isle of Man.
A glastyn is rather like a BROWNIE, helping the farmer with chores and asking only for a bowl of cream and some bread at day's end.
He may also appear in the guise of a small grey water-horse or a lamb, always with an unusually long tail.
As with all denizens of Fairyland, the glastyn may be perverse as well as benign by turn, and reports have been noted of those who have run amok, raping women and  destroying crops if they have been slighted in any way.
Such a reaction is most likely if the glastyn or his family has been hurt or injured when the farmer was clearing land.
As a result, Manx farmers always walk around such areas and describe their intentions out loud, giving the glastyn ample time to relocate.
Gnome
The word ‘gnome’ comes from the Greek gnoma (knowledge); thus the Knowing Ones or the Wise Ones.
According to the medieval Rosicrucian system, and to Paracelsus' work before that, gnomes are one of the four ELEMENTAL spirits of earth; namely the SYLPHS of the air, the SALAMANDERS of the fire, the NYMPHS or NEREIDS of the water, and the pygmies or gnomes of the earth.
These gnomes would move freely through the earth and were guardians of mines and quarries.
Alexander Pope wrote, in his preface to The Rape of the Lock (1712):
The four elements are inhabited by spirits called sylphs,
nymphs, gnomes and salamanders.
The gnomes or demons of
the earth delight in mischief; but the sylphs, whose habitation is
in the air, are the best conditioned creatures imaginable.
These small, wrinkled, bearded beings may be confused with TROLLS or DWARVES, due to their appearance.
They revel in annoying mortals and playing practical jokes, particularly by using their magical picks and shovels to relocate planted seeds or undermine a house's foundations.
Goblin
A general name for the familiar demon or mischievous spirit who dwells in private houses or in the chinks of trees.
Goblins are generally small and quite odd-looking, being swarthy and bowed, with caps pulled way over their eyes and extremely large, gnarled hands.
In Germany, goblins were often called Hodeken (‘little hat’) due to their habit of pulling on their felt hats so snugly.
Goblins may adopt the shape of an ugly animal to torment humans, especially on Hallowe'en.
They are thought to be the Devil's companions and to tempt men to death or illness by offering them bewitched foods.
In The Goblin Market (1862) Christina Rossetti wrote:
We must not look at goblin men
We must not buy their fruits
Who knows upon what soil they feed
Their hungry, thirsty roots?
They are not always malicious towards mankind, being known as ‘kobold’ or ‘demons of the mines’in Germany, and ‘coblyns’or KNOCKERS in Wales and south-western England, because of their habit of tapping on the shaft wall to identify the whereabouts of a rich lode of ore.
Golden Fish
An enormous fish who lived in the Black Sea.
As big as two cathedrals it was covered with scales of pure gold.
One day it became stranded in shallow water and was rescued by a humble fisherman.
When the Golden Fish offered this man a reward he asked only for bread, which the creature promptly provided.
The fisherman's wife, however, chastised him for this simple request and returned to the shore, there to harangue the Golden Fish with her demands for jewels, wealth and status.
The Fish patiently granted her requests until she greedily asked to be created as God.
Suddenly all the gifts disappeared, and the pair were left only with the humble fisherman's hut they owned to start with.
Goosey
A whimsical story is told by Whitby farmers from Yorkshire in northern England of the GHOST of a young man who wanders the town at Christmas time.
This foolish lad was said to have gorged himself on an entire goose one Christmas Eve and, upon staggering home, was robbed and murdered.
Ever since, he has been unable to rest and bemoans his gluttony and foolhardiness.
Gorgon
In Greek mythology there were three unusually hideous gorgons who lived beneath the sea.
They had bronze scales, lolling tongues and yellow tusks, and serpents on their heads instead of hair.
Medusa was the Queen and so hideous was her face that anyone who looked upon it was turned to stone.
She was killed by PERSEUS when he held up his shield to  her and she gazed at her own reflection.
As she died, the winged horse PEGASUS sprang from her blood and the hero was able to escape on the steed.
Homer in The Odyssey refers to the horrid creature:
Lest Gorgon rising from the infernal lakes
With horrors armed, and curls of hissing snakes
Should fix me stiffened at the monstrous sight
A stony image in eternal night.
The word ‘gorgon’ has more recently come to mean anything that is exceptionally abhorrent.
Shakespeare used it in Macbeth to describe the murdered body of Duncan:
Approach the chamber and destroy your sight
With a new gorgon…
Graces, The Three
The Romans believed there were three sister Graces, befriended by the MUSES.
They were named Euphrosyne, Aglaia and Thalia, and were usually shown embracing each other, demonstrating that where one is, all are welcome.
They preside over the affairs of men, taking special interest in decorum, purity, happiness, goodwill, kindness and gratitude.
Grace
Daughters of the sea-god Phorcys, the Graiae were sisters of the GORGONS.
They were named Pephredo, Deivio and Enyo, and were depicted as three grim-looking old women; they had only one eye and one tooth between them, which they constantly passed around.
They alone knew where the evil gorgons were to be found and jealously protected their whereabouts until PERSEUS forced them to reveal their secret when he stole their eye.
Grampus
An aquatic monster, the grampus frequented English lakes and could be seen spouting huge columns of water as it wallowed in warm, muddy water.
It had a head rather like a dolphin, with a blunt-ended nose.
Green Children
Discovered near the mouth of a pit in  Coggleshall, eastern England, during the sixteenth century, according to Thomas Keightley in Fairy Mythology :
…they differed in the colour of their skin from all the people of our habitable world, for the whole surface of their skin was tinged With a green colour.
Brought to the home of a knight, this girl and boy wept a great deal, spoke in strange syllables and would only eat green beans which, according to Celtic superstition, are the food of the dead.
They eventually learned to speak English and explained they had come from St Martin's Land, a twilit, subterranean place.
One day they had wandered to the cavern's mouth and there they were struck unconscious by the bright sunlight.
The girl eventually was baptised and, significantly, lost her green colouring though she remained ‘rather loose and wanton in her conduct’.
The boy, however, pined and died.
Green Lady
A tree ELF, most often to be found in elm, oak, willow and yew, but also in pine, holly, ash and apple.
The old English folksong demonstrates that they could often be sinister in their intent, waylaying passers-by and snatching at the wind with skinny, white hands:
Ellum do grieve, oak he do hate
Willow do walk, if yew travels late.
All such plants must be treated with respect, so as not to offend the Green Ladies.
For instance, permission should be sought before lopping a branch from a tree which is known to be frequented by a Green Lady; superstitious Derbyshire farmers plant primroses at the foot of such trees each Midsummer's Eve, so as to be rewarded with wealth and longevity.
Green Lady is also used to describe a greyish-green GHOST or PHANTOM often found in Scotland.
These were said to haunt families when a death in the family was imminent, such as the Green Lady of Caerphilly who would assume the shape of a bunch of trailing ivy, and wander thus through ruined castles and graveyards.
Gremlin probably the species most recently to enter the catalogue of supernatural beings, for it was only during the Second World War that these misty GNOME-like creatures were blamed by British and American pilots and navigators for any trouble which assailed their aircraft.
The pilots nicknamed them ‘gremlins’ and felt, generally, that they were friendly pranksters rather than dangerous antagonists.
Witnesses describe gremlins as looking like rabbits or bulldogs, sometimes wearing spats, top hat and breeches, and with long, webbed feet that enable them to move quietly.
More recently, stories have circulated that mechanical or electrical faults in factories are due to gremlins taking over the working of machines.
Griffin
The griffin, also spelled gryfin or gryphon, originated in Indian and Arabian lore.
It is the offspring of a lion and an eagle, with the hindparts of the former and the head, neck, wings and claws of the latter.
Eight times larger than a lion, the griffin has an acute sense of hearing, and its talons are highly prized for their ability to change colour when they come into contact with poison.
Sir John Mandeville, fourteenth-century English traveller and writer, described it in detail:
…they have the body upwards of an egle and benethe as a lyonn…but one griffoun hath the body more grete and stronger than one hundred egles such as we have amonges us.
For one griffoun there will be flynge to his nest a great hors, or two oxen yoked togidre…he hath talouns so grete upon his feet…so that men maken cuppes of hem to drynke of…
The creature was sacred to the sun and drew the chariot of the Sun god across the sky each day.
The griffin also had a lust for treasure and hoarded caches in lofty mountain caves.
This, and the fact that the females laid eggs of agate in nests of pure gold, meant the griffin was hostile to aggressive treasure-seekers and swift in its attack.
It was also the mortal enemy of horses and would rip them apart in seconds with its mighty talons.
Griffins were recently adopted by the Christian church as a symbol of Christ, the leonine part signifying his mortality and  the eagle's head and wings representing his divinity soaring skywards.
Gruagach
There are two distinct species of this Highland Scots fairy.
The first is a female spirit with long fair hair who travels from village to village by water, visiting farms and helping to tend cattle.
Her mode of transport means she will arrive drenched at the door of a farmhouse to beg shelter and ask leave to dry herself by the fire.
Should she be allowed in she will be lucky around the house, and serve the family well.
The second type of gruagach is male, and he will also help with farm work, wearing a jerkin of bright red and green leather.
As with the BROWNIES, gruagachs will happily serve their masters for nothing more than a cup of milk.
Gulon
A ferocious beast living deep within the Scandinavian forests.
Resembling a feral cat, it could be identified by its fox's tail and shining, mirror-like eyes.
Unlike most other fabled beasts it preferred to scavenge carrion from the forest floor rather than kill for fresh meat.
Hunters would pursue it relentlessly during the snow season, for its winter pelt was especially prized in coat and hat making.
Gwraggedd Annwn
Also known as Gwrageth Anoon, these beautiful blonde water-maidens live in rich palaces beneath the many lakes of Wales.
Stories tell of certain flowers or stones by a lake which can be touched in a special way to reveal a secret passage to the middle of the lake.
There the Gwraggedd Annwn hold court, surrounded by beautiful gardens, and a visitor will be entertained with music and offered fine victuals.
However, it he takes as souvenir so much as a blade of grass the entrance to this charming kingdom will close forever more.
They are not as dangerous as MERMAIDS or NIXIES, and on nights of the lull moon will dance in the meadow flats, wafting scarves of silver mist above their heads.
A predominantly female race, they have been known to take mortals to be their husbands.
Children born of these unions  were often gifted in the art of healing and became famed physicians.
A lovely story is told of a young herdsman who saw one of the Gwraggedd Annwn rowing on a lake in a golden boat.
They fell much in love, and her father gave her a fine dowry of fat lake-cattle and his blessing for a happy marriage, with the proviso that the groom never raise his hand to the water-fairy.
Many happy years passed, but eventually the Gwraggedd Annwn's curious fairy ways were her undoing.
For laughing and singing at a funeral her husband gave her a reproving tap, and she had to return to her home in the lake.
Gwyllion
Forbidding and evil-intentioned Welsh mountain fairies.
Quite hideous to behold, the female gwyllion is closely allied with the goat and can assume this animal's shape.
They only come out when the sun sets, and their favourite past-time is to lurk amongst the rocks on either side of a mountain path at twilight.
From this vantage point they will silently spy on travellers, offering wrong directions if asked and placing obstacles such as stones and logs on the path.
They are afraid of storms and will ask for shelter when it rains — invariably they are received hospitably, for folk are afraid of retribution from a gwyllion.
As with any other evil-intentioned fairy, they may be repelled with cold iron or an opened Bible.
H
Hades
The Greek god of the Underworld, or Unseen World, whose name has become synonymous with the infernal regions themselves.
Hades was later known as Pluto or Orcus to the Romans.
Son of CRONUS and husband of PERSEPHONE, Hades was charged by his father with ruling The House of Shades, or the dead.
He was gloomy, stem and deaf to all appeals.
Worshippers used to avert their eyes from his statue when making a sacrifice to him, so deep was their respect for his fierce nature.
His kingdom was a treasure trove of jewels and gold, and ancient folk revered it as a source of other wealth, such as crops, minerals and fresh water.
However, those who passed through the entrance gates where Hades stood might never return to the mortal world.
This god's symbol was a two-pronged fork, which popular folklore adapted as the Devil's pitchfork.
Hades also possessed a magical helmet which rendered him invisible during his travels on earth.
Hag
So-called from ‘hak’, a species of snake, developing into the term ‘hagge’ during the sixteenth century to describe ‘a succubus who sits on a man's chest and gives him nightmares’.
Any horrible old woman dabbling in the supernatural during Shakespeare's day would have been derided with Macbeth's greeting:
How now, you secret, black and midnight hags?
This is the most popular view of the hag — a ugly old crone who is allied with the devil and practises her occult spells to the detriment of mankind.
However, hags could assume many appearances; often they were thought to be of enormous  proportions, such as the giantess Grendel of Scandinavian legend, or the Blue Hag of the Highlands in Scotland, whose grey-blue cape was the swirling mist of the glens.
Such hags were ugly, with massive twisted features and great strength.
Like the nature goddesses of old, they were responsible for storms and rock-falls. paralleling the seasons, such hags can metamorphose into beautiful — though treacherous — young maidens in the spring time.
Some appear as GHOSTS, while others turn into cannibalistic monsters like the witch BLACK ANNIS who was said to be a descendant of the Celtic winter goddess, Anu or Danu.
Hag of the Dribble
Also known as the ‘gwrach-y-rhibyn’, this sorrowful spirit is the Welsh version of a BANSHEE.
A hideous old woman with wild hair, long skinny arms and a ghastly, toothless grin, she haunted the banks of the River Dribble.
Some sources claim she was derived from one of the old Welsh water-goddesses, others that she only haunts descendants of the more noble families.
Her piercing cry is a death omen and she will hover near the person she is attempting to warn, crying ‘My husband!
My husband!’ if a man is to die, or ‘My child!
O, my little child!’ if a baby is endangered.
Hahgwehdiyu
The Iroquois Indians believed Hahgwehdiyu to be the Most Divine One, responsible for creating the world.
Along with his evil twin brother he was born of Ataensic, the earth goddess.
He shaped the horizon using the curve of his hand, and took sand from his mother's face and breasts to create the moon and stars, respectively.
Hahgwehdiyu was constantly trying to control his wicked brother who would use forces of darkness, thunder, wind and rain to destroy all the good work achieved.
They fought a duel using huge thorns of the sacred crab-apple tree, and Hahgwehdiyu emerged victorious.
He banished his brother to the west, along with his servants of darkness, although the spirits of thunder and lightning gave their allegiance to Hahgwehdiyu instead; henceforth this god was depicted with a drum and a forked  head-dress, representing these forces of nature.
Hairy Hands
A very peculiar monster which haunts Devon in south-western England.
In pre-automobile days, a disembodied pair of hairy hands would tear at horses' manes, frightening them and causing them to rear.
More recently Hairy Hands has been reported as wresting steering wheels from drivers' hands and forcing them off the road, often causing appalling accidents.
Local lore has it that the hands belong to a convicted highwayman who would hold up carriage-travellers in the early nineteenth century.
For his felony, his hands were cruelly lopped and thrown away.
As they were denied Christian burial the hands proceeded to assume a life of their own.
Hameh
In Arabian mythology, a bird formed from the blood and brains of a murdered prince.
It has beautiful purple and green plumage, but its voice is strident and it threshes its wings frantically overhead when in the presence of any other murder victim, crying ‘Ishkoonee!’
(‘Give me a drink!’— of the murderer's blood).
It will not rest until the death has been avenged and the murderer punished, when it will fly to the Afterworld and inform the victim of his murderer's fate.
Hanuman
Formed like a monkey and with the heart and soul of a god, Hanuman was the son of the Indian god Vayu.
He led an army of men and monkeys against the many-headed evil Ravana, who was Lord of the Underworld and commanded a tribe of malformed spirits, to rescue the goddess Sita.
His first move was to build a causeway to the enchanted isle (Sri Lanka), and then place Ravana's citadel under siege, ripping up trees and toppling walls in mischievous monkey-fashion.
Ravana captured Hanuman and set fire to his tail, but the monkey avenged himself by growing to the size of a giant and setting fire to the city.
He then flew to a nearby magic mountain to gather healing herbs for his troops, which ensured their success in battle.
Henceforth, men and monkeys remain staunch companions.
Hap, Hapi
see APIS
Harpy
Monstrous storm goddess of Classical origin, a black-winged creature with the head and breasts of a woman and the body and limbs of a vulture.
Harpies were fierce and loathsome, living in stinking filth and contaminating anything they neared.
Virgil described them thus:
Of monsters all, most monstrous this; no greater wrath
God sends 'mongst men; it comes from depth of pitchy hell:
And virgin's face, but womb like gulf insatiate hath,
Her hands are griping claws, her colour pale and fell.
The daughters of Electra and the sea-god Thaumas, the harpies personified whirlwinds and storms.
Their names were Ocypeta (Rapid), Celeno (Blackness) and Aello (Storm).
They were infamous for tormenting and starving the blind king Phineus, until the warrior hero defied them and let the king rest at last.
Latterly the word ‘harpy’ has come to mean any person who is cruel or merciless, or who hungrily tries to appropriate the food or belongings of a weaker person.
In Pericles, Prince of Tyre Shakespeare wrote:
Thou art like the harpy
Which do betray, doth wear an angel's face,
Seize with an eagle's talons.
He used the motif again in Much Ado About Nothing :
I will do you…any embassage…rather than hold three words' conference with this harpy.
Hathor
The Egyptian sky-goddess, represented as a woman with cow's horns, between which was suspended a solar disc.
She sometimes appeared on earth as a hippopotamus, too, and her epithet was The Golden.
The mother and wife of RA, the sun god, Hathor presided over matters of beauty, love and marriage, and attended childbirth.
She was also the tutelary deity of music and love, usually depicted with a drum or rattle.
The legend has it that, in the guise of a cow, she gave birth to the entire world and all its inhabitants.
Another extraordinary tale says that Ra, convinced mankind was plotting to overthrow him, sent Hathor to kill them all.
However, Ra squeamishly refused to witness the slaughter, so he flooded the fields where his subjects were with beer which had been dyed red with pomegranate juice to resemble blood.
Both Hathor and her potential victims became exceedingly drunk and merry, so she failed at her task.
Hathor was also thought to dispense food and drink to the dead as they passed into the Afterworld, and some papyri show her either licking a newly dead soul or offering comforting suck from her udder, whilst in her guise as a cow.
Headless Horseman
The tradition of ghostly horsemen minus their heads, or carrying their heads under their arms, is a very ancient one.
Early Norse folklore describes such GHOSTS, swathed in black cloaks, thundering across the skies.
Woden, the Scandinavian war god, was thought to lead this band of spirits, all of whom were once kings ruling different fiefdoms and all of whom were killed in battle.
More recently, the American writer Washington Irving (1783- 1959) described the ghost of a cavalryman ‘whose head had been carried away by a cannonball in some nameless battle’ during the American War of Independence.
This ghost, in the absence of a head, carries a huge flaming pumpkin to light his way as he tears after late-night travellers at break-neck speed to see whether they have his head secreted in their luggage.
As with many ghosts this headless horseman is only permitted to travel between midnight and dawn.
For the rest of the time, he and his steed must return to the churchyard where his mortal remains lie.
Hecate
One of the Titans, and strongly associated with the moon and witchcraft, Hecate had three bodies and three heads (those of a lion, dog and mare).
She was also a triple deity, being goddess of the occult, the Underworld and of crossroads.
She was sometimes referred to as Trivia and offerings of black lambs, honey and new-born puppies were left for her at crossroads.
Shakespeare referred to her three-fold nature in A Midsummer Night's Dream :
And we fairies that do run
By the triple Hecate's team.
Originally thought to have a beneficial effect on flocks, Hecate was once the patroness of herdsmen.
Latterly, however, she became a powerful spirit and practitioner of witchcraft, witness Shakespeare's Macbeth's reference to her as a ‘secret, black and midnight hag’.
She is thought to travel across the night sky bearing torches, and the mythological dragons who pull the dark clouds of night across the sun are called Hecate's Team.
Hel
Also known as Hela, the goddess of the Ninth Earth and guardian of the Underworld in Norse mythology.
The daughter of the evil LOKI and sister to the terrible wolf-demon FENRIR, Hel dwelt beneath the roots of the sacred ash, Yggdrasil.
She had a demonic nature, cursing all her subjects to dreadful sickness and painful deaths.
The only souls who escaped her torments were those who were pure in thought or who had died for a noble cause.
Her face and body were the livid blue of a cadaver, and her ghastly attendants were aptly named Gangla (Decay) and Ti (Slowness).
Hel lived in the land of Elvidnir (Den of Sleet and Black Clouds), eating the brains and bones of mortals with a bewitched knife, Sult (Starvation), and sleeping in a vile bed named Kor (Sickness).
Thomas Gray, in The Descent of Odin (1768), wrote:
…down the yawning steep he rode
that led to Hela's drear abode.
Gray noted, also, that Hel's kingdom was banished so far from Asgard, the home of the gods, that it took ODIN nine days and nights to reach it.
Helios
The Greek sun god, known to the Romans as Sol.
Son of  the sea god Hyperion, Helios' sisters are Silene the moon goddess, and EOS the goddess of the dawn.
He drove through the heavens, from east to west each day to his palace in Colchis, in a golden boat drawn by four winged white horses.
Helios was such a dazzling sight that few mortals ever glimpsed him in detail, and he was known to have struck sinners blind with the rays from his golden helmet and breast-plate.
Helios was thought to see and know everything, and he was often invoked in blessings; his fault was that he could not keep a secret.
He was not as promiscuous as the other classical gods, and actually rejected the lovely NYMPH Clytie who pined for him until her body became a beautiful flower — the heliotrope — which turns to watch the sun's progress across the sky each day.
Hephaestus
The son of ZEUS and HERA, Hephaestus was the Greek god of fire and the protector of blacksmiths and craftsmen.
He was to become Vulcan to the Romans.
Hephaestus was crippled and ugly, having had the temerity to interfere in a quarrel between his tempestuous parents, and been flung from Olympus to the Island of Lemnos below for his pains.
Milton described the god's mishap as follows:
…from morn to noon
He fell, from noon to dewy eve,
A summer's day, and with the setting sun
Drop't from the zenith, like a falling star,
On Lemnos, the Aegean isle.
Hephaestus was a talented artisan.
Among his many fine artefacts were the armour of ACHILLES, a golden throne for his mother, the necklace of Harmonia and the axe which split Zeus' skull, facilitating the birth of ATHENE.
He also forged the Fire-Breathing Bulls for King Aetes, and moulded the clay which formed Pandora, the first woman.
His workshops may be found wherever molten lava or metal spills onto the ground, and smoke occasionally belches forth from his underground chimneys, known as volcanoes.
A bitter and sad god, he was repeatedly cuckolded by his wife APHRODITE, whom he had blackmailed into marrying him.
In his humiliation he forged a magical net which caught her in flagrante delicto with her lover, ARES, and exposed them to the derision of the other gods.
Hera
Daughter of CRONUS and wife to ZEUS.
Through her status as Queen of Mount Olympus she was the patron of all womanly activities, including childbirth, and the guardian of wedlock.
She was jealous of her husband's many romantic liaisons and was a formidable opponent, with many stories being told of her harrying Zeus' mistresses and persecuting his illegitimate children.
For instance, she sent two serpents to kill the baby HERCULES, who was Zeus' son by the mortal Alcmene, but he succeeded in strangling them.
Hera was also the protectress of the home and domestic industry.
Devotees of her cult represented her as a cow crowned with a diadem, a literal earth-mother.
Her personal attendants are the graceful Hons, who ensure that the seasons and events follow their allotted schedule.
Hera was vain and vindictive, if incited.
For instance, when Paris designated the wanton APHRODITE as the most beautiful of the goddesses, Hera's morals were affronted and she arranged for the Trojan Wars to occur as just recrimination for the slight.
Hercules
A demi-god, Hercules was the greatest of the Greek heroes.
He was the son of ZEUS and the mortal princess Alcmene, and possessed many fine qualities, including extraordinary wit and great strength.
However, he was the butt of HERA's wrath and she drove him to madness.
The Delphic Oracle advised Hercules that the only way to rid himself of her curse was to undertake twelve gruelling tasks.
These ‘Labours’ were sung of by bards as follows:
The Nemean lion first he killed
Then Lerne's Hydra slew;
Th'Arcadian stag and monster boar
Before Eurystheus drew:
Cleansed Augea's stalls,
And made the birds from Lake Stymphalis flee;
The Cretan Bull, and Thracia mares,
First seized and then set free;
Took prize the Amazonian belt,
Brought Geryon's kine from Gades;
Fetched apples from the Hesperides
And Cerberus from Hades.
BREWER Dictionary of Phrase and Fable 
When Hercules completed his tasks he was welcomed to Olympus and granted the gift of immortality.
As was fitting for one so widely travelled, he became the patron of trade and voyages.
See AMAZONS; CERBERUS; ERYMANTHIAN BOAR; HADES; HESPERIDES; HYDRA; NEMEAN LION; STYMPHALIAN BIRDS.
See also ANTAEUS; ATLAS.
Herla
The King of England in ancient times, he figures in fairy legends as follows: a mysterious creature covered in hair and cloven-hoofed, paid a visit to King Herla on the occasion of his marriage and showered him with many marvellous gifts.
As he left the court, he asked the King to visit him when he, too, wed in a year's time.
This King Herla and his retinue duly did, bearing many gifts and well-wishes.
So greatly did they enjoy the celebrations that they stayed for three days.
The pygmy king gave Herla a small dog to set on his saddle as a parting gift, and told him not to get off his horse until the dog did.
On returning, Herla found all had changed, for in truth three-hundred years had passed and not three days.
When two members of his party jumped to the ground they crumbled to dust.
As a result, King Herla rides the countryside with his ghostly retinue still, hoping the dog will indicate where it is safe for him to stop.
Hermaphroditus
The son of HERMES and APHRODITE, Hermaphroditus was an extremely beautiful boy.
The NYMPH Salmacis was especially besotted by him, and Ovid (43BC-AD118) wrote that she ‘prayed that the twain might become one flesh,(from Metamorphoses).
This did indeed occur, for when she went to embrace him the bodies of the lover and the beloved merged forever, becoming a double-sexed being — a youth with the breasts of a woman.
The cult of this twin deity reached its height during Roman times, when the god symbolised the joint sacred rule of emperor and consort.
Hermes
The son of ZEUS and the nymph MAIA, Hermes was the messenger of the gods, as well as being the god of good luck and wealth, and therefore the patron of both merchants and thieves.
He was precocious and enjoyed mischievous pursuits.
For instance, his winged sandals helped him to steal cows belonging to APOLLO, and his wit ensured the stock walked backwards so that no trace of their movements could be found.
Hermes’ musical talent ensured he remained a favourite with the gods, and he was credited with inventing the lyre from a tortoise shell.
His mercurial personality was likened to quicksilver, to which was lent his name, according to Hoole's Ariosto :
So, when we see the liquid metal fall
Which chemists by the name of Hermes call.
An ingenious inventor in his own right, Hermes was an alchemist by trade.
We still refer to certain compounds as being ‘hermetically sealed’, in reference to the touch of his magic caduceus which he latterly bestowed upon AESCULAPIUS, the god of healing.
Hermes also watched over travellers, and roads often sported wayside shrines or hermaeia which featured a bust of the god, or the herald's staff which was his emblem.
The Greek philosopher Theophrastus (c.372–287BC) wrote of a travelling friend's respect for Hermes:
…he goes by the carved shafts at cross-roads, pours oil on them from his flask, falls on his knees, makes an obeisance, and only then moves on.
An extrapolation of this responsibility saw Hermes designated as the conductor of the souls of the dead to HADES, as well as being a god of sleep and dreams.
Herne
the Hunter A famous PHANTOM said to gallop on horseback through Windsor Park, near London.
Tradition has it that he was one of King Henry VIII's forest wardens.
He offended the king in some way and was summarily hanged, appearing since as a shaggy man, wearing a great set of stag's horns and blowing a trumpet.
Shakespeare describes his appearance in The Merry Wives of Windsor :
There is an old tale goes that Herne the Hunter…
Doth all the winter-time at still midnight
Walk round about a oak with great raged horns
And there he blasts the tree, and takes the cattle
And makes milk yield blood and shakes a chain
In a most hideous and dreadful manner.
Other sources claim Herne was more likely a woodland spirit, whose home was a particular oak tree now long gone.
Still others claim he was adapted from tales of the Norse god ODIN, and his fleet-footed mount Sleipnir.
It remains a surety that sightings of this spectral figure — the most recent by a London youth in 1964 — portend ill.
Hesperides
Charmingly known as Children of the Evening Star, these three lovely Greek goddesses guarded the golden apples which HERA received as a marriage gift.
Milton wrote of:
Hesperus and his daughters three
That sing about the golden tree.
Along with the hundred-headed DRAGON Ladon, the Hesperides lived in a beautiful orchard, referred to by Robed Greene in Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay (1598):
Shew thee the tree, leafed with refin'd gold
Whereon the fearful dragon held his sete,
That watched the garden of the Hesperides.
HERCULES, as one of his Twelve Labours, was charged with slaying the dragon and, outwitting the three sisters with the help of ATLAS, procuring the apples for Eurystheus.
Hillmen
Also known as Mound-folk, the Hillmen are Scandinavian in origin and refer to a class of beings between ELF and human.
Most live in caves or under hills and mounds in a typically village environment, farming blue-skinned cattle.
They are master smiths and have superior mystic ability in interpreting runic knowledge.
Like GNOMES, hillmen avoid the sunlight, for it can strike them blind.
On the Isle of Man they were known as Hogmen and tended to be far more aggressive, kidnapping women and children and setting fire to barns.
However, if well treated, they made generous neighbours and always marked the birth of a neighbourhood child with a pouchful of gold sovereigns.
Hippogryph
Also known as the ‘hippogriff’, these were winged creatures born of the union of a male GRIFFIN and a filly.
The name comes from the Greek hippos (horse).
Poets referred to the hippogryph as a symbol of love, presumably because of its soaring habit and fantastic, gleaming appearance.
Milton wrote in Paradise Regained :
So saying he caught him up and without Wing
Of hippogrif, bore through the aire sublime
O'er the wilderness and o'er the plaine.
Hob
Though most usually the name given to kindly domestic spirits, there are a few exceptions.
Most notable is the GHOST named Hob who haunted several of the rivers in Yorkshire.
Thought to be the spectre of a horseman who once drowned nearby, Hob is condemned to plague other travellers by redirecting signposts, extinguishing lights and placing boulders in their path.
Hobgoblin
Also known as hobmen, the name hobgoblin is thought to be a corruption of ‘Rob-goblin’, i.e. Robin Goodfellow, or PUCK.
Shakespeare wrote in A Midsummer Night's Dream of:
Those that hobgoblin call you, and sweet Puck
You do their work, and they shall have good luck.
Generally, hobgoblins are a more friendly species of the oft-malevolent GOBLIN.
Domestically inclined spirits, they are happiest when warmly ensconced by the grate or hob over a kitchen fire, and are more at home in the country than in a city or town.
If treated well, they will protect the household from evil spirits and undertake chores in the kitchen, though they do not like to go outdoors.
Like BROWNIES they are happy with am offering of bread and milk at the end of the day.
Ill-treated hobgoblins can cause strife and discord, though, souring milk, tangling clothes and muddying floors for spite.
A Herefordshire hobgoblin would avenge himself for any insult by stealing all the family's keys and refusing to return them until his favourite cake had been baked and left on the hob for him to eat.
Hobyah
Amongst the most evil and dangerous of fairy spirits.
Very similar to BOGIES used to chastise children, hobyahs kidnapped people and imprisoned them in caves, where they had to mine for fairy gold before they were eaten for their pains.
According to K.M. Briggs, hobyahs were ‘terrified of dogs, and with good reason, for they were finally all eaten up by a large black dog’(from The Fairies in Tradition and Literature).
Hooper
An eerie spirit who frequented a certain beach cave in Cornwall, south-western England.
Thought to be the GHOST of a local fisherman named Hooper, the spirit appeared as a soft, grey cloud and emitted strange cries to warn of coming storms.
Should any other fishermen ignore the warning of Hooper and sail out into the weather, they could find themselves drawn inexorably back to shore, even against the tide.
The spell was broken one day by a particularly stubborn fisherman who used clubs to beat his way through the grey mist.
His boat never returned from its trip, nor was the Hooper ever seen again.
Hop O'My Thumb
The name given by Kane O'Hara in his poem Midas , to a tiny little boy thought to have pixy blood:
You stump o'the gutter, you Hop O'My Thumb
Your husband must from Lilliput come.
Horla
The protagonist of Guy de Maupassant's definitive story of a POLTERGEIST-like haunting,Le Hora (1887).
The horla became increasingly malevolent towards inhabitants of the house, moving furniture and breaking crockery, and filling the house with a sense of dread.
Described as having no ‘clearly defined outlines’, but rather ‘a sort of opaque transparency’, it was VAMPIRE-like and sapped energy from the household inhabitants.
The horla became stronger than they, and eventually the family left the house to the devices of this ‘malevolent force from an unknown dimension’.
Horses of Power
A very old Russian folk tale claims that once a year the night sky is filled with the thunderous sound of hooves, as magnificent horses, once ridden by famed heroes, ride again.
It is also said that in times when Russia has need of strength in battle, these horses will awake their masters and carry them to where they are needed.
Horus
The Egyptian god of sunlight and daybreak, Horus was usually depicted in hieroglyphics by a sparrow-hawk, a bird which was sacred to him.
Other epithets name him He Who Is Above or He Who Is After.
One of his eyes was the sun and the other the moon.
Horus continually waged war with Seth, the god of darkness and evil, and eventually won the privilege of assisting his father OSIRIS in the Judgement Hall, where he was responsible for weighing the hearts of all arrivals on the Scales of Truth.
Host
The Host of the Unforgiven Dead, also known as the Sluagh, is the term used by people from the Scottish Highlands to describe the spirit world.
Evans Wentz in Fairy Faith in Celtic Countries descried the Host as:
…travelling in the air above places inhabited by people.
The host used to go after the fall of night, and move particularly after midnight…
The Host are forbidden to enter the Kingdom of Heaven until  they have repented of their early sins.
Particularly recalcitrant spirits may refuse to do so, returning to earth each night in the form of black clouds which block out the light of the moon.
They become bitter and evil, fighting each other and poisoning animals and humans with venomous darts.
Evidence of the Host's appearance is said to be the red crotal (lichen) stain found on rocks the morning after a heavy frost, which is blood they have spilled during their aerial spats.
Huitzilopochtli
The mighty Aztec god of war.
He was depicted as the sun, a young warrior who was born each day, defeated the stars of the night and was resurrected again and again by the souls of warriors in his care.
Huitzilopochtli was born of the goddess COATLIQUE, and she was made aware of his conception when a wreath of blue humming-bird feathers fell from the sky.
His acolytes wore head-dresses of these feathers and carried gold staves and shields in temple processions.
The sixteenth-century Franciscan historian, Bernadino de Sahagun, wrote:
The priests offered [this]idol flowers, incense and food and adorned it with wreaths of flowers and garlands of feathers History of Things of new Spain 
Such libations were probably not the norm, however; other records speak of ceremonial statues made of flour mixed with sacrificial blood, and battle prisoners were  disembowelled on Huitzilopochtli's temple steps to appease the god, when he was angered.
Hydra
The offspring of TYPHON and ECHIDNA, Hydra was a nine-headed serpent who lived in the marshes of Lerna.
It ventured forth only to kill cattle or flatten crops, poisoning the air with its fetid breath.
HERCULES' second task was to kill this monster.
However, as soon as he struck off one of its heads another two shot up in its place.
Finally he managed to overcome the Hydra by cauterising the necks after each decapitation, and burying the heads beneath a rock.
By dipping his arrowheads in the monster's blood, he ensured they would  become poisonous.
Hyter Sprites
These fairies from East Anglia in eastern England are very well intentioned.
Sand-coloured with green eyes, they can readily assume the form of sand-martins and, thus disguised, will rescue lost children and return them to their homes.
If the child has become lost or frightened as a result of parental neglect, then the adult in question may expect to be admonished by the fairy, who dislikes irresponsibility and carelessness.
I
Idun
In Scandinavian mythology, Idun was the goddess who held the magical Apples of Youth.
These she kept in an ivory box, and the gods ate from them as often as they wished to renew their youth.
She was kidnapped by the storm god but the other gods commanded LOKI to retrieve her, for they all began to age rapidly without her supervision.
Imp
Also known as impet, a little demon, devil or evil spirit.
The word ‘imp’ means a graft or shoot, hence is sometimes used to describe a child, as in Cromwell's comment about Prince Edward when writing to Henry VIII:
Let us pray for…our King's most excellent majesty and for…our Prince, that most angelic imp.
Pathway to Prayer
More common is Milton's use of the word, describing the serpent in Paradise Lost as ‘the fittest imp of fraud’, for imps are thought to sprout from Satan and to frequently adopt various animal forms in order to serve their evil master.
Theirs are the more menial chores in Hell — the fetching and carrying of water, for instance— and their reward is to suckle at a witch's nipples.
Inanna
The Sumerian goddess of love and war.
She was identified with the planet Venus and thought to be the daughter of the sky god, for another of her epithets is Mistress of the Sky.
Inanna made a pilgrimage to The Land Without Return, a hell below the earth's surface presided over by her sister, the mistress of death.
Inanna's request for water was denied and her sister, inflamed with jealousy, had her turned into a corpse and  hung on a stake.
Inanna was restored by her loyal subjects, but was forever accompanied by a ghastly demon-servant and had to periodically go into hiding so her evil sister could hold sway and unleash her temper — thus explaining the continuing paradoxes of life and death, illness and health, harvest and famine.
Incubus
A ghostly spirit, or demon, who assumed a man's form in order to have sexual intercourse with mortal women.
The word comes from the Latin  in cubo  (to lie heavily upon), which probably referred to the powerful nightmare which would assault the victims after seduction.
The incubus appeared either as a handsome young stranger, or in the guise of a trusted family friend — even a member of the clergy — to best gain the woman's confidence.
Their task was to impregnate the woman so she would eventually produce children who could serve Satan.
The great magician Merlin was said to have been born of a union between an incubus and a nun; happily Merlin used his other-worldly powers of wizardry for good, rather than evil.
Iris
The Greek goddess of the rainbow, or the rainbow itself.
Iris was most often depicted as a NYMPH with golden, winged sandals and a herald's staff, for she was employed as a messenger for the gods.
When she had a missive for delivery the rainbow was a bridge let down from heaven for her to travel upon.
Sometimes it plunged into the depths of the sea, indicating she was taking a command to the sea-gods from ZEUS; at other times a blessing from HERA would take the multi-hued arch directly to the door of a worthy mortal family.
Ishtar
A wanton Babylonian goddess whose cult was marked by lascivious excesses.
The Classical historian and traveller Herodotus (c.480–425BC) wrote:
The foulest Babylonian custom is that which compels every woman of the land once in her life to sit in the temple of Ishtar and lay with some stranger…after sexual union has made the woman holy in the goddess' sight, she returns home…
Handsome  women are, of course, soon free to depart, but it happens that the uncomely sometimes have to wait several years…
The wife of Tammuz, Ishtar was a powerful goddess whose annual death, resurrection and marriage dates paralleled the agricultural calendar.
Her bad temper was notorious, and she was often depicted with a beard and a bow and arrow, testifying to her warlike character.
Isis
The Egyptian goddess of the earth and moon.
Wife of OSIRIS and mother of HORUS, she possessed great magical powers and her epithet was She Who Is Rich In Spells.
Isis was usually depicted as wearing a large pair of cow's horns — an animal which was sacred to her — between which a disc representing the moon was suspended.
Isis is thought to have invented spinning and weaving and was the tutelary patron of childbirth, meting out the fate of mortals as they entered the world.
Erasmus Darwin referred to her domestic powers in his Loves of the Plants (1789):
Inventress of the woof, fair flax flings
The flying shuttle through the dancing strings…
Taught by her labours, from the fertile soil
Immortal Isis clothed the banks of the Nile.
The Romans tell that Isis appropriated a portion of the sun god's power when she grew weary of worldly affairs and thereafter adorned the heavens as the constellation of Sirius.
Apuleius believed she was mother to the gods of the Roman Empire — DIANA, MINERVA, Venus, HECATE, etc. — and awarded her the additional responsibility of ensuring the welfare of sailors through the use of a celestial wooden rudder which controlled the wind and waves.
Izanagi and Izanami
Two supreme deities who were the brother and sister Creators of the World, according to Japanese mythology.
Out of the original ocean of Chaos they were born, symbolising the interactive forces of Yin and Yang.
Izanagi possessed a magical jewelled spear and this he flung into the  endless water, creating the first land-mass from its point.
Here the couple built a magnificent palace and begat many other Japanese gods.
Izanami died when giving birth to the fire god, and the distraught Izanagi followed her to the Land of Gloom, where he was appalled by the sight of her body infested with maggots.
Izanami henceforth became the Earth Mother, the prime goddess of Shinto, and presided over the Underworld.
Izanagi fled back to the earth's surface, pursued by an army of thunder gods and headless warriors.
He managed to rout them by tearing his clothes off and setting them to sail down a river, then blocking the river with a mighty boulder.
By his actions he ensured temporary respite for mortals from evil forces, though they periodically seep past the stone to plague the world, at Izanami's behest.
J
Jack In Irons
A giant Yorkshire PHANTOM who haunts lonely roads.
He is swathed in chains, from which hang trophies — namely the heads of his victims, hanging by their hair.
Jack is thought to be the GHOST of some poor manacled prisoner who died in a dungeon and has henceforth sought to torment other humans.
His favourite custom is to loom out from the wayside and startle travellers.
With his cumbersome chains he does not move very quickly, though, so a quick sprint will save a potential victim from Jack's clutches.
Jack O'Lantern
Also known as Jacky Lanter, this is an English term used variously to describe WILL O'THE WISP or PUCK.
In some parts of the West Country Jack's magical lantern, glimmering in the marshes, is regarded as a lucky charm.
An old saying runs:
Jack O'Lantern, Joan the Wad
Who tickled the maid and made her mad
Light me home, the weather's had.
Elsewhere the GOBLIN lights are regarded as dangerous, leading travellers into trackless wastelands and to their deaths.
Jaguar
A beast worshipped as a powerful god in pre-Columbian South America.
Its staring eyes and double row of fangs feature in many religious icons, and its skin has magical healing properties.
Warriors still hunt the jaguar in ritualised fashion; they must stalk it for three days and it may only be killed with a wooden spear.
The jaguar represents the ancient power of the jungle, and must be treated with absolute respect.
Its power is formidable and it has a direct effect on the fertility of  crops and mankind — witness statues of jaguars coupling with women as a means of ensuring the tribe's continuity.
Janus
A Roman god, Janus guarded doorways and was therefore the god of auspicious beginnings.
He had two faces, each looking in opposite directions.
This had symbolic significance on the double-gated temple in the Roman Forum, which was open in times of war and closed when peace prevailed.
This simile continued in use even in recent times, with The Times newspaper commenting on the American Civil War as follows:
Slavery was the hinge on which the gates of the temple of Janus turned.
Janus developed into a god of all beginnings, and accordingly the month of January was named in his honour.
He is usually depicted with a bunch of keys — hence our word ‘janitor’— and extremists of his cult called him Janus Quadrifrons (Four Heads) believing he also controlled the four seasons.
Jenny Greenteeth
A malignant water-sprite, native to the north of England.
As with many BOGIES her presence is used to discourage children from misbehaving.
In this instance, Jenny Greenteeth is a HAG with long green fangs and sharp claws who drags children who stand too close to the river's edge to a watery gave.
Her presence is signalled by the green scum found on the top of stagnant pools, and apparently her favourite delicacy is bare feet — a thinly, veiled admonition to keep those shoes and socks on, no matter how hot the day.
Jersey Devils
These monsters are found only in New Jersey, USA, and are said to be the descendants of the illegitimate offspring of a woman named Mother Leeds.
With twelve children to her credit, she became pregnant for the thirteenth time by a British soldier.
As a result of her in fidelity and disloyalty to her country, the child was cursed from birth, rapidly growing to be over six-foot long with a snake's tail and  bat wings, and the head and mane of a black stallion.
A snorting and savage beast, it promptly ate all Mother Leeds other children and plunged into the New Jersey forest, from whence it emerged regularly to tear clothes hanging out to dry, and trample vegetable gardens.
Jimmy Squarefoot
A creature only ever seen on the magical Isle of Man, Jimmy Squarefoot has a formidable appearance, with the head and tusks of a large boar, the body of a man, and large square feet swathed in calico bands.
In days of old, he was thought to have been ridden by one of the Foawr, fabled giants who threw stones at the earth as they passed overhead.
More recently he appears to prefer amiably wandering the countryside and doing no harm.
Julunggul
The god of Creation in Aboriginal legend; known as Yulunggu, he appears as a rainbow snake who arches himself across the sky early in the rainy season.
His appearance is essential to the tribes' fertility, and he is petitioned in initiation rites for young boys at puberty.
Dreamtime legends tell that the Julunggul, in his guise as a gigantic serpent, dug out many rivers and waterholes as he writhed through the desert sand.
This is why the rivers have many curves, because they follow the wriggling tracks of the serpent; similarly, waterholes are round because they are in the shape of a snake coiled up to rest.
Julunggul has a violent temper if his rest below the earth is disturbed.
Once, he chased a young girl up into the Milky Way.
So angry was he with her that he flung a handful of the stars after her, and they fell to earth with such force that they formed a row of waterholes across the country.
Juno
In Roman mythology, the venerable Queen of Heaven and wife of JUPITER.
Originally a moon goddess, Juno presided over matters of fecundity, childbirth and marriage.
She was venerated by women in a feast named Matronalia, and the month of June — once called Junonius — was considered most auspicious for weddings.
Juno was the guardian of the home  and with the title ‘Regina’ was once lauded as the Queen and Mother of all Rome.
Jupiter
The god of sun and sky, Jupiter also controlled rain, thunder and lightning.
Any place struck by a bolt of lightning was considered sacred to him.
He was the guardian of property and guarantor of oaths taken in his name, and became the patron of the Roman empire, taking a special interest in games and sports.
The Ides, or days when there was a full moon, were sacred to him and his shrines were placed high on mountain tops.
In the latter days of the Roman Empire his powers were assumed by the Emperor, or Divine Guide of the World.
Cicero, who had his head and hands cut off for recommending a return to republican principles, ruefully referred to Jupiter as ‘the awful presence of the supreme mind’, perhaps foreshadowing Christian beliefs.
K
Kai-n-tiku-aba
The Samoan people explain the mythos of Creation as follows: as Na Atibu, the father of the gods, lay dying, he decided the world was ready for mankind and that it was time for mortals to settle the earth.
His spine then became a great tree with many branches, known as Kai-n-tiku-aba, and the first people sprouted as so many blossoms and fruit.
At first, all was well.
Then a surly man named Kourabi shook the tree from spite and broke the main branches which were heavy with another generation of ‘fruit’.
Thus the people were scattered far away from their original home, and bitterness and a capacity for battle entered their souls.
Kali
A Hindu goddess named after her home Calcutta (Kalikutta, or Kali's village).
She was the wife of SHIVA in Hindu mythology; the Queen of Death and Terror, she is usually represented as drinking the blood of a victim and dancing on his corpse.
Kali wears a girdle of severed human heads.
Her skin is blue-black, she has a long red tongue, and snakes twine about her body.
She has four arms, making her an inescapable foe — one hand holds a sword, one a human head, one is raised in a gesture of peace to trick the unwary, and the other forms a claw, ready to pinion its next victim.
Kali was worshipped by the fearful Thuggee cult, religious extremists who killed in her name, believing that only through destruction as personified by Kali could the creative life-force be revealed.
Kama
The Hindu god of love, Kama is the husband of Rati, the goddess of sensual desire.
He is represented as a plump youth riding on a sparrow or a parrot, and he carries a bow of bee-encrusted  sugar cane and five arrows, which represent the Five Senses.
Festivals in his honour are marked by a plethora of flowers, and the lusciously scented frangipani is held sacred to him.
Kama also bears the epithet The Bodyless, a reference to his ruin with the god SHIVA, who reduced him to ashes for an act of impertinence.
Karkadann
A ferocious beast which padded the plains of Persia and India in search of prey.
A solitary predator it resembled the grey wolf, except that it had two horns — one long ivory one in the centre of its forehead, and the other a squat and curved tusk at the tip of its nose.
The karkadann was strong and vicious, and could slay even elephants.
A prized trophy was its horn for, like the UNICORN's, this would sweat in the presence of poison.
The karkadann, despite the violence of its temper, could be seduced by the gentle song of a ringdove, and it would lie perfectly still when this music was heard.
Huntsmen rapidly learned this trick and would carry a pair of ringdoves with them to render the karkadann helpless before their attack.
Kelpie (or Kelpy)
A Scottish water spirit.
Although sometimes appearing as a short man covered in hair, it is most often identified as a wild young bogey-horse, or a cross between a horse and a bull displaying two long, sharp horns.
Kelpies may be readily identified by their hoof-marks, for their strange inverted pad leaves the reverse of those of normal horses.
A magical beast by any account, J.F. Campbell in his Popular Tales of the Western Highlands (1890) writes:
…his back lengthens to fit any number; men's hands stick to his skin and [when]he is killed nothing remains but a pool of water.
A magic bridle may be used to tame a kelpie temporarily, though this will engender great rage in the creature.
The kelpie grazes beside rivers and streams, luring unsuspecting humans to ride him.
As soon as they mount, he dashes into the water — at best he will give them a ducking, at worst he will drown and  then eat them.
Graham in his Sketches of Perthshire wrote:
Every lake has its kelpie or water-horse, often seen by the shepherd sitting upon the brow of a rock, dashing along the surface of the deep or browsing upon the pasture or its verge.
In several fables the kelpie appears as a handsome young prince, who lures maidens to a watery fate worse than death.
A sure indication of such a disguise, though, is that the seducer's hair will be wet and full of weeds or shells.
Keres
According to Greek mythology keres were VAMPIRE-like spirits who attacked the body when it was time to die.
These spirits were begotten of Nyx, the goddess of night, and they wore robes stained scarlet from the blood of their victims.
Keres were often described as hovering, on outstretched wings, above a battlefield, for their favourite pastime was to swoop upon a warrior at the point of his death and suck the blood from his mortal wounds.
Khu
The ancient Egyptian name tor a GHOST.
They believed that as soon as a person died their spirit attached itself to the family left behind.
The god of the dead spirits, Chontamenti (He Who Is In The Utmost West), is often depicted with the head of a dog or jackal and newly dead spirits sometimes assume this form also, howling as the cortege passes.
If the person had lived and died peacefully, then his khu would likely be benevolent, although an unpleasant death might result in a violent khu.
Ritual offerings of meat, spices and wines were made by the mortal family to propitiate the restless spirit.
Killmoulis
A particularly ugly BROWNIE or sprite from Scotland who acts as a guardian for a mill.
Every mill has a killmoulis or mill-servant, who is devoted to the welfare of the family it serves.
They are characterised by having no mouth and an enormous nose — to eat, they presumably snort up their food.
Dwelling in a favourite cosy spot by hearth or oven, the killmoulis would  wail if sickness or misfortune threatened the family.
However, he could also be a tiresome prankster and thus often more of a hindrance than a help about the house — Briggs tells of practical jokes such as‘blowing ashes over shelled oats spread out to dry’(from The Fairies in Tradition and Literature).
In Amsterdam and Copenhagen these brownies are known as Kabouters or Kaboutermannikins.
Although somewhat dim-witted they are marvellous workers and willingly light fires, cook and clean.
They are also talented wood-smiths, carving toys for children and ornate pipes and spoons for adults.
Kirkgrim
A GHOST thought to haunt churches, where its appearance was an ill omen.
Sometimes described as a pig or a horse, it was doubtless derived from the ancient custom of sacrificing an animal when a church was being built and burying the carcass in the foundations, in turn being a memory of pagan rituals.
T. Thistleton Dyer comments that it was once customary to inter a lamb beneath the church's altar; the kirkgrim or churchgrim, in the form of this lamb, would latterly appear in the pews to indicate a coming funeral.
Knockers
Cornish GOBLINS who dwell in mines of southwestern England and point out rich veins of lead, silver and tin.
Miners say that they indicate the whereabouts of the ore by tapping on the shaft walls with their antler-picks, hence the name.
Also known as ‘coblyns’ or ‘coblynau’, Cornishmen have long left pieces of traditional miners' fare — the Cornish pastie — for the knockers to eat.
However, whistling and swearing offends them and they will shower the guilty person with pebbles and gravel until he stops.
Another tradition has it that the knockers are afraid of the sign of the cross, an idea which probably stems from the legend which says that knockers are the GHOSTS of the Jews who took part in the crucifixion of Jesus and were punished by being sent to work in the mines.
Kobolds
A German species of KNOCKERS who also live in mines.
They are, however, far more malicious in their  intentions, and wilfully frustrate miners by causing rockfalls and accidents, cutting ropes or extinguishing lamps and thus stymieing their labours.
Interestingly the blue metal deposit, cobalt, was so named by miners because it was useless and troublesome, reminding them of harassment suffered at the hands of these GOBLINS.
Koki-teno
The legendary fox spirits of Japanese superstition, they can either assume human form or enter the living body of a man or woman, most often appearing as beautiful women in long white gowns.
To accomplish this, the spirit has to wander old cemeteries until it finds a human skull, put it on its head and then turn to the North Star.
Legends tell that the Koki-teno can seduce any mortal man and that their victims will eventually become subject to‘fox possession’, running about growling and easily frightened by dogs.
Kraken
A huge sea-monster, variously described as a serpent or squid, said to have been seen off the coast of Norway and on the North American coast.
It was described by Bishop Pontoppidan in the eighteenth century as being over a mile and a half in circumference; he also said the sea all around it was darkened by the jets of ink it spat out.
Pliny spoke of the kraken in the Straits of Gibraltar, where it basked on the warm surface of the water and was mistaken for a series of small islands.
The animal was thought to have many tentacles and to spend most of its time sleeping.
Tennyson, in his poem The Kraken (1930), speaks of:
Below the thunders of the upper deep
Far, far beneath in the abysmal sea
His ancient, dreamless, uninvaded sleep
The Kraken sleepeth [until]
Once by man and angels to be seen
In roaring he shall rise and on the surface die.
The most recent sighting was in 1977 by Indonesian fishermen.
The kraken is generally believed to be a type of giant cephalopod which normally lives and feeds at the bottom of the ocean.
If, however, their food sources are jeopardised, they will  rise to the surface preceded by a boiling mass of water, there to menace ships and grasp and eat sailors.
One of the theories about the abandoned ship  Marie  Celeste is that the crew were plucked off by a hungry kraken.
Kuei
Evil Chinese GHOSTS, spirits which draw their form and power from the forces of darkness, misfortune and death.
They are usually the ghosts of people who lived evil lives during their time on earth, and are undeserving of entry to Heaven.
Thus they become malicious and bitter.
At best a displeased kuei will overturn furniture or pinch children's faces; at worst it will bring sickness or death to the home.
Rather like English fairies, kuei will shy away from weapons made of iron or steel, and will not trouble a house where these are placed in the doorway.
Nor are they especially intelligent.
Although it was once thought only Confucian scholars could outwit a kuei, a deterrent popular amongst all Chinese is to set it to solving a riddle.
The kuei will usually give up and leave a house in high dudgeon.
The most efficient means of diverting a kuei is to sculpt upward-turning eaves on a roof.
This spirit can only travel in a straight line, so when it slides down the roof in the hope of gaining entry to a house, it will be swept up in the air again by the curving gable.
Similarly, a screen placed across the inside of a doorway will hinder their progress, for they cannot move sideways.
Kukulkan
According to Mayan tradition, one of the most important gods.
Depicted as a feathered serpent, he was the chief god of life, as well as controller of the winds.
Kukulkan was attended by spirits of earth, water and fire, and was responsible for the sprouting of maize crops and the mating of fish — in short, in his hands he held the key to the tribe's survival.
A beneficent deity, Kukulkan was once held to have been a king from another land, who arrived in Yucatan by sea and elected to stay rather than risk the return voyage.
In this guise he was more of a cultural hero, and reportedly taught the people how to compile a calendar of the seasons and to consult the heavens for weather information.
L
Lakshmi (or Laksmi)
One of VISHNU's many consorts, she was the goddess of good fortune, wealth and beauty, usually depicted as a full-breasted maiden sitting upon a lotus flower, or carrying one in her left hand as a symbol of her involvement in agriculture and harvest.
A gentle, flower-garlanded goddess, Lakshmi spent a great deal of her time in contemplating the universe and bestowed gifts of calm and wisdom upon those mortals who sought to emulate her through transcendental meditation.
A myth of creation states that Buddha was born of a thousand-petalled gold lotus, which hereafter became Lakshmi's womb, and a source of both mental and physical succour for pilgrims seeking solace.
Lamas
A type of benevolent and protective DJINN, or spirit, who supervised the welfare of mortals.
The lama was found in ancient Chaldea and was usually depicted as a female, her likeness being carved beside portals to sacred chambers to repel evil.
In later myths the lamas assumed different shapes and names, such as Nigal who had a lion's head, and Kirub who had a bull's torso.
Most often, though, lamas were stylistically portrayed as winged hybrid creatures and may have been linked to the later goddess-spirit who presided over the home and heart, Lamaria.
Lambton Worm
The Saxon word for DRAGON was ‘worm’, and one of the best known tales of the creature is sourced from fourteenth-century Lambton, a village in England's north country.
There the heir of Lambton, a devil-may-care lad who delighted in offending people, sat down to fish one Sunday morning in full view of all the local folk who were dutifully  attending church.
Cursing his ill-luck in not having caught a fish, the heir suddenly felt a tug on his line and struggled to land a horrid creature, described by a passer-by as being:
Like a great eft [newt]…except that it's got nine holes around its mouth…and bodes no good…
TRADITIONAL
The heir tossed the creature in a well and went away to fight in the Holy Land.
During his absence the worm grew to massive proportions, coiling itself around the hills and terrorising the countryside.
It was said to drink the milk of at least nine cows daily.
On his return, the heir of Lambton asked a neighbouring witch how to destroy the monster.
She told him he had to cut the worm to pieces and fling them into a swiftly flowing river, ensuring they could not join together again, a method consistently used from then on by knights in their pursuit of dragons.
Lamia
A female monster of Greco-Roman mythology, not unlike the GORGON or the Scottish GLAISTIG fairy in her gruesome habits.
Originally the Queen of Libya, she was seduced by JUPITER; jealous JUNO murdered her children and cast a spell which turned her into a beast with the head of a woman, the body of a snake, strange cloven hooves and a flowing lion's tail.
The Lamia also had a peculiar ability to take out her eyes and hold them in her hand.
As a result of this curse, she set about devouring any children she came across, in perverse vengeance for having lost her own.
Thus the Lamia was long used as a BOGIE to frighten naughty children.
Other of Lamia's offspring have become known as Lamiae.
These lovely girls with long fair hair were actually blood-sucking VAMPIRES who preyed exclusively upon young men as they lay sleeping.
Some accounts claim that the Lamia was actually Lilith, Adam's first wife, who refused to bear his children and was cursed for deserting him.
La Milloraine
The country name given to a large, sad-faced GHOST who haunts the Touraine area in France.
No-one is quite  sure of the origin of the PHANTOM, who is female and thought to be quite overweight with flabby arms and many double-chins.
However, she is quite dolorous, and sighting her, or hearing her crying as she slowly shuffles by, are both very bad omens.
The sight of this ghost usually indicates an outbreak of fever or disease close by.
Lazy Lawrence
A GHOST who is said to be the guardian spirit of Somerset orchards, in south-western England.
He can change his shape at will, sometimes assuming the form of a spirited colt who will chase children or other thieves away from the crop.
Lazy Lawrence is a powerful spirit and widely thought to inflict ‘crampe and crookeing and fault in their footing’ upon wrongdoers, as this local saying testifies:
Lazy Lawrence, let me goo
Don't hold me summer and winter, too.
His presence is also still felt in the phrase ‘Lazy Lawrence's Load’, which is how a farmer would describe a worker who struggled under a too-heavy load of fruit.
Apparently this was the wont of the original Lazy Lawrence, a lackadaisical labourer who would avoid making an extra trip if he could.
His ghost, therefore, is always described as being hunch-backed.
Leanan-Sidhe
A shadowy and seductive fairy, the Leanan-Sidhe may be ruthless and dangerous to those who fall under her spell.
She is capricious, elusive and quite irresistible.
In Ireland her behaviour is as a benign MUSE, her beautiful voice and exquisite music inspiring poets and singers to brilliant, albeit short, lives.
On the Isle of Man, she is known as Lhiannon-Shee and appears as a blood-sucking VAMPIRE.
Le-eyo
The great god-ancestor of the Masai tribe in Africa.
Le-eyo was distinguished by an error which mankind has been trying to right ever since.
Charged with meting out rights and privileges for all beings and entities at the time of Creation, he carried a small leather pouch on one hip containing the charms  for immortality and reincarnation, while a large stone bucket to his other side contained materials for instigating death and decay.
The moon and man stepped up to Le-eyo together, and the god became confused, saying ‘Man, die and remain away; moon, die and return’ as he sprinkled them with the reversed charms.
The moon has henceforth had the ability to return to earth, while man's right to do so was forfeited.
Lemures
Also known as ‘larvae’ these were the evil spirits of the dead during Roman times, as opposed to the good natured ‘lares’.
Milton, in his Ode On The Nativity , wrote of:
The lars and lemures [who]moan with midnight plaint…
They were most active during the month of May, when they would return to torment the living.
During this time, many offerings were made to MAIA, the goddess of the dead, to assuage her, and a constant din of drumming was to be heard which frightened off her attendant GHOSTS.
Black beans would be burnt on the graves of those recently deceased to stop them from becoming lemures, for they were known to detest this smell.
Leprechaun
The best known of Irish fairies, shoemakers by trade, the word ‘leprechaun’ coming from leith bhrogan (the one-shoe maker).
These solitary cobblers are often found under a dock-leaf working merrily on a shoe, although, like their cousins the CLURICAUNS, they can frequent wine cellars and have been known to over-indulge in heather-ale.
Leprechauns usually wear a cocked hat, breeches, and shoes with large buckles.
William Allingham described one thus:
I caught him at work one day, myself
In the castle-ditch, where the foxglove grows —
A wrinkled, wizen'd and bearded elf
Spectacles stuck on his pointed nose
Silver buckles to his hose
Leather apron — sole in his lap —
‘Rip-rap, tip-tap,
Tack-tack-too!’
Leprechauns are extremely wealthy and hide crocks of gold and jewels about the countryside.
They can be persuaded to reveal the whereabouts of this treasure by holding their eyes in a fixed stare, though they will disappear the instant the mortal blinks.
Rarely, however, has anyone been able to outwit a leprechaun, for they are characteristically sly and tricky and enjoy playing practical jokes on mortals.
One story is told of a man who saw a leprechaun bury a purse of gold in a field of ragwort.
Excitedly he tied his red neckerchief to the plant's stem and ran home to fetch a shovel.
When he returned, every ragwort plant in the field sported a red banner.
Leviathan
The great sea-monster of Biblical legend.
In the Book of Job 41:19, we learn that:
His breath kindleth coals and a flame goeth out of his mouth [and]he maketh the deep to boil like a pot.
The Leviathan's skin was made of chain-mail and repelled any arrows or spears.
His eyes were so bright they glowed beneath the sea, and when he moved he was preceded by an evil-smelling fog on the surface of the waves.
The Leviathan was a ruthless and cruel creature, with ‘a heart as hard as a millstone’, and it destroyed anything which came in its path.
Some accounts have it that the Leviathan was actually the mate of the land beast BEHEMOTH.
Cod separated the pair for fear they would reproduce, and eventually forced them to do battle with each other.
Other records describe the Leviathan as an enormous salt-water crocodile; the word was used to describe DRAGONS also, and was used as a title for the later Kings of Egypt.
Liekkio
A ghostly flame which hovers over bogs and meadows at dusk in rural Finland.
Rather like the English WILL O'THE WISP, this light bobs at eye level and invariably presages death or mishap to any traveller who follows it, mistaking it for the lights of a welcoming farmhouse.
The Finns tell of a long-ago New Year festival where children  would sing while marching through the village holding candles above their heads.
This custom ended suddenly when a witch took the opportunity to kidnap several of the children, who were never seen again.
The little flames of Liekkio are, therefore, thought to be the GHOSTS of those lost children, still carrying their candles.
Since they may only return to earth by replacing one of their number with a living child, mothers warn their off-spring never to follow the lights.
Limbo
From the Latin limbus (the edge), it is the name given to the region inhabited by those spirits who can go neither to Heaven because they are not baptised, nor to Hell because they have committed no great sin.
Unbaptised infants are thought to live in limbo, and their spirits may be summoned or used for either good or evil purposes.
Lobs
Shakespeare called PUCK ‘the lob of spirits’, inferring he was a prankster who essentially meant little harm.
Lobs are BROWNIE-like creatures with long tails.
Large and amiable their strength makes them very useful for heavy farm work, such as threshing and mowing.
The Lob-lie-by-the-fire of Scottish legend was a particularly large specimen, as was Milton's Lubbard Fiend :
…then lies him down, the Lubbard Fiend
And stretch'd out all the chimney's length
Basks at the fire his hairy strength.
Like brownies, they prefer to work during daylight hours and snooze in a warm spot by the hearth during the day, only hoping for a bowl of milk as payment for their labours.
Known as ‘lubberkins’ in Elizabethan times, the more doltish lobs were relegated to the simplest of tasks and took their refreshments outdoors, so clumsy and ill-mannered were they.
Loch Ness Monster
Possibly the most famous ‘fabulous beast’ in our world today, the belief in the much-sighted ‘Nessie’continues to linger.
Expeditions to the bottom of the peat-filled loch in 1976 resulted in many photographs of what appeared to  be a herd of giant sea-creatures with paddle-like fins, long necks and calf-like heads.
The most likely explanation is that these creatures are a form of large sea-cow, though monster-watchers around the world still hold firmly to the view that the ancient loch is home to a family of plesiosaurs, a remnant of the Mesozoic era.
Loki
A mischief-maker by nature, Loki was the Norse god of evil.
The son of Farbauti, who ferried the dead to the Underworld, Loki was shunned by the other gods and roamed the world sowing disharmony in retribution.
He was fickle and false, clever and cunning, and was usually symbolised by the tricksy flame of a forest fire, a classical emblem of wanton destruction.
Amongst his many escapades, Loki artfully contrived the death of BALDER the Beautiful through his cunning use of a mistletoe dart.
He used his handsome appearance to seduce an ogress who bore him three dreadful children, FENRIR the Wolf, the Midgard Snake and HEL, all of whom caused travail to the other gods.
Loki was caught and punished by ODIN several times, once being imprisoned beneath the earth's surface where he shook so violently that the world trembled.
However, his incorrigible nature meant he was unrepentant, and Loki ultimately formed an army to fight THOR and Odin in the Ragnarok, the battle which destroyed the First World.
Looe
In Cornwall, south-western England, it is said that a giant white hare named Looe gambols along the clifftops on evenings when there is a full moon.
Some say it is the form assumed by the GHOST of a girl disappointed in love, who fruitlessly searches for her sweetheart, a fisherman who was drowned.
This belief means it is quite common today for a newly wed bride to be terrified by the omen of a white hare appearing in her path, for this augers ill for her marriage.
Looe could also be a variation on witch-lore, for witches were thought to use hares as familiars.
However, the ‘great white hare’ is most likely a ruse invented by long-ago Cornish pirates and smugglers who wanted to deter  people from walking along the shore on a brightly moonlit night.
Lorelei
One of the most beautiful water-spirits known, Lorelei is said to have been a German girl who was unlucky in love and drowned herself as a result.
She then assumed the form of a MERMAID, or SIREN, and was often seen sitting on the banks of the Rhine strumming a wistful song on her harp.
Some tales say men who have seen the Lorelei lose their minds or their sight, or both.
Others say she avenges herself of the insult offered by her erstwhile lover by luring fishermen and other sailors to their doom.
Lunantishee
An Irish tribe of fairies that frequent blackthorn trees, guarding them from harm from careless passers-by.
Woe betide anyone who breaks a branch without first asking permission of the lunantishee, for they will torment the offender, prodding him unmercifully with their bony white fingers.
Taking a cutting from the tree on Hallowe'en or May Day when the fairies are about is also extremely foolhardy.
Lung
The great, glittering DRAGON-god of China, present at the Creation of the World.
The Pan Ts'ao Kang Mu , a sixteenth-century Chinese medical almanac, offers the following description:
Its head is like a camel's, its horns like a deer's, its eyes like a hare's, its ears like a bull's, its neck like a snake's, its belly like a clam's, its scales like a carp's, its claws like an eagle's, and its paws like a tiger's…
The lung's emerald scales number eighty-one, a very potent lucky number.
He flew the skies as master of the winds and rain, and served mankind well by controlling monsoons and hail.
To propitiate him, the people offered Lung roasted swallows, hearts and red lotus blossoms.
Lutin
A GOBLIN who figured prominently in French folklore, particularly around the Normandy region.
Sometimes appearing as a beautiful horse, saddled ready to ride, Lutin was better known as a hearth sprite.
‘To lutin’ means to tie hair in ELF-locks; sometimes he would tangle a horse's mane so badly it had to be cut.
Lybardde
see CAMEL-LEPARD 
M
Maat
The goddess of truth and justice in Egyptian mythology, Maat was the personification of world order and was determined to impose her own exemplary standards of legality upon wayward mortals.
She was the daughter of RA, and honorary consort to the Pharaoh, who was charged with ‘Honouring Maat, by living through her laws’.
Maat wore a single ostrich feather in the centre of her forehead; one of her tasks was to weigh the souls of dead men for OSIRIS, and she would use this feather to test and redress any imbalance in the Scales of Truth.
Mab
Mab is the Queen of the Fairies in England, having originated from the Irish warrior-queen, Maeve of the SIDHE.
The latter was exquisitely beautiful, so much so that it is dangerous for any mortal to look upon her.
Queen Mab, however, is more popularly featured as a mischievous sprite than a royal personage, for the word ‘ qu'en ’ in Saxon meant, simply, ‘female’.
Ben Jonson described her as follows:
This is Mab, the mistris-Faerie
That doth nightly rob the dayrie
…this is shee that empties cradles
Takes out children, put in ladles…
Shakespeare termed her ‘the fairies' midwife’, whose office was to deliver the brain of dreams or, simply, to send dreams — often erotic ones.
Thus, when Romeo says ‘I dreamed a dream tonight’, Mercutio replies ‘O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you’.
Sir Walter Scott followed the same track, saying ‘I have a friend who is extraordinarily favoured with the visits of Queen Mab’.
Macha
According to Irish religion, Macha (or Machas) referred to a compound trinity of goddesses who concerned themselves with childbirth, agriculture and war.
Following Macha's own death when giving birth to twins, she grew to prefer the fields of war and death and would be heard celebrating her morbid surroundings in a howling ecstasy of grief.
Early warriors would petition Macha's aid before a battle by impaling skulls of prisoners on staves carved in her honour, in the hope she would be well pleased by the sight and not claim their lives.
It was Macha who taught Irish women how to keen over their dead, taking the notes of her own awful cry from the shrieks of widows and groans of women in childbirth.
Mafulke
The Polynesian natives explain the origin of fire as follows.
The Great Earth Mother Mafulke lived in the Underworld and tended the enormous fires which blazed there.
She alone was able to start fires, bearing sparks in all her fingers and toes.
There was no light or warmth on the surface of the earth, for she selfishly kept it all to herself.
The first man, Maui, begged Mafulke for a little fire and she reluctantly gave him one of her fingers.
Maui claimed to lose it, so she offered him each of her fingers and toes, one by one, until she realised she had been tricked.
In a thunderous rage, she sent rain to the earth to extinguish Maui's fires; however, the man managed to hide Mafulke's two thumbs from the deluge, and ever since, man has been able to make fire by rubbing two squat sticks together.
Maia
The daughter of ATLAS the Titan, Maia was one of the beautiful Pleiades who appear now as stars in the northern hemisphere.
She was deified by the early Romans as a fertility goddess and was combined with the Phrygian goddess CYBELE in a cult which also worshipped Vulcan.
Usually represented by a mound of earth or a mountain, Maia wed ZEUS and their offspring included HERMES.
Some sources claim the fifth month, May, was named for her, and that she latterly came to oversee the transit of the newly dead to the Afterlife.
Manabozho
The principal god of the Algonquin Indians of North America; also known as Michabo, or the Great H are.
The grandson of Nokomis, the Earth Mother and the Creator of Fire, Manabozho was credited with many inventions; for instance, he taught braves how to read signs and omens in the forest, and he taught women the healing benefits of many herbs.
Once, observing a spider spinning its web, the god devised the art of making mesh for fishing nets.
Large and white, Manabozho was believed to live on an iceberg, the smoke from his pipe taking the form of mist on the surrounding water.
He was also a brave warrior and killed the evil Great Fish that menaced his people by plunging a barb of ice down its throat and into its heart.
Manes
The Romans called the spirit or GHOST of a dead person his manes or mares , and believed it was also interred deep in the earth in its master's grave.
The manes rarely slept quietly, however, and would appear via a cave or chasm if its surviving relatives had left any of its wishes unfulfilled.
Manes were generally of a benevolent temperament.
The Romans referred to them as ‘the good people’, and each household had its own retinue of such ancestral ghosts.
However, the Romans took care to appease the manes wherever possible, making offerings to them known as ‘ religiousae ’ if they became troublesome, causing household disturbances or illness.
From this custom came the saying ‘to appease his manes’.
An example saw the head of the household getting out of his bed at midnight on 13th May, filling his mouth with black beans and then spitting them to the floor, saying:
With these beans, I ransom me and mine
Ancestral ghosts, begone!
TRADITIONAL
Thus the manes would be stopped from interfering in the family's affairs.
Mangar-Kunjer-Kunja
The great Australian tribe of Aranda  Aborigines believed a complex tale of Creation.
First, amidst the primeval chaos, there existed only two mute creatures, rolled together and ignorant of sight or sound.
Like symbiotic grubs they lay twisted together in a ball, until Mangar-Kunjer-Kunja appeared in the guise of a lizard.
With his sharp claws he separated the two beings and swiftly carved nostrils, eyes, ears and genitals, thus creating the first man and woman.
He also taught them the arts of circumcision and sub-incision, used to produce the traditional tattoos sported by Aranda menfolk.
Lizards remain sacred to these tribesmen, and death is said to result from accidentally killing one.
Manipogo
The Canadian version of the LOCH NESS MONSTER.
First sighted in 1909 in Lake Manitoba, it was described as a giant sea-serpent with a yellowish-brown hide and a caterpillar-like ‘humping’ action.
Eye-witnesses believe it could come from the same family of beasts as Ogopogo, Tazama and Pohengamok, who all dwelt in lakes throughout British Columbia.
Indians reported that, before taking a canoe on any of these lakes to fish, they would place a dog or a pig in the prow.
Thus, if the lake monster surfaced, the animal could be quickly offered as a sacrifice, allowing the boat to make a quick return to shore.
Manitou
A powerful guardian spirit of American Indian tribes.
As distinct from a personal tutelary spirit, who watched over an individual brave, the manitou patronised the entire tribe and was thought to be the long-ago founder of that tribe.
Most often, the manitou appeared as a nature-spirit and was depicted by its tribe with fetish-charms of certain animals, trees, stones, stars or water.
Thus, in lay terms, the manitou was a mascot or luck-bringer, responsible for protecting the tribe's welfare.
It was very important that its totem animal — often an eagle or a snake — not be harmed, for the manitou itself would be deeply angered by such an action.
The tribal SHAMAN was responsible for calling upon the manitou at special ceremonies, offering such gifts as tobacco, usually accompanied by a ritual prayer:
Thou  are Manito.
We give thee to smoke…
We are often sick, our children die; we are hungry.
Have mercy upon us.
Hear me, O Manito, I give thee to smoke.
SPENCE Myths of North American Indians 
Manitous were rarely evil, though they were known to delight in practical jokes.
Usually a particular area was declared holy in the manitou's name, such as a group of rocks or a lake.
Often the manitous could be heard in these places, and they would mimic passers-by rather like an echo.
Manticore
Also known as a mantiger or montegre, this creature had the body of an heraldic tiger with a mane, and the head of an old man with either one or two spiralling horns.
It was first described in Tylor's Primitive Culture as being:
…bred amongst the Indians, having a triple row of teeth, in bigness and roughness like a lion's, face and ears like a man's, a tail like a scorpion's, with a sting and sharp-pointed quills…
Aristotle added that the manticore's voice was ‘like a small trumpet’ and that it was very wild, although if its tail was bruised it could be tamed without any trouble.
Sometimes it is shown as having bat wings as well, and Indonesian records describe each quill in the beast's tail as being tipped in poisonous juices of the upas tree for added impetus.
In India, it is still believed that certain people are able to assume the shape of a manticore, which then circles villages looking for human prey.
When a manticore captures a victim the terrible rows of razor-sharp teeth make short work of bones, clothing or any other clues, thus explaining how occasionally individuals simply disappear without trace.
Maras
Originally a Norse term for GOBLINS who attacked sleepers, robbing them of their faculties so when they finally awoke they were bereft of speech.
It was similarly used in long-ago England to describe night-riding demons, usually female, who preyed upon men and gave them bad dreams.
Our legacy today is the word ‘nightmare’.
These spirits were also known as  ‘mahrs’, and could assume a more erotic personality.
Most often, they were souls of jilted girls who visited their erstwhile lovers while they slept, stimulating them to nocturnal emissions and general restlessness.
Fairyland was once called Mirryland or Marayland, and it was here witches claimed to ride at the time of their Sabbats.
Marduk
A great hero of Babylonian legend, Marduk was the son of the water god Ea and the goddess of harvest Hinlil.
He was half man and half fish; because he could live on both land and sea he was created Lord of the World and renamed Bel by the Sumerians.
(As Bel, he was thought to have created the world as a result of his battle with the fearsome water monster TIAMAT, who had gripped the world in chaos.
Bel went on to fix the planets' courses and rationalise the universe alarming Tiamat's DRAGONS in heaven from whence their fiery breath became lightning.)
Marduk was also a mortal king, whose children travelled the earth as ambassadors of their country.
An important son was Nebo, who was later deified as the god of learning, for taking the gift of written language to other kingdoms.
Mares of Diomedes
Horses belonging to the ruthless King of Aetolia in ancient Greece, named Dinos (Dreadful) and Lampon (Bright-Eyed).
Diomedes' mares differed from mortal horses in that they would feed only on human flesh, a trait encouraged by their master who ordered them to eat any stranger who trespassed in his kingdom.
It was HERCULES who broke the mares of their sordid habit, by killing the king and feeding his flesh to the horses.
So bitter and rank was this meal that the mares lost their taste for eating humans.
Mars
The Roman god of war.
Unlike the popular Greek deity ARES, Mars was thought a noble god.
He was regarded as the patron of herdsmen and their flocks, and, as the father of ROMULUS AND REMUS, was the honorary patron of Rome.
At one time he was a sheep-farmer himself and, upon his  deification, placed his flock in the heavens so as to keep a close eye on them.
Hence the constellation of Aries is close to the planet Mars.
Carrying a lance and attended by a wolf Mars did, however, have his bloodthirsty moments.
Ptholomeus wrote of the Romans:
…these men of Mars causeth warre and murther and battayle.
…. He is red and angry…a maker of swordes and knyves and a sheder of man's blode.
Compost of Ptholomeus 
Mauthe Dhoog
A very famous spectral hound which haunts the ancient castle of Peel on the Isle of Man.
Soldiers present in the guard-room which it frequents describe it as a black spaniel who would enter the room when candles were lit and disappear at daybreak, trotting up the hallway.
It is thought to have once belonged to a member of the castle's guard, and soldiers treat the little dog with much respect, refraining from swearing within its earshot.
This superstition harks back to when a drunken trooper inadvertently cursed the Mauthe Dhoog, only to be struck dumb and die three days later, a fan referred to by Sir Walter Scott in his Lay of the Last Minstrel :
For he was speechless, ghastly wan
Like him of whom the story ran
Who spoke the spectre-hound in Man.
Mermaid
The best known of all the fairies who live in the water.
Traditionally both the sexes have a human head and torso, and the tail of a fish.
The maids are lovely to behold, combing their long tresses and gazing at themselves in hand-mirrors, while singing with exquisite sweetness on a rock near the water's edge.
Browne wrote of:
Ye mermaids fair
That on the shores do plait
Your sea green hair.
Mermaids are not unique to the ocean, however, being found also in lakes and freshwater streams.
It is said that if you visit the  Mermaid Pool of Derbyshire just before dawn, you will see them swimming gracefully in the dark waters below.
Most commonly, tales are told of mermaids who fall in love with mortal men and painfully shed their tail in order to be able to live with them on land.
Children of such a union are said to be born with webbed feet or scaly skin, although as with any fairy/mortal mating the child will be uncommonly gifted.
Mermaids are also able to lure men to live with them beneath the sea, particularly if they are young and handsome, for mermen are often ugly and fierce.
The story is told of Lutey, a Cornish fisherman, who rescued a mermaid stranded in a tidal pool and returned her to the ocean.
As he approached the water she begged him to come with her and tried to drag him into the sea.
He stopped her with the threat of his drawn knife and she sorrowfully sang:
Farewell, farewell!
For nine long years, I'll wait for thee
And hold thee in my heart, my love
And then I shall return!
TRADITIONAL
The mermaid did indeed return to claim Lutey and it is said that every nine years hence, one of his descendants is lost at sea.
Mermaids were sometimes captured and kept for the knowledge they could bestow upon humans, particularly their understanding of herbal lore and their gifts of prophecy.
Chambers wrote of a mermaid who gave a lad medical advice for his sweetheart's illness:
Would ye let the bonnie May die in your hand
And the mugwort flow'ring in the land?
Mermaids can, however, be destructive.
Believed to be the GHOSTS of drowned men and women, the females frequently cause shipwrecks for love of a human sailor; a person soon to die by drowning is said to see a mermaid cutting a caper upon the water's surface, in anticipation of fresh company.
Mermecolion
A rather tragic member of the leonine race, found in Asia.
It had the head of a lion and the body of a great bull ant.
However, because the ant's stomach could not digest the meat that the beast caught and ate with its lion-mouth, the mermecolion would swiftly starve and die after birth.
Merrows
Irish mer-people, also known as the Murdhuacha.
The females are very beautiful, like MERMAIDS, with long flowing hair, sweet voices and jewelled webs between their fingers.
They often appear as an omen before storms, though they are more gentle-natured than mermaids.
The male merrows, though quite amiable, are extremely unattractive to behold.
Croker wrote of them:
They are nothing worth looking at, for they have green hair and green teeth and little pigs' eyes and long red noses and shod arms more like a flipper than any respectable arm that could do a day's work.
Merrows differ from other sea-fairies in that they wear red feathered caps to swim underwater.
If their cap is stolen, they cannot return to the sea and may wander the shores in the form of hornless cattle.
Mimicke Dog
An endearing creature with curly ringlets instead of fur, the Mimicke Dog was featured in Edward Topsell's seventeenth-century Historie of Foure-Footed Beasts.
An appealing and playful pet, it would imitate men's voices and their habits, creating confusion and mischief within a household.
Often, one would be trained to carry out chores normally done by a kitchen maid.
The Mimicke Dog was thought to be raised by apes in Africa, from whence it was imported to England as a treasure for Queen Elizabeth I.
Minch Men
see BLUE MEN
Minerva
The Roman goddess of education and business, Minerva was linked strongly with the Greek ATHENE.
Her name was derived from the Latin root mens (thought).
She had various responsibilities: as Minerva Medica, for instance, she was the  patron of doctors and medicine, while her irascible temper meant that the spoils of war were also dedicated to her.
Minerva, like Athene, was usually depicted wearing a helmet and armour and carrying a lance and shield.
Minotaur
With the body of a man and the head of a huge bull, this creature was the result of a frenzied union between Pasiphae, Queen of Crete, and a white sea-bull.
The Cretans named it Minotaur, meaning ‘bull-son of the King Minos’.
This Minotaur was imprisoned in a labyrinth beneath the Palace of Knossus and, as it would eat only human flesh, each year seven handsome youths and seven beautiful maidens were sent in to the monster's lair to meet their doom.
The Minotaur was finally slain by Theseus, who found his way out of the labyrinth by trailing a skein of thread given him by the king's daughter, ARIADNE.
Miraj
A strange and often savage creature from an island in the Indian Ocean, the miraj was a large hare with yellow fur, who sported a single spiralling black horn in the centre of its forehead.
Unlike mortal hares, the miraj was both predatory and carnivorous, pursuing deer and antelope with great ferocity.
Mithra
The Persian god of daybreak, also known as Mitra.
His epithets include The One Who Dispels Darkness, a reference to his appearance as the light which preceded the sun as it rose.
Contemporary sources described Mithra as having 10,000 ears and eyes, and as riding a gleaming white chariot above the clouds.
During his travels, Mithra was thought to see all — nothing could be concealed from his gaze.
The word ‘mithra’ was also used to describe a friend, and this god was thought to be a true friend of man, protecting and warming him in life and death.
Mithra was later adopted by the Romans, who designated him to oversee all legal affairs and transactions.
He was usually depicted as a young man with a Phrygian cap and short tunic, thrusting a sword into the neck of a bull and thus demonstrating his triumph over the forces of evil.
Mithra was merciless to his enemies, wielding a huge mace and firing poisonous darts as he rode into battle, attended by the virulent boar Verethraghna which was ‘sharp in tusk, unapproachable, a raging beast’.
An old prayer to Mithra sums up this duality in his nature:
Mithra — evil you are, yet most good to the nations
Mithra — evil you are, yet most good to man
In the world, you have power over peace and war.
Moirae
see FATES
Moloch
The primitive Canaanites worshipped Moloch with rather gruesome rituals, including child sacrifice.
The statue of Moloch in Carthage had large outstretched hands for children to be placed on before they tumbled to a blazing fire below, where they would be ‘purified’ and blessed by that god.
Reference is made in the Bible,Kings 2, 23:10, to man making ‘his son…or daughter to pass through the fire to Molech’.
The word ‘moloch’ is still used to refer to any supreme sacrifice and was, in fact, used to describe the Crucifixion of Jesus, God's first-born son.
Monongahela Monster
One of the best documented tales of the sighting of a sea monster occurred in 1852, when a whaling vessel, the Monongahela , netted and took aboard a creature which was rather like a cross between a snake and a crocodile.
Over one-hundred feet long, with ninety-four teeth, it had a long tail and four webbed paws.
The creature was sketched and the drawing witnessed by all the crew before it was decapitated.
The head was then pickled in a ten-foot long tin box, and the rotting body returned to the ocean.
Although the drawing made it back to civilisation the pickled head, along with the rest of the ship, was lost.
Morag
A dun-grey monster, very similar in appearance to the fabled LOCH NESS MONSTER, believed to live at the bottom of  the thousand-foot deep Loch Morar.
According to a local song:
Morag, harbinger of death
Giant swimmer in deep green Morar
The loch that has no bottom
There it is that Morag lives.
Although this creature has not been reported as actually killing any people, its appearance is a frightening one with eyewitnesses testifying to its huge head and swelling shoulders, and the fearsome groans it emits.
Morgan le Fay
A famed enchantress, known also as Morgaine le Fee, or Morgana the Fairy.
Daughter of the Queen Igrayne and half-sister to King Arthur, she revealed to him the intrigue between Lancelot and Guinevere by giving him a magic draught which opened his eyes to the perfidy.
She was ill-intentioned towards Arthur, constantly plotting his undoing and the destruction of Camelot.
Apart from the Arthurian legend, Morgan was the name of a Celtic sea-fairy; an echo of this belief is last seen when Morgan le Fay is one of the four fairy queens who spirit the body of King Arthur across the water to the Isle of Avalon.
Mumiai
A type of POLTERGEIST.
It is best known for persecuting Indian peasants, especially the lower castes or ‘Untouchables’, who may have stolen from a neighbour or have demonstrated dirty habits.
These poor scapegoats are regularly beset by mumiai who toss their belongings in the air, break pottery and trample on gardens, so as to force the peasant to move out of the village.
Mura-Muras
Ancestral spirits of Aboriginal tribes who accompany their descendants in their daily life.
They may be petitioned by men to help with hunting animals, or by women seeking assistance with childbirth or illness.
Most commonly, mura-muras are asked to send rain, for it is well known that if one is offended he will hold up a huge bark dish to the heavens  and catch all the rain on its way to earth, out of spite.
He may be placated, an acceptable tribute being pebbles doused in the blood of six young men, then placed high up in the branches of a tree so the mura-muras may reach them.
The blood symbolises water, or life-blood of the tribe, and the spirit will respond with a like gift of his own ‘blood’, the rain.
Muryans
A Cornish word for ants.
Cornish people of southwestern England believe souls progress through various stages, reducing in size each time until they reach the last stage of the cycle before passing to Heaven or Hell.
During this final stage they appear as ants, which are really fairies in disguise.
Therefore it is considered extremely unlucky to step on one.
Muses
Nine young goddesses, daughters of ZEUS and Mnemosyne, the spirit of memory.
They attended APOLLO.
The Muses dwelt upon Mount Olympus and each was charged with supervising a particular artistic talent, fostering it wherever it was found amongst mortals.
Their fields of expertise were: Calliope, epic poetry; Erato, erotic poetry; Euterpe, lyric poetry; Polyhymnia, religious poetry and hymns; Clio, history; Urania, astronomy; Terpsichore, dance; Melpomene, tragedy; Thalia, comedy.
Myndie
Snake During the Dreamtime, Australian Aboriginals say, different creation ancestors gave the country its form.
One of these was the dreadful Myndie Snake, the servant of Pundijl, who was the spirit ancestor of man, having created the first mortal from clay.
The Myndie Snake was ten miles long and moved shifty across the desert, often travelling just below the surface of the burning red sand.
Aboriginals still point to various rocky outcrops or sandstone gullies which trace the Myndie Snake's progress through the outback.
Its task was to destroy all those who broke Pundijl's laws, and its way was swift and terrifying.
Transgressors would see the enormous snake bearing down on them, so they would break camp and attempt to hide in water holes or caverns.
The Myndie Snake would find  them and drip venom upon them, poisoning the water and burning them where they hid.