

BEAM ME UP SCRITTI Tales From The Gartside SUSANNAH HOFFS' Bedtime Stories U2: A Classic NME Interview Revisited Hanging tuft KITCHENS OF DISTINCTION GALLIANO THE THEATRE OF WAR SHABBA RANKS KILLING JOKE MOCK TURTLES CUD BLEACH BANDERAS THE CLASH SOHO ‘Chick’ Out The Singles ALLIED CARPETS The Inspirals invade the USA
NEWS!
Sampled Notes
REVENGE return to the stage with their first date of the year at the ‘Skin Two In The Midlands’ party at the Wolverhampton Ritzy (March 27).
Tickets are £6 in advance (£8 on the night) and there is a strict dress code of rubber, leather, fetish glamour or full evening dress only!
EURYTHMICS release their ‘Greatest Hits’ album on Monday, March 18.
Featuring the best of their singles from '82s ‘Love Is A Stranger’ up to and including last year's ‘Angel’.
The duo of Annie Lennox and Dave Steward have released seven albums and sold nearly 15 million records worldwide since they formed in 1981.
LEVEL 42 have a new record deal with RCA, having settled out of court with their old label Polydor following a dispute over the band's next album.
The leaders of the British jazz-funk explosion in the early '80s had ten hit albums in their 11 years with Polydor and their old contract still had another six albums to run.
DEEP PURPLE have a 27-track, triple-album collection, titled ‘Anthology’, containing all the best tracks from their first formation in 1968 up until the first split in 1976, released by EMI on March 18.
DUSTY SPRINGFIELD releases a five-track video titled Reputation — The Videos on Monday.
It charts her recent return to prominence and features her hits ‘Nothing Has Been Proved’ and ‘In Private’along with interview footage.
KLF, ADAMSKI, SOUL II SOUL and HAPPY MONDAYS are just a few of the bands who have been nominated for the UK section of the Technics 1991 World DJ Awards, which are to be held at the London Palladium (April 7).
The Awards will feature performances by as yet unannounced top names and are followed by the 1991 World Mixing Championships to be held at Hammersmith Palais (April 8).
Nominations for the World Section include Deee-Lite, Madonna, Snap, MC Hammer and Black Box.
BLONDIE will have her two ‘Best Of…’ compilations out in competition with each other when FM Revolver releases the imported ‘Blondie Hit Collection’album this week.
Chrysalis released their own ‘The Complete Picture — The Very Best Of Deborah Harry And Blondie’ LP last week.
GILLES PETERSON, head of the Phonogram offshoot Talkin Loud, has been reinstated as director/DJ of London's Jazz FM station, after being sacked for playing anti-war songs during the Gulf crisis.
There he goes — Who man turns down La's hot seat
THE LA's are still looking for a producer for their next album, after plans to work with PETE TOWNSHEND were scrapped.
A source close to the group told NME that initial meetings with The Who guitarist came to nothing because of a ‘clash of personalities’.
‘On paper it would have been perfect, but they didn't exactly hit it off,’ said the source.
‘Lee Mavers is not always the easiest person to get on with and Townshend is the sort of person who doesn't have to put up with any shit.’
The group's debut LP, released late last year, was fraught with difficulties.
Several producers worked with the La's and numerous recording sessions were scrapped before Go!
Discs boss Andy McDonald was forced to take over supervision of the album.
‘That first record was finally released a good 18 months later than it should have been,’ said the source.
‘Nobody wants to see that happen again.’
Townshend, meanwhile, has scuppered Roger Daltrey's plans for another world tour by The Who.
NME understands that Daltrey wanted to capitalise on the success of 1989 reunion shows, but Townshend will be busy working on a new solo album.
New Stuffies stuff
THE WONDER STUFF are back on the vinyl trail with their first single for more than a year.
‘Size Of A Cow’ will be out on the Polydor label early next month, backed with live tracks recorded in Los Angeles last year.
The Stuffies last graced our eardrums last spring with the single ‘Circlesquare’, which gave them their biggest hit to date.
The band are currently putting the finishing touches to their third album, which should be out early in the summer.
It is being produced by Mick Glossop.
Live dates are being set up to follow the release of the album, the group's first since ‘Hup’ in 1989, and NME understands plans are afoot for a major outdoor show in the Midlands.
The Roses: Boo-hooing all the way to the bank
THE STONE ROSES/SILVERTONE court case kicked off in earnest last week, when a legal representative for the label suggested that the Manchester four-piece band acted childishly in their attempt to bow out of their contractual obligations.
Mr Peter Prescott QC told a packed London court that Silvertone had taken a ‘big risk’ signing the band in 1988 and that attempts to poach them had only occurred after the label had played its part in engineering their success.
‘They can't now be heard to say, ‘Boo hoo I want to get out of it now’,’ said Mr Prescott.
Silvertone are seeking a court declaration that four members of the band and their manager Gareth Evans are bound to their contract, among unconfirmed rumours that Geffen are ready to move in to snap up the band for £2.2 million.
THE ROLLING STONES release a live album on April 2, recorded during their recent world tour.
‘Flashpoint’ features 17 tracks, including the controversial new single ‘High Wire’, and is in the shops on Monday.
The album includes early classics like ‘Little Red Rooster’ and ‘Satisfaction’, as well as songs from the recent ‘Steel Wheels’LP.
The CD and cassette versions of the album feature another new studio track, ‘Sex Drive’.
Meanwhile, a spokesman for the group has scotched rumours that Bill Wyman is about to leave the Stones.
The tabloid stories emerged after Wyman missed out on a video shoot for ‘High Wire’.
Birdland fly the next?
BIRDLAND, currently in the Independent Top Ten with their eponymous debut LP, are currently the subject of industry rumours that they are about  to sign to MCA.
The Coventry four-piece recently signed to the US arm of the company and an insider told NME : ‘It seems likely that the deal will go ahead pretty soon’.
Birdland's manager Wayne Morris told NME : ‘All I can say is that reports of the band leaving Lazy are totally untrue.
I remain tight-lipped, but there's a smile on my face, so make of that what you will.’
Meanwhile LEVITATION, Terry Bickers' outfit soon to sign to the Ultimate label, have been added to the bill of Birdland's show at London's Kilburn National on March 14 along with Chunk and Trip.
Birdland: US airborne?
Alternative Glasto
PLANS ARE being made to host an alternative to the cancelled GLASTONBURY festival in June.
Details were sketchy as NME went to press, but it is understood that an application to Northaven District Council in the west country has been made to host a 100,000 capacity open air event, running over June 21, 22 and 23 — the weekend Glastonbury traditionally takes place.
The site, on the east side of Bristol was described by one source as ‘a superb place to host a festival’.
JAMES release a re-recorded version of ‘Sit Down’ on March 18.
The song, a long-standing live favourite, was produced by Gil Norton and the flipside has a nine-minute live version recorded at Manchester's G-Mex last December.
The 12″ and CD formats feature a previously unreleased track, ‘Tonight’.
The band are currently working on their new LP due for release in the Autumn, backed up by a major UK tour.
In the meantime, an hour-long documentary of the G-Mex gig is being transmitted in the Granada region on March 27.
US NEWS
MICHAEL JACKSON and actor JACK LEMMON will chair a tribute to chimpanzee researcher Dr Jane Goodall in Beverly Hills California, in May.
Funds from the event will support work at the Jane Goodall Institute in Tucson, Arizona.
Rykodisc are currently reissuing the QUEEN back-catalogue in the States and have said that their CDs will include special remixes of certain Queen classics, masterminded by Rick Rubin and Michael Wagner among others.
VANILLA ICE was ticketed for a fire code violation in San Antonio, Texas, after inviting fans to gather around the stage.
Assistant fire marshall Jose Garza says a brass railing at the front of the Municipal Auditorium was broken by the pressure of the crowd.
Ice could be fined $100 to $2,000.
While in Texas, Ice also paid a $516 fine that had been outstanding since he was convicted of assault in 1988.
He had served a year's probation because of the incident, but had not paid the fine and a warrant for his arrest was issued two months ago.
QUINCY JONES' record sales were boosted after he won eight Grammy Awards last month, with his record label receiving over 50,000 orders for ‘Back On The Block’ only 24 hours after the awards show in New York.
A label executive expects him to sell ‘several hundred thousand more albums’ than the 1.8 million already sold.
U2 will release their next CD without the environmentally unfriendly ‘long box’ packaging still prevalent in the US.
‘North America is the only territory where this wasteful practice takes place,’ said band manager Paul McGuiness.
‘By the time the band releases its next album, we expect the practice to be a memory.
And needless to say we will never release another CD with a long box.’
THE COCTEAU TWINS started the second leg of their US tour in St Louis on March 12.
The band will end the dates with a concert in Miami on April 10, and then the band goes to Argentina and Brazil.
Houston police are trying to find a man who has succeeded in getting teenage girls to pose nude for him by saying they will appear in a music video for NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK.
He's been telling the girls that their costumes for the video will be added by using computer graphics.
A Fleadh in your ear!
THE POGUES and CHRISTY MOORE are the main attractions of Fleadh '91, the second annual festival of Irish music in London's Finsbury Park.
That Petrol Emotion, The Chieftains, Paul Brady and Mary Black have also been confirmed for the festival, which takes place on June 2, and promoters The Mean Fiddler expect to announce another 22 names in the near future.
Tickets are £22.50 and available from the usual agents and all Mean Fiddler venues in London (Subterania and the Powerhaus).
Postal applications should be sent to Fleadh 1991,, enclosing a stamped addressed envelope and adding 50p booking fee per ticket.
Cheques and postal orders should be made payable to Winfield Promotions Ltd.
There are also two phone lines for the event; an information hotline and a competition line to win tickets.
FADs all over
NEWFAST AUTOMATIC DAFFODILS, grooveriders extraordinaire whose debut LP ‘Pigeonhole’ hit the Top 40 last year, release a new Play It Again Sam single on April 2.
The Martin Hannett-produced ‘Get Better’ is their second 45 since singing to the Belgian label and the band set out on a European tour in March including a date at The Locomotive in Paris on March 20.
Following the European stint, they embark on a ten-date British tour on May 15, details of which will be announced at a later date.
Meanwhile, in America, the New FADS have signed to Mute/Electra through Play It Again Sam.
It's o-fish-al!
Shurely shome Mish-take!
THE MISSION have announced details of their guests for their outdoor show at London's Finsbury Park on June 1.
NEW MODEL ARMY were confirmed for the gig last week and now KILLING JOKE and THE HENRY ROLLINS BAND join the bill, with one more act still to be announced.
Tickets are £20 from the usual agents, or by post from .
Enclose a stamped addressed envelope, add 50p booking fee per ticket and make cheques and postal orders payable to Winfield Promotions Ltd.
There is an information line for the latest news and a competition line to win tickets.
PET SHOP BOYS, currently stampeding towards the Top Ten with their cover of U2's ‘Where The Streets Have No Name’, have added another seven shows to their UK tour.
The tour now starts in Chris Lowe's hometown with a gig at Blackpool Opera House .
REM: video-free Europe?
REM have run into controversy over the video for their single ‘Losing My Religion’, with Irish television refusing to show the clip.
The country's national station RTE has deemed the religious imagery in the video, in particular a crucifixion scene, unfit for broadcast in Ireland.
Pat Morley, producer of RTE's major youth programme Beatbox , said: ‘It's a bit over the top for us, it might offend viewers.’
Bill Berry and Peter Buck of REM said they were surprised by the ban when interviewed on Irish radio at the weekend.
‘It's the first time we've been banned anywhere,’ said Barry, adding that singer Michael Stipe had been involved in the production of the video and that the rest of the band had only seen it once.
The group caused a stir two years ago with the video for ‘Pop Singer '89’, which featured topless dancers.
MTV showed the clip once and then withdrew it.
Meanwhile, REM, whose new album ‘Out Of Time’ hits the shops this week, will be releasing a series of live tracks on limited edition compact disks throughout the year.
There will be a special CD to accompany every single release from ‘Out Of Time’, each containing three live songs, forming what is basically a live album.
The first of the CDs is in the shops on Monday, comprising the current hit ‘Losing My Religion’ and live versions of ‘Stand’, ‘Turn You Inside Out’and ‘World Leader Pretend’.
It comes complete with a full colour poster.
REM can also be heard on Nicky Campbell's Radio 1 show between 10pm and 12 midnight tonight (Wednesday).
They'll be playing live in the BBC's Maida Vale studios and talking to Campbell about the new album.
See definitive new interview next week.
That'll be the deity
NED'S ATOMIC DUSTBIN's debut LP ‘God Fodder ’is released on Furtive, through Sony Music on April 1.
Featuring their current hit ‘Happy’ as well as previously released singles ‘Kill Your Television’, ‘Until You Find Out’and ‘Grey Cells Green’, the album is available in all formats, with no bonus tracks on CD or cassette.
The LP is produced by Jessica Corcoran in tandem with the band and coincides with the tail end of their current tour, a sell-out but for a few tickets for their London show at The Kilburn National on April 4.
NED'S, CARTER/USM, THE WONDER STUFF and SENSELESS THINGS have joined forces to voice their opposition against a team of merchandise bootleggers currently operating outside their gigs.
A spokesperson told NME : ‘The stuff they're selling is unbelievably shoddy and the T-shirts wash out after two or three washes.
We'd recommend people to stay away from them for their own safety, as there have been several violent incidents recently.’
THE FALL release their second Cog Sinister/Fontana LP ‘Shiftwork’ on April 22, the first since the controversial departure of Marcia Schofield and Martin Bramah last summer.
‘Shiftwork’ features 12 previously unreleased songs, with Mark E Smith, Craig Scanion, Steve Hanley and Simon Wolstencroft being augmented by a new member, violinist Kenny Brady.
As yet, there are no plans to release any singles from the LP and no live dates have been scheduled until the Autumn.
‘Jinxed’‘fathers blow out UK tour
THE GODFATHERS have been forced to cancel their British tour, which was due to start this week, after bassist Chris Coyne sprained his wrists fighting off two muggers.
Chris has been told by his doctor not to play bass for at least two weeks, but the band have been able to salvage the London show of the tour.
The Town & Country Club gig will go ahead on March 21.
Two men challenged Chris as he walked his girlfriend home after a night out.
He successfully fought them off and they fled empty-handed.
Coyne will be fully recovered by the time The Godfathers head off for European and American dates by the end of the month, but the British dates cannot be rescheduled until early autumn.
‘Needless to say the band are gutted,’ said a Godfathers spokesman.
‘They seem to be jinxed when it comes to playing in the UK.
In 1989 then guitarist Kris Dollimore went down with chickenpox on the day of a big show with UB40 at Aston Villa football ground.
We had to blow out the first two weeks of an American tour.’
Details of the rescheduled UK shows should be announced in the next couple of weeks.
THE SOUNDTRACK to Oliver Stone's much talked about film ‘THE DOORS’ is released by Elektra on March 18.
Featuring 12 Jim Morrison compositions including ‘Riders Of The Storm’, ‘Light My Fire’ and ‘Love Street’, the CD and cassette versions include four extra tracks, including ‘LA Woman’, The Velvet Underground's ‘Heroin’and classical piece ‘Carmina Burana’.
The movie, starring Val Kilmer, is released in the UK on April 12.
Radio 1's new recipe: hold the Mayo!
RADIO 1's much-touted new playlist formats came into operation last week, guaranteeing more airtime for album tracks and a wider spread of singles.
The station re-thought its playlist procedures after mounting criticism from all corners of the music industry, including label bosses, pluggers, journalists and the artists themselves.
‘The new playlist will mean more music in daytime programmes across the broader range,’ claimed Chris Lycett, Head Of Music at Radio 1.
‘The expanded ‘A’ list means we can give maximum exposure to new bands, while the new ‘C’list of album tracks is a clear response to the changing tastes of our audience.’
Under the new format, the ‘A’ list is expanded from 15 to 20 singles, each guaranteed a minimum of 15 plays a week, while the 20 singles on the ‘B’list can expect around ten plays a week.
The ‘C’ list of album tracks comprises six songs guaranteed daytime plays.
The industry is waiting to see if the facelift will have any effect, although critics say the changes are largely cosmetic and don't go far enough.
‘It will be interesting to see if the system has been improved in any way, but it will take a couple of months before we really see any indication of that,’ said one insider.
‘Many people feel that Radio 1 has just made a couple of minor alterations to get the critics off their backs.
Things might have been different if there had been more consultation with industry people across the board.
‘We'll just have to wait and see if things get any better.
If it transpires that there's been no real change the detractors will be more vociferous than ever.’
The BBC, however, are confident that the new playlists will please listeners.
‘Devoting more airtime to music means we can offer listeners a broader range of singles and albums,’ said Paul Robinson, chairman of the  playlist panel of producers and DJs who select the records to be played.
‘While our competitors play only ten records an hour we can play at least 14, and that's without losing out on speech areas like news, interviews and DJ input.’
LUSH, who fly to America next week in preparation for their forthcoming six-week American tour with Ride, have planned two secret gigs in the south-east at the weekend.
The 4AD tour piece play London's New Cross Venue on March 15 and Windsor Old Trout (16).
No future plans for record releases have been made as yet, but it is understood that the band are working on their first album proper, following last year's singles-compilation ‘Gala’.
THROWING MUSES, currently on tour in support of their acclaimed 4AD album ‘The Real Ramona’, release a new single in April.
‘Not Too Soon’, written and sung by Tanya Donelly, is taken from the LP and is backed by previously unreleased material, as yet  unnamed .
The bank have also added a second London date to their tour, playing the Town & Country Club on April 2.
In the meantime, they embark on a European tour visiting France, Germany, Holland and Belgium.
Len's mother of an LP
LENNY KRAVITZ has recruited both SEAN ONO LENNON and GUNS N' ROSES guitarist SLASH to record the follow-up to his critically acclaimed ‘Let Love Rule’ LP.
‘Mama Said’ is issued on April 2 and sources close to NME have described the album as ‘a major departure from his previous work, with many of the songs sounding like a weird blend of psychedelic dub.’
Kratitz recently took part in a re-recording of John Lennon's ‘Give Peace A Chance’, which was partly re-written by Sean Ono Lennon and issued by Virgin.
He has also placed an advert in New York's Village Voice in search of a tour band, requesting applicants ‘who really rock hard’ and count John Lennon among their influences.
‘And this is the intro to ‘Norwegian Wood’…
’ Lenny playing Lennon's guitar (fact!)
Kitch's brew up a tour
KITCHENS OF DISTINCTION (above) release their second One Little Indian LP on March 18 and have announced a massive UK tour through March and April.
‘Strange Free World’ is produced by Hugh Jones and has been recently released in America to great acclaim (see feature, page 16).
They play Windsor Old Trout 
(‘Strange Free World’ is reviewed on page 32.)
GARY CLAIL releases his long-awaited follow-up to last year's ‘Beef’ 45 with a new Perfecto single, entitled ‘Human Nature’, out on March 18.
Produced by Adrian Sherwood and remixed by Happy Mondays' production team of Paul Oakenfold and Steve Osborne, vocals on the single are provided by Comic Strip performer Alan Pelay.
The B-side of the 12″ and CD formats is ‘Rumours’, another Adrian Sherwood production fronted by Bim Sherman.
Clail, currently on British tour, takes his On-U Sound System to Preston Lancashire Polytechnic on March 17, and not Lancaster Polytechnic as previously stated.
808 STATE perform a massive all-night rave at London's Brixton Academy on April 13.
The Mancunian dance team are the first band to host an all-nighter at the venue and intend to perform two sets, one at 10pm and the other in the early hours.
They are supported by N-Joi and longtime 808 collaborator MC Tunes.
Added attractions include Sound Garden Club DJs Tony Ross, Nipper and The Spinmasters from Manchester as well as Fabian and Grooverider from the capital.
Tickets are priced £12.50 and are available from  the usual agents.
Right on ‘Swine’
CHAPTERHOUSE release their third Dedicated 45 ‘Pearl’ on March 18 and have announced details of their most extensive tour yet.
The Reading guitar outfit's latest waxing comes in all formats, the seven-inch backed by ‘Come Heaven’, while the 12″ and CD versions have an extra track called ‘In My Arms’.
The 17-state tour calls in at Manchester University 
SENSELESS THINGS have signed to Epic for a six figure sum and go into the studio next week to record their debut album.
The punky four piece will record under the direction of Jessica Corcoran, producer of Ned's Atomic Dustbin, and intend to finish the LP within a month.
A UK tour for June is currently being organised and the band follow it up with dates in Europe, Japan, America and Australia.
Speaking about the deal, Senseless Things manager Adrian Boss told NME : ‘We want to make the most of this deal and maximise the opportunities that come along with having a worldwide deal.
We're looking to conquer the planet over the next 12 months.’
‘When will we, will we be famous?’
Senseless Things in Steve Lamacq-style meeting mode at CBS
GREEN ON RED issue their China single, ‘Little Things’, on March 11 and play three dates in London to tie in with its release.
The track is produced by Al Kooper, leader of Blood Sweat And Tears and ex-collaborator with Bob Dylan, The Rolling Stones and Jimi Hendrix.
The seven-inch format features a new track ‘Cherry Kind’ and the 12″ and CD versions have four songs, including ‘Sun Goes Down’and ‘Waiting For Love’.
The band play London Mean Fiddler (March 21, 22) and London New Cross Venue (23).
DOCUMENT-NURSERY Records re-release ECHO AND THE BUNNYMEN's debut 45 ‘Pictures On My Wall’ next Monday, March 18.
Originally issued in 1979, the B-side is a previously unreleased version of ‘Read it in Books’, the song co-written by Julian Cope and Ian McCulloch, which originally appeared on the flipside of the 45.
RECORD NEWS
45s
ALIAS: ‘Waiting For Love’(EMI) another collection of American soft rockers who deserve to bite the bullet, with this, their second single, preceding their debut LP due next month…out now
DIANE BROWN & BARRIE K SHARPE: ‘Love Or Nothing’(ffrr) the ‘Ground Beat’ sound goes over the top with this soul brothers track amalgamating R&B, Philly, Garage and just a hint of hip-hop — out now
PAPA DEE: ‘Beautiful Woman (Love Supreme)’(Arista) raggamuffin rapper of a toaster, who popped up on Titiyo's ‘After The Rain’ single, spreads it on thick with his own debut…out now
DESTROY THE BOY: ‘Only One Night’(White Light) four piece North London band, and mates of Soho, whose pop fury has been described as ‘tunes which wriggle like eels in a neckbrace’— out now
THE HONEY THIEVES: ‘Second Hand Man’(Buzz) wild, leather-clad bunch of rockin' Dubliners with their second buzz-inducing single, produced by Chris Allison, and the follow up to their Irish Top 20 hit, ‘Drive’— out on Monday
JEFFERSON AIRHEAD: ‘Congratulations’(Korova) four piece from Maidstone, of all places, who have nothing to do with Airplanes, Starships or Eurovision song contest winners, with their debut freak out — out now
THE JEREMY DAYS: ‘Sylvia Suddenly’(Polydor) Germany's hip, if hideously named, pop combo preview their forthcoming new Langer & Winstanley produced album, ‘Circushead’, with this girly ditty — out on Monday
LAND OF FUN: ‘In The Basement’(EMI) previously on Police Records, this  Detroit crew got a UK release for their under-the-floor filler — out now
ALISON LIMERICK: ‘Where Love Lives’(Arista) cutting her cake both ways with this re-release of her massive club hit, remixed so she can have her doughnut and eat it — out on Monday
LITTLE ANGELS: ‘Product Of The Working Class’(Polydor) small heavy metal devils get socially wicked with another Top 40 bound single lifted from their all seeing ‘Young Gods’ album — out on Monday
ORCHESTRAL MANOEUVRES IN THE DARK: ‘Sailing On The Seas’(Virgin) synthetic pop duo of yore back minus Paul  Humpreys but with the same old brash, electronic burping — out on Monday
P.U.M.P.: ‘Barabajagal (Love Is Hot)’(Ultimate) out of the ashes of the Junior Manson Slags arrives Aqua Marina, with her Purple Under Melted Pink getting down on the dancefloor with a hot and sultry Donovan song.
Surely some mistake?— out on Monday
Q-TEE: ‘Free The People’(EMI) smart rapper, who may or may not be cute, looks for revolution in the hands of a remix by PWL's star remixers, Phil Harding and Ian Curnow — out now
QUIET BOYS: ‘Modal’(Acid Jazz) an elusive London mob based around DJ and producer Chris Bangs of Galliano, Courtney Pine and Paul Weller credits, with an EP of progressive jazz-House — out on Monday
RAIN TREE CROW: ‘Blackwater’(Virgin) ex-Japan style merchants David Sylvian, Mick Karn, Steve Jansen and Richard Barbieri reform and return with more svelte, oriental-oriented art — out on Monday
DEL SHANNON: ‘Walk Away’(Silvertone) posthumously-released single from his album, ‘Rock On’, recorded with Tom Petty, Jeff Lynne and producer Mike Campbell before his death last year — out now
SNAP: ‘Megamix’(Arista) Turbo powered dance crew mix up their Number One single, a Top Five hit and two Top Ten hits for mega success candidate — out now
THRILLED SKINNY: ‘Let There Be Shelving EP’(Hunchback) top DIY enthusiasts knock up a tasty four track EP with a couple of bits of string and some sticky-back plastic.
Not surprisingly comes in a wallpaper sleeve!— out now
VENUS FLY TRAP: ‘Achilles Heel’(Danceteria) Northampton band who are ‘big’ in France, chortle, chortle and produced by The Jazz Butcher — out now.
LPs
THE ALMIGHTY: ‘Soul Destruction’(Polydor) heavenly heavy metal merchants demolish their second studio album prior to assaulting Europe on tour supporting Megadeth — out on Monday
THE CLASH: ‘The Story Of The Clash’(Columbia) now they are top of the chart mountain, the last gang in town flood the place with an avalanche of Westway Rockin' rereleases — out on Monday
CABARET VOLTAIRE: ‘Body And Soul’(Les Disques Du Crepescule) Sheffield's legendary Techno beat masters go with their own clonking bleep alongside Richard Kirk's Xon and Sweet Exorcist projects — out on Monday
THE FLESHEATERS: ‘Dragstrip Riot’(SST) prime movers of the LA underground scene with 17 prime cuts of rib-tingling, fist smackin' stuff — out on Monday
GRAND FUNK RAILROAD: ‘Capitol Collectors’(Capitol) retrospective of these American hard rockers from the '70s with their nine US Top 40 hits, including ‘The Locomotion’, featured here — out now
HELLOWEEN: ‘Pink Bubbles Go Ape’(EMI) Germany's premier rock band go to hell and back with this frightener, containing such weird titles as ‘Heavy Metal Hamsters’ and ‘I'm Don’Fine Crazy Man’!— out now
INTO PARADISE: ‘Churchtown’(Ensign) second album from this major new Irish talent, titled after the suburb of Dublin they come from, and featuring the iridescent ‘Burns My Skin’ single — out on Monday
THE LEAVING TRAINS: ‘Sleeping Underwater  Survivors ’(SST) misunderstood Los Angeles band with their confusingly titled fourth album of mixed up and messed about songs of violence and torture — out on Monday
THE MACC LADS: ‘Twenty Golden Crates’(Streetlink) pub band of unlovable rogues celebrate their tenth anniversary, would you believe, with this beer swillin', sheep shaggin' and chips ‘n’ gravy guzzling collection — out on Monday
MYSTERY SLANG: ‘Venus Grove’(Virgin) conjuring up the dark brooding of The Doors and the yarn spinning of Tom Waits from a new, wild-eyed Nick Cave type — out on Monday
RANDY NEWMAN: ‘Awakenings’(Warner Bros) the soundtrack to a new Robert De Niro and Robin Williams film from the legendary US singer/songwriter with the Zombies ‘Time Of The Season’ classic added for luck — out now
SAXON: ‘The Best Of Saxon’(EMI) no doubt very short compilation of the best from these former contemporaries of Iron Maiden and Del Leppard back in the days of the late '70s New Wave of British Heavy Metal — out now
FRANK SINATRA: ‘The Reprise Years’(Reprise) ol' rheumy eyes is back with a collection of his finest croons, on the label he founded, including ‘I've Got You Under My Skin’, ‘Strangers In The Night’ and, of course, ‘My Way’— out now
VARIOUS: ‘Night And Day — The Cole Porter Songbook’(Polydor) with the renewed interest following ‘Red Hot And Blue’, along comes a superb collection of this classic English gent's epic songs by a host of jazz greats, including Ella Fitzgerald, Louis Armstrong and Billie Holliday — out now
THE VASELINES: ‘Dum-Dum’(Avalanche) seminal debut from these slippery customers, now remixed and remastered — out now
‘Wakey wakey!’
Randy Newman on the film trail
TOUR NEWS
BLUR have added an extra date to their forthcoming UK tour, visiting Coventry Tic Toc on May 3.
PAUL BRADY, plugs his forthcoming Fontana LP ‘Trick Or Treat’ with shows at Leeds  Coliseum 
BUFFALO TOM, the acclaimed Boston three piece, play a one-off gig at London's Powerhaus on March 21.
THE CROWD SCENE play a string of dates at London Marquee with Melt, London New Cross Venue with Green On Red 
CURVE, super sonic pop merchants that feature Toni Halliday and have a grand ‘Blindfold EP’ out on Dave Stewart's Anxious label, play their first ever gig at London's Camden Underworld.
DEAD MILKMEN, punky Philadelphians on the Emergo label, appear at London's Borderline on March 13 (tonight).
THE DEEP SEASON, beefed up acoustic strummers with lyrical bite, appear at London Wandsworth Freeways 
DODGY, the much touted Kingston combo, headline London's Town & Country 2 on March 14.
DOUGHBOYS, Montreal's answer to Mega City Four, have been confirmed as guests of Ned's Atomic Dustbin on the April leg of their UK tour.
They visit Nottingham Rock City 
WILL DOWNING visits Britain for a special one-off date to promote his forthcoming LP ‘A Dream Fulfilled’ on 4th & Broadway.
The soul crooner plays London's Shaw Theatre on March 18.
FIELDS OF THE NEPHILIM don the wide brimmed hats and cover themselves in flour for two nights of doom laden entertainment at London's Town & Country Club on March 29 and 30.
FISHMONKEYMAN, whose excellent debut EP ‘If I've Told You Once’ was recently re-released through WEA, play Aberdeen Caesars Palace 
FRAZIER CHORUS, Brighton's favourite ironic popsters, have a one-off date to coincide with the release of their new album ‘Ray’, the follow-up to their excellent ‘Sue’ debut, appearing at London Subterania.
FUDGE TUNNEL, recent Earache signings currently working on their debut LP ‘Hate Songs in E Minor’ appear at London Hampstead Moonlight Club 
GRAPE, Bristol-based purveyors of a feverish brand of pop, play Bristol Fleece & Firkin 
MC HAMMER, recipient of multiple Grammy awards recently, has added another date to his UK tour at Whitley Bay Ice Rink on May 17.
Tickets are available from  the usual agents, priced £15.
THE HARD ONS, raucous Australians on Vinyl Solution, stop off in the UK on their European tour visiting Birmingham Barrel Organ 
THE HONEY SMUGGLERS, psychedelic groove merchants whose second EP ‘Besides Which’ is out now on Ultimate, play Oxford Jericho Tavern 
THE HONEY THIEVES, the Dublin band who recently won the Phil Lynott Memorial Award for Best New Band of 1990 in recognition of services to leather trousers, have a UK date to coincide with the release of their new ‘Second Hand Man’ single at London Rock Garden.
INCOGNITO, excellent jazz/soul outfit on Talkin' Loud, play London's Brixton Fridge on March 16.
THE JEREMY DAYS, eloquent German popsters on Polydor, play London Marquee on March 18.
Support is provided by labelmates Great Northern Electrics.
JOOLZ, high priestess of punk poetry, plays Portsmouth Polytechnic 
THE KEATONS release their new single ‘Factor Alpha’ in April (produced by Carter USM's Fruitbat) and embark on a lengthy tour kicking off at Liverpool Picket 
THE LEVELLERS celebrate St Patrick's weekend in true fashion (despite hailing from Crawley), with gigs at Essex University 
THE MACC LADS celebrate ten years of writing songs about farting and suchlike with two gigs at London's Marquee on March 29 and 30.
ONE STYLE MDV, BACK TO THE PLANET, THE SEA and six other bands play a multicultural ‘Rock Against The Rich’ benefit at the London's Triangle Music Workshop on March 16.
SANITY ASSASSINS, a hybrid of The Ramones and Strawberry Alarm Clock, play Huddersfield Top Spot 
SLAP IN THE FACE, LA pop rockers relocated in the heart of London's East End play London Kennington Cricketers 
ROD STEWART has announced a new series of shows at Aberdeen Exhibition Centre  Tickets are available from the usual agents, priced at £18.50/£20 for Wembley and the NEC 
THIS RAGGED JACK, West London three piece recently described as a ‘bastard fusion of blues, club and rock music’, play Cardiff University 
THRILLED SKINNY support the release of their new EP ‘Let There Be Shelving’ with dates at London Hampstead White Horse 
THOUSAND YARD STARE, currently causing a whirlwind of A&R attention at the moment, visit London Islington Powerhaus 
UK SUBS, the oldest punks in town (not including some of our staff), visit Manchester International 
VENUS FLY TRAP, who've just released their latest ‘Achilles Heel’ single on Danceteria, play Nottingham Old Angel 
WELFARE HEROINE, off-kilter indie folk featuring NME scribe Dele Fadele on vocals, support Bleach at Manchester's Boardwalk on March 15.
THRILLS
EDITED BY STUART MACONIE
DESIGN CLASSICS
Natalie Merchant on the Clairol Foot Spa (TM)
AFTER a hard day's spinning and weaving, what could be nicer than to slip out of one's sandals and dip a foot in a beautiful fountain of gleaming plastic?
From the finely crafted flex in virgin white vinyl to the deliciously tingly nodules along the bottom of the bathing area that sensuously massage your foot when you use it, the Clairol Foot Spa is indubitably the ultimate home chiropaedic device.
The smoke-brown translucent top lifts up to reveal a heavenly miniature pool which fills with pre-warmed water.
The control panel is discreetly tucked away on the front and is totally invisible when the spa is in use.
This maintains the important illusion that one has stepped into a warm stream in a lush tropical forest.
Turn the knob clockwise, and wow!! your foot is gently kneaded by the swirling water.
The Clairol model is the only spa to offer a choice of three speeds, the first of which causes your toe hairs to sway like daffodils in a light breeze; the second bubbles gently like a pot of mung beans on simmer, and the third, to be used only when one feels particularly in need of a good rebirth, can cause orgasm in your achilles tendons.
Available in shoe sizes five–13 ( children's ), one–six (ladies') and a male size, and operational on solar power with a small roof adaptation from Earthenergy Inc of Twin Falls, Idaho, this is the perfect present for a creative person.
Perhaps if my maternal grandmother had had one on her nightly return from the candlewax factory here in Wiggly, Connecticut she might have had the energy to start her own bangle stall at weekends.
As it is, when I use mine, I think of her, and of the generations of Merchants that have not been as lucky as I. 
Natalie: Spa-ce cadet
THRILLS BELIEVE IT OR NOT!
Technotronic rapper Ya Kid K has written several episodes of the sitcom May To December 
Marc Almond's grandfather patented the prototype paper clip.
Rock legend Roger McGuinn provided the voice of ‘Brains’ in the puppet series Thunderbirds 
Olympic athlete Steve Cram produced several demos for Martin Stephenson And The Daintees.
Czech premier and playwright Vaclav Havel ran the Prague branch of The Shadows fan club.
Popular Radio 1 DJ Steve Wright nicks all his jokes from Thrills 
ENORMOUS PIGS
CONTINUING OUR series spotlighting a series of indisputably big pigs.
This week a tender shot of JANICE and family captured by our own Kevin Cummins.
SEMINAL MOMENTS IN ROCK
This week: The day the keyboard player in Jesus Jones replaced Chris Lowe.
(SCENE: The Royal Albert Hall.
The Pet Shop Boys' world tour rehearsals have been thrown in disarray by the flaring up of Chris Lowe's lumbago.
At EMI's suggestion, Wayne Divot, The Keyboard Playing Twat Out Of Jesus Jones is drafted in.
The hastily assembled pair strike up the lush strains of ‘Always On My Mind’).
Neil (singing ironically ): ‘You were always on my mi-ind/You were always…’
(He is put off by the sight of Wayne, who is pogoing furiously behind his keyboards, like someone at a Members gig in 1978) Erm, excuse me, but what do you think you're doing?
Wayne (looking around queryingly) Who me, guv?
Neil: Yes, you.
I take it you are familiar with our songs and the aloof sophistication with which we present them…well, kindly desist from cavorting like a chimp with a roman candle up its arse and get on with it!
(They begin again.
All is well until the chorus when Wayne spins on his back foot, tips the keyboards over and rushes upstage where he jostles Neil and begins bellowing ‘Yo!
Bring The Noise’ into the mic.
Neil waves the Viennese Boys Choir to a halt and brushes down his overcoat.)
Neil: Have you any idea how much a Giles Peterson three vent Crombie costs, you uncouth little man?
Considerably more than a baseball cap bearing the legend ‘Brits On The Piss, Wicked!’
I can tell you.
Now pull yourself together, get back behind the keyboard and make with the Chris-style po-faced air of Weltschmerz .
(They try ‘West End Girls’ but as they get to the line about The Finland Station, Wayne somersaults over the keyboard, does that crap dance that vaudevillians do where they move their hands across their knees, makes a shadow puppet of a seagull in the beam of one of the lasers, does the hitch-hike from Saturday Night Fever, and gobs on Derek Jarman.
Derek wipes his face and claps his hands impatiently.
Derek: Well, I'm afraid we won't be needing you, lovey, thank you.
(looks at clipboard) Could we have the next candidate, please?
(Enter Keith from The Farm wearing deely boppers and a Father Christmas suit.
He farts and puts his thumbs up.
Neil turns to the camera and hits his forehead with the palm of his hand.
Fade)
‘Ere, Neil, can we do ‘Lovepump’ now?’
‘BIG MOUTH’
‘We met Derek Smalls of Spinal Tap!
He was a very nice man.
When they do a tour, we're gonna be on the guest list.
Imagine that!
We're on Spinal Tap's guest list!’
Patrick, Kitchens Of Distinction
‘30 Something’ is our difficult second album — for all the wrong reasons.
It was easy to make, but it's difficult to listen to!’
Carter USM
‘After the show we're in the van reading books, Margot doing her needlepoint.
None of us has a drug habit or drinks heavily.
I guess we must be pretty boring.’
Cowboy Junkies' Michael Timmins
‘Prince is very nice.
At first he was really quiet but I kinda changed that because I treated him like my brother by punching him!’
Elisa Fiorillo
‘Nothing like me has ever happened in the rap world — ever!
You never see a white guy rappin' and dancin' like I do.’
The terribly modest Vanilla Ice
‘Being the sexiest man alive is better than being the sexiest man dead.’
Mel Gibson
‘One day I will learn English but it will take me a year in life.
It is hard to find one year and, if I found it, I don't think I'd spend it learning English.’
Gerard Depardieu
COMPETITION SEGA
COMPUTERS?
PAH!
They are just for sad trainspotters who still live with their parents at 29 and fancy Lady Penelope off Thunderbirds and wear a scarf and read 2000AD aren't they?
NOOOOO!
Only in your mind , Mr New Model Army!
Computer are, in fact, as any  fule  kno , the bloody business!
The Thrills Nerve Centre has now been ‘computer-ed up’ for the '90s and that is precisely why they're all calling it The Hi-Tech Capital Of Satire.
More wires and codes and vectors and cursors have gone into making this one section than 808 State's entire back catalogue, pal!
And, as a fitting tribute to the white heat of technology (and slaying dragons) we proudly present a Red-Hot Computer-style Offer to end them all.
The SEGA MICHAEL JACKSON MOONWALKER GAME COMPETITION!!!
Those awfully clever people over at Sega have offered Thrills some prize-stuff that is not only EXPENSIVE and WORTH LOADS but UNIQUE too!
You can win not only a Megadrive 16-bit computer console (exquisitely  styled to produce faster and smoother games playing scenarios and requiring greater levels of skill and dexterity, it sez here) but also a brand new Michael Jackson game to go with it.
The ‘Moonwalker’ game combines Jacko-esque fantasy fun with a scorching pop soundtrack.
This is no ordinary cash-in either, kids — Michael himself has actually been consulted every step of the way in the development of the Moonwalker game.
It was his original idea; his recommendations were used on the ‘look’, and he even recorded some special ‘whoops’ for it.
Cor.
In the game, you are Michael!
You have magic powers in your one glove (Wooooo-oooohhh!).
You search for the missing kidnapped children and defeat Mr Big!!
And your nose alters miracykiyskt!
(Last bit not true).
In order to win this corking game, and the machinery upon which to prod at it and be Gandalf, just answer this Jacko question.
Q: Which of Michael's  sisters hasn't had 16 Top Ten hits off her last LP?
Send your answers by computer please (or by post if you are in New Model Army) to Thrills Moonwalker Competition  And then be the first of two people out of the spangly hat.
Over and out.
Woooooh.
Man and machine in perfect harmony (man, right)
‘Musicians Against Success’ launch nationwide campaign
AT LEAST two ex-members of MICRODISNEY have this week publicly pledged their support to a newly-founded organisation dedicated to being obscure and not getting within sniffing distance of the Top 75.
The non-profit making body — known as MAS, or Musicians Against Success — was formed by JUNIOR GISCOMBE, THE MEN THEY COULDN'T HANG, an MC who no-one can remember the name of, and DREAM ACADEMY's lighting man, as a direct response to recent developments in the charts.
‘We're appalled by what's going on in the charts at the moment.
Bands are getting in them, and no-one out there seems to care!’ commented CHUMBAWAMBA drum roadie Reg Goreham.
‘And all the government is doing about it is running the country!
When will ordinary people realise that it's not just god bands that put out records.
Shite ones do too!
There are hundreds of ineffectual, half-hearted, derivative, dull, inexperienced, outdated and naff groups out there that are suffering because of some outdated imperialist dogma which states that records-sold equals success.’
In response to claims by MAS that the BBC has circulated a list of 67 records that they have allegedly ‘banned’ due to their being unlistenable, a spokesperson for Radio 1 said ‘Absolutely.
This is completely true and I don't deny a thing.
All 67 have been blacklisted, and for entirely justifiable reasons.
Now get out of here.’
BILLY BRAGG, who has also offered his support to the MAS campaign, gave this response: ‘This is typical of the BBC to try and wriggle out of it.
The bastards.’
‘You don't have to be a musician to get involved with MAS,’ chairman Big John of GOODBYE MR MACKENZIE told Thrills .
‘If you're a fan of crap music, or involved in putting on pathetic bands at local venues then MAS would like to hear from you.’
STOP PRESS.
At time of NME going to press, the situation in the charts was still ongoing, but the MAS campaign seemed to be close to striking its first blow with the new HOLLY JOHNSON single hovering around the Top 100.
Musicians Against Success (l to r): Two Men They Couldn't Retire, Billy Bragg and Big John
CRAP THINGS BANDS DO 3
An investigative Thrills series which lifts the lid on the stupid, rubbish stunts bands pull mistakenly believing them to be big or clever.
This week: BUYING A FARM.
ONE OF the more significantly tossy tactics open to the very successful musician is the purchase of a farm.
Paul McCartney owns practically all of the Mull Of Kintyre.
Jethro Tull's Ian Anderson owns about ten million acres in the borders and Roger Daltrey is a big cheese in the trout farming world.
Needless to say, these mega-rich popsters just swan around in wellies every other weekend for the benefit of the colour supplements ‘Day In The Life’ features and leave all the actual farming to peasants who get up at dawn and get paid in potatoes.
And it's not just old '70s rockers.
Steve and Gillian out of New Order live on some kind of smallholding.
If these people are so keen on farming, why did they bother forming a band?
Why didn't they go straight to agricultural college?
Why?
Because they couldn't bear the thought of talking to all those oiks and retards, that's why.
Macca has always loved the relaxed rural lifestyle
SECRET DIARY OF CARTER USM Aged 30 something…
Mon 30.
Got up.
Cardboard box seemed to hold up well to last night's storm.
Rolled over onto our manager once or twice, but all in all, we survived another gruelling night beneath the arches in cruel, harsh, unforgiving London.
Felt pretty chipper, as we scraped together enough coins to buy a shared polystyrene cup of milky tea.
Watched an Open University programme in Dixons window and said ‘Morning’ to all the early morning newspaper sellers and market traders who passed by.
Then we were picked up in a BBC limo to go and review the papers on Breakfast Time .
Lunch at the Savoy (complained about the salmon, but the Tennants Extra had a certain je ne sais quoi ).
Helicopter to Paris to discuss the first Carter Autumn Collection.
We told Jean Paul that the cut-off jeans held together with masking tape and ground-in dirt were a bit trop , and he assured us that the too-small cycling caps would look genuinely ridiculous when they were made up.
Back in time for our encore at Wembley (well, after six nights, you do tend to get a bit lax, and anyway, the tapes went on in the right order and the dry ice was great).
Some  c- had nicked the bit of corrugated plastic off the top of our house when we got home.
We've got his number, we reckon it's Mad Jack McClafferty from Box Ten.
Tues 30.
Got hosed out by the council this morning.
Wrote a great new song about it though, called ‘Hose Line Is It Anyway’(it's a pun, see, on ‘Whose’— I dunno, we're wasted in this job).
Signed on.
Begged a bit of dosh together by laying a hat on the floor down the underground and sucking a harmonica.
That's another track in the can for our forthcoming double concept album ‘Tequila Mockingbird’.
Jet-skied over to our studio in Walford to arrange the orchestral parts of ‘Where The Fleets Have No Blame’ about war and Imperialism and wife-beating and the launderette being full.
Arranged them by pushing the ‘record’ and ‘play’buttons down at the same time.
Gala Ball at Grosvenor House tonight.
Got sat between Lady Antonia Fraser and Viscount Linley — worst luck!
Wed 30.
Woken up by an inner-city riot.
Again!
Hendon's not the area it used to be.
Scrounged a kipper off our tour manager Tel for breakfast, and then went about cleaning some chimneys for the nobs up West.
Cor, strike a light!
It ain't easy making an honest bob these days.
Second album went platinum in  Uruguay , which sparked off further offers from Hitachi Records plc.
We're not interested, frankly.
Let them pay for the kebabs anyway.
Got a fax of the latest front cover —Crazy Golf Monthly .
Used it to patch up the hole in our roof.
Guv.
Carter The Unprintable
MATERIAL WORLD
BANDERAS
ADVANTAGES OF ONLY HAVING TWO IN THE GROUP
Sally: More money
DISADVANTAGES
Caroline: Sharing the money
FAVOURITE MEAL
S: My own potato surprise
C: Chicken Saltimbocca
FAVOURITE DRINK
S: Red wine
C: Drambuie
WHICH SITCOM CHANGED YOUR LIFE?
S: No sitcom ever changed my life — had you said soap opera, it would've been different.
C:The Good Life 
WHICH BOOK CHANGED YOUR LIFE?
S:Peter And Jane — I learnt to read
WHAT MAKES YOU DANCE?
S: Alcohol
C: Kylie
WHAT MAKES YOU CRY?
S: Alcohol
C: The thought of leaving my daughter to go on tour.
WHAT'S SO GOOD ABOUT SPAIN?
S: Everything
C: Practically everything
FAVE RAPPER
Both: 3D, Mushroom and Daddy G (Massive)
FAVE WOMAN IN ROCK
S: Jimmy Somerville
FAVE MANCUNIAN
S: Jack Duckworth
C: Vera Duckworth
FAVE COMEDIAN
S: Dawn French
C: Viv Reeves and Bob Mortimer
WORST ADVERT CURRENTLY ON TV
S: The new Diet Coke ad
C: Gino Ginelli
LEAST FAVE MAN IN ROCK
S: MC Hammer
C: Jimmy Somerville
FAVOURITE DJ
Both: Mike and Spence from Less Stress
WHAT WAS THE LAST VIDEO YOU RENTED?
S: Basket Case II
C: Jeff Striker (A Matter Of Size)
MOTTO
S: If it's too loud, you're too old.
C: Never tell hairy tales for baldy folks.
Banderas…
This is your life
ON
Edited by Steve Lamacq
Feed your airhead!
Onwards with POPPY FACTORY, Leeds movie addicts and Friends Of Cud; and JEFFERSON AIRHEAD, prime movers of the ‘Maidstone’ scene
BLESS THEIR POINTED LITTLE HEADS
Jefferson Airhead are from Maidstone.
Which prompts me to wonder, what is the correct term for a native of Maidstone.
A Maidstoner?
A Maidstonian?
‘A Wanker…or a commuter.’
So bang goes my tactic of inventing the so-called ‘Maidstone’ scene.
Ah well.
What we're left with is four young men from a Kent dormitory town whose ‘Congratulations’ single, a cynical but groovy off-colour shuffle, is one of the treats of the spring.
Jefferson Airhead are definitely a band of the times — young but old-headed, exuberant but smart, and fired with the possibilities of the new pop euphoria; anything goes and Jefferson Airhead are going along with it all.
‘When we were putting together our demos,’ says singer Mike, ‘we heard ‘The Only One I Know’by The Charlatans and I was really pissed off because I thought it was exactly what we were trying to do…and they'd got there first.’
But don't let such talk put you off.
There's a lot more to Jefferson Airhead than rent-a-baggy camp followers.
For one thing, they're not afraid of the mainstream.
They cast their net wide over the waters of pop and rock and are as happy sounding like INXS as Northside.
Mike explains.
‘I like what's going on in music.
It's the first time in years that I've enjoyed the charts.
But I'm aware that people are going to be suspicious of another band mixing guitars with dance beats.
Our album is definitely not an indie-dance album.
If you say we're more of a pop band, then that's a compliment.
The other day we did get compared to EMF, though, which is a bit worrying.’
Though a mere 18 months old in this incarnation, the band already have a healthy roster of tunes which walk the fine line between Sly Stone funk and ‘Abbey Road’ songsmithery.
Such considerations aside, they're also tailor-made for ‘days out’ features in My Guy .
Ben agrees.
‘I know.
When we began I was convinced we were going to appeal to your 25-year-olds and up.
But now it seems the kids are into stuff like ours.
It's a bit of a worry.
Have you seen our video?
A bit lightweight.
You don't think we come over as bimbos, do you?’
A bit of lightweight never hurt anybody, I tell him.
Speaking of which there's the name.
Aren't you afraid people will think you're a latterday…
‘Barron Knights.
Well, it is supposed to be a joke.
Plus a little dig at dinosaur bands.
You say we might have trouble in the States.
Not when you think we were going to call ourselves Fleetwood Mac.’
Jefferson Airhead's most despised record is ‘Rock And Roll And Brew’ by Meatloaf.
You love them already, don't you?
AND THEY CALLED IT POPPY LOVE
‘It's a matter of indifference to me/How your biggest lie came true/As a matter of fact I'm hollow/But what does it matter to you?’(‘7×7’— Poppy Factory
Released this week, the debut single by Poppy Factory, ‘7×7’ is a great wodge of ideas and sentiments.
It's loaded with the Things You Hope To Find In Singles (but seldom do): like mystery, space, and, underneath that, a deep-set sense of bitterness.
It conjures up images of the old Nimble bread adverts with the girl in the balloon, or the bit in The Snowman where the kid flies over the coast.
Only with a more macabre edge.
Better still ‘7×7’ suggests a band who have a mainstream appeal without the usual pithy approach of commercial bands.
Poppy Factory fall somewhere between The Psychedelic Furs/Pet Shop Boys/Neil Diamond and The Cure.
Having been through the usual bass/guitar/drum formative years, they've moved sideways to a shiny guitar/keyboard sound which draws on the good bits of the early '80s, without being retro.
Musically it's just the right side of being cheap — lyrically it's got a depth to it which cries out Secrets!
Zeal!
Good Scripting!
‘It's much less musical influences with me,’ explains singer/guitarist Jock, ‘I get more images from films and books.
A lot of our lyrics are like the David Lynch type of thing.
Blue Velvet has had more effect on me than anything musically — it's that idea of everything superficially being nice and chummy but underneath there's something sinister.
Our songs, superficially, you might get off on the hook, but you can go further into the lyric.’
Based in Leeds/Bradford, Jock and keyboardist John were previously in a band called The Word — second keyboardist/bass player Mick joining in '89 from another local outfit.
They signed with Chrysalis late last year, a success tempered by the death of two of Jock's friends in the same week (which spawned one of their other leading tracks, the ironic ‘Good Times’).
‘7×7’, which reassuringly is already getting some airplay, was also written just after they signed.
On top of everything else it's got a kind of kitchen sink drama air about it.
‘Some of those old black and white films, like Billy Liar , have got that sort of kitsch quality mood, which is what our music captures,’ adds John.
‘They leave you in a certain mood, which you might not be able to explain at the time, but it gets under your skin.’
The ‘7×7’ main refrain (‘Call me Charlie Bubbles’) is another film reference, taken from an Albert Finney pic.
‘I've got very vague memories about it.
But the Charlie Bubbles character, which Finney played, his marriage had broken up and he wasn't getting on with his kids.
And all the way through the film these things were happening and you're waiting for the thrilling resolution.
But all that happens at the end is that he wakes up one morning, goes outside, gets into a balloon and takes off.’
‘7×7’ is about escape.
It is angry, yeah.
It's like the John Lydon thing, anger is an energy, one of the images was spitting on the world, literally, from a great height.’
Asset-wise the Poppy Factory are comparatively wise; different and charismatic, in a weird way they're the playwright pop band opposite World Of Twist's Gerry Anderson TV sound.
It's very spacious.
‘For me a classic pop song has a great hook, but you always leave something out for people to put in themselves,’ says John.
‘There has something for the listener to contribute, to make it personal for them.’
Live Poppy Factory are augmented by a curious stage set, constructed by friends the Art Junkies, using bits of old bicycles and TV sets.
There's also a link with neighbours Cud, who Mick worked with on their latest single — and who they've gigged with.
More live shows are to follow, and another single.
‘The thing about recording is, you always find bits of paper in the studio with lyrics on which people have left behind.
The last time we came across this one that said ‘I was born in the country and I know the code.’
 F—ing hell, we were pissing ourselves.’
Quite right too.
Poppy Factory, featuring Joe Jordan (centre, probably)
Jefferson Airhead white rabbit on and on
The Airhead: a cover of ‘We Built This City’ in 20 years
WHERE THERE'S MOCK…
Dry'll be bound.
THE MOCK TURTLES have actually got a hit record.
Manchester's ‘best psychedelic band’(© Terry Christian) are more interested in their Hollies records than hanging out with Anthony H though, as STUART MACONIE finds out.
In the Boar's Head Inn, Middleton, North Manchester, lunchtime trade is brisk as the ‘pie and a pint’ diners escape from the sheeting rain.
At the next table sit two fine specimens of Mancunian youth.
Though work demands that the collar and tie replace their ‘loose fitting’ apparel, they still look baggy ; unfocused eyes, flattened fringers.
One is frighteningly reminiscent of Bez — should the Mondays hoofer ever opt for regular employment with the Woolwich.
They are discussing soup.
Yes soup.
Not glibly but earnestly.
Baxter's versus Heinz, cockaleekie or mulligatawny.
It is a bizarre conversation.
What is it with soup, I wonder, as Mock Turtle Martin Coogan slurps on his minestrone.
‘Soup,’ he laughs.
‘Well, we heard that it's all that Ian Brown will eat so we reckon it's the secret of being dead thin and good looking!’
THE STONE Roses may be thinner but these days you've got a much fatter chance of hearing a Mock Turtles record on the radio.
How should we describe them?
‘Manchester's best kept secret’ is one current fave, though The Word 's Terry Christian, fatuous even by his own lofty standards, referred to them as ‘Manchester's best psychedelic band’; the memory of which grieves Martin still (‘I just turned to our guitarist and said ‘What the  f— is he talking about?’’
What The Mock Turtles do is so embarrassingly simple that it's easy to trip yourself up describing it — they make pop records, in the same way that The Beatles, The Byrds, The Kinds and Syd's Pink Floyd made pop records; with the guitars well upstage and choruses forged in heaven.
The Mock Turtles are very 1991 which implies being slightly 1967.
But psychedelic?
‘We're part of an older tradition.
The instant, timeless attraction of a good tune.
No matter what your background is, be it punk or rap or whatever, when you hear ‘Waterloo Sunset’ you know it's a bloody great tune.
Of course we're influenced by fashion.
We'd be foolish not to.
But we're not dictated to or dominated by the latest fashionable sample or the current BPM.
The heart of it is classic good tunes.
Someone like Northside or The Mondays, though I'm not knocking ‘em, they're more about grooves.’
By anybody's standards the new Mock Turtles single ‘Can You Dig It’ is a classic good tune, with a soupçon of grooviness.
Dreamy, deft and economical, it was born to prowl the airwaves.
It even understands that by repeating the chorus to the fade, you give Gary Davies a perfect platform from which to give the traffic update.
Anyone who has a heart will part with good money to hear that hook again, and at the time of going to press, many thousands already have.
‘Yeah, maybe I should be more excited than I am.
Being in the charts is one of those things you always dream of but now I've done a few of those things already.
Like Bill Nelson produced our last single ‘Magic Boomerang’ and he's a childhood hero of mine.
I nearly passed out when I shook his hand.
Now it's ‘Oh Bill's on the phone.
What does he want?’’
Like many left floundering in the wake of ‘Can You Dig It’, I'm discovering The Mock Turtles backwards.
Previously they'd just been another name in the Gig Guide or sharing the billing on a Cud poster.
Martin very graciously lives with my ignorance.
‘We'd been beavering away on Imaginary for a while but we never got the success we deserved through limited resources.
Majors spend more on one ad than we did on recording an album.
So, sadly, we had to leave for Siren last November.
Still, Imaginary have got the ‘Turtle Soup’ album so they should make a bit of money out of it.’
Steve gave up the day job last August and, with my razor sharp powers of journalistic observation, I think the day had some importance for him.
‘It was  f—ing brilliant.
 F—ng great.
I hired a karaoke machine, went down the pub and gave 'em a few numbers; ‘Girl From Ipanema’, ‘I Write The Songs’.
It ended in total debauchery.
I had got totally pissed and had to do a gig that night.
I was a computer engineer, though normally I tell journalists I was a gravedigger.’
A man steeped in the froth of pop, he can pinpoint the moment the romance began.
‘I was about 12 and going to the school up the road — Clint Boon was in the year above me — and one morning there was this big commotion in the classroom.
I fought my way through the crowd and there's these kids playing electric guitars through this tiny amp.
The sound was shite but the vibe was huge.
I though, ‘that's for me’.
It was rebellious and naughty and all those clichés.
Nothing to do with playing the clarinet in the school band.
‘I used to play the clarinet, you see.
I made a deal with my mum to take clarinet lessons if I could have guitar lessons as well.
Course I hung around in the park instead of going to clarinet lessons.
My mum and dad couldn't understand why I was so shite at it!’
Middleton, also home of Bernard Manning and The Chameleons, nestles in Manchester's downmarket northside.
Though The Turtles may be part of an older Manc tradition, of The Hollies, The Distractions and 10cc, Martin has no problem with the euphoria of the last 18 months.
‘We get kids shaking the maracas and doing the dance at our gigs and that's cool.
We've never jumped on the bandwagon 'cos it's clearly going to end in tears, but there's definitely been a vibe that hasn't been around since the days of the Buzzcocks and The Electric Circus.
But does anybody give a toss where you're from these days?
I mean, Ride are from bloody Banbury, how happening is that?’
Though Martin finds the idea of ‘hob-nobbing in Dry with Anthony H Wilson’ tasteful, he is happy to be something of a nascent local celebrity.
‘Oh, I've got the right ego.
If I walk through the Arndale in Middleton some kids will always shout something and I love it!
And it's only some daft kids, for  f—'s sake!’
AFTER SEVERAL more drinks we decided to test the theory by walking through the aforesaid precinct.
Nobody shouts at us, though a young man with a bowlhead cut did nudge his mate and mutter something.
What next, I wonder?
‘Sod it!
Let's go and hob-nob in Dry.’
Soup-bowlheads The Mock Turtles (l to r): Martin Coogan, Martin, Andrew, Steve and Joanne
COOL AS SUFF**K
The first truly mind-boggling band to come straight outta Ipswich, BLEACH are subversive, anti-artwank, cathartic and in-your-face with a FULL STOP.
Suffolk Punchdrunk: STEVE LAMACQ.
Pictures: MARTYN GOODACRE
‘We were buzzed by the US airforce when we were making our video because we had all these massive lights on in the middle of a forest near one of their bases,’ says Bleach singer Salli.
‘We were prancing about making a racket in the middle of the night so they had a helicopter up straight away to see what we were up to.’
Subversives eh?
Bleach are the first truly mind-boggling band ever to come from Ipswich, an archetypal Suffolk market town, once home of Bobby Robson and erm, that's it.
Their presence in 1991 is a significant factor in proving there is life after 4AD, Creation, and armchair indie trends.
On the one hand, Bleach are almost frustratingly normal, anti-artwank people who like pets and Clint Eastwood films.
Yet music-wise, the chemistry between the four piece produces a tense, beautiful sound which goes one better than the passive stance of last year.
In effect Bleach are not just the antithesis of The Chart Show , but a challenge to latterday Designer Credibility.
You had baggy, druggy and Camden Lurch, now here's the Suffolk Punch!
Subversive?
RIGHT!
It started late last year with two critically acclaimed gigs in London.
Since then, Bleach have released their debut ‘Eclipse’ EP — featuring the deliberately droning eight minute ‘Crimson O’— and supported on last autumn's Ride tour.
Their new EP, ‘Snag’, promises to keep the momentum going, being aired at Snub TV and shipping out 6,000 copies in its first week of release.
‘Snag’ shows the reassuring breadth of Bleach; from the belligerence of ‘Burn’to the luscious pop of lead track ‘Dipping’— on first hearing a frenzied, claustrophobic love song (‘I'm drowning in you!’).
‘But it's not a love song though, is it Salli?’ prompts primal drummer Steve.
‘It's about shagging.’
‘Yeah, it's about lust rather than love.
The words were a train of thought suggested by the music, by Neil's guitar line.
It's kind of rude I guess.
Steve used to sing backing vocals on it, but he was singing completely different words because he couldn't understand what I was on about.’
‘Dipping’, with its dark waves of guitar and whirlpool melody, is like a white hot punk version of the opening scenes from 9½ Weeks .
‘Yeah, I can see a number of situations where it would sit really nicely,’ adds Steve.
‘I was thinking more of Pretty In Pink , but I really like the idea of music in films, where the song's less incidental but more a part of the film.
‘The reason we did a video for ‘Dipping’ was because it conjured up a lot of images.
I don't think we actually used any of them in the end but it has got that cinematic imagery to it.’
‘They wanted a load of scantily clad models in it,’ mocks Salli, ‘but we couldn't run the budget to it.
Or was that where all the money went in the first place?
On all those girls round at Steve's place?’
‘SNAG’, ON a weightier note, also shows the new angle Bleach have on the '90s guitar ‘scene’.
In comparison to the Murmuring Bands (Slowdive, Chapterhouse and the appalling Cranes), the Ipswich foursome are far more confrontational.
Other highs in their set, like ‘Wipe It Away’, ‘Fall’ and ‘Burn’are aggressive retorts which, in effect,reject the unaccepted .
‘A lot of women in bands, I find, are mushy and tokeny,’ says Salli.
‘Things that people say in interviews, I've noticed that their lyrics are a process of self analysis and that's quite an introspective thing.
Whereas with us, it's the other way round, it's about chucking it out, it's actually anti-analytical.
SWALLOW THAT!
That's why it works.’
And here's the crux of why Bleach are worthy of your attention: because they want to stamp their mark on an otherwise self-conscious indie chart.
And because they want to leave their mark FULL STOP.
‘Isn't that what life's all about?’ says Steve, ‘you're born and you die at 75 and you're one of millions of people who no-one's going to remember.
But somewhere along the way, if you can create something important then…‘
‘It's not being afraid of dying,’ adds Salli, ‘but I'd hate to die having done nothing, even if it was just a little step forward.
Being in a band was an accident for me, because I haven't found my perfect form of expression yet.
But anything I do, I'll have a bloody good go at it and take it as far as I can.
‘I got hassle all the way through school because I had the wrong haircut and wouldn't wear uniform and I was just annoying and disruptive.
But I came through all that and thought, I'm never going to feel guilty about how I feel again, or what I want to do.
Being in a band is as valid as anything like getting an apprenticeship or working in a furniture factory, which were the options open to me.
The thing I learnt was to turn conflict round so that it wasn't a negative thing, it was a cool thing.’
BLEACH NOW seem settled about being unsettled.
The ever-improving music section of the band — Nick (bass) and Gene Wilder lookalike Neil (guitar), who missed the photo sesh because his wife was having a baby — have now, with former TV researcher TV Salli and forestry worker Steve, kicked in their jobs to tour.
There's a sound commitment here.
And if that sounds a bit po-faced, then you're missing the point.
We're talking about the multi-faceted Bleach here The band who, on their current tour, want to collect good food recipes to make up a nosh fanzine.
‘The best section of the video is where we're all dancing around, taking the piss out of ourselves.
It depresses me that people don't see our sense of humour,’ says Steve, Bruce Forsyth style.
‘We're entertainers.
Not like Jimmy Tarbuck, I mean, we want to move people.
That's evident by the letters we get.’
Salli: ‘What's the word people always use when they're talking about Shakespeare?’
Bard?
‘No, cathartic, that the idea is it's a cleansing thing.
People experience the performance and relate to the emotions that are being expressed and they go away feeling better.’
If Bleach have a problem, it's the way they under-sell themselves so often.
In fact, they remind me of the Prudential TV ads (‘I want to be in goal’, ‘I want to be…remembered!’).
‘In France they have a Minister For Rock who goes round and investigates the need for venues and rehearsal space,’ says Salli.
‘He puts in for grants for bands and things like that.
That's what I want to see happen in this country and I want to do it.’
I wouldn't bet against her.
Nick, Salli and Steve: there's none so queer as Suffolk…
FUN, FUN, FUN 'TIL THEIR DADDY TAKES THEIR T-SHIRTS AWAY
Don't have a cow, man!
As the ground war began in the Gulf, INSPIRAL CARPETS took the Moo-nited States of America by storm, bringing their brand of psychedelic pop to the West Coast home of organ music.
IAN McCANN has visions of Enoch Powell, Bruce Dickinson and eels, between meetings with the band.
Carpets bagged by AJ BARRATT
I have been in America precisely four hours and already the madness is starting.
Several members of the Inspirals contingent are going to watch mud wrestling in some dodgy bar.
The hotel on Sunset Boulevard is full of nutters playing Heavy Metal in their rooms and there's a jet-lag hell-hound on my tail.
Turn on the radio and on every station The Eagles are ‘Living it up at de Hotel California’.
Go downstairs to buy a pizza, and on the way back up to the room there's a short, familiar figure in the lift.
It's Bruce Dickinson.
I am about to introduce myself when I notice that he's carrying an armful of eels.
Eels ?
Welcome to West Hollywood.
God help us all.
I've yet to see a lovable moptop Inspiral Carpet in the flesh, but obviously they're on the verge of making it here when they're staying in the same hotel as Bruce Dickinson out of Iron Maiden.
All they need to do is write a song about a hotel and, er, walk around with an armful of very long fish indeed, and America is theirs.
Can't decide whether I've imagined the eels or not, so I decide to sleep on the matter.
Have a reassuring dream about buying a tin of varnish and wake refreshed.
Don't feel so very goo as I'm showering when I notice a discreet star-shaped brass plaque stuck on the tiles.
I wipe off the condensation: ‘John Belushi died here.’
I know for a fact that he did not, unless he walked a couple blocks afterwards.
You want dead stars?
LA's got ‘em.
Judging by the number of stars in this hotel, lots of plaques will eventually be in order.
Ageing diminutive Dick of rock, Little Richard, is a permanent resident.
Swingbeat New Editioners Bell Biv Devoe are hanging out in the lounge telling stories of how the helicopter in their latest video toppled off a windy roof.
They survived unscathed.
Shame.
Large rapper Chubb Rock is here, and so is an unidentifiable American HM band who talk about women's bums all the time.
‘You see her butt?
What a bitch of a butt, boy!’
Sooner or later one of them is bound to snuff it.
Bruce Dickinson and his eels are not in evidence.
I must have imagined it.
And yes!
There is an Inspiral Carpet eating breakfast.
Clint has just met one of The Boys, the latest in a long line of piss-poor pre-pubescent Motown acts that the company hopes will be the new Jacksons.
Clint has tried to get into the lift with A Boy, and the 11-year-old's minder has said ‘No way man.
He travels alone.
Don't you know who this is?’
Maybe he thinks this strange limey with the psychedelic shirt will slip the golden gooselet some crack in a John Belushi scenario.
The clean-living Clint waited hungrily for the next lift down to crack eggs-over-easy.
Never let it be said that the Inspiral Carpets do not like a good breakfast.
The day passes in a haze of Russian taxi drivers who know even less about LA than my dead Gorbals grandma.
At 9.30 in the evening there's a small queue of people at The Palace club at Hollywood and Vine, a dump about half the size of London's Town & Country with a quarter of the atmosphere.
There wouldn't be a queue at all if everyone, even those who fought the hippy wars, didn't have to produce ID to prove they're over 21.
A fair guide to how wonderful The Palace is can be found on the reverse of a ticket, which is a coupon for 75 cents off a Jack In The Box quarter pound New Old Fashioned Patty Melt.
Exactly how the skeletal Ms Melt feels about this offer is unclear.
Hey Herb, how was the Carpet Band?
Well, they wuz English shit.
But I got 75 cents off a New Old Fashioned Patty Melt…
In fact the Carpet Band aren't shit at all and they prompt a series of stage invasions that persist until singer Tom Hingley threatens to leave the stage.
It's a schizophrenic audience, brought here by the prospect of seeing a Manchester band much-played on college radio, the network that airs Morrissey as well as The Eagles.
Half the crowd expect a punk band and half are curious old gits who remember organ bands the first time around.
Pleasantly surprised by the dazzling laser and slide show, the old gits shake their heads in a display not seen in Europe since Syd Barrett hung up his sandals.
It isn't a perfect gig, but there's a fair buzz.
After, the Inspirals meet radio and record company people.
Neither party seem too interested in the other, and that night I dream about Enoch Powell showing me around a slum street with a vile grin on his face.
First eels and now Enoch.
I'm not sure which is the more slimy.
THE FOLLOWING day is Saturday, and the Inspirals rise at some unearthly hour for the long drive to San Francisco.
The press posse take a plane which arrives late and loses photographer AJ Barratt's luggage.
By the time we arrive at the hotel the Inspirals are already soundchecking for tonight's gig and the ground war has begun.
A few brave shops and apartments on the drive to the gig are flying banners that say ‘No War’ and ‘US Out Of Everywhere’.
Slim's is generally reckoned to be the best small gig in San Francisco, maybe because there's a ‘brew-pub’ opposite which sells real bitter.
The crowd is more responsive than in LA, strange considering everyone's heart must have sunk into their trainers.
Perhaps everyone wants to forget the Gulf.
An outbreak of mooing in the crowd swells until most of the club is doing it.
San Francisco is, it seems, getting Mad Cow.
There are no pitch invasions, and the audience isn't as inclined to hippychic as LA's.
And I catch the roots of my Enoch Dream: his grinning mug makes a brief appearance on-screen as an Inspiral slide.
The minibus picks up the Inspirals party outside the hotel in Japantown, San Francisco at 10.30 the next morning, a Sunday.
Our driver looks like Leland Palmer, but the Inspirals aren't worried as long as Killer Bob doesn't appear.
Clint Boon moves to the front of the bus to chat with Mr Palmer, who has some '60s rock tales to tell, and the Oldham Organaire sits in respectful thrall as the driver tells of riding in on a motorbike from the mid-west in the mid-'60s to make San Francisco his home.
‘It was a great time,’ he says.
‘Free rock'n'roll in the park every weekend with naked girls everywhere, and as much pussy as you could eat.’
Not all the band are interested though.
Shiny-topped bass player Martyn Walsh is concentrating on perfecting a second art, that of saying ‘Bollocks’ while burping.
Leland Palmer ignores him, doing what all good rock'n'roll drivers do: pointing out the house where Robin Williams lives, pulling up at a liquor store, and drawing our attention to a woman with an exceptionally large arse riding a bike.
We stop at a war memorial for what guitarist Graham Lambert ironically calls ‘a photo opportunity’, only to be chased away by a jobsworth demanding a permit, and pause at a sculpture dedicated to the Jews that died in World War 2, one of those chilling reminders that provide a spot of scary realism in every fantasy city.
While the Inspirals are pure entertainment, their slide show features a few disturbing images —witness Enoch — and lyrically they go where no other ‘Manc band’ has ever been before.
Martyn doesn't burp here and is concerned that pictures at this spot might be considered sick.
The Inspirals aren't frivolous, despite the mooing.
Final photo-stop is in front of the Golden Gate Bridge, and driver Palmer's experienced eye assesses the band.
‘I've driven a lot of bands,’ he says, ‘and I don't know these guys but I can tell that they're good just from the way they are together.’
Driver Palmer is, of course, totally right, but he just seems blank when I ask him to answer my ultimate query abut America and rock.
Can you buy marrowfat peas over here?
THE INSPIRALS move down to the Harbour area and sit on a green patch with the sun beating down like it can rarely do in Oldham.
It's too nice a day to talk, but Clint, Craig and I talk anyway, buzzing on the warmth of it all.
Gulls the size of light aeroplanes flap over litter bins, joggers reeking of anti-perspirant run backwards, and a bunch of people who look like the original Haight Ashbury hippy collective play conga drums and saxophones in the distance, blowing a surreal note on a balmy breeze.
It had, at first, seemed totally unlikely that this bunch of ugly Northern oiks would ever make it in America, but they're starting to make perfect sense.
Clint obviously derives a lot of inspiration from West Coast rock and although their look is a quarter of a century out-of-date here the gigs unveil a few Inspiral imitators.
If the Doors comparisons are to be believed — which they are not — success is only around the corner if the amount of hype for Oliver Stone's movie is anything to go by.
In truth the Inspirals' so-called fairground sound is far more kitchen sink than rinky-dink.
There's a lot of British misery in their lyrics, brought to the fore by the fact that Tom sings like he really means it.
The Inspirals aren't cool rockers, and their approach is far closer to the 1966 garage punk bands of Texas and Frisco like The Castaways and Count Five than Jimbo's dick-showing,Look at me ,I'm a mess angst.
They are perhaps the perfect mix for America: a friendly logo, a psychedelic edge, a great show and an Englishness guaranteed to stir the Anglophile lurking in every American.
Christ, when you get close enough they're not even really ugly, and that's after a week on the road with the face-wrinkling prospect of four more weeks to go.
‘They're too busy analysing things here, rather than just getting on with it,’ says drummer Craig Gill, considering America.
‘They'll analyse why we use a cow and come up with some really psychedelic meaning for it.
They want to know what ‘Cool As  F— ’ means when they're just things that have come off the top of your head and you've stuck on a T-shirt.’
‘But in America,’ says Clint, ‘the press and radio people are more aware of the music.
IN Britain it's more your style or where you come from or your haircut, whether you like The Stone Roses or whether you think such-a-body is shit.
But they're very into the show here.’
‘Even if we played shit they'd love the show,’ barks a dismissive Craig.
Cow-boys Clint and Craig
Way out West (Coast): Graham, Bungle, and Tom
‘They can relate to the light show,’ says Clint.
‘Particularly here on the West Coast.
Last night there were a lot of people at the gig who were here the first time around and they can relate to what we're doing.
We don't want a middle-aged audience, but they can see there are elements of  Jefferson Airplane and stuff like that in what we do.’
There  seem to be as many casually curious at the gigs as real fans.
‘Hard to say,’ muses Clint.
‘I'd like to think that our audience here came out because of the last gig, because that caused a real stir here and I'd like to think they were here because they'd heard it was special.
That's where we're gonna win out here because we do bring a bigger show than other bands that come over.
It's not as good as we can do in England, but it's the Inspiral attitude: we won't make any profit because we're bringing a boatload of gear over, but everyone will remember it.’
‘It shows we're making an impact,’ reckons Craig, ‘because we've been approached to do the music for a surfing movie, using ‘Sun Don't Shine’, ‘Commercial Rain’and ‘Weakness’.
We've also been told by our publishers that Back To The Future 4 is gonna feature ‘This Is How It Feels’.’
‘The Doors movie is gonna help,’ says Clint.
‘People always talk to us about The Doors.
It's hard to explain, but I'm convinced it'll benefit us.’
Aren't you sick of that comparison?
‘It's the organ and our songwriting, the way we play,’ says Craig.
‘The Doors had completely mixed influences,’ says Clint.
‘The drummer was a jazz geezer, the keyboard player was classically trained, the singer was a freak…he used to fall over onstage an’ all.
Only it was cool when he did it!
It's like that with us.
We're not into a set thing like Sly And The Family Stone or James Brown.
There's element of everything, there's a straight  f—in' ska piece in one song, and I've lifted bits from Phillip Glass and Enya and Twin Peaks .
And that's what The Doors were like.’
But the Inspirals don't really sound anything like The Doors…
Craig: ‘Yeah, but they had this element where they could write classic pop chart songs, and then again they could write ten minute mad songs as well.
And we're like that: we write ‘This Is How It Feels’ and then we can do ‘Further Away’, which is reminiscent of ‘Light My Fire’.’
Clint: ‘If you listen to something like ‘Spanish Caravan’, The Doors were so diverse.
We never based ourselves on them but we just developed that way.
If anyone makes the comparison we take it as a compliment.’
The fact that the Inspirals' next single is called ‘Caravan’ might not do any harm either.
Clint: ‘Erm, that's a good point…
I forgot about that, yeah…‘
There is a brief diversion as a dog wearing a necktie and dark glasses runs by.
Whoever owns that animal has got a strange sense of humour.
Can a band of dry-witted semi-Mancunians really make it here?
Clint: ‘There's never been any doubt for us right form the first time we came over.
There's an Englishness about us, but there's also so much about us which is American, like the haircuts and some of the clothes and the organ which is like Texas garage music.
Sam The Sham And The Pharaohs?
And The Mysterians, stuff like that.’
American kids don't know that stuff now though, surely…
Craig: ‘They do.
We heard ‘96 Tears’ on the radio the other day.’
Clint: ‘It's like The Beatles.
They took a section of American culture, the R&B thing, and added something English to it.
That's what we've done.
We've maybe 40 per cent American influences and the rest is  Manchester .
We're a bit different to other ‘Manchester Bands’.
Nobody's modelled themselves on us, they've gone more the Roses and the Mondays.
And I'm glad of that.
It means we can exist in our own little Inspiral world.
We're not just of this period, we write good songs and there's always a demand for a good song.
It's like ‘Bridge Over Troubled Water’, Simon & Garfunkel, will never go out of fashion.’
Yeah, but it is shite.
‘I like it,’ says Clint.
‘There's a groove in it even though it's not built around it.
If people around the world can relate to it, what the melody is, then you've got a timeless classic.’
Hold on, Yank tour madness is getting a grip again.
THE INSPIRALS admit that they, in Clint's words, ‘Get niggled by little things’ on the road, but they're as likely to go into a discussion about the virtues of meat pies in Dallas as opposed to Houston, as they are to have an out-and-out fight.
‘It's taken us five years to get this far and by now we know when we've had enough of each other and when to get out of the van and go and sit somewhere quiet to cool off,’ says Craig.
‘You might be dying with  tonsillitis and every  f—er is taking the piss out of yer and running around and shouting in the room.’
Clint: ‘It's like every trade.
It'll never be perfect but it can run as smooth as you can get it.
If you can't bear to be in a van with five bastards than you shouldn't be in a band.
Every day you come up against something that you could worry yourself sick about but you've got to accept it.
It's just part of your job.
You learn to adapt.
The novelty of touring America is wearing off, and you might spend 24 hours in the bus.
But until you're really big you've just got to realise that there are some things worth paying money for and some things that aren't.
We can't organise the tour to stop off in a hotel every night yet.’
If the hotels are full of Bruce Dickinsons then that may be just as well.
Clint: ‘We met Bruce Dickinson and he was alright.
His wife's a fan of ours.
You wouldn't believe it.
You imagine what a guy like that is like and then you meet him and he could have been one of us.
He's from the North, talks a bit like us, he's got the same kind of outlook and he told us not to be taken in by America, that it's not real.
Don't be taken in by it, don't get eaten up by America.
I'd like to try living here, see how long I could stand it.
But I'd have to have the money to get home.
I met Iggy last time I came over.
He knew about us, that was a kick, but he didn't come to the gig and he said he would.
But he's in really good condition, f—in' muscles!
It showed us that you can be 45 and don't have to be washed up.
I can relate to that even though he gets a lot of shit off people.’
‘That's 'cos you get a lot of shit off people,’ says Craig.
‘You're right.
I'm 32 and I get a lot of shit for it.
Imagine what it's like to be 45…
We're always game for meeting people whoever they are.
You can always learn something, whether it's Thunderclap Newman or Keith Sweat.
‘We went to The Grateful Dead's house last time we were in San Francisco, the house they had in the '60s.
They had it painted up all psychedelic from top to bottom, but then the next people that moved in had it painted over except for one ceiling.
There's a wall on one side and in the '60s everyone who visited San Francisco like Jimi, The Animals, The Doors, all signed it.
And this pillock that owned the house later painted over it with emulsion.
Stupid bastards.
So we drew a cow on it and signed it to start a new trend.
I dunno whether it'll catch on…‘
Hunger grips everyone.
Tom walks over to a pizza stall, looking as at home here as a row of tulips in the Gobi Desert.
‘We're lucky in that we are a band that uses singing,’ he muses.
‘So many of the other bands that come over are going to find it hard here because they don't really sing and they don't write songs in the traditional sense.’
A 40 minute drive from San Francisco brings us to Palo Alto, a college town supposedly full of yuppies.
A couple of henna-headed teenage fans are sitting with their backs to the outside wall of the club, and they remain cool when the coach arrives, politely asking everyone to sign the singles they've brought along.
The club is large enough to accommodate the Inspirals' fans, but not a lot more.
The DJ fills out the early evening playing the most obvious indie-dance records, as he will finish the evening.
The stage is high, deterring those who see the stage as their personal Kuwait and giving the laser-lit silhouettes of the Inspirals real presence when they arrive to a pre-recorded keyboard and mooing groove.
Although Clint's organ is low in the mix there's a real energy to the band tonight, a power that destroys the idea that the Inspirals aren't a great live band, which has been lingering in my mind since LA.
The lights, which once seemed to be there to compensate for any lackings in the performers' abilities, are now secondary to the punch of the music.
It's a long show, nearly two hours, with ‘Sleep Well Tonight’ recalling Joy Division's ‘Atmosphere’, ‘Sackville’suddenly sounding like a massive hit with Tom totally in control of the proceedings, new songs ‘Caravan’and ‘Skidoo’burying themselves in your guts and ‘Directing Traffik’and ‘This Is How It Feels’turning into hard anthems about life in general, not just northern songs.
Yes, there is more mooing, and the energy level leaves the crowd like limp rags.
There are depths to the Inspiral Carpets that even the band are just beginning to find out about.
After the show the band chill out in the car park, meeting Carpettes from around 16, who got in on borrowed ID, to those in their mid-20s sucking on roaches who have just heard about the band along with The Charlatans UK (!) and want their logo in felt tip on a T-shirt.
Some Anglophile girls in Adidas plead fruitlessly for admission to the bus in the hope of getting a piece of Clint.
Graham Lambert and Martyn Walsh linger for a chat with the fans, and one girl wearing a home-made Cows shirt runs of wailing ‘He likes my cow!
He likes my cow!’
A woman from the American record company who looks oddly like Clint from fringe to feet declares the gig to be the best she's seen from a new visiting British band.
She may be right.
After an hour or so the Carpettes still linger in the parking lot as the coach doors slam shut.
The Inspirals settle down for a night's kip on the 800 mile drive up to the moonlit coast to Seattle for tomorrow's gig.
A fog starts to fall on the road to San Francisco, and the fans disperse.
A new invasion of British bands has begun, once again influenced by American grooves.
No one would be stupid enough to believe that what they were doing would change anything, that a war might stop because of a pop song.
But songs like ‘This Is How It Feels’ and ‘Commercial Rain’might perhaps remind America there is a world away from what Hollywood and the TV likes to project.
It might only be pebbles against Patriots, and the Inspirals might be as interested in the ephemera of psychedelic pop and training shoes as they are in delivering any deeper message, but to their new American fans the Inspirals represent a special hope, an idea that something more sensitive than Guns N' Roses and Madonna might thrive.
Thanks to them, this time next year, American pop might have turned around altogether.
The new Doors?(l to r): Graham, Clint, Bungle, Tom and Craig
ROCK OF AGES: CLASSIC NME INTERVIEWS
THIS WEEK: U2 1980
EIRE'S APPARENT
U2.
Neil Tennant may wonder how they can expect to be taken seriously but, to millions of record buyers the world over, they are the ultimate realisation of the rock dream; tribal passion, myth, commitment and the belief that guitars really can bring down governments.
Back in 1980, however, they were just one of a generation of bands (Bunnymen, Teardrops, Joy Division/New Order) attempting to forge a new kind of rock music in the wake of the punk revolution.
Though major celebrities in their native Eire, they were still merely a cult amongst the British ‘alternative’ vanguard.
PAUL MORLEY travelled to Ireland to spend a weekend with the band who, he felt, were on the verge of greatness.
As it turned out, of course, he was right.
And even 11 years ago, it was obvious that Bono was a different kind of frontman, burning with conviction, railing against the ‘stupidity’ of the contemporary pop scene and naively convinced of rock's potential.
The piece captures the band at a crucial moment in their rise to the status of phenomenon.
The future was still uncertain enough for Morley to declare ‘U2 don't want to be cultish.
They don't want to be massive.
This is the testing time.’
‘But can you trust it?’
Bono, the insurgent, irrepressible singer for Dublin quartet U2, finishes making a hard point using a typically animated gesture.
I let silence be my reply and wait for him to continue.
He will.
We're sat either side of a small old table, just big enough to take a tray of tea, set simply alongside other tables and chair sin the cheaply luxurious lounge of the Country Club hotel in Cork, Ireland.
We've just finished a breakfast that makes you realise Cleese must have really researched Fawlty Towers .
And we're talking about music; passionately enough to be waving our arms about; for our voices to crack in both joy and despair; for a stranger to be bemused.
Bono is Irish.
Real name Paul Hewson.
Bono is derived from some gang name he acquired during a recent delinquent youth.
His voice has a racy fluency blended with the intuitive lilt of generations.
It's a little like Ireland's current leading anti-hero Geldof, but not as panicky, not as  pacy .
Now that The Boomtown Rats have disclaimed the tiny nation and been disclaimed, Bono's group U2 are indisputable Ireland's finest; recent winners of a host of Hot Press awards; recent chart-toppers with ‘Out Of Control’.
They're at the rare-in-Eire point where they're recognised in the streets, hounded for autographs at Gaelic football matches, and TV and radio regulars.
Most pertinently, they're at the point where the dubious advantage of being sucked into London systematically develop in front of their half-repulsed eyes.
That's what we're talking about, our voices raised; London's box of tricks.
The value of its communicative procedures and potentiality; the resounding negativity of the expectations, prejudices, cynicism; the comfort of those cuddled inside.
The spoilt people.
Bono is deeply concerned about trust, deception, corruption, problems of honesty — you know the values.
He has the freshness of hope of someone who has yet to fully experience the closed shop of London's damagingly influential network, yet with the cynicism of one who is ready and waiting to be disillusioned, who knows that to make any impact isn't going to be easy.
Bono and the group are warily preparing to leap from Irish success — a literally poor type of success; sales of 20,000  merit a gold disc in Ireland, and entertainers like The Pope win those — into British obscurity, and wondering how to grab attention, scythe through the settling collection of old values, scatter the cosy tribal narrowness…
‘Even over here,’ tuts Bono, ‘we get people coming up to us and saying, ‘Well, I like you…but I don't really like you because I'm a mod and you're not!’’
Even in Ireland.
U2, LIKE many others, are uncertain just where and how their transcendentally eclectic, refreshingly realistic, naively passionate and elusive pop music is going to hit.
Whether anyone's willing to be receptive to a music that is not as seriously, purgatively ‘innovative’ as the post-punk noise that veers towards the Rough Trade arena, not quite as vulnerably half-original as the music of this year's Gig Of The Century bill (Ratio, Teardrop, Echo).
Yet that's not as meticulously commercial as the Rats or Squeeze, that doesn't cut huge corners to seduce and entertain.
That music that doesn't ‘belong’.
U2 are not a pop group like The Undertones, although their music is driven and energised by exactly the same instinctive romantic desire — wish fulfilment.
U2 are not a politically and musically aggressive rock group, but they don't ignore morals or values.
They are limitedly radical.
They are not yet great; but they could be — if they were allowed.
U2 don't want to be cultish.
They don't want to be massive.
This is the testing time, and Bono and myself are getting worked up talking about it.
‘We're up in the air at the moment,’ Bono concludes a line of conversation where we're wondering about the direction and attitude of new music (But can you trust it?) especially those current wagon hoppers such as Killing Joke (J'accuse!).
‘We're still discovering, growing…
One of the reasons we chose the name U2 was to have that ambiguity which I think is necessary, so that it's not so easy for people to make premature assumptions or wrong associations.
But it's not a name that will directly confuse people.
The name in a way is obvious; there's nothing to it really.
It's not blasphemous, it's not going to upset people.
It's just really simple and straightforward.
BUT it's not like The U2 or The U2s , which is already happening and ruins it.’
Bono understands and relishes the positive subversive possibilities of pop, and realises the piercing edge it should have over the advertising poster, the average sitcom.
He wants to ride in on pop so we can't ignore him.
It's 11 o'clock in the morning, but we're still getting excited.
I bet we're speaking too quickly.
‘I respect the fact that The Jam can touch people and what they're doing is an attempt to be ‘real’— no myth or far-fetched fantasy — and it's for real people, not people who follow trends.
We play to lots of kids who like The Jam and I think that they hear something like ‘English Rose’ and I believe that they go in and look for something deeper.
That's a position that I envy.’
The potential of pop is uncanny, and something not to be abused or underestimated.
‘It's truly incredible.
This is an incredible area to be getting involved in.
Popular music.
Phew!’
Bono can hardly contain himself Neither can I.
‘It's brilliant!
And we've got other cookies in the basket that we're not even aware of yet!
The attitude is important.
It's an honour to be involved in it…to beat it.
And we have the drive involved to beat it at its own game.
I think the danger for U2 is not just achieving, but holding back the achievement.
Like The Jam have done that really well.
And that's the main job.
‘I sound optimistic.’
Bono wakes up from some sort of indulgent (but more realistic than you realise) reverie.
‘I don't always feel this way.
The first task that we have is to present ourselves and that way we can get into the papers and on to the TV and smash those trends that are destroying things, sucking up people's blood.
Ska!
R&B!’
I join in, of course.
Rockabilly.
HM!
I nearly fall off my chair.
Through the cleansing fire of punk (and Mod) they came…
U2 on the Dublin boardwalk, 1982
‘It's very clear-cut.
Very well defined.’
Bono stiffens in his chair and spits out  the list.
‘Tie!
Haircut!
Smile!
Beat!
Enjoyment!
Dance!
‘I don't believe in masturbation.
I don't want to be masturbated in that way.
I don't just want people to get their rocks off.
I don't mind that, but you can't just have that.
That's like a function.
It's like a machine.
You press the button and it dries your hands.
You're a rock group so people get their rocks off.
I don't want to be just that little fulfilment.
‘Like Ian Page (lead singer of Secret Affair ) will go on about being a mod is being an individual.
Then I'm a mod!
If punk means expressing yourselves vehemently, strongly, pink hair, expression, then I'm a punk!
If Heavy Metal means banging my head against the wall, then I'm that.
I'm not being one of them at any given time, because that is so stupid.
I can't handle that.
‘All this happens in London mostly and spreads from there.
London is supposed to be permissive.
London is supposed to be freedom!
London is traps.
London is boxes.
London is chained in bondage, in fact.
And if a band coming from Thick Paddy Land — and that is not true — comes along and tells these people what's up they might not be awfully pleased.’
A number of times during my weekend visit to Ireland, Bono hints that a move to London is all but inevitable.
The type of move they (reluctantly) want to make is somewhere between the decision of The Undertones to leave Derry and to tour constantly but always return, and The Boomtown Rats, who have now disowned the fatherland.
‘Everyone from the Rats has left the country really bitter,’ explained Bono.
‘I won't leave this country bitter at all.
The plan is that if we have to leave, and we're still not sure, it will only be for a while.
It's basically that we feel the group has to be thrown into different circumstances if it's going to be stimulated, if it's going to change.
It would be very easy to stay here.
But we'll go…and we have to come back.’
A DRY four-hour Sunday drive from Cork to Tullermeny, a small village 70 miles from Dublin, sees Bono apologising for the lack of splendour in the unceasing and somehow dainty countryscape.
This stretch apparently isn't a good example of Ireland's legendary finery; it's too yellow and normal.
It still seems to be over-green, rolling, bendy, miniaturised, unworldly.
On the car radio, U2's old single ‘Out Of Control’ appears, mixing uneasily with the laminated noises of Britchart and Eurosong contest-type jollity.
Hearing U2 interrupt the relentless flow of smoothly shaped pop bullets and the marble-in-throat inanity of the big hearted DJ, the true extent of their indigenous task becomes clearer.
Even if U2 shook the world, their own country and, more especially, the dismal youth outside Cork or Dublin, would hardly be moved.
Trip backwards and sidewards through time, visit Ireland, the peculiar mix of quaint lost tradition, British influence, agricultural aggression and continental modernism, you can begin to understand how come Geldof is so paranoiac, persecuted, wretched.
The country's musical artificiality and stagnant stupidity drably undermines the development of its youth.
U2 and close spirits are not simply fighting against lack of rock groups, or regressive traditional rock activity, but against the stiff tradition of Irish showbands, the giddy lack of pop choice or opportunity.
The Boomtown Rats have exploded out of the country, but there is little lingering after-effect.
New groups are continually emerging — DC Nein, Atrix, Virgin Prunes, Berlin — but the state of the rock fabric is depressing, the apathy pervasive, the submission unbearable.
‘This country is blocked,’ says Bono.
‘These people are actually just waking up out of a sleep.’
On the same day that The Boomtown Rats play Leixlip Castle in Dublin to 14,000 people, that Bob Geldof sweeps out on stage screaming ‘Who's won?’ referring to the battle with Dublin eldermen for the right to play; the same day that 30 people are hurt and Geldof refers to Ireland as a ‘banana republic’and a ‘despicable nation’, U2 appear at the Garden Of Eden club in Tullermeny.
As an experiment, U2 are to play the unfortunately titled but surprisingly attractive dance-club with (shudder) A Showband — Tony Stevens and his awesomely wunnerful band.
Let me explain: showbands are slick, soulless, plastic.
Showaddywaddy have based their whole art on them, but have more life.
The showbands are failed rock musicians; their faces shine with aftershave, their hair is permanently immobile, their grins reveal too  much teeth, their eyes are black holes.
They're impossibly fit and tanned, their technique is improbably overcompetent.
Some of them play in their sleep when they're on stage.
Stevens and his merry band are severely uniformed in white blazers, violently creased red flares and clean fingernails.
These bands are Ireland's heroes.
Some have hits in Ireland.
Mostly they cover UK chart hits.
Bono tells me that before Ireland received TOTP fans flocking to the dance halls thought that the showbands actually were Slade, Sweet, Mud…
U2 are smashing up against this tradition as much as daft rock developments elsewhere, determined to introduce original music and manner to backward Irish youth.
A sense of rebellion, a gesture towards the exit.
How futile is it?
Bono and U2 sometimes wonder, but don't give up the fight.
If with the people of Irish city centres there's an undercurrent feel of inferiority — apparent through outside enforcement — the youth of Tullermeny aren't even aware that they're missing out on anything.
Before U2 appears the atmosphere is of a cold youth club.
Sunday best pale and awkward teenagers, unsure and toughly giggly, sit around the central dance floor waiting for the first two or three to start dancing so that the rush can begin.
Three bold, badly made-up and tartily dressed girls make a move to the dance floor, swing their knees gamely, swish their hair like Legs And Co (dodgy Top Of The Pops dancers ) to a Lene Lovich tape — but it could be anything.
Within five minutes the dancefloor is filled.
Once the kids and those slightly older have made it, they all do their best steps and twists, unself-consciously, monotonously, strangely introverted.
They rarely smile and there is a far away look in their eyes.
Round the side on hard backed chairs the non-dancers sit and wait, probably just for the end of the evening.
There is no bar, no alcohol; no obvious reason why they're here at all…
Except this is the week's big night out, the escape from one routine into another.
It is more sad and dispiriting than I could ever begin to explain and you would ever believe.
‘You cannot exaggerate that sight,’ Bono will later say.
U2 COME alive on a carpeted, brightly lit stage four minutes late at 11.04.
Tony Stevens will follow.
The U2 opening blast is exhilarating.
There is minimal response from the audience.
A few lost souls wander aimlessly down to the front and stare up at Bono's frantic, manic animation, briefly bemused.
Some gently sway.
Sat along the front of the stage, bored looking girls can't even be bothered to turn around and see what all the commotion is about.
The audience peers at U2 like they're looking at animals in the zoo.
They're not used to this intimidating energy, the volume, Bono's mobile passion.
Momentarily curious, some wander away.
Those that do dance could be dancing to anything.
The stupid thing is that U2 are not just a good new rock-pop group, ‘boy isn't it great that they can emerge out of the unhelpful Irish environment’.
They don't even play a blinding Boomtown blend of past happy pop styles, excusable because of its patchily irresistible presence and selfish impact.
U2 are a four piece rock group stretching the possibilities of that line-up to the new and accessible levels.
It's not possible to say that U2 sound like blah, which is great.
But let's toss a few images about to gauge the potential extent of U2's mesmerising all-round appeal.
Drummer Larry, bassman Adam and guitarist The Edge have been together with Bono since schooldays.
Together, developing carefully but quickly, they've established their own language, their own ways of structuring and responding.
The balance of their music is not as idiosyncratically staggering as Joy Division, but can be as refreshing.
They can also manage the dense drive of The Jam, but are more flexible.
The intricate but not alienating, chiming and charging structures of their songs are reminiscent of Penetration, a desperately underrated group Bono was very fond of.
U2 also come from all sides, appear louder and bigger than three musicians should be, as powerfully spread out as the Rats.
Above all this they're fronted by a stocky, breathless, extrovert fully tuned-in to the possibilities of body language and eye contact.
They're as unique as it is possible to be without splitting at the seams.
And when their ideas are fully formed they will be…unbeatable?
Bono: ‘One day I'll have leather waistcoats!’
Larry: nice jumper!
The Edge on erm, the edge
In Tullermeny it's a noise meaning little.
It's hard to sway with.
That lead singer can be quite funny, but mostly he's just like a maddie.
Why is he staring at me, why is he shouting at me?
Why is he so worked up?
Why?
The question flicking through eyes are rhetorical.
They're not really bothered.
They're disinterested, but surely they don't deserve to be?
The performance hardly captures the depth of U2, the potential massive yet subtle assault.
Bono has nothing to bounce off, just a blandness; he gets frustrated, slows down, misses cues, annoys the group.
Larry shouts at him later for his indulgence, and Bono admits he lacked the discipline to sell himself, the ability to attack positively the disinterest.
But then only Showaddywaddy, or perhaps Blondie, or especially Tony Stevens and his band, with their crazy covers of recent chartbusters could convert this isolated Irish apathy into something slightly lively.
After the performance the Garden Of Eden manager runs through the motions.
‘Very good, very good,’ he chimes.
‘Much different from Horslips ('70s Irish proto raggletagglers ).’
That's the only rock group to have previously played the place.
‘I felt ashamed because we didn't work,’ Bono tells me later.
‘I actually saw it as a great challenge.
I actually felt when we walked out on that stage that we might be able to meet the challenge.
That's why I wasn't pissing about when I rushed on shouting ‘GOOD EVENING EVERYONE!’ like exaggerated…
I was trying to pretend that there were lots of people loving us there.
For maybe 30, 35 minutes I tried that and then I just felt it slowing.
It became like slow motion.
We blew the challenge, and that's bad.
‘Tonight we could have shown what rock ‘n'roll can do, but we failed.’
But if you don't try no one else will.
‘If we move to London, become bigger, when we come back we would want to play this place but there's the danger that the manager is not going to pay us more than a hundred quid because we only draw a certain crowd…
So we can't get there because it become impractical and those people get lost .
They're gone!
They might never see another amplifier again!
EVER!
Wow!’
The sad thing is they've never notice.
ON THE Saturday night U2 played in Cork, Ireland's second city and a place naturally if infrequently served with mainland rock acts.
Queues form early, the dance hall fills.
Most of these people  know an amp from a tea-bag.
And because they've been given a tantalising series of glimpses of a fuller life, they're aware and starving.
Inside the hall I'm quickly surrounded by friendly eager lads in makeshift punk clothes covered in punky badges, who hungrily batter me with curious searching questions.
All these groups I keep writing about — what are they really like on stage?
What do you thing of U2?
Cockney Rejects?
Throbbing Gristle?
Certain Ratio?
The Worst!?
Ah, rock'n'roll…
The Cork U2 set shows how the group will be receive din Britain when they begin to be accepted: excitedly, stupidly.
It's like an Electric Ballroom gig: rowdy, bawdy, hands outstretched, fingers touching, bodies crushing.
An obscene extreme to the Tullermeny gig.
It reveals how close U2 can come to being a straightforward rock group — one of those!— and simultaneously how far they can move away from that.
Bono is adored.
He dangerously treads the fine line between being adulated rock star and parodying that role.
He controls fights and calms down a stage invasion.
He's never sure whether to patronise the audience for their stupidity, understand and gee them on, cool them down or join in.
In the end he does it all and more.
Acting, hurting, fighting.
His performance is unruly but riveting.
‘I'm not yet fully in control of my own performance,’ he will tell me.
‘I'm not sure which way it's going to go when I hit that stage.
It could go anyway.
There have been times when I have been really frightened and could hardly sing.
I hardly looked up.
Like when I can't get anything out of the hall, the audience, I turn into myself, close my eyes and try to find something there.’
What is he frightened of?
‘I'm scared of the responsibility of standing in that space.
Sometimes I don't want to be on that stage.
Sometimes I can be really happy.
Other times I am mean and nasty, and there are other times when I haven't got complete control of myself but I do want some sort of discipline.
I haven't got that yet.
I would like to take any situation and get something out of it.
You can't always do that.
You can try though.
You must try.’
Through lively, lashing, conscientiously structured songs like ‘Cartoon World’, ‘Boy Girl’, ‘Out Of Control’, ‘Trevor’, ‘Twilight’, ‘The Dream Is Over’, ‘Another Day’, ‘Shadows in Tall Trees’, potently splicing the wiggly world and the real world, U2 desperately point out the absurdity and danger of the happiness we're continually told we enjoy/envy/suffer/can't do without.
Attack it with irony, with anger, coyness, doubt.
They define the contradiction of escape and escapism.
But for all the attempted value and variety of their pop it can sound obvious and predictable, just like Gang Of Four sometimes do.
U2 need and know the need to rise above this.
And they prefer to make it easier than harder.
They know the small corners they cut.
‘We don't want to go for the sort of so called innovation that can alienate an audience,’ he exclaims when we talk about the sometimes clichéd dynamics of their music.
‘We have to penetrate…we use those structures to penetrate the audience.
‘But I'm willing to play the game.
I am, but in doing that I must retain my own effort, my own irony.
I wouldn't falsify what I feel.
On stage I look exuberant because I feel exuberant.
I don't pretend.
U2 never pretend.
It's not that we've planned a compromise, it's what has come naturally within the group.
U2 is like learning, it's like a child learning.
We've been given Lego and we're learning to put things together in new ways.
This is a stage that we've got to that I'm not ashamed of, but I believe we will get much stronger.’
U2 WILL soon be signed by a big British label and their naive, brave attempt to balance the points of view of such as Bob Geldof and Mark Smith will get its toughest test.
A group like U2 should be chart material, playing new pop that doesn't falsify or perpetuate or enhance the bright fantasy.
Radical entertainment.
If groups like U2 don't get the opportunity, through prejudice, complacency, cultishness, to move into view, the vibrancy and challenge of recent pop will steadily deteriorate.
The problem could be felt within months.
Tourists and Vapors in the charts.
U2 and The Distractions not in the charts.
No fun.
U2 don't deny fun, but neither do they deny reality.
U2 are about colour posters, serious words and warnings, staying awake, laughing at uncertainty.
You can smile at them, and with them.
U2 keep me happy!
Furious!
Unspoilt!
Dissatisfied!
Awake!
Hungry!
U2 should be for everyone.
And you too?
SCHREIBERS ON THE STORM
‘Get into those Kitchens and rattle those pots and pans!’
Yep, forsaking the toilets of Blighty for the, erm, toilets of Noo Yawk (Noo Yawk's legendary CBGB's actually —Ed ), KITCHENS OF DISTINCTION are now busy shifting, erm, kitchen units across the pond faster than a microwave can dry a poodle.
Cooking up a story: ANDREW COLLINS.
AGA candids: MARTYN GOODACRE
Kitchens Of Distinction are currently seated in Katz's famous delicatessen in New York and, before them, taped proudly to a napkin dispenser, is an understated, handwritten sign that says: FOR YOUR INFORMATION, YOU ARE SITTING AT THE WHEN HARRY MET SALLY TABLE.
ENJOY.
No shit.
This is the very downtown deli in which actress Meg Ryan turned When Harry Met Sally from just another romantic comedy into That Movie With The Faked Orgasm Scene In It.
And this is just the latest episode in Kitchens Of Distinctions' star trek across America.
They've rubbed shoulders with Spinal Tap on the West Coast, they've ‘schmoozed’ with David Cassidy, Brinsley Forde and Huey Lewis at a San Francisco garden party, they've been driven around the Hollywood Hills in a convertible by an A&M rep who then let them stare at his Moray eels, smashed, for two hours.
They even saw Judy Garland's fence.
‘And Zsa Zsa Gabor's dog!’ adds drummer Dan.
‘Unless that was Zsa Zsa Gabor…‘
And on top of that, it turns out that the Americans really dig The Kitchens.
‘They love us!’ exclaims guitar wiz Julian.
‘They're like an extra family now,’ Patrick says, not without a playful glint in his eye.
‘We've been taken under somebody's wing.’
‘We're not used to it.
Normally, people treat us like scum in England.’
Steven, Katz's head waiter and full-time ‘character’, serves up three mammoth egg mayonnaise sandwiches with a comic sneer on his face.
‘Vegetarians?
Every Deli owner's dream!
Hitler was a vegetarian!’
He sets down the Kitchens' salami-free, chicken-free, beef-free, pastrami-free, rib-free order, with a characteristic ‘Enjoy!’ and then sits down with them at their table and lights up a cigarette.
Only in New York.
Here every waiter's a stand-up (sit down) comedian, one in five people you meet is a serial killer, joggers have an attitude, and a bunch of pinko liberal vegetarians from England can play the legendary CBGB's club and get treated like gods.
‘In England people want to fit things in ,’ starts Dan, in the first of many essays on Why America Is Fantastic And Britain Is Shit.
‘In America, people are more concerned with the music.’
Kitchen sync (l to r): Patrick, Dan and Julian
Patrick takes up the thread.
‘Like, we were concerned that the bands we were supporting out here (The Trash Can Sinatras and The Charlatans — we thought, will we fit into their audience?
But apparently American audiences just go and watch ‘the bands’, and if it's ‘Alternative Contemporary’ then that's what it is.
Which is really refreshing.
‘In England I think we're seen as a bit of an anomaly.’
What, a cult band?
‘No, a  c- band.’
KITCHENS OF Distinction are essentially a guitar band.
They go about their business with guitars.
They make stunning guitar music.
And they've been making it for right on four years now, backed by the colourful and wily One Little Indian label, earning themselves Single Of The Week round here pretty much every time they put one out, and doing quite nicely in end-of-year writers' charts too.
Real people like them, too.
‘At Christmas, a fan sent us the remains of their Christmas dinner,’ recounts Patrick, with a measure of embarrassment, ‘a potato, some stuffing, and a mince pie.’
Why?
‘'Cos he loves us!
I don't know why.’
And are you now starting to lose your grip on reality?
‘I don't think we ever had one.
We just create our own daily reality.’
The Kitchens are in New York for the first time, because last August, A&M America heard their just-completed second album and bought it on the spot.
‘It's going all by itself!’ is how the band describe their current ascension, as if they are powerless to stop it.
Actually, gift-wrapped and escorted by A&M for this short promo tour of the US, the Kitchens' destiny is pretty much out of their hands.
All they can do is be at the radio station on time, and play their funky music whenever placed on a stage.
The rest is somebody else's business.
Three weeks ago they got a manager.
That's how serious it is.
But do they actually want to get bigger?
‘Yeah.
But we're not in any great rush.’
‘We've been out on the West Coast where everything's mellow and laid-back,’ says Julian, when I ask for his first impressions of NYC.
‘It's a lot more pushy here.
You can sense it almost immediately.
Everyone's  f—ed up.
It's cold as well.
And full of Americans.’
‘AND THANKS to A&M — for treating us like the rock stars we're not,’ grumbles Dan into the mic, between songs at CBGB's.
This, I think sums up the Kitchens rather neatly — they're not much like corporate-trousered rock stars, but they're hardly the Manic Street Preachers attempting to bring down the system from within either.
The Kitchens are too old for that.
‘Yeah, I don't think anything could faze us any more,’ sighs world-weary Patrick, already on to his second career, being a qualified doctor.
‘Apart from a few more beers,’ deadpans Dan, who hasn't got any hair at all, and pretend to be unimpressed even by the supremely impressive.
Speaking of which, the ancient trio make light work of the legendary CBGB's.
Not since I saw Talking Heads doing Yardbirds covers here in 1976 (This is Earth CBGB's ?—Ed ) have I enjoyed myself so much watching guitars being played.
CBGB's is all at once an intrinsically ‘Noo York’ place and a thousand light-years away from the push'n'shove of this most overbearing of cities.
From the front, it looks like a textured wall that time forgot — once inside, you could be in the corridor of a completely wooden train.
It's only the knowledge that Television, Patti Smith, Blondie and The Ramones used the place as their Bull & Gates in the olden days that flushes you with a tingly sense of excitement when you find out that the toilet is a damp patch on the floor.
Still, the door policy makes up for it — they let you in if your name is quite similar to one that's on the guest list.
I got in as ‘Alan’.
It's a real gig but it isn't.
The crowd really get off on the Kitchens' distinctly '80s sound, whooping like only Americans can, and calling out for all the correct songs — and then it dawns on you.
How come they're familiar with album tracks from an album that isn't released here yet?
Easy.
Two hundred out of the 300 ‘punters’ are record company guests.
‘They're all music fans…there's very little spiel…’ remark the band, in defence of A&M America.
It's only natural for a newly-signed group to see their bloated, sap-sucking US record company as exceptional, spiritually different from all the others — but I'll take their heartfelt claims with a line of salt, thanks.
It's great to be instantly famous — and that's how A&M makes them feel — but let us not forget what the company's really interested in.
Kitchen units — and the shifting of said units.
‘I'm not sure I'd buy a record by a band called Kitchens Of Distinction!’
 Patrick confesses.
Julian: ‘I wouldn't either!
Bloody Hell!
Not with those covers!’
Dan: ‘I'd tape them off my mates.’
Julian: ‘I'd like to think we can get successful being the way we are, a gay man, a Welsh man and a Jewish man with no  f—ing pretensions — our music is more interesting than other bands and we're interesting people as well.
They're all full of shit, totally shallow and got no brain!’
It must be said that the Brooklyn Beer is talking here — it's a particularly dark and mysterious brew.
But it's reassuring to hear the usually humble and pathetic Kitchens sing their own praises so.
They readily damn the ‘Love Is Hell’ LP nowadays, and reckon ‘Strange Free World’is their first record.
Produced by the ever-dependable Hugh Jones, it features — for the first time ever — live drums by Dan.
‘The engineer wouldn't even let me use real cymbals on ‘Love Is Hell’!’ he shouts, whose input on that LP was, erm, streamlined by the use of computerised rhythms and triggered samples.
Tellingly enough, the only track on there with real drumming was the acknowledge classic ‘The Third Time We Opened The Capsule’, a song which literally soars above the rest and spits.
Hugh Jones, though, is pure ‘old school’, and he had the patience and faith to produce the band au naturel (‘It's actually got less guitars on it, but we recorded them better.
Less guitars but more — which is quite a Zen thing really!’)
The results are fabulous, as already hinted at by the current 45 ‘Drive That Fast’, a grippingly gentle, coolly frantic, scarily mellow passage that fittingly knocks 'em over at CBGB's.
AT THE risk of tarring the Kitchens with a ‘retro’ brush, there is something very 1982 abut them.
Being top-line Bunnymen/Joy Division/Cocteaus fans to a man, the band aren't in the least bit worried by the accusation.
Dan: ‘Ooh, 1982, good year.
Damned, Ramones — I always get into things too late!’
Dan and Julian had left college and were busking round Europe at the time — bongos and guitar, covers of ‘Like A Hurricane’, you get the picture.
Julian: ‘Sometimes we'd get stoned and play avant garde.
I'll never forget that night in Seville…‘
Patrick is equally reflective about 1982: ‘It was my year of thinking.
I was thinking, what am I doing in this medical school, having a shit time?’, and I was with my first and last girlfriend.
It was a big year — a year of decisions.
In fact, I made a major decision in '84, and followed it through in '86.
As you can see, there's no big rush!’
Kitchens Of Distinction are in the potentially painful process of arriving: they're on a collision course with 1991, and, despite all the fashion points stacked against them, the no-great-rush policy seems ready to pay off.
If you can stand the heat, get into the Kitchens.
Julian: 4…erm…eternal
Julian: playing 12-breakfast-bar blues?
DO THE GART, MAN
After a critical and commercial drubbing was dealt out to the last SCRITTI POLITTI album, GREEN GARTSIDE ran to the hills to lick his wounds.
Back with a ragga version of a Beatles song, he's bracing himself for another savaging, but at least he's got a hit, he tells TERRY STAUNTON.
On the facing page, IAN McCANN profiles the true star of Scritti's single, ragga superstar SHABBA RANKS.
The dancehall foundations are shaking and there's outrage in the ragga ranks.
A white pop star has plundered their culture with the aid of Lennon & McCartney — but what's worse is that one of dancehall's finest footsoldiers is a co-conspirator.
Scritti Politti have been conspicuous by their absence over the last three years, with Green Gartside hiding in the hill of South Wales after the poor critical and commercial response to the last album ‘Provision’.
Now he's back with a furiously reworked ragga version of the Beatles B-side ‘She's A Woman’, heading straight for the Top 40 as we speak and featuring top toasting from ragga megastar Shabba Ranks.
It's head and shoulders above the glut of uninspired Fab Four and Stones covers of the last 18 months or so, but Shabba fans and the ragga fraternity in general are almost universal in their condemnation of the record.
Green Gartside sighs and lights another cigarette, bracing himself for the inevitable criticism.
‘I expected to curry quite a lot of disfavour from almost everybody,’ he says.
‘Some people will see it as any number of cardinal sins, y'know, the diluting of dancehall at the hands of a wimpy white boy.
Unimaginative people, I think, won't like it.
‘The brief as far as I was concerned was not to imitate a dancehall record, not to try and pretend it came from Gussie's Music Works or it was a Firehouse Crew production or something.
To be honest, that would have been very easy to do, because in terms of production they're very simple records.’
Simple or not, the dancehall posse are proud of their music and have not taken kindly to Green's intrusion.
Shabba Ranks and his enigmatic manager ‘The Specialist’ seem to be in a minority with their enthusiasm for the record.
‘Essentially they didn't know me from a hole in the ground when I first approached them and were willing to give me the benefit of the doubt.
‘The whole thing might not have ever got off the ground if Maxi Priest hadn't been in the same room as them when I called up.
He put in a good  word for me and it went on from there.
‘When Shabba and his posse were listening to the final tune they were nodding sagely.
He leaned over to me and said ‘Yeah, big hit — this could get you an album deal’.
I didn't want to be smarmy and say ‘Well, I've already got an album deal, actually’.
‘He genuinely had no idea whatsoever as to who I was, and nor should he be expected to know or care about me.
His is a very different world to mine.’
SHABBA AND ‘The Specialist’ may not be the only ones to respond with a terse ‘Who he?’when confronted by Scritti Politti, Green having kept such a low profile over the last three years.
It took Martyn Ware and Ian Craig Marsh of Heaven 17 to woo Green away from his idyllic semi-retirement with an invitation to contribute a song to their second volume of wild and wacky cover  versions ‘Music Of Quality And Distinction’, to be released later in the year.
Green has a go at Stevie Wonder's ‘I Don't Know Why I Love You’(‘not as hysterical as the original’) and he used the spare studio time at the end of the session to knock off a couple of singles for himself.
A version of Gladys Knight's ‘Take Me In Your Arms And Love Me’, another ragga collaboration, this time featuring the vocal talents of Sweetie Irie, should see the light of day in the summer.
In the meantime, ‘She's A Woman’ looks set to give Green his biggest hit for six years.
‘Mercifully I don't get to hear many of the other Stones and Beatles covers that have come around, but I suppose there is some validity to reworking songs.
It's a time-honoured tradition, and ‘She's A Woman’ has always been one of my favourite songs.
I invariably choose it when I'm on the Radio 1 My Top Ten sort of things.
‘It's the first time I've ever done a cover and it was a lot of fun.
I definitely wouldn't have done it if I hadn't already released a heap of my own songs.
I weighed up the pros and cons of doing it, and there were no other pros other than it might be fun.’
Fun was indeed the key element, and the single also provided a welcome break from working on homegrown material, Green still smarting over the tepid reaction to the ‘Provision’ album of 1988.
Having hit pop paydirt with the much loved ‘Cupid & Psyche’ album in 1985, Green's next record was a major disappointment.
‘I'm not really inclined to do a post-mortem on ‘Provision’, other than to say that I acknowledge that it was less successful and less fun than the previous album,’ he says in a most matter-of-fact voice.
‘The last album just ran out of fun along the way.
I still think some of the things on it were OK, but it generally fell between any number of stools.’
To restore his sanity, Green disappeared to a small village in South Wales, giving only a handful of trusted friends a forwarding address.
He made sure that his record company, Virgin, didn't know where he was.
‘I was consciously hiding from everybody.
It was a good thing to do, everyone should try it once in a while.
I was screwed up over everything, really, I'd had enough and I just needed to escape.
‘It was exactly semi-retirement because I took all my gear down and demoed a good album's worth of material.
It's pretty much ready to go but I'm quite keen to extend this playtime period I've given myself.
I don't want to ring the bell on myself and go back into the classroom just yet.’
Green's playtime involved getting pissed with the locals during leisurely lock-ins in the village pub, and intentionally losing touch with the big bad world of the music business.
‘It's difficult to keep up with things in Wales, you leave three-quarters of the world behind when you cross the Severn Bridge.
You can just about cling on to the periphery of things if you're in Bristol, but once you're past there forget it.
‘I used to hate even visiting South Wales, because the idea of going back always seemed like an admission of defeat to me.
It's as if you'd gone out into the bigger world and found out that it's frightening or that it hurts, so you go home.
‘I don't want to make a big thing about holing myself up in the middle of nowhere, but people are asking me where I've been and I can't really say I've been touring the Far East or helping Bob (we think he means Dylan —Ed ) with his album.
‘I would imagine Bob may need help with his album, but I'm having far too much fun in the playground and getting pissed.
He ought to try it himself sometime.’
Gartside: back from Wales and the Green, green grass of home
'MUFFIN COMPARES TO YOU
‘Shabba's dominance of reggae is due to his unique voice, strong personal style and quick wit.’
Shabba Rank's gruff growl has graced over 50 reggae single hits since 1987, with more than one record a week often hitting the charts.
During Christmas 1989 — as important a time of year for reggae sales as the pop market — he held four of the top six places in the UK reggae singles chart.
Simultaneously, he topped the JA and New York charts.
While most reggae DJs rapidly rise in popularity only to sink within a year, Shabba's following has swelled over the past four years to a point where the reggae market is too small to contain him — witness the shooting and tear gas panic last year at the Brixton Academy, or January's trashing of Tower Records, London, during a personal appearance.
But to the ragga audience Shabba is more than just an MC.
He's a cultural icon, a standard-bearer for the dispossessed yet still proud black urban youth.
At 15 Shabba (real name Rexton Gordon) cut his debut single, '79's, ‘Heat Under Sufferer's Feet’, calling himself Co-Pilot.
It didn't sell, and Shabba retreated to the dancehalls to work the mic for various sound systems.
By the mid-'80s fans of live sound tapes were buzzing about an incredible talent with a rhyme for every occasion and a put-down for every challenge.
When he re-emerged on record in 1987 he was ready for  all comers and quickly established a reputation as the upcoming DJ.
His rough, pure ragga voice cut a pile of reggae hits throughout 1988 for most of JA's leading production houses: King Jammy's, Bobby Digital, Black Scorpio, Dennis Star and Mixing Lab.
Although his solo records were strong, his work partnering singers like Thriller U and Cocoa Tea was explosive and gradually his status soared over that of rivals Ninjaman and Chaka Demus.
It took a while before anyone issued a Shabba album, perhaps because he was so popular in reggae's ‘get a money’ freelance business that no producer could pin him down long enough to cut enough sides.
King Jammy tired of waiting in 1989 and put out half a Shabba album ‘Rough And Rugged’, a ‘clash’ featuring six raps from Shabba and six from Chaka Demus.
Any remaining doubts about Shabba's status were demolished when ‘Who She Love’, a single for Jammy's shared with Cocoa Tea and Home T, hit Number One in the reggae charts in Jamaica, London, New York, Toronto and Miami in the winter of 1988 –'89.; His first solo set, ‘Best Baby Father’, was released in September 1989, produced by Bobby Digital.
One track, ‘Wicked In Bed’, sold well enough on 45 for the backing track to sire ten more versions for an LP of the same title.
Inevitably Shabba turned up at Music Works, the studio that ruled Jamaica in 1988 –'89,; and there producer Gussie Clarke cut Shabba on some of the best records of the era: the lighthearted ‘Twice My Age’ with Krystal, and ‘Pirate's Anthem’, reuniting him with Cocoa Tea and Home T.
In April 1990, Jammy tidied up his Shabba Ranks back catalogue with ‘Star Of The '90s’, a compilation of hits, another chart-topper in the UK and New York.
A collaboration with Mikey Bennett of Home T delivered ‘Golden Touch’, Shabba's best solo LP.
Throughout 1990 rumours spread that a less-busy Shabba had signed for a major, which finally happened when CBS picked him up in America at the end of last year, and worldwide earlier this year.
Shabba's dominance of reggae is due to his unique voice, strong personal style and quick wit.
He has never been anything other than a raggamuffin, and that's why his fans identify with him totally.
Although many of his lyrics have been in the sexist style known as slackness (ironically, incredibly popular amongst women in Jamaica) Shabba has also rhymed on cultural if not overtly political topics.
If pushed, he'll tell you ‘I'm a teacher,’ presumably metaphorically.
Whether Shabba succeeds outside of the reggae market is dependent on whether a major can retain the energy of his ragga product.
With Cutty Ranks rising fast in Shabba's slipstream — even recording with Home T and Cocoa Tea — Shabba must know that it may be too late to turn back now.
In that light, and with reggae still regarded as little more than a novelty by the mainstream music business, Shabba's ambition can only be applauded.
Shabba Shabba hey: too big for the reggae market, but can he take ragga to the masses?
SINGLES REVIEWED BY SOHO
YOUR HOST: ANDREW COLLINS
DEFINITION OF SOUND: Wear Your Love Like Heaven
This record is literally aglow with vibes.
The sleeve's even the right colour.
The name's good.
The wiggly handwriting's good.
And lo and behold, what's inside is a regular joy too —‘uptime’ dance upholstery with a jolly rap, a Jesus Jones drum pitter-pattern and a proper chorus too.
Not to mention guitars — ssssshh!
T: When they put this on at The Brain (a club in London) it cleared the floor!
All the dance snobs just walked off, and everybody else just went mad!
(What a result.)
J: It's like rapping Beatles.
This is 1990s!
I hope it's a massive hit.
And they should rerelease the previous single.
T: I can just imagine all those old rappers going —(makes vomiting noise)—‘This is hippyshit, man’.
And on the other side, you've got all the hippies going ‘What's all this rapping?’
We all agree that this is fresh air in a cardboard wallet.
And British too, which, in these trying times, is quite a shit and dangerous thing to be.
Well done.
DESTROY THE BOY: Only One Night
The heady fund of top level corruption hangs in the air and curdles the coffee.
Destroy The Boy are Soho's mates, see, and I have allowed them to make this relatively new London band SOTW3 only under severe ideological duress.
They sound like The March Violets getting lessons off The Smiths, but they do supply at least four different brands of guitar — fuzz, acoustic, slide and soaring.
Like Ghost Dance, er, happened.
P: They've got a sexy bass player (Ann).
T: All the musicians we know like Ann.
She wears big DM boots and she snarls at people, she's no Little Miss Come-on.
This is funky Country & Western.
With Siouxsie singing it, it's just like we always thought, isn't it?
When you get your single reviewed it's not how good it is — it's who you know!
J and P: Hahahahahahahahaaaaa!
J: It's catchy.
It's pop music.
And there's nothing wrong with pop music.
T: Bring back the fuzz guitar!
I heard a fuzz guitar the other night — who was playing it?
J: You!
BLEACH: Snag EP
Beach are this week's archetypal, one-syllable hopeful indie band, a four-song EP is the correct thing for them to be releasing, and titles like ‘Burn’ and ‘Seeing’are the correct things to be on it, each one laced with all the right expansive guitar and aptly sweet and cottony (female) vocal.
It's a good job it's dead exciting — if a little transient.
Jackie Out of Soho reviews it in short exclamation-marked bursts
J: Pixies!
Fantastic!
Thumbs up!
T: The sound of people that read books.
I don't know how these bands rehearse.
J: Ten out of ten!
Take it off!
Ha Ha.
Getting a record reviewed is brilliant — even if it's bad.
We got a flexi reviewed by Steven Swells (sic ) once — he said it was sexy.
That was extremely useful to us.
I rang him up and complained though!
OCEAN COLOUR SCENE: Yesterday Today
I find myself strangely and mysteriously drawn to killing Ocean Colour Scene.
This is an illogical, nay, fanciful urge since I have never really heard them.
However, now I have listened to their first Phonogram-fuelled '60s Baggle Taggle on vinyl, I discover that I can't even be arsed to find out where they live.
Seen it, done it.
Bo-o-o-oo-oo-oring.
Soho, meanwhile, enthuse and make me feel like a miserable old fart.
T: Four tracks, value for money.
It's the baggy Hollies, innit?
D'you reckon they wear winkle pickers?
Striped T-shirts.
White Levi's.
They should get themselves a steel guitar.
P: Is the singer pretty?
(I fetch them a photo.)
He's got a good set of teeth.
T: I like the fact that they manage to do The Byrds so well.
And no fillings!
GW McLENNAN: When Word Gets Around
You can't keep a good Go-Between down.
Following last year's Robert Forster solo effort, co-conspirator Grant — now embarrassingly reinvented as ‘GW’ for effect — attempts to follow suit.
T: I'm worried about the return of acoustic songs to some of these songs.
J: What are you talking about?
We've done it!
T: When?
Name one song!
(An argument ensues about whether there's an acoustic guitar on Soho's LP.
This is bad news for ‘GW’.
They seem to have forgotten about his earnest tune completely.
As we launch into a debate about last week's Clash front cover, GW's jaunty, surprisingly Big Country-tinged epic kind of ends , unlamented.)
TRIP: Miss You
Yeah.
It's another tiredly drug-oriented name — with how many syllables?— and there is a proud boast on the sleeve that says ‘No samples, DJs, edits or bleeps’.
Somebody call New Model Army!
We inadvertently play the B-side first, which sounds like The Clash.
No need for that this week.
A quick flip, though, and all is well.
‘Miss You’ is a v fashionable romp through the Rolling Stones' 1978 hit with, amazingly, no DJs, edits or bleeps on it.
J: Sacrilege!
It's good!
I reckon they're probably really good live actually.
T: Where can I get hold of some good acid?
GREASE: The Dream Mix
A frightening and under-hand piece of work that must be addressed, since a whole new generation of Pop kids are now getting into ‘the bobby socks and engine-stripping {Weltsschmertz}of Grease — a musical that came out before The Manic Street Preachers were born .
This is a real duff cash-in on the Megamix of yore, with THAT drumbeat added to ‘Grease Is The Word’ and the soppy ‘Hopelessly Devoted’segued in for variety.
The Soho girls squeal, which means they are older than ten.
T: That Grease album has got some break beats on it that have been used on loads and loads of stuff.
P: Put the film out on video and it'll be a hit all over again.
J: I always wanted those trousers that Olivia Newton-John wore.
HOLLY JOHNSON: Across The Universe
Disgusting hogwash.
It's been downhill since those blokes who didn't play on Frankie Goes To Hollywood went.
Starts with a wolf-howl and then descends into galactic camp that has none of Betty Boo's appeal, but all of her ideas (that's both of them).
Soho beg to differ, natch.
T: It's great!
Listen to them old-fashioned Syndrums!
J&P: Yeeeeeaaah!
Woooh!
J: I like him, he's such a brilliant performer.
This is everything it should be.
The kids'll love it.
STEREO MC'S: Lost In Music
There's a stupid and pretentious joke warning sticker on this.
It says ‘Spiritual Guidance Advised — Explicit Concepts’.
Hope this peels of without chaffing the sleeve, because I'm up for the record itself.
J: It's alright, but it sounds a bit dated to me.
It's not even 1989.
T: It sounds like really, really early rap.
J: With Gary Byrd!
SMALLTOWN PARADE: And We Dance On
Tim reckons he's heard this one before.
I know I have — Like a million times.
Why is it that so many young bands want to write The Stone Roses' second album?
There is a CND symbol on the front of this record, therefore we have been forced to ban it, in the interests of being Right Wing.
P: Woooh!
I like it!
J: We're liking everything today!(they giggle, theatrically, like the Philadelphia cheese girls ) They're from Hackney.
Yes!
We were filming this video in Soho, and all these prostitutes were going ‘Stay in Hackney, girls!
You're doing alright, we love ya!’
Sounds a bit hackneyed to me.
P: No, this is cool, this is, like, hippy.
T: The new Mod scene is based in Hackney, you know.
TOM JONES: Carrying A Torch
A promising nightwatchman's anthem, done in the style of a dreary ‘Green Green Grass Of Home’ style ballad, written and produced by Van Morrison.
I'd have preferred Tom producing Van, myself.
This way round, you lose the laff-factor on both counts.
The Welsh One looks like a lizard on the front though, which is remarkable.
T: One of the best rock ‘n’ roll singers this country's ever produced, Tom Jones.
He's great, he's got a really open attitude.
Apparently, he's done a Waterboys track (‘Strange Boat’— Ed) on his new LP.
Makes a lot of sense, these two working together.
J: He's got a great voice, and Van Morrison writes brilliant songs.
Usually.
T: He's a Christian Scientist isn't he, Van Morrison?
I'll take it off now before the feedback.
P: Wait, I wanna hear Van Morrison's voice!
J: He's not singing on it, it's by Tom Jones, Pauline, can't you read?
THE APPLES: Eye Wonder
Ex-members of the Syndicate, Win and Hey!
Elastica get together under the weight of variously failed careers and get a logo a bit like The Cure's.
The outcome is an entirely anonymous textbook of ‘indie-dance’ poses.
The Soup Dragons should be cherished, and The Apples are why.
Very core.
J: I'm afraid this is dull and dreary.
T: But good nevertheless though.
I reckon they got a one-single deal on Epic.
It's a bit of a shame really.
That's what record companies do, they give 'em just enough money to go and make a single, tell 'em they're gonna make them into stars and the next minute, they don't push the single, they don't bother with it.
They're just throwing mud against the wall, they've got no idea.
PERE UBU: I Hear They Smoke The Barbeque
Didn't we see David Thomas off last time he attempted a comeback?
And aren't Pere Ubu now redundant since Colourblind James Experience happened?
Either way, this is the depressing sound of an art-rock voice sweating and gurning in the face of a relentless MOR ‘softie’ that INXS would call progressive but no-one else.
Like remaking Eraserhead in colour, with music, and casting Mike McShane as Henry.
T:(Reading from press release)’…
The thinking man's favourite pop group’.
Ha!
I saw this old pamphlet for Shakin' Stevens from about 1971 and it said ‘Thinking man's rock'n'roll.
Brilliant.
J: I like his vibrato.
He makes great videos as well.
He looks like someone's Dad.
Not mine, thank God.
VIXEN: Not A Minute Too Soon
T: I think Vixen should cover up.
They're letting down womanhood by selling themselves on their sex.
I think it's disgusting.
They had a video, about two songs back, where this bloke's following a woman and she's looking around.
It's just basically set up for a rape scene.
(He gets up and  ‘accidently’scratches the record — which knocks it on the head for Vixen — and me, since we are reviewing the singles on the editor's stereo.)
J: Whoops!
Sorry Girls.
RUTHLESS RAP ASSASSINS: Justice
Welcome to a piss-perfumed darkened stairwell in a suitably depraved inner city.
This is where the Ruths are at , conjuring up doom-with-a-view atmospherics in a way that makes the Definition Of Sound record seem somewhat friv.
In a perfect world, there's room for both.
T: Hey, we used that break beat — don't you recognise it?
We know where you got it from, lads!
It's from Funkadelic.
I like this.
Well ‘ard.
J: You see, we're all music fans, and it's really hard for us to slag anything off, really.
T: I like that line, ‘Social workers love me 'cos I keep 'em in work’!
Pity they come from Manchester, that's a real  f—ing albatross now, isn't it?
TEST DEPT: New World Jungle
How exciting to sample George Bush talking about the Gulf, eh readers?
Test Dept aren't by their very nature , exciting — but people are still a bit scared to broach the naffness of their output for fear of getting shouted at by Swells.
He doesn't frighten me.
This record features lowdown bass that goes for the backs of your legs and up a bit.
There is less panel-beating here than your dusty preconceptions would have it (none, actually), but plenty of po about the face and burly beats and, having heard the Ocean Colour Scene single, this is vital .
T: I've got a lot more respect for them now because I met one of them at a party once and he told me they're going to be bigger than The Beatles — in all seriousness.
But then they went up and did a whole loada stuff for the miners.
They're ideologically sound, although sometimes they don't look it, know what I mean?
A little bit Teutonic.
Good bass (adopts comic whine) can't hear much of a song in it though.
They'll love it in Northern France.
WOMACK AND WOMACK: Up Town
They look happy together don't they?
And that's important.
But really, to lay what might be deemed a ‘soulful’ voice over a track this jerky and irritating is a dunder-headed thing to do.
T: It sounds like he only knows one programme on the drum machine.
J: Sounds like quite a good song but the production's weird .
SUN CARRIAGE: Sarah CD
A mighty drum intro that could definitely handle itself in a fight with the mighty drum  intro in Ride's ‘Dreams Burn Down’.
Henceforth it slides off into (dare I say) Camden Lurch territory.
It's a darn sight heavier than Vixen, and they come from North London too!
J: I love it!
T: Camden Lurch?
I don't know what that is?
(I tell him.)
Steve Lamacq invented it?
What — one drunken night?
JUDAS PRIEST: A Touch Of Evil
T: Doesn't this bloke play golf in his leisure time?
J: I don't understand this Heavy Metal lark really.
It sounds like 1979.
It'll be massive.
SINGLE OF THE WEEK
THE POPPY FACTORY: 7×7
Already an office rave,(makes a change from that bleedin' Carter LP anyway!) this, The Poppy Factory's debut, is one of the year's most refreshingly singular singles.
Rigid drums, a sparky synth backdrop, a My Bloody Val interlude, and that plaintive call for Albert-Finney-grim-up-North-'60s-kitchen-sink character Charlie Bubbles.
And it builds like an entirely reputable building firm.
The B-side's ‘Kitchen Mix’ starts with the sound of someone making a cup of tea.
This obviously worries Tim.
Tim: Listen to that!
They wouldn't have put that on if they hadn't been on drugs!
That's of no interest to anybody unless you're on marijuana or LSD.
(Pauline whispers that it's like World Party.)
Only on the bit where he sings through a teapot!
(At this point, Steve Lamacq enters and threatens physical violence if Soho don't make it SOTW.)
Pauline: We've been threatened by Steve Lamacq!!!
Jackie: Albert Finney!
Single Of The Week!
This single will definitely grow on you.
T: Yeah, but that's what you said about that REM pile of crap.
Definition Of Sound: heaven-sent
Destroy The Boy: friends in high places
THE CLASH
THE UNCUT CRAP
OVER 56 THINGS YOU NEVER KNEW ABOUT THE CLASH
Joe Strummer was born in Ankara, Turkey.
His dad was a civil servant.
The Clash temporarily became The Lash when they became studio players for vice queen Janie Jones.
They appear on her single, ‘House Of The Ju Ju Queen’.
The Clash weren't always into combat fatigues.
When Mick Jones and Paul first got involved with the punk experience, they used to customise  ladies' car coats.
Bernie Rhodes, The Clash's notorious manager, was a long-time sidekick of Malcolm McLaren.
Bernie says he invented punk rock.
Nobody believes him.
Most of the debut LP ‘The Clash’ was written on the 18th floor of a council high rise on London's Harrow Rd.
The flat was owned by Mick's grandmother, who regularly turned up at Clash gigs.
During a tricky period in the late '70s, Manager Bernie Rhodes tried to replace Mick Jones with Steve Jones from The Sex Pistols.
Joe Strummer played a bearded dishwasher in the mercenary army who gets thrown into a river in Alex Cox's Walker .
No-one has ever seen said film (except David Quantick).
In the early days the Clash often went hungry.
Once, after a long night spent putting up posters, Paul Simonon heated up the remainder of the flour and water paste on a rusty blade and ate it.
During a drunken scene from Alex Cox's Straight To Hell , you can see Joe Strummer kicking a tin can and calling out the names of footie players such as David Speedle, Pat Nevin and Kerry Dixon.
Joe is a big Chelsea fan…
Joe once sent the fanzine Alternative Ulster a thank-you present — a consignment of lawnmower parts!
Joe Strummer toured America as an honorary Pogue in Winter '87, replacing Phil Chevron who was ill with a stomach ulcer.
The Pogues took advantage of this situation by playing faithful versions of ‘I Fought The Law’ and ‘London Calling’.
When The Clash played the ‘Night Of Treason’ at the Royal College Of Art in '77, the DJ and poster designer was NME 's very own Savage Pencil.
Shane McGowan was victim of a famous ear-biting attack at an early Clash gig.
The Spanish lines in ‘Should I Stay Or Should I Go’ and ‘Spanish Bombs’are not  grammatically correct.
On the TV show Something Else , Joe Strummer once suggested that band managers should be put in concentration camps.
Pride Of The Cross, a band featuring ex-Pogue bassist Caitlin O'Riordain (and her replacement Darryl), once performed The Clash's ‘Complete Control’ as a protest against Pogue Mahone changing their name to The Pogues.
The Clash were the first (and last?) white band to have their likeness painted onto the wall of Lee Perry's famous Black Ark recording studios in Jamaica.
Joe Strummer once said his favourite record was Van Morrison's ‘Gloria’.
When The Clash first met up with beat poet Allen Ginsberg in '81, Joe asked, ‘Well Ginsberg, when you gonna run for president?’
The response was, ‘Never, or I'll wind up in Diamond Hell,’ a weird  Buddhist allusion.
Joe Strummer promised the town of Corby, Northamptonshire, a pink Cadillac.
It was delivered but did not go.
Joe Strummer's real name is Joseph Mellor.
Mick Jones' real name is Mick Jones.
The so-called Clash MKII — of ‘Cut The Crap’ fame — featured two men called Vince.
One used to be in Bristol's Cortinas, the other one was really called Greg and studied Physics and Astronomy at University College London.
Strummer disliked the punk practice of gobbing.
Especially after someone landed a greenie in his open mouth and he got hepatitis.
Sandy Pearlman, producer of ‘Give ‘Em Enough Rope’, so disliked Joe Strummer's voice that he mixed it more quietly than the drums throughout the album.
There were 204 drummers auditioned before The Clash settled for Nicky ‘Topper’ Headon.
Joe was formerly in dodgy pub rock bands The 101ers and The Vultures.
Strummer realises the evils of drugs.
He once told NME , ‘I've smoked so much pot, I'm surprised I haven't turned into a bush’.
The first Clash gig in Belfast was stopped by the authorities.
Undeterred, the band went sight-seeing around the various trouble spots, getting their pictures taken besides security gates and confused-looking squaddies.
The Clash II went on a busking tour to promote the ‘Cut The Crap’ LP.
They weren't any good.
Paul Simonon was once voted the world's hunkiest man in Playgirl magazine.
After leaving The Clash (and being name-checked as ‘Tory Crimes’ on the sleeve of ‘The Clash’), original drummer Terry Chimes joined Bowie clones Cowboys International.
who were one of the least successful bands of the late 1970s.
He also drummed with Black Sabbath and Samantha Fox.
The song ‘Capital Radio’ claims that ‘There's a tower in the heart of London/With a radio station right at the top’.
In fact, Capital Radio is only half way up the tower.
The cover of ‘London Calling’ is a rip-off of Elvis' ‘Rock And Roll’LP from '56 and was taken by our own Pennie Smith.
Joe Strummer — now yawnsomely familiar as an actor/soundtrack producer — once directed his own movie Cops & Robbers , starring Mick, Paul and Clash photographer Pennie Smith.
MORE CLASH FACTS PAGE 40
MORE CLASH FACTS!
Joe Strummer once shared a squat in London's Albany St with a son of Terence Conran (of Habitat fame).
We know that Paul Simonon smashed his bass guitar — as photographed on the cover of ‘London Calling’— at exactly 10.50pm.
This is because he broke his watch in the process and handed the busted bits to photographer Pennie Smith.
(What is this? 57 things you didn't know about Pennie Smith?— Ed).
Captain Sensible once invaded the stage during an early Clash gig on the continent.
He was booted off and landed on some fencing, causing great damage to his testicular region.
Joe Strummer once said that listening to John Peel was like a dog being sick in your face.
Clash manager Bernie Rhodes had a Renault with the licence number CLASH.
‘Train In Vain’ isn't listed on the sleeve for ‘London Calling’because it was originally going to be a flexi give-away with NME .
Unfortunately, the idea proved too expensive and the track went on the LP instead.
The Clash are crap businessmen.
They signed a record contract that didn't have a clause for tour support.
As a result, they lost tons of money when punk rockers trashed concert halls during their first shows.
Also, they insisted that ‘Sandinista’ and ‘London Calling’were issued at budget price, meaning they didn't make any money out of them.
Topper Headon's favourite ever drummer is Phil Collins.
‘Great Mates’ The Blockheads (they of Ian Dury And…) once turned up unexpectedly at a Clash recording session dressed as policemen, causing Mick Jones to flush all his illicit substances down the toilet and the rest of the band to flee.
And there's more!
Flowered Up's co-manager Terry stars in Rude Boy as a wayward yoof put on the straight and narrow by Joe.
The spread-'em-against-the-wall pose on the cover of ‘White Riot’ was borrowed from a dub LP called ‘State Of Emergency’by Joe Gibbs And The Professionals.
Both Paul Simonon and Viv Albertine of The slits modelled for a Laura Ashley calendar.
Whilst at public school, the young Joe Strummer was an avid stamp collector.
During the filming for the ‘Bankrobber’ video, Clash roadies Baker and Johnny Green faked a bank job in South London.
They were stopped and questioned by the police, who thought they were the real thing.
Joe has run both the London and Paris marathons.
Slowly.
‘Strum Guard’ is a term used solely by Joe Strummer to describe the bandana taped around his right hand to protect it from his own vigorous guitar-flailing.
Flowered Up's next single, ‘Take It’, includes lyrics lifted from the soundtrack of Rude Boy , The Clash's on-the-road movie.
‘Rock The Casbah’ had the very first rock video that starred an armadillo (unless ZZ Top got there before them!)
British Telecom wanted to use ‘London Calling’ for their last advertising campaign.
They were told to bog off.
Mick Jones played guitar on the Elvis Costello song ‘Big Tears’ on the B-side of ‘Pump It Up’.
When American writer Lester Bangs toured England with The Clash, Bernie Rhodes tried to set him on fire.
Songs that mention Clash members and associates: ‘Walk Out To Winter’(Aztec Camera), ‘Punky Reggae Party’(Bob Marley), ‘Posing At The Roundhouse’, ‘Part-Time Punks’(TV Personalities), ‘Gangsters’(The Special AKA), ‘The Feeding Of The 500’(Crass), ‘Tear Stained Letter’(Richard Thompson), ‘Death Threats’(Throbbing Gristle), ‘Joe Strummer's Wallet’(The Stingrays).
‘Should I Stay Or Should I Go’ was written by Mick about American singer Ellen Foley (above with Mick), who sang the backing vocals on Meatloaf's ‘Bat Out Of Hell’LP.
Paradise
EDITED BY MC CANN
Welcome to the Pleasure Dome, hep cats — neo-mod jazz poets GALLIANO are on the hip tip with their Italian cardies, ENERGIZE take a bleep into the unknown, THE IMPOSSIBLES float by on Farley's rusks, and TEMPER TEMPER inject some progressive soul into Manchester and, erm, America too.
PLEASURE PRINCIPLE
Hacienda DJ and general top Manc Dave Booth has a new night of wax spinning, this time in London.
The Pleasure Dome is the host for Dave's blend of up-front dance and indie tunes, where the sounds are likely to include ditties from the likes of Happy Mondays, The Charlatans, World Of Twist, 808 State, A Tribe Called Quest and The KLF, interspersed with a splattering of classic House tunes.
Dave plays on Friday nights from 9.30pm until 2.30am and the entrance is a mere £5 with concessions for NUS/UB40 card holders.
The Pleasure Dome is situated upstairs at the Dome 
GROOVE CHECK
SAINT ETIENNE: Nothing Can Stop Us
MUSIC TO swoon to.
Pure sexy vibes, breathless vocals and brilliant drum rolls.
Haunted by the spectre of Northern Soul, wrapped in perfect pop melodies and probably the best record this year.
KATHERINE E: I'm Alright
JUST WHEN you'd given up on Italian House, along come more chattering piano breaks and gusty female vocals to drag you back onto your feet.
Exciting and excited, use liberally to stoke sagging dancefloors, it works every time.
DIANA BROWN AND BARRIE K SHARPE: Love Or Nothing
THE RETURN of the sophisticates.
Not as sharp as ‘Masterplan’, but still pretty cool.
Funkin' soul grooves, smooth vocals and a chunky  clavinet moves the music with a steady, relentless momentum.
Laid back, bang on and chilled to the gills.
DOUG LAZY: H.O.U.S.E.
SORRY, BUT I'm having none of this.
There are just some things that don't compliment each other, no matter how hard you try, and this is very trying.
New Yawk drawling rap over Kraftwerk's ‘The Model’ just does not work, no way, no how.
Handbag DJs will love it.
COLLAPSE: My Love
PROOF THAT you still need vision and imagination to create good dance music as well as all the right equipment.
This track rambles everywhere, goes nowhere fast and loses all credibility with a cheesy rap containing the immortal line ‘I'm as serious as cancer’.
Give me a break.
HULLI GALLI!
Galliano are hip, let's get that straight.
As musicians, jazz poets and exponents of hardhitting lyrics there aren't many outfits that come even close to matching them for dynamism or style.
Still in their musical infancy, these guys are prospective heavyweight champions…no sweat.
Recently signed to Gilles Peterson's Talkin' Loud label at Phonogram, it's here that they've gathered to address the question of how the Great British music press is going to receive them.
‘We've just done a Talkin' Loud showcase at Ronnie Scott's for the press and I'm not sure how we went down,’ says frontman Rob Galliano.
‘I thought we might have looked a bit stiff 'cos it wasn't our usual type of audience.’
That comforting ‘usual’ audience are the connoisseurs of all things cool who make up the heaving Dingwall's audience on any Sunday afternoon.
Rob elaborates.
‘Our material is for anyone who wants to listen, but basically we're coming from a club scene.
Record companies are rock record companies and they don't understand that sort of culture.
‘Soul II Soul went whoof to the top, and so the record people started to dig deeper into that whole club scene.
They rummage around and every so often come up with a new act.
‘I've heard it said that the only reason we got the contract with Talkin' Loud is 'cos we know Gilles.
They seem to think it's all a big scam between Gilles and his mates, but it's more of an understanding of where we're coming from.’
Spry takes up the attack.
‘All the movements start like that.
Take punk, it was all about a tight nucleus of bands who were all mates.
Every little scene comes out of a posse.
You hook up with the people on the same  trip and work it from there.’
That's not to say Galliano are insular in any way.
Just check their influences and you get an idea as to how open-minded they are when it comes to plying their act, as Rob offers.
‘You can go through roots, pass through funk, go towards soul — even hit Northern a little bit.
Get out to Gospel and have a look at Bob Dylan.
Pass through samba, latin and Brazilian.
That's a mighty diverse playing list and one which makes their debut album, ‘In Pursuit Of The Thirteenth Note’, seem an attractive prospect.
Originally intending to go on stage, drop ten poems and have them recorded for vinyl, Galliano have enlisted the help of former Style Council keyboardist Mick Talbot to come up with a calling card that bodes well for the future.
Musical flair alone hasn't been the reason why the jazz poets/warriors have hit the ground running, it always helps to be seen as part of a fashionable movement.
No surprises here, Galliano are neo-modernists, or so the style pundits would have us, and them, believe.
Constantine picks up the thread.
‘Being lumped in with the mod thing which is kickin' around at the moment has certainly helped us.
I wouldn't say it's accurate but where there's a tag, there's an interest.
Barrie Sharpe was even called a neo-mod.’
Rob seems genuinely puzzled as to why the band have been heralded as the great white/black hope for modernism in the '90s.
‘I can only think it's down to our Gabbichi cardigans,’ he laughs.
‘I've been wearing those since I was a casual all those years ago, but they're a sticks-man item, not mod in any way.’
Still, scam or no scam, there's no denying, especially not from Galliano themselves, that the tag is currently working full steam ahead in their flavour.
A drawback is that it's put them in the frame for some pretty clueless advances from non-comprehending journalists eager to get to the bottom of this modernist lark.
‘I was speaking to this chick writer,’ drawls Constantine, with just a hint of Ladbroke Grove patois.
‘She wanted to know where we all met and I told her that it was through the vibe.
I couldn't believe her reaction, she was totally stupefied.
I tried to explain that you either had the vibe or you didn't, it wasn't something that I could explain.’
For the uninitiated, they met 18 months ago, enjoying a common outlook on music and deciding to take it from there.
Spry, who has spent the duration of the interview waiting for his chicken and pineapple pizza to arrive, flicks through a copy of Vogue Collection .
He asks for our opinions on a leggy model who's draped over a sunlit verandah.
Boys being boys,(What, you mean sexist tossers?— Female Ed) the interview crashes to a halt as Galliano grapple for a peep of her pins.
They don't know her name and the chances are that she ain't that familiar with them.
If she's got half an ounce of cool in her beautiful bones then she'll get wise.
St Etienne: Heavenly-sent
Galliano: WARNING — this band features Mick Talbot
HI, ENERGISE
Round and round, and back again, everything spins around, passing by if you missed it the first time.
David Lee from ENERGIZE thinks Electro is on its way back, and could speak for many hours about the halcyon days before Electro meant toddlers break-dancing in the streets, title-dropping classics like Man Parrish's ‘Hip Hop Be Bop’, early Mantronix, and Shannon.
You can hear his background, taste and influences on ‘Report To The Dance Floor’, his contribution to the ‘Biorhythms 2’ compilation, which has just been released in remixed form on a label notorious for its bleeps.
All Nettwork artists seem to take the idea of ‘sparse’ to new and distant boundaries, but David has replaced those bleeps with a mutant robot voice ordering some lucky conscripts to report to the floor.
This comes courtesy of more Electro; namely Midnight Starr's ‘Freakazoid’.
‘Everyone's sampling early House.
I was a fanatical record collector; I've got six to seven thousand records so I've got plenty of places to look for ideas.
But if ‘Report To The Floor’ had come out in 1982, I would have liked it.’
It's a continuing theme; dance is fickle and chews up styles so quickly it's possible to be last week's thing when your work is still relevant: ‘Electro was given a bad name by break-dancing,’ reckons David.
‘People wouldn't play it, so I used to tape it from John Peel's show.
I still like Electro and I think it's coming back.
You could play ‘LFO’ or ‘Tricky Disco’next to‘Hip Hop Be Bop’.
The equipment used is much the same; the same drum machines as then.
It's how you use the stuff that separates the men from the boys.’
David was an outsider.
‘I used to live in real soul-boy territory, and I used to buy records like ‘Don't Make Me Wait’ by The Peech Boys with my meagre earnings.
Nobody else really liked it, and my dad used to say that he could have sent me any old rubbish in the post and I would have liked it.’
Unlike the achingly trendy and nauseatingly elitist days of Rare Groove, David believes in the most obscure the better but shares his discoveries.
‘There were so many crap records.
You had to get things by mail order, but now you can get anything in the shops.
Everything used to be really difficult to get hold of.’
David has another secret to share.
He was Raven Maize, a mysterious man with ‘Together Forever’, a club hit in '89, and far more soulful than the pristine work he offers at the moment: ‘In those days I could record for nothing.
I pretended I was someone else because when I'm vibing with someone about other people's records, I can pull it off.
When I hate doing it is with my own records; I've just heard it in my head for so long.
I get really  finicky and picky.
I just end up with my head in my hands about some chord changes or something.’
Obsessive perfection pays.
Listen and learn.
In space, no one can hear you bleep: Energize's David Lee
EMISSION IMPOSSIBLE
Margaret Grundy and Lucy Dallas sported vague notions of being rich and famous when they were still pushing each other round the playground.
They spent their adolescence hanging out together, fostering unhealthy obsessions for spotty pop bands and painstakingly creating fanzines called Clouds Have Groovy Faces which were crammed with Parma violets and articles on My Bloody Valentine and Primal Scream.
Their fascination for twisted pop classics led them to barter their worldly goods for two acoustic guitars and into The Impossibles.
‘We were crap for ages,’ confesses Lucy, ‘but we hung on in there, gradually improved and started pestering people for support slots.’
Having already established a network of contacts through their fanzines, The Impossibles appeared alongside the Swans, The Primitives and Dinosaur Jr.
With that behind them, they hardly seem likely candidates for the pages of Paradise , but then Margaret and Lucy boast eclectic tastes which range from Abba to NWA, from everything released by Creation to Sly Stone.
Living by the principle that variety is the spice of life, The Impossibles have pushed ‘Delphis’, their latest single, on to the dancefloor with a helpful nudge from Terry Farley and the ubiquitous Fluke.
By their own admission, Lucy and Margaret aren't ‘committed dance freaks’, more curious observers and ardent admirers of good music.
‘I was really surprised we got Terry Farley,’ says Lucy.
‘I mean, we've never heard him DJing, we just really liked the stuff he'd done with Primal Scream, and as for Fluke, well, we'd heard a lot of really good things about them — plus they're signed to Creation.’
Much to their relief, the remixes merely enhanced the song rather than completely altering its character.
‘Delphis’ floats around dreamy vocals, clever chords, is pushed along at a dignified pace and is a perfect  antidote to the tense teutonic Techno and ball-breaking Gospel anthems currently dominating the scene.
‘It was like giving our baby away,’ sighs Lucy.
‘Even though we wanted to go along to the studio, we kept well away from the remixes because we'd have been ‘Oooh don't take that out, don't change this’.
But we're really happy with the end result.’
To add to their joy, The Impossibles recently enjoyed the coveted position of NME 's Single Of The Week.
‘Actually I was really happy about that, not just because we'd been made Singe Of The Week, but because it was a woman reviewing the singles — and they're a lot harder to please.
Some people tend to have preconceived ideas about us because we're young and female.
I'm not saying everyone wants to shag us, but some men we've encountered have been really patronising.
They either automatically assume we're just backing singers or we're a folk outfit just because we use harmonies and acoustic guitars.’
‘Dance?
Us?’
The Impossibles celebrate their arrival on Paradise by doing the Bird
TEMPER-MENTAL
Temper Temper are glossy.
Once you've seen the video for their current single, ‘Talk Much’, they're even glamorous.
Odd really, for a couple of Manchester-based people who've gone for a progressive soul angle and eschewed any trendy trip.
Temptress Melanie Williams and partner in crime Eric Gooden refuse to ‘Jump on to any bandwagons, even with new technology’ and got their deal with Virgin's Ten label the hard way.
They met at a party in the mid '80s.
Eric, at the time a budding saxophonist, press ganged Melanie into service as a singer in his band Adventure.
They left to do their own thing and ended up signed to US label Geffen in '86.
‘The whole House thing was happening then, so they thought it would be a good idea to send us to Chicago,’ says Eric.
The obscure single ‘Showdown’ followed, but little else.
A few years on, back in good old leafy Didsbury, vocalist Melanie and all-round muso Eric have earned a serious Stateside buzz as Temper Temper.
When we meet they have just returned from a promotional stretch with Virgin in Los Angeles.
On listening to the forthcoming album you could be persuaded that Temper Temper are purposely aiming for our American cousins and their huge R&B markets.
They agree that the States beckon for a second time but Melanie says: ‘It's very difficult because America's so segregated, and it's horrifying to see how much prejudice there is, really.
Certainly, you've got to be pigeon-holed into a market and people want to know whether I'm white or black, which is something I've never had to think about before.
They wanted to make sure I was black, basically.’
Eric (who is also co-founder of the Blip dance label) is the quiet one.
Melanie, with her wholesome post-feminist lyrics, is keen to stress that their work is about ‘getting in touch with ourselves’.
‘Ourselves’ includes the extended circle of Temper Temper friends and associates.
The radio-friendly ‘Talk Much’ features a couple of serious John DaSilva mixes, one of which is named after the Hacienda Shiva nights.
Temper Temper are two people with a mature outlook.
They specialise in songs that deal with adult, relationship-based, matters.
As such, they represent a strong vein of soul that has struggled in the recent ravealonga Manchester years.
‘Talk Much’ says a lot about them, and their resilience.
The Dancing Didsbury: Eric and Melanie
FILM
THEATRE OF WAR
Right, the war's over, let's see some real action!
Gore-starved GAVIN MARTIN and DANNY KELLY pick the best war flicks of all time and say ‘get 'em on TV — pronto!’
THE WAR movie died a death during the Gulf War.
In Hollywood a host of productions, several with a Middle East location, were postponed, cancelled or left stranded in the sand.
In Britain, television stations re-jiggled schedules to remove the fearful sight of death and battle from the screen.
During the war public lust for military strategy and precision bombing was catered for by US military and British forces high command cockpit videos.
But round the clock televised commentary by David Dimbleby and British officer types on loan from the Gentleman's Club Of Choice or press conferences chaired by Stormin' Norman Schwarzkopf live from Saudi could never tell the whole story.
War movies were the other first casualty of war.
Why?
Because they tell truths and provide insights beyond the reach of foreign correspondents angling for knighthoods and Pulitzer Prizes.
From every era and every culture, war movies have shown the hell of young men trapped in combat, the behind scenes political skullduggery which results in scapegoats and wasted lives as well as bringing to life tales of astonishing bravery.
Now that the ‘Mother Of All Battles’ has, temporarily at least, subsided, the war movie in all its blood-soaked, strafe-bombed, napalm reeking death or glory guts-spilling heart-wrenching glory should return to the small screen.
What follows, while by no means comprehensive, is NME 's guide to the world blown wide open by the greatest war movies, a world we'd like to see on TV as we wait for the next one.
The big ‘un.
ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
THE MOST famous pacifist film of all time.
Its tale of the journey of young German WW1 recruits from wide-eyed enthusiasm to dead-eyed disillusion then just plain old dead eyes is, by the standard of Erich Maria Remarque's original book and later films, mawkishly sentimental, but the central images remain powerful.
No-one who sees this film ever forgets the enemies-in-a-hole scene or the final (enemas-in-a-hole scene), painfully poignant, shot.
LA GRANDE ILLUSION
AN ELEGIAC, unutterably sad stop-all-wars cry from the son of master painter Auguste.
Set in a WWI officer's prisoner of war camp it shows the last veneers of a chivalrous, civilised Europe being ripped away by the black talons of mechanised war.
Watch it for its parched melancholia: watch it for the fantastic innards-eaten Erich von Stroheim; watch it and spot which tiny, yet central, image Spielberg nicked from it for ET .
VICTORY THROUGH AIR POWER
TOTALLY,TOTALLY weird shit, The Disney studio made two contributions to the US war effort.
One was to paint the roofs of LA big armaments plants to look like suburban gardens (for fear of Japanese bombing); the other was this quite extraordinary piece of cartoon propaganda.
You guessed it — garish, lovingly drawn, heavy bombers pound the enemy into purple, yellow and pink puffs of smoke.
Like Bambi never happened.
You never see it on Disney Time …
THE BEST YEARS OF OUR LIVES
DESERVEDLY LADEN with Oscars, this film set and remains the benchmark for all soldiers-come-home movies that followed.
While ignoring the possible trauma caused by the actual fighting itself , it graphically explores (through brilliant performances by Frederic March, Dana Andrews, Harold Russell, Myrna Loy and Virginia Mayo) the fractures that war creates in the lives of even the victors.
As much a film about marriage as war, it does both wonderfully.
THE ODD MAN OUT
JAMES MASON plays a haunted Irish rebel gunman who staggers — shot and dying — through an unnamed city.
The movie isn't really about the war between Ireland and England — it's about the archetypal soldier martyr, stumbling into a purgatorial nightmare where he's forced to question his life, action and consequences.
The allegory peaks in the scene where Mason meets a mad artist who wants to paint his portrait because he has ‘the eyes of a dying man’.
THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
AMERICAN CIVIL War through the eyes of Audie Murphy (the most decorated US soldier of WWII, turned actor).
Drifting, dreamy, misty (the ‘fog of war’ is the natural environ here) the film was mangled at the editing stage and Huston vehemently disowned it.
It remains, however, an eerily effective evocation of the first industrialised conflict, the dress rehearsal for the trench slaughter of WWI.
ATTACK!
THE FIRST truly realistic, not to say brutal, Hollywood look at WWII.
German tanks roll out of the mist like giant indestructible daleks to crush and dismember the incompetently, corruptly-led GIs.
Few films have done the helplessness and (physical, morphine-requiring) pain as well as this.
‘Tough’ is too watery a summing up; ‘wound-raw’is nearer.
PATHS OF GLORY
THE WAR within.
Glory is about the class divisions in the French army during the First World War.
Kirk Douglas' Colonel Dax is the focus sympathising with prole soldiers in the trenches but unable to reason with the aloof, detached aristocrats in high command.
He's selected to defend three soldiers who refused to fight in a battle they had no chance of winning.
This early Kubrick movie is a much more telling critique of the sheer cruelty of the military mind than the recent overblown Full Metal Jacket .
THE BRIDGE ON THE RIVER KWAI
STIFF BRITISH upper lip comes face to face with Japanese Prisoner Of War Camp cruelty and is forced, perish the thought, to compromise.
Alec Guinness plays the epitome of the Decent British Officer Johnny who decides, in order to re-establish military discipline and morale among his men, to play ball with his captors by building a bridge, militarily essential to the Japanese.
In the resultant culture clash Guinness drowns, heroism subverted by duty, reality distorted by the military mindset.
A microcosmic war where all the damage is psychological and moral.
THE BATTLE OF ALGIERS
A TRIUMPHANT trompe-l'oeil ; fanatically detailed (right down to the grainy film stock) reconstruction of events in the Algerian war of independence from the French during 1954 –'57); that looks uncannily like documentary reality.
So much so that in America the Black Panthers studied it for tips on guerrilla tactics!
Terror, counter-terror, torture, and the absolute necessity of violence (later much more clumsily explored by Leone in A Fistful Of Dynamite ) are relentlessly portrayed, all to Ennio Morricone's least flowery score ever.
Nerve shattering.
The tracks of my tears; Jack Palance crushed beneath a tank in Attack!
Inadequate dressing rooms marred the making of Das Boot
Mel Gibson in Gallipoli: ‘I've left the oven on…‘
THE DIRTY DOZEN
LEE MARVIN leads a group of 12 prisoners — some rapists and some murderers — on a mission into wartime Germany.
The theme is  redemption through battle and Aldrich's raw, violent, magnificently acted movie shows how war relied on the worst instincts in men to achieve the best results.
The most memorable scene has German officers and their ladies trapped in an underground bunker and showered with hand grenades and gasoline.
Payment in kind for Auschwitz and Belsen.
JOHNNY GOT HIS GUN
BONKERS, AND totally captivating.
In the month that WWII broke out, Trumbo's pacifistic novel about the previous bash was issued and instantly suppressed (a move with which, incidentally, the author was in full agreement, feeling it too dangerous a book for soldiers already in the field to be exposed to).
Thirty-three years later, aged 65, he made his directorial debut with the same mind-numbing story of a soldier who wakes up in hospital without arms, legs, face, sight or hearing, but who can still think.
His harrowing journey of realisation, acceptance, communication (through head-tapped morse code) and an eventual blow-job from a sympathetic nurse is as strong an anti-war statement as yet committed to celluloid.
And if you think all that sounds weird; it's also got Donald Sutherland as Jesus!
THE BATTLE OF CHILE
A 271-minute documentary released in three parts after it was smuggled out of Chile.
Captures the angry collapsing mood of the country as Allende's left wing government is threatened and eventually deposed by a right wing junta.
The atmosphere is charged — the camera prowls street demos and violence and impassioned rhetoric spurts from citizens on every corner.
The sub-plot has the CIA agitating and funding strikes that eventually topple Allende.
In one scene a gunman points his weapon at the cameraman.
Then he shoots him.
GO TELL THE SPARTANS
A GRITTY, realistic approach to Vietnam with Burt Lancaster as the commanding officer becoming cynical about the war in 1964, long before it became a media affair.
His cynicism is understandable — the black humoured script depicts US soldiers as sadists and racists, hopelessly trying to find a rationale for a war that their country cannot justify.
THE DEER HUNTER
ANYONE FOR a farewell wedding dance?
A hunting expedition in the mountains?
A game of Russian roulette with the Vietcong?
A homecoming funeral march?
It would be a shame if Michael Cimino should go down in history as the man who sunk a studio with Heaven's Gate .
The Deer Hunter is one of the greatest debuts in cinema history, magnificently realised ritual scenes and performances (De Niro, Streep, Walken) in a tale which shows how the Vietnam war ripped a Pennsylvanian mining community asunder.
BREAKER MORANT
AT THE end of the Boer War, Edward Woodward and two members of an Australian platoon face court martial.
The charges have been trumped up to satisfy the political aspirations of the British empire.
A post-mortem into the cause, effect and outcome of legitimate war aims this multiple Australian Oscar winner is a devastating indictment of the nasty scapegoat zeal which lives on after battle.
APOCALYPSE NOW
WAR AS opera, Vietnam as Queen-budget rock video, blah blah blah.
The most overscrutinised (especially by rock bands), over-analysed and over-scripted (ie, pretentious) war flick of all time: but don't let that spoil it for you.
Lie back and enjoy the sensory carpet bombing; helicopter ballets, the exploding treelines (long before the ‘Take Your Breath Away’ car ads), the flak jacket dolly birds, Brando's malevolent walrus, the whole of Southeast Asia as expendable theme park kaboodle.
Apocalypse Now is that rare paradox, both over-rated and essential.
DAS BOOT
ONE OF two sprawling films (Heimat being the other) that marked Germany finally coming to terms with the war, relatively free of guilt.
Das Boot — the most expensive film ever made in Germany — is an obsessively detailed, fiercely unpretentious spotlight on the coffined claustrophobia of a U-boat crew.
Their physical containment becomes vividly exemplified in the famous scene were, driven to enormous depth, the rivets from the hull pressure-pop, becoming deadly projectiles from which there's no hiding place.
An intensely unbiased essentially human film of men literally crushed by war.
GALLIPOLI
THE STORY of British incompetence wasting the flower of ANZAC youth on a Dardanelles beach, this was one of two great war flicks to come out of the late '70s/early '80s Australian movie boom (the ‘Nam-set The Odd Angry Shot was the other).
The story — foot racing mates Mel Gibson and Mark Lee's exuberant gambol to their date with wholesale slaughter — is familiar, but the telling (by turns raucous and buddy-buddy) ratchets up the tension notch by inexorable notch until that final, in every sense of the word, frame.
It's as famous and disturbing a last shot as that of All Quiet On The Western Front .
RAN
A TOWERING epic by the veteran Japanese genius, restyling Shakespeare's King Lear storyline in the warlord era.
Ran means chaos, a state which reigns when the Warlord Nakadai divides his kingdom between three sons.
Raging monumental battle scenes, an unremittingly pessimistic worldview, a nation hopelessly divided — Kurosawa's vision of war is sweeping, absolute — a grand, neo-Biblical ball of confusion.
COME AND SEE
THE GREATEST battle of WWII (fought between the Nazi hordes and the Soviet people ) seen through the deteriorating physical and mental faculties of a young Russian partisan.
The audience is dragged through the same mire as the resistance fighter; by the film's end we're as tired and frazzled as they are.
That's why the very un-Hollywood editing (the German prisoners, after very little discussion are summarily disposed of) comes as less of a shock than it ordinarily would have.
Beautiful to behold, agony to sit through.
HOPE AND GLORY
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL RECREATION of the director's time as a boy in blitz-torn London.
Memorable because it posits the unorthodox but believable idea that for one lower middle class pubescent Brit kid the period between 1939 –'45; was above all an EXCITING time.
The dreaded Hun provides fireworks displays, force a total reorganisation of the humdrum routine and create the bombed out landscapes where he discovers sex.
What a luvverly war.
WAR IS HELL
TEN WE REALLY DON'T WANT TO SEE
ESCAPE TO VICTORY (1981)
SYLVESTER STALLONE, Michael Caine and a bunch of footballers (Pele!
Adriles!
Moore!
Erm, Summerbee!!) play Third Reich at footie and stage mass breakout.
Honest!
THE LONGEST DAY (1962)
Wayne…
Mitchum…
Fonda…
Wagner…
Burton…
Moore…
Ryan…
Bollocks…
CASTLE KEEP (1969)
COMMANDER BURT Lancaster ignores men and chats fart about paintings and statues he's guarding.
Total arT wANK.
ALL THIS AND WORLD WAR II (1976)
WARTIME FOOTAGE overlaid with Beatles songs performed by assorted pop dolts of the time.
Probably the spark that ignited punk…
THE GREEN BERETS (1968) /FIGHTING SEE BEES (1944) /BACK TO BATAAN (1945) /SANDS OF IWO JIMA (1949) /FLYING LEATHERNECKS (1951)
ETC ETC etc.
And any other John Wayne war vehicle that isn't They Were Expendable 
THE WILD GEESE (1977) /THE WILD GEESE II (1985)
‘GLUG GLUG glug, more Scotch anyone?’
ZULU (1963)
OR ANY other film in which black, brown, yellow or red people chant, holler and cavort instead of taking cover from White Man's Heroic Hail Of Death.
FORCE TEN FROM NAVARONE (1978)
WORSE THAN The Guns of Navarone itself.
Just stop and think about that.
HOLOCAUST (1980)
OR ANY other concentration camp mini-series which is just an excuse for some right-on actress to shave her head and suffer stoically (see: The Joan Of Arc Syndrome).
THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE (1974) /ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT (1980)
OR ANY other re-make of a war classic starring Richard ‘John Boy Walton’ Thomas.
Breaker Morant: Being Boer-ing
‘Have you got a light, Immac?’
Depilatory cream was unheard of when they made Battle Of Algiers!
Kirk Douglas (right) gets totally wired in Paths Of Glory
AWAKING DREAM
AWAKENINGS
THE PROLOGUE to this movie is cold, haunting and ominous.
Kids play in the snow, the seasons change but winter soon returns.
Randy Newman's stark musical theme gives the tableau a brightened sense of foreboding as one of the children seems to be losing his grip on life.
One day the others call for him but he's bedridden, he won't be coming out to play.
Not today, not tomorrow, not ever.
Cut to 1969, over 30 years later.
Dr Malcolm Sayer (Williams), a reclusive, emotionally repressed doctor more at home with plants than people, arrives at Bainbridge hospital in the Bronx.
The hospital is a ‘chronic care’ facility — meaning the patients are hopeless cases and the conditions are borderline adequate.
Sayer has come to work as a laboratory assistant but he's drawn to a group of patients scattered throughout the hospital.
Outwardly they are zombies — unable to move or talk — but Sayer believes there's life inside them all.
Battling with the hospital bureaucrats, he's finally permission to experiment using a new drug aimed at sufferers of Parkinson disease called L Dopa.
Leonard Lowe (De Niro), the kid from the opening scenes, is the first patient to undergo treatment…
Structured with detailed sensitivity, Penny Marshall's follow-up to her debut Big is a moving elegy to the enduring capacity of the human spirit.
Based on the true story recounted in Oliver Sacks' book,Awakenings is the story of a real life miracle.
Because, in the summer of 1969, people who'd been consigned to the medical scrap heap, victims of the 1920s sleeping sickness or  encephalitic epidemic, really did take up their beds and walk.
For a short time they began to lead normal, fun-loving lives.
There's little in Marshall's CV to prepare you for the way this story, awash with sentimental pitfalls, is turned into a deeply stirring, full blooded drama.
In tandem with production designer Anton Furst (the mastermind behind Batman 's neo-gothic sets) Marshall evokes the impersonal attitude and oppressive atmosphere that prevails in medical institutions.
The idea of enclosed worlds is powerfully woven through the movie and the patients' dilemma effectively contracted with Sayer's own emotional development.
This is a movie about the fragility of relationships and hold on normality.
The various  patients',reactions to their awakenings fill out the picture.
Old ladies trapped in time imagine they are in 1929 and love's first blossoms are just around the corner, an old man feels angry and cheated that 40 years of his life have disappeared.
Lowe's mother, who has built her life around her son as a zombie, is thrown into shock and confusion when her son awakens…
This is a courageous work which eschews cheap shots, using comic touches and the motif of seasonal changes to develop the humbling theme.
Marshall's own father had a stroke while making the movie and the character Paula, who comes to visit her similarly stricken father, has obvious biographical resonance.
But that's purely incidental; as a director of actors Marshall, formerly Laverne of US sitcom Laverne & Shirley , has an ingenuity that's rare among her movie making (mainly male) peers.
The performances in Awakenings are marvellous.
Jazzman Dexter Gordon in his final role as the awakened musician/dreamer Rolando proves he could have not one but two brilliant careers, old stage trouper Gloria Harper gives her awakened mad flapper full flight and John Heard is a rock of cynicism as the hard bitten hospital administrator.
But where it really takes off is in the central performances by De Niro and Williams.
As Sayer, Williams carries the first half of the movie.
This is the role where he proves his worth with a characterisation which is by turns taciturn, compassionate and obsessed.
But Williams steps aside for the second half which belongs to De Niro.
For a while now the man they call the greatest living actor has seemed to be coasting.
Excellent as he was in GoodFellas , you couldn't help thinking that the understated menace required for the role came to him like second nature.
As Leonard Lowe he faces his biggest career challenge since Raging Bull .
At first, when the L Dopa starts to work and he signals his awakening with some familiar Dr Niro facial ticks and mannerisms you think he might be blowing it.
Gradually the performance builds into something extraordinary, a gallant voyage into uncharted territory.
Unlike Day Lewis in My Left Foot or Dustin Hoffman in Rain Man De Niro pulls of an internal and external transformation.
The movie pivots on not one but two such changes, and the result is exhaustingly cathartic, ultimately uplifting.
When Pauline Kael reviewed him as the bloated Jake La Motta in Raging Bull , she said that what De Niro was doing was certainly something, but she'd hesitate to call it acting.
His effect here inspires much the same reaction.
Truly barrier-breaking stuff.
Along the way he recreates Nicholson's grandstand rebel yell in One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest and confirms his repressed screen love persona in perhaps his sweetest, saddest relationship.
At the heart of Awakenings is a journey into the unknown, a journey which it suggests can only be undertaken with faith, understanding and dedication to humanity in all its ravaged, tormented wonder.
These qualities spring forth in every area of the movie and find their most brilliant focus in De Niro's performance.
It is another remarkable landmark in an extraordinary career, taking place in a movie that really warrants the achievement.
Wakey Wakey!:
De Niro and Williams in Awakenings
De Niro as Lowe on his first day out for 20 years
REELING AROUND
How long can he keep it up dept.
Zalman King , the soft porn peddler responsible for 9½ Weeks and Wild Orchid , is still at it.
His next pic Blue Movie Blue stars Nina Siemaszdo as a distressed 17-year-old who goes to work in a high class brothel after her junkie father dies.
Faith No More guitarist Jim Martin has blagged a central role in Bill And Ted's Excellent Adventure 2 .
The movie sequel, subtitled Bill And Ted Go To Mars , features the neanderthal guitar man as a space travelling, axe-wielding superhero.
Martin and his Faith No More buddies are also supplying several brand new songs for the movie's soundtrack.
Alec Baldwin , star of this week's release Miami Blues , has just signed a deal with Paramount to star in a series of hi-tech thrillers as CIA operative Jack Ryan in adaptations of Tom Clancy's novels Clear And Present Danger and Patriot Games .
Baldwin has already starred in the mega successful Clancy adaptations The Hunt For Red October .
Rappers Kid ‘N’ Play and Full Force are lined up to star in House Party 2 .
John Doe of X and Beastie Boy Adam Horovitz are supplying the sound track.
Meanwhile House Party producers Reggie and Warrington Hudlin are preparing a science fiction musical comedy with several as yet unspecified rap artists in starring roles.
Meanwhile,The Ramones ,Coati Mundi and Tone Loc join David (Buster Poindexter)Johannsen in the movie remake of antiquated TV series Car 54 ,Where Are You ?
Excellent: Big Jim Martin goes to space
THE ROAD HOME (aka LOST ANGELS)
THE CASTING of Beastie Boy and wanna-be-black rapper Adam Horowitz as a wanna-be white gang member lends an ironic edge to this otherwise dire teen movie.
Horowitz's adolescent angst is the usual stuff about ‘careless’ parents, pill-popping, losing your cherry, driving convertible cars into swimming pools, and rebelling against adult authority figures.
But this is also a flabby ‘problem picture’, a sketchy portrait of white middle class families cracking under the strain of an alienated Los Angeles lifestyle.
It's also an exposé of those private mental hospitals that specialise in ‘treating’ delinquent teenagers — as long as their medical insurance cover holds out.
Occasionally, the film hits the right note, but mostly the disenchanted teenagers seem merely petulant, while the parents and shrinks are portrayed as either feckless drunks or mercenary medics.
Hudson's operatic visual style is peculiarly ill-suited to the subject matter, rendering arty and distanced what needs to be hard-edged and immediate.
The result is a set of absurdly over-stylised set pieces, most of which lack either suspense or emotional credibility, or both.
Like most teen movies made by concerned middle-aged parents, this is as irrelevant as a Bing Crosby record at a Beastie Boys concert.
VIDEO
DICK TRACY
WARREN BEATTY's homespun cartoon played by real life characters is a film a clef of sorts.
Dick Tracy is a bland superhero cast in the actor's most flattering image of himself.
He befriends a battered child, stays faithful to Tess Truchart despite the show stealing advances of Madonna's Breathless Mahoney and takes on an all-star super cast of grotesques that include Al Pacino and Dustin ‘Mumbles’ Hoffman.
Despite the Hollywood in-jokes and the impressive visual sets, this grant indulgence soon fizzles out.
The Dick is limp, folks.
Beatty's Dick: limp
MARC BOLAN AND T-REX: Born To Boogie
SOUNDED LIKE a good idea — Mister Marc the silver-tongued rock ‘n’ roll pixie, Clown Prince of wig out rock poetry and sassy riff crazy singles caught in action back in his heyday.
But this 1972 concert film, interspersed with ‘accidental’(sic ) offstage scenes, is hardly an edifying addition to his memory.
Directed by none other than Ringo Starr (!) the first thing that Born To Boogie makes obvious is that, outrageous and intoxicating as they were on single, T-Rex were an appalling live band.
Perhaps frustrated at their teeny bop tag, anxious to prove their ‘real’ musical worth, they engaged in long, smelly, extended blues riffaramas (an 11-minute version of ‘Get It On’anyone?).
I guess it is mildly amusing to see Bolan's head emerge ghostlike from Elton John's piano as the guesting Reg hammers out ‘Children Of The Revolution’, though probably not for the right reasons and certainly not enough to detract from the leaden weight of the music.
Likewise, the ‘humorous’ offstage footage with Marc and Ringo goofing off (ie wasting our time) in a field playing ‘Jeepster’complete with a string quartet.
More self-indulgent self-important twaddle, the product of a rock star who really did believe his own press, his own myth.
If I didn't know better, I'd say Bolan and Starr were obviously partaking a bit too copiously at this time.
Release Slade In Flame now and show that big screen glam didn't have to be a total sham.
Rock pixie Marc goofs around for Ringo before another visit to the 12-bar
WARLOCK
GAUCHE, OVER the top t'witching and ‘woulding ham job with Julian Sands zapped way back to the 18th Century by Richard E Grant's title character.
Great fun if you don't take it too seriously and with effects as ludicrous as these you won't be able to.
WHITE ZOMBIE
A BELA Lugosi horror classic, derided when originally released back in 1932 but now hailed as his finest role.
Genuinely eerie feel permeates dreadful goings on amongst voodoo children of the Haitian mountain.
THEY LIVE
MODERN EXISTENTIALIST thriller played out in a ghoulish horror setting.
John's Carpenter's best movie since Assault On Precinct 13 follows a loner/drifter in Reagan's America.
Arriving at an itinerant workers’ hostel in LA he discovers the terrible truth about life when he happens upon a pair of magic sunglasses.
The shades reveal all yuppies to be pizza-faced aliens with newspapers and advertising slogans spewing forth conditioning propaganda (don't think/sleep/work).
Thankfully there are others also in the secret so the people have the power and the times they are a-changing…
Very funny and kind of inspiring.
‘This man is not Stevie Wonder!
He is a pizza-faced alien!’
The magic sunglasses reveal all in They Live
HOW DOES one involve Van Morrison in a show that basically wants to document and explain his ultra-hefty talents?
Maybe that's one reason why this show has been a few years in the making.
It could also have a bearing on its unusual style — no verbal testimonies from friends and colleagues, no old archive footage, just Van getting royally stoned on the music with some mates.
But such company!
The study begins with Van and Bob Dylan busking around the Acropolis, wacking ‘Crazy Love’ and ‘Foreign Window’off into the rarefied Athens air.
Morrison consequently goes genre-stomping, singing a great ‘Vanlose Stairway’ with the Danish Swing Band, and managing just as comfortably with The Chieftains for a try at ‘Raglan Road’.
The greatest treat though is to see Van with John Lee Hooker.
During a short spoken reminiscence, Van gets passionate about the blues and the powerful way he came to empathise with these guys.
Three decades on and he's still enthralled — he almost falls blubbering at John Lee's feet.
Van and Bob busking in Athens: an amusing yet titanic meeting of minds in One Irish Rover
LONG PLAY
EDITED BY STUART BAILIE
FRAZIER CHORUS
Ray
FRAZIER CHORUS, bless ‘em, have become something of an industry joke.
Permanently placed at Number 55 in the not-quite-so-top 100, they are destined to be remembered as yet another band Virgin failed to encourage into the charts (famous last words part 136).
This, of course, has nothing to do with the featherlight pop of the Brighton trio.
Judging a band by its chart position is clearly stupid, but Tim Freeman & Co's lack of commercial success has led to panic button A&R-ing in the form of the dance remix.
Oakenfold's version of ‘Cloud 8’ was the only well executed or timely attempt (coming as it did during last summer's mellow months), and is included on the four track limited edition giveaway, ‘The Baby Album’.
Thankfully, ‘Ray’(cutely named after their manager) follows the path taken by their excellent '89 debut, ‘Sue’.
It showcases the talents of Freeman, his sardonic wit and deadpan delivery resembling a dope-addled John Lydon.
Trapped in the revolving world of afternoon TV, this is a man who would have quite happily recorded the LP from the comfort of his bed had they been able to fit it in the studio.
The music (marshalled by Ian Broudie) also has a perverse appeal, flutes whistling and horns parping to the synthetic groove.
‘All The Air’ signals the timely return of the waltz to popular music, while ‘We Love You’echoes with deep double bass and stuttering bass pattern.
There are few genuine surprises, the pace remaining consistent and the mood whimsical throughout.
Timidity in pop will get you nowhere, but it makes for great listening.
A Chorus of approval
VARIOUS
The Comic Relief Big Red Tape
THIS SHOULD be crap.
Everything about Comic Relief '91 points to imminent crapness.
If the very best single they can come up with is a double A-side featuring Hale & Pace (Britain's unfunniest men) doing ‘The Stonk’, and Victoria Wood stretching that tired Ovaltine and slippers persona to new depths of smugness, then March 15 could be a very depressing day indeed.
However all is not lost, since this 20-minute, £1.99 tape is a thing of uncommon usefulness.
For Harry Enfield fans anyway.
Around some recycled comedy songs (French & Saunders do Abba, Lenny Henry milks his dull Theophilus P Dickjoke character, and Spitting Image donate a voice or two), Hazza Enfield and Paul Whitehouse recreate their finest hour(s) ie ‘Smashie’ and ‘Nicey’the Radio FAB FM deejays — and it's all new material!
Needless to say (if you saw the BBC2 series), this inexhaustible well of fun is pure genius, as the two nasal, patronising, Tory airheads (based on all of Fluff Freeman, DLT and Simon Bates' most heinous crimes) turn ‘chit chat’ and ‘being MAD’into a way of (avoiding) life.
To borrow from our hosts, it's ‘STONKINGLY CHARITABULOUS’!
Easy digs at Our Tune (TM), roadshows, funny phone-characters and ‘charidy ’ in general are effortlessly carried into sublime new areas thanks to H and P's ‘phenomenal’knack for Radiospeak.
The other stuff's crap, by the way.
But thank the God Of Comedy (Bob Mortimer, probably) that there is now a way of giving money to Comic Relief and laughing on the bus.
Tape-tastic.
THE PRAYER BOAT
Oceanic Feeling
AT THAT difficult and defiant age of 19, it is perhaps quite extraordinary that The Prayer Boat have chosen to study so closely the catalogues of The Waterboys and Van Morrison — old men, of their fathers' generation.
‘Oceanic Feeling’ is The Prayer Boat's first album.
It was written in the foothills of the Wicklow mountains in Ireland, and is almost entirely acoustic-based.
It will probably be the least fashionable release of the year.
(More folk than poke).
But I kind of like it anyway.
Overall, the record has a spacious, gracious, soothing feel.
The Prayer Boat don't write songs, so much as swells of piano and guitar which float the peculiar Mike Scott-like voice of Emmet Tinley.
The weakness of ‘Oceanic Feeling’ lies in its clean, compressed production.
Even the pointed vocal melodies of its strongest tracks, ‘Stopping The World’ and ‘Upside Down’, do not cut out of the level bed of instrumentation.
Five guest musicians contribute cello, violin, flute, sax and percussion, but these cameos find no feature in the one-dimensional mix either.
The album is devoid of both highlight and bite.
There is a promise, and strength of quality in their songwriting, but The Prayer Boat appear to have some way to paddle before they find a grasp of the studio techniques they will need to coax real spirit from their music.
BAROQUE OF AGES
REM
Out of Time
WITH THEIR last album, ‘Green’, REM reached an important turning point.
In the space of six short years and over as many albums, the group had reached a natural peak; from humble indie college campus roots to masters of the musical universe.
Where could they go next?
The airwaves and the stadia had been conquered, and claims they were the greatest rock'n'roll band in the world hardly seemed outlandish.
They chose to dismantle themselves and start from scratch all over again, rather than take the easy route of formulaic consolidation of their position.
As Michael Stipe sang on ‘World Leader Pretend’, ‘I built this wall, and I will be the one to knock it down’.
REM are back after a period of self-imposed reinvention, and ‘Out Of Time’ is easily their most eclectic and wildly inspired album yet, although it is still very identifiably REM — a brand new book from a familiar author.
‘Out Of Time’ represents the aural equivalent of a cabinet reshuffle.
Berry, Buck, Miles and Stipe exchanged instruments for parts of ‘Green’, but here the whole writing, rehearsal and recording process sees them taking on new roles within their democracy.
It's also the first time that outsiders have been allowed into their close-knit community.
Where previously REM have relied on their unique four-way telepathy to create their masterworks, ‘Out Of Time’ welcomes a string quartet into the picture and there are outstanding contributions from rapper KRS-1 and Kate Pierson of The B-52s.
Pierson is particularly effective on the closing ‘Me In Honey’, a charming and frantic duet with Stipe accompanied by a relentless acoustic guitar riff, and the bubbly single-in-waiting ‘Shiny Happy People’.
The latter opens with a lilting waltz before breaking into a sun-drenched pop anthem, a warm and welcome blood relative to The B-52s' own ‘Love Shack’.
As Kate, Michael and Mike Mills each have a crack at the title line, Peter Buck offers one of his neatest trademark guitar hooks.
KRS-1 weighs in on the opening ‘Radio Song’, predictably the most curious and out of character track, which switches from gentle Velvet Underground strumming to anxious funk workout.
It's also the album's most lyrically pointed song, Stipe offering a slight return to the eco-concerns of ‘Green’ as he bemoans the banality of pop radio while ‘the world is collapsing around our ears’.
The other major departure on ‘Out Of Time’ is Mike Mills stepping forward to take the lead vocal on two tracks: the cheery garage pop of ‘Near Wild Heaven’and the bloodrush charge of ‘Texarcana’, which evokes memories of the days of ‘Reckoning’.
Stipe continues to take a back seat on ‘Endgame’, a largely instrumental piece with horns and strings taking centre stage while the singer ululates in the wings.
As diverse as the music may be, there is a seam of despondency in Stipe's words, a world-weary tone of resignation.
‘This could be the saddest dusk I've ever seen’ he laments on ‘Half A World Away’, while the desolate ‘Low’sees him in gloom overdrive to a bass and bongos backing.
The bleakest moments prove to be highlights after several listens; the obtuse spoken narrative of ‘Belong’ possesses a strange macabre quality, while the tortuous vocal of ‘Country Feedback’could be Neil Young at his most psychotic.
Stipe sings for the main part in the first person, though it's unclear if he's taking on a character or being genuinely autobiographical for the most part.
The hit single ‘Losing My Religion’ is likely to be read as self-reflection on REM's position in the worldwide musical scheme of things, doubt and discomfort at the prospect of unwanted disciples: ‘Oh no, I've said too much/I haven't said enough’is the paradox that runs throughout.
If the baroque instrumentation (Buck gets to play his beloved mandolin on several occasions) and the special guest spots are REM's way of breaking free from the expectations of others, it seems unlikely to dilute the adulation they've enjoyed or endured since the days of ‘Document’ at least.
The greatest rock'n'roll band tag may have been uncomfortable to live with in the past, but this album will not make the title any easier to shift.
Contrary to the record's title, REM are not out of time.
They've gone through a carefully planned period of transition to keep things interesting for themselves, and their time is about to start again.
THE RAILWAY CHILDREN
Native Place
CALL ME old, call me antiquated, but I remember a time when The Railway Children were, if not quite press darlings, then at least going on the occasional date with the media.
They were on Factory, they were churning out some debonair guitar pop in the form of ‘Brighter’ and ‘A Gentle Sound’and they were liked .
Then they signed to Virgin and the Mighty Lemon Drops syndrome struck with a vengeance, ensuring that, up until‘Every Beat Of The Heart’ meandered chartwards, policemen wouldn't even speak to The Railway Children let alone arrest them.
And really, in spite of the quartet's realised commercial capabilities, this cunning reissue proves precisely why they were ignored for so long.
The problem with ‘Native Place’ is there is absolutely bugger all wrong with it.
Dominated by Gary Newby's Freemans catalogue vocals, there isn't a chord or a shimmering crescendo out of place.
This is music that doesn't fart, belch or sweat, a handful of songs which don't so much live as exist , patiently.
Sure, ‘Something So Good’ and ‘Harbour Force’are thoroughly adequate on a headnodding level, vaguely emotional and politely insistent the both of them.
‘You're Young’ carries itself glacially.
Polite and featherlight, this is the record you can take home and make your parents' goes tap along to.
They'd call it Beatpop.
I'll settle for calling it beaten .
SUNSONIC
Melting Down On Motor Angel
THE FLOWERPOT Men used to make minimalism seem like overkill.
When Adam Peters and Ben Watkins changed their band's name to Sunsonic they maintained this virtue to release a couple of refined, ambient, floating singles.
Sadly they also peddled some overblown crap.
Having found technology they seemed somewhat confused.
Techno-heads claim they abused technology to become a poor man's Beloved.
Sunsonic had also wandered too far from the indie path to be appreciated.
In short they were lost.
Unfortunately, ‘…
Motor Angel’ is two-thirds throbbing directionless pop where the vocals sound like Billy Idol, even more bewildering because the remaining third is outrageously good.
When Sunsonic retreat to ambience and minimalism they are untouchable.
‘Memories’ has a pitter patter drum pattern and eloquent, moody Depeche Mode synth line backed by some Sylvian style crooning.
‘Head Of Sand’ takes you on a soothing train journey that never reaches its destination but the seats are real comfy.
The closing track, ‘Shay Shay’, is the best; muttered vocals, wave noises and a twinkling star guitar line.
Sunsonic should forsake the pomp and strip down their sound.
After listening to this it's obvious there's still hope.
TALULAH GOSH
They've Scoffed The Lot
‘THEY WERE based in Oxford and much disliked,’ proclaims the press release accurately.
For Talulah Gosh were always portrayed as the epitome of anorak-wearing, twee ‘C86’ pop, frivolous indie kids giving rock'n'roll an uncomfortably cute name.
All mainly true, of course, but Talulah Gosh were also fizzy, inconsequential fun and smart articulators of nervy adolescence.
This nine-track mini-album twins two Radio 1 sessions from the beginning (August '86) and end (January '88) of their slightly less-than-brilliant career.
The '86 songs are, to be honest, a bit too sugary, especially the monumentally drippy ‘Looking For A Rainbow’.
Nevertheless, ‘Do You Remember’ stomps along endearingly and the version of ‘Talulah Gosh’, with its uncertain changes of pace, is a neat blueprint of the later single.
A year-and-half later, though, with Eithne replacing Elizabeth as second vocalist, the sound has toughened up substantially.
There's little dawdling to sniff flowers now, just giddy, breakneck pop; ‘In Love For The Very First Time’ is gushing and gossipy, while ‘Be Your Baby’is '60s girl group sentiment wised up and flung into the backroom of the Camden Falcon.
On the hurtling ‘Break Your Face’, Amelia even makes highly unlikely threats of violence.
In a bad mood, ‘They've Scoffed The Lot’ probably sounds rubbish, but, for all those who fought in the Shambling Wars, it's worth a rash.
DONNY OSMOND
Eyes Don't Lie
GROWING OLD is a terrible business for most of us at the best of times.
If you happened to be megafabulously famous way back at the start of the '70s, the problems are literally multiplied twentyfold.
If you're lucky you'll strike it rich like Gary Glitter (Are you sure?— Ed).
If fate is against you, you'll be joining Les ‘Bay City Roller’ McKeown for a tragic appearance on Jim'll Fix It .
And if you manage to retain all of your marbles, you might possibly be as street-sussed as Donny Osmond.
Y'see, ‘Eyes Don't Lie’ is so blatantly aware of current fashions Donny could well have been created specifically for the job by a record mogul Frankenstein.
At times, his resemblance to George Michael isn't just striking, it's out on long-term industrial action.
And the title track sounds like nowt less than Prince kicking a passing pauper's head in.
More than that, the Donny of the '90s is sufficiently mature and (deep voice) masculine to cause Tom Jones sleepless nights worrying about his own sexuality.
‘Never Too Late’ is a virile, pump action beast of a rock song: ‘Sure Looking’is a pheromone-fizzing funk workout; ‘Private Affair’is the Big Soul number, the last buttock-groper at the Sainsbury's Chrimbo disco; and, most thrusting of all, is ‘My Love Is A Fire’, a steaming sauna of crunching beats and lascivious guitar tremors.
Forget ‘Puppy Love’—‘Eyes Don't Lie’ is a series of doggy-style shags.
Shame then that underneath the sheen of sweat, it isn't actually very good.
Don't call us, Don — your phone's been cut off.
Railway Children: no good tracks
George Michael?…
Cliff?…
Hasbeen
JOHNNY CASH
The Mystery Of Life
…
OR THE legend continues.
Consigned to the obituary column more times than he's popped a pill or praised the Lord, Johnny Cash continues to confound critics and medical science by bouncing back every year with a new triumph.
Since the dawn of a new era, when he signed for Phonogram in 1985, he's been making records which don't shame his reputation and often add to it.
Masterminded once again by his redoubtable friend, producer and self-proclaimed ‘musical masseur’ Cowboy Jack Clement, ‘Mystery Of Life’has the downhome feel and thoughtful song selection of the rejuvenated Cash.
Cash is a road addict whose finest moments are usually to be savoured in live performance.
Last year in London's Kilburn National he gargled his way through an entire set with a bad throat infection.
The show ended with an ovation from the audience and an apology from the singer.
Then he came out and played the whole set again, miraculously cured, singing brilliantly.
Nothing quite so staggering happens here but for followers of Cash (the man, the myth) this record manages to be inspiring, pointed and impassioned.
Cash's records work best as biopics, his voice can turn words into a movie.
‘The Greatest Cowboy’ sails close to parody, rewriting ‘Ghost Riders In The Sky’, but the big brooding figure comes clear in ‘I'm An Easy Rider’, stands proud on the Southern sense of place anthem ‘Hey Porter’.
On another revival, ‘Beans For Breakfast’, he's a bear with a sore head, a deserted ‘hungry, lonely nasty man’.
Cash freely revives his back catalogue, fine by me — he gives them new life and a new generation deserves to hear where Nick Cave got ‘Wanted Man’ from.
The best new Cash here is ‘Going By The Book’ where Biblical storied and Gulf War reports collide, weighty concerns that match his stentorian, testifying tones.
Songwriting genius Tom T Hall's duets on the masterful ‘I'll Go Somewhere And Sing My Songs Again’.
The latter is an evocative nature ballad and a poignant portrait of the artist at sunset but the forecast says Cash will be mining riches and holding back the black night for many years to come.
Johnny Cash: the comeblack (ha!)
BLACK SUN ENSEMBLE
Elemental Forces
HENRY KAISER
Hope You Like Our New Direction
TO CREATE their latest batch of songs, Black Sun Ensemble look to the desert wasteland of Tucson, Arizona, to think about the end of civilisation, the futility of war and how to sound like Marillion.
The sun has obviously boiled their brains dry —‘Elemental Forces’ is a work of warped hippy ideals and punky ferocity that occasionally slips into a groove of plotted madness.
Black Sun Ensemble rely on the kind of guitar sound that floats almost too closely into jazz fusion territory.
However BSE manage to bridge such obstacles with style, ease and flair.
An almost remarkable achievement, even though you feel as though you've been in their bedroom before in a different life.
To date Henry Kaiser has appeared on over 80 albums.
For his latest he ropes in some 27 guest artists including John ‘Drumbo’ French (formerly Captain Beefheart's drummer), Bruce Anderson and Richard Thompson.
‘Hope You Like Our New Direction’ is worth buying for their version of David Essex's ‘Rock On’which has to be the best, and most elaborate, version of a pop song recorded.
Rather than emulate the original, Kaiser and his cronies turn David's innocent little rebellious rocker into a full blown free-form jazz improvisation piece that chugs along for over 12 minutes.
A hit perhaps for Kaiser here?
That'll be the day.
CHEF JAM!
THE KITCHENS OF DISTINCTION
Strange Free World
FOR STARTERS, forget the painfully wacky name.
Though perhaps easiest pigeonholed as an ‘indie guitar band’, that's where nearly all the comparisons between The Kitchens and the bulk of their contemporaries end.
Not for them chirpy whelk stall amateurism or cheerful under-achieving.
KOD belong to and older and, dare I say, bolder tradition of British independent rock stretching back through The Bunnymen, The Banshees, The Cocteau Twins and The Smiths.
‘Strange Free World’ is a neon-lit switchback rider after too long in the grime of squatterdom.
The secret of exciting pop lies in corralling a succession of brilliant moments.
Moments that you want to revel in again and again.
This record is chocka with them.
Two bars of ‘Railwayed’ and you're on the edge of your seat.
The sound is fearless and intrepid, and the whole album teems with stratospheric energy, just the right side of grandiose.
‘Stadium indie’…which might explain why the Americans are taking to this with such gusto.
With less talent underpinning it, this could be arty bombast, but the strength of the ideas, the fire of the delivery, turns it into something majestic.
Enough flattery.
More moments.
The first ten seconds of ‘Hypnogogic’ recreate the mystery world of Wire in their heyday.
All of ‘He Holds Her, He Needs Her’ is an unreconstructed pop thrill built around some implausibly fab arpeggios.
‘Gorgeous Love’,(that dare not speak its name, natch) is ecstatic in the best sense of that mauled word.
On the other hand, ‘Polaroids’, a basically sound tune, is carrying several pounds of unwanted flab around the rear end and ‘Within The Daze of Passion’ over-stretches a rather minor point.
Not that this will matter when you get to the closing track ‘Under The Sky, Inside The Sea’ which belies its Walter Softy title by being quite stunning.
When, defying logic, the Burt Bacharach horns come in, it's the pop moment at its life-affirming best.
Yesterday the Fulham Greyhound, tomorrow the world.
Shifting (kitchen) units: no dissing the Distinctions!
CACTUS RAIN
In Our Own Time
ANNIE HOGAN formed Cactus Rain in the summer of '89.
An impish musical visionary who'd previously worked alongside Marc Almond and Barry Adamson, she enlisted the help of vocalist Frances Adie and ex-Tommy Chase Quartet keyboard player Teddy Edwards.
Their influences were spot on— Scott Walker, John Barry, Nina Simone, Tony Benn and Liverpool FC among others — and their early gigs a whirlwind of piano and percussion.
A major deal has come, but sadly Edwards has departed, removing some of the band's jazzier elements.
‘In Our Time’, nevertheless, is an astute record, standing tall among pygmies.
The genuine craft of Hogan's songwriting is in her re-interpretation of the classic pop song.
While some seek to emulate their heroes, wallowing in idle retrospection, she blends past and present with immaculate precision.
‘Hopes And Fears’, an ocean of strings (courtesy of The Reggae Philharmonic Orchestra), is set against the more pizzicato rhythms of ‘Self’.
Their first single ‘Mystery Train’ is restructured with bleeps and beats to sound altogether moodier, while ‘Senses’is one of those emotional anthems that sits at the end of the set.
Although there are no perceptible weak links in this collection, the band may need to be wary of overburdening every track with intricate musical twists and turns.
That apart, this is an extremely assured debut.
Cactus reign?
DO THEY MEAN ‘EXODUS’?
BOB MARLEY died ten years ago this May.
Island Records, never the exploiters of Marley's music some believe (Lee Parry once claimed on quickly deleted vinyl that the company ‘Kill Bob Marley and take away his royalties’), have recently issued the ‘Talkin' Blues’ album of out-takes, and last year released several Marley albums afresh on tape and CD.
Now, in a more concerted effort to get the Marley message across, all his Island albums have been re-pressed in all formats on Marley's own Tuff Gong label, now part of Island itself.
No matter what the individual records might be like in themselves, the ten studio albums, two live LPs and two compilations represent a major body of work.
And with the possibilities for more stuff like the fine ‘Talkin' Blues’ limitless, Marley's legacy still has a big future in the marketplace.
‘Catch A Fire’, recorded in 1972 –'73,; was Marley's first Island LP.
Although he had already recorded enough material to allow six albums (never mind dozens of songs on singles) to be released, only two of those albums, ‘Soul Revolution’ and ‘Soul Rebels’, were recorded specifically with the intention of album release.
But these were grassroots reggae music, and ‘Catch A Fire’ represents the first time that Marley — or indeed any reggae artist other than Jimmy Cliff — had ever been given the budget that a rock band got to record an LP.
‘Catch A Fire’ still features the ‘original Wailers’Peter Tosh and Bunny Wailer, together with the Barrett Brothers rhythm section.
While this is raw, stunning stuff, it falls slightly between two stalls, that of the rich, commercially viable material recorded later, and the roots material he was recording for Tuff Gong singles, and the version of ‘Midnight Ravers’ to be found here is considerably inferior to the Jamaican 45 release.
But with Bunny Wailer oddly quiet in the writing stakes and Tosh contributing only the previously recorded ‘400 Years’, this is Marley's show, and on ‘Concrete Jungle’, ‘Slave Driver’ and ‘Stir It Up’, no-one could argue that this is not a fascinating record.
‘Burnin'’, cut in 1973, is a far more coherent package, containing Marley and Tosh barking ‘Get Up Stand Up’, Bunny Wailer's sublime ‘Hallelujah Time’, versions of Marley classics ‘Small Axe’, ‘Duppy Conqueror’ and ‘Put It On’, plus the menacing ‘Burnin' And Lootin'’, and ‘I Shot The Sheriff’, the song that proved his commercial potential when covered by Eric Clappedout.
In fact, ‘I shot The Sheriff’ was merely a Marleyised version of the storyline in a song that The Wailers had used as a vocal showcase since the late '60s, The Impressions' ‘Keep On Moving’.
It's a shame that the Wailers trio broke up soon after ‘Burnin'’ came out: two albums into their new role they were already totally on top of the situation.
For many, the first reggae album they bought was 1974's ‘Natty Dread’.
Now denuded of Tosh & Bunny Wailer, Marley was supported by the experienced but deliberately chanty female trio the I-Threes.
Containing the first studio cut of ‘No Woman No Cry’, versions of early Jamaicans singles ‘Belly Full’, ‘Bend Down Low’, ‘Natty Dread’ and ‘Lively Up Yourself’, this is, superficially, a simple set of songs that went against the grain of the mesmeric dub that was then dominating reggae.
But the arrangements are becoming a little more fulsome, drum machines (the innovation of bass players Family Man Barrett) appear on two tracks, and the band are getting more writing credits.
A revolution was brewing.
It arrived with ‘Live’.
The 1975 Lyceum concerts were not the first Walters shows in London, but the impact with which they hit still has implications for reggae today.
The Wailers were the first true self-contained live act in reggae not dependent on any pick-up members and capable of blowing away any other band in the world.
The stately measure of the band, who were not particularly loud, was the steady, elegant funk they put into the music; they didn't need flashness or speed to get across.
‘Live’ delivered a hit single in ‘No Woman No Cry’and put Marley into the album charts for the first time.
Reggae, other than as a nutty dance medium, had arrived.
Although ‘Rastaman Vibration’ did not get universally good notices on release in 1976, time has offered it a better response.
Containing the aching ‘Johnny Wax’, the much-covered ‘Crazy Baldhead’, a version of the rare ‘Man To Man’ in ‘Who The Cap Fit’, and an adaptation of a Selassie speech, ‘War’, that fitted perfectly with Marley's Rasta and freedom doctrines, ‘Rastaman Vibration’was not as easy going and energetic as its predecessors.
Marley  spent much of his time away from Jamaica after being shot by raiders, and as a consequence his popularity dipped there to the benefit of Big Youth and Jacob Miller.
But '76 did see Marley in the US album charts, a hitherto unimaginable feat.
1977's ‘Exodus’ finds Marley and band at the peak of their creativity.
Side One is pure philosophy from ‘Natural Mystic’ to the complex title track, through ‘Guiltiness’and ‘The Heathen’, militant songs with a powerful drop.
Side Two contains four once and future hit singles: ‘Jamming’, ‘Waiting in Vain’, ‘Three Little Birds’ and ‘One Love/People Get Ready’.
Intriguingly, the sessions for the album began at Lee Perry's Black Ark studio, but very little of the material was ever released.
Had the set been finished there, we might have got an album of more intensity but without commercial success —‘Exodus’ was on the UK album charts for over a year.
1978's ‘Kaya’ was a massive seller, delivering ‘Satisfy My Soul’and ‘Is This Love’to the charts, but generally it found Marley coasting.
There is a curiously dull feel to the LP, like Marley was burnt-out like the spliff on the back.
It would take the One Love Peace Concert and a trip to Ethiopia to rejuvenate him.
The live double album, ‘Babylon By Bus’(named after an NME headline) was an equally dull affair.
(Both 6)
‘Survival’ was an altogether more militant record, released in 1979 and focusing on Zimbabwe where Marley would soon play the official independence ceremony.
‘Wake UP And Live’, ‘So Much Trouble’, ‘Ambush’ and ‘One Drop’are all classics, cut with the dry, unfussy sound that Tuff Gong specialised in.
1980's ‘Uprising’ was Marley's last completed album, a patchy affair but still bearing some great songs like ‘Bad Card’, the gutsy ‘Work’, ‘Redemption Song’and the hit ‘Could You Be Loved’, taken at an unusually rapid tempo.
The gaunt picture on the back tells a story that few understood at the time: Marley was being eaten by cancer.
‘Confrontation’, issued in 1983, was a pretty fair posthumous set.
Tracks like ‘Buffalo Soldier’, ‘Trench Town’ and ‘Rastaman Live Up’deserved to see release, although once again other versions of the tracks remain in the can, like the cut of ‘Stiff Necked Fools’that marked current reggae rulers Steely & Clevie's recording debut together.
The two compilation albums, 1984's ‘Legend’ and 1986's ‘Rebel Music’are carefully packaged for two different markets, the former offering 14 hits, the latter ten roots songs.
They make a fair introduction to Marley's music, but for the true man try ‘Exodus’ or ‘Burnin'’.
Marley never stood still and reggae did not die with him, but it has changed.
For a nostalgia that still strikes a chord today, here he is.
Marley's ghost: still sending out rastaman vibrations
NME GIG GUIDE
Having returned from his transatlantic jaunt to Peru, singer Lee Mavers leads THE LA's on their biggest UK tour yet, to promote their current Go!
Discs 45 ‘Feelin'’.
Following the success of last year's eponymous debut LP, the Scouse three-piece have been busily constructing their own home studio and working on new material expected before the Summer.
They visit Edinburgh Network  Support on all dates comes from The Milltown Brothers.
Recent major signings OCEAN COLOUR SCENE first surfed into the indie charts last summer with the delightfully trippy ‘Sway’.
Tipped for the top by A&R folk as soon as they showed their faces in the capital, their label Phffft! was snapped up in a deal with Phonogram, and their second single, a four track EP led by ‘Yesterday Today’ is out this week.
They play Leicester University 
TWT
THIS WAS THEN
MARCH 13
1781 Uranus discovered.
1960 Adam Clayton, bassist with U2, born in Dublin.
1969 George Harrison and Patti Harrison are arrested on charges of marijuana possession, after police raid their empty London home and find 120 joints.
MARCH 14
1971 The Rolling Stones play a farewell concert at The Roundhouse, Chalk Farm, London, before becoming tax exiles in France.
1981 Eric Clapton is hospitalised in St Paul, Minnesota, with stomach ulcers and is forced to cancel a four month US tour.
1989 American radio stations ban Cat Stevens records following his support of Ayatollah Khomeini's call for the execution of Satanic Verses author Salman Rushdie.
However, Muslim ex-singer Stevens, now Yusuf Islam's reaction was anything but angry: ‘I've been trying to get record companies to stop selling my records for a long time.
This is saving me the trouble.’
MARCH 15
1944 Sly Stone (Sylvester Stewart) born Dallas, Texas
1962 Terence Trent D'Arby born in Florida
1975 Marc Bolan and Mickey Finn disband T-Rex
1980 Rude Boys, the fictionalised documentary film about a Clash roadie, which they disowned, opens in London.
MARCH 16
1970 Tammi Terrell, who duetted on Marvin Gaye records, dies in Philadelphia undergoing a brain tumour operation after collapsing on stage in his arms.
1975 Aaron T-Bone Walker, bluesman who pioneered the modern day guitar, dies of pneumonia in LA aged 65.
1977 A&M Records drop The Sex Pistols only a week after signing them, due to bad press.
They walk away with £40,000.
1979 Elvis Costello and Bonnie Bramlett (of Delaney & Bonnie) come to blows after a racialist argument at the Holiday Inn in Columbus, Ohio.
MARCH 17
1944 John Sebastian, bespectacled singer and guitarist with The Lovin' Spoonful, born in Greenwich Village, New York.
1982 Teddy Pendergrass in a critical condition in hospital after crashing his Rolls Royce into a tree.
MARCH 18
1941 Wilson Pickett, R&B singer most famous for ‘In The Midnight Hour’, born Pratville, Alabama.
1965 The Rolling Stones are fined £5 each for urinating in a garage forecourt after a concert in Romford, Essex.
1972 Ringo Starr films Marc Bolan and T-Rex in concert at Wembley Empire Pool, for the film, Born to Boogie.
Said a daily newspaper: ‘The Beatles and the Stones may have had similar scenes but even they could never have induced bullet-headed toughies with flat noses and bovver boots to wear stick-on gold stars round their eyes.’
1977 The Clash and Elvis Costello release their respective debut singles, ‘White Riot’ and ‘Less Than Zero’.
MARCH 19
1976 Paul Kossoff, former guitarist with Free, dies in his sleep during a flight from London to LA.
1980 Elvis Presley's autopsy report is subpoenaed by the US courts investigating gross over-subscription of drugs by his former doctor, George Michopoulos.
1982 Randy Rhoades, guitarist for Ozzy Osbourne, is killed along with Ozzy's hairdresser, when his plane crashes into a house near Orlando, Florida after buzzing their tour bus.
‘I'm gonna get me a gun’: Cat Stevens (with pistol) and fellow '60s hot-shots Hendrix, Gary Walker Brother and, erm, Engelbert Humperdinck.
A BOY NAMED SUE
The Bangles have split and SUSANNA HOFFS has gone OTT sexy…erm, sorry,natural .
DAVID QUANTICK gets down to his underwear to talk with the girl Bowie forgot.
Susanna Hoffs strolls across her posh hotel room and shakes hands.
She has the sort of smile that makes you think that any minute now she's going to put her head on one side, but she never does.
The record company folk who have been talking Gulf and eating her sarnies leave and Susanna draws up a chair, sits on it cross-legged and starts to play with her hair, twisting it and knitting it.
By the end of the interview she will have plaited it into a handy living-room rug, but for now Susanna wants to talk about her NME photo session.
‘I enjoyed it!’ she beams.
‘It was fun!
We just got creative with it.
In The Bangles’ day, it was like — another photo session, four girls against the wall, let's get it over with, kind of thing.’
She frowns and then beams again.
‘But this one we had fun.
It's gonna look like Helmut Newton!’
HOFFS WAS the Bangle who looked, er, ‘cute’, sang lots of hits and got a solo deal last year which has just resulted in the brilliant (and witty) LP ‘When You're A Boy’, containing both Bowie's ‘Boys Keep Swinging’— hence the name — and the steamy-ish hit single ‘My Side Of The Bed’— hence the UK visit.
Susanna likes being a solo artist.
‘It's really fun,’ she smiles, plaiting furiously.
‘There were so many tensions in The Bangles, in the sense of so many artistic restrictions to make things right politically.
The whole thing became an exercise in what you can't do, not what you can do.
It wasn't very appealing to me.’
At the end The Bangles — Hoffs, Michael Steele and sisters Debbi and Vicki Peterson — were at each other 's throats, fighting, swearing and sending each other sheep's heads in the mail.
Except, of course, they weren't.
‘No!
Not at all,’ frowns Hoffs.
‘I think there was a lot of loyalty and desire for the marriage to work out, particularly between Vicki and I. I mean, you'd think that the two sisters would have bonded together against everyone, but there would be different…coalitions.
These words keep coming into my head!’
Susanna pulls herself together.
It's a pop war she wants to talk about.
‘I think the biggest problems were between Debbi and I, not to name names…’ she confides to a nation.
‘But I think because she was in her big sister's band, Debbi always felt very frustrated.
She wanted to be in the band so bad she said ‘I'll play drums’.
‘She was lucky and talented and she could do that, but I don't think she ever wanted to be a drummer…
Not to psychoanalyse her in any way, but we all became the Big Sisters to Debbi.
A lot of times Vicki and I would agree and she would object.’
The Bangles' famed ‘gimmick’ was that they were Four Chicks.
It was an angle that caused them to fall apart in the end.
Democracy in pop works about as well as golf in space.
In Britain, all bands are made up of burly chaps whose pent-up emotions cause them to split up by post and be rude to the bass player in print rather than face the separation.
In California, Susanna Hoffs had no such hang-ups.
‘We had a completely decent band meeting.
Debbi was like ‘yes, I'm completely miserable but what do you mean, break up the band?’’ says Susanna before turning into a hippy.
‘My basic feeling was that we were all unhappy.
I said, each person sitting in this room is entitled to their emotions and if you're unhappy then you should do something about it, because you can't carry on this way with this tension, it's not productive, it's not fun…‘
So the Bangles disbanded and Hoffs walked into the sunset, a thousand corporate cheque books glinting behind her in the sun's twilight glow.
The Bangles were, after all, a hot money-spinner for the big corpos.
One wonders if Susanna Hoffs is a brand name?
‘Not really,’ she says, a-twirling her raven locks.
‘In taking this on, there's a responsibility goes with it, sure, and it was a weird sensation at first being in the studio and feeling that if I wanted to fight for something with the producer, I didn't have any allies…
‘But I don't view what I do like a brand name thing.
People see Madonna almost like a corporation, as you say, but I think I'm just kind of winging it.
Listening to my instincts…‘
Certainly ‘When You're A Boy’ relies less than Bangles' albums on the collaboration of West Coast professional song writers like Billy Steinberg and Tom Kelly.
Hoffs goes simile mad again.
‘I think that's true.
When the marriage was over I was left with nothing.
This record was like going on lots of blind dates with new people…
I'd love to have a partner I could always work with.’
She could always ring David Bowie.
‘When You're A Boy’ features a very droll version of ‘Boys Keep Swinging’, as well as some seriously funny takes on '60s and '70s pop.
‘That all kinda balanced out that other side of me that's attracted to emotional songs,’ nods Hoffs.
‘and the whole '70s are making their way back and there's a lot of that in the record.
I intended it to have a lot of humour.
The Bowie thing was kinda like the spirit I did ‘Walk Like An Egyptian’ in.
The kind of songs I sit there and enjoy singing are like ‘Eternal Flame’, songs that have rich melodies.’
Susanna pauses for breath.
‘But ‘Boys Keep Swinging’ was like the spirit of Debbie Harry lives on, late '70s, weird, campy.
All I was into in the late '70s was Patti Smith, Iggy Pop, The Ramones…the whole New York art scene, the whole kind of post-Warhol, post-Velvet Underground thing.
‘Critics always prefer the things that are not pop,’ says Susanna, summing up 25 years of the music press in nine words.
‘But I can't resist looking back at the history of rock and having this addiction to the great pop music that's been made, whether it's T-Rex or Blondie.
People don't realise that in its own funny way, it's pop art.’
Talk of things that may or may not be art brings us on to the ever-popular topic, sex.
The Bangles were noted for their pouting and semi-clad image, were they not?
Susanna shakes her head.
‘The Bangles wanted to emphasise the rock'n'roll side of the band and in doing so thought regalia and kind of hippyish, Hendrix-style clothing was gonna put that image across, but it ended up looking very glamorous, it ended up looking glammier and glammier even though the intention was for it not to be glamour…
With me I wanted everything to be more natural.
Even though people are perceiving what I'm doing now as the sexy new me, I just feel like it's more…me .’
Indeed.
One has to ask, though — how many videos have you appeared in clad only in your underwear?
‘I don't know…
I never counted, really,’ Susanna ponders.
‘I've been talking to people about this, 'cos everyone thinks the video is so sexy, you know.
It's not something you go about consciously.
I'm not trying to sound sexy, but there's something about being on stage, being in front of a camera, that forces you to…’
Take  your clothes off?
(I muse but am too weedy to say.)
‘…deal with that relationship.
It can be a very uncomfortable thing, but part of showbusiness is coming to terms with performance, even if you're performing in front of the camera.
It's actually a pretty bizarre kind of thing.’
Hoffs twists some hair and goes for the sexism angle.
‘If you're a woman, you're under a lot more scrutiny about it.
If Mick Jagger is feeling himself out on stage in tight clothing, I'm sure he comes under attack in some way, er…
But if a girl turns up looking sexy, everyone thinks, are you using your sex to sell yourself?
And if you come in there looking like hell, then they say, my God, look at her , she just looks terrible .
Like they've done to Elizabeth Taylor or whoever.
I think it's difficult to be a women in that way.’
A close relation of a fair point there.
But Susanna is deeply interested in this bit.
‘Rock'n'roll opens up these floodgates,’ she insists.
‘We'd been doing the video for eight hours straight, everything was getting loose and they say, we wanna do a hand-held sequence, just go for it, run around the room and do whatever you want.
Something clicked in my head.’
Hoffs, er, went for it.
‘It was the first time I didn't have to worry what the other girls were gonna think, what anyone was gonna think and if I don't like what happens I can cut it out…
And I went to the video edit and they'd used almost everything from the sexy take, it was really over-the-top,’ she sighs.
‘It was too sexy for the song so I toned it down.’
SUSANNA HOFFS — who by temperament is probably not suited to avoiding glamour — is smart and very groovy.
‘When You're A Boy’ is one of the neatest LPs of the year so far and, it must be said, causes an awful lot of Bangles products to look like Barbie with a Rickenbacker.
Hoffs makes pasta twists with her hair.
‘I was always thinking in The Bangles, I have to be me, but there was this group image I had to conform to,’ she muses.
‘There was this group image I had to conform to,’ she muses.
‘There was this group unity we had to have that I felt lost in and I didn't really relate to.
I felt alienated even then…‘
Susanna beams.
‘And now I feel it's so nice to be free to try things.
If you do a photo session and you look ridiculous, it's just one day, you move on.
I don't feel I have to establish any one version of who I am, 'cos I don't know what that is, anyway.’
A future Queen of Pop, ma'am, is who you are.
Sexy new-look Susanna Hoffs practises pop-art with her mate Dave Bowie
HAY CHEWED…
Those four horny young mad cows CUD are in clover as they chew over their newfound ultra-trendiness despite the beefs about their drummer.
Heiff they the stomachs to milk their success?
Veal they have a steak in the future udderwise?
STEVEN WELLS investigates.
Ox Brownie: PETER WALSH
Carl Puttnam's beautiful Mick Hucknall-style russet locks bounce in time with the throbbing, sultry beat.
His powerful, soaring, soulful voice adds beauty to lyrics which precisely and poetically dissect the universal sexual experience.
He is a sensual being, everything about him and his music is an elegant dismissive wave of a scented lace hankie in the face of those who regard Cud as a joke band.
He is a pop panther, a rock dandy who combines the animal sexuality of Prince with the cocky swagger of the young Jagger.
And the greasy, scabby, crusty horrible fans all chant ‘YOU FAT BASTAD!
YOU FAT BASTAD!’ as a stage diver is thrown back on to the stage and Carl, who has removed his glasses in a rare moment of vanity, gets out of the way by blundering blindly into the snare drum.
This never happened to George Michael.
It should have done, but it didn't.
‘Thing is,’ says the grotesquely obese Carl in his duh-duh cockernee-Yorkshire mongrel fat bastard accent, ‘thing is, I'm not fat.’
I run my hands over his torso and count the ribs.
He's right, he has the body of a whippet topped by the face of a bulldog that's been given a severe kicking.
He is, in fact, a fat-faced bastard.
Before the gig, Cud munch shark steak and nut loaf, Mike Dunphy drives a pea to the edge of his plate and then points at me with his fishknife.
‘You said we were sexist!’
He's talking about the time I approached them at Leeds Poly and asked them why their logo featured women's breasts rather than the species-ist cow's udders I made them change it to.
‘We've heard you've got scrotal elephantiasis,’ says Carl.
It is true, I was a life-model for art classes at Leeds Poly when Cud were still students there.
They never drew me naked.
They would have remembered.
Yes, I have prostituted myself for the sake of art.
But I've never sold soiled knickers to Sunday Sport readers.
Steve Goodwin is The Drummer From Cud and he's pretending that he thinks it's a really cool joke ha ha ha that both he and the band he loves have become a synonym for wanky indie crap.
He even informs me that the correct expression, à la Viz , is ‘the drummer out of Cud’.
The truth is that for the first month of the NME s TDFC offensive he was totally paranoid.
Why me ?
What do they know about me?
Are they in cahoots with that mad biker From Leicester?
The Mad Biker from Leicester wants to kill The Drummer From Cud because TDFC boffed TMBFL's ‘main squeeze’.
‘When we played Leicester last time he was shitting it…’ says Mike.
Carl is also haunted.
Ever since Jonathan King took a whole line in The Sun to inform the world's thickest readership that ‘Cud are a decent band’, Carl has had a recurring nightmare.
‘Me mum and me dad are separated, like, and me dad reads The Sun .
I have this image of him going — narking ‘ell!
That's my san!
‘E mast be LOADED — and then getting on the next coach to Leeds to get all me money just like John Lennon's dad.’
Like The Beatles and the Stones and Talcy Malcy McLaren and Bernie ‘Clash’ Rhodes and just about everybody who's had a smidgeon of cool in Britpop, two of Cud were art students.
They were art students at the time when art college was the bolthole for all the drug-deranged bongo bashers, paint flingers, crappy experimental film-makers and fanny dancers who thought being a student was a great doss but they were  f—ed if they were going to read any books.
Nowadays things are different, the Happy Mondays are not an aft school band, Happy Mondays are the anti-art school band.
The whole Manc/baggy palaver was the first big wave of Britpop cool that's never owned an NUJ card.
That's partly because 30 years of pop culture have soaked the working classes with cool and partly because the present generation of art students, thanks to the cuts and the anti-Marxist/'60s/experimental backlash, are wankers.
‘When we went, Leeds Poly was full of dropouts and freaks and punks, y'know.
Now all the women have got long skirts and all the blokes have got really sensible haircuts, they all do oil painting and the music they like is shite.
When did you ever see a student wearing that Manc gear?
You don't do you?’
In the late '70s the arts departments of the Poly and University of Leeds spawned, amongst others, The Mekons, Delta 5, Severed Head And The  Neckf—ers , Zodiac Mindwarp, Ralph And The Ponytails, Dorothy's Cottage (an aggressively gay tuba combo), Sheeny And The Goys, The Gang of Four, The Three Johns and Soft Cell.
In the '70s and the '90s they've given us Crispin Twat's ‘Fruit Bowl in Oils’ and Cud — the last of the great art school rockers.
It's a fact — the Cuds are alright.
The last album —‘Leggy Mambo’— stonks.
The new single —‘Magic’— stonks also.
When Cud emerged from the womb every boring bastard white boy was playing ‘soul’.
They stood out then because they played — to quote one critic —‘spaz rock’.
They jerked and spasmed when they should have Red Wedged and Fred Perried.
Because they frolicked at the temple of Bootsy Collins and Hot Chocolate instead of worshipping at the shrine of Marvin Gaye.
And because they had a stupid name and a fat bastard with glasses for a singer.
‘People are always comparing us to Bogshed’, slurs Carl in the band van after the third encore and the obligatory dressing room conversation with two fully grown men with Baldrick haircuts, plastic carrier bags, tatty combat jackets, thick lensed NHS glasses and lots and lots of badges.
Oh how wonderful it must be to be an indie musician!
‘Awkward, angular.
We think we sound like a cross between INXS and Led Zeppelin and everybody else thinks we sound like  f—ing Bogshed.
I mean, ugh?’ he shrugs his shoulders and waves his beer and makes a geeky face.
‘I mean what do you do?’
But D.I.S.C.O.
— the Fat Slags end of the dance scene — is now hip and, thanks to the ascendance-y of the Mancsters, the charts are choc-a-block with ugly bastards.
But not awkward and angular ugly bastards.
That's Cud's major problem.
They don't bag .
They don't groove.
They are peanut bonfire toffee rather than Cadbury's Caramel.
And they cater to the deranged grin fetishes of retired colonels from the home counties.
But first we must talk about bananas and Mark E Smith.
The Cuds eat two bananas a day.
Isn't that dangerous?
‘They're anti-depressants,’ claims TDFC.
‘They stop you from tightening up.
Yes, you can scowl and laugh but we are very keen on our diet…‘
Would Mark E Smith benefit from a diet with a high banana content?
Would it loosen him up?
‘He still makes out he's this ignorant working class lad…’ says Carl.
‘We really like Mark E Smith,’ chips in Bob Mortimer lookalike and cutie bassist William Potter.
‘Oh yes!’ agrees Carl, shaking his Carol Decker wig furiously.
‘We really like Mark E Smith.
When The Fall played Leeds, part of their rider was to play a football match so all these young lads from the area turned up to take the piss.
Someone nicked Brix's earrings and this lad just walked up and grabbed Mark E Smith's beer and just walked off with it and Mark was juts like making out like he thought it was really ‘cool’ being robbed by these street kids, these really horrible street kids who were just ripping the piss out of them…‘
‘I'd just like to point out,’ says Little William, ‘that we really like the Happy Mondays.’
But, our Carl, what's that ironic line in ‘Justice’ about ‘The prettiest girls coming from the upper, upper middle classes?’
You, my san, have got a chip on your shoulder.
‘What I got is an inarck…an inar…culate…
’ What he's got is enough alcohol and other poisons in his system to put his brain on a slow train to Pudsey forever.
But never mind.
‘An inarcker…a feeling I can't articulate (hoorah!) of just being like  f—ed off with people who are richer than me.
It's like when I was a kid and when everybody else in the grammar school got school dinners I had to queue outside the headmaster's office every morning for me free dinner ticket.’
It's called class hatred, Carl, it's perfectly normal and healthy.
Do you get on with Bez?
‘I've never met him.
Sometimes he seems alright, sometimes I think we'd get on.
But then people go on about his past, the drug dealing and that.
But our whole band have been to college — they were the first people in our familiar to have been able to get any further education.
And I think if we hadn't gone we could be like that — it changes you.
My brother hangs out with people who beat people up as like a job.
Get tooled up with baseball bats and go smash some windows in some club.
I could've ended up doing that.’
So you're like the arty film student in The Yob ?
You've even got the same horrid hairstyle!
‘Yeah, I'm a crap snob now.
I mean, we complain about the mineral water not being from France — we don't like the English stuff and we don't like it fizzy either.
We're really fussy twats.
We don't tolerate crusts on cut sandwiches.
No way.’
Meanwhile, back in Leeds, the Cud fan club has got its first PO box number and the Rev Martin Baker — a one-time member of utterly crap Leeds Punk & Western combo The Buttercookies (along with a gentleman called Sick O'War and our very own James Brown)— has a sound idea.
He runs a series of adverts in the Sunday Sport offering pairs of ‘soiled librarian's knickers’ for a tenner.
And he gives the Cud PO box as an address.
Within a few weeks the office is flooded out with envelopes stuffed with cash.
Dig deep enough into Cud's sordid past and you discover many horrible things.
Some of them even more horrible than being described as ‘decent’ by a wonky-gobbed ex-public school exhibitionist and professional arsehole with a gnat's testicle for a brain.
Steve ‘The drummer out of Cud’ Goodwin
Carl ‘fat-faced bastard with glasses’ Puttnam
William ‘Bob Mortimer lookalike’ Potter
Mike ‘fishknife-in-your-face’ Dunphy
LIVE
INSPIRAL CARPETS
IT WAS surely no coincidence that the first record played after the Inspiral Carpets left the Palace stage was The Stranglers ‘Golden Brown’.
Whoever controlled the PA system was obviously thinking what I was, and he made his point beautifully.
The two bands definitely have something in common.
Apart from the shared snaking keyboards, in Tom Hingley, the Inspiral Carpets have a frontman who, like Hugh Cornwell, actually makes an effort to sing in the old-fashioned sense.
None of those wimpy washed-out vocals for Our Tom.
He graduated from the Phil Oakey/Tony Hadley/Julian Cope School of Crooners.
The Inspirals appear to have fallen into a crack in the US market.
So far, they've failed to make a serious dent in the all-important college music scene, essential if a so-called ‘alternative’ band wants to crack America (and keep their US record deal).
They're not girlfriendly ‘cute’ like the far more successful Charlatans; they're not a ‘lads’band, like the Happy Mondays, who are finally becoming MTV regulars.
There's almost something too grown up about the Inspiral Carpets: like The Stranglers, they're too professional, too accomplished, too ‘manly’.
There's nothing vulnerable about them, and nothing begging you to like them.
The word around town after the Inspirals debuted in LA last June was definitely ‘boring’.
But something drastic happened in the intervening eight months.
Everything has been beefed up, from the sound to the onstage visuals, now in dazzling Human League proportions.
It's implicit from their staging that the band knows they're nothing to look at, and they were smart enough to create a slide show that transfixes the audience.
They've also developed a very effective device) slow-starting songs that gather momentum to become hypnotic, like ‘Commercial Rain’, and the thunderous ‘She Comes In The Fall’.
An hour of wall-to-wall Carpeting would have been perfect, but they wouldn't get offstage, and dragged on for another 30 minutes.
There's a lot to like about the Inspiral Carpets.
A bit more self-control (on their parts) might have made me love them.
I will remember them as living proof that you can have too much of a good thing.
THE FATIMA MANSIONS
‘JIHAD JIHAD, what the  f— was that?’
A bounding, yelping evolutionary throwback?
A ranting, riveting ball of phlegm made flesh?
A bog-eyed incubus on day release from hell?
No, but it's close.
Let's not mince words, Cathal Coughlan is the most compulsively watchable frontman in Britain today.
Years ago, on Microdisney's ‘Bluerings’, he tagged himself ‘Scum condensed of Irish bog/Ruffian, traitor, demagogue — that's me,’ and, though the music's changed radically, the persona's stayed the same, highly strung and highly sprung.
Whether throwing punches and poses, splashing sweat across the stage or conducting the band with a towel over his head, there's a real dynamism about his performance, an intensity which the band match blast for blast.
Tonight, two covers conveniently mark The Fatima Mansions' musical parameters.
The Scott Walker-written ‘Long About Now’, delivered during a keyboard-accompanied interlude mid-set, is a haunted and expressive croon, while the version of Ministry's ‘Stigmata’ clatters relentlessly.
If anything, though, their own songs are more bruising, more exhilarating.
The opening ‘Angel's Delight’ straddles the two extremes, swinging from deceptive sweetness to quivering vitriol and dementia.
‘Hive’, meanwhile, sees the bassist trying to scratch holes into the neck of his instrument while Coughlan lies supine in the stage slop howling his tonsils out.
‘My piety has been unfailing,’ claims the singer dubiously before ‘The Holy Mugger’and, as usual, God gets a good kicking; especially on ‘Viva Dead Ponies’, where Jesus is back on earth owning a paper shop in Crouch End.
Finally, there's ‘Blues for Ceaucescu’, prefaced by an explanation of the song's continued relevance thanks to events in the Gulf and ending with a massed  f— off of a farewell.
Magnificent.
If you're doing anything vile tonight, make it enjoyable,’ hams Coughlan during ‘Viva Dead Ponies’.
He did.
It was.
LEVITATION
IT'S THAT difficult second band syndrome at its experimental sickest.
Terry Bickers left The House Of Love to rise to autonomous heights with Levitation but bungles total accomplishment on vocal ability only.
Seeing as the best thing about Levitation is the way they challenge his previous band's liabilities, it's a shame Tel's still trying to master his own voice, but there's still time before they release their debut single.
Levitation are The Cure, Bowie and James with a large injection of acceptable '90s rock.
Their guitarist resembles Free's spaced out Paul Kossoff and the keyboardist's one-song singing debut ‘World Round’ sounds like Squeeze's Glenn Tilbrook.
At times Levitation attempt to musically shock but it rarely works, ‘Squirrel’ has a weird keyboard break which fits in as much as George Bush would at a peace benefit punk gig, but at least they try to bemuse.
If Levitation dropped at least three songs from their set tonight they could have been dynamically interesting instead of sparsely tedious, but at least they wouldn't get invites to a House Of Love musical appreciation party.
This is Levitation — can they rise to the occasion?
HEAVEN'S GREAT!
HEAVENLY NIGHT
DEFINITE END-of-the beginning vibes for Heavenly, as one of our more maverick and thus of-the-moment labels made the now customary jaunt to the Locomotive for a night that proved that to make any inroads into the popular imagination, you must first step aside from the scene-steeped mainstream.
Accordingly, first up were East Village, Heavenly's wild card from early on, when their timeless swoonings and groomings were seen as making some case for the plurality of the dance scene from which Heavenly first hatched.
But if their frankly messy performance at the last Heavenly bash in December served only to illustrate the gulf that now exists between gamely played ‘real’ instruments and the lush sheen afforded the high tech brigade, then tonight their strengths were all their own.
Inadvertently reflecting some of the new-found ‘posse’ mentality, EV's three writers sing their own songs, diffusing still further the four-square thrust of conventional rock with chiming, circular guitar runs (a million miles away from indie's dull scrubbing) and rueful bass hums.
Arrant melancholia carrying a nail-studded nightstick, the single ‘Circles’ plain haunted.
More problematic still — for an audience weaned on mere generic repetition — are the Manic Street Preachers.
Round NME way the jury's still out on their Jamie Reid-inspired stencils and spirit of '76 obstructionist shenanigans, suffice to say they're not The Clash (the on-stage aesthetics are all wrong for starters), owing as much to the confusion politics of glam as they do the confrontational blitzkrieg that was punk.
That said, the new single ‘You Love Us’ is pure agitpop, a pleasure-pain guitar 'n' spit opener that saw gallic jaws dropping to the floor followed swiftly by muffled boos from the OAP bar at the back.
MSP's politics have been shoved so far to the fore (presumably to mop up any stray prejudice to their musical influences) their very real talent for balls-out rock'n'roll has been largely ignored.
Forget the grinning drummer or the antics of the bass player (the first to go down to stroppy retaliation), this band are a scorched earth antidote to faint hearts and floppy fringes.
Recriminations over the sound and an equivocal audience response (some pogoed, most stared blankly on as a repeat offender dove on to dance to ‘Motown Junk’) sees the set and with the bass ricocheting off the backdrop, the drum kit going down to a repeated kicking and singer James making messy love to his gorgeous white Gibson.
Yep, it's the future Jim, and just as we remembered it.
In desperate need of love vibes, the audience descended like a pack of ravenous wolves on St Etienne, not least because this duo of Thunderbird puppets in polo necks are now fronted solely by Stephanie, a dead ringer for the teenage Bardot who gambols about the stage in such a display of unrestrained delight, that you think ‘this is the real thing’.
Whether purring along to the chatter rhythms of ‘Kiss And Make Up’ or merely blowing away her fringe, eyes struck heavenward, she's an instant star in a country that patented the idea of reckless innocence, from Jane Birkin to Vanessa Paradis.
The boys may have thought of tacking Countdown 's Richard Whiteley on to the start of Neil Young's ‘Only Love Can Break Your Heart’(last year's most natural shuffle beat appropriation) but the show's all Stephanie's.
And with St E's wholesome regard for strong melodies evidenced again by the next single ‘Speedwell’ can this really only be a one-night stand?
So successful was St Etienne's PA you worried for Flowered Up and, in particular, the now legendary diva of frug pop, Barry Mooncult.
No need.
Firstly, any lingering gossip about scams or hype evaporated at an impromptu set for Windsor's assorted scruffians last summer, where Flowered Up revealed themselves to be well drilled in jazz funk slinkiness (!).
And Barry?
Well he started tonight, dressed in a racy yellow and orange petal, dusting the stage.
Yes, the monitors, the bass player, the tambourine — the lot.
This he continued to do — between jaw-jutting in that peculiar Mussolini-meets-Foghorn Leghorn manner of his — until the brass-necked wonder that is still ‘It's On’.
Whereupon he wandered on to the stage carrying a 12-foot ladder he repeatedly threatened to climb.
With a gang of laddish stooges grooving alongside to encourage him, Barry continued to lord it over the stage, munching an apple whilst reclining against the drum riser or simply feigning sleep flat on his back.
If all this sounds like over-egged exhibitionism at the expense of the music, then it probably is, but only because songs like ‘Crackerjack’ and the next single ‘Take It’— with its Rude Boy quotes and even a wah-wah guitar solo are belters.
Best response of the night — not bad going in the face of St Etienne's new-found libidinous following — and a fitting end to a night that fed off nothing more than the sheer character of the individual bands.
The new Bardot: St Etienne's singing sensation Stephanie
Balls out rock'n'roll the revisionist Manic Street Preachers way
INTO PARADISE
THE PRUDES
‘BURNS MAAARGH SKEIEEEN !’ screams the large, bulky frame of Into Paradise singer Dave Long.
Only minutes earlier, the gentle giant was in the bar chatting with friends and fans, the next he's on stage and screaming himself raw as the tortured madman at the wheel of the flaming incandescence that is Into Paradise live.
This contrast between the warm and friendly and the suicidally intense is the basic conundrum that fuels the awesome, burning power of this Irish band.
However, prior to the Paras going in, The Prudes had proved a completely distinctive and revelatory experience.
With singer Bradley acting out his Mozzer fantasies by lurching around on top of the monitors — only lacking a bunch of daffs stuffed down the back of his pants — their arrogance level has been hoisted a welcome couple of notches.
Add this to the fact that their two new guitarists have added a much needed harder edge to their typically English, whimsical pop and its indie dance grooves.
There's hope for them yet.
Every now and again a band comes along that completely defies all attempts at fitting into any sort of neat package.
A band that rages across the rock firmament with such intensity that they can not be easily assimilated into the serried ranks of all the other homogenous contenders.
Into Paradise are one such band.
In the period between albums, they've managed to harness the raw power and aggression of their songs to greater effect live.
Where previously they would on occasion lose direction and splutter to a halt, now their relentless barrage seamlessly moves from one epic song to another.
Oldies like ‘Heaven’ and ‘Red Light’rattle and hum in grand style, far better than their recorded versions, while their latest single, ‘Burns My Skin’, proves to be a glorious, bloodcurdling emotional release.
New songs like ‘Angel’ show another side to Into Paradise, with its slow burning atmospherics forming a stark contrast to the bulk of their material.
They even dash off a version of Magazine's ‘Shot by Both Sides’, that would have seriously disturbed Howard Devoto if he was present.
All this and ‘Heaven’ too.
On form, Into Paradise are truly awesome.
OH WHAT A LA-VER-LEE RAW!
THE LA'S
LEE WEARS a shiny nylon jacket that's on loan from the Sir Alf Ramsey estate, and cheesy sports pants that look as if they could walk home on their own.
He doesn't say a word — I mean zip — throughout the show, and he turns his back on us regularly.
So now we've got the objectionable bits out of the way…
The rest is a rare and lovely thing, a gang of reticent yahoos and one king-talent street-poet, wrestling with the job of making those fine tunes rage and twirl and levitate outside any of your normal cheap expectations.
People say that Lee is either precious or lazy (make up yer minds, f—wits !), but it's become manifest that these songs are worth all the tons of grief and introspection and the endless re-tuning.
After the gig, we mooch around the band's dressing room and try to give off an inconspicuous vibe (a hard one, since we're the only ones that aren't stoned out of our gourds and don't have accents that can hack their way through huge mountain ranges).
But all the time we're earwiggin' to Lee and his mates and what they thought of the show.
Lee is typically miffed; he liked playing the acoustic guitar, and the soft textures it gave off, but then he was beat when it came to playing lead breaks.
Also, the mic wasn't giving off the warm, mucky sound he'd been going for.
And the band wasn't as profoundly tuned into the music as he'd wanted.
Nobody else I met had any big reservations.
Sure, The La's will never be stand-up comedians or the most demonstrative folk, but this music does send you places.
There's a great physicality to it, like when Lee's bro Neil biffs away at the drums during ‘Failure’.
He's got this little kit, but there are hardly any mics there, and the low-decibel La's style means that you can directly pick up every collision between muscle and wood and steel.
You really catch the guts of the music coming through.
Lee will rap on about this feeling of unison — he calls it the pulse — a mystical experience that arrives when the La's all hit that special groove at the exact time.
I got it off ‘There She Goes’ tonight and so did a couple of hundred others.
It was magical, a huge thing of rapture.
If they can learn to sustain this over a long while, The La's would be world-shakers.
The other thing that gets blasted away tonight is the theory that Lee is hung up on writing ‘that difficult 13th song’.
There are half a dozen songs tonight that haven't been released, and they're all worth their stuff; a bonkers instrumental after the Grateful Dead called ‘Swashbuckler’, a flaming flamenco exercise (‘Callin'-All’) and a yearning epic sung by John that took the wired-up angsty quality of The Boys' ‘First Time’ and put in some of Roy Orbison's operatic noodlings for good measure.
Loved it.
The La's are alright then.
We got the pulse and it was wonderful, and we easily forgave Lee's dodgy line in fashion and his unceremonious stagecraft.
Like he sings on one of his mega singles, open your mind.
Yahoo's in the house: Cammy twirls those fine tunes
KINGMAKER
THERE'S SOMETHING rare and unrestrained about Kingmaker which tonight promises huge things rock-wise for the future.
And when I say rock, this is the dynamic blues-Clash-U2-alternative type, not the stuff stadium/metal bands make in between the pubs opening.
Kingmaker's progress is already well  pacy .
Six months ago under their previous name Tombstone, I happily tagged their demo Worst Tape Of The Week and hid it under a large pile of old papers where it wouldn't offend anyone.
But within the last three months — and four London gigs — their set's fitted perfectly into place.
It's frustrated, urgent and fluent — plus it's got that feeling of abandon which makes it unpredictable and on edge all the time.
Songs like ‘Freewheeling’ and ‘Pockets Of St Machali’(both from their recent EP on Sacred Heart) are good examples of where the flailing sound touches a few raw nerves.
And this from a Hull trio of two teenagers and a drummer in his mid-20s.
They give you the immediate impression of being a band here to stay: one that'll potentially outlast changes in the musical landscape, without turning into listed institutions like Simple Minds.
In clichéd terms, I guess, there's something very down to earth about them.
They look likeably studious, a mix of the solemn Rock School look with a clumsy enthusiasm.
Myles looks like a kid Joe Strummer, guitar replaced by his low-slung bass, while singer Loz twists his guitar round stiffly, dealing with songs' tricky arrangements.
Tonight, they're better than just being workmanlike (one of my other gripes before), graduating through ‘When Lucy's Down’ and the Irishy ‘She Talks’.
Best song of the night though, is the bitter ‘High As I Kite’ which builds via a tense three minutes, drops out and then comes back like an annoyed shop customer,to have another go .
This is the spirit.
Where once you had Ghosts Of Princes In Towers, now you've got Kingmaker.
A great leap forward.
THE HOLLOW MEN
AFTER A couple of years on the indie circuit, Arista signed The Hollow Men, releasing their ‘Cresta’ album late last year, and it looked like these hard-working Leeds-based popsters were ready to step up a league and move on to a new, higher profile.
Sadly, nothing much has changed and they seem stuck in the same low level ‘Well, at least we've got a bit of a student following’ rut.
Seeing them live it's hard to understand why this situation has come about because, while they fail to break new ground, their quasi-psychedelic pop is pleasantly uplifting and danceable.
Tonight at the end of (yet another) tour they cracked along, alternating the boisterously rhythmic with the elegantly dreamy.
Their bold melodies and huge, happy harmonies are held together by a crisp, springy backbeat, with the simple songs benefiting from the uncluttered arrangements and straightforward treatment.
Their lolloping sound occupies an area somewhere between The Mock Turtles and James, with David Ashmore's husky vocal style uncomfortably close to that of Tim Booth.
The ‘Cresta’ LP suffered from patches of sluggishness, but live their big beaty pop is far more fluid and satisfyingly substantial.
Thankfully, they don't press the wah-wah pedal too hard, opting instead for a frothy, tumbling spiral of sound and some trippily mesmeric highlights.
The Hollow Men lack a bit of spark and passion, but what they really need to lift them out of their mid table rut is just one killer tune to help bring their genial pop to the attention of a wider audience.
SUNFLOWERS
SUNFLOWERS ARE from Newcastle.
They are preposterously young and have a singer whose wardrobe is anything but skintight.
At present their sound has more to do with youthful enthusiasm than finesse.
What they do have, though, is a still-blossoming talent and an evident euphoric thrill of being on the stage.
In the future they should have plenty of praise heaped on their shoulders, but at this stage in their careers they don't really need it.
Too many of their songs are still too unfocused and fat.
The intricacies in these songs, especially the slow one, ‘It's Only Everything’, need to be explored rather than smothered in Ride-like assaults of guitar noise.
The singer shakes a mean tambourine and has a delightful, echoed-up, soaraway voice.
The rhythm section flickers between Happy Mondays, Ride and The Cure (Robert Smith is coincidentally scrubbed and present) but suffers from being too quiet.
The mix of guitars isn't quite right either.
What could be pristine melodies are choked by sledgehammer rhythm guitaring.
As yet unsigned, Sunflowers need a few months to diet and define their direction.
Tonight they were spunky but never sexy.
By summer, though, they should have flowered.
King for a play: Loz finds his way around those ‘difficult’ arrangements
MARDI* GRASS!
(*That's French for the day after Monday!)
HAPPY MONDAYS
THE ATMOSPHERE at La Cigale, if not double mega top, is relaxed.
The Mondays amble on, Shaun in customary pose, his expensive jacket fully fastened (contrary to a recent report it is hardly a ‘mail order blouson’— when will people finally realise that the Mondays don't wear Joe Bloggs?), hands in pockets.
His stage presence lately has been little more than a presence; he seems happy to stand in the shadows, occupying his usual spot on the drum riser while the spotlight dances on Bez and Bez dances with Rowetta and Rowetta plays with her whip, a caricature bad girl playing with the bad boys.
This audience is clearly on user-friendly terms with ‘Pills 'N' Thrills And Bellyaches’, no one here needs convincing that the Mondays are a top rock experience, so there's a cosy audience/band rapport which adds to the laid-back feel of the evening.
Shaun's lyrics must seem doubly obscure to the French, but they surely recognise character when they see it.
In 1991 the Mondays appear confident, their sound — improving all the time.
It's not a powerful blast, more a loose-limbed mellow mood.
The vibe is pervasive; not often do you see both lighting and sound engineers dancing behind their desks between bouts of knob twiddling.
They ease gently, throbbingly through ‘Kinky Afro’, but ‘Loose Fit’ stands out as the song that suits their current mood exactly; slinky, elastic, swaying with a sexy guitar, it's effortlessly groovy.
It might seem like it's all going to fall apart at any minute, but that's the key to it — it's totally wrong to call them shambolic; you have to be right on top of things to sound this loose.
In ‘God's Cop’, Mark Day's guitar is raw and rasping like it eats ten jangly guitars for breakfast; rhythm and booze at its best, but gelling easily with the older, classic Bez-dance tunes ‘Hallelujah’ and ‘Wrote For Luck’, both still mesmeric, especially with tonight's flashy light show, and ‘Step On’still makes a stomping lingering finale.
The Mondays just get out there and get on with it; what you see is what you get and their honesty shines through every move they make.
So much has been written about this band, their every move painstakingly analysed, that it's hard to add any startling insight, any new interpretation to the minutiae of Shaun's behaviour.
But it would be good to see him project a little, and not withdraw into his shell.
The best Monday shows happen when Shaun and Bez interact, and you get a real sense of their personalities.
Aurally the Mondays improve all the time, they're truly worth travelling all over the world to see…
Wembley, the Maracana Stadium, Elland Road…the only way is up; they really are on the edge of greatness.
In the club atmosphere of La Cigale, the spark was always there, the reason why so many have gone out on a limb to should their name from the rooftops, but the Mondays are in danger of slipping into routine.
They can be rough, ragged, they can have fights onstage, but they were never meant to be a workaday band.
A quick cure for lazyitis, please, and then it's back on the road to the very top.
Cigale together now: Bez…leads the troops…into action
PAIN TEENS GOD
TONIGHT FREE expression blasts its way out from the gloom and squalor in the shadowy shape of God from South London and Pain Teens from Houston, Texas.
God deliver first, an ugly shambolic noise attack which is punctuated by lead vocalist Kevin, as he scrapes his lungs raw in a vicious attempt to command our full attention.
Over the hypnotic maelstrom of perverse pounding that the rest of God are kicking up his strenuous efforts seem wasted.
Thanks to a sound system that fails to function properly, Kevin's words of diseased warning and wisdom are indecipherable.
The same thing happens when he picks up his tenor sax, licks the end of the mouthpiece and proceeds to honk and howl like a man possessed…
He might as well have been blowing a dog whistle for all we heard of his wasted energy.
God were good, but hampered by the very technology that is supposed to help them get their message across.
Pain Teens open up in a cloud of dry ice that fills the stage and eventually leaks out on to the dance floor.
Through the billowing smoke, shadows can be seen writhing about, one of which is wearing a devil mask that leers out of the fog and shakes its horns to the hellish racket.
When the smoke clears Pain Teens turn out to be more down to earth, a punky bar band who occasionally stray into territory that can best be described as extra terrestrial.
Vocalist Bliss Blood mixes dominatrix chic with rock'n'roll bawdiness, a powerful performance that, although not fully formed, allows the audience to whip up their own fantasies in time to Pain Teens' alternative progressive/oppressive sonic attack.
They shift through the songs on their excellent ‘Born in Blood’ with joy, pride and professionalism, enhancing the material rather than simply grinding it out on stage.
The songs are allowed a life of their own and, dodgy PA permitting, it works splendidly.
The real treat of the evening, however, is their version of Bowie's ‘She Shook Me Cold’ where poppy nostalgia is transformed into something that sounds like the soundtrack for a Kenneth Anger movie.
Not quite beyond the threshold of pain experience I was hoping for…but damn close.
DISNEYHOOD
MOST EVOCATIVE name of the week if nothing else, wrapping together pre-adolescence, the most fashionable of neckwear and the great Goofy in three succinct syllables.
Better still, Disneyhood proffer a smart escape route from the Robey's desolate Quids in night.
Out to prove that, hey, not everything from Watford is Second Division material, the quartet are at that warming ‘promising’ stage, trekking down the demo trail with sprightly aplomb and a cunning awareness of how to do The Right Thing, naturally.
Slightly baggy, without flapping wildly in the wind, theirs is a blend of cultured early '80s pop instinct and '90s nuance.
A kind of updated Orange Juice for the crossover generation, if you will.
So, chopped frets meet slapdash rhythms and get on famously, wisely deciding to move in with singer Chris Waterman's big, gold-white guitar and 24-going-on-14 cherubic looks.
‘My Friend's Name’ builds carefully, unperturbed by the strobe-laced barrage of dry ice, and a dual wah-wah drive encourages ‘Unreal’to kick up healthy dust clouds.
It's the noise element which could yet be their finest asset: if baggydom has been polluted by feyness and undermined by limp-wristed disinterest, then there's a huge gap in which hectic (but tuneful) arse-kickers can make their mark.
For sure, Disneyhood won't be challenging Swans in the heavyweight ring just yet, but they frequently flourish a muscular grip on proceedings, ultimately putting their collective foot down for a finale of ‘Sight Return’, intimidating in its volume and velocity.
Gem-like already, certainly.
With a bit more polish, Disneyhood will be dazzling.
GALLIANO
RUN FOR the hills; the jazz revival strikes back.
But the good news is that the word jazz is no longer synonymous with earnest types in black polo necks.
That's all in the past.
Galliano play seamless, mellow grooves with soul, and not a black beret in sight.
At last, a jazz influenced band who don't try to look as if they've just stepped out of the pages of Kerouac.
Galliano are cool and wise, but they don't alienate their crowd by flaunting the books they want you to believe they read; instead they quote Bob Marley and laugh.
The chiming keyboards of Mick Talbot stay enigmatically in the background, drowned in the authentic atmosphere of smoke and mild intoxication.
The band are slick and smooth, but not sickly; the bongo player is so ‘relaxed’ he barely remembers to jump on stage and play.
They would be dangerously close to having style over content if the songs weren't so good, and if singer Valerie Etienne didn't have such a heaven-sent voice.
She makes you see reason — she made me want to smile more and drink less.
Her voice is the best thing about tonight, and she isn't their usual singer.
The interplay is fascinating.
There are no stars, no-one grabs the spotlight or slyly edges anyone else out of fame's way, they all support each other.
Everyone dominates central stage for a while, just so long as they need it, only to return it chivalrously after their moment.
Meanwhile, everyone's dancing; there isn't a still body in the building.
Life's a nightmare unless you can laugh, and it's not use documenting the down side of reality unless you can smile, dance and live enough to make it all worthwhile.
Galliano are a big help in that respect.
MODERN ENGLISH
‘GOOD TO see the same people here after six years,’ states frontman Robbie Grey.
Yes, post-punk furtive romanticism prevails tonight and Modern English are dictating the whole story.
This isn't a desperate attempt at reliving past glory, it's a little more sincere than that.
They've roped in drummer Chris Acland of Lush and guitarist Russell Yates of Moose for their cautious ground-testing comeback gig, a sort of one-off, growing indie supergroup.
Modern English have quite a history.
Having been together for ten years, disbanding twice and then leaving prolific label 4AD, ME went to America to chance it lucky.
And how the Americans love them.
Sell-out-tours, a gold album and as much fame as their modest little heads could handle.
And so to Britain and not a whiff of a hysterical fan in sight.
If the crowd anticipate passé renditions of classic ME songs like ‘I Melt With You’ they were about to be disillusioned.
‘After The Storm’ once sounded remarkably like The Chameleons' ‘Swamp Thing’but now, possibly due to the time lapse or the injection of fresh young blood, it becomes a substantial pop song with trendy keyboards and influential, garbled guitar noises.
A casserole of dissimilar musical interests cunningly fused into one big bowl.
Modern English may be pensive about their comeback but they're certainly not paranoid or precious about a few meagre errors, and this is when the fun really starts.
It's their last song, the one everyone has been waiting for, it's their biggest hit — it's a hysterical cock-up.
What a laugh, Modern English merit respect even if it's for their sheer determination and sense of humour.
BIRDLAND
WHAT DO you do when your image as a bunch of glamorous rock'n'roll animals starts wearing thin, and you still haven't made it into the big time?
When you can choose to carry on regardless, or retire and work in an office.
Or if you're really hard-faced you can try the ‘We're really serious artists’ routine.
These are the options now facing Birdland, those retrogressive bleach boys of yore; the notorious Brummie blond bombshells who when they weren't throwing up, were trashing up hotel rooms and getting up the noses of every other band in the land.
Their response to this problem was to release a suitably grown-up, remarkably restrained, but really rather dull LP, and to start talking a load of old bollocks about maturity and development.
They can't even tear up the hotels on this tour because they're sleeping on the tour bus.
Next thing you know they'll be trading in their cuban heels for a pair of comfy slippers, and asking for tea and biscuits on the rider.
The LP shows the Midland Ramones desperately trying to widen their scope, moving off their narrow base and even slowing things down a little on occasion.
But live these experiments are virtually forgotten as they plough on with their ridiculously outdated, clichéd brand of power punk.
It all fizzes along at quite an invigorating rate without ever threatening to rise above the gaudily superficial.
Indeed, it's doubtful whether their audience actually wants anything other than the cheap, juvenile excitement generated by their high adrenalin post punk thrash.
It's pointless attempting to pick out individual songs because they're all brutally reduced to one-dimensional, rudimentary stompalongs that quickly become brain-numbing and tiresome.
Lee's excitingly edgy guitar occasionally manages to break through the murk but his brother Robert's thin vocals are lost in the unrelenting din.
The band's onstage antics are almost as tacky and see-through as the music, and one can't help wondering if half their rehearsal time isn't taken up with mandatory pogoing practice.
The three front men appear to have worked out a rota so that when one of them tired of the constant leaping about he can take a breather while the other two step in and compensate with eye-catching leaps of their own.
It's hard to know where Birdland can go next.
The LP has just confirmed the fact that the most interesting thing about them is their hard-earned reputation as the hell-raising punks that everyone loves to hate.
If you take away the image all that's left is a bunch of exceptionally pretty boys making some very ordinary music.
These snotty cartoon punks will just have to carry on pogoing.
SWEET JANE'S
JANE'S ADDICTION
THERE IS a sizeable price on the head of Jane's Addiction.
Tonight, touts remove five times the original ticket cost from those who didn't make it to the box office.
Since singer Perry Farrell talked candidly in the British music press about splitting the band, this could be the last intimate London venue Jane's will ever play.
Past 10pm, everybody is watching the spray of light in the doorway between the dressing room and the stage.
Waiting for Jane's Addiction to come on is like waiting at the altar — there are moments when you're certain they will blow you out.
This is largely because there has always been so much more speculation than information about the personal stability of Perry Farrell.
Tremors of acute anticipation chase through this audience.
Perry once said in NME that ‘everything I do with Jane's Addiction is about a rush.
I don't want to fill a prescription.
I want to push buttons.
You've always got to be trying to crawl up higher.’
In modern times, American hard rock has become a clumsy, conventional and tacky beast.
Even Guns N' Roses, who found success representing free spirit within the genre, seem to have lost the plot with this fatuous triple second album idea.
Jane's Addiction have a third album, ‘Ritual Do Lo Habitual’, which challenges the very ethos of rock music.
And it is the freak subversive genius of this record that makes them the single most important rock band of our time.
Live, Jane's are devastating.
They are everything and nothing that rock'n'roll is meant to be.
I catch glimpses of stage divers shooting at the brave people below; bodies bowing over the balcony at queasy angles; guitarist David Navarro's sneer; Eric Avery hunched on his bass; Perry, in a fishing jacket, moving like a marionette that swallowed a pneumatic drill.
The sound man struggles for a couple of numbers to actually pull their frequencies back to earth.
‘No One 's Leaving’.
It seems unreal that Perry could even consider dissolving Jane's, given what he makes of a stage with them.
Numerous characters surface in him up there tonight.
At applause he will smile and bob like a child in a nativity.
He treats hecklers as Andrew Dice Clay might: ‘Hey, did you just say, ‘take my cock out’?
I'll take it out, if you'll suck it.’
And he finds a little space to make conscious points: ‘I want you to know that I'm a skinhead now.’
He has indeed shorn-off the dreads.
‘I'm going to infiltrate the skinheads and tell them about black people.
I don't know if they'll get it.’
Tonight the set rushes like an elemental force —‘Been Caught Stealing’ and ‘Standing In The Shower…
Thinking’ make Molotovs with maverick junk-funk melody.
‘Of Course’ takes on a fiddle.
‘Mountain Song’ and ‘Stop!’batter some God out of Navarro and his rioting guitar.
And then there is ‘Three Days’, the ethereal siren of this set.
Perry dedicates it to Xiola.
Xiola was a lover of his.
She is now deceased.
I mentioned her once in an interview and Perry began to cry.
I don't think there will ever be another band who assail their songs quite like Jane's Addiction, or that will find such fluid precision at the same vertigos of intensity.
I can't believe for one minute that Perry would really give it up to be a video director.
Lee Birdland: pogo no-go-go
Farrell: NOT Perry-pathetic
FRED FACT
BY THE INFO-MOUS FRED DELLAR
SHE MOVED THROUGH THE FAIRGROUND
Can you tell me what's happened to EDDI READER, once the leading light of Fairground Attraction?
As you probably know, Eddi turned up in the TV series Your Cheatin' Heart , not so long back, doing her joint vocal and thespian thing.
More recently she headed over to Dublin to work on an album with producer Kevin Moloney who, in the past, has masterminded releases by the likes of Sinead O'Connor, U2 and Clannad.
Expect the results via RCA sometime in the summer.
THE LAST STRAWB
I've got a band called THE STRAWBERRIES and we are pretty good, blah, blah, blah…something like a hybrid of REM and Motorhead.
Anyway, a friend told me that there was a band a long time ago, in the '60s, that had the same name.
Can you tell me something about them?
Do they still own the name or do we have to change ours to The Screaming Yellow Cassettedecks?
I might add that this is not an attempt to get publicity as there are only three NME readers in this town — and we all play in the same band!
The Strawberries?
Well, I remember Strawberry Alarm Clock, a bunch of psychedelic nutters from Santa Barbara, who had a massive hit with ‘Incense and Peppermint’ in 1967 and then went on to appear in the Psych-Out movie.
Then there was a '60s outfit called The Strawberry Children, whose mainman was Jim Webb.
Also, there's been Strawberry Switchblade, Strawberry Park, and The Strawberry Hill Boys, who eventually shortened their name to The Strawbs in order to become famous and sign Rick Wakeman.
I would have advised you to change your name to Wild Strawberries, which would have all been very Ingmar Bergman, all totally Swedish.
But I remember something about Don Airey (Colosseum, Bernie Marsden, Cozy Powell etc.) playing keyboards in a band of that very name just a couple of years back.
So maybe you'd better stick to being just The Strawberries after all.
OAKLEY CORRALLED
In the Christmas issue of NME the Record News section mentioned a new single by RESPECT with PHILIP OAKEY called ‘What Comes After Goodbye’ which was to be released by Chrysalis.
Was this ever issued as I've seen nothing of it anywhere?
Also, is there likely to be a new Human League album and tour this year?
The Respect single was released on December 24, which was a decidedly dodgy date on which to push any new-born record into a then well-boozy world.
Try ordering a copy on CHS 3640 .
As for that League album and tour, the official line, suitably vague, is ‘the band are in Sheffield, just writing material.’
My guess is that we'll hear little from them, at least this side of the summer hols.
WAH ARE THEY NOW?
Have Strange Fruit any plans to release the first WAH!
HEAT session, comprising ‘Seven Minutes To Midnight’ etc?
It's pretty unlikely that this session will ever see the light of day on Strange Fruit, as the label's last Wah release ‘The Mighty Wah’ proved about as popular as a motorway scheme through Kew Gardens.
‘Could be that some tracks could emerge on a compilation, however,’ says SF's Clive Selwood.
Next up on the label's roster is the previously announced five-track job from Tim Buckley plus the Radio 1 audition session by Arthur Brown.
Those audition sessions were produced by Bernie Anderson, who signed Tom Jones after hearing ‘this scruffy Welshman who opened his mouth to produce a magnificent sound’ but who wasn't so impressed by The Rolling Stones, whose audition got the thumbs down.
ICICLES NOT WORKING
Could you find out what THE ICICLE WORKS and, in , IAN McNABB are up to?They seem to have been missing in action, releasing a couple of singles off the last album without providing any back-up tours to promote them.
All of which is pretty weird because I'm used to catching the band three or four times a year!
Do you want the bad news or the very bad news?
The Icicle Works don't appear to be particularly active at the present moment and Ian McNabb was recently to be spotted playing a solo gig at Camden's Underground Club.
There's also been a change in management, while Epic Records have confirmed that the band has been dropped from the roster.
Apart from that, everything's fine!
Reader all about it!
‘Isn't he that bloke out of The Farm?’ ponders a bemused Wah! fan
The Icicle Works during McNabb's Jeff Lynne phase
DISCOGRAPHY
KILLING JOKE
This one's for Jason Grandcourt of Mackay, Australia, who, many moons ago, requested a Killing Joke listing.
The arrival of the ‘Extremities, Dirt And Various Repressed Emotions’ album seemed to provide an apt moment to compile the required discography and, thanks to help from readers John Elliot of Hawick and Mark from Sheffield along with Frank O'Donnell and his valiant cohorts at PolyGram, I've managed to piece together what would seem to be a complete run-down.
Unless you know better, that is!
That Joke in full Caveman: Third Flintstone From The Sun
Kirk Douglas eat yer dimple out — The Farm are Number One!
Chris Isaak: wicked threads!
‘Wild Kids on a rock'n'roll binge’ etc: Kim and pal, 1981
The Swede taste of success: Seal
Fred's indie faves The Honey Smugglers
Will they stay or will they go?
Certainly the state of the British record industry is far from healthy right now.
Particularly the indie sector, which is responsible for supplying so many new acts.
When the recent Rough Trade collapse became apparent, one indie label manager, whose records are distributed to RT told me: ‘Depending on the way things go, I could be winding up.
Also, if Rough Trade went under, there'd only be one really big indie distributor left — and one result would be that many less commercial records would never find an outlet.
Eventually, everything would be considered in terms of sales.
Which wouldn't be healthy.’
Indie distribution has always been a thorny problem.
Time after time, companies have taken a dive, leaving a mass of dead and dying labels in their wake.
Even the currently flourishing Pinnacle Distribution did a kamikaze act just a few years ago, decimating the indie scene.
Since then, Steve Mason, who did a Victor Kiam and bought the company himself, has masterminded a remarkable recovery job and such recent Top Ten singles as Nomad's ‘(I Wanna Give You) Devotion’ and Kylie's ‘What Do I Have To Do’, were placed in the shops by Pinnacle.
However, such achievements do not guarantee stability.
Rough Trade helped KLF's ‘3 AM Eternal’ obtain a Number One placing the very week the company were forced to make a large number of employees redundant.
At the moment of writing, they distribute Mute, Strange Fruit, Alternative Tentacles, Big Life, and various other labels that have contributed much to the Indie Chart over the years.
But they're still in trouble.
The situation is a sad one.
Especially when indie labels are currently faring better than at any time during their history.
A recent singles survey published by the record industry magazine Music Week showed that, in terms of strike rate (that is the percentage of Top 40 hits per release achieved by labels releasing ten or more singles during 1990) PWL were out in front, notching 11 hits from just 40 releases, garnering a 68.7 per cent success rate.
Factory (six from 11) was third, while Mute (eight from 20), also made the Top Ten, ahead of such giants as CBS (27 from 82), Mercury (12 from 40) and Epic (13 from 76).
And maybe it is this very success rate that causes problems within the indie sector.
For companies that have kept at a specified size over the years, working to budgets that they know and understand, are forced to expand to deal with the increased flow.
If they don't they go under.
And if they do, they very often go under just the same.
Rough Trade, for instance, had to dip into the piggy bank to move into the American market, where they're now said to be pulling out.
They also purchased new and larger premises and opted for computerisation, all of which was costly.
Yet it was the only way to go if the labels they represent were to compete with the might of the majors.
I don't know the answers to the problem.
All I know is that I've felt a mite sadder every time an indie distributor like Making Waves or Red Rhino have hit the dust.
Am I being too pessimistic?
Maybe.
When I browse through the list of tracks on Beechwood's latest release (the 11th) in their ‘Indie Top 20 Chart Hits’ series and note the success of Carter TUSM, The Charlatans, Flowered Up, Teenage Fan Club, The Shamen, and others, things don't seem so down after all.
Perhaps I'll play The Honey Smugglers' ‘Listen’ just one more time, then snooze off counting the many great records that indie music has thrust our way in the past.
When I wake up, maybe I'll find that, like the death of Bobby in Dallas , all the recent news has been some kind of bad dream and that labels like Sarah, Non Fiction, Play It Again Sam and Cooking Vinyl all have bands on Top Of The Pops .
In the interim I'll just keep my fingers crossed.
ANGST
EDITED BY STEVEN WELLS
Dad, who was Morrissey?
PULL YOURSELF TOGETHER SON…
Ancient hippy legends from the ANGST Vaults
Send your niggles and squiggles to Angst, the page that couldn't care less, at NME .
Blunt crayons only, please.
LETTER OF THE  MILLENNIUM 
As a bisexual dress-wearing jessie I would like to say this to Baw (Angst , February 23): You are sexually repressed.
You worry about the size of your penis.
You slavishly follow the most conservative and conformist musical movements ever manufactured.
You seek the company of other ‘men’ to pump up your insecure masculinity.
You are probably gay and won't admit it, even to yourself.
Some advice from one queer to another: Come anywhere near Reading with your rapist-gaybashing-scum attitude and you'll eat your next Christmas dinner through a tube.
Violence breeds violence, boyo, and we know more about it than most.
PS: I sing in a band that makes Slayer and Napalm Death sound like Talulah Gosh, wimp.
Yo!
Send us a tape!— SW
PROPER ‘LADS’ MUSIC RULES
Today I heard an interview on Italian radio with EMF.
Interviewer: Which bands do you hate?
We want to hear names!
EMF: EMF, ha ha ha!
Jesus Jones, Pop Will Eat Itself…
Interviewer: No, please be serious!
EMF: Well then — The Cure, 808 State, The Beautiful South…bands like these.
Int: I thought you'd say something like Kylie Minogue or something.
EMF: Oh no!
Kylie is really good…
(Haven't we already heard that, dearest NME ?
Now see your influence…)
Somebody Who Can't Wait For The New Morrissey Record, Milan
Oh GOD!
We are SO SORRY!
If we had known that our ceaseless lionisation of El Kylo would one day result in a pop band saying they preferred the raging sexy raunch of her latest single to the droning early-'70s lard-rock of The Cure!
Disaster!— SW
How come that only two really explicit anti-war records have so far surfaced?
One, of course, by Carter and the other by, I ask you, The Rolling Stones, all of whom are older than I am.
Turning rebellion into money, eh?
But before Musicians Against The War had the guts to get off their arses rather than supporting the kicking of other  people's , where the hell WAS the rebellion?
Ho ho Keith, some wags at the NME have taken to calling MAW ‘musicians against success’ because — get this — those musicians who've had the guts to stand up and be counted like Sinead O'Connor, The Farm, Carter USM, Cud, Billy Bragg, Lisa Stansfield, The Stones, Lush, Orbital and Soho are all ‘failures that no-one's heard of’.
Ho ho.
Traitors flinch and cowards sneer — SW
THAT TONGUE UP SHAUN RYDER'S BOTTOM INCIDENT
And in next week's super, soaraway NME , we have Shaun Ryder on the toilet.
If that Shaun Ryder is capable of having children I don't think the fact should be publicised.
Your full page photograph has no doubt encouraged many young and impressionable fans of Happy Mondays to go out and have children.
Many will no doubt then be lured into the dangerous and deadly activity of ‘marriage’.
No doubt you will merely accuse me of being an old fuddy-duddy trying to stop young people having fun.
But surely it is the duty of an influential paper like yours to point out to your readers the facts that marriage and ‘scoring’ babies are the cause of more nervous breakdowns, violence and jumping off tall buildings under the impression that you can fly than any other form of domestic arrangement.
‘Jael Otis Ann Ryder was born at 6.30am on Saturday, February 16, weighing in at a bounding 10lbs 10oz.’
Can this be a line from the same music paper which advised Bob Geldof and Paula Yates to get an abortion?
Don't get me wrong, I think the Mondays, Geldof and Yates are all twats, but your inability to get your tongue from between Ryder's buttocks pisses me off.
A YOUNG CONSERVATIVE TALKS UTTER SHITE
Is that poor Andrew Collins some sort of old punk or perchance one of those sad tossers who once flogged Socialist Worker to 14-year-olds?
His review of that crap band The Farm was pure ‘Swellsian’ swill.
The Farm represent everything utterly obnoxious about this country, probably not their fault as they never had a decent education, but glorifying football thuggery, provincial mediocrity and small-minded plebbiness only encourages the pettiness of our current society.
At least previous populists like Julie Burchill and the Swells were funny and obviously masochists.
Andy Collins is just piss-poor and ordinary, just like The Farm.
Yeah!
We don't need whining leftie bands like The Farm droning on about justice and equality now that Britain is such a wonderful place, where nobody sleeps in a cardboard box or goes hungry or gets busted for the colour of their skin or dies of hypothermia, where pigs fly and the sun always shines and where kids from council estates have just as much chance of becoming millionaires as — say — kids who inherit a million pounds from mummy and daddy.
The Farm, stude, are the most courageous, committed and righteous band to have emerged for a decade.
If they annoy suck-holing, spittle-licking, brain-dead Tory scum like you so much, then they must be doing their job.
Do us a favour and go stick a sharpened pencil in your neck you festering dollop of shite encrusted wank — SW
The Farm…what have they got to say for themselves?
BUGGER ALL!
Half a dozen uninspired shaggy dog school stories padded out with publicity photos are not the stuff of exciting pop journalism.
Dearest Derek Ridgers, I would like to congratulate you on your brilliant interview with The Farm…
And what about the great James Brown photos?
WAKEY!
WAKEY!— SW
THE MANIC STREET PREACHERS — HARDER THAN CANDY FLIP?
If the Manic Street Preachers are so Jonathan-Kinging radical why don't they go round Channel 4 and kick Terry Christian's smug, ugly, homophobic face in and then cut Amanda De Torybimbo's Barbie-doll head off with a rusty cake slice?
I mean, I thought The Word was supposed to be ‘daring’ and ‘radical’and ‘with it’and oh so rebellious?
So why did it recruit its presenters from Tory Wankers Against Taste?
It's almost as bad as the NME !
Come on you Manics!
Words and empty gestures are not enough!
If you are really a ‘rebel’ band then let's see you stop posing and start offing a few pigs.
Here's a list for you — Jonathan King, MC Hammer, Simon Bates, Colin Moynihan and Edd The Jonathan-Kinging Duck.
Total bastards and enemies of mankind all of them.
OK, so you'd probably end up getting gunned down by the SAS or something, but that's got to be a better end for a bunch of real rock terrorists than ending up as a Levi's advert.
Besides, you could go on a really severe diet and wear blonde wigs and blame it on Birdland.
Nah, you're right.
Nobody would believe you.
QUALITY LETTER WRITING — A FEW SAMPLES FROM THIS WEEK'S MAILBAG
Julian Cope is the TRUE god.
Lee Mavers is a twat.
Motorhead are shite except for‘The Ace Of Spades’.
Manic Street Preachers are the non-thinking man's Birdland.
Come on, this isn't the mutual arse licking society.
What are the meanings of the words  f— , c- , b—llocks and Barbara Ellen which appear in your paper every week?
Heavy metal is shite and Baw is a wanker.
Anyone who writes to Angst is a complete toss-pot.
I think that you invent most of your letters yourself.
In fact you probably invented this one.
Peter Gabriel's version of ‘Biko’ farts on Simple Minds' version.
Craig, you're bizzin' ma biz, man!!
Who cares how many sheepshaggers there are in Wakefield?
I think that PWEI are a very, very, very sad and shite band.
Have you ever noticed that EMF is an anagram of FME?
What do they mean when they say they come from The Forest Of Dean?
Are they Jonathan-Kinging all-year round campers or something?
MC Hammer is obviously on the money when he claims that Vanilla Ice stole his act.
That's why Vanilla Ice is shite.
Our wonderful readers, all over
When will you realise that so-called ‘funny-man’ Vic Reeves isn't actually funny and see him for what he is — a talentless, dumb Northerner.
Why don't you focus on the up and coming young comedians from the pub and night club scene.
Little & Large, Bobby Davro and all of The Copycats gang are just a few top comedians to start this way.
So come on and give us some respect.
Stop plastering Vic all over your music paper and make way for some real talent.
You idle slothful gits!
‘Help us!
Or the planet gets it!’ our jolly NME team jive us from the inside back cover of a recent ish.
May I suggest that as an organisation creating and distributing warehousefuls of what turns into waste paper on a weekly basis you should keep your mouths shut.
Whilst it may be too much to ask that you immediately take on any responsibility for seeing that the 120,000 weekly NME s are properly recycled (By heck, we are talking SERIOUS wank — ER!— SW), you could perhaps act responsibly by doing your bit to ease unemployment by taking on someone with the job of disposing of your own rubbish soundly.
Your profits will stand it.
OUR profits?
Hey, is this a co-op?
Here was silly old me thinking I was working FOR the fantastic IPC.
Know thine enemy, eco-dork — SW
I am out here with Uncle Saddam and missing out on life's necessities such as Carter USM's new vinyl.
What is happening?
Is  there life after Challenger tanks?
I hope so.
My nose, bum and Pixies tapes are getting worn down.
Don't get me wrong — the old squaddie faves such as Kylie, INXS, Cher and Rick Astley are in plentiful supply.
I am not a scrounging pain in the arse, just your average pissed-off ‘what the bloody hell am I here for?’ soldier.
Please (grovel grovel grovel) help me as I am at my wits' end with all this shit.
Cheers, Andy
Send Andy your own compilation tapes including, if you wish, selected tracks by Country Joe And The Fish, Edwin Starr, Billy Bragg, Elvis Costello, John Lennon, Soho, The Farm, Robert Wyatt, Metallica and our Lisa.
Amongst others — you know, people nobody's ever heard of.
The address of Servicemen Against The War wouldn't go amiss either — SW
What a pair of ‘we're so hard’ wankers Gang Starr are.
If Vanilla Ice spouted the same sort of shit they did he'd be pilloried.
But no, just because they're black, Quantick has to lick their arses clean.
‘If you hang around with us all day you'll hear us calling women bitches and calling each other  motherf— .’
Eh?
Thrilling stuff, lads — you're playing stereotypical black roles without even acting.
Yo!
Spot on Otto, but it's even worse than you think.
The real reason the normally rabid and vociferous DQ was such a wimp with Phil and Luke Gangsta has little to do with inverse racism.
David was merely paying his social class dues — yes, you've guessed it — Dave and the lads were boarders at the same minor Public School together.
Despite the fact that David was expelled in the third form for dissing the gym teacher who confiscated his Uzi and broke his crack-peddling ring, he still feels enough loyalty to the old alma mater not to drag its name through the mud by engaging the lads he fagged for in a ‘naughty-word’ style debate.
— SW
I have never in my entire life seen so much crap (wheeeeeeee !).
Remixes, dance tracks and even total imposters pretending to be musicians (wheeeeeeeeeeee !).
This music is just drum machine backed rubbish created by selfish, talentless scum (wheeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee !)
It is a shame that our up and coming indie bands who I may also add do play proper live music (TEN TON WEIGHT-STYLE KERSPLAT !)
‘I sold my soul to rock'n'roll before it sold its soul to the major multi-nationals.’
PUBLIC Nme
There comes a point in our exciting, recklessly hedonistic lives, and possibly even in your relatively dull versions, when the ever-crackling London showbiz scene JUST ISN'T ENOUGH.
At such moments, we at Public NME do not, like you , resort to languishing at the back of seedy gigs, grumbling into our flimsily-iced shorts about the dismal lack of ligs in our lives.
Instead, we waste no time in nonchalantly kicking aside the obligatory minor celebs who form queues daily in the hope we might let them press their lips against our sinfully expensive shoe leather, and march forcefully into the Ed's inner sanctum.
There, we demand he unlock his secret safe stuffed with laundered readies and produce sky's-your-limit expenses so that we can fly First Class to foreign lands and unearth bigger, better, albeit often unprintable, goss no other column will have access to.
It certainly worked this week (hic, belch) when we popped over to France, the land of garlic, CHARLES AZNAVOUR and rakishly tilted berets, and discovered a Heavenly Records party in full swing.
Anyone who's anyone was there, and most even played a set or two for the frothing crowd at a Paris party that rivalled those thrown by our old mate the Emperor Caligula for debauchery, excess and copious amounts of projectile-vomited, half-digested food and winestuffs.
Present and acting remarkably badly were funsters HAPPY MONDAYS, FLOWERED UP, MANIC STREET PREACHERS, EAST VILLAGE, ST ETIENNE, ANDY WEATHERALL and NED'S ATOMIC DUSTBIN.
A fine and storming time was had by all (to put it mildly), the degenerate nature of the evening summed up perfectly by the mildly amusing spectacle of one SHAUN RYDER being carried out of the venue at the end of the night, screaming out the directions to his hotel to his sweating, grumbling slaves.
The rider for the evening (the biggest ever we can faithfully report) disappeared in minutes and took its toll on certain partygoers.
Not least BARRY MOONCULT who went so ape-dropping crazy, he was spotted stumbling out of the party while it was in full swing armed with a stash of joke bombs, which despite being pretty harmless (containing about as much genuine explosive as your average cap pistol) make a loud enough bang to put the fear of God into the most ardent of atheists.
Armed thus, and in the mood for, erm, fun, Mr Mooncult stormed down to Paris' notorious Pigalle red light area and proceeded to lob his ‘ammunition’ at puzzled transvestites.
Public NME takes a dim view of types who persecute innocent human beings who just happen to enjoy the feel of women's lingerie against their bollocks, but did find it quite funny that the be-wigged ‘bomb victims’ were so convinced it was an aerial attack they raced into a nearby hotel to beat up a perfectly innocent couple snogging on a balcony.
In the end, Mooncult was spotted and had to race for his life down a backstreet pursued by no less than 15 hairy sailor types in cocktail dresses and six-inch heels.
Meanwhile, the night was nearly ruined for everybody when a horde of beery Welsh rugby fans descended on the venue and proceeded to expose their gargantuan bellies in a threatening manner and generally menace the anorexic pop people present.
One man who wasn't there long enough to get his head crunched by the rugger roughs was BEZ from The Mondays.
While FLOWERED UP were in the process of getting kicked out of their hotel for spraying the porters with fire extinguishers, Bez was safe in his room making a four-hour phone call to his missus and the very adorable new addition to his family, baby son ARLO.
We have since learnt from an unreliable source that Arlo is so named because Mr and Mrs Bez were trying to work their way through a baby's name book and got bored with it by the end of the ‘A’ section.
We at Public NME are surprised that Bez stuck it that long and that Bez Junior isn't lumbered with Aaron.
Also partying this week were THE CLASH and ECHO AND THE BUNNYMEN, both celebrating their recent chart success with old material.
Making toasts to each other with an enthusiasm bordering on indecency were MICK JONES, IAN McCULLOCH, RODDY FRAME, EDWYN COLLINS, and JANE'S ADDICTION.
Our spies report that guests wearing Levi's received free parasols for their jugs of cider.
Over in Ireland, BOB DYLAN got his collar felt last week when a hotel security guard accosted him as he crept stealthily down a little-used fire escape.
Despite Bob's protestations that he was staying in the Presidential Suite, was trying to avoid fans, and was actually the ‘BAWB DYLAN’, the callow youth grabbed him by the scruff of his ketchup-stained hooded to and sneered, ‘Oh yeah, and I'm the Prime Minister Of Ireland, so I am’.
All was cleared up later when the hotel manager came to investigate but our sympathies must go to the hapless Security Gorilla, as recent photographic evidence proves that mistaking Bob Dylan for a tramp with salubrious lodgings in Cardboard City is something even hardened celeb watchers like ourselves have done at some point or another.
Also in Dublin recently was SINEAD O'CONNOR, who was shocked when the local bloodbank refused her kind offer of a donation.
Apparently the woman who is now so famous that her every offhand comments is carved in tablets of stone for FRANK SINATRA to jump up and down on, could not qualify for tea, biscuits and fainting spells because she's seriously underweight.
Other gaelic flavoured news this week includes the revelation that THE EDGE will be spending a lot more time poncing about in Tie-Rack cravats and spouting epigrams from now on as he's just purchased OSCAR WILDE's old gaff.
Another U2 character into home improvements is dapper urban cowboy BONO who has just received permission to build a huge swimming pool in the grounds of his mansion.
Our spies report that Bonkers Bono is so excited he's decided to have it built in the shape of a guitar, though we at Public NME think a huge shoe-shape would be more relevant as the new album U2 are currently working on is supposed to be a load of old cobblers.
A collaboration from the depths of hell looks on the cards, we can report with our fingers stuffed prematurely in our ears, as VIC REEVES and BOB MORTIMER have been spotted in cahoots with THE BEAUTIFUL SOUTH all over London recently.
The snippets of conversation our spies could catch featuring more about ‘12″ versions…’, ‘toecurling guitar solos’ and ‘dancing chicks’much more than would otherwise seem feasible.
Bobsy actually drummed for The Beautiful South when they played at The Brit Awards some time ago, so don't hold on to your ears pop kids.
You're not going to need them.
At the recent JANE'S ADDICTION gig at The Marquee, people were not so much holding onto their ears as trying to stop their eyeballs standing out on stalks, so plenteous were the glittering celebs out to cheer the visiting Americans on.
Present and definitely NOT signing autographs ‘thank you very much’ were THE WONDER STUFF, THE MIGHTY LEMON DROPS, THE GODFATHERS, JESUS AND MARY CHAIN, PRINCESS CAROLINE OF MONACO (well, it looked like her) and THE SENSELESS THINGS.
The latter lived up to their name with gusto by getting helplessly drunk, being in a celebratory mood because they'd signed their lucrative CBS contract that very afternoon.
Not having such a fine time at gigs recently were CARTER USM, whose own live experience at The Riverside venue in Newcastle proved painful when JIMBOB skidded on a banana skin some thoughtful fan had thrown onto the stage, and fell straight on his ass.
A rumour has since flown around the circuit that poor Jimbob's bruises are not particularly pretty.
More problems at gigs for THE HOTHOUSE FLOWERS who, as their album is currently hogging the Australian Number One spot, are encountering Corks-Around-Hats mayhem Down Under.
At one gig in Melbourne the crowd invaded the stage in such numbers that LIAM had to stop the show and lead the uninvited participants off in an orderly line.
Also out and about this week were THE PRIMITIVES and CHAPTERHOUSE who were spotted at THE POETS gig tapping their beer bottles along in time to the swell up-and-coming sounds emanating stageside.
One man was so overcome by the gig he jumped up next to the band and harassed the crowd into giving them a standing ovation.
As it was a standing-only venue, this wasn't hard to organise.
The cheerleader in question?
None other than Food Label entrepreneur ANDY ROSS.
And the Public NME team were reduced to hysteric this week by the news that IRON MAIDEN — forerunners in the Live Fast, Die Young And Leave A Foul Looking Corpse rock community — have made a seatbelt commercial currently screening in the States.
Apparently, the ad consists of BRUCE DICKINSON holding the band's mascot EDDIE up to the camera and drawling: ‘Buckle up, or you could end up looking like this,’ but market research has revealed that viewers were far more frightened at the prospect of looking like Brucie himself.
Even pop stars get bored sometimes kids and THE DRUMMER FROM CUD is no exception.
Exhausted by the glare of fame that has been his lot since NME elevated him to cult status TDFC (as we like to call him, being mates and all that) has been trying to relax by helping his bandmate CARL build a replica of London out of matchsticks in his Manchester bedroom.
We hear that progress has been rather slow of late but feel this has less to do with the quality of Swan Vesta the boys are using and more to do with their strange diets.
Apparently the Cud crowd are great fans of the energy giving benefits of the humble banana and eat at least 20 each a day.
It would seem that for some of the pop contingent evolution never happened.
Perhaps Darwin should be told.
Up until the last minute of press day, our lines are always open, the overworked, underpaid hordes of YTS types we use to compile the stories thrashed to within an inch of their lives with our old school ties if they miss so much as one happening event.
This is why we are able to report that THE WORLD OF TWIST were involved in a horrifying car crash whilst travelling to a children's TV Show this very weekend.
Well, when we say horrifying car crash what we really mean is that one of the two cars got a puncture and the other vehicle bashed into the back of them but you never know, it could have been worse.
As it was everybody was thankfully unhurt, though a scary moment  occurred when the AA member turned up and turned out to be none other than an ex-member of THE TREMELOES.
Talking of scary moments, Manc popsters THE AWESOME THREE are encountering a few of those since releasing their ‘Possessed’ single.
Apparently the band members have been inundated with mail from the mothers of female fans complaining that their music is Satanic and they do not wish their daughters to have anything more to do with them.
As these letters have had no discernible effect and The Awesome Three boys are still enjoying the odd night tying up white-clad virgins and offering them up to the Devil, the incensed mothers have now taken to writing to the band's parents.
We bet the Marquis De Sade never had to put up with bollocks like that.
And finally, readers may recall NME 's STUART BAILIE's ‘sex’ posé on BARNEY from THE MILLTOWN BROTHERS bending over naked for the cameras at a Paris jaunt.
Well, since Stu reported this The Milltowns' record company have been swamped with requests for actual photographic evidence of the event.
Some have even described in loving detail what they think the posterior in question might look like.
Lensman Of The Moment PETER WALSH responded with a curt ‘No Comment’ to our reporter, but we hear that the wily scamster is considering holding an impromptu auction for fans and perverts alike so get your bids sorted out fast.
Dear Mick,
How are yer?
Congrats on the big hit!
Great that we're making a few bob at last; I've bunged down a few more ideas for old Clash songs we could flog to various fee-paying customers.
I'd value your opinion on these…
Cheers for Now, Joe 
Tired, not to say bemused, by their recently-acquired reputation as miserygobs and no-hopers, POP WILL EAT ITSELF recently decided to follow the example of history's great groups and get themselves photographed with a very famous and trendy actor.
THE CLASH went to New York and got snapped with ROBERT DE NIRO; THE POGUES went to LA and got MICKEY ROURKE; the Poppies, in their own inimitable manner, went to Australia and got that JOE MANGEL git out of Neighbours !