

CONTENTS
REGULARS
5 Editorial
Britain's old establishment is alive and well
7 Shoreditch,
Roger Woddis
8 Diary
Sean French is horrified to discover that God is a psychopath
9 John Cole
Are trade unions coming back into fashion?
10 Political column
Labour and the Liberal Democrats talk the same language, says Sarah Baxter
11 Political sketch
Edward Pearce on when a first-class generalist meets a grubby technician
25 American diary
Alexander Cockburn on the Los Angeles gangs' plan for urban regeneration
27
Letters
30 Fringe benefits
Colin Ward on Beating the Bounds
45 Endgames
Competition, Cryptic Quiz, Crossword
47 Backchat
Mat Coward on PR — pretty ridiculous
47 Forteana
Paul Sieveking on serious sexual assault — on horses
FEATURES
12 Breaking away is hard to do
A radical pressure group in Scotland is attempting to unite opposition forces, but the rifts are deep, reports Kirsty Milne
13 I'll take the lone road
Alex Gordon thinks Scotland should go its own way
14 To the aid of the party
How have Tories governed Scotland without a mandate?
By packing quangos with their supporters, says Kenny Farquharson
15 The draughtsman cometh
The Tories have every right to press ahead with boundary changes, claims Sarah Baxter
17 Time for change
Fred Halliday on primaries, Cubans and Mr Moonbeam
18 Psychic terrorists
The New Alliance Party is based on encounter therapy.
But it has growing influence in the US, and money too, says Bruce Shapiro
20 Zealots for the television age
Lubavitch Jews are on the march, and believe the Messiah is living in New York, reports Jack Shamash
22 Which way now?
John Smith and Bryan Gould put forward their visions for the Labour Party's future
26 Common ground for battle
Stuart Weir reports on Tory and Labour attempts to win the argument over constitutional reform
ARTS & MEDIA 31
Pursuing the millennium
The Arts Council wants broader, and better, subsidised culture.
The government wants endless jamborees.
Boyd Tonkin foresees a collision
Comedy
Oliver Double tells right-on jokes to right-off audiences
Film
Anne Billson yearns for a touch of Mel Brooks in Europa Europa 
Music
Robert Yates listens to Diamanda Galas, diva of the fight against Aids
Television
Kirsty Milne wishes that the BBC arts department would blow its own trumpet
BOOKS 37
Words without end
Ellis Cashmore finds few surprises in Studs Terkel's epic survey of US attitudes to race
History
Phillip Knightley uncovers the cover-up of My Lai; Diarmaid McCulloch discovers a 17th-century loony left council
Society
William Keegan on J K Galbraith, scourge of the rich; Martin Fletcher on Derek Jarman, scourge of the straight
Science
Marek Kohn defines the mind with Nicholas Humphrey
Fiction
Carole Morin on Leslie Dick; Chris Savage King on Sally Brampton
PrintOut
Libel and the novelist
EDITORIAL
Modern morality The Queen and the Archbishop have shown the continuing authority of the old establishment
Whatever happened to modernity?
Two speeches straddled the domestic political scene this week, each of them an affirmation of the survival of the British ancien régime and of the continuing relevance of archaic institutions of the UK state.
On Tuesday, the Queen was wheeled out for her first-ever appearance at the European Parliament to give what the Guardian wittily described as the ‘royal oui’ to the EC.
And on Sunday, the Archbishop of Canterbury, George Carey (at a service of dedication to mark — of all things — the advent of the single European market), inveighed against the ‘trickle-down’ theory of wealth distribution, whereby ever-higher incomes for the wealthy are somehow supposed ‘naturally’to find their way through to the poor.
Thus did the twin figureheads of the British establishment (the crown and and its conscience) speak on the two central political issues of the day.
In doing so, they reminded us, 46 years after Labour's first attorney general, Sir Hartley Shawcross, declared ‘We are the masters now’, where the real mastery still lies.
For all the rhetoric of a ‘classless’ society, of enabling people ‘to rise as far and as fast as they can’, to quote John Major's first speech to the new parliament, the reality remains of a nation in which inherited wealth and privilege, and institutionalised power or authority, matter far more than what individuals make of themselves.
Hence, the leaden delivery of some Euro-platitudes, by a woman who really ought to be able to do a better job of reading other people's speeches after 40 years of doing little else, carries more political import than anything else that has been said about Europe since the election.
And the fact of George Carey's criticism of massive pay rises to top bosses, and his sermon on the social responsibilities of wealth creation, is of concern to those bosses and wealth ‘creators’ because remarks that would have been unexceptional from other quarters came from the head of the established church — a case of the upstart vicar from Barking not yet fully appreciating the nature of his role within the establishment to which he has only recently secured entry.
The Times on Monday said that the league table of the country's 300 wealthiest people, published in the Sunday Times the previous day, showed that ‘only a half [155]of the 300 inherited most of their money and aristocrats make up a mere sixth’.
The emphasis is ours, bewildered by the way in which the Times adduces such facts as evidence of how ‘people from a humble background’ can progress in modern Britain, rather than as proof of the persistent importance of inheritance and class.
Just as bewildering is the Times ' depiction as ‘curious’
George Carey's argument that it is wrong ‘to make money for its own sake’.
Carey may be contested, as the Times , the Institute of Directors, Nicholas Fairbairn MP et al have been quick to attempt, but there is surely nothing curious in the head of a Christian church saying there are matters of greater moral significance than making money — unless by curious is meant the fact that Carey is head of a Christian church that also happens to be the established church of the realm.
In the absence of other voices making the same moral argument sufficiently loudly, we should perhaps be grateful to hear it from the very heart of the establishment.
Capitalism is not yet so triumphant that it can disregard moral dissent.
Unlike in parts of America, wealth alone cannot yet parade itself here as a sole, sufficient mark of human worth.
Carey addressed the wealthy directly, quoting Jesus' parable about the sorting of the goats (the wealthy) from the sheep (the poor) in St Matthew's gospel: ‘The curse is upon you…for when I was hungry you gave me nothing to eat, when thirsty nothing to drink; when I was a stranger you gave me no home, when naked you did not clothe me; when I was ill and in prison you did not come to my help.’
Carey continued: ‘I doubt if He would have been impressed by the argument that the goats had been waiting for these things to trickle down as a by-product of economic growth.’
The reaction to George Carey's speech suggests that many of today's wealthy in Britain are not content merely with being wealthy.
They want their pieces of silver and a crown of thorns too.
It is a strange reflection on the lack of modernity in British politics that it took a pillar of the old establishment to tell them they can't have both.
Malawi is no longer ruled by fear
Something momentous is happening in Malawi,writes Julie Flint .
International aid donors meeting in Paris this week to discuss cutting payments to that far-flung little country — once a bulwark against communism, today a relic of one-partyism — must wish they knew exactly what.
Less than a week after riots over price rises in basic commodities left 22 dead in the greatest upheaval since independence 18 years ago, the Consultative Group of donor governments finds itself reviewing Malawi's human rights record with two large question marks hanging over the debate.
What has been the fate of Chakufwa Chihana, the opposition leader arrested on 6 April (see ‘Silenced Spring’,NSS,17 April)?
And what does it mean when the Malawi News , official organ of the Malawi Congress Party, refers to Chihana, not as ‘a nobody and failed businessman’, as it did after his arrest, but as ‘a Malawi opposition and labour leader’?
Emphasising that the aid weapon helped to encourage liberalisation in Kenya, Britain and America are pushing for tough action in Paris to mellow Malawi's life president, Dr Hastings Kamuzu Banda.
But the EC is divided, with some donors fearing that pressure on a Malawi under siege may be counterproductive.
Until last weekend, there were no indications of change in the rule of repression that served Dr Banda so well, until Catholic bishops broke the nation's silence with a highly critical Lenten pastoral letter.
Chihana's arrest was followed by the expulsion of three churchmen, the arrest of half a dozen worthies, including two churchmen and a church elder, and a serious escalation in violence by the Congress Party's Youth League.
Chihana's secretary's mother was arrested and tortured.
She was stripped naked and beaten with a cattle prod before being thrown into a cell full of excrement.
When she was released, it was on pain of death unless she persuaded her fugitive daughter to return to Malawi.
Her treatment increased the concern about Chihana's well-being — perhaps even his life.
Police have twice failed to present him in Lilongue's High Court — the first time to the surprise even of the prosecution — and have defied an order for his wife and lawyer to have access.
The latest word from Malawi is that they may see him after Kamuzu Day, a possible flashpoint, this Thursday.
So far, so usual.
Last weekend, however, after rioters looted and burned and smashed, and the army was compelled to escort Banda's heir apparent, John Tembo, to safety, the Malawi News not only took the extraordinary step of giving a graphic account of the riots, complete with quarter-page photographs, but also accorded Chihana's court case detailed front-page coverage.
A personal appeal by Banda, the father of independence, halted the rioting.
But, whatever the Consultative Group decides in Paris, it is clear that Malawi is no longer ruled by fear.
As a senior diplomat said last week: ‘The people went out and found they weren't struck by lightning.’
Whose Europe is it?
Not everything that comes out of Brussels is good.
It is a simple lesson, but one that the British left has not quite learned.
In the mid eighties, Jacques Delors swept away years of Labour Europhobia with his seductive prospectus for a workers' Europe that would outflank national governments — especially the one in Whitehall.
But the Social Charter turned out not to be for the likes of us.
And now, this week, come two more Euro developments that look distinctly unappetising.
The first is the European Commission's insistence that abolition of border controls means what it says: come next year, there must be no passport or customs control whatever at Dover.
You don't need to be a fan of British immigration control, or to fear a pestilence of rabid French dogs, to feel trepidation at the prospect.
If port immigration controls are removed, internal immigration controls will be stepped up instead.
That means more routine passport checks for every black person living in Britain, and identity cards for everyone.
The second piece of news is that John Major is supporting a commission proposal for a European Official Secrets Act.
Under the proposal, a series of ‘security gradings’, similar to those in British law, will apply to material whose disclosure would be ‘detrimental’ to the ‘essential interests’of member states.
The proposal leaves open the possibility of criminal proceedings in Britain against anyone who leaks EC information.
People working for the commission will be vetted, according to the procedures of their own country — which means, in Britain, secret vetting by MI5.
This week, the civil liberties group, Statewatch, has published the text of the EC's proposal.
The reason for a new secrecy law is that, post-Maastricht, the EC is getting more and more involved in contentious areas like defence, foreign affairs, and asylum policies — part of the famous ‘ever closer union between the peoples of Europe’.
But there doesn't seem to be much in it for the peoples themselves.
FOURTH ESTATE A regular monitor of the Tory press
6 May:The day before the local elections.
The Express runs a story headlined ‘Why voting Labour is a waste of money.’
An editorial claims that ‘Labour councillors are happy to spend your money to buy the votes of gay, ethnic, and freak culture groups.’
A feature on Neil Kinnock's future claims that his ‘appalled friends’ have tried to deter him seeking a place on Labour's national executive, ‘fearful of the boyo in the backseat’.
7 May:‘The smile is engagingly diffident.
Always will be.
John Major is that kind of chap.’
So starts an editorial in the Mail .
‘The man with the ready grin, who is entrusted with the nation's destiny…has great reserves of strength.’
Pass the sick bag.
8 May:As John Major admits that Sir Colin McColl is head of MI6,Today talks to McColl's neighbours.
They reveal that, amazingly, he is ‘a nice man who…lives very quietly’.
9 May:‘James Bond takes on IRA,’ reports the Sun , in a hopelessly OTT account of how MI5 will take the lead role in mainland counter-terrorism.
‘Britain's first woman spy chief yesterday launched a James Bond-style war against the IRA.
Spymaster Stella Rimington will lead a 2,000-strong secret army dedicated to hunting down the terrorists.’
Pistol-packin' Stella ‘vowed to use every trick in the book’, it adds.
11 May:The Mail defends the astronomical salaries of top business executives (which they award to themselves) from attack by the Archbishop of Canterbury.
‘In the real world of free competitive markets, profits and ultimately all other rewards including salaries and wages, result from pleasing the customer,’ it says.
‘The Archbishop seems to be harking back to the politics of guilt and the socialist faddism of yesteryear.’
In the Express , Robert Kilroy-Silk takes another swipe at Bryan Gould.
‘Behind the mask of sweet reasonableness is the type of person who damanges the image of politicians.’
The problem seems to be that Gould expresses views at odds with the official policy of the old shadow cabinet of which he was a member.
For once, Kilroy neglects to mention Gould's antipodean origins.
12 May:The Mail prints a letter from its owner, Lord Rothermere, saying that he wishes to distance himself from the newspaper's criticism of the Archbishop of Canterbury the previous day.
‘I find myself in agreement with the tenor of the Archbishop's address,’ he writes.
The Sun also agrees with the Archbishop: ‘Carry on, your Grace.
We need someone to speak on the side of public morality.’
Nothing daunted, the Mail accuses the Queen of treason on its front page: ‘The Queen puts Europe first,’ is the headline.
SHOREDITCH
John Major officially revealed last week that the head of MI6 is Sir Colin McColl, a fact that anyone who cared already knew.
But we still don't know much about the man himself apart from his age (59), and that he went to Shrewsbury School at the same time as Michael Heseltine.
This last fact sent Shoreditch hurrying to the British Library to scour back numbers of The Salopian in search of clues to ‘C’ 's character.
Here, then, is his ‘Valette’ entry for February 1951: ‘C H V McColl, Classics VI.
House Monitor.
Bentley elocution prize, 1950.
Exhibition in Classics to Queen's College Oxford.
School and Higher Certificates.
House captain of running and athletics.
House running colours.
House rowing colours.
House football colours.
Vice president of the debating society.
Sergeant in CCF Cert.
‘A'.
P.T. Standard.
First Class Shot.’
Well, the latter must have been a useful accomplishment in MI6, likewise, fleetness of foot — he won a school race in 1950.
But there is more.
In 1949, he played Caesar in Shaw's Androcles and the Lion , but, said the reviewer, he ‘fidgeted too much to give the impression of assurance and dignity’.
He did better the next year in the title role of Dr Knock , acting ‘with ease and obvious personal enjoyment’.
In the debating society, he proposed the motion that ‘in the opinion of this house, beauty is a virtue.’
The verdict on this was that: ‘He spoke with great gusto, with some unfortunate pauses, due to his losing his place in his notes.
Not all his arguments were entirely to the point, but he produced a confident and humorous speech.’
And, record the rowing notes, in those days, he weighed 10 stone, 6 pounds.
If only we knew as much about John Major's schooldays.
The shadow cabinet elections are arousing unusual interest because of change at the top.
Will Gordon Brown be shadow chancellor, Tony Blair shadow home secretary, and Robin Cook shadow president of the board of trade?
Will Gerald Kaufman stand down?
(Yes, probably, but he's hesitating.)
Will Jo Richardson?
(The same.)
There will be at least three, and perhaps four, spaces to fill; so there will also be an influx of new faces lower down the scale.
Tipped for promotion are three front-bench women, Harriet Harman, now health, Mo Mowlam, the City, and Hilary Armstrong, education.
It's not that the PLP has anything against men as such .
It's just that there aren't enough of sufficiently high calibre in the party's lower ranks.
Michael Meacher isn't one of those Labour front-benchers, like Roy Hattersley and John Prescott, who thinks that his party alone has all the answers.
There he was on television this week, whipping up a meeting of left-wing students into a frenzy with his oratory: ‘There are new forces in our society — new forces, new loyalties, new ideas not yet articulated — which may yet come to our rescue.
Now, some of them will come from the Labour Party, and some of them will come from other associations not yet formed — I accept that as well— but I say this: in whatever shape these new forces manifest themselves, they will come from you, the despised students of humanity.’
Passionate stuff, huh?
Unfortunately, Meacher was only acting: he was playing himself in the 1985 TV drama Edge of Darkness , which the BBC is repeating.
Behind him was a big CND poster, and beside it, another two, reading ‘VICTORY TO THE MINERS’ and ‘COAL NOT DOLE’.
The Commies at the BBC waited until after the election before letting the public see Labour in its true colours.
Bob Hughes, MP for Aberdeen North and chair of Anti-Apartheid, has received a letter of congratulations on his re-election from an unlikely source — the South African ambassador.
Hoping to visit Durban this summer, he immediately rang the embassy to see whether this meant he was now off their notorious stop-list.
‘Well, it's really only for drug-smugglers and terrorists now,’ came the reply.
But I'm not sure.
We'll have to get back to you.’
He's still waiting.
The Daily Telegraph caused a storm in a teacup last week at the Queen's grocer, Fortnum and Mason in Piccadilly.
The day after Marlene Dietrich's death, it reported that the legendary actress ‘had German, French, British and American newspapers delivered each morning, and devoured them while drinking Fortnum's Prince of Wales tea’.
Not according to Fortnums.
‘We have never sold the stuff in our entire history,’ sniffed a member of their tea and coffee department.
‘Anyway, we are not permitted to use the names of living members of the Royal Family in this way.
It is in fact Twinings of the Strand who market the brand, for which we have received a few erroneous enquiries.’
Alas, they'll be getting a lot more as a result of the Telegraph's scoop.
Intimations of immorality?
Bishop Eamonn Casey, whose surprise paternity was revealed last week, doubtless drew inspiration from the decoration of his own cathedral, Galway.
There, on a wall plaque, can be seen that other famous fornicator of Irish origin, J F Kennedy, pictured in a pose of sublime mawkishness, eyes closed, hands joined in prayer, contemplating further exercise of droit de president .
ROGER WODDIS Bully for him
‘Parents must retain the right to mete out physical punishment as a last resort.’
— Stephen Green, chairman of the Conservative Family Campaign, on proposals by the Scottish Law Commission to outlaw parental violence, while permitting ‘safe smacks’
The Chief Defect of Stephen Green
Was being just a shade Too Keen
On Parents clobbering their Kids,
Which Common Decency forbids,
And publicising his Campaign,
The Accent being on the Pain.
In this, it must be said, he stood
With most of British Parenthood.
He blames your lenient Swede or Finn
For Europe's lack of Discipline,
And claims it is Le Vice Anglais ,
Which made him what he is today.
While others may express Alarm,
He thinks Safe Smacks do Little Harm,
And though admiring Scottish Laws
Regrets a move to Ban the Tawse.
Administering the Leather Thong
Helps Bairns distinguish Right from Wrong.
If Conscience shrinks from causing Pain,
A Caring Parent should explain,
While beating children Black and Blue,
‘This hurts me more than it does you.’
He spanks with love the Little Dears,
And thanks the Lord for Wackford Squeers.
DIARY ‘God…a psychopath brandishing a nuclear weapon...’
Sean French has been reading the Bible
My long-standing suspicion that amnesia is a crucial qualification for public life was strongly reinforced by the behaviour of Labour shadow ministers after the election.
When normal people would have been lying in their beds with the covers over their heads, these MPs bounced on to our television screens debating the minutiae of the leadership election system.
I felt this even more vividly last week when I went to the launch for Robert Harris' book,Fatherland .
Various politicians and celebrities were present, but the most charismatic-looking by far were Tony Blair and Peter Mandelson.
They arrived together, dressed with the studied perfection only achieved by gangsters and people about to appear on television.
They seemed to have their own lighting system trained on them, a glow of success and power.
I felt a perverse, and entirely unfair, urge to bang their heads together and tell them it was their duty to be depressed and scruffy like me.
If nothing else, this explains why they are in politics and I'm not, although it doesn't explain why I'm in journalism.
Within days of the election result and devastating discrediting of opinion polls, Peter Kellner was using opinion polls to explain why things weren't really that bad for the Labour Party.
It was like a man convicted of forgery paying his fine with a dud £50 note.
But then most columns in the press are written with the tacit understanding that the readers won't remember what they have read and columnists won't remember what they have written.
Occasionally I get the unnerving sense that one or two people are paying attention to what I am saying.
On the occasion of my recalling my promise to eat a copy of NSS if Neil Kinnock were to reach Downing Street, Patrick Phelan writes, wondering with an air of innocence, ‘Is there perhaps one other thing you are hoping no one will remember you promised?
How is the Bible reading going?
Or am I being impatient?’
Mr Phelan is referring to my promise to read the Bible at a rate of five chapters a day, thus finishing it in a year.
I have now resumed and read enough to assure my correspondent that he is lucky that his impatient reminder was directed at me and not at God, whose response to murmurings about the unforeseen delays in reaching the promised land was smiting with pestilence.
And that was when he was feeling merciful.
The shock for an innocent like me is to discover that Moses' conversations with God resemble a policeman negotiating with a psychopath brandishing a nuclear weapon and making wild demands.
I had never realised the Ten Commandments are followed by a library of supplementary instructions of thuggish brutality.
They provide an unnerving demonstration of the common core of totalitarian systems.
For example, if a ‘prophet, or a dreamer of dreams’ entices you to follow another god, then even if the person is a close friend or member of your family, ‘neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou spare, neither shalt thou conceal him: but thou shalt surely kill him’.
More terrifying still, the text insists that the rebellion itself comes from God as a test of faith.
This method was duplicated precisely in Stalin's Russia, in which children who had betrayed their parents were celebrated, and where the secret service set up its own subversive societies to encourage traitors to show themselves.
It also anticipates Marx-ism, Freudianism and modern free-market capitalism in its insistence that it cannot be criticised because there is no position outside from which to criticise it.
And much of the Old Testament dealings with God are richly comic.
I love the passage (Numbers 14:15-17) where Moses craftily dissuades God from killing his own people by suggesting other people will think he did it to cover up his inability to get them to the promised land.
Even better is the final presentation of the promised land (Deuteronomy 9:6) like a cross father grudgingly handing the Christmas presents to his undeserving children: ‘Understand therefore, that the Lord thy God giveth thee not this good land to possess it for thy righteousness; for thou art a stiffnecked people.’
And if anyone should encounter Patrick Phelan, give him a wide berth, since he will almost certainly be suffering from a contagious plague of boils.
Has the art of the aphorism expired entirely in modern Britain?
I've been consulting a re-issue in paperback of John Gross' excellent Oxford Book of Aphorisms and scrutinised some modern examples in ‘Quote Unquote’, the sample of sayings of the week published each Saturday in the Independent .
Gross provides a large number of examples on the subject of men, women and marriage.
I like Achille Tournier's statement: ‘When the fine eyes of a woman are veiled with tears it is the man who no longer sees clearly.’
Compare and contrast with last week's statement by Auberon Waugh: ‘The greatest sin-gle cause of unhappiness in Britain today is the modern British woman's hatred of housework.’
Waugh himself can't be blamed for the wrenching out of a context that might have helped us to understand whether he is referring to unhappy women, rendered so by not being content with their lot, or men, who are now being forced to lend a hand with the Hoover.
Whichever is the answer, one might protest that it is among the most self-evidently absurd generalisations to have been made since the ludicrous title of Saul Bellow's last full-length novel,More Die of Heartbreak , to which one must answer: no, more do not die of heartbreak.
More die of cancer, heart disease, famine, measles and virtually anything else you can think of.
But good aphorisms do not have to be meaningful in a strict sense.
When Karl Kraus says that ‘Some women are not beautiful — they just look as if they are’, we know what he means.
Aphorisms don't have to be right, but they must have a snap to them.
By contrast, Waugh's statement is just inert, a joy buzzer that doesn't buzz.
However, it is sprightly compared with the pronouncement on ‘automatic honours for public servants’ by Richard Shepherd, the Conservative MP: ‘It almost has the quality of handing out lollipops to the general satisfaction of the recipients.’
A sentence of this kind would be an interesting test for advanced foreign students of the English language because it is not merely unepigrammatic but devoid of meaning.
In a curious way you can understand what is being said only by letting your mind slip into the same fuzzy state Shepherd's must have been in when he spoke.
I suppose that in some recess of his mind he was recalling the old cliché about honours being handed out like lollipops, but the more I look at the sentence the less I understand what he was on about or why it was considered worthy of preserving in print.
My final choice from last week's ‘Independent’ was the example that provoked me into attempting this subject in the first place.
One might have hoped for silence from Diana Mosley but now she has been giving us the benefit of her experience on the subject of sexual politics: ‘There are quite as many henpecked husbands in the world as there are battered wives, something feminists fail to notice.’
After I have finished this column, I am going to visit Diana Mosley carrying a hen in one hand and in the other a club of the sort favoured by marshals at her late husband's political rallies in the 1930s.
‘Lady Mosley,’ I shall say, ‘Would you care to compare the two following sensations?’
I shall place a few grains of corn on her head and allow the hen to peck them off her scalp for a minute or two.
Then I shall batter her with the club for the same amount of time.
Aphorisms are all very well, but sometimes a point needs to be made more directly.
JOHN COLE The way to the voters' heart Trades unions may be coming back into fashion
Is trade unionism soon to become ‘the sin that dare not speak its name’ within the Labour Party?
I ask, because after reading 22 pages of closely argued articles in the Fabian Review about Labour's defeat, I can only find one reference to the unions, and that not from any of the 18 invited contributors.
It is possible that I missed someone's parenthesis, but only a promise in the editorial that ‘the link between the party and the unions’ will be among subjects discussed in future sticks in the memory.
And ‘the link between the party and the unions’, important though it is in the debate about internal democracy, is not germane to our theme today.
This is to ask whether Labour is not in danger — again — of preparing itself to address yesterday's agenda.
Specifically, it is to query the new received wisdom, that the alternative party to the Conservatives in British politics has only to take the consumerist road, and present itself as the protector of the individual against Big Business and Big Government.
The Prime Minister has already shown his sensitivity to a feeling that individuals are getting a poor service from the public sector, hence the Citizen's Charter.
William Waldegrave has now been appointed his lieutenant in the grinding battle within Whitehall, against warriors who will doubtless counterattack with the saddest words of public administration: ‘We've always done it this way.’
Conservatives will continue to argue that in the private sector, competition must bear the principal responsibility for protecting the individual's interests.
For large utilities, like gas, electricity and Telecom, consumers' watchdogs stand as a referee administering not too clearly understood rules.
But for the butcher, baker, DIY shop, holiday company or plumber, the remedy seems to be to go to another trader next time, and write this disappointment or disaster down to experience, unless it is bad enough to take to a lawyer or the Small Claims Court.
What turns political policies into vote-winners is their ability to affect the lives of large numbers of people in an important way.
That is what has made the Tory policy of selling off council houses at prices advantageous to the tenants a much more electorally significant event than any of the plans for wider share ownership promoted or floated by Tory, Liberal Democrat or Labour politicians.
Employee share ownership has not generated great public debate or excitement because the sums involved, for most employees, are not large enough to grab their attention.
The likely profit for most individuals is likely to be as large as a percentage point or two in the wage settlement made by their unions, or offered by their employer.
Which brings us back to Labour and the unions.
A fashionable consensus may be emerging, among those who reject any variation of the ‘one more heave’ school of Labour electoral thought, that a mixture of constitutional reform, including proportional representation; a philosophy based on using the community to protect the individual; and a set of consumer-friendly policies is the best way to create a modern left-of-centre party to take on the Conservatives.
Oddly enough, in the Fabian collection, it is Professor Raymond Plant, chairman of Labour's working party on voting systems, who goes furthest in insisting that the debate must be much wider than that.
He is, apparently, far from being a one-club golfer.
In an interesting discussion of varieties of egalitarianism, Plant attacks the rhetoric that links freedom only with consumer choice.
With a side-look at the American inner cities, he argues that collective provision must be linked not just with the needs of the have-nots, but ‘with all people who are able to exercise their freedom only within a cooperative society imbued with a sense of fairness’.
In other words, even if you are reasonably well-off in Los Angeles, the cost of security in your apartment block may soon become prohibitive.
There must be a better way to achieve a city at peace with itself.
The question for politicians of all parties contemplating their electoral prospects in the nineties, must be: what is likely to preoccupy voters most?
People, at least in the articulate middle classes, usually have their horror stories of public transport, their run-ins with bureaucrats of one kind or another.
Many also have grumbles about shops and service trades in the private sector.
If John Major, or anybody else, could prevent the local garage overcharging or under-performing, or encourage a lower-price, less uniform snacks policy in pubs, he would doubtless win brownie points from some voters.
But I doubt if anyone will win the 1996 election on a slogan of ‘Back to the simple cheese sandwich at £1.25, and death to expensive Ploughman's lunches’.
Is it only the recession that makes so many people, especially the young, talk so much about their job prospects?
Surely it is more than that.
In both blue-collar and white-collar employment, the long-predicted world in which nobody could expect to have one job for a lifetime has now arrived.
And not in the most propitious or enjoyable circumstances.
At a time when trade unions are at their weakest for half a century, employment is definitely a buyer's market.
In large parts of the newspaper industry, for example, proprietors now refuse to negotiate collectively with the National Union of Journalists.
In broadcasting, short-term contracts often replace staff jobs.
In accountancy, banking, other middle-class professions, previously cast in the ‘job-for-life’ mould, there are frequent redundancies.
It seems certain, even when Britain emerges from the recession, that the world of work will occupy much more of many people's thoughts than it did before.
I suspect it will become a more dominant issue than value-for-money, whether in the public or private sectors, absorbing though these now seem to many politicians of all shades of opinion.
If you do not earn the money, or enough of it, buying goods or services is a secondary consideration.
In the postwar years, the trade unions spent many years digging their own grave, before, notoriously, they disgusted public opinion by refusing to dig real graves in the 1979 public sector strikes.
One of the TUC's two great general secretaries, George Woodcock — the other was Walter Citrine — warned them that they would lose influence if they did not reform themselves.
(If anyone wants to see prescience in its purest form, they might read quotations from Woodcock's writing in my obituary article about him in the Dictionary of National Biography.)
Yet the time may come when the unions will have expiated their follies of the sixties and seventies, partly through the rationalisation and mergers of the past decade, partly through reforms forced on them by changes in the law during the eighties, partly by a public rediscovery that trade unions are a necessary part of a free society.
It was, after all, the absence of free trade unions that made the Soviet Union such an effective tyranny, for there was no protector of the individual against the system; and it was Polish Solidarity that began the unravelling of the communist tyranny.
The need for the Labour Party to abandon the trade union block vote has seemed to me an open-and-shut case since I first wrote advocating it, in the old Manchester Guardian , in 1957.
This has profound implications for other parts of Labour's organisation, which is why leaders from Hugh Gaitskell to Neil Kinnock have postponed the change.
Now these will have to be tackled.
But is there not a distinction to be made between the role of the unions in Labour's internal democracy, and their role in society?
Whatever institutional changes are made in the Labour Party, tradition dies hard.
For many years ahead, unions will be seen by voters as being on the Labour side of the fence.
If, as I suspect, many employees turn more than in the past decade to trade unionism, to improve the condition of their working lives, the public image of the unions, whether positive or negative, will be important to Labour.
This may be the wrong time for the party to avert its gaze.
Have they heard about babies and bathwater?
Political column Spot the difference between Labour and the Lib-Dems Sarah Baxter
The Liberal Democrats are comparing Paddy Ashdown's speech in Chard last weekend with Roy Jenkins' 1979 Dimbleby lecture, which led to the birth of the Liberal-SDP Alliance.
Also last weekend, the Fabians published their general election post-mortem.
Spot the difference between the Fabians and Ashdown.
(Contributors to Fabian Review are quoted in italics; the other comments are taken from Paddy Ashdown's speech).
‘Those who sit back in politics can quickly find that others have moved on.
.. our task in this parliament is to create the force powerful enough to remove the Tories; to assemble the policies capable of sustaining a different government; and to draw together the forces in Britain which will bring change and reform.’
The lesson, in my view is clear: neither to stand still and simply change leader; nor, certainly, to go lurching back to the early 1980s, but to continue and intensify the process of change.
This must happen at the level of both ideas and organisation.
.. the struggle to establish a clear identity for a radical left of centre politics in the latter part of the 20th century goes much deeper than individual policy issues.
Tony Blair MP
‘Unless there is a change, Britain is in jeopardy of becoming entrenched in a system of almost permanent one-party Conservative government; elected by a minority but able to exercise the exclusive power of a majority.’
Democracy is in danger of dying on its feet in Britain.
First past the post and governments elected by a minority of the vote are sustainable only when there is a turnabout of minority governments.
Calum Macdonald MP
‘What does this mean for those millions in Britain who live their lives shut out from the Conservative view of how society should be?
The poor, the unemployed, the homeless, those who have lost and will increasingly lose the small luxuries of hope as our public services continue to decline, our environment gets dirtier and our pride in a compassionate and caring society withers away…
As we now contemplate our strategy for the years ahead, let us never forget that they are the people who sit huddled outside, waiting for us to get it right.’
The world still has vast interests in the private sector that often go unchallenged; the need for good public services is probably more important than ever; and there exists still cruel poverty for many millions amidst great wealth…
Labour's values are therefore not in any sense historically redundant.
That is both our hope and our opportunity.
Tony Blair
‘Many of the imperfections and injustices in our political system — the overweening power of the executive, the absence of proper protection for personal liberty, unfair voting, excessive secrecy, a Conservative dominated press, the centralisation of power — all these were tolerated by many in Britain, precisely because, from time to time, power changed hands…
Are we prepared to witness the slow death of pluralism within our democracy?’
Where does this leave Labour?
As the party of permanent opposition, perhaps, defending those who need to be defended as best it can…
But I hope that we can do better…
If Labour is serious about challenging the dominant-party state, then it had better get serious about democracy now.’
Tony Wright MP.
‘It is our task, as Liberal Democrats, to set our sails to the new winds which will blow through the nineties; to establish the new frontier between individual choice and collective responsibility.’
Labour must, once again, be the party that stands up for the individual against the vested interests that hold him or her back…
This is its historic mission, as necessary today as it was 100 years ago.
But the means of fulfilling it will be very different.’
Tony Blair
‘[It is our task]to create a taxation system whose purpose is not just to re-distribute wealth, but also, and perhaps chiefly, to redistribute opportunity.’
Labour's rhetoric should be about engineering a genuine equality of opportunity rather than imposing a mythical equality of outcome…
Clearly, there is not very much room to increase the burden of taxation.
Simon Crine, General Secretary of the Fabian Society.
‘I do not believe that mathematically constructed pacts and alliances are the way forward either for Liberal Democrats or for others.
At best, they would be a waste of time, at worst , positively damaging.
What is, however, in both our interest and that of the country is to work with others to assemble the ideas around which a non-socialist alternative to the Conservatives can be constructed.’
To talk of pacts and electoral agreements is much too ambitious at this stage, and it may in the end be impractical or unnecessary.
But we must discuss areas where we can cooperate and work together.
On almost every area of social and economic policy, Labour and Liberals were in agreement.
Calum Macdonald
‘What this means for Liberal Democrats is that we must be much less exclusive in our approach to politics and much more inclusive to others in this one.
We must look outward to the concerns of wider sections of our community.
We must learn to work with others in a common cause.’
There should be no preconceptions whatever, no areas of intellectual abstinence, and we should go out of our way to build common cause with other parties around the world in searching out the way forward.
Tony Blair
There are shared analyses too of the problems faced by both parties during the election.
Paddy Ashdown would certainly agree with Peter Mandelson that the ‘nudging and winking’ during the final week of the campaign about a Lib-Lab arrangment made Labour look weak and muddled and John Major principled.
Patricia Hewitt's candid acknowledgment of the voters' ‘visceral fear of change and of Labour’ was felt on the doorsteps by Liberal Democrats with particular acuteness.
The two parties remain at loggerheads on traditional issues of great principle.
The Liberal Democrats under Ashdown are enthusiastically pro-market and anti-trade union; they are seeking to create an anti-socialist alternative to the Tories rather than an anti-Tory alliance.
On the other hand, the Labour leadership battle has thrown wide open the question of trade union influence and the party is now more interested in regulating rather than renationalising industry.
Whoever succeeds Kinnock, these differences are unlikely to get in anyone's way.
Petty rivalries and jealousies will.
Peter Mandelson, Patricia Hewitt and a number of other Fabian commentators could have behaved more courteously by addressing the Liberal Democrats by their full name instead of calling them Liberals; Tony Blair could have had the courage to name them at all, instead of subsuming them into a vague phrase about building common cause with other parties ‘around the world’.
Who else was he talking about?
Labour already has links with social democratic parties the world over.
The chief offender, however, is Paddy Ashdown.
Although his party only won just over half of Labour's national share of the vote, he crowned himself moral leader of the opposition the moment the election was over.
His speech in Chard was full of insults as well as overtures to Labour.
There was a vacuum on the left, he said; Labour was without a convincing creed of its own; it was exhausted intellectually and divided internally; it was blocking progress and delaying the defeat of the Tories.
Strong words from a leader who, right up to polling day, declared that he was as willing to do a deal with Major as Kinnock.
Liberal Democrats like to think they can provide the brain to Labour's brawn, but with 18 MPs and 19 per cent of the vote, Ashdown's claim to provide ‘leadership for the wider debate about the construction of a post-socialist, non-Conservative Britain’ is a fantasy.
He has yet to come to terms with the fact that a popular front of the mind or body means a Labour leader in Number 10.
If he can look that prospect squarely in the eye and both parties cut out the cheap jibes, they will see that they are talking the same language.
Edward Pearce's Sketch When a first-class generalist meets a grubby technician
Monday dawned to a nameless figure answering questions for a non-department whose head had been defeated in the election and now reigned in a spiritual fashion from the Lords.
The man in question, one of those footmanly types, Twit (first class)— pencil thin spray-on hair and pained costive expression — was, as they would have put it at his public school, ‘being ragged’ by rough children from the village.
The missing minister was Mrs Lynda Chalker (Overseas Aid), who for years has retained her first husband in her name, since Lynda Landa sounds like an entry for the Eurovision song contest.
The stand-in who could also pass for a horribly oppressed 25-shilling Victorian clerk was, of course, Mark Lennox-Boyd, son of the more famous Alan.
And he concluded proceedings by almost screaming at an astonished Mrs Ann Clwyd who had been teasing him; it was a burst of rage that rocked his high chair.
She should apologise to the whole House, it was a disgrace, it wasn't fair, it wasn't fair.
Lord Lundy could hardly have put it better.
Upper-class types who can't cope are thinner on the ground than they were, but in an exalted sort of way William Waldegrave is one of them.
He didn't on Monday do a Jennifer and burst into tantrums.
He was pleasant and good humoured.
But in the general debate on privatisation, he illustrated the higher Civil Service's preference for the first-class generalist with a philosophic overview as compared with the grubby technician.
To put such a man against John Prescott of the bulging briefcase, instant information and armfuls of railway timetables, is a mistake.
For oxygen-free abstraction, for higher thought strewn with parameters and world views, Mr Waldegrave is, as they say in David Byrne's Bar, your only man.
Faced with the problems of letting businessmen make money out of the railway timetable without cancelling the Eastern service as uneconomic, he was the very model of a fifth-century Hellene under a tree in the Agra.
Your first-class generalist, especially your Oxford first-class generalist, is always in danger of retreating to the mediaeval schoolmen and wondering how many Flying Scotsmen could be delayed on the head of a pin.
The learned men of that school were known as doctors plus epithets: the Angelic Doctor, the Sublime Doctor and so forth.
Mr Waldegrave is the Snooty Doctor!
And it was cruel of Teddy Taylor to cast into such a garden of refinement the used oil drum of a question about trains from Southend.
Mr Waldegrave gracefully admitted not knowing and promised to send a letter to the low fellow.
And in the era of John Major's classlessness, it was not wise of Waldegrave in complimenting the new Speaker to speak of his ancestors having been dragged to that very chair at the time of the Black Death.
William Waldegrave among MPs has the air of Prince Charles at the Stretford End.
Mr Major, whom one suspects of more mischief and humour than he is credited with, has declared his old enemy to be ‘Minister for the Little People’, which sweetly traps Mr Waldegrave between the cartoonist Pont and the leprechauns.
The Secretary of State for a Higher Sphere, in the absence of the transport minister, was also trapped for the day with Mr Prescott whose ancestors during the Black Death were sullen and resentful charcoal burners with chips on their shoulders.
Actually, Maximum John was sunnily good-humoured on Monday, refraining entirely from picking anybody up by the lapels to ask them, ‘You what?
You bugger.’
Though he would hate to have it said, he is an intellectual himself who has paid transport the compliment of studying it properly and knowing most things about it.
What he actually offered was a vigorous defence of the mixed economy with a passing assault on Treasury investment rules.
It was only the stupidity of Treasury rules that had stopped BR under Labour and Tory governments going after private capital.
But had anyone thought through the relationship between coal and rail?
Suppose coal were run down on short-term profit calculations, how did any private or public organisation running the railways cope with the consequences to freight?
What about the monopolistic profits, as witness electricity and Manweb's latest and forecast profits as quoted in the Times business survey — 77 per cent up in 1990-1991?
These are not things much taught at the 14th-century Sorbonne.
And who paid for all that then?
He leaned benevolently towards the Tentative Doctor.
The Little People?
SCOTLAND
I'll take the lone road Alex Gordon on why he thinks Scotland should go its own way
I am one of those Labour voters who supports the Scotland United initiative.
It has taken 13 years to come to this position.
Perhaps I can explain why.
In 1979, as a member of the Labour Party Young Socialists, I was gutted, as indeed we all were, when Labour lost the election having been brought down by the ‘Tartan Tories’.
Then, in 1983, as an undergraduate, no longer in the Labour Party, I campaigned in Glasgow for a vigorous Labour Party and the return of 44 MPs, having convinced many Nationalist friends that independence was a side issue, having seen an SNP- ‘manufactured’ government tear apart the very fabric of our society.
England voted Tory.
In 1987, I didn't have to concern myself about Doomsday scenarios as I was staying in Manchester.
Yes, it opened my eyes to the plight of socialists and Labour Party members in England and to the fact that not all the English voted Tory, particularly in the north.
As the campaign progressed, I became increasingly angry at the attitudes of my friends at home and how different they said things were there, believing, as I did and still do, in the importance of a Labour victory for Britain as a whole.
In Manchester, as in Scotland, it was a good night for Labour but overall the result was still devastating.
The next morning, I came home to defiance in the face of defeat and 50 Scots Labour MPs, the Fighting Fifty.
This defiance was expressed not simply by a host of politicians, personalities and pop stars, but also by ordinary men and women in the street.
Many will remember a street interview, I think by Scottish TV, in which an ordinary guy from Glasgow upbraided an old woman who was happy to see Thatcher back at Number 10, with the all-too appropriate retort: ‘Are you off your fucking head, Mrs?’
By 1988, the Fighting Fifty had become 49 and then 48.
From 1987 to 1992, with an increasing sense of despair, people looked to Labour for leadership on a wide variety of issues.
On the Poll Tax, they rejected non-payment but failed to provide an option for people except NUNGE, nothing until the next general election.
And so to 1992.
I am in Glasgow, along with a handful of friends, all with good jobs, all with good prospects, two of whom will certainly lose out if Labour are elected.
Nevertheless, they had all had voted Labour.
By 1.30am it was all over, four more years and a large carry out to be bitterly consumed.
Next time we may well vote for the Scottish National Party, no more NUNGE.
I do not believe in the SNP, but in realistic terms the only chance of seeing a society based on social justice is through independence.
The Labour Party in Scotland has failed to deliver; I have not been betrayed, I have been misguided — and I am certainly not alone.
To Brian Wilson and other defenders of the union, I say only one thing.
I am a Labour supporter with many friends carrying cards, and, despite having observed the ‘anti-Labour virulence’ of the SNP, I do want Labour to come together with the Nats, the Liberals, the Greens, the Unions, the churches, the mosques, the synagogues, Uncle Tom Cobbley and all.
I know of others who feel much the same — it's called consensus politics, and it requires cooperation and a concentration on what the parties have in common rather than exaggerating their differences.
This style of politics is common in Europe: it is not too much to expect Brian Wilson and others to accept this responsibility.
This may appear selfish to comrades south of the Tweed-Solway.
It is not intended to be and I am sorry if it appears so.
Many of us don't have a British identity, some shared experiences beyond Blue Peter images of a united United Kingdom.
We have walked along a similar road, but so have comrades elsewhere in Europe.
If, as Brian Wilson says, it is Labour's job to defend its people and communities to the best of its collective ability in Scotland, then it has to be accepted that the Scots have to go it alone.
To the aid of the party How have the Tories governed in Scotland without a mandate?
By packing quangos with their supporters, says Kenny Farquharson
All of a sudden it seems Scotland's Tories want to be loved.
There is a cuddly look about the new Scottish Office ministerial team and there have been unconfirmed sightings of the word ‘consensus’.
Interest is now focused on how this might manifest itself in the government's promised rethink on constitutional reform.
But there are those who say that, if the Tories are serious, there is an easier way to take more account of what Scots want — one that might be less dramatic than a limited constitutional concession but probably more effective.
What is being suggested is a softening of the hard line taken by the Tories in Scotland over the past five years in the use of political patronage.
It is in the Scottish Secretary's gift to appoint people to the ruling committees of more than 100 quangos and public bodies controlling key aspects of the nation's life, such as health, education, the environment, economic development and the arts.
Arguably, these are where real political power lies in Scotland.
To control them is to control the way government policy is implemented, and in the past they were the means by which Scotland adapted Westminster's diktats to suit Scotland's needs.
‘It was one of the reasons the middle class in Scotland felt the Union worked for them,’ says Lindsay Paterson, of Edinburgh University's Unit for the Study of Government in Scotland.
‘The government never really tried to impose its views on Scotland.
There was a process of compromise until there was consensus among the professionals.
Now Scotland's middle class feels excluded, especially those like teachers and doctors working in the public sector.’
It was a cosy arrangement that allowed Scotland to retain its separate identity within the United Kingdom — a kind of home rule by quango.
It also allowed Scotland's distinct traditions in areas such as education and the law to be protected.
Labour and Conservative administrations both followed the convention, with some Tory secretaries of state actually being more pernickety than some of their Labour counterparts about picking truly representative appointees.
What has destroyed this is a shift, accelerated in the late 1980s, away from the notion that public bodies should represent the public.
It has happened throughout the UK, but given the role these organisations played in keeping the Union workable, it is particularly significant north of the border.
The most vigorous exponent of the new approach has been Margaret Thatcher's favourite Scottish Office minister, Michael Forsyth, who until his promotion last month to the Department of Employment was the most loathed man in Scottish politics.
The method used in the past few years has been simple — ignore names put forward by organisations you do not approve of and pack the committees with more sympathetic interest groups.
In practice, this largely means freezing out local authority representatives and the relevant trade unions, which, compared to south of the border, are more generally accepted as deserving a place in public life.
What really rankles is the loss of the idea that these bodies are broadly representative of the communities they serve.
Last year, Scotland's 16 health boards were reconstituted so that no trade unions or local authorities had the right of membership, and they are now dominated by the Tories' natural allies — business people — under the cloak of rhetoric about bringing in commercial nous (see box).
‘What has been lost on the health boards is a basic insight into how people live and what they think,’ says Jim Devine, Scottish area officer for the health union Cohse.
‘Five out of six people on the Greater Glasgow health board are card-carrying members of the Tory party.
If that's representative of Glasgow, then it is a different city from the one I know.’
On bodies such as the Scottish Vocational Education Council, the representation of Scotland's biggest teaching union, the EIS, has been cut in favour of more sweetheart unions like the head teachers'.
On regional education committees the teaching unions have had their voting rights removed.
As a result, reforms like school boards and compulsory testing for primary school pupils — which would have been unlikely to survive unscathed in the more consensual days of previous Tory administrations — have been implemented and then decisively rejected by the public.
For a country that almost defines itself in terms of its distinctive education system, such changes are seen as an attack on the Scottish way of life.
However, the Scottish Office has not had it all its own way.
Some health boards have experienced trouble finding suitable numbers of business people to take up the available seats, even after reducing the size of boards from 18 to 12.
‘They weren't interested because they realised what they would be expected to do,’ says Jim Devine.
‘If you are a high-flier in commerce or industry, the last thing you want to be associated with is the closure of a hospital.’
In other cases, good old commonsense has prevailed.
When the government set up Local Enterprise Companies as an important tool for economic development there was no place in their plans for trade union representation.
But in many parts of the Scottish central belt, the business people involved realised how foolish this was, and invited senior trade unionists on board.
Many Tories now recognise that the abuse of political patronage has played a significant part in fuelling Scotland's dissatisfaction with the Union.
Among those in the party who would like to see a more accommodating approach is Ross Harper, a prominent Glasgow lawyer and one of two main contenders for the Scottish party chairmanship, if the present incumbent Lord Sanderson stands down as expected next year.
‘I detect, in the current composition of the Scottish Office team, a maturity of judgment that will take account of Scotland's special position,’ says Harper, in what could be read as a dig at the departed Michael Forsyth.
‘While every political party will recognise and promote the talent within its own party, it's just as important to recognise talent and experience elsewhere.
There are many government departments that affect the everyday lives of Scots and it is important that these appointments are balanced.’
Privately, others are less measured.
‘Forsyth went bananas and abused the whole system,’ says one senior wet.
‘It was embarrassing, even to Tories.
I expect we'll now see trade unionists and others appointed where appropriate.
It's especially important on health boards so we can win back some public confidence regarding the NHS.’
If there is a desire to go down this road it has to be said it may not be as easy as it might at first seem.
The make-up of some of the most influential quangos is laid down in law, and would require more legislation to change.
Also, most appointees on public bodies are given their jobs for a set number of years, so it could be some while before changes filtered through.
But there is still considerable room for manoeuvre.
A straw in the wind will be who is appointed to an important new quango that will control university funding, the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council.
If, when the list of members is handed down from the St Andrew's House — Scotland's Whitehall — it contains a majority of business people, it will be a message from the government that Scotland is not ready for consensus.
It will also be an opportunity missed.
Scotland's health boards
Eleven of Scotland's 15 health board chairmen represent business or Conservative Party interests.
Another two are farmers, and two are neutral.
Conservative Party and business interests make up 46 per cent of the 90 members, 19 per cent nominated either by themselves or the boards.
Of the 90, only nine come from medical professional bodies, six from local councils, and four from universities.
There are no trade union representatives, or people nominated by the Scottish TUC.
Greater Glasgow Health Board appointees include the Rev Roderick Campbell, a campaigner against perceived left wing tendencies in the Church of Scotland, and a columnist for the magazine Scottish Conservative .
It also included, until her recent death, Lady Goold, wife of a former chairman of the Conservative Party in Scotland.
WASHINGTON DIARY Time for change Fred Halliday ponders on the primaries, the Cubans and Mr Moonbeam
A pointed feminist saying about the president goes: ‘George Bush is every woman's first husband’, an apt summary of Francis Fukuyama's concern that in liberal democracies the greatest threat is boredom.
Feminist issues, in particular sexual harrassment, abortion and the role of women in politics, have been more central to this election campaign than in any previous one.
Mass mobilisations by the so-called ‘pro-life’ forces in Buffalo are designed to focus on an issue that puts liberals on the defensive: abortion is to the US Democratic Party what taxes were to Labour.
There is an increasing mood in favour of reversing the Supreme Court decision (Roe vs Wade) that in 1973 allowed some abortion.
Yet in the primaries, liberal women candidates have made a strong showing, two campaigning as outraged by the treatment meted out by male congressmen to Professor Anita Hill in the hearings on the Clarence Thomas nomination.
In the Pennsylvania primary, Lynn Yeakel, a 50-year-old Democrat with a long experience in working for battered women, job training, abortion counselling and family health care, scored a big upset victory after running ads on TV showing excerpts from the Hill hearings.
Hill, now a national heroine, speaks to large audiences; her statements make the TV news.
Another focus of feminist debate has been Hilary Clinton, wife of the Democratic front-runner.
She has a career in legal reform related to children's defence and legal aid, ‘stood by’ her husband in the controversy over his personal behaviour, and has been suggested by him as a possible member of his cabinet.
Thirty eight per cent of those polled think that she ‘helps’ him, 30 per cent think that she ‘hurts’him.
Her remark that she could always have stayed home and made cookies has discomfited Republicans, not least Barbara Bush.
Many voices are heard in favour of more women running for office, and Emily's List, a group that funds only Democratic women running for office, has seen its membership grow by more than 300 per cent since the Hill-Thomas hearings.
The right-wing commentator George Gilder recently observed that America benefits from revolutions, successful and failed, in other countries, since the élites leave and come to America.
The US got the ‘best’ of the Cubans and Iranians, as it got many from 1848 (Pinkerton, the organiser of anti-union factory guards was originally a British Chartist), and is now taking the cream of former communist states.
Among the more recent arrivals in the Washington area are those from the Horn of Africa.
A Somali taxi-driver denounces those in his country who still think they can make a radical revolution, before turning to a discussion of the narcotic, khat, legally available in Britain but banned for some time in the US.
In the Ethiopian revolution no one for a long time knew the fate of Haile Fida, leader of the left-wing Meison group: I only had his death confirmed when the Ethiopian lift-operator in a DC hotel told me he had been in the same cell when Haile was taken out to be shot.
Today there are around 7,000 Eritreans in the area, many taxi-drivers and restaurant owners.
When Eritrea achieved de facto independence last year, 80 cars went from DC to New Jersey to the home of the veteran Eritrean labour leader Woldeab Wolde Mariam, whom I had met more than 20 years ago in exile in Aden, and brought him to the Washington community church, Saint Selassie.
An Eritrean taxi-driver, once a guerrilla specialist in urban infiltration and explosions, who came to DC after being seriously wounded, has his comparative view of colon-ialism.
‘British colonialism was no good, but it taught people to read.
Italian colonialism was no good, but it taught people to work.
French colonialism only taught people to put on perfume and a new shirt.
In Djibouti, the former French colony, only 2 per cent can read, but they all have their shirts,’ he said disparagingly.
He had been a carpenter, but Bush put him out of work.
‘I'm voting for Clinton.’
The Cubans have thrown the US off balance by, in the wake of the Libya-Lockerbie crisis, demanding extradition to Cuba of two men accused of blowing up a Cuban airliner over Barbados in 1976.
But they are not forgiven.
‘George Bush to be the first US President to visit a free Cuba’ headlines the far-right Miami Diario de las Americas , carrying, on its inside page, details of how to phone Cuba and send over food parcels, as well as where to register your confiscated property for repossession after the regime has gone.
Those who favour dialogue and opening to Cuba are silenced — editors of the Miami Herald who recently suggested as much received death threats.
A friend who talked recently with the State Department Cuba desk asked them what would be necessary for a lifting of the embargo.
The reply: free elections in line with western standards.
And who would run against Castro?
They had no idea.
If Castro won would they accept it?
After a long pause, yes.
Friends of Cuba suggest they may just scrape through now that oil in commercial quantities has been found.
In response to US pressure, Fidel may do another Mariel, letting thousands of criminals and others escape to the US along with those who want to go.
The ultimate showdown: US intervention in support of a rising on the island, Castro seizes the 2,000-odd US troops at Guantanamo and throws his MiG-29s at Miami, Tampa and other southern cities beloved of the Republican Party élite.
For all his reputation as a crank and Mr Moonbeam, Jerry Brown packs a great electoral speech.
He quotes Thomas Jefferson: ‘This country needs a rebellion every 20 years', and the USA has not had one for 200.’
‘You know crack was invented in the 80s.
You know that, don't you?
It was invented under Reagan and Bush.
They didn't have it before then.
That's when — you know, you've heard about supply-side economics.
You've heard about deregulating cocaine.
That's what crack is…
The biggest housing programme in America is now prison-building.
Prison-building, that's the new public housing, other than housing for Bush and Quayle.’
He hammers home the message that the US international role has destroyed it at home: ‘The battle is right here, and it's not incoming missiles, it's incoming inequality.’
The area of Washington I know best lies around Dupont Circle, its streets now ablaze with pink, purple and white azaleas, the pavement cafes now opening up, and where for the past two decades the left think tank, the Institute for Policy Studies, has been loc-ated.
Tragedy and curiosity combine.
About a mile away, at Sheridan Circle, our director, the former Chilean foreign minister Orlando Leteleir and Ronni Moffitt, an institute worker, were killed in October 1976 by a car bomb planted by right-wing Cubans in the pay of the Pinochet secret police: only in the past few months has the Chilean government paid compensation to their families.
Next to the People's Drug supermarket is a multi-ethnic restaurant that once advertised Persian food, in English and Persian, but has now prudently changed the latter to a more vague ‘international’.
Up the hill towards Columbia Heights, where last year a near popular insurrection against the police occurred, Ethiopian and Eritrean restaurants — the Asmara, the Ras, the Red Sea — have been growing; the latest arrivals are West African food and the Azerbaijani Café.
The temple of the White Sikhs has moved on, there are many more South Asians than a decade ago, Egyptians have taken over one of the fast-food diners.
Gem of the district, and one of my favourite places in the world, is Kramer's Bookstore and Afterwords Café, with a wonderful array of literature, political and other books.
Starting with breakfast at 7am, Kramer's stays open until two in the morning: there are few better ways to unwind than browsing to Vivaldi or jazz late at night.
AMERICAN POLITICS Psychic terrorists The New Alliance Party is based on encounter therapy.
But it has growing influence and money, says Bruce Shapiro
On 7 December last year, Mayor Carrie Saxon Perry of Hartford, Connecticut — the first African-American woman elected mayor of a major city, a progressive Democrat whose eloquent oratory and elegant clothes alike make her one of the state's most recognisable figures — was master of ceremonies at the opening of a political campaign office on Main Street.
To a substantial crowd gathered on the office steps, she enthusiastically brought on the candidate: ‘I want to introduce to you, possibly — isn't that wonderful — the next president of the United States.’
Mayor Perry's candidate that day was not a fellow Democrat but Lenora Fulani, presidential aspirant of the New York-based New Alliance Party.
Mounting the podium after Mayor Perry, Fulani delivered an impassioned address touching briefly on political corruption, police brutality, Haiti, capital punishment and David Duke.
She raised more than US$7,000 in pledges from the crowd.
Such tributes to Fulani are becoming more familiar, particularly in cities like Hartford, where she and the NAP are little known.
But in cities like San Francisco and New York, where the NAP is a familiar presence, judgments of a different sort —‘deceitful’, ‘divisive’, ‘political destroyers’, ‘Moonies of the left’— echo with remarkable consistency from the lips of activists, black and white alike, who have encountered Fulani, the NAP and party leader Fred Newman through more than a speech.
The NAP has long been controversial, thanks largely to its practice of recruiting members through group psychotherapy and to its alliances with figures as diverse as the neo-fascist Lyndon LaRouche and the Reverend Al Sharpton.
But in the past, the controversy could be confined, like the NAP itself, to the political margins.
No more.
As Mayor Perry's encouragement demonstrated, Fulani's status as an African-American woman and the utter absence of a consistent progressive agenda among this year's leading Democratic presidential candidates make her a tempting protest vote in some decidedly mainstream quarters.
Fulani's minor-party ticket will appear on the November ballot in nearly all 50 states.
Her campaign has qualified for more than US$1 million in federal matching funds, surpassing Jerry Brown's.
Week after week, Fulani attracts impressive media coverage, from respectful CNN interviews to a front-page story in New York's Daily News .
It's time to take Leonora Fulani and the NAP seriously; they are no clones of LaRouche, but a national political phenomenon on their own terms.
What's their real agenda?
Scratch an activist or politician who has encountered the NAP and that uneasy question lies close to the surface.
One answer comes from Fulani herself: ‘more democracy’.
Asked to elaborate, she lays out a series of proposals only slightly to the left of the League of Women Voters: universal voter registration, inclusion of minor-party candidates in presidential debates, revival of the Fairness Doctrine for broadcasters, ‘direct democracy’ in the form of citizen referendums on national issues like the budget, and an all-encompassing but vaguely articulated ‘economic democracy’.
That's as specific (or radical) as Fulani gets.
But Fulani's and the NAP's real agenda is most clearly evident in the slow, steady growth, over more than 20 years, of what once seemed an insignificant crackpot organisation.
The NAP's history begins around 1970.
A tiny radical collective on Manhattan's Upper West Side got the idea of organising political activity around a profit-making experimental encounter therapy practice.
Eventually dubbed social therapy, the scheme proved both an effective recruiting tactic and lucrative business, generating steady streams of adherents and revenue.
The intellectual and emotional leader of that original collective was Fred Newman, a Korean war veteran, who had grown up in the Bronx, held a PhD in the philosophy of science from Stanford and abruptly turned to Marxism in the mid-1960s.
Newman and his band of followers became obsessed with their idiosyncratic vision of a psychotherapy that would challenge not just individual neurosis, but structural injustice in society.
Newman and his original associates (all white and mostly women) were hard-liners who argued that only a revolution of the working class could resolve the individual psychic crisis.
‘There are no private feelings, only social relationships,’ declared one early social therapy handbook.
Replacing ‘bourgeois’ relationships with new revolutionary patterns of consciousness meant virtually every aspect of existing life — sexual orientation and partners, domestic arrangements, employment — could be challenged at the whim of a therapist, with accommodation a condition of remaining in therapy.
Newman referred to himself at the time as a ‘benevolent despot’.
Much of the ‘revolution’ urged upon clients involved advancing the business interests of social therapy itself — recruiting adherents among friends, lovers and neighbours, often dangling before them the possibility of readily available sex, and making large financial donations to the movement's work.
There was overt political work as well, again in accordance with Newman and his associates, who, by the mid-1970s, formed their own grandly named International Workers Party, its leadership indistinguishable from the social therapy collective.
Soliciting funds on the street, and becoming a growing presence at neighbourhood meetings, the Newmanites (then numbering perhaps 30 committed members) moved in and out of coalitions and vicious factional struggles with other marginal groups.
The most notable coalition was with Lyndon LaRouche, already well on his journey to fascism.
In 1977, a social therapy client-turned-practitioner, Nancy Ross, won an Upper West Side school board seat.
That success led the Newmanites further into electoral politics, where they finally emerged in 1979 as the neutral-sounding New Alliance Party.
One New Yorker who encountered Fred Newman and social therapy in the early years was Lenora Branch Fulani, who was earning a PhD in developmental psychology at the City University of New York.
She heard Newman lecture in the late 1970s and was ‘intrigued by the progressiveness of the politics guiding his thought’.
When the Newmanites metamorphosed into the NAP in 1979, they quickly adopted a political agenda far more likely to win allies — and donations — than their neo-Trotskyist rantings.
One of the more common Manhattan experiences of the early 1980s involved being approached by well-dressed individuals and asked to sign a petition helping the NAP get on the ballot in the name of democracy, and then being hit for a contribution.
The NAP adopted a strategy that Newman and Fulani eventually called ‘Two Roads Are Better Than One’: supporting the party's own electoral line but also the campaign of any Democrat who would accept their endorsement.
African-Americans also fit into that original NAP strategy.
Starting in the early 1970s, Newman, and his then all-white collective, embraced the notion that while they would form an intellectual vanguard, the black community would produce ‘organic’ leaders of its own.
Louis Farrakhan of the Nation of Islam was one ally, all the more so after Farrakhan's famous denunciation of Judaism as ‘gutter religion’ led Jesse Jackson to take two steps back.
For the NAP, the watershed year was 1984, when Jesse Jackson first ran for president.
In keeping with Newman's ‘Two Roads’ dictum, the party supported Jackson but also ran a presidential candidate in the general election — a black socialist-turned-NAP member, Dennis Serrette.
Serrette was on the ballot in 33 states and received 35,000 votes.
In 1988, thanks to an ever-larger pool of therapy clients-turned-volunteers and an ever-larger pool of contributions, the NAP managed to qualify for matching funds and place its new presidential candidate, Leonora Fulani, on the ballot in all 50 states.
An accomplished public speaker with an instinct for the soundbite, Fulani became national chair of the NAP as well as its presidential candidate.
In 1988, she travelled around with an imposing security squad of African-American women, hinting at once of black nationalism, gay pride and eerie robotic conformity.
(This year, the security squad is multiracial.)
After loudly supporting an often-uncomfortable Jackson campaign again in the primary, Fulani went on to run on the NAP ticket, winning 240,000 votes in the general election — a considerable performance for a minor party.
Behind the NAP's growing visibility lies a carefully engineered cash machine, founded in the social therapy practice.
The party's strategy of giving campaign contributions the colouration of psychic healing was demonstrated recently in Brooklyn.
There, it gathered some 250 faithful for a report on New Hampshire and, more important, for an intense fundraising pitch.
‘The more you give, the more you grow,’ Fulani intoned.
‘Take it out of your rent.
It feels very, very good.’
Party members and supporters make their legitimate contributions to NAP campaigns.
At the same time, social therapy clients — among them, all party members — pay their fees to Newman and the other social therapists, who turn a portion of those fees over as their own contributions to the party and its affiliates.
That's the basic framework.
Over the years, though, this cash machine has grown increasingly complex, spawning a series of real estate holdings and for-profit businesses — an ad agency, a law firm, a publishing house, a theatre company, and an accounting practice, among others — all run out of the same cluster of Manhattan offices, all employing therapy clients and party members who in turn channel their often-meagre earnings back to the party.
Each of those businesses also serves as a recruitment vehicle for the party itself.
The donations help the party and campaigns qualify for federal matching funds, and hundreds of thousands of dollars of the matching funds are funnelled from the party back to the business through the purchase of their services.
The NAP handles its critics and presumed political opponents with libel suits, smear campaigns and harrassment.
Then there are the stories that surface with remarkable consistency throughout the NAP's history, stories of stable activist organisations overrun by blocs of party members who attempt to steer the group into the Newmanite orbit.
When the NAP can't take over an organisation or movement, it resorts to deception, creating a front group that is almost indistinguishable in name from a more broad-based and respected rival.
The most famous example is the Rainbow Lobby, which reminds donors in unreadably small footnotes to its fliers that it is not affiliated with Jesse Jackson's Rainbow Coalition.
Another example of NAP's marketing-by-deception occurred in California's East Bay.
An Asian-American organisation published a newspaper about violence towards Asians called Break the Silence .
The NAP, trying to make inroads into the Asian community, put out its own sheet, called Breaking the Silence .
There are close connections between social therapy and the NAP's most frightening political tactics.
According to every independent account of social therapy since Newman and his followers started out, it often — at least for those clients deemed likely prospects for active party membership — turns out to be something else: a tool for making isolated, distressed individuals totally dependent on Newman and the party for all sense of self-esteem and community.
Therapists and groups of clients berate individuals for their past behaviour and values, pushing them to the point of breakdown and then offering relief in the form of acceptance by the new therapeutic ‘family’, which in turn means volunteer work or financial contribution to the vertically integrated therapy empire.
Other identifications — whether with feminism, the gay community, independent activist organisations — are derided as bourgeois and self-limiting.
Some former social therapy clients describe being asked to inform NAP of their whereabouts at all times so they could be contacted for party activity, or to hand over their children to the party's care in order to devote more time to politics.
Fulani, Newman and NAP have no mass following.
They claim 10,000 members, but if campaign finance forms are any indication, a few hundred hard-core activists is a more accurate estimate.
But, at the same time, several aspects of the Newmanites' campaign make them a uniquely threatening phenomenon on the political scene.
First, there is Fulani herself.
Any minor political candidate with the charisma and political skill to win support from mainstream black Democrats like Hartford's Mayor Perry is a symbolic force to be reckoned with.
What's more, the NAP is fundamentally different from most political marginals in several important ways.
It has a steady, auto-nomous source of money (the social therapy business), and its followers are far better integrated into the mainstream of American life, with no Moonie-like flower sales, no Charlie Manson eyes, no anti-Semitism loosely cloaked in ravings about the Queen of England in the style of LaRouche.
Wealthy, well-organised, possessed of a conventionally comprehensible overt platform and a clear strategy, there is no reason to think that the NAP will stop growing.
Indeed, the party thrives in precisely those situations in which political chaos is matched by a vacuum of genuine, well-rooted alternatives — in short, the current state of the US's electoral politics.
In that sense, the party's new visibility is a distinct rebuke to the democratic left.
The NAP and Fulani offer the false but alluring appearance of symbolically charged and emotionally outraged response to the feelings of exclusion from the political process many Americans harbour.
In a year when the Democratic presidential nominee may well be someone who golfs at whites-only club and is willing to throw the switch of the electric chair, Lenora Fulani's appeal will continue to grow.
But add up the ledger: psychic terrorism aimed at party members, disruption and intimidation of opponents, elevation of politicial demagogues, hoodwinking of the public, and an ideology teetering between right and left, between provocative symbolism and head-spinning paranoia.
One cannot support Fulani, whether by vote or contribution, without aiding the jackboot movement behind her.
JUDAISM Zealots for the television age Lubavitch Jews are on the march, and believe the Messiah is living in New York, reports Jack Shamash
Shortly before Christmas, commuters driving home down London's Park Lane had something of a surprise.
Parading along the road in a stately line, driven by Hasidic Jews with long beards, were 150 large cars, each with a giant branched Jewish candlestick mounted on the roof.
This sort of dramatic display of Judaism is the public face of Lubavitch — an ultrareligious movement that has become increasingly powerful over the past ten years.
To supporters, Lubavitch is the most exuberant and positive thing to hit Judaism in centuries.
To opponents, it is an insidious force, a Jewish militant tendency, spreading its own sinister doctrine.
Lubavitch occupies a peculiar place in the Jewish world.
Ostensibly, it is just one of numerous Hasidic sects, whose roots lie in the villages of eastern Europe.
The men sport black coats and long beards and dedicate their lives to prayer in a way that has changed little in 250 years.
But unlike other Hasidic sects, Lubavitch does not shun the outside world.
Its members devote much energy to outreach work — persuading secular Jews to be more religiously observant.
The most important difference, however, can be found in a brownstone building in Brooklyn.
Inside, sits a diminutive man with a grey beard who has just celebrated his 90th birthday.
He is Rabbi Menachem Schneerson, the ‘Rebbe’ or spiritual leader of the Lubavitch Movement.
To followers, he is more than just a guiding light — he is the Messiah.
There are about 55,000 members of the Lubavitch sect, who are based mainly in New York and Israel.
Only 1,000 members live in Britain, although their influence is out of all proportion to their numbers.
Few people doubt the zeal of the Lubavitch movement.
Their rabbis, realising that most Jews rarely see the inside of a synagogue, have gone out to the people.
At least three vans regularly tour London persuading Jews to fulfil religious obligations — inviting them into the vans to say prayers or recite the traditional blessings over bread and wine.
Throughout Britain, they have set up centres for Jews to meet.
And they advertise.
In New York, the word is spread on poster hoardings.
In this country, they hire the electronic noticeboards in post offices for messages such as‘Jewish mothers and daughters light your Sabbath candles!’
Rabbi Leivi Sudak is the Rebbe's emissary to Edgware, a north London suburb.
Every weekend, he drives around the streets talking to crowds of young Jews who gather there.
Most of the youngsters know him by name and he is often called to Hendon police station when they get into trouble with the law.
Inside his dining room, under a large picture of the Rebbe, he showed me a book listing thousands of organisations run by Lubavitch across the world.
There were pictures of Lubavitch Hasids having meetings with potentates such as King Juan Carlos of Spain.
‘Lubavitch never sleeps,’ he told me.
Another rabbi enthused about the range of activities.
‘We have bagel brunches, debates, discussion groups, and weekend programmes.
We provide scholarships for Israel and the States.
And if you want your kitchen koshered we'll do it.’
Although all orthodox Jews believe that the Messiah will come, the Lubavitch allow messianic vision to colour their entire lives.
Cars have bumper stickers declaring: ‘We want Mashiach [the messiah]now!
This slogan crops up throughout Lubavitch life.
It is written on children's notebooks and chanted by their youth groups.
Lubavitch leaders always claim publicly that the identity of the Messiah has yet to be revealed.
However, among their ranks it is universally believed that their leader — Rabbi Menachem Schneerson — will fulfil the Messianic prophecy.
Schneerson was 90 at the beginning of April.
Such is his charisma that thousands of people queue for audiences with him.
He is credited with almost miraculous powers of healing.
He distributes dollar bills to his supporters and these notes are kept as talismans to ward off evil.
Opponents claim this ‘cult of the individual’ is against the spirit of Judaism.
Lubavitchers point out that a belief in the imminent coming of the messiah is a fundamental tenet of Jewish faith.
And that each generation contains a potential messiah.
Because of Rabbi Schneerson's piety, they argue, he is the most likely candidate.
‘Our Rebbe embodies the messianic ideal,’ said one rabbi from Stamford Hill in north London.
‘We talk openly about him being the messiah, and we feel sure we will see the Messiah before the end of the Rebbe's days.’
The Lubavitch hope to hasten the coming of the messianic age.
This explains the fervour with which they perform their outreach work.
Every time a Jew remembers to say his daily prayers, they feel the Messiah come a step nearer.
This zeal has led Lubavitch into politics.
The Rebbe has told Israeli followers to vote against left-wing parties that would cede land to the Palestinians — an action he maintains would be militarily disastrous.
In the finely balanced world of Israeli politics, such pronouncements are important in swaying public opinion and the Rebbe's critics have been vociferous in condemning this stance.
Chaim Bermant, columnist for the Observer and Jewish Chronicle , feels the Rebbe's judgment is seriously flawed.
‘He has never set foot in Israel and yet claims to be an expert in Israeli affairs.
Now he fancies himself as a great military strategist.
He is quite batty.’
But it is in domestic affairs that they are most controversial.
Within Anglo-Jewish society, many regard them as a sort of cult — like Moonies or Scientologists — desperately trying to win converts.
Lubavitch admit that by persuading young people to become fiercely religious, they can break up families.
Rabbi Faivish Vogel, who runs Lubavitch in Britain, explained: ‘If it's going to be a violent break-up, we encourage youngsters to move more slowly.
We usually tell students to finish their university courses before going to religious seminaries.’
He said that Lubavitch offered counselling for parents distressed by the prospect of their children throwing up a lucrative career for a life of prayer.
‘Sometimes people get upset.
We understand that.’
At the same time Lubavitch has won many friends.
One Lubavitch rabbi in Stoke Newington organises gifts and loans — often running into thousands of pounds — for congregants fallen on hard times.
Another young man told me how a Lubavitch rabbi helped him when he got into trouble with the police.
‘He really straightened me out.
I now sit with him in synagogue every Saturday morning.’
However, even supporters feel the movement sometimes goes too far in its quest for souls.
I learnt of one Jewish man who married a non-Jewish woman and approached Lubavitch for spiritual help.
They told him repeatedly to leave his wife.
The pressure led to a nervous breakdown.
Lubavitch is heavily involved in work with students.
At Oxford University, their chap-lain has built up an active programme of events, getting speakers as varied as heart transplant pioneer Dr Christian Barnard, actor Jon Voigt and Israeli cabinet minister Ariel Sharon.
Chaim Bermant, though, sees this as window dressing.
‘They have intellectual pretensions but it is all sham.
They have no respect for non-Jewish culture and would be only too happy if Jews never set foot in a university.’
The most serious accusation is that they are attempting to take over leading British orthodox synagogues by stealth.
One Reform rabbi, Jonathan Romain, describes them as ‘the Jewish militant tendency’: ‘They do jobs that no one else will do — as caretakers or teachers — and take over the synagogues through the back door.
This is very worrying.
They have no interest in the wider Jewish community or in society at large.’
Lubavitch rabbis currently run six major synagogues in London and there are many others dependent on Lubavitch teachers.
Rabbi Vogel, director of Lubavitch, agreed that this could cause friction.
‘Some sections of the community are in fear of Lubavitch incumbents.
However, there are numerous communities where the Lubavitch rabbi has revived a community that was literally dying on its feet.’
This is widely recognised as one of the more remarkable achievements of Lubavitch.
In Walford Road, Hackney, the community was drifting away until a Lubavitch rabbi took over.
He gained a reputation for being broad minded, and welcomed homosexuals, single parents and black Jews (the offspring of Jewish mothers and West Indian fathers) who sometimes get a frosty reception elsewhere.
Like all Lubavitch ministers, he was eager to cut across barriers of class and prejudice.
The result is that the synagogue, which three years ago came perilously close to closure, is now busy every week.
The reaction to this is varied.
The Chief Rabbi, Dr Jonathan Sacks, is a supporter of Lubavitch and claims to have found his spiritual path during a discussion with the Lubavitcher Rebbe.
The former Chief Rabbi, Lord Immanuel Jakobovits, was more sceptical.
He warned against messianic fervour and obliquely compared the Rebbe with Shabbetai Zvi, a false messiah who galvanised Judaism in the 17th century.
The comparison with Shabbetai Zvi is apposite.
Zvi was captured by the Turks and forced to convert to Islam.
His death was followed by major schisms that still reverberate.
The Lubavitcher Rebbe is recovering from a stroke.
He has no children and no obvious successor.
His followers are determined he will be revealed as the messiah as soon as possible.
In Britain, they are mounting lectures, and distributing pamphlets on the same theme — the Messiah is at hand.
In Israel, they have built an exact replica of the Rebbe's house so he will feel at home when he is proclaimed as Messiah and brought to the Holy Land.
Many Jews regard these preparations as un-Jewish, and even sacreligious.
But then if Lubavitch is right and the messianic age is upon us, the criticisms will scarcely matter very much.
THE LABOUR PARTY Which way now?
John Smith and Bryan Gould put forward their visions for the party's future
After four successive election defeats, the Labour Party once again faces the painful task of reappraisal and reconstruction,writes John Smith .
We must develop policies that meet the new challenges we will face as Britain prepares to enter the 21st century.
In the debate about the future of the Labour Party, there can be no room for complacency or morbid defeatism.
The Labour Party's future strategy cannot conceivably amount to ‘one more heave’ or, at the other extreme, consist of liquidation and merger with the Liberal Democrats.
Commitment to the values and principles we stand for, reinforced by the recognition that — unlike the other opposition parties — we gained ground on 9 April, must be combined with realism about the further progress and change that will be necessary if Labour is to achieve victory in 1996 or 97.
Instant wisdom proffered by some commentators in the quality press is that Labour's task is forlorn.
At best we are trapped in a modern version of the ancient myth of Sisyphus: condemned forever to roll the electoral stone to the top of the hill only to see it roll back down again.
This unhappy prospect, it is argued, is the inevitable consequence for a party of the left committed to redistribution and public services in a society dominated by an increasingly affluent majority.
Saddened sympathisers offer condolence: that we are the victim of our own success — that it was Labour's postwar achievements that gave rise to today's affluent but now electorally ungrateful majority.
Writing from an American perspective, J K Galbraith, in his new book,The Culture of Contentment , gives a similarly pessimistic account of the political deadlock caused by the affluent majority.
According to Galbraith, America's democracy of the contented contemptuously ignores the growing underclass of the poor, underestimates the declining competitiveness of the US economy, and responds resentfully to any remedy that intrudes on the majority's self-satisfaction.
Galbraith is sceptical that conventional US politics will be capable of achieving a full democracy that ‘embraces the interests and votes of all its citizens’.
The only challenges to the ‘culture of contentment’ are shocks such as economic depression, war, or an uprising of the underclass.
In the wake of the Los Angeles riots, it would be foolish to ignore Galbraith's prescient warnings.
Nevertheless, I do not accept that his pessimism is warranted in Britain.
Although we too have developed what has been described as the two thirds/one third society, I believe it is well within the capabilities of Labour to develop policies for economic and social progress that can appeal to the contented majority.
Just how comfortable, contented and affluent are the majority in Britain?
Are they immune to anxiety about the decline of our inner cities, to unemployment, homelessness, drug abuse, and crime?
Are they insulated from concern about the quality of healthcare and education that is available to their families and themselves?
Are they fully satisfied with their standard of living and the quality of their lives?
I am certain they are not, and it is worth remembering that the majority did not vote Conservative on 9 April.
Many of the so-called contented majority are concerned about poverty and injustice.
They recognise that arguments for a fair system of taxation and benefits, for protection from exploitation and discrimination, and for help for the unemployed, are not only moral issues but questions about the cohesion and security of the whole community.
Most people in Britain depend on public provision for health care and education.
The private sector is too small and too expensive to educate and care for us all adequately.
That is why the majority will respond to the threats of fragmentation and commercialisation of our health and education systems.
Why should we assume the so-called contented majority has come even close to fulfilling its aspirations?
For many in Britain, opportunities are restrained and their full potential is unrealised.
Lack of investment in skills and innovation limit the potential of many to boost their levels of pay and job satisfaction.
Women, now more than 50 per cent of the population, endure frustrated ambitions.
To close the gender gap, new ways must be found to overcome barriers of inadequate training, low pay, discrimination, and the absence of proper child care.
Even the most affluent — who can afford private health care and private education — cannot buy a clean environment.
We must integrate environmental concerns into every area of policy; demand tough action against pollution, enforced by effective, independent agencies, and campaign for stronger inter-national action to protect the ozone layer, reduce acid rain, and tackle global warming.
Labour can succeed because our concerns are those of the majority.
But we must make sure our party and policies are geared to Britain's needs in the late 1990s and the new century to come.
That is why we must push forward the vital work begun by Neil Kinnock of modernising the party.
We must encourage the widest possible involvement of our membership.
Our greatest strength is their energy and commitment.
That is why I believe the future of the Labour Party must be founded on the clear principle of one member one vote.
This will require a new structure for the electoral college, new rules for selection of candidates, reform of the trade union block vote, and new procedures for policy.
We also need a new vision.
The Conservatives have for too long been able to exploit simple ideas about choices and markets.
We must demolish their fraudulent claims to be the party of freedom and opportunity.
Labour must reassert the ideological strength and popular appeal of the values and ideals of democratic socialism.
We know real freedom for the majority depends on economic efficiency and social justice.
Democratic socialists have always rejected a narrow conception of freedom and have fought for the ‘positive freedoms’ of wide access to education, health care, housing and employment.
We must demonstrate that poverty, unemployment, low pay and low skills are not just barriers to individual opportunity, but that they undermine the capacity for wealth creation.
This is our economic argument: a path to personal enrichment from the fruits of economic progress more widely shared.
But our idea needs to be strengthened with a political argument: a path to personal empowerment by encouraging responsibility and participation in a democracy in which power is more widely shared.
It is a strategy for citizenship and community.
That is why I believe the time has come when Labour should commit itself to a Bill of Rights based on the European Convention of Human Rights.
That is why we need a Freedom of Information Act, why government must be more pluralistic and more decentralised, and why we should fully explore electoral reform.
We need a new constitution for a new century.
We must ensure government is brought closer to the people and communities it is elected to serve.
We must strengthen the rights of consumers and challenge the power of monopolies and big business.
Labour must lead the challenge against the vested interests that control so much power and privilege.
Labour will be trusted with power if we show we want to share power with the people.
We must build the broadest possible movement of opposition to Conservative policies.
We must speak for the majority that opposed the return of John Major's government.
If we set about our task with intelligence and commitment, victory is well within our grasp.
Labour's election defeat has produced two contradictory responses,writes Bryan Gould .
Neither should be accepted.
The first is the notion that all that is now required is ‘one more heave’.
No such illusion can survive a sober contemplation of the 7-point gap between the Tory share of the popular vote and ours.
The second response is more apocalyptic.
It suggests Labour can never win again, that our only chance is to strike an electoral pact with the Liberals and that, failing that, we face a one-party state on the Japanese model.
This, too, should be rejected.
We returned to Westminster with 40 additional seats.
No other alternative to the Tories is on offer.
Yet it is a view that is rather more difficult to dismiss, if only because there is at its heart a real, and so far unresolved, problem.
Labour is said to be in terminal decline because we have failed to identify, let alone appeal to, a natural constituency we might expect to provide us with majority support.
Our 1992 campaign exemplified this problem.
Our appeal to our traditional supporters was not enough to outweigh our lack of success with those growing numbers who no longer count themselves as working class.
Our policy-making seemed stuck in a time warp in which we saw our role as offering help to a disadvantaged majority against a privileged minority — seemingly unaware that income is no longer distributed in a pattern that is pyramidal, but is egg-shaped.
We had little to say to those on middle incomes whose votes decide elections.
Our endorsement of Tory macro-economic policy, and acceptance that it should aim for no more than monetary stability, meant we were unable to offer them a convincing route to full employment or economic recovery.
Nor did we make much effort to match the potent appeal of Tory policies on privatisation and council house sales.
We failed to offer proposals that could have been equally appealing but more constructive — such as more control over lifetime contributions to pension funds, greater stakes in enterprises through measures like employee share plans, more extensive rights as employees.
All that we had to say to them was that we intended to tax them more severely.
It is not that redistributive taxation is wrong, or should not be a core part of any left programme.
It is simply that it left us stranded.
Those promised the increases in child benefit and pensions showed little sign of being grateful for our concern.
There was an irredeemably old-fashioned ‘welfarist’ flavour to our proposals that did not appeal to many who were meant to benefit.
We ended up alienating one group of potential Labour voters by appearing to cap their aspirations, while failing to appeal to another group who were not impressed by our attempt to offer them greater benefits.
If we are to do better in 1996, we must avoid the trap of appearing to set one group against the other.
We must make a joint appeal, unifying the interests of those whose support we seek.
Only thus can we construct a constituency whose natural home is Labour.
The basis of that appeal must be the offer of real economic opportunities — full employment and increased rewards for that employment — to all those who want to make something of themselves.
We cannot do that, however, without challenging an economic orthodoxy of which the Tories are the natural custodians — that always gives priority to the short-term interests of the minority who hold and deal in assets, as opposed to those who live and work (or want to work).
We must also understand that people are no longer content to be identified in policy terms by their membership of socio-economic groups.
They rightly insist on being treated as individuals.
We have failed to grasp that most people are now accustomed to exercising choice, however limited their purchasing power.
They like the sense of power and freedom that choice gives them.
They are no longer prepared to ‘like it or lump it’ with publicly delivered services.
Labour has failed to adjust to those changes because our traditional preoccupation with the delivery of public services means we have identified more with the producers than consumers.
And our proper anxiety to complement the market with collectively delivered provision has sometimes blinded us to the obvious point that the only real purpose of any provision is the satisfaction of individual needs, and that a failure in these terms will be judged harshly.
None of this means the socialist objective of equalising power and spreading choice and freedom should be abandoned.
Recognition that market provision is preferred makes the socialist project more urgent.
It means the dangers of market provision must be guarded against.
Power should be equalised and people should be properly equipped to operate in a marketplace that would otherwise treat them unfairly.
Resources should be used to equip people to act in their own interests rather than to pauperise them by treating them as dependents.
So, for example, instead of concentrating resources on child benefit, it may be more sensible to increase provision for child care, so women may enter the job market.
Labour's concern should be with the initial distribution of wealth, rather than with a post hoc redistribution.
We should aim to increase people's ability to participate in, and gain the rewards of, wealth creation, rather than limit ourselves to what is, at best, the palliative of redistributive taxation.
This approach allows us to offer a coherent politics, allying ourselves with people's aspirations while fulfilling our true purpose of advancing the wider and longer-term interests of the whole community.
It provides us with an appeal to a constituency the Tories have been allowed to monopolise.
We must have many other things to say — to women about their interests, needs and values, to constitutional reformers about decentralisation and pluralism, to the party itself about democratising our own affairs, to our European partners about a new European agenda — but our main task is to identify with that majority constituency.
The apocalyptic view must be rejected.
Labour will be re-elected.
The elusive goal of becoming the natural party of government is by no means beyond reach.
If I did not believe our politics — our socialism — worthy of majority support, I would not be in politics.
AMERICAN DIARY Bloods money Alexander Cockburn on the Los Angeles gangs' plans for urban regeneration
In a month or so, when the camera crews have left South-Central Los Angeles and weeds begin to poke their way up through the tarmac in the burned-out lots, it will be easy enough to see who was just talking and who had a genuine plan.
Of course, the sensible thing would be to put some decent amounts of money into the poorer bits of Los Angeles, and cities similarly afflicted, but that's the kind of language most white politicians are programmed to avoid.
The right has reasoned the way it always does.
Bruce Herschensohn, a TV pundit in California seeking the Republican nomination in an upcoming Senate US race, proclaimed in the wake of the riots that ‘some people are rotten’, and derided the idea of underlying social causes.
Picking up on Herschensohn's ‘bad seed’ theory, the federal Centers for Disease Control announced that investigators were being dispatched to investigate the ‘epidemiology’of the riots.
The possibility of viral transmission is not to be precluded, though no doubt a dermatological faction in the CDC will identify melanin as a significant factor.
George Bush has been swerving from side to side as Jekyll battles Hyde for command of the president's soul.
Hyde will inevitably prevail, with South-Central standing in for Willie Horton in the autumn campaign, and a continuing sideline in denouncing LBJ as the prime cause of urban collapse.
Asked why, amid the riots, he was off to yet another fundraiser instead of heading for Los Angeles, Clinton responded that ‘life must go on’.
Since the entire political strategy of his Democratic Leadership Council has been to persuade white folks that the Democratic Party no longer cares for ‘minorities’ and will target no particular money in their direction, Clinton has been predictably low on concrete ideas, coming down from the hills after the battle to suffocate the wounded with great cushions of blather about how ‘we’have ‘refused to confront our differences’and ‘for this neglect we have all paid’.
Though he was careful to say that the solution was not to ‘throw money at problems’, Clinton is recycling such old Great Society approaches as job-training, education programmes and the like, all part of the package that enabled the Democrats in the sixties to shirk what the party advocated in 1946, namely a full employment act.
This is bottom-line anathema for the corporate class, since it would outlaw the pauperised, feminised work force underpinned by immigrant $6-an-hour labour that keeps the profit curve from dropping through the floor.
The only proposal that even remotely echoes the spirit of that full employment act is the $35-billion urban rescue package urged by big-city mayors before the LA riots as a way to combat recession, and now being pushed with fresh ardour by Boston's mayor, Ray Flynn, Governor Jerry Brown and the Congressional Black Caucus.
Economic proposals by big-city mayors have the newslife of an earthquake in Chile, but this doesn't alter the fact that it remains the only substantive programme.
The mayors' plan, targeting $35 billion in fiscal assistance, public works, community development black grants, job training, and low-interest small-business loans, has been taken up in Congress where it has met the famous legislated ‘wall’, which prevents shift of military funds to social programmes rather than to deficit reduction.
This is a self-defeating battle, since defence cuts have already had a savage impact on greater Los Angeles and, most particularly, LA county.
Early this year, some of the nation's most distinguished economists, among them such Nobel prize winners as James Tobin, Franco Modigliani, Robert Solo and Lawrence Klein, said, given the need for expansion, a short-term increase in the deficit was timely and appropriate.
This is the bottom line.
When the talk of renewal and uplift and volunteerism has dwindled and the weeds sprout amid the ruins, we will be left with the options: Plan A, let poor city neighbourhoods rot; or, Plan B, put in dollars and jobs and a plan.
We've just seen the consequences of Plan A.
There is in fact a detailed expression of Plan B, which we may as well call Plan C. It was put out earlier this week as a joint reconstruction programme for LA by the Bloods and Crips, the LA gangs whose truce in fact began before the riots began.
From internal evidence, this excellent reconstruction programme does not seem to be the work of a left groupuscular intellectual, speaking in the name of the gangs.
For one thing it is devoid of the relentless lilt and terminological tedium of the professional programme writer.
It doesn't seem to be Farrakhanist in origin, though the role of the Rev Louis Farrakhan in the uprising has probably been much underestimated.
The programme of black capitalism resurgent was summed up in the wall slogan, apropos attacking the Koreans' stores: ‘Day One, burn them out.
Day Two, we rebuild.’
The Bloods/Crips programme is so infinitely the best scheme for recovering LA thus far offered that I append it here in its vivacious entirety.
Bloods/Crips proposal for LA's face-lift
Burned and abandoned structures: Every burned and abandoned structure shall be gutted.
The city will purchase the property if not already owned by the city, and build a community centre.
If the structure is on a corner or vacant lot, the city will build a career counselling centre or a recreation area respectively.
Repavement: All pavements/sidewalks in Los Angeles are in dire need of resurfacing.
The Department of Transportation shall pay special attention to the pedestrian walkways and surface streets located in predominantly poor and minority areas.
Our organisation will assist the city in the identification of all areas of concern.
Lighting: All lighting will be increased in all neighbourhoods.
Additionally, lighting of city streets, neighbourhood blocks and alleyways will be amended.
We want a well-lit neighbourhood.
All alleys shall be painted white or yellow by the building owners and alley lights will be installed at the cost of the owner.
Landscaping: All trees will be properly trimmed and maintained.
We want all weeds/shrubbed areas to be cleaned up and properly nurtured.
New trees will be planted to increase the beauty of our neighbourhoods.
Sanitation: A special task force shall be assigned to clean up all vacant lots and trashed areas throughout the deprived areas.
Proper pest control methods shall be implemented by the city.
The city will declare a neighbourhood clean-up week wherein all residents will be responsible for their block — a block captain will be assigned to ensure cooperation.
Blood/Crips Educational Proposal
1.
Maximising education standards in the low income areas is essential to reduce the possibilities of repeated insurrection.
The Blood/Crips propose that:
a)
$300 million will go into the reconstruction and refurbishment of the Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD) structures.
b)
$200 million will be donated for computers, supplies and updated books (each student shall have the necessary books).
c)
All teachers' salaries shall be no less than $30,000 a year to give them an incentive to education in our districts.
d)
Re-election shall be held for all Los Angeles Board of Education members
2)
Reconstruction shall include repainting, sandblasting and reconstruction of all LAUSD schools; remodelling of classrooms, repainting of hallways and meeting areas; all schools shall have new landscaping and more plants and trees around the schools; completely upgrade the bathrooms, making them more modern; provide a bathroom monitor to each bathroom which will provide fresh-up toiletries at a minimum cost to the students.
3)
A provision for accelerated educational learning programmes shall be implemented for the entire LAUSD to provide aggressive teaching methods and provide a curriculum similar to non-economically deprived areas.
Tutoring for all subjects will be made available to all students after school hours.
It will be mandatory for all students with sub-level grades to participate.
In these after-school tutorial programmes, those students whose grades are up to par will receive federally funded bonus bonds that will be applied to their continued education upon graduation from high school.
They will also receive bonus bonds for extra scholastic work towards assisting their fellow students.
All institutions shall maintain a second shift of substitute teachers in the schools to enforce educational excellence.
Special financial bonuses shall be given to students who focus on education beyond the school's requirement in the areas of applied maths and sciences.
High achievers in these areas shall be granted a free trip to another country for educational exchange.
Fifty students from each school will be granted this opportunity each year for an indefinite period.
4)
The LAUSD will provide up-to-date books to the neglected areas and enough books to ensure that no student has to share a book with another.
5)
LAUSD will remove all teachers not planning to further their education along with teachers who have not proven to have a passionate concern for the students.
All teachers shall be given a standard competence test to verify they are up-to-date with subjects and modern teaching methods.
Psychological testing will also be required for all teachers and educational administrations.
All teachers shall be given a competency test to verify they are up to date with subjects and modern teaching methods.
6)
All curriculums shall focus on the basics in high school requirements and it shall be inundated with advanced sciences and additional applied math, English and writing skills.
7)
Bussing shall become non-existent in our community if all of the above demands are met.
Blood/Crips Human Welfare Proposal
Hospitals and Health Care Centres: Federal government shall provide the deprived areas with three new hospitals and 40 additional health care centres.
Dental clinics shall be made available within ten miles of each community.
The services shall be free and supported by federal and state funds.
Welfare: We demand that welfare be removed from our community and welfare programmes be replaced by state work and product manufacturing plants that provide the city with certain supplies.
State monies shall only be provided for invalids and the elderly.
The State of California shall provide a child welfare building to serve as day care centres for single parents.
Parks & Recreation: Los Angeles parks shall receive a complete face-lift, and developed activities and programmes in the parks throughout the night.
Stages, pools and courts shall be reconstructed and resurfaced, and the city shall provide highly visible security 24-hours a day for these parks and recreational centres.
Programmes at the parks shall be in accordance with educational programmes and social exchange programmes developed by the city for adults and young adults.
Bloods/Crips Law Enforcement Programme
The Los Angeles communities are demanding that they are policed and patrolled by individuals who live in the community and the commanding officers by ten-year residents of the community in which they serve.
Former gang members shall be given a chance to be patrol buddies in assisting in the protection of the neighbourhoods.
These former gang members will be required to go through police training and must comply with all of the laws instituted by our established authorities.
Uniforms will be issued to each and every member of the ‘buddy system’, however no weapons will be issued.
All patrol units must have a buddy patrol notified and present in the event of a police matter.
Each buddy patrol will be supplied with a video camera and will tape each event and the officers handling the police matter.
The buddy patrol will not interfere with any police matter, unless instructed by a commanding officer.
Each buddy patrol will also be supplied with a vehicle.
Blood/Crips Economic Development Proposal
Loans shall be made available by the federal and state governments to provide interested minority entrepreneurs interested in doing business in these deprived areas.
The loan requirements shall not be so stringent that it will make it impossible for a businessman to acquire these loans.
These loans shall not exceed a 4 per cent interest bearing charge per year.
The businessman shall not be required to have security for the loan.
However, the businessman must present at least two years of business operations and taxes, with a city licence before funds will be allocated.
The owner must have either an established business desiring to expand or a sound business plan.
Assistance for business plans shall be made available to these businessmen by the Small Business Administration.
Additionally, the Small Business Administration will provide agents to help each business to develop a sound business plan from beginning to end.
No one will be neglected in receiving adequate assistance.
These business owners shall be required to hire 90 per cent of their personnel from within the community and the monies shall not be distributed in a lump sum.
Funds will be released in increments outlined by the business plan.
Any businessman that doesn't conform to the hiring practices will have funding ceased until they conform.
In return for these demands, the Blood/ Crips Organisation will:
1)
Request the drug lords of Los Angeles take their monies and invest them in business and property in Los Angeles
2)
Encourage these drug lords to stop the drug traffic and get them to use the money constructively.
We will match the funds of the state government appropriations and build building-for-building.
3)
We will match funds for an Aids research and awareness centre in South Central and Long Beach that will only hire minority researchers and physicians in the Aids epidemic.
Conclusion:
Meet these demands and the targeting of police officers will stop!
You have 72 hours for a response and a commitment, in writing, to support these demands.
Additionally, you have 30 days to begin implementation.
And, finally, you have four years to complete the projects of construction of the major hospitals and restorations.
Give us the hammer and the nails, we will rebuild the city.
Budget demands: *
Proposal for LA's Face-Lift:$2 billion 
Education Proposal:$700 million 
Law Enforcement Programme:$6 million 
Economic Development Proposal:$20 million 
Human Welfare Proposal:$1 billion 
Total:$3.728 billion 
LETTERS
Joseph Seery, of Darlington, says the responses to John Cole's column on third-world famine relief (24 April), on which I commented here on 1 May, ‘are, I hope, a fantasy…part of an experiment to see how far imaginary outrageous statements can go before their authenticity is challenged.
If so, Mr Platt, I challenge you and an appropriate humanitarian relief agency claims its £5.’
However, if these views are authentic, says Seery,(and, regrettably, I can assure him that they are), he wishes to point out:
1.
John Cole called for a transfer of resources from the rich to the poor.
2.
In this context — and in many others where the contrast between rich and poor is not so extreme — readers of NSS are among the rich.
3.
Socialism is organised benevolence — and compulsorily organised benevolence if it has to be.
4.
Those now providing voluntary humanitarian relief are merely doing of their own free will and on a small scale what we hope citizens of the rich nations will as soon as possible compel their states to do on a massive scale.’
Therefore, Seery continues, ‘The criticisms [you]received raise the following questions.
If we do not now, and voluntarily, give:
1.
Have we any right to urge others to vote for a political party that will compel others to give?
2.
Will others believe we are sincere when we urge them so to vote?
3.
Have we any answer to the jibe, ‘If it is the right thing to do, you would be doing it now instead of waiting for everyone else'?’
Seery has a (powerful) case.
And for the benefit of those readers who are persuaded by his arguments (and those who are not, too), may I refer you to a letter from Simon Kyte appealing for financial and professional help for the Humanitarian Appeal for Victims of the Yugoslav Civil War.
Kyte, who was a founding signatory of the appeal, says it has been set up ‘to help finance long-term grass-roots reconstruction, and supports small groups of people in ‘Yugoslavia' who are committed to feeding people, housing refugees, establishing playgroups for children, and to helping all those who refuse to fight.
War and conflict, violence and destruction make news headlines; positive moves towards peace and reconstruction don't!’
The appeal's address is PO Box 338, London WC1.
Immediate response
Any political party ought to have vision, but it's rather strange to find your editorial (‘The vision thing’, 8 May) quoting William Beveridge on the evils of Want, Disease, Squalor and Ignorance.
You might as well have quoted Dickens, because Beveridge's remarks judged by today's standards almost belong in the 19th century.
Are we really to believe, as John Prescott seems to imply, that our government (and Major in particular) doesn't care about the nation's health or education or social welfare?
It is so much nonsense, and the Labour Party and its leaders would do well to admit it.
However, there is an unjust distribution of wealth in our society, as there is in the world as a whole, and the most obvious sufferers are families.
The Labour Party should be advocating in the strongest terms a substantial increase in Child Benefit, even if this means increasing income tax on people earning as ‘little’ as £14,000, together possibly with increases in excise duties.
Such measures would, I feel, bring forth an immediate and enthusiastic response, because everyone knows that that is exactly what is needed.
The benefits would need to be extended to all those on income support as well.
Key for Labour movement
John Prescott (‘The vision thing’, 8 May) is quite right to focus attention on the goal of full employment as the key value for the Labour movement.
The relevance of this goal is no less than it was in the 1930s and 1940s.
Its achievement, however, is immeasurably more difficult.
I have not heard anyone propose a serious project for the restoration of full employment at the national level.
Of course, there are national measures, and indeed local measures, which could and should be taken.
But the essential problem is that nation states no longer have the capacity to manage ‘their’ economies, the main movers of which have long since become transnational corporations.
Surely, the lowest level of coordinated action at which we could seriously confront this question is that of the European Community?
A coordinated European recovery programme could secure its national components against adverse commercial pressures and reinforce development programmes through international convergence.
It could also sustain redistributive policies that might be very difficult to operate at a lower level.
Above all, it is at the European level that expanding aid programmes could be devised to stimulate a widening of trade and recovery in the south and east.
The precise details of a European recovery programme would vary according to political balances.
But the great gap in Labour's programme for 1992, was that even the most modest bids for such a policy were missing.
There were strong arguments to persuade Labour leaders to lower their sights in terms of national economic policy.
But this could be justified only if, simultaneously, the same sights were raised to hit European targets.
Currently, the Commission is developing its proposals for development and cohesion, and it would have been very nice to have seen this work unfolding within the context of an informed and radical debate, pushed forward by the socialist parties of all the member states.
Above all, the British election was a perfect platform for such a debate.
Not a squeak did we hear.
Europe disappeared from the political imagination for the duration, not merely during the last month of the campaign, but during a large part of the long and tedious pre-campaign.
In this way, we lost any realistic chance to reaffirm the essential truth of John Prescott's commitment.
The Labour Party will not revive until it can show how to achieve jobs for all who need them.
I suspect that this means that it will revive only after we have begun to build the European Socialist Party, and with it the hopes of millions.
Due to the union
Steve Platt seems to have caught himself in a dialectical contradiction (‘Not paying, not voting’, 8 May).
In the political parlance of 1992, I suppose it might be said that Mr Platt has given himself a double whammy.
On the one hand, he bemoans the development of a political underclass as demonstrated by poll-tax refuseniks and Los Angeles rioters.
On the other, he claims on the letters page (Letters report) that my suggestion — that the way to revitalise socialism is by rank and file activity at the grassroots — is no way forward because 97 per cent of workplaces employ fewer than 20 people.
First, the development of a political underclass does not exclude, at the same time, the rise of political organisations.
Indeed, the one may feed into the other.
Equally, some political organisations are so ineffective (the Labour Party), that riot actually stands a better chance, on occasion, of making the powers-that-be aware of discontent.
I call in my defence the poll tax and, most particularly, its demise following the Trafalgar Square demonstration of 30 March 1990.
Second, the figure of 97 per cent of workplaces with fewer than 20 people, is, in itself, meaningless.
Where I work there are more than 1,000 people in the building.
Around 80 per cent of these are in an appropriate trade union.
This very week, successful workplace meetings and discussions have been held to discuss union matters and, inevitably, politics as well.
As with Russia in 1917, the larger workplaces (and there are lots down the Albert Embankment where I work), are the significant ones.
Equally, the unions, for all their faults, remain, perhaps, the last mass organisation in the country.
Building union organisation is not as dramatic as a riot, but it is still possible and does offer hope where Steve Platt offers pessimism!
Cartoon cyphers
While I'm inclined to agree with Ruth Picardie (‘Mad, bad and dangerous’, 1 May) that ‘insisting on positive images spells creative death’, and that the protests over Basic Instinct have been misguided and stupid, she really is way off the mark when she compares Paul Verhoeven's psycho dyke thriller to Tom Kalin's Swoon or Gregg Araki's The Living End .
Of course, lesbian and gay film-makers are as capable of producing ‘negative’ images of lesbians and gay men as their heterosexual counterparts.
Some would argue that they be actively encouraged to do so — anything to break the stranglehold of ‘positive imagery’.
The point is, however ‘negative’ their representations may be deemed to be, both Kalin and Araki are dealing with three-dimensional fully fledged characters with emotions and motivations — not cartoon cyphers of the paranoid heterosexual imagination.
Body politic
In her review of Jane Ogden's Fat Chance!
The myth of dieting explained’(‘Unnatural acts’, 8 May), Jane Mills rejects the thesis that this ‘modern obsession with slimming’ can be explained simply in terms of male/female oppression.
She is critical of Ogden's assertion that ‘women diet because they hate themselves’, instead speculatively suggesting that since ‘fashion acts as a vehicle for fantasy’, women may be motivated by ‘self-love’ rather than‘self-hate’to diet.
I found her argument terrifying.
It seems to be based on the implicit assumption that women who reject dieting and respond to their bodies' hunger can have no role to play in their own, or anybody else's, fantasies.
It is precisely because our bodies and fantasies are so closely linked that feeling you don't conform to the current ‘skinny’ aesthetic can have such detrimental effects on the way you feel about your body and concomittantly, yourself.
Identity crisis
With the Labour Party in a state of revision, a basic fact is being overlooked: the Labour Party is not able to move forward without new membership, fresh ideas and a sense of coherence.
While some ‘cooperation’ with the Liberal Democrats may be eventually possible (and sensible) to give impetus to the politics of the left, a fusion with the Liberal Democrats is not conceivable.
The Liberal Democrats remain a strong contender in left-of-centre politics, perhaps more certain of their identity than the Labour Party — albeit with some shaken confidence.
The attraction of the Social Democratic Party some 10 years ago to those not previously active in politics was not the ‘break-away’ policies then dividing the Labour Party, but the foundations of an accessible, open and equal party structure.
Today, those searching for similar democratic party structures may well identify with Labour Party values, moreover may see the Labour Party as the successor to the SDP in assuming this role, but feels deterred, or even intimidated, by trades union domination with block voting and ‘baronial’ patronage.
Therefore, the choice the Labour Party must face is either to transform its structure into a membership party of an equal democratic form, separate from (but maintaining informal association with) the trades unions, or to be stifled by its history, losing what may be the last opportunity to become a party of regeneration and progress.
The Labour Party has moved on to the social democratic ground, it may even choose to call itself a social democratic party — in any case, it should complete the process with a constitution to suit.
Equivalent of Malthus
The various responses to John Cole's points on famine relief (itemised in Letters report, 1 May) I read with weariness.
There seems to be a coldness at the heart of much hard-left philosophy, where theory takes precedent over practical help.
A starving child needs food now, not the revolution later.
Of course, the iniquitous one-way traffic between north and south must be sorted out, and third-world debt slashed — but what can we do in the meantime?
The Spectator gets its readers off the hook by a return to Malthus, who made a virtue of not helping the poor, as then, he informed us, they would drag us down by overbreeding.
A very self-serving philosophy, albeit dubious mathematics.
But the left cannot be equally self-serving by hanging on to absolutes.
Bernard Shaw wouldn't give to charity.
He damned them all, saying the right answer was political; full stop.
This statement is the left's equivalent of Malthus.
Very convenient, and, of course, right, up to a point.
Charity creates problems for us.
The flag days, the appeals, tthe starving children hurt.
Even the poorest of us have some money in our pockets some of the time.
So, if someone tells us charity is wrong — he not only salves our conscience, but saves us money too.
How much simpler to say, ‘I never give to charities.’
So all right— what else do you do?
If political activity only amounts to selling the party newspaper outside a shopping centre, a lot of people will die waiting.
There has to be first aid as well as long-term treatment to world problems.
Labour pressure
If Labour had cut arms spending, and thrown defence workers out of a job without making plans for their redeployment, it would have suffered electoral defeat, says Gerald Kaufman.
He knows, however, that the party had developed plans for converting war industry to peaceful production.
Our leaders lost much support because they rejected the peace dividend policy of the delegate conference year after year and failed to campaign for it for years before 9 April, 1992.
I believe that the Conservative government itself will now be forced by the coming financial and economic crisis to slash its £24 billion a year arms bill.
And I hope it does.
But it must be as the result of Labour pressure — and clearly seen as such.
CND's future
Unusually for the NSS , your editorial on CND and the Labour Party (‘Discussing strategies’, 8 May), is wide of the mark.
The Labour Party is irrelevant to the work of CND in the short to medium term.
Other campaign groups have it comparatively easy.
In principle, everyone wants to end poverty and hunger, save whales and fluffy seals, find a cure for cancer or HIV.
From a position of majority support, those campaigns can start to progress their causes by embarrassing politicians into action.
That works because public opinion is something that few careerist politicians want to act against.
CND, by contrast, has never scored more than 42 per cent in polls for its core case of nuclear disarmament by any means necessary.
So long as the majority of the British public believe that we ‘need’ a bomb, we'll have Trident.
So CND's future has two stages.
The first, most difficult stage, is to get the public to reject nuclear deterrence itself, not just individual products of it.
Currently CND has to start from scratch every time the target changes its name — from Cruise to Trident most recently.
It needs the public to associate the phrase ‘nuclear weapons’ with the word ‘useless’.
Then, and only then, will it be in a position to force political parties to act.
One thing it could do now is to trash the notions that prop up Trident.
Trident looks set to be one of the biggest obstacles in the renewal of a non-proliferation treaty in 1994-95.
The choice will soon be between a total nuclear weapons ban, and a wildfire spread of nuclear technology.
Your own suggestion about a campaign on a British test ban is a good one because it's short-term and achievable.
If CND sets about the job properly, it may find it easier than we suppose.
But the broadening of CND's agenda beyond British nuclear weapons and their closest causes and effects is either an admission of defeat or an absence of strategy (possibly both).
The campaign's agenda of Trident, conversion, test bans and warhead convoys is plenty wide enough.
Female representation
It would surely be better for the case of female representation in the letters page (8 May) if the concerned person of gender were not to write in from Hampton Wick.
It has, shall we say, connotations!
Concerned person of gender
Boys, boys!
It's no good printing my letter if you're just going to do it again.
Left out in the cold
Julia Bard (‘The priests have it’, 1 May) rebukes anti-racists for turning a blind eye to religious fundamentalism, and cites a recent issue of the Runnymede Trust Bulletin to illustrate her argument.
It is valuable that she has raised some very important and complex questions, but regrettable that her account of the Bulletin was extremely misleading.
It is regrettable also that she failed to recognise the rise of anti-Islamic racism, in which the demonising of Islam as ‘The Other’ of the west is taking shape.
She argued that the Bulletin of March 1992, in recognising the role of religion in the formation of group identities, was colluding with the oppression of women's rights.
However, women's oppression in minority communities, as in all communities, is not located in any particular set of circumstances.
Muslim communities like any other are varied and diverse, liberal and orthodox, left and right, and women's rights are fought along these complex lines.
Ms Bard's article displayed the ‘Islamophobia’ currently rampant among certain anti-racists and sections of the left.
It is difficult for her and others to grapple with the fact that, although they often oppose racism on behalf of Asian communities, they find themselves unable to control and dictate the forms that anti-racism takes.
For organisations like the Runnymede Trust, it is crucial to be alert to the various fronts upon which racism appears, and offer whatever support we can to those who want to challenge it.
This involves, among other things, pointing to changes in the nature of racism and to issues on which both the left and conservatives have disagreed with minority communities.
Killing debate
Thank you for Elizabeth Young's review of Sadie Plant's work,The Most Radical Gesture: the Situationist International in a postmodern age (8 May).
It's about time somebody killed this ‘debate’ dead in its tracks, even if it meant stating the obvious; that postmodernism is nothing more than Situationism without the socialism, the archetypal assimilation of revolutionary technique and terminology.
I'm just amazed that no one 's said it till now.
I will most certainly be buying Ms Plant's book, though not, I fear, the hardback version.
Buying (consuming), a book on Situationism is ironic enough.
Paying £40 for it is nothing less than extortionate.
Uses and abuses
Goering is said to have reached for his gun whenever he heard the word ‘culture’.
I tend to (but only tend to) reach for mine (I haven't got one) every time I hear the word ‘religion’.
The feeling occurred again when reading Julie Bard's article (1 May) on the appalling uses of religion to curb individual freedom by — in this case — leaders of British Muslims.
Let's face it: all gods are created (‘invented’ would be a truer word) by a human being of some sort.
And, as a consequence, a phenomenon, peculiar to the species, called ‘belief’, takes hold like an infection, or on-going plague, and in the course of time a formidable hierarchical structure develops.
The ‘belief’ spreads, through persuasion, communal pressures, and most usefully by indoctrinating children before they have a chance to think for themselves.
The whole system is staffed by a pyramid of priests and their counterparts: imams, rabbis, brahmins, bonzes, and so on.
And withal, a system of power is establised.
Power over people: the sacerdotal few over the compliant many.
‘Thou shalt believe’— the most absurd philosophical construct in the whole of human history.
Could anything be more insubstantial than mere ‘belief’?
Religion brings comfort to many people.
Bully for them.
But never let it be exploited to curb an individual's right, in freedom,not to believe.
And certainly not as a reason or excuse, to kill.
Code of accountability
Further to Micheal Meacher's article on the censorship of whistleblower (‘Shut up or get out’, 1 May), nurses, midwives and health visitors are clearly enjoined by their regulatory body, the United Kingdom Central Council (UKCC), that their first loyalty must be to their patients or clients.
Their detailed code of accountability holds individual nurses or midwives responsible for failure to report inadequate provision of resources, for example, if this jeopardises patients.
Yet the UKCC is impotent when nurses or midwives are disciplined or victimised for doing what it itself instructs.
Nursing and midwifery have begun to develop the accoutrements of a profession, but this development has been impeded by the burgeoning of lay-managers in the NHS, who have considerable power, but not necessarily any professional expertise, and whose prime loyalty is to accountants and not to patients.
Cultural alternatives
Rose Jennings' observant review of Strains of War (‘Complaining agit-properly’, 8 May) gets to the nub of some difficult curatorial decisions.
It's been clear for years (ever since the Hayward exhibitions The Other Story: AfroAsian Artists in Postwar Britain and Art in Latin America met with such dismally insular reponses from most of the critics) that massive justification is needed for any exhibition that seems ‘foreign’.
And things are getting worse.
With the elimination of political opposition comes a virtual elimination of cultural alternatives.
In an arena now entirely stocked by affectless Goldsmiths' artefacts,Strains of War is weird enough to require explanation.
Jennings was right, and bright, to highlight one thing I said about the artistic choices behind the show.
I did indeed want ‘to counteract the aesthetic of technologised murder which was filling our TV screens’.
That principle entailed a definite choice of technique.
It meant consistently rating the human/e over the technological.
The focus came from lighted candles (outside the War Office in 1991, on a Prague students' grave in 1991, in every blacked-out Polish window in 1980), rather than crosswires and scanners.
Jennings compared Strains of War with an earlier exhibition of print works by women artists, including the Guerrilla Girls, held by Bookworks.
New York's Guerrilla Girls (and their slightly embarrassing English imitators Sweet Fanny Adams) try to fight fire with fire and porn with porn.
By imitating the language of the powerful, with however subversive an intent, they in fact pay homage to it.
To me as a woman they are as depressing an example as the Duchess of Finchley.
There's about as much real passion in the passage against the Gulf war quoted by Rose Jennings as in the shrink-wrapped volumes on a newsagent's top shelf.
Strains of War is a show for untermensch .
It gives centre stage to women, minorities, exiles, those who've endured war rather than bright boys brought up on Biggles.
Last week I got a letter.
It said: ‘On my way to the courtyard this morning, I went into your gallery as a sanctuary and found myself surrounded by startling, horrific and disturbing images which yet had a positive and uplifting effect.
The overall quietness, awe inspiring, almost like a mediaeval cathedral, was due in part to the forms and in part to the arrangement of those forms.
Without the slightest doubt this is a remarkable, compelling exhibition.
It must be a great advantage to those who live, work and shop in the area…’
Not true, unfortunately.
If you want to build a chapel of remembrance, don't site it in a Woolwich shopping precinct.
But if not there, where?
One of the most powerful, peculiar and popular images in Strains of War is a gigantic photocollage.
Called ‘Market Madness’, it shows the floor of the Stock Exchange as a mass grave.
Its artist, Leon Kuhn, was in the early 1980s a political cartoonist for the New Statesman .
His services have not been required by the past three editors of NSS .
Actually, his services were not required by the first art editor of the newly created NSS.
The current art editor has never seen his work.
Perhaps he should get in touch
FRINGE BENEFITS Colin Ward expects open-air readers to go Beating the Bounds
Denis Pym from Polstead says that there's a cut-off point at a certain age.
‘Above it, people know every field, footpath, hedge, boundary and copse in the parish.
Below it, they have very attenuated mental maps.’
The same thing is found in town.
City teachers, even the most experienced, are so accustomed to mobility, access to transport and social competence in getting around that they are continually surprised to find that so many of the children they teach lead lives confined to a few streets.
I knew a south London teacher who invented an instant tradition of local environmental walks to remedy this deficiency, and called it Beating the Bounds of the Catchment Area.
She was building on a genuine ritual of immemorial antiquity, that of Beating the Bounds.
It is reported by collectors of folk customs, like George Ewart Evans, as a joyful pagan procession that reached Britain in the eighth century, and was later Christianised and celebrated at Rogationtide, the fifth Sunday after Easter.
In the days before maps and enclosing landlords, it was a means ‘both of reaffirming the parish boundaries and of entreating God to send good weather and fair fortune to the growing crops’.
The crowd followed the priest carrying wands or sticks and, at landmarks like ancient trees, were ordered (by Elizabeth I) to hear the priest say: ‘Cursed is he that transgresseth the bounds or doles of his neighbour.’
The boys of the village were taken along in order that environmental lessons should be bumped into their heads.
Evans says that the title of Gospel Oak was in many places conferred on to the tree that, ‘in for instance the Suffolk village of Polstead, has long outlasted the ceremony’.
Evans explained that: ‘The bearer of the sticks and the young boys in the procession also had an essential part in the ceremony: at certain points of the boundary — usually those susceptible of dispute — the men proceeded to beat the landmark with their sticks; then half in jest, half in earnest, they transferred their beating to the boys; as an 18th-century record had it: ‘whipping ye boys by way of remembrance and stopping their cry with some halfpence'.’
Obviously, this is too valuable a tradition to be allowed to die out in the century that has seen more restriction of public access to land than any previous period of history, including the Enclosures.
(Witness, for example, Channel 4's recent Cutting Edge on the battle for access between landowners and ramblers.)
The Open Spaces Society, which is by far our oldest environmental pressure body has for more than half a century been encouraging the continuance of the ancient practice of Beating the Bounds by parish and community councils and local groups.
And this year, Rogation Sunday, 24 May, is the day.
It doesn't recommend trespass, it urges that you should consult the police and get third-party liability insurance.
It does urge you to take along the children, but bump them gently.
There is still time to Beat the Bounds anywhere, urban or rural, on 24 May, and to get a reply (if you send an sae for details) from the Open Spaces Society, 25a Bell Street, Henley-on-Thames, Oxon RG9 2BA.
No, I won't be there.
I'll be investigating the privatisation of canal-side assets by British Waterways.
The Open Spaces Soc-iety is overwhelmingly right in stressing that it isn't just feudal landlords who are the threat.
Clem Shaw, the maker of Channel 4's film for Cutting Edge , told the Times : ‘We thought we'd be looking at lots of ramblers trampling over delicate areas, but it turned out to be much more of a social perspective than an environmental one; more of a political issue than I'd intended.’
Beating the Bounds is a public gesture, not a quaint old ritual.
ARTS & MEDIA
Pursuing the millenium The Arts Council's new national plan belongs to a lost age of growth and experiment.
Boyd Tonkin argues that the cultiral future will look more like and endless festival
David Mellor had a nicely turned music review in the Spectator the other week.
Our first Secretary of State for National Heritage had spent his Easter hols at the Lucerne festival, where the London Symphony Orchestra (last year's Arts Council grants: over £1 million) proved its world-class rank with a ‘peerless’ Mahler One.
‘My little bosom,’ wrote the commissar for fun, ‘swelled with pride.’
That's one, familiar way to push public money at the arts; a high-gloss, standard-repertoire, national flagship.
Here's another: an Arts Council-funded photographic project called What She Wants (with a grant of £14,000, half the sum requested) is inviting women to submit intimate pictures of men, and a report of the session that produced them (‘Did he let you do everything you wanted?’).
Billed as an ‘experimental reversal of erotic traditions’, the male nudes will form a touring exhibition, with books and seminars attached.
Whatever swells as a result, it's unlikely to be the Mellor bosom.
Most of the £240 million earmarked this year for the Arts Council and its partner bodies (Crafts Council, Regional Arts Boards, British Film Institute) will go to fund events somewhere between these two poles of standard-bearing pomp and guerrilla provocation.
To justify its ways, this week the council releases the first draft of its National Arts and Media Strategy.
This vast stocktaking and forward-planning exercise was commissioned by Richard Luce in 1990, and drawn up with the aid of 44 discussion papers and 3,000 participants.
After another burst of consultation, it will hit the music-loving minister's desk in late summer.
The first thing to note about the raw strategy is that it dearly wants to have it all.
Arts funding bodies should cherish both ends of the spectrum, it affirms, and most points in between.
Although it clearly plumps for quality, not bulk, the draft's shopping-list of wants soon smothers this principle.
Back to our examples: it would be ‘an act of vandalism’ to weaken the top 20 arts clients, from Covent Garden down, who snaffle just over 50 per cent of all Arts Council and regional cash, while London and the south-east swallow 57 per cent of all funds.
Far better to broaden their remit through touring, education work, equal opportunities, it argues, than to cut them off and drive them into the arms of market forces.
On the other side of the equation, let mischief and dissent thrive.
For example, ‘work from a specifically feminist perspective’— such as What She Wants — merits support; ditto black arts (still without an adequate definition in Arts Council-speak) and arts for and by disabled people.
Gay artists?
A timid compromise, here: in the shadow of Section 28, they get encouragement ‘to meet and develop their ideas’, with no hint of cash.
So, as a cultural manifesto for the fin-de-siècle , the draft brings to mind the Caucus Race from Alice in Wonderland .
Everyone has won, and everyone shall (or at least, should) have prizes.
The document has few harsh words, except perhaps for the folkies: their organisations, apparently, can't sing the same tune.
(One roll-call of disadvantaged groups has a telling juxtaposition: ‘people with disabilities, folk enthusiasts…’
Stir thousands of artists' and administrators' strongly held views into a small pot, and it's no surprise that the mix tastes like a very solid fudge.
In the Arts Council's rhetoric of liberal synthesis, dichotomies are forever being overcome by acts of sheer good will.
There's no final conflict, we are assured, between quality and diversity; between minority and popular art; between the commercial and subsidised sectors; between heritage and innovation; between arts as an economic boost and a spiritual uplift.
The national strategy unit, led by Howard Webber and Tim Challans, has fused its contrary voices with diplomatic panache.
They can sell this package to their existing customers.
Can they interrupt David Mellor's musings on the later Toscanini long enough to make him listen?
That now looks improbable, first of all because the new, bloated Heritage department turns the Arts Council and its peers into smaller fish in a bigger pond that stretches from broadcasting on one side to museums on the other.
Despite an inflation-busting 37 per cent rise in allocations over the current three-year period, the council's status inside a fiefdom that oversees the £1 billion-plus state culture industry will drop.
Besides, the advent of a National Lottery next year could make a nonsense of the strategy's premises about funding.
More important is the fact that many of the draft's boldest strokes would seem a lot more realistic if they had been destined for Mark Fisher and a Labour government.
To be brutal, no plan for a branch of public expenditure that calls for an end to disparities by ‘levelling-up resources’ across the board will ever drown out the office CD of the former Chief Secretary to the Treasury.
No one could accuse the strategy of political pussy-footing.
The National Curriculum?
Needs reform to favour the arts, with a compulsory element for 14-16 year olds.
Student grants for arts training courses?
Make them mandatory.
Adult education in arts?
Expand it, and keep it cheap (the opposite is happening).
Competitive tendering?
A non-starter for council arts venues; turn them into trusts instead.
Local authorities?
Key partners in the arts investment game, who should have a statutory responsibility for cultural provision.
It was brave of the authors to heap praise on the high-energy policies of Labour cities such as Sheffield and Birmingham; and braver still to cite Richard Rogers' plan for London, co-written with Fisher.
Brave; but, since 10 April, not especially wise.
Even if it fails to find favour from above, the document will prod British artists and their funders into clearer thought about the how and why of what they do.
Some sections are exemplary: the argument against a ‘hierarchy of arts’, for example, but in favour of a definition of ‘quality’ that ignores labels and fits each form and each place.
All this assumes grown-up artists and a grown-up public, whereas too much of the recent ‘pop vs posh’ media rumpus sounded like a nursery squabble between absolute beginners.
More broadly, the strategy forms a kind of palimpsest of liberal views about the subsidised arts over the past four decades.
Its deepest layer is John Maynard Keynes' commitment, from the time the Arts Council's creator first signed a lease on Covent Garden, to fund a handful of internationally competitive performance companies.
On top of that comes the bolder 1960s fashion for sending small parcels of public money to pioneers and mavericks.
Now, we have ‘the right to fail’ rebaptised as ‘the duty to experiment’, with a lucid set of proposals for funding individual artists instead of bureaucracies.
Plastered over this is the 1970s language of identity politics and group empowerment.
It treats cultural representation as a sort of compensation for those sidelined by reason of race, place, gender or disability, and unpacks all the many meanings of ‘access’: from affordability to wheelchair-ramps.
Last, and still liveliest, comes the entrepreneurial chatter of the 1980s.
Here, public art becomes a tonic that can galvanise moribund cities, enthuse alien-ated youth, plug into popular culture and repay risky investments with a dividend of social solidarity.
Four separate agendas, then; and a funding agency that wants to juggle the lot.
But perhaps the government has a fifth, and this one will prevail.
From now until the year 2000, the arts calendar is silting up with festivals, memorials and monumental events.
In place of the culture of critique that infuses Arts Council thought, the Major regime will dole out a culture of commemoration.
From July to December, for a start, the rapidly arranged Festival of Europe (£6 million extra cash) will mark Britain's EC presidency.
Meanwhile, the Arts 2000 scheme trundles on, with a different city or region acting as showcase for a different form each year: Birmingham for music now, East Midlands for dance in 1993, then Manchester for drama…
The pre-millennial frenzy culminates in 2000, the Year of the Artist.
Lord Palumbo, who chairs the council, wants this moving bandwagon to inspire ‘a celebration for the whole of the UK’.
Meanwhile, his own doomily titled Millennium Fund aims to spruce up historic sites and buildings in preparation — well, for what: just a date on the calendar, or the day of judgment itself?
These are deep waters, but our cultural future now crawls with signs of a barely rational obsession with great memorial feasts, a never-ending British Day of the Dead.
‘There is a sense of looming festivity,’ notes Gavin Henderson (who directs the Brighton Festival) in his discussion paper.
We should only hope that the minister doesn't start using the Book of Revelations as his appointments diary.
In Robert Musil's great novel,The Man Without Qualities , cynical officials in shabby, multi-cultural Austria-Hungary on the brink of the first world war plan lavish jubilee celebrations for the old emperor Franz Josef.
The planning becomes an end in itself.
Perhaps they should commission, say, a monument to the Emperor-of-Peace-and-Nations-of-Austria?
But first there must be an architectural competition, and before that, a competition for the best idea for a competition; pending, of course, the decision as to whether the monument will be built.
Musil called the Imperial and Royal state after its German initials: ‘Kakania’, or Shitland.
For the becalmed, uneasy years that stretch ahead, the Major government already seems set on an Austro-Hungarian cultural policy: plenty of circuses, but not enough bread.
In its earnest liberalism, the Arts Council still has its sights fixed on a conflict-free Utopia full of maximum diversity and minimum friction.
As the millennium dawns, it will have to make do with Kakania, with all its phoney festas of civic pride and national unity.
The task for artists, and their patrons, is to make sure the timetables fill up with living work, not empty ritual.
Next week, British Day at Expo '92 in Seville will climax with a gala concert of music by Andrew Lloyd-Webber.
If David Mellor had arranged it, we might at least have had Elgar.
Comedy Gagging on the punters Oliver Double reports on the stand-up's life of right-on jokes for right-off audiences
The provincial alternative comedy circuit is nothing if not chaotic.
My own introduction to the world of stand-up involved performing at benefit gigs in the upstairs room of a pub in Exeter to an audience that shouted at one another until the local anarchist punk band came on.
In 1987, I moved to Sheffield and formed Red Grape Cabaret, and for the past three years I have toured the country with fellow comedians Roger Monkhouse and Adam Cavaleri, telling jokes in a bewildering variety of circumstances.
The chaos factor means that the size and composition of the audience can never be predicted.
It is genuinely disorienting playing to 300 students at Lampeter University one night, and then facing a meagre 15 punters at Treadwell's Art Mill in Bradford the next.
Then there is the fact that audiences consist of very different groups of people.
Sexually explicit material is fine in front of a student crowd, but elsewhere it can be a bit tricky.
It was embarrassing to ask the punters at York Arts Centre to join in my comedy song by chanting the line ‘fuck the system’, given that a fair few of them were over 60.
Audience variation presents particular problems for the politically motivated comedian.
On the one hand, there are the ideologically correct venues.
At a gig in Newcastle, I was reprimanded for saying that a condom smelt ‘fishy’, as this was deemed to be implicitly degrading to women.
On the other, there are politically hostile audiences.
Anyone who argues that the demand for reactionary comedy died with Benny Hill has obviously never played the provincial circuit.
On one occasion, when playing to a group of Durham University students, I told them that I had been personally responsible for Nelson Mandela's release, and a tuxedo-clad toff suggested I shouldn't have bothered.
And after dying horribly at a Nottingham University ball, I was confronted by a dandruff-afflicted sound operator in a Marillion T-shirt, who advised me to ‘cut the left-wing politics, mate.’
A bigger headache is being misinterpreted, and student audiences seem particularly adept at getting the wrong end of the stick.
One of my routines graphically explodes the euphemisms in TV adverts for sanitary products.
I attack the taboos surrounding menstruation that make women embarrassed about ‘the normal workings of their bodies’, and explicitly state that I think such taboos are ‘stupid’.
In spite of this, after a show at the University of East Anglia last year, a punter came up and said, ‘That bit about tampons was great, 'cos you really embarrassed some of the girls.’
Perhaps more annoying is the number of student gigs that end with people coming up to me and sharing a few queer-bashing jokes.
‘You'll like this one,’ they leer, before showering me with a few priceless gems from the treasury of homophobic humour.
They seem to assume that because my act is a bit obscene, I'll like nothing better than a bigoted belly-laugh.
It is incredible that they misread my act so completely.
My material is studded with leftie jokes, and until recently, Red Grape Cabaret used to tour with an openly gay comedian.
Such situations typify a provincial comedy circuit whose very existence is barely acknowledged in the capital.
Tell an alternative comedian that you live in Sheffield and work mainly outside London, and there's a good chance that they'll treat you with suspicion.
‘You people come down here to perform, and you're obviously really experienced, and we wonder where you've sprung up from,’ they comment, a little defensively.
Or sometimes, they're more patronising: ‘You'll need to move to London eventually, so you can get toughened up by playing the circuit.’
This kind of attitude is becoming increasingly outdated, given the number of top alternative comedians who have learned their craft at least partly outside London.
They include the likes of Mark Hurst, Frank Skinner, Henry Normal, Linda Smith, Kevin Seisay, and Bob Dillinger.
As for the idea of moving to London to get ‘toughened up’, this is laughable.
In general, the provincial circuit is a far tougher cookie than its metropolitan counterpart.
One of the most frustrating problems is organisational incompetence, particularly in venues that don't run cabaret regularly.
Arriving for a show to find that the publicity consists of a couple of hand-drawn posters taped to the wall can be completely demoralising, but some of the mistakes promoters make are less obvious.
One is simply placing a microphone in the corner of a bar and hoping that people will listen, and another is putting comedians on as part of a disco.
In both cases, the comic tends to act as a mere distraction from the main activity of drinking or dancing.
Another problem is the infinite variety of provincial venues.
London clubs differ from one another, but most are organised along the same lines, usually based in pub function rooms.
Outside London, you can find yourself performing in student unions, arts centres, pubs, theatre foyers or art galleries.
Whereas London cabaret bills tend to be filled with straight stand-up acts, in provincial gigs you are more likely to be put on with local bands, cringe-worthy performance poets, or singer-songwriters wielding acoustic guitars.
Some gigs stand out as being particularly absurd.
At a show in a dilapidated disco in Barrow-in-Furness, I went on after a community pantomime, in which the wicked witch — a local Labour councillor — was booed off by trade unionists involved in industrial action.
All things considered, the provincial circuit presents a hell of a challenge.
The only advantage London has in developing an act is that it offers the opportunity of performing frequently.
With its 5,000 regular cabaret-goers and 50 or so clubs, the London circuit allows new acts to improve more quickly, and also to earn decent money.
Outside the capital, gigs are rarer, and it is still barely possible to earn a proper living.
But in spite of the difficulties, I'll continue to live in Sheffield and tour the provincial circuit, if only to keep the London comics suspicious.
No time for false modesty BBC2 should boast more about its role as cultural patron, says Kirsty Milne
The present generation of BBC executives are not natural trumpet-blowers, and the controller of BBC2 is no exception.
‘No other broadcasting organisation in the world could do this,’ said Alan Yentob sheepishly, before hastening with evident relief to unveil his new season of long-cherished arts programmes.
More sprightliness in the name-tag might not have gone amiss.
Commissions and Collaborations (BBC2, from Saturday 16 May) sounds more like a departmental discussion document than an adventure in cultural scheduling.
But the content looks ambitious and imaginative.
Yentob, a former head of music and arts, takes the BBC's role as a cultural patron.
According to colleagues, he has been seriously complaining for years about the parasitic passivity of arts television, which simply points a camera at a performance conceived and organised by someone else.
For Commissions and Collaborations , 12 short dance films have been commissioned from young choreographers and performers.
The composer Mark-Anthony Turnage has written a 30-minute television opera,Killing Time , with a libretto incorporating prison poems by Albie Sachs and Ho Chi Minh.
Following the success of the Bristol-made Byline series, poets such as Adrian Mitchell and Douglas Dunn have been making half-hour documentaries in verse,Words on Film .
And Ken Russell is back after 22 years with another composer-movie,The Mystery of Dr Martinu (9.40pm on 16 May).
In a normal year, only a quarter of the BBC's performing arts output is specially commissioned.
But innovation does not come cheap.
Incredibly, no one seems to have worked out the cost of the season as a whole.
Dennis Marks, head of music programme explains that he usually has £60,000 an hour to spend on programmes.
For this season, the short ‘Dance House’ films and the one-off Cross Channel (featuring the all-female Cholmondeleys and the all-male Featherstonehaughs) are costing him £200,000 an hour — half of which is met by co-production money.
‘It is the expensive end of the range,’ Marks concedes.
‘But you are paying for the rehearsal period, for the creative process itself.’
The creative process came cheapest in the ‘Billboard Arts Project’, for which the BBC paid famous artists £1,000 apiece to create an image for display on advertising hoardings.
A documentary,Outing Art , will look at the boundary between art and advertising, and discuss how the artists — who include Howard Hodgkin, Ian Hamilton Finlay, Damian Hirst and Sarah Raphael — coped with moving from the gallery to the street.
The billboard project neatly bridges the divide between ‘high art’ and popular culture: a dichotomy that preoccupies arts television in general, and the BBC in particular .
The feeling is that, in the 1980s, too much time and energy was lavished on programmes about Doc Martens.
The Late Show , challenged by David Hare to decide whether Keats was more important than Dylan, now seems inclined to come down on the side of Keats.
BBC2's recent Rembrandt season confirms that the figure of the artist has come back into fashion.
So, too, does this season's series of six Artists' Journeys .
According to Keith Alexander, executive producer: ‘We felt we should be doing programmes about tradition, but not with Kenneth Clark holding forth in Tuscany.
Here we're doing it through the lens of a contemporary artist.’
Jim Dine, on a trip to Norway, describes Munch's The Scream as ‘more of a caricature of Angst than the real thing’, while Sean Scully waxes lyrical about how the colours in his Manhattan bathroom remind him of Matisse.
Programmes like these, Alan Yentob accepts, are likely to command only modest ratings.
But he hopes to attract interest from the casual viewer through what he calls ‘guerrilla raids on the schedules’.
The five-minute dance films, two of which will be shown each night, may pick up an uncommitted audience.
There will also be random, 90-second slots of public reaction to the BBC billboards — not easy to predict when, for example, Paul Graham's image of a Union Flag is due to be shown in Derry.
Yentob and his colleague Michael Jackson, who came from The Late Show to run the music and arts department, are picking up warm endorsements for assuming Channel 4's mantle of experiment.
Commissions and Collaborations makes a good case for the BBC's role as a patron of the arts — not only for respectable institutions like the Proms, but works that may be difficult, controversial, fey, or just not very successful.
Yet Yentob insists that: ‘This is not a propaganda exercise.’
Why shouldn't it be?
It is the perfect moment for loud lobbying on behalf of the arts.
In the short term, a special Board of Governors' meeting next week (20-22 May) will discuss the results of internal task force reports on the future of the BBC.
The Charter is up for renewal in 1996, and there are ministers to be lobbied and Conservative backbenchers to be wooed.
John Birt, the director-general designate, has lavished money on expanding and refining the BBC's news and current affairs.
He means it to form the unimpeachably authoritative core of a publicly funded broadcasting service.
Do expensive minority arts programmes, which no one else will make, also figure in his vision of the future?
Music A diva of the plague years What if Aids became a subject for pop, not just the pretext of a gig
Turning public health into song, take one :Wembley Stadium, last month, for the Freddie Mercury celebration.
Rock stars punch the air, embrace one another, pray; and enjoin the world to use a condom.
Take two: the Cathedral of St John, New York, 1990.
Diamanda Galas, smeared in blood, performs her Plague Mass , a vocal drama tracing the impact of Aids on society.
An inscription on the record of the performance runs, ‘Give me sodomy, or give me death.’
As responses to the HIV virus, they could hardly be more different.
The first is fraternal, popular entertainment, and a financial godsend for health care and education.
The second is intensely combative performance art, and just about self-financing.
It would be perverse to find fault with the elevation of Aids awareness to the status of a rock cause, and particularly silly to fret about performance infelicities (nobody really looks to David Bowie for enlightenment, do they?) providing the message gets across and the money comes in.
Still, there was a gaping hole at the centre of the Wembley concert.
Rather than simply tacking on a message to their usual turn, as was the standard approach, who among the stars was using their — ahem — art to grapple with Aids?
In contrast, Diamanda Galas' records and performance pieces since 1984 have done almost nothing but that.
The main marker of her music is her voice.
A three-and-a-halfoctave range allows her to move from a fire-and-brimstone holler to a murmur to a speech in tongues.
The altered states, the plangent electronic keyboards, and her use of Biblical text all conspire to create a portentous sound.
It might sound like classic fringe fare, inaccessible and wilfully marginal.
And she can strike as all too keen to play the introverted sensitive soul, cloaking herself in black and describing Baudelaire and Nerval, some of whose poems provide a decadent counterpoint to the Bible in her music, as ‘blood brothers’.
But she does not, she says, shy away from a wider public.
Indeed, extra-curricular activity includes attracting as much media attention as possible as a member of Act-Up, the New York activists whose purpose is to elevate Aids to the top of government priorities.
She records for Mute Records, who, as the the sales of Dépeche Mode show, are no slouches in distributing sounds to the masses.
It is her treatment of the topic, she contends, that is bound to make her a minority interest.
She rejects sentimentality as an approach to Aids.
Assumptions that she is driven by pity (usually based on the death of her brother Philip from an Aids-related illness in 1986) annoy her.
She says that her concern is not with raising consciousness so much as approximating, in performance, to the public turmoil and private suffering caused by Aids.
She first noted what she calls a ‘plague mentality’ enveloping discussion of Aids in 1984, and conceived the Masque of the Red Death trilogy of albums (completed in 1988) and the Plague Mass as a dramatic revenge on the inaction or malice of those in government and the church — or among the ‘decent people’who were propagating the idea that a biomedical condition was a moral verdict.
The design works best in performance, where she favours the creation of something akin to the surround-sound sometimes set up in cinemas.
Primed like an athlete (until recent events, she revelled in a ‘Mike Tyson of song’ tag), she bounces her repertoire of voices around what is, in effect, a bowl of sound, aiming to achieve an ‘atmosphere of claustrophobia and oppression’.
This is her idea for impressing on the audience how the powerless feel.
She complements it with vocal caricatures of the monstrous and a keening she calls a ‘vengeful mourning cry’.
Galas is wary of making a point of her own HIV status (negative), because she believes, rightly, that it should be beside the point in judgments of her work.
Being infected should not add to her credibility, while not being so should not disqualify her from comment, she says.
Concentrating almost exclusively on Aids as a subject matter is self-evident to her; as obvious, it seems, as fighting fascism was to Orwell in the 1930s.
In this stance, Galas is very much the New York activist who has grown too used to seeing friends die.
Her fervour and her depiction of a siege mentality do not transfer too easily to Britain.
Simon Watney, the British writer, has spoken of how the anger and elegy of American artists reacting to Aids rest heavily on personal experience of the illness.
The relative rarity of that sort of experience here supports what was always clear: that the showbiz prodding of the Mercury concert is more appropriate in Britain — appropriate, that is, as a tool in Aids education.
However, as a window into the emotions released by a virus-turned-epidemic, it was always a non-starter.
Galas says: ‘I train hard so that I can attempt to give voice to as wide a range of impulses as possible, so that I can be a proper medium for them.
Otherwise, with all those emotions swirling around inside, I might have ended up in a mental hospital banging my head against a wall, screaming ‘mama'.’
Film The good soldier Anne Billson misses the black comedy in a bizarre story of wartime survival
Buckle up your backpacks.
We are being swept away on a tide of picaresque Euromovies.
Only a few weeks ago we were trotting the globe with Wim Wenders' Until the End of the World and Volker Schlöndorff's Voyager , or rolling along transcontinental rails with Lars Von Trier's Europa .
Or at least, some of you may have been; I contrived to stay in the departure lounge for all these Angst -ridden travelogues, and I can't say I'm busting a gut to catch up with any of them.
But now we have another pan-European item, confusingly called Europa Europa (Odeon, Kensington, and Screen on the Hill from 15 May).
This one is a German/French co-production shot in Poland, and written and directed by Polish-born Agnieszka Holland, veteran of several script collaborations with Andrzej Wajda.
The producer is German, as are many of the actors and most of the dialogue.
The Americans went nuts over it and awarded it the Golden Globe for Best Foreign Film.
But the German jury responsible for selecting its nation's entries for the Academy Awards caused a rumpus by declining to submit it for nomination.
The excuse that filtered through to the press was that jury members didn't consider the film sufficiently ‘German’.
One assumes they meant in the way of financial backing and key personnel, but the apparent snub led to accusations of anti-Semitism and xenophobia.
Thirty of Germany's best-known film-makers, including Wenders, Schlöndorff and Werner Herzog, put their names to an advertisement in Variety expressing regret at the decision, writing of ‘the special responsibility the past imposes on us’.
The suggestion was that the jury didn't care for Europa Europa 's subject matter, for it deals with something many Germans probably prefer to forget: the Holocaust.
The magazine Der Spiegel recently published the results of an opinion poll revealing that 14 per cent of Germans still think Jews were partly to blame for what happened to them in the second world war, 36 per cent believe Jews ‘have too much influence’, and more than 50 per cent believe it is time for Germany to forget the past and move on.
Forgetting the past is obviously not the positive action it ought to be if it results in waves of violence towards anyone perceived as not sufficiently ‘German’.
Immigrant workers, easy scapegoats for the newly reunited country's economic ills, have been the latest victims of bigoted violence.
One's blood ran cold when German politicians, rather than condemning such violence outright, instead found it more expedient to talk of clamping down on immigration — as though immigrants themselves were partly to blame for being beaten up and firebombed.
Plus ça change .
With this sort of baggage still going round on the carousel, it's a pity that Europa Europa doesn't marshall its thought-provoking material into a better movie.
It is based on a true story so outrageous that it would never in a million years have passed muster as fiction.
Solomon Perel is a Jewish teenager whose family has fled Germany to settle in Poland.
When war breaks out, he becomes separated from his relatives, but manages to survive the war by passing himself off as a German soldier of Aryan origin.
Adopted by his commanding officer, he ends up in an élite training school for Hitler Youth, barking Sieg Heil along with the rest of them.
Everyday concerns such as urinating, taking a shower or having a routine medical examination become nightmares of concealment, lest someone spot his giveaway lack in the foreskin department.
Torn between passion and prudence, he falls in love with a spiteful little blonde, and, even as he is being taught in class how to recognise a typical Jew by his grotesque hooked nose, he is personally being held up as an example of the ideologically acceptable East Baltic race.
This is mind-boggling black-comic stuff, but Holland, perhaps overwhelmed by the weight of the Holocaust taking place just out of frame, seems to sit back and let it happen.
Consequently, the result is a dull plod, a sort of po-faced mini-series in which a whole bunch of set-pieces go begging for some cinematic tricks to give them a proper build-up and punchline.
While Solomon is posing as a German soldier, for example, he makes a botched attempt to surrender to the Russians that results in his inadvertently capturing their position — but the irony is passed over in so offhand a fashion that one barely notices it.
Arthur Penn made a remarkable tall story out of a similar theme in Little Big Man , a sympathetic account of American-Indian life filmed 20 years before Dances With Wolves .
Jack Crabb, like Solomon Perel, survives by repeatedly switching sides and identities, right up until Little Big Horn.
For all its playfulness, that film offers a clear-eyed dissection of myth, and packs one hell of an emotional punch.
Its recreation of the Washita massacre is enough to reduce the grittiest viewer to a wailing jelly.
Europa Europa , on the other hand, holds Solomon's predicament up for our detached scrutiny, rather than involving us at gut level.
If just one or two Germans among that 50 per cent see it, and are thus prevented from forgetting the past, it may be worthwhile.
But, as the film trundles to its conclusion, the appalling yet delicious ironies of Solomon's adventures remain untapped.
Maybe a touch of Mel Brooks wouldn't have gone amiss.
BOOKS
Words without end RACE Studs Terkel Sinclair-Stevenson, £16.95 Ellis Cashmore
Reading Terkel's book reminds me of driving from Washington DC to San Francisco.
The journey is long and, occasionally, stirring; but it is also very much the same at any one point, especially crossing Kansas, Colorado and Utah, where the landscapes become numbingly familiar.
Race 's power to surprise fades as we progress through the 400-odd pages of ‘raw’ talk and we arrive at the conclusion more exhausted than enthralled.
Louis ‘Studs’ Terkel has been chronicling the thoughts of ‘ordinary’Americans since 1966, when his Division Street was published.
It was the first of a series of books consisting mainly of interviews.
Terkel, who is 80 this month, once described his method as ‘guerrilla journalism’.
He would point his tape recorder at subjects and invite them to ruminate and, hopefully, fulminate.
Early works, such as Hard Times (1970), were garnished with parables from Terkel's memories.
But his career-defining Working (1970) was a plenteous ethnography: white-and blue-collar workers ventilated their discontent with the monotony of their jobs and the narrow satisfactions they offered.
Their stories were anything but monotonous and unsatisfying.
These tales of detachment from work and of turning into virtual automata crackled with insight.
The book commanded an almost biblical reverence.
What gave this and subsequent works weight was their sheer authenticity: real people spoke through the text, via Terkel's tape recorder.
Resisting all moral generalities of a them-and-us type, Terkel simply absorbed and conveyed.
Nor did he seek sanctuary in numbers.
His samples were small, unscientifically selected and, in all probability, representative of only his own friends and acquaintances.
But Terkel's people were believable; their views were not rendered harmonious in the interests of advancing a theory.
They clashed and clattered discordantly.
His texts were like epic editions of the famous WFMT Chicago radio show he has hosted for the past 35 years, in which he encourages but never intrudes.
His secret has been to approach ordinary people about non-controversial issues.
It is a mischievous tactic, as his subjects' responses unfailingly provoke.
In his new book, though, Terkel reverses the process of alchemising the banal into something special.
The special becomes banal.
Race centres on a topic that is genuinely controversial, that rivets public attention on both sides of the Atlantic, and that Terkel himself calls an obsession.
Even before starting it, we expect to be sent reeling.
Yet the book itself vacillates between the wonted and the novel.
We recoil at whites' uprooting their ‘deep down feelings’ about how racism is quite natural: ‘How do we change human nature?
I don't think we can.
I think we can suppress it.
.. Maybe one day it will disappear, this racism.
It's not going to happen in my lifetime.’
We lean towards the view that: ‘Race is only used when it's to somebody's advantage, and I don't mean the working-man's advantage…
It's always an advantage to the man that's making the money, who's using these guys to use this thing to divide them.’
Every so often, we are startled, such as when we read of an expatriate black South African who longs for apartheid: ‘At least in South Africa I knew what I was fighting against.
I knew what the limits were, so I could brace myself.
Here I am told I'm free, I'm the equal of everyone, fair play is the name of the game.
Yet, try as many of us do, we seem to get nowhere.’
We even excuse ourselves a smile at the Catholic priest who tells of how he, being an incompetent tennis player, accidentally mishit a shot that flew into an adjacent court where a black man happened to be playing.
‘He came over incensed, accusing me of hitting the ball that struck him in the testicles…it's a reflection of the degree of tension.’
In the deliberately uneven text, there are Japanese Americans who reflect on inter-ethnic rivalries, Mexican Americans who opine that Hispanics are the ‘new niggers’ and African American lawyers dismayed over the inability or unwillingness of young blacks to speak standard English.
Among the subjects Terkel's interviewees muse on are Louis Farrakhan, the Nation of Islam's leader, who seems to command utter loyalty or utter loathing; sexual jealosy, a theme that has gone cool in Britain, but still raises temperatures in the US; and the future, about which there is absolutely no agreement.
Every so often, a not-so-ordinary voice pipes up.
Academics and journalists lend what Terkel terms ‘overviews’, though their contributions seem no less subjective or more privileged than anyone else's.
Terkel's role — ostensibly, at least, for this book is a product of immense interviewing and editing skills — is to stitch the testimonies together with short descriptive paragraphs.
To the end, he is merely listening to his subjects, respecting without judging them and keeping us, as readers, flush against them, indulging in their foibles and sharing their fantasies.
Why, then, when people speak with such apparent honesty about such an important issue, do we feel we are drowning beneath cataracts of monologue?
The reason, I suspect, is the topic itself.
So much has been written and read about race that the question ‘what do people think about race?’ seems slightly jaded.
‘What don't they think?’ is probably more apt.
And ‘why do they think it?’ is definitely the single most pressing question left unanswered.
In other contexts, Terkel's great virtue is his ability to leave subjects rich and ravelled.
But here is a theme already so ravelled that it craves disentanglement.
Other studies guided by a similar spirit of fidelity have employed the verbatim method and produced more coherence.
The best is Bob Blauner's Black Lives, White Lives , which manages to generate an almost poetic cogency without sacrificing plausibility.
In a British context, my own attempts to unpick the Logic of Racism were inspired by Terkel's earlier tableaux vivants .
I am no fan of laboured expositions and the pat wisdoms dispensed by many academic writers on this subject.
But, equally, I am unsure of the value of the knowledge provided here.
Technically remarkable as his study is, some sort of ordering framework would have made Terkel's ragbag of responses more itelligible.
And, if ever a subject needs intelligibility, it is race.
In a period when, as recent events in Los Angeles and elsewhere have shown, the ethnic melting pot has dissolved into a racial meltdown, the clemency of clear understanding is as sought-after as ever.
But the Terkel magic, that typically produces the wondrous from the mundane, this time yields only triteness.
Bombs of bitterness AT YOUR OWN RISK: A SAINT'S TESTAMENT Derek Jarman Hutchinson, £12.99 Martin Fletcher
If there is such a thing as the literary equivalent of an incendiary bomb, then this is it.
Like a stickered exclamation mark, the title warns of the inflammatory material within its letter-box size covers.
Of all Derek Jarman's written work,At Your Own Risk is his most militantly outspoken, as courageous as it is heedless, as intemperate as it is driven by profound moral injustice.
This is emergency-speak; life on red alert: ‘For the first twenty-five years of my life I lived as a criminal, and the next twenty-five were spent as a second-class citizen, deprived of equality and human rights.’
His powder-trail prose is composed of bleak trigger-finger sketches of gay oppression, with the barrel of his rage aimed at the heart of unseeing, uncaring Heterosoc.
Never a subtle diplomat, Jarman upturns the tables in his role as agent provocateur by declaring that heterosexuality ‘is an abnormal psychological state,’ and that ‘all men are homosexual, some turn straight’.
More effective, perhaps, in his war against ignorance and prejudice are the depressing statistics he cites of gay abuse and assault, including the chilling revelation that 19 per cent of gay teenagers attempt suicide.
It is the close focus of snapshots like these that lend credence to the white heat of his outpourings: ‘I have lived for fifty years as an unequal in this country, enveloped by hate’.
Not all is spleen, however, as Jarman recalls the exhilaration of discovery and experimentation in the 1960s: ‘I was young and attractive and everyone was after my arse.
The appalling claustrophobia of Heterosoc could be subverted there.’
Sex became a way of life, a way of bonding and learning, and Jarman rapidly rose to the pinnacle of sexual and social acceptance.
At David Hockney's opening at the Kasmin gallery in 1968, Steven Buckley announced loudly: ‘You're running out of Knights to sleep with, Derek’.
But HIV changed all that: ‘What, in another decade, had been a trip to the clap clinic was now a trip to the mortuary’.
Bravely, some would say recklessly, Jarman made his positive diagnosis public and, as in Kafka's Metamorphosis , awoke to a screaming wall of censure.
He directs his bitterest fury at the hysteria generated by a homophobic press, the lack of information available on the virus, and the unwillingness of any political party to address the problem.
Ostracism, the easiest social solution, is inevitable: ‘Those of us who are HIV+ are in another kind of concentrtion camp’.
His brief obituaries of friends who have died from HIV sear the eyes and mind.
As always with Jarman, there is a wider context to this catalogue of malaise, and he writes passionately about our country's cultural decline.
His flashes of brilliance make one want to leap up and cheer: ‘No English man or woman could play Antony and Cleopatra: passion and love are quite beyond them, they could never discard their suburban subservience.
Antony and Cleopatra would always be a mere John and Norma’.
His laser eye could strip paint off walls: ‘England is Europe's madhouse, poor, derelict and deprived; where the rulers batten on an ignorant and regressive working class who are fed with the most tawdry material promises; so insular that no-one is able to see the shit-house this country has become’.
Brittle and bitter as Jarman's voice sometimes is in At Your Own Risk , his semtex-packed sentences are welcome thunderflashes of dissent in the grey drizzle of a dispirited political climate.
Junk bonds KICKING Leslie Dick Secker & Warburg, £13.99 Carole Morin
Leslie Dick's second novel,Kicking , is about self-absorption and courage; about withdrawing from junk or breast-milk.
Cerebral Connie and her friends, the thirtysomething children of the ‘arty, tasteful, cultured’ rich, are not interested in making money — thank God, because there are too many vulgar materialists and miserable bastards who live on council estates in contemporary fiction.
Connie, an art critic, has an on-off obsession with Mikey, the cousin and lover of Ruby, her best friend.
Beautiful Ruby can detect a hint of misogyny from across the Atlantic and is not enough like Kenny Rogers' Ruby, though Connie admires her unreservedly.
Mikey, the junky New York artist, accuses Connie of being bourgeois.
Connie cries a lot.
The flaws of this book are the flaws of its heroine.
But some of the best fiction is narcissistic, and it is possible to stay up late reading about this self-analytic, neurotic, emotion-junkie.
Connie's self-knowledge and her unspoken fear of cowardice save her from being a precious bore; and writing the book in the third person, even though from Connie's viewpoint, was a good idea.
Connie pretends to be more interested in her friends' motivations and feelings than her own, but ultimately they are another way of understanding herself.
She can resort to ludicrous hypothetical questions (for example, ‘What's my investment in triangulation?’) while examining the themes of the plot in a pretentious conversation at the end.
But despite her aggressive passivity, Connie is likeable; an achievement in a masochistic character with no sense of humour.
She ‘takes comfort in the idea that there is no cure for anything ever’, but her self-doubt makes her feel responsible for her friends.
She is compelled to preserve her image of them, and has difficulty abandoning anyone because of her own vulnerability.
Even her envy is magnanimous.
She is intelligent, sensitive, and has an eye for an elegant fabric.
The best bits in the book, like the anecdotes of female literary suicides, have the engrossing quality that upmarket glossy-magazine articles could have if their obsessions weren't so self-consciously frivolous.
Connie's visions of her past are expertly merged with the present as she moves backwards and forwards in time, following an order of association, not chronology.
This raises questions about ways of seeing and remembering that are important to fiction.
Though Connie knows that individual vision is personal, and doesn't have to compromise truth (the suicide she witnesses at the beginning is described twice, quickly and slowly, close and distant), the book itself is finally dependent on recognition.
Rather than inventing a unique fictional world, it creates a recognisable reality that calls for accuracy.
In the pre-punk 1970s, before working-class chic peaked, hipsters at art school would have out-posed middle-class Ruby.
They would not have been refreshingly down-to-earth for her sake.
The worst bits in the book raise a suspicion that it was hastily written, or not rigorously edited: ‘I mean, we were teenagers.
Which means, we were tormented, confused, cruel, selfish, and miserable.
The difference is that we didn't know then what we know now, we didn't know what would become of us’; or ‘We were so young and spilling over with everything inside’.
The meandering reminiscence of boarding-school rituals is like being forced to listen to a long, pointless story about an acquaintance's childhood.
And while the settings are evocative, Dick tends to street-drop as if advertising an A-Z.
Despite its charm,Kicking is more flawed than a second book by a clever writer should be.
We're happy doing nothing THE CULTURE OF CONTENTMENT J K Galbraith Sinclair-Stevenson, £14.95 William Keegan
The great man has done it again.
This short, meticulously-honed volume sketches the background not only to the Los Angeles riots, but also to the result of the recent British election.
While in the world as a whole the dispossessed may outnumber the reasonably well-off by some four to one, in the democratic ‘market economies’ of the capitalist world their minority status assures them lasting subservience to the democratic majority.
The ‘culture of contentment’— Galbraith might equally have used the phrase ‘culture of complacency’— is the prevailing majority of electors in the US, UK and other advanced economies.
They weep crocodile tears for the poor and disadvantaged, but are basically happy with things as they are.
In common with the financial markets in which they invest their funds, they are essentially short-term in their outlook, and would rather invest in secure compounds for the rich than extra public spending on the improvement of housing, education and job prospects in the urban ghettos that occasionally trouble them.
Galbraith attributes the traditional tolerance of the underclass to the view, now perhaps no longer valid, that what keeps them happy (or, at least, unrevolutionary) is the possibility that they may eventually get out.
He also has no hesitation in reminding capitalism, in its spooky hour of triumph over communism, that the ‘culture of contentment’ has always depended on this underclass — indeed, has happily imported it when necessary to do the menial and distasteful jobs at the cheapest possible wage.
Anxious liberals or ‘lefties’ sometimes underestimate the degree to which the underclass will put up with its lot.
Those among the contented who own to a social conscience may not fully appreciate that the conditions suffered by the urban underclass can be marginally less unendurable than those they have escaped from (whether in the American South, Puerto Rico or the shanty towns of the West Indies).
But what happens if the traditional route out of the slums is effectively barred, or if unemployment is so high that the underclass is offered no hope?
Therein lie the seeds of social explosion, as in Los Angeles.
Galbraith, as always, writes in pellucid prose, and has not lost his talent for demonstrating that our rulers have few clothes when it comes to justification of their economic policies.
The ascendancy of monetary policy over fiscal and incomes policies in the US and UK has damaged investment, and the high interest rates used to deflate the economy benefit — guess whom?
Even FD Roosevelt, he reminds us, had to tell lies about his fiscal intentions in order to get elected (it is a pity the Labour Party did not see the proofs of this book); and the famous fiscal deficit of the US, ‘though a topic of voluble discourse’, was ‘less of a threat to the contented than the taxes that would have reduced it’.
Vested interests, notably the military, but also the US middle classes who do well from social security (but not ‘welfare’), are happy to keep certain elements in the budget.
But they vehemently oppose the kind of expenditure that helps the underclass.
Indeed, under the egregious President Reagan and the so-called ‘supply-siders’, enormous and successful efforts were taken to ensure that the poor got even poorer.
Whether events in Los Angeles and elsewhere will change the outlook is not at all clear.
Galbraith was writing before the latest riots, and is already considered something of a prophet for having done so.
But he is not sanguine about the ability of the culture of contentment to see beyond its nose.
Nor, I fear, is this reviewer.
But we have to keep on trying: in the long run more generous social provision, and a return to more enlightened economic policies, are in the self-interest of even Contented of Basildon.
Is that all there is?
A HISTORY OF THE MIND Nicholas Humphrey Chatto & Windus, £16.99 Marek Kohn
According to the 1929 Encyclopaedia Britannica , one theory of consciousness holds it to be inherent in every atom of the body.
Another suggested it was produced by special nerve cells in the brain; a third that it came in units called psychonic impulses, generated when two nerves were in communication.
The textbooks may have moved on, but it's a fair bet that people at large remain equally unable to get their heads round the idea that ‘mind’ is a product of the ordinary stuff of the brain, rather than a distinct quality.
In the same way that the spectacle of a butterfly or a peacock still arouses the feeling that there must be more to it than evolution, consciousness insists there must be more to itself than that.
It is assisted by the tradition of knowledge that values perception and disdains sensation, maintaining that what we feel is less important than our awareness of reality.
Hence the sensation of the sun on our skin is philosophically inferior to our perception of the sun's objective existence.
Nicholas Humphrey's project, to establish a theory of how consciousness evolved, begins by returning to sensation.
He starts with a hypothetical amoeba, upon which the light of the primeval dawn falls.
It wriggles away, and, with this active response…life is on the royal road to consciousness.
The key to Humphrey's concept of consciousness is that sensation is not the passive reception of stimuli, but an active process in which the organism responds by sending messages to do something.
In thesimpler organisms, the feedback signal goes back to the boundaries on which the stimuli impinge.
As neural complexity increases, however, it becomes possible to send the signal to a region of the brain which forms a map of the body surface, parts of which have evolved into sensory organs.
This increases the precision of the system.
It also, vitally, causes the moment of sensation to be prolonged.
Sensation is experienced in the present, but this is a subjective moment distinct from the dimensionless instant of the physical present.
Consciousness, in Humphrey's scheme, arises when sensation is made to reverberate within the nervous system, connecting the present to the immediate past: ‘the conscious present is largely the immediate sensory afterglow of stimuli that have just passed by’.
This implies, among other things, that the use of the term ‘consciousness-expanding’ to describe certain hallucinogenic drugs is strictly justified.
Mescaline and LSD make colours seem more intense and time much slower; the reverberations are stronger and the conscious present lasts longer.
Conversely, some depressive states make colours seem dulled and flat.
Humphrey suggests that the sensory activity has been enfeebled and the conscious present shortened.
His theory also underwrites the commonsense view that other mammals, at least, also benefit from the priceless gift of consciousness.
And a discrete gift it is too; either an organism has a reverberant feedback system, or it doesn't.
Consciousness could not have arisen by degrees.
In principle, too, it should be possible to design an artificial organism organised along the same basic principles that produce consciousness in living things.
But Humphrey argues that such a design might well not produce consciousness, because the sensation from which the latter arises is essentially a redundant survival from primitive forms.
The ‘feel’ of redness may derive ultimately from the ameoba's aversive reaction to red light.
Such qualities are integral to consciousness; history is difficult, if not impossible, to design into a system.
Humphrey's style is personal and informal; when he is finished, he reveals a palpable satisfaction — and unease.
He is aware that, absorbing and stimulating as it is, his answer to the question of consciousness will seem to some to be on a par with ‘42’, the celebrated answer to life, the universe and everything.
Whether it concerns mind or cosmos, the ultimate question is always Peggy Lee's: ‘Is that all there is?’
This Nazi kind of thing FOUR HOURS IN MY LAI: A WAR CRIME AND ITS AFTERMATH Michael Bilton and Kevin Sim Viking, £17.99 Phillip Knightley
On 16 March 1968, Charlie Company, a unit of the Americal Division's 11th Light Infantry Brigade — an ordinary bunch of young American soldiers aged between 18 and 22 — massacred some 300 civilians in the village of My Lai, South Vietnam.
Later it came out in the press, there were some shocking pictures, and one of the company's officers, Lieutenant William Calley (25), was put on trial for war crimes.
But he did not go to jail and the story melted into the general horror that was Vietnam.
Now it has all come back.
This brilliant and disturbing book shows how little we understood what really happened at My Lai and how we failed to appreciate its significance.
The reason, the authors suggest, is that public perception of the event was skilfully changed by the US establishment.
It is an important story that goes to the heart of America's vision of itself, and the conclusion is an uncomfortable one: far from being an aberration, atrocity in wartime may be as American as Big Macs.
It is important to recall exactly what these ordinary American lads did to the Vietnamese women, children, babies and old men they found in My Lai.
Although there were no Viet Cong in the village and not a shot was fired at them, they set about slaughtering the Vietnamese civilians with a primitive and sexual savagery that is hard to believe.
When children came running to them for sweets, they scythed them down with automatic fire.
They herded mothers and babies into bunkers and threw grenades in after them.
They raped and sodomised Vietnamese girls and then sliced open their vaginas with bayonet or knife.
They scalped old men and women, beheaded others, slit throats, cut out tongues, sliced off ears, and hacked off limbs.
A two-year-old child hauled itself out of a ditch where its mother lay dead with dozens of others and began to crawl away.
Lieutenant Calley seized it by one leg, flung it back into the ditch and shot it.
The village paths soon became covered with a mass of bodies, brains, blood and intestines.
Later, the explanations the young Americans of Charlie Company gave were singularly mundane: ‘I wanted to see what it was like to shoot someone…
The first one's hard but once you start it's easy to keep on.’
Some wanted the dubious honour of being a ‘double veteran’— American army slang for raping a woman and then murdering her.
But one explanation that occurs over and over again, and merits closer study, relates to the Holocaust: ‘It was this Nazi kind of thing…like the gas chambers and what Hitler did…
It was like a German bloodbath — what the Germans did to the Jews.’
And just as nobody at first believed that the Germans slaughtered Jews, nobody wanted to believe that young American soldiers could kill women and babies.
When an army investigator went to interview Ronald Haeberle, the army photographer who had been with Charlie Company, Haeberle produced some horrific colour slides of the killings and said that he had included some of them in an illustrated talk about the war he had given to various clubs, teachers' associations and youth groups.
The reaction, he said, had been disappointing.
Most people refused to believe them and said that they had been faked in Hollywood.
It was the same when Lieutenant Calley was eventually charged with multiple cases of murdering ‘Oriental human beings’.
The media was not interested: the New York Times gave it two paragraphs;Life and Look magazines turned down the excellent investigative article by Washington freelance journalist Seymour Hersh, and the big news organisations failed to follow up tips about the case.
It was only when Haeberle's pictures surfaced that the story really broke.
The US establishment moved immediately to limit the damage.
Government spokesmen persuaded the media to stop talking about the ‘My Lai massacre’ and call it instead the ‘My Lai incident’.
The army report of its investigation was watered down.
Again the word massacre was dropped, this time in favour of‘a tragedy of major proportions’.
References to ‘murdered women, children, babies and old men’ were changed to ‘non-combatant casualties’.
Details of the rapes were omitted or softened.
At the trials of Calley and others — either because the defence lawyers succeeded in having it excluded or because journalists wanted to spare their readers — the horrifyng detail was not reported.
The result was that public perception of My Lai was crucially altered and Americans came to believe that Calley and his men had inadvertently killed some Vietnamese civilians in the heat of battle.
So when Calley was convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment, he became a hero overnight.
Young women had travelled from all over the country during his trial to see him and meet him.
Now he had to employ a secretary to answer his fan mail.
(Why do some women find the murderers of other women so attractive?)
‘Free Calley’ stickers appeared on cars across the country, flags flew at half mast, veterans returned their medals, a song called ‘The Battle Hymn of Lieutenant Calley’sold 200,000 copies in three days, and new recruits at US Army bases drilled to ‘Calley, Calley, he's our man’.
In Vietnam GI's chalked up signs reading ‘Kill a Gook for Calley’.
President Nixon caught the public mood.
Three days after Calley's conviction he freed him from jail pending his appeal and allowed him to live in his officer's quarters.
The army now did its bit.
On review it reduced Calley's sentence to 20 years and then later halved it to ten.
Four and a half months later he was freed on parole, the only member of Charlie Company to have been convicted.
Today, fat and prosperous, Calley manages his father-in-law's jewellery shop in Columbus, Georgia.
In his own, ghosted, book he scorns concern for the babies he and his men killed.
‘On babies everyone's really hung up: ‘But the babies, the little innocent babies!'
If we're in Vietnam for another ten years and your son is killed by those babies, you'll cry at me, ‘Why didn't you kill those babies that day?'’
The significance of My Lai is that it threatened the American national myth — that of moral superiority.
The truth is different.
The Americans massacred the Sioux — men, women and children.
They massacred the Filipinos, regarding them as little better than dogs.
They committed atrocities against the Japanese and the Koreans.
Racist atrocity has been as much a part of the American experience of war as any other nation.
My Lai gave the United States a chance to face this fact.
It failed to do so.
Mother's ruin GOOD GRIEF Sally Brampton Sinclair-Stevenson, £14.95 Chris Savage King
Good Grief is an odd title for a modern novel.
The expression has been extinct since the second world war.
Yet the main character says it at every opportunity — that, and ‘silly old moi ’.
Our new role model, Hildamay, isn't selfish: more a regular girl guide.
She knocks sense into feckless girlfriends' heads, sets up an arranged pregnancy, ticks off a married man for playing fast and loose.
He says ‘I underestimated you’ appreciatively.
Noticing a badly dressed woman while driving in Knightsbridge, she can't restrain herself from rolling down the window and crying out ‘Why?’ in sheer exasperation.
The classless society is clearly on its way.
There's a brisk word for the little people — waiters (‘idiot’), cleaning ladies, young policemen, flower stall men (‘what kind of mortgage do I need for those?’),
Rastafarians on pavements and Harrods perfume girls, ‘grateful’ for her interest in collagen.
These exchanges are a ground-breaking insight for neo-conservative realism.
You only have to look at a prole in this book and it rolls over to have its tummy tickled.
Of course, this is not all there is to life, and Hildamay finds true contentment by adopting a nine-year-old girl who introduces herself on the tube.
Irresistible charm is brought to bear again as she butters up a worthy old bag (‘unpleasant’) who has a few tedious objections to our Hildamay waltzing off with her granddaughter.
The real mother is only 24, wears cheap, shabby clothes, has stiff hair like straw, thin legs, says in a quiet moment ‘I'd like to be a person like you’ and smokes her cigarettes too low.
Crikey!
Anyone can be a biological mother, but it takes a professional woman to make a good job of it.
Did anyone mention meritocracy?
Keith Joseph is a glowing influence.
The reprobate mother, who may also be gin-soaked, is almost the only interesting creation; her, and a louche bitch author called Cassandra, almost up to Dallas characterisation.
Don't be deceived by the bright pink cover: there is no joy to be had.
In restaurants, girls haughtily discuss cocks and fucking, but hardly anything happens.
The heroine collects champagne glasses, and recommends the drink as a diuretic.
There are lots of shirty assertions about independence, few actively demonstrated.
This is supposed to be a bright exercise in bittersweet recognition.
But no amount of bashful cuteness can disguise its humourless narcissism.
There's not even any relish in the privileges noted.
Aspiration and acquisition are abandoned for a priggishness that basks in its own complacency.
From a writer who edited Elle in its snazziest phase you would have expected more nous.
But this is the most deluded form of post-feminism: lies, lies and smiles.
A pure brew FIRE FROM HEAVEN: THE LIFE OF AN ENGLISH TOWN IN THE 17th CENTURY David Underdown HarperCollins, £17.99 Diarmaid MacCulloch
Dorchester, Thomas Hardy's Casterbridge, and still an agreeable country town, may seem typically and conventionally English.
Yet Professor Underdown's marvellous book shows just how particular Dorchester was two centuries before Hardy.
A community trauma made the difference: a fire on 6 August 1613, from which comes the title of the book.
Three blackened churches were left looming over the ruins of a town at least half destroyed.
Only one person died, so appalling financial loss was tempered by human deliverance.
Over the next decades, the chastened population, directed by John White, a formidable Puritan parish minister, did their best to rebuild a little Jerusalem in Dorset.
What a man White must have been!
He even changed people's sexual habits, so that the town's bastardy rate slumped.
Equally remarkably, he made them open their pockets, so that they gave with extraordianry generosity when other communities as far away as Italy suffered disasters like their own.
All Dorchester was regulated.
The poor were helped in their distress, the children educated and taught a trade, the godless tamed; there was even a public library where the townsfolk could turn the globes to learn their geography, or contemplate the world beyond in the pages of John Calvin.
A piquant feature of Dorchester's municipal charity was that much depended on a town brewhouse.
The later association of stern Protestantism with teetotalism was impossible before the days of tea, coffee and drinking-chocolate.
Alcoholic beverages were a fact of life when most drinking-water was a health hazard, so Dorchester's Puritans killed several birds with one stone by taking over the demon drink themselves, to administer it with moderation and make a healthy profit to be dispensed to the needy.
Ribald measures of organisational capacity in relation to breweries spring to mind; let it be noted that Dorchester ran its municipal brewhouse efficiently and profitably in the great days of Puritanism, but not thereafter.
The great days were not long: half a century at most.
All the time there was opposition.
Some townsfolk loved their town in a different way to Puritans, valuing stage plays, fun and good fellowship as the cement of the community.
They expressed their fury with the godly in lewd ballads that echo through Underdown's story.
Dorset gentry were irritated at Dorchester folk's disregard of their social superiors; national politics brought disaster.
Several townspeople were so depressed at the semi-popish ways of Charles I and Archbishop Laud that they took their idealism to the New World, to a new and more perfect Dorchester.
The Civil War brought grave troubles; White had to flee to London to escape the wrath of Cavaliers, and he was old and ailing when he returned.
Yet the Dorchester Puritans did not despair.
They did not much like Oliver Cromwell and his dangerous toleration of loose religion, but his regime gave them the chance to start again.
What really ended their efforts was Charles II's Restoration.
For most of England, it was a triumph, but in Dorchester it sapped the life out of their pious busyness.
Soon Jerusalem was no longer to be seen in Dorset's green and pleasant land.
Some historians minimise the importance of theology, and play down the role of Puritanism in early modern England.
In a piece of justified self-advertisement, Underdown invites them to read this book.
Here was a community in which people argued fiercely about theology, even sang ballads about predestination.
Dorchester may have been an extreme case, but throughout England, there were hard-working, anxious, godly folk whose rage with their king eventually led him to the scaffold at Whitehall.
They are wonderfully portrayed in this study, which should become the English equivalent of Le Roy Ladurie's Montaillou .
Here is the detail of a world we may be glad to have lost: the constables listen at the keyhole to a flaming row, solemnly counting up swear-words so that the fine per oath could be calculated properly.
PrintOut Double lives Boyd Tonkin
Like any good circus, the English law of defamation has sideshows and well as star attractions.
One of the oddest is the use of libel writs to harass novelists who inadvertently give unpleasant characters the same name as real people.
These cases hardly ever go to court, but publishers have a long record of paying up and shutting up.
They also tended to pulp the offending books.
Heinemann liquidated Anthony Burgess' early novel The Worm and the Ring , although the complainant — a school secretary from Banbury — didn't even share a name with the character she thought resembled her.
In 1932, the young hopeful Graham Greene had to pay for part of Stamboul Train to be reprinted after J B Priestley had objected to ‘Mr Savory’, a pompous writer of potboiling sagas.
Twenty years later, Antonia White's The Sugar House actually went before a judge, when an actress called June Sylvaine took umbrage at the book's portrayal of a bitchy, overweight trouper of that name.
The weight issue seemed to bug her most: ‘It is bad to be fat if one wants to play leading ingénue parts.’
She won £200, although the coincidence certainly arose from what libel specialist David Hooper calls ‘nothing more sinister than a half-remembered name lodged in the author's subconscious’.
Now history has repeated itself.
The second novel by NSS contributor D J Taylor,Real Life , features a pornographer called Morty Kronenburg, producer of such films as Girlschool Janitor and Spank Academy .
Real Life was widely reviewed, and a flesh-and-blood businessman called Mr Morty Kronenburg came to hear about it.
His name had somehow crossed Taylor's mind and stuck there; and he sued.
Mr Kronenburg's lawyers accepted that the defamation was accidental, four-figure damages were paid, and Chatto & Windus, having first withdrawn the book, has reissued it with an elaborate disclaimer slip.
But not every writer is so innocent.
Thinly veiled portraits of actual people in fiction vastly outnumber this type of unlucky strike.
Greene may have half-intended readers to identify Mr Savory with Priestley, and every year throws up a few romans clearly in need of a clef .
Tariq Ali, who took the left intelligentsia apart in Redemption , is fortunate that British Trots won't use the bourgeois libel laws; while Melvyn Bragg has a transparently sour sketch of a Lynn Barber-style interviewer in his new serial-novel Crystal Rooms.
Do the victims care?
More than they let on, I suspect.
Somerset Maugham's Cakes and Ale mocks a vain middlebrow bestseller called Alvin Kear, modelled on Hugh Walpole.
‘Read on with increasing horror,’ admits Walpole's private diary.
‘Unmistakable portrait of myself.
Never slept.’
ENDGAMES WEEKEND COMPETITION
No 3226 Set by Margaret Rogers
We asked you for a diatribe in verse from Neil Kinnock against the Tory press, the short-sighted public, or anyone or anything else he might be against at the moment.
Report by Grace Elegy
First, I would like to draw to the attention of two or three people (they will know who they are) the words: ‘in verse’.
Having got over that little unpleasantness, I thought your efforts quite spirited, and a delight to read.
I was pleased with W F Owtram's opening two lines: ‘Was it for this I quitted Rhondda, /In my dreams at large to wander…
’ I was also bowled over by T J Davies' rewrite of The Waste Land : ‘April is the cruellest month, breeding/Bluebells out of the red land, mixing/Amnesia and greed, stirring/Dull boots without spring rain.
/Winter made us hopeful, covering/The land in speculation while we fed/The little wife on dried tubers…
’ You can see where it starts to go wrong, sticking just a little too closely for comfort to the original.
I also wasn't sure what Kinnock was railing against.
Surely not the time of the month?
Surprisingly, only Roger E Bryan tried to conjure up the real Neil Kinnock, now unsuppressed by his minders and able to give full rein to his natural prolixity: ‘I am full of hate, spite, yes malice and rage/Or even loathing, disgust, rancour, venom and wrath…
’. An excellent try.
Basil Ransome-Davies' entry was, as usual, bursting with expletives: ‘You bloody fucking bleeding sodding scum…’
Appropriate enough this week, but I wonder what Basil would send in if asked for something pleasant and lyrical.
Finally, I shall print Kevin Irving's poem in its entirety: ‘Oh Noooooooooooooooooo!’
Yes, that was it.
£15 to xxxx and xxxx Ten for the rest.
Postscript:I have had a note from George Cowley, who chides David Morton for his entry in no 3224.
Basil Boothroyd, says Cowley, was ‘never editor of Punch ’.
(He was assistant editor for 18 years.)
What Morton actually wrote was that Punch went through ‘several golden ages under the editorship of Basil Boothroyd, Alan Coren and Malcolm Muggeridge…
’ Would Morton care to write in and explain himself?
BACKCHAT Mat Coward
Following the election result, it seems almost inevitable that Labour will adopt a commitment to some form of proportional representation (writes Backchat's ‘things that seem almost inevitable following the election result’ correspondent ), although, ironically, it seems considerably less inevitable now than it did a few weeks ago.
For the time being, however, it is probably still just about inevitable enough to justify a closer look.
The front-runner is generally agreed to be the Multiple Non-Transferable Ticket System (No Refunds), which is currently used in Iceland, Bosnia, and parts of Turkey.
Under this method, candidates buy a voting slip from a booking office.
The fee charged depends on whether the election is a matinée or an evening poll, and dress is optional.
Voters may buy as many tickets as they wish, though no single voter may occupy more than one seat at a time.
On leaving the voting station, electors are requested not to reveal the result to those who have yet to vote.
Supporters of this option claim it reinstates the spectacle of demo-cracy, while critics content themselves with pointing out that it is currently used in Iceland, Bosnia, and parts of Turkey.
Another scheme put forward by reformers is the Dedicated Sprout System, which uses computers to translate the wishes of the electorate into parliamentary fractions.
A magic sprout from the mountains of Tibet is spun around a type of electronic roulette wheel, the unconscious yearnings of the citizenry acting as an invisible force on the brassica, thus producing an outcome in tune with the true needs of the community.
Although widely endorsed by astrologers, spiritualists and the old Liberal Party, this method is condemned by its detractors as being too uncomplicated to do any good.
It is also opposed by Methodists.
Some sections of the radical left have long advocated the Additional Migraine System, which aims to ensure equal represent-ation of every kind of minority.
Under this scheme, voters can be penalised for failing to list tall lesbians, Egyptian cross-dressers, and short-sighted window-cleaners in the correct order of preference — although, in order to avoid discrimination, election literature is prohibited from revealing any details at all about candidates, including their names.
Voting is compulsory, except for registered anarchists, who are allowed to abstain, provided they fill in the correct forms.
This method is used in France, though only as a party game, not actually for electing governments.
Guess The Weight Of The Donkey and Pin The Tail On The Jam Sponge are not, in fact, recognised PR mechanisms at all, contrary to some reports, although it is true that they inspired the electoral systems in Israel and Italy respectively.
Neither is: ‘You Know Where To Put Your Cross If You Wanna See Preety Lady Alive Again, Si Senor’ under active consideration by the Plant Commission, except possibly for the regional assembly of the Isle of Wight.
Many die-hard defenders of the outmoded Please Pass The Toast system have expressed fears that fair votes must inevitably mean granting a platform to ultra-rightists.
This worry is somewhat overstated.
Very few of the world's PR parliaments are controlled outright by Nazis, and a comfortingly high number include opposition coalitions led by groupings significantly to the left of Stanley Baldwin.
While it is true that, in most of them, a party with 10 per cent of the popular vote holds 100 per cent of the power, this is surely preferable to our present system, which condemns us to a lifetime of minority rule.
FORTEANA A hand-picked review of the weird and wonderful by ‘Fortean Times’ editor Paul Sieveking
For two or three years, someone — or something — has been attacking and mutilating horses and cows in western Sweden.
About 200 horse attacks had been reported to the police by the time the mystery was brought to national attention by journalist Siewert Oholm's TV programme Svar direkt on 25 February 1992.
In the summer of 1989, the number of reports increased.
In 90 per cent of the incidents, the victims were horses, almost always assaulted in the same way.
They were cut with a sharp, scalpel-like instrument, in or beside their sexual organs.
The wounds were often 30 centimetres long, and five or six centimetres deep.
About 50 per cent of the animals were so sev-erely maimed that they had to be put down.
Most of the attacks were near main roads, and the original police hypothesis was that a single madman or religious fanatic was motoring from one enclosed pasture to another; then several horses seemed to have been assaulted in different places at the same time, although this is not certain.
Note how an evildoer is nearly always a ‘he’ until the contrary is proven.
According to Marie Raden, police investigator in the Vanersborg district, it requires an astonishing knowledge of animals to be able to approach the horses, and hurt them so badly, without causing them to offer resistance.
There were cases where watchdogs didn't react, even when they were only a couple of yards away.
There was no indication that the animals had been drugged.
In August 1991, several horses were assaulted in the neighbourhood of Fargelanda in Dalsland.
It began when a mare, belonging to Marianne Gothberg, was cut round the vagina.
Another of Mrs Gothberg's horses was cut the following day, and the day after that a foal was found bleeding on a neighbouring farm.
More horses in the area succumbed, and some 40 farmers formed a sort of ‘home guard’.
They caught a suspicious individual one evening, and turned him over to the police; but he turned out to be a frightened bilberry-picker who had lost his way.
Tord Haraldsson from Alingsas, who belongs to the investigating task force, said that similar assaults in Denmark and the US have turned out to be sectarian rituals, where fanatics have been drinking horses' blood to gain strength.
This is news to me; the widespread cattle mutilations across the American midwest in the past two decades are variously blamed on cultists, aliens or government experimentation, but, as far as I am aware, no actual proof has ever been found to back up any one of these hypotheses.
Several farmers and horse breeders appeared on the TV programme.
They stressed that seve-ral attacks had taken place almost in their presence, and couldn't understand why their horses had submitted without offering resistance.
The perpetrator was like a phantom or a supernatural being.
A vet said that the attacker had a good knowledge not only of animal beh-aviour, but also of animal anatomy.
The reviewer of the programme in Sydsvenska Dagbladet the next day drew a parallel with ‘the horrible murder and cutting up of a prostitute, Catrin da Costa, in Stockholm a couple of years ago’.
It was not possible to determine how the woman had died, since she was dismembered and her head was never found.
Now that the horses are turned out to pasture again after the winter, the Fargelanda ‘home guard’ is again mobilised, and others are being organised all over western Sweden.
The first mutilation of the year was reported in Expressen on 14 April.
A mare was found at a place called Vitehall near Kyrkekvarn, bleeding from wounds in her vagina and hind legs.
A ‘my-sterious’ red car driven by a young man sped away from the spot as the mare was found; but it was not yet clear how the wounds had been inflicted.
The mare might have been kicked by another horse.