

MELVYN BRAGG'S STYLE.
RICHARD INGRAMS'S SANITY GOOD SPORTS Patrick Collins on England rugby Russell Bulgin on Grand Prix Cricketing cartoons by Ken Pyne and David Haldane Is anyone clean enough to be President?
Inside: How America's greatest leaders fail today's character tests Macaulay Culkin famous, rich, sober and a virgin — he's perfect!
Vote for Mac
Country life
The sender of the first cutting published will receive a bottle of Aberlour whisky and £5.
For all other cuttings published a miniature bottle of Aberlour and £5 will be awarded.
Cuttings should be sent to Punch 
Nelmes pleaded guilty to inflicting grievous bodily harm with intent when he appeared at Gloucester Crown Court in September last year.
The court was told how Karen, who is partially dead and dyslexic, was ‘the light of his life’ and Nelmes was very protective of her.
Once inside, Princess Diana spent 40 minutes talking to the patients, one of whom had sadly died only hours before the Princess arrived.
A boss who was accused of rationing his workers' toilet paper today insisted ‘I'm no skinflint’.
He said the allegations made by 13 sacked staff were ‘a tissue of lies’.
A man asked police to guard his South African home while he was away, but on return at night was shot dead in mistake for a burglar.
WEDGES FOR TWO MILES
The World According To MR PUNCH
Neil's steaming night of passion
It is an absolute rule of the Punch Table that nothing said around it ever finds its way into print.
Now, you may wonder, along with one of my guests this week, what the point is of having Punch lunches if their proceedings remain private, but we like it that way and, besides, it means that we get some seriously filthy gossip.
This week, however, I can remain silent no longer.
A story was told whose smear value demands immediate publication.
It will be of immense value to the editors of the Daily Mail ,Sun ,Sunday Times , and even our very own, dearly-beloved Daily Express (wakey, waaaakeeee!!!) as they prepare their entirely unbiased coverage of the political scene.
And here it is: I have proof that Neil Kinnock once spent a night of passion alone in a miner's cottage with a well-known writer.
A well-known male writer, to boot.
Ha!
Does that pass the smear-test or what?
Of course, it won't have much to spark the interest of the up-market end of the Murdoch empire, since the writer in question had no connection whatever with the Soviet Communist party, although he is pretty partial to Tottenham Hotspur.
But I can just see the Sun headline, a fitting follow up to ‘Paddy Pants-down’, to wit: ‘Is Neil A Nancy Boyo?’
The full, torrid, sickening truth behind the astonishing saga that will rock the country to its very foundations, can now be revealed.
It involves a midnight visit to a sleepy Welsh village, a chance meeting between a young backbencher and a famous wordsmith and, most telling of all, a steaming cup of tea.
It all began when Hunter Davies, the country's best-loved family man, accepted a commission from a publisher to write a book on the best of British.
So off he went to spend a day with people or institutions that embodied the very best our country has to offer.
One of the tasks he set himself was to profile a backbench MP.
And the one that was chosen was an unknown but idealistic young firebrand from the valleys by the name of Neil Kinnock.
After a hard day's politicking, they ended up back at Neil's terraced cottage in South Wales.
On the outside, it looked like any other two-up, two-down.
On the inside, however, it had been transformed by the keen eye and busy hands of Neil's lovely wife Glenys.
It was a very temple to the wonders of Habitat.
Glenys, however, was not at home when the ginger firebrand and the Beatles' confidant arrived.
Nor was she present when the carrot-topped left-winger offered his bed to the exhausted scribe.
Nor could she have been aware of the matey tap with which the russet radical awoke the aforementioned scribe in the morning, a cup of tea grasped in his proletarian fist.
Suggestive, eh?
Well, no, of course not.
Neil Kinnock is a red-blooded, hard-drinking, fist-swinging family-man.
There is no truth whatsoever to any suggestion that he is anything less than lustily heterosexual (and spousally loyal to boot).
In other words, the whole of the story above is merely an innocent encounter, puffed-up into a tissue of lying farragoes.
Just like every other political story this year, in fact.
That's not how the Sunday Times would see it, of course.
This week saw the second of their massive Kinnockathons, which set out to prove at vast length and with exquisite tedium what Punch first established in May last year, to wit: that both Hansard and the cuttings files are full of daft remarks uttered in the days when the windbag was still a firebrand.
It is, of course, pathetic that a man who used to be a raging republican should turn into a slavering royal poodle, just as it is sad that his economic and political principles should have become as unrecognisable as the Welsh rugby team.
But Kinnock does have a defence — two, in fact.
A bird in the hand is worth two votes for Bush
A man must be allowed to grow up, even if he does so in public.
And, in any case, there is nothing dishonourable about a politician who wants to get elected.
Businessmen sell products they think the market will wish to buy.
Why should a politician not peddle policies for which an electorate might wish to vote?
One answer to that question can be found in America.
As the electoral process has lumbered into action, much attention has been paid to Bill Clinton's alleged sexual dalliances and his attempts to evade  war service in Vietnam.
This week we publish an article by the American journalist Marsha Dubrow which demonstrates the degree to which similar enquiries would have prevented the election of men such as Lincoln, Roosevelt and John F Kennedy.
The article does not, however, cover the stories that go unreported or un-analysed because of the media's obsession with filth.
For example, Mr Clinton recently OK'd the execution of a man who had committed murder.
The man in question was severely mentally impaired, as Clinton knew.
Yet the American public's obsession with capital punishment, particularly in a Southern state like Arkansas, means that any politician demonstrating his toughness will score over those suspected of wishy-washy liberalism.
And if a few black spastics have to fry, well, too bad.
Governor Clinton, in other words, is a man who could well be accused of wanting power so badly that he is, quite literally, prepared to kill for it.
His willingness to prostitute himself to the worst instincts of the electorate makes Neil Kinnock look like a beacon of moral and political rectitude.
But here's a thought for both men: there are times when a nation has to be persuaded to do something that it does not want to do because its future welfare demands it.
The art of persuading a nation that it is in its own interests to make sacrifices is known as leadership.
Both Britain and America are in desperate need of this rare commodity and both, if their current crop of politicians is anything to go by, are unlikely to get any.
So, here's a thought for Bill, Neil and all the spin-doctors and psephologists who advise them: try having some real, unwavering principles for a change.
You never know, it may actually work better than you think.
To say I am a sports-nut would be an understatement.
I am an obsessive, addicted, manic observer of all forms of sporting activity.
Yet the Winter Olympics left me entirely unmoved and uninterested.
This may be because the British competitors were pathetically talent-impaired.
But it may also have to do with the so-called sports that were on display.
After much consideration, I have concluded that no activity can be called a sport when any of the following apply…
1
The competitors wear chiffon or sequins
2
Ditto lip-gloss
3
This counts double when the competitors are male
4
The activity is performed to music
5
Marks are awarded for wiggling one's chiffon-clad bottom to the said music
6
It's a man's bottom that's wiggling
Whooo…
Spooky!
REVEALED: the frankly uncanny similarities between Michael Jackson and Benny Hill
Mr Michael ‘Whackson’ Jackson surprised observers of the pop scene when he stopped off in London en route from his coronation as an African tribal king (see ‘A Bit of a Git’).
His reason for being in Britain was, it appeared, a desire to pay tribute to Benny Hill, the politically incorrect comedian, who was languishing in a hospital bed, following a mild heart attack.
Many people affected surprise at the unlikely friendship between the surgically-reconstructed counter-tenor and TV's roly-poly vaudevillian.
But, as our investigations have shown, the pair share a number of uncanny similarities, for example…
1
Both are white
2
Both have had Number 1 hit singles in Britain
3
Both have been chased down London streets by rampaging packs of women.
(Note: The notion that Mr Hill chases women is a myth put about by humourless, crop-haired feminists such as Mr ‘Ben’ Elton.)
4
Both have famously reclusive lifestyles
5
Both have unusually solitary personal lives
6
Both have appeared in botched film versions of classic children's tales (Hill in Chitty Chitty Bang Bang , Jackson in The Wiz )
7
Both enjoyed their first solo chart success in the month of February, with records whose title began with a ‘g’.
Benny Hill's Gather In The Mushrooms reached number 8 in February 1961, Michael Jackson's Got To Be There peaked at number 5 in February 1972.
These are some of the uncanny facts that have caused us to consider Messrs Hill and Jackson and ejaculate, ‘Whooo…spooky!’
BENNY HILL — A man whose fascination for high-speed milk distribution struck a chord with the record-buying public
MICHAEL JACKSON — Billy Jean, it transpired, was not his ‘girl’ as had previously been alleged
Review of the week
FLAVOUR OF THE MONTH
February's micro-celebrity of the moment is Catherine Zeta Jones
The Darling Buds Of May returned and suddenly Miss Zeta Jones was popping up all over the place.
There she was:
bursting out of a cling-film top as she accepted a Variety Club award.
straining the seams of a skimpy dress on Aspel & Co 
Barely constrained by her minute dress at a movie premiere.
Fortunately, Miss Zeta Jones wore ordinary clothes for her visit to a victim of Motor Neurone disease.
But it was back to normal as she told Woman's Own about her ‘sizzling’ three-months with Blue Peter ‘hunk’John Leslie.
Miss Zeta Jones, a most serious artist, was then upset over rumours that she wanted to be a rock star.
And yet when it was mentioned that she narrated on Jeff Wayne's album Spartacus , she stormed, ‘It is not a pop album.
It is a credible piece of work.’
So was her plea that being famous was ‘terrifying’, after one male admirer gave her a bouquet and a man on a motorbike ‘kept staring at her’ in a traffic jam.
Relief came when she jetted out to co-star in Christopher Columbus alongside Marlon Brando (space permitting).
Here was her big break, a star role to confirm that all-important credibility.
The promo photo of her dressed as a 15th-century temptress got a suitably artistic response:
‘It's Mariette the Malteaser,’ salivated the Sun as she told the paper, ‘I love working in period costume — it makes me feel really feminine.’
‘Saucy Mariette’, drooled the Mirror , lingering over her ‘plunging neckline as the sea breeze brushed her hair’.
‘Her clothes will be ripped apart during a love scene in her raunchiest role,’ shrieked the Daily Express expectantly.
Most illuminating was the insight offered by a crew member who said, ‘Most of us have been watching with our tongues hanging out.’
Quite so.
A bit of a GIT
IT WAS A BIG WEEK for would-be gits.
Mr David Coleridge's Chairmanship of Lloyds came under criticism from a group of irate Tory MP's, Michael Jackson followed his trip to Africa with a stay in London during which he spoke with his fans via messages (eg ‘I love England with all my heart’) written on pillowcases, dropped from a 14th floor window, and the British Winter Olympic Team returned gongless from Albertville.
But this week's award goes to MR CLIFF RICHARD , for his assertion that, ‘I could do a nude video and it would be the biggest thing that ever happened in Britain.’
Actually, Cliff, our computer simulation suggests that, in the unlikely event of your making a nude video, Britain would sigh, ‘Oh dear, the poor old boy's been a bit of a git.’
Cliff: shocked fans say ‘no’ to a dirty stop-out scenario
CORRECTIONS
Benetton is an Italian sweater as is 
Luciano Pavarotti who has abnormally large lungs as has 
Jane Fonda ( all of a sudden )who was great as a call girl (Klute )as was 
Pamela Bordes who is currently writing a work of fiction as is 
Norman Lamont (his Budget speech)who has a sexy lodger with a whip as did 
Indiana Jones' landlord whom no one 's ever seen just like 
Paul Gascoigne's nightclub assailant who was a paragon of publicity-shy discretion just like 
Benetton's new ad campaign!
Help the aged
Has Richard Ingrams finally gone completely ga-ga?
We were so worried by the Oldie editor's eccentric behaviour, we sent off letters to the agony aunts to ask for their help
Thirty years ago, it was happy Richard Ingrams, the madcap youthful japester
Today, it's miserable Mr Ingrams, grimly fending off the onset of senile depression
Seasoned media watchers have been much concerned with Richard Ingrams of late.
It's been all downhill since he was wrenched from the helm of Private Eye by his homuncular protégé Ian Hislop.
Now Ingrams has found a new hobby in his retirement, the Oldie , a publication with extra-large print to cater for the antiquated myope.
His strenuous efforts to drum up any kind of interest in this product, already nicknamed the Foldie , has increasingly resembled a man trying to hammer-throw in a wardrobe.
In one recent interview, the pock-marked organ-player fell apart so drastically, he wound up huddled by the fire barely able to form a coherent sentence.
Has it come to this?
The great anti-Establishment provocateur of the Sixties now reduced to a gibbering wreck?
Deeply concerned by this news, we dispatched letters to the agony aunts of Fleet Street to seek advice.
The letters were written from the point of view of Ingrams's offspring and mentioned obliquely, among other things, Ingrams' secession of Private Eye , his ‘prank’ affair with Pamela Bordes, and his fashion shoot for the Observer clad in ludicrous youth garb.
We hope their heartfelt advice is of some use to the grand old man.
Our letter to the agony aunts about Richard Ingrams
Dear Agony Aunt,
My father has started behaving in the most strange way.
For many years he was a successful businessman.
He ran his own small business, but then about five or six years ago it all started to go wrong.
He had a young man in his twenties working at the company.
They got on very well, nothing homosexual I don't think, but they did spend a lot of time together.
Then my father decided to hand over the company to the young man.
None of his office mates agreed and they all left.
It got very bitter.
He was at a loose end.
I don't know how this affected his relationship with mother, but they are now separated.
Dad has gone a bit funny about sex.
He even pretended that he was having an affair with a younger woman.
It was as if he just wanted to show off, or something.
Now he's taken to dressing up in young people's clothes.
He wears denim jackets — with the collar up!— and sunglasses.
I do so want to help him before he makes a complete fool of himself.
What do you suggest?
Yours sincerely,E. J. Thribb 
What advice do the agony aunts offer the silver-haired ex-satirist?
SUNDAY Mirror
Virginia Ironside, wrote:
‘Perhaps your father is having some sort of mid-life crisis…possibly all is not well.
I would talk about it to your mum, though of course it would be kinder if you did not mention the business about fancy girlfriends.’
Recommended remedy:He should share his worries with close relatives — and ‘my help line is in the Sunday Mirror each week.’
Bella
Anne Lovell, wrote:
‘It seems you feel he's not behaving in the way you think a father should behave.
But you have to remember that you have a life of your own to get on with.’
Recommended remedy:He should try for an appointment with Relate (‘but there is a long waiting list’) or even a local branch of the Catholic Marriage Advisory Council.
Woman's Realm
Gill Cox, wrote:
‘It does indeed sound as if your father is having some kind of identity crisis.
He's casting around trying to find a way of presenting himself that's different from his past life.
However, it doesn't seem he's found a satisfactory answer for himself yet.’
Recommended remedy:He should see a counsellor to ‘talk through how he's feeling’, or try to contact Relate.
DAILY Mirror
Marjorie Proops, wrote:
‘I must admit it does sound as if your father is enjoying a new lease of life and possibly he is even trying to recapture his youth.
This sometimes happens to men in middle age, and it is usually only a passing phase.
It has probably been caused by his friendship with a younger man.’
Recommended remedy:‘Just keep an eye on him, and make sure he does not do anything too silly!’
Woman
Sue Frost, wrote:
‘Your father may be embarrassing, but is he putting himself at risk?
Sometimes the individual wants to shake off constraints…
Do you think he is ill?’
Recommended remedy:Try to persuade him to see his doctor and reassure him that you still love him.
The cure:To ease the Ingrams malaise, it's simple.
Give him a hug and tell him that you love him.
Or could it be the waitresses at the Groucho Club do enough of that already?
Competition results
Melvyn Bragg erotic parody winners
We asked you to pick out Melvyn's love scene from five erotic literary extracts.
Most of you were spot on.
But a black mark goes to the improbably named ‘C D Lush’ of the Travellers' Club who failed to distinguish between Melvyn's extract and D H Lawrence's.
First out of the hat was John Riley of Fribourg, Switzerland, who receives a signed copy of Melvyn's meisterwork,A Time To Dance .
The other signed copy goes to the winner of our Melvyn parody competition Tim Hopkins of Luton, who topped the poll with his elbow-shuddering effort:
I remember so well the last time our secretions commingled.
I had driven in tumescent haste to our tryst at Appleby horse fair.
(The gypsy in my soul wanted the gypsy in my arms!)
My subterfuge was a visit to the Rotary — but the only rotary aspect of that day was the circle my buttocks described as I thrust you to orgiastic multiplicities.
The atmosphere was unforgettable hot and sticky — as indeed was your body in the aftermoments of my pleasuring you.
As it was such release for me, too — release from the rigours of placing my variously sick relatives in hospices the length and breadth of Cumbria.
Never, never will I forget your father's horses gathering to witness our nakedness.
Nor will I forget your failure to understand why I kept my priapic self concealed in you — even when love's urgency had receded.
Well, my doe-eyed ingénue , it was an act of simple kindness and consideration: I didn't want to frighten the mares…’
However, an honourable mention must go to Caroline Bainbridge of Northolt, Middlesex, who used suitably passionate pink notepaper.
Her vigorously uplifting entry ran:
Oh darling, I'll never forget that day when we drove in, in,into the heart of the rolling hills.
I remember driving harder,harder in order to arrive quickly at our favourite patch of ferns, while you sat by me innocently panting.
Yes, panting!
You needed me and it made me feel so good!
Not even the hasty relieving of my weary bladder as we scrambled out of the car was enough to offset that wonderful feeling of rejuvenation.
We tore at each other 's clothes — your suspenders, my corsets.
You were so eager.
Amid a crescendo of passion I forced open your legs and you joyously proclaimed, ‘Thank you, thank you, I could never do the splits before.’
The moment was complete when I realised that the action had also cured my arthritis and that I hadn't needed the strategically-placed piece of double-sided sticky tape.
And a Pennine-sized cheer goes to Brian Jenner of Oxford for his sweat-stained offering:
We lay entwined on a secluded hillside.
You joked that as you kissed me deeply you could taste the tang of my lunchtime Cumberland sausage.
Even here you wanted to explore my crags, my tarns and my knoll.
I consented and, likewise, I wanted to explore the thicket of your thighs, which to my delight I found heavy with vernal dew.
I thrust into rough grass and smoothly penetrated your loamy depths.
A soft drizzle began to fall…
And lastly a sheep-scaring well done to D P Jones of Lisburn, Co Antrim, for his moist submission:
He moved ever closer, then slowly, slowly her eyes flickered open, gradually recognising the man who was about to take her sweet maidenhead.
And then — and then — and THEN…
Alas, Mr Jones seems to have passed out with excitement at this point.
Gutter gossip
Guttersnipe
A thinking man's guide to tabloid tattle
by Mr Mitchell Symons
Mr James ‘Jimmy’ Nail , the thespian of unrestricted growth who gives working people his Spender , has been generously delivering himself of his Weltschmerz .
He claims that he regards himself as ‘someone who has stepped off the edge of a cliff’.
But he reserves his deepest angst for thespianism which is, according to this latter-day Irving, ‘a pain, like a trip to the dentist — an unpleasant experience.’
Guttersnipe is obliged to bravely disagree with Mr Nail's equation of his acting with orthodontics.
With a dentist one can understand what the chap is actually saying.
Further to last week's revelation that Mr Phillip Schofield , the televisionist, was espied taking a walk with an ‘amazing dreamgirl’, it appears that his ‘chum’,Mr Jason Donovan , the out-and-out all-round entertainer, has been squiring a Miss Narelle Curtis , an Antipodean mannequin.
Eyewitnesses indicate that ‘the couple spent three hours laughing and cuddling at a Melbourne nightclub.’
Sadly, Mr Donovan said, ‘I'm just relaxing — it's great to be back with friends.’
Once again our hopes for his affairs of the heart are dashed.
Ms Siobhan Fahey (see below) has been explaining her emigration to the south of France.
Apparently, she believes that London is unsafe for the development of her heirs,Samuel Hurricane and Django .
‘There's no way I want to bring up my kids in London,’ pontificates the songstress, ‘The streets are dangerous and there are too many weirdos around.’
If by ‘weirdos’, Ms Fahey means bizarrely attired, tousled-tressed former narcoticists who perform in beat groups, then one fears that in the form husband,Mr David Stewart , she might be taking the problem with her.
Miss Denice Lewis , the American poule de luxe , has been shedding light on her fellow compatriot,Mr Steven Wyatt , the ‘wealthy oil trader’ who kindly befriended our own Duchess of York .
It transpires that Miss Lewis and Mr Wyatt cohabited in London for a brace of years.
During such time he was wont to arise at 5.30 every morning in order to be ‘in tune with the rhythms of the day’.
Furthermore, Mr Wyatt also introduced the  ampulaceous belle to the benefits of ‘Kundalini’(Indian yoga), ‘cold showers’ and ‘an iridologist’.
Nevertheless, baser appetites were not neglected and Miss Lewis vouchsafes that ‘Steve is also a brilliant lover, the very best I have ever known.’
Indeed so ‘brilliant’ was Mr Wyatt that his erstwhile inamorata once persuaded him to engage in carnal activity on board an aeroplane.
‘We once made love on the spur of the moment in the loo of an aircraft,’ she recalls.
Without for one moment implying any impropriety, this last episode demonstrates how deliciously appropriate it is that Mr Wyatt should subsequently have struck up such a warm friendship with the world's foremost collector of air miles.
Mr Michael Jagger , the vocal stylist with the once-popular beat ensemble, The Rolling Stones, is soon to achieve the venerable rank of grandfather.
Authoritative sources have revealed that his daughter Miss Jade Jagger is some four months away from her confinement.
The putative father is one Mr Piers Jackson , an artist to whom the traditionally-minded Miss Jade is, of course, not betrothed.
There is only one reservation: should Miss Jade bear a daughter, can Mr Jagger guarantee that he will in future years be able to keep her away from the attentions of his bass (sic) colleague,Mr William Wyman ?
Finally, in the week that the flame of altruism flickered on as the saintly Mother Teresa and her divine holiness the Princess of Wales clasped hands in a gesture of tender solidarity that touched the souls of millions, it was revealed that:
Pop star Mr Nathan Moore is touting for gigs in gay London clubs;
Miss Barbara Streisand , the nasally-unchallenged tragedienne and diva, ‘is now terrified to make stage appearances’;
TV's Miss Victoria ‘Vicki’ Michelle gets so many requests for suspenders that she'd ‘go BUST if she answered them all;
Mr Hugh Scully , the televisionist, sends his ‘old ties’ to ‘farm workers in Africa’;
Miss Ulrika Jonsson , the Nordic meteorologist, was named ‘rear of the year’; and
Mr Marlon Brando , the appetite, ate a ‘mammoth £100 meal’, and justified his nickname of ‘Gut-father’.
Who pray is…
MS SIOBHAN FAHEY?
Guttersnipe's Dictionary of National Biography
MS SIOBHAN FAHEY, the vocal stylist with Shakespear's Sister, a popular singing duo, was born in London 34 years ago.
Ms Fahey departed from her employment in the Decca Records press office in order to become a co-founder of the seminal trio, Bananarama, with which she enjoyed multiple success ‘singer’ lieder such as‘Na Na Hey Hey Kiss Him Goodbye’and ‘Robert De Niro's Waiting’.
However, melodious success was not entirely fruitful and in the late Eighties Ms Fahey retired from Bananarama and moved to Los Angeles.
Once again though she is enjoying pre-eminence in the taste or pre-adolescent spring — as evinced by the success of the song ‘Stay’.
The catalyst for her new ensemble was undoubtedly her 1987 marriage to her fellow troubadour Mr David Stewart.
Anything to get out of the house…
Dredge's week
‘It's the Post Office's new customer charter booklet for next door’
‘Look, look — a Scottish Conservative member of parliament!!’
‘Got any Benetton sweaters, pal?’
PhotoSynthesis
Caplin & Jeremy
I think I came unstuck at the last fence
If it weren't for this job creation scheme I'd be on the rubbish tip
I'm going off the rails too
I tell you the end of the recession is right behind us
Talk about the unelectable in pursuit of the unaccountable
All this fuss over the hunting of a few small cubes of mycoprotein
Wrong Quorn, Kenneth
It's OK chaps, I've just dug up some more voters
I do find him a bit wet after David Owen
Politics
Julia Langdon
Mr Major tries to turn nasty
If the Prime Minister wants to win, he may need a new mean streak
These are difficult days for John Major.
Not only is he facing an uncertain future, he is being forced to behave in an uncharacteristic fashion every day.
For as the election draws ever-nearer, he is being asked to make what for him must be the ultimate sacrifice: from time to time, he is actually having to be nasty.
As he asks forgiveness for his trespasses, on his knees beside Norma every night, he must find it increasingly hard, too, to forgive those who trespass against him.
His politics are not of the kind which nurture nastiness; he was fashioned for finer things.
It is very easy to be beastly if you are, say, Norman Tebbit or Dennis Healey — although the old bruiser does seem to be showing distinct signs of turning into a benign grandpa.
And even if it doesn't come naturally, most politicians develop the ability to be absolutely horrible whenever it is required.
The Prime Minister is not like that.
If he will forgive me he is rather like a graduate from the Shirley Williams institute for the caring and compassionate politician.
This can be misleading.
The caring and compassionate are also capable of being utterly ruthless, as Mrs Williams was sometimes claimed to be.
The point about her was that she had a trick which worked and, unlike many politicians, She Was Not Found Out.
It was very simple: it was to appear reasonable in all circumstances, even when severely provoked.
I discovered this by accident.
I carelessly accepted an invitation to debate with Mrs Williams on the future of social democracy etc on the radio.
Mrs Williams was at the time the most popular women in the world, after Mother Teresa, and it occurred to me, rather too late, that I was on to a loser here.
So I decided that in order not to appear as a bad-tempered harpy, I would agree with everything Shirl said and then add: ‘But…’
Imagine my surprise when I discovered that this was exactly what she did.
We had a most uninteresting conversation but it was extremely illuminating.
Every time Shirley was on the telly thereafter, I would notice how she put her head to one side and agreed absolutely with the questioner ‘except didn't he think that…’.
This digression is prompted by the experience of watching the Prime Minister trying to horrid to Neil Kinnock twice a week and occasionally trying to put the boot in elsewhere to the Labour Party.
The Tories are, wisely, keeping their boy away from most of the rough stuff — rightly recognising that such strengths as he has are in his niceness — but he has to look like he wants to win sometimes.
And he does want to win very much — not least because of the aforementioned who are trespassing against him.
As ever with politics, these are not his enemies, these are his friends.
In fact his so-called Honourable Friends.
It must have been very galling for Major, when he established membership of the A-Team to write the election manifesto, that he had to choose for it those very men who are most likely to profit from his failure.
His friend Chris would do nothing, of course, to undermine him deliberately but Patten has always been spoken about as a one-day leader.
Ken Clarke has been an obvious candidate for some years.
But most worrying of all is Tarzan.
Michael Heseltine, The Man Who Brought Down Mrs Thatcher, and last week the man who brought down the house in a dazzling Commons performance.
The man with the most to make from Major's election defeat.
What is Hezzy's game?
It is quite simple.
He still wants to be leader — or, better still, prime minister — and he knows that he is still in with a chance.
His camp followers have been nodding their heads sagely and saying that all is  not yet over and Hezzy may not be destined to live out his political life amid the ruins of the Department of the Environment — once he's pulled it down, that is.
The brilliance of the recent verbal firework display he put on at Westminster enchanted his party — just as it alarmed the Labour Party that John Smith proved such an easy target for him.
It cannot have cheered John Major that much, Oh no.
He knows he has been warned.
There is a very smart woman working in Conservative Central Office who has taught me a trick at least as useful at that of Shirley Williams.
When someone is rude — a waiter, a civil servant, a politician — she says ‘Huh, if I was you I'd sue.’
‘What?’ they say.
‘I'd sue,’ she says.
‘You should do it.
You've a very good case.’
‘Sue’ they say.
‘Yes’ she says, ‘the charm school.’
The Mystery of the Missing Maxwell Hat appears to have been solved.
This I can tell you is a great relief.
The mystery of the missing millions is as nothing in comparison.
I am slightly embarrassed by this story but I fear it should be told.
I have a grey trilby which I have had for many years.
When I was political editor of the Daily Mirror , Maxwell took a shine to this hat and asked me to get him one identical to it.
He then wore it daily for years and, on occasion, nearly sacked people if it was temporarily mislaid.
Finally it was lost.
Days were spent by his staff attempting to replace it.
Unsuccessfully.
The butler was transferred shortly afterwards.
Now I see the hat has appeared in the lot of Maxwellian headgear purchased by the Sun for their mischief-making.
It was not lost, after all.
Where's it been all these years?
Just at the back of the cupboard?
Another small revelation from the sale of Maxwelliana concerns his books.
As you may have heard there were not many of these and most of them were copies of his biography.
There was, however, also a copy of the standard lawbook Archbold , with a highly significant bookmark at the page marking the chapter on criminal libel.
It had not been there long.
Very shortly before Maxwell embarked on his last voyage on the Lady Ghislaine he was discussing legal matters with the Legal Director of Mirror Group Newspapers, Arthur Davidson.
He called Davidson to his flat and asked him which lawbook he should consult on this subject.
Davidson told him and furnished him with the office copy.
And that is why the legal department of the Daily Mirror will have to buy a new copy of Archbold .
It went into the sale.
Dispatch Box
A LABOUR MP WAS EXPLAINING to me why there are a number of his colleagues who are sponsored as MPs by the National Union of Railwaymen, but do not appear to have any connections with trains, railway junctions or signal boxes.
The NUR had an unfortunate experience, apparently, a few years back when it made an unwise sponsorship.
Sid Weighell, the then general secretary introduced new rules.
Potential candidates had to be able to spell ‘train’.
Given the confusion surrounding their plans for railway privatisation, perhaps the Government ought to demand the same test for all of its would-be railway experts.
The Duchess of York's ANGRY COLUMN
The ginger toff who's quite pissed-off
Look, Quite frankly, I mean I just don't know why I'm writing this column, OK?
Because I'll have you know that I'm on strike.
There, I'll bet that surprised you.
I know exactly what you're going to say.
You're going to say, ‘How can anyone tell the difference?’ or ‘Well it makes a change from being on holiday,’or something nasty and bitter and hurtful like that.
Because that's all anyone ever does these days.
They just moan on and on about Fergie this and Fergie that…and I've simply had enough.
That's it.
Enough
I've told a couple of trusted friends.
And they've told Today and the Sun , so now it's official.
The picket lines are up, the rule book's out and it's eight months and not a stroke of royal work for me.
Nothing, Not a sod.
I'm on strike.
Of course it never used to be like this.
Oh no.
When I took that layabout lecher off the Queenie's hands, she was only too bloody grateful.
I can tell you.
What with him moping round like a wounded jelly just because Koo had given him the old Dear John, he was no damn use to anyone at all.
Well, I put some timber back in his mizzen mast, and no mistake.
Tedious
Of course, back then, the proles couldn't get enough of me, waving their grotty flags at the wedding and saying what a breath of fresh air I was and calling their filthy little daughters Sarah.
The announcement that rocked the Palace
Birthday blues for Andrew as Fergie goes on strike
But now they can't wait to sign up for some tedious opinion poll, so they can tell the News Of The Screws that they think I'm a layabout, or cast aspersions at my lovely new house.
Republicans
And I have to practically get permission from the Palace before I can go to the bloody bog in the morning because Her Maj is petrified I'll put my foot in it again and encourage the republicans.
Well, watch out world, because Sarah's not going to take it any more.
This is one hell of an angry Duchess and she's looking for trouble.
Hasta la vista , baby.
I'm on strike.
Miners…0 Duchess…1
BRITAIN'S MINERS DO vital job in gruelling conditions but when they went on strike they sacrificed all their earnings and were attacked by the police.
I don't do any sort of job at all, yet when I go on strike, I am still paid my Civil List and the police have to protect me.
It's a funny old world, what?
She's fat, she's round, she's always on the scrounge
PYNE
‘Since he appeared in pantomime he's regarded it as his lucky costume’
‘I'm getting a bit concerned about his commitment’
‘How did Iraq get into these championships anyway?’
‘At last, they've found a natural successor to Geoff Boycott’
‘He's in training for Pakistani referees’
‘I hear they've got a camera in the stumps’
Money
Earthquake in Japan, not many interested
How Tokyo tremors could cause heart attacks in London
‘Just wondering whether this open-and-shut case of a forged fiver would improve their low morale’
There was an earthquake in Tokyo recently but I'd be surprised if you'd heard about it.
The Japanese authorities have tried to play down its importance.
And who can blame them?
After all, it was only 5.7 on the Richter scale, not quite as big as the one six years ago.
It lasted only ten seconds and it was at four in the morning when nobody was around.
Only 30 people were injured and the resultant fires didn't last for long, so speculation about how many injuries or how much damage there would have been if people had been up and about is pointless.
Perhaps it will be six more years before another tremor like that.
Or perhaps the recent tremor was just a prelude to the really big one.
If you believe in cycle theories, you could be forgiven for thinking a big one is due about now: the last big quakes have occurred in 1633, 1703, 1782, 1853 and 1923.
The Japanese authorities have an interest in playing down the importance of earthquakes but I don't.
The 1923 earthquake devastated Tokyo.
A big quake this year could do the same.
And devastation in Tokyo could have startling consequences for the rest of us.
A quarter of the Japanese population, some 30 million people, live in the most exposed area which also contains not only the vast bulk of the business community but also an alarming quantity of chemical plants.
The Tokyo Stock Exchange keeps its back-up computer next to the main computer and there are no records outside Tokyo.
In the event of an earthquake destroying these two computers, every foreign investor with shares in Japan would have no proof of ownership.
The Japanese, on the other hand, would need all the money they could lay their hands on to rebuild.
What would be easier than withdrawing their overseas investments, something that would decimate our markets?
The appalling liabilities of Western insurance companies would mean wholesale disinvestment while the sudden scarcity of money in the Western financial system would have catastrophic effects in the midst of a recession.
According to Michael Lewis, author of Liar's Poker , the Japanese are well prepared for the Big Quake.
In his latest book he tells of sophisticated computers that can move tall buildings in the opposite direction to the tremors.
But these computers are so far untested.
You know me.
I don't like to be unduly alarmist.
But next time I see a tiny snippet buried deep on page seven about a quake in Tokyo, I shall do a bit of trembling myself.
Collectors of bank-notes in Argentina are apparently now able to collect ‘swaps’, notes identical to others in every single detail, even down to the serial numbers.
Yet they aren't fakes, for it would appear that they've been printed by the county's National Mint.
The authorities can't decide which explanation they prefer; either that the printing equipment is faulty, or that the duplicates are replacements for faulty notes that should have been destroyed.
The press, however, is baying for blood, far preferring the notion that someone within the Mint has got into the habit of dashing off two notes where one will do.
and then feeding them out into the already perilous economy.
Over here it doesn't even look as if you need access to the Royal Mint or the Bank of England to forge bank-notes, judging by the warning messages on the colour photocopiers that have stationed themselves inside the printing bureaux.
These machines created a stink in holland last year when a magazine showed how they could be used to copy paper money.
But you shouldn't worry.
The notices make it abundantly clear that anyone being so naughty is breaking the law.
That will certainly put a stop to it.
It doesn't though, and the photocopiers are good enough to pass official muster, how long can it be before we have the sort of crisis of confidence in our physical currency not seen since the days of the coin-clipping Tudors?
Being surprised by opinion polls is like being taken aback by blue skies.
Nonetheless I am puzzled that, according to an NOP poll, the Post Office is the most popular of all the public utilities with a satisfaction rate of 78 per cent, while the least popular was British Telecom with just 60 per cent .
I'm no great fan of BT but surely I can't be the only person to feel that, despite its unbearable corporate smugness, its waste on stupid logos and its ludicrous charging for directory enquiries, it has transformed itself since privatisation into an organisation that is relatively efficient.
One can hardly say the same about the Post Office which busts a gut licking the boots of its business users at the same time as it cuts the quality of service to residential customers.
What's more, BT appears to have come up with a superb product that is available to everyone, not just business users.
With their Chargecards you can dial out from almost any phone at the same cost as using a phone box, the cost of the calls being added to your normal bill.
As someone who hates being pestered by incoming calls, I no longer see the point of a cellular phone.
Chargecards are almost as convenient and a fraction of the price.
Yet another plus mark to BT.
Who says the age of miracles is dead?
Money Box
SMALL BUSINESSES are doubly hit by the recession, not only from its direct effects but also from the appalling way that bigger companies delay paying their bills.
A tale in the British Venture Capital Association's magazine shows how one small company overcame this problem.
Being polite didn't work.
Getting angry didn't work.
Nor did solicitor's letters and a visit from the company's credit controller.
What did do the trick was getting its staff to ring the creditor every 30 seconds for an entire day, then beginning again at eight the following morning.
The recalcitrant firm, dependent on telephone selling, couldn't afford to have its lines tied up and waved the white flag together with a cheque.
HONEYSETT
‘Right, which one is the boil?’
‘For a start you could do with a new burglar alarm’
‘Don't worry, the au pair will clean it up’
‘And how long have you thought you were a beached whale, Mr Thompson?’
‘It's sweet really, he's taking her out to ram-raid a flower shop’
‘It wasn't exactly what I had in mind when I asked the council if I could donate some money for a seat in the park’
Struggling in the face of a varsity
Simon Fanshawe
The campaign to win the student vote has a lot to learn
Without wanting to appear cynical, it's pretty safe to say that in the run up to elections, one expects the odd vote-catching ruse from politicians.
In her day, Mrs Thatcher tried to look like a normal human being and went shopping.
For the last couple of times, Neil Kinnock has tried to look working class and dropped his aitches, and this year Paddy Ashdown came out in favour of a well-hung parliament and dropped his trousers.
Even Hitler kissed babies.
But in the last few weeks, John Major has given us two particularly staggering examples.
Since the beginning of life, Tory mythology has had students down as long-haired layabouts with no sense of duty, patriotism or where the bathroom is.
When I was at university, we fulfilled expectations in every way by occupying the refectory to get the Americans out of Vietnam.
Don't sneer; it worked.
But I think that secretly the vice-chancellor and the other grown-ups were delighted by this kind of behaviour, as it proved beyond any reasonable doubt that we were students and they were teachers.
On hearing about any kind of student activity, my father, instead of being pleased that we were out of bed, used to shout about the need for us to ‘grow up’ and ‘learn the facts of life’.
I don't think he realised learning the facts of life was precisely what most of us would do if we stopped demonstrating and went back to bed.
I use my father as an example because he was a Tory, and therefore as enthusiastic about students as beagles are about smoking.
But in a piece of electioneering that is almost extraterrestrial in its proportions, the current Tory Cabinet is trying to become the Student's Friend.
It has attempted to climb above the condom in the fresher's priorities list and announced that it is considering giving students a significant voice in the pay rises of their lecturers.
In a Which?approach to the golden years of youth, when you're supposed to be rolling joints and learning how to organise a demo, they're trying to turn students into consumers.
After years of abusing students, minsters are clearly now hoping that nothing washes whiter than a government's attempt to get re-elected.
Frankly though, it doesn't have a double-glazing salesman's chance in hell of working.
Students who don't know who half their lecturers are at the best of times can't be in a position to decide on their pay packets.
Only a tiny percentage of students I have ever met have been to a seminar or a lecture.
When the World Student Games were held in Sheffield, the sound of the starting pistol at the beginning of each race sparked off a peace demo against the use of firearms.
Races could only get going on a majority vote of the Student Union, and then only if it was quorate.
Students are not attuned to making decisions.
All except engineering students, that is.
They spend most of their time creating explosive devices several times more powerful than the results of gourmet vegetarian weekends, and then become Young Conservatives.
However, what they have in decisiveness, they lack in acne-protection.
And who wants spotty people deciding anyone's pay rise?
Engineers apart, there are no students who will ever manage to get it together to decide on pay.
The hassle will be just incredible, man.
And if tutors go on strike because they don't get more money, it certainly won't be the students who notice.
The second example of electioneering is similarly aimed at youthful voters.
The Ministers for the Arts has teamed up with Mick Jagger and announced National Music Day.
This is about as likely a piece of social intercourse as Andrew Lloyd Webber and Neil Young getting together to do National Good Looks Fortnight.
Tim Renton is obviously the kind of person who would turn the volume down on a Johnny Mathis 78.
He's about as likely to have sympathy for the devil as he is to have satisfaction.
The youth appeal of Mr Jerry Hall, father of five and collector of Old Masters, is well documented.
At almost 50, he may be nearer in age to Mother Teresa than New Kids On The Block, but he can still drive the pubescent in all of us wild.
But if they really wanted a Rolling Stone with Youth Appeal, they asked the wrong one.
They should have asked Mr Bill Wyman, even though he's left the band.
I can only hope that his kind of electioneering cynicism will fail abysmally and by the time National Music Day comes round next year, Tim Renton will have left office too.
‘Bloody kids!’
Sport
Patrick Collins
A red rose-tinted spectacle
Hipflask Henrys prepare to toast Carling their darling at Twickenham
The scene: a crowded bar at Charles de Gaulle Airport.
The time: three hours after the recent France vs England rugby international.
A dozen large men, fortysomething and mostly wearing waxed jackets, are bellowing ‘Jerusalem’.
One waxed jacket detaches himself from the group and approaches a lone drinker across the bar.
‘Sorry to be a pain, old son,’ he says, ‘but I'm bloody sure I know you.
Nairobi!
Of course!
You played in that match when I crocked my knee.
Second row, am I right?
Well, bloody hell!’
Hands are pumped and gossip updated.
Waxed jacket is an accountant, working in the Gulf: ‘For my sins,’ Lone drinker is a director of a bank in East Africa and says he mustn't grumble.
Eventually, flights are called and business cards are exchanged.
Strangely, the match is never mentioned, as if a spot of gloating over an English rugby victory might be construed as bad form.
But on parting, lone drinker asks the inevitable question: ‘You'll be at Twickenham, of course?’
‘Too right,’ says waxed jacket.
‘Three down, Welsh to go, eh?
No bloody problem.’
And he disappears swinging a bag of duty-free claret and singing of dark, Satanic mills.
Now it has not always been easy to warm to England's rugby followers, whose customary note is somewhere between a bray and a bellow.
And they can be at their least lovable on foreign soil, especially in Paris, where French forwards stamp on blameless English heads and French waiters wilfully ignore instructions.
On the eve of the international, a Home Counties gourmet had flounced through a restaurant in St Germain to return his steak: ‘Le service est terr-eeble!’ he cried.
‘I distinctly asked for it bien done.’
But if they are difficult to love, then they are all to easy to envy.
For, as far as English rugby is concerned, these are the days of miracles and wonders, the days when England can turn out the finest team ever and cavort through the Five Nations championship as if it were a lap of honour.
In years to come, old men will stare into clubhouse pints and recite the names like a litany, from Webb (J) to Richards (D), the way the Welsh drool over all those Davieses and Williamses.
And they will recall that day at Twickenham when Carling's team observed the traditional formality of victory over Wales to secure its second Grand Slam.
For nobody doubts that the Welsh will be severely chastised on March 7th.
Indeed, in the aftermath of Paris, one camp-following hack remarked that England ought to score about 437 points against the current Welsh team.
‘True,’ says his chum.
‘And the second half'll be just as one-sided.’
As a captain recruited from central casting, Will Carling feels obliged to disown such presumption.
He flicks through his computer in search of the file marked: ‘Over-confidence; The Perils Of,’ and he produces a stream of anodyne phrases which might have been scripted at Anfield or Old Trafford: ‘Take nothing for granted…great respect for the opposition…must get it right on the day.’
But you feel certain that deep inside he is saying ‘If we don't put 437 points on those bleeding Welshmen….’
Yet England must enjoy their dominance while they can, for their days of effortless superiority are almost done.
After Twickenham, the English are likely to lose the services of Webb, Underwood, Dooley, Probyn, Winterbottom and Skinner.
And their departure is likely to leave something of a hole.
In fact, there is a real chance that next season the England captain will not be on first-name terms with almost half of his team.
But next season is an age away and, in any case, minds can change and even the most robust arms can be twisted.
For the moment, this extraordinary team prepares to offer just one more performance at Twickenham.
And there they will play before the clubbable committee men and the hoorays of the hospitality boxes.
They will play before the howling, hipflasking hordes of Old Stiffupperlippians, each of them wearing a red rose and not one of them a Labour voter.
they will play before the pundits and the populace and, probably, the Prime Minister.
And, did they but know it, they will also play before an accountant in a waxed jacket who was once king of the line-out in Nairobi.
He confidently expects the day to yield a crushing English victory, a Triple Crown, a Grand Slam and absolutely no bloody problem.
And he is unlikely to be disappointed.
Patrick Collins is chief sports writer of the Mail On Sunday
‘This new haka isn't having quite the effect on the opposition we'd hoped for’
Robert Thompson
‘Good afternoon, sir.
Can I interest you in an aerial photograph of your house?’
‘Good God, it's Nigel.
He's committed insecticide’
‘Look, it's Fax Bygraves’
‘Smoking them's not too bad, it's putting them out with your foot that really hurts’
‘Don't worry.
Whatever it is, it's not serious’
‘You spoil that beagle’
‘…then we lost the Andrex account’
UNEMPLOYED MARKET TRADER WIFE AND 6, NO…5, TELL YOU WHAT, AS IT'S YOU, 3 KIDS TO SUPPORT
How to be a has-been…
WORLD CHAMPION
The hey day
You are the champ and no mistake.
Fans queue up to get your ‘X’ in their autograph books.
No supermarket opening is complete without you snipping the ribbon.
But it's all downhill from here…
The slippery slope
1
You appear on Wogan to promote your new ‘gentle giant’ image.
The interview goes well until you give him a friendly pat on the back…
2
And break his spine.
The appearance on Aspel & Co is mysteriously cancelled.
You are hired by the Esther Rantzen to read out amusing misquotes on That's Life!
Unhappily…
3
You can't read.
You are transferred to ‘less onerous duties’ as the BBC's complaints ombudsman.
After your ‘personal reconciliation visits’…
4
Complaints suddenly dry up.
The BBC finds you ‘surplus to budget’ when they find you haven't paid the licence fee.
The futile gesture
5
You form ‘We Are The Champions’, ‘a trade union for excellence’.
One problem.
You can't fill in the application form.
6
You visit Saddam Hussein to plead for hostages.
‘Sorry’ says Saddam, ‘I haven't got any hostages.’
You go to Rome to meet the Pope…
7
But the Pope's in Poland.
You join the Samaritans.
Suicides double.
You appear in panto.
Audiences halve.
8
You try to enter an alcoholism clinic.
But they don't take teetotallers.
You become a devout Muslim.
After a week…
9
The mosque converts to Christianity.
You accuse yourself of rape.
But no victim comes forward.
You admit having Parkinson's disease…
10
But refuse to pay for the baby.
You retire ‘still undisputed champion’.
Your sport is so dreary that nobody can be bothered to contest it.
The cruel twist
After your death, from Tyson's Tension, you become a hero for the National Lysdexia [sic ]Foundation.
They produce a book outlining your life.
But no one can read it.
All the presidents' women
Given the current moral climate, just how many of the great American presidents would have made it into the White House today?
Marsha Dubrow opens the Oval Office's can of worms
We know of no spectacle so ridiculous as the British public in one of its periodic fits of morality
Thomas Macaulay
Macaulay was certainly right except for one detail.
He forgot to include the American public during election year.
Their  quadrennial stampede for the moral high ground is more fervent than ever, as Democrat Bill Clinton and Gary Hart before him can testify.
The scrutiny of a presidential candidate's private life never used to be so intense.
But during the Eighties, when materialism and malfeasance predominated, the electorate suffered guilt pains.
If anyone was going to give Mother Teresa a run for her money, they thought, it had better be the president.
By 1988, one campaign button admonished that ‘You Can't Run For President With Your Fly Open’.
The result of such stringency is a vetting of would-be candidates that makes the post of Pope look like slumming.
The interesting question is, under today's restrictions, just how many of America's great leaders of the past would still have made it to the White House.
This issue of a candidate's personal integrity is known as the ‘Zipper Test’(often euphemised as the ‘Character Question’) but in Britain adultery or promiscuity is now only a terminal problem if the politician lies about his exploits (since Lucrezia Borgia women have rarely figured as dissipated politicians).
Tory ministers Cecil Parkinson survived the impregnation of his then secretary, Sara Keays.
And Liberal leader Paddy Ashdown's popularity actually increased after the revelation that he'd dipped more than just a toe into the typing pool.
But these are humdrum mid-life crises when compared with America's presidential wannabes and has-beens.
To start with the martyr of the moment, take pilloried candidate Bill Clinton, who is now lumbered with the nicknames ‘Slick Willie’ and ‘Mr Beef’.
Mr Clinton's only crime so far is to have been accused by an ageing cabaret artiste of infidelity.
The charge has not even been proved but it left him 12 per cent behind Paul Tsongas in the New Hampshire primary.
This is rather cruel when set against the examples of his predecessors.
Take the charmed prince John F Kennedy, the Casanova of the Casa Blanca, whose paramours included a mafia moll.
Or Ike who more than liked his wartime driver and mistress, Kay Summersby.
Franklin D Roosevelt found that happy days were here again for 30 years with his lover Lucy Mercer Rutherfurd.
Presidential scandal is often lipsmackingly venal, in both a financial and sexual sense.
No polls are necessary to reveal a trend of scandal: Democrats do to mistresses what the Republicans do to slush funds.
But several administrations have combined both.
The original sin began in the first cabinet when treasury secretary Alexander Hamilton was said to have misused a married woman and government funds.
A family man himself, Hamilton paid blackmail money for two years to the cuckolded James Reynolds and his wife Maria.
After this shockeroo was leaked, Hamilton saved himself by writing his own version which became a best-seller in America and in Britain.
Thomas Jefferson became the third president in 1801 despite published accusations of his seducing two married women and keeping a slave mistress.
The opposition press also said he'd pupped at least five children.
Jefferson made no public denial, preferring, as he told a friend, to trust his countrymen ‘to judge me by what they see of my conduct on the stage where they have placed me.’
Hear ye, hear ye, candidates.
Andrew Jackson won the presidency in 1828 in spite of his pipe-smoking wife Rachel being branded ‘adulteress’ and ‘whore’for purportedly marrying before she was divorced.
The rumours killed Rachel Jackson before hubby took office, just as they had killed his 1824 presidential bid.
Grover Cleveland had the last laugh about reports of siring a bastard son a decade before his 1884 campaign.
Republicans chanted ‘Ma, Ma, Where's My Pa?’ to which Cleveland's supporters later retorted, ‘Gone To The White House, Ha, Ha, Ha.’
A role model for damage control if not birth control, Grover acknowledged the son and cabled his party leaders: ‘Above all, tell the truth.’
President Warren G Harding's affair with Nan Britton was a minor tempest compared with his administration's many scandals, which included the case of the Teapot Dome oil reserves.
This was a bribe-riddled deal which resulted in the first imprisonment of a former cabinet official.
It also provides a useful example to journalists bored with adding the suffix ‘-gate’ to the names they give to all political scandals, regardless of whether they have anything to do with break-ins in Washington: by adding ‘-dome’hacks can bring a new sense of variety to their reports, regardless of whether they have anything to do with teapots.
Harding had a wilder sense of fun than Nixon, too.
In between excusing his notorious ‘Ohio Gang’ cronies, he had a literal tunnel of love carved to his mistress's boudoir.
The legendary mole hole was exposed 30 years later when a startled construction crew smashed into it.
In Incredible Era , a book on the corruption of the Harding years in the Twenties, historian Samuel Adams wrote, ‘A president is measured, weighed and catalogued by the character of his chosen intimates.’
It's not known if Nixon or Reagan ever read this passage.
It was Vietnam wrongs and civil rights more than scandals that rained down on Lyndon Johnson ‘like a Longhorn steer pissing on a rock’, as less delicate Texans were wont to put it.
Asked about LBJ's reputed roaming from his home on the range, his wife Lady Bird chirped, ‘My husband loved all people, and half the world's people are women.’
When critics accused Richard Nixon of ‘indecent exposure’, they weren't revealing the origin of his nickname Tricky Dicky; they were referring to his 1952 TV speech where he was broadcast cuddling his cocker spaniel ‘Checkers’ in an attempt to clear his name (with dog lovers at least) in the first cock-up regarding a slush fund.
This presaged by 20 years that apt acronym CREEP (Committee to Re-Elect the President), whose coffers financed the Watergate scandal which led to jail for ten aides and to Nixon's resignation in 1974 to avoid impeachment.
Numerous key Reagan administration figures were indicted for, and some convicted of, major offences ranging from violating federal ethics laws to perjury.
Among those who had brushes with the law were former Attorney General Ed Meese, White House chief of staff Michael Deaver, the Housing and Urban Development Secretary (the ‘Dud from HUD’) Samuel Pierce and aide Lyn Nofziger.
That's aside from Iran-Contra which miraculously left Ron-bo and ‘Poppy’ Bush unscathed.
The only other printed hint of tarnish was George Jr's denial of his father's rumoured affair.
‘The answer to the Big A question is n-o.’
Less cryptic was Barbara Bush, who once fumed at me after I made a similar enquiry: ‘It's none of your business and absolutely not…
It's a ridiculous question.
It's outrageous to ask it…appalling…demeaning.’
Popping that question was the nadir of my career.
I agree with this lady and with the dictum of Jennie Churchill, Winston's American mum who dallied a bit herself: ‘Just don't do it on the street and frighten the horses.’
But if her advice were heeded, America's brain-dead presidential campaigns would be even more stultifyingly boring.
Not to worry.
Suzanne Garment writes in her recent  book Scandal : ‘The great American scandal machine that we have built for ourselves is up and running with ferocious momentum.’
This machine does not just feed off ‘peckerdillos’.
There is also the fertile hunting ground of health.
Will Bush's Graves' disease affect his candidacy?
What about Democratic hopeful Paul Tsongas's lymphoma cancer which has not recurred for over five years?
Did the fact that he is accompanied by a doctor on the campaign trail help to lose him last week's TV showdown with Clinton?
Only the coming months will tell.
Elections, and history, might have been quite different had people known about the depressions of previous presidents like George Washington, who suffered terribly during the Revolution.
Abraham Lincoln, too, had many well-documented major depressions.
One forced him to stand up his fiancée Mary Todd at their first planned wedding in 1841.
The worst of many ‘uncontrollable depressions’ during his first 18 months in the White House came when his son Willie died.
‘Lincoln, by today's standards, would be disqualified hands down,’ states Dr Ronald Fieve, author of Moodswing , citing dumped 1972 vice-presidential candidate Senator Thomas Eagleton after his depressions and electric shock therapy became known.
During World War II, President Franklin D Roosevelt showed ‘classic signs of depression’ including indecision, loss of appetite, weight, sleep, and staring into space.
According to FDR's Splendid Deception by Hugh Gregory Gallagher: ‘It seems undeniable that depressive neurosis — a state of reactive depression — was a condition of the last year and a half of his life.’
This poses the worrying possibility that when the big three Allied leaders got together, a dying depressive, an alcoholic manic depressive (Churchill, as diagnosed by one prominent psychiatrist) and a murderous sociopath (Stalin, as diagnosed by almost everyone) were getting together to plot the downfall of a genocidal maniac.
And we wonder why the world has problems.
FDR also suffered from paralysis and tried to deceive the public that he could still walk.
He had ramps built for public appearances and used his sons as virtual crutches.
In the worst of three public falls, he ‘crashed over like a tree’ at the 1936 Democratic convention, but aides rushed to hide him and pick him up.
Then he wowed 100,000 cheering fans with his ‘ Rendezvous With Destiny’ speech.
Most damaging to the action man myth of JFK was his serious adrenaline disorder, Addison's disease, which gave him acute back pain.
During the 1960 campaign, the Kennedy entourage dodged the opposition's charges about the disease, which was diagnosed two decades earlier by a London doctor who commented, ‘He hasn't got a year to live.’
At the White House, a medic whom JFK called ‘Dr Feelgood’ regularly gave him shots containing amphetamines.
Nixon's drug of choice was liquor.
Watergate co-star John Ehrlichman was quoted as saying that Nixon got ‘pie-eyed’ at least once.
One Of Us by New York Times columnist Tom Wicker is less pithy: ‘Physiologically, this fellow has a disability.
One drink can knock him galley west if he is tired.’
Alexander ‘I am in control’ Haig, Nixon's last national security assistant, was quoted as saying that he sometimes had to act as president when ‘Nixon was drunk.’
To be fair to Nixon, other aides question the famous account of a drunken president in Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein's The Final Days .
Although mild in comparison to Lyndon Johnson and Dwight Eisenhower's heart attacks, President Bush's arrhythmia threw the country into its own heart attack.
Not least because J Danforth Quayle was grinning inanely in the wings.
Bush wins in the most repulsive photo-op stakes for his much exposed Japanese upchuck.
Bush's ingesting Halcyon has been partly blamed for the ‘vomit thing’.
But what substance makes him produce answers such as this to a question about extending unemployment benefits: ‘If a frog had wings, he wouldn't hit his tail on the ground — too hypothetical.’
All of a sudden it becomes frighteningly clear why over 40 per cent of the New Hampshire electorate were keen to see Pat Buchanan in the White House.
David Haldane
‘Strewth!
Worst case of heatstroke I've ever seen’
‘Who's the bastard in the trilby hat, white coat and 11 jumpers?’
‘Looks like we're going to be in for some pretty flamboyant fielding from the West Indies’
‘I see the TV cameramen are wearing protective helmets for the World Cup’
‘Well, Fred, it looks like we've got a slight delay as a pitbull strays on to the pitch’
‘Quite frankly, I don't think he knows how to handle fast bowlers’
‘Of course, the cricket World Cup attracts the more knowledgeable streaker’
‘And as the light fades, we watch the last urine sample of the day being taken slowly back to the laboratory’
PURPLE PROSE
The column that gives the frustrated writing talents of the PR and hype business the exposure they so richly deserve
Title: Preston Vineyards Wine Label
‘We call this wine ‘Nouveau with a difference.’
Effusively fruity aromas of the Gamay grape give the wine pizazz in its youth, while its full, rich texture promises a tasty tomorrow.
Our Gamay Beaujolais is freedom of expression in your glass.
Kick the conventions.
Ice it for a picnic, try pickles and Würst, a pungent raclette , salt-dried cod.
Sniff it in black tie or slurp it in jeans etc, etc.’
Title: Cox on Valentine's Day
‘Apples are good for your heart so give your loved one a Real English Cox on Valentine's day.
Plentiful supplies of Real English Cox are in the shops now with their rosy-cheeked healthy appearance and their sophisticated aromatic flavour they make a perfect lover's gift etc, etc.’
Title:Jean Lassale Watches For People With A Passion 
‘Elizabeth Teissier — Astrologer, Authoress, Journalist.
Intution.
Awareness.
A scientific Sense of the relation of Time and Space to Man.
These are the bases of the passionate beliefs of this renowned astrologer.
She understands fully the permanence of the bonds which link men and women to the stars, to Venus, to Jupiter, the Black Moon, the Dragon, her understanding is her passion etc, etc.’
Title: The Blunted And The Bold
‘Cypress Hill are smoking funk, and they've rolled it into a fat album featuring ‘How I Could Just Kill A Man’ and ‘Hand On The Pump’.
‘Tim Dog mangled a city with ‘F-ck Compton’ and spit it out with ‘Step To Me’.
Penicillin On Wax , the album, is a hardcore cure for the ill etc, etc.’
Title: The Enchanted Crystal Fairy
‘The enchanted fairy is delicately sculptured in fine bisque porcelain.
Her glazed porcelain wings billow in a gossamer sweep of iridescence.
In her hands, the very source of her being…the magic of crystal, believed to hold astounding powers.
Poised on a mount of hand-polished crystal, the luminous fairy gazes into her magic quartz etc, etc.’
Earn £10 and send your favourite purple press releases, bilious brochures and lurid leaflets to Punch .
Or fax them on 
Who hairs wins
Is there a link between a racing driver's haircut and his track record?
RUSSELL BULGIN trails the men who tress for success
There are only two things you need to know about the new Grand Prix season which kicks off in Kyalami, outside Johannesburg this Sunday.
World Champion Ayrton Senna will still be incorrigibly quick and FISA, motorsport's governing body, will take no steps to ban hideous haircuts.
Forget dwindling girls, hyperthyroid budgets and the demise of any real overtaking.
the real danger facing Grand Prix racing is that the Rug Nightmare is now an integral part of race driver appeal.
Compared with tennis players, or even footballers, racing drivers have the worst hair-grooming in sport.
Admittedly, there are no pink mohicans or beaded dreadlocks in Formula One but if you want funny ha-ha there's Alain Prost's perm, last sported by Kevin Keegan in the Seventies.
And if you want funny peculiar, simply gaze upon Thierry Boutsen's reverse-flip bird's-nest tonsure.
Maybe this look is dead cool in Belgium, but I think it unlikely.
So why do these death-defying techno-superheroes have such tress trauma?
Their other accessories are all pretty cool: private jets, Boss jeans, tanned Euro-trash girlfriends.
But the hair…
There was a time when a racing driver's wife or girlfriend clicked the stopwatch in between making the tea.
But a pit lane full of Longines-Olivetti computer gear and Desert Storm-style motor-homes has reduced the role of these companions.
This consists of carrying helmets and grinning — simultaneously if possible.
Alas, stylish though they are, the drivers' wives have had no effect on their men's hair.
There are several logical reasons for this.
The first is that drivers spend most of their working lives, with their heads encased in a fibreglass bucket.
No amount of ingenuity with a bottle of Timotei is going to disguise the fact that, once out of the car, your average speedster looks as if he has reversed through a hedge.
The second is that drivers like to retain at least one common link with those fans who don't have private jets, Boss jeans, impossibly lithe blondes etc.
The drawback is that racing drivers work in an area where they are idolised by people whose idea of le dernier cri is a logo-ed nylon pit-stop windcheater the colour of Day-Glo toothpaste.
If one remembers that golf is the preferred pastime of a Grand Prix racer, one can see how such a tendency can escalate — check trousers, floppy hats and fringed white shoes
However, it is not entirely facetious to say that there is a correlation between a driver's haircut and his performance.
Take the start of last year's Grand Prix season when Senna set a new record by winning the first four races on the trot.
The racing scribes, of course, got it all wrong.
They cited the inevitable comparisons with racing legends like bald Juan-Manual Fangio and perfectly-  coiffured Jim Clark.
What the hacks should have contemplated was the truly telling detail of Senna at race one in Phoenix.
Namely, that he sported sub-collar locks to make a ponytail look like a distinct possibility come the season's finale in Monaco.
Can you imagine it?
First, Senna, the quickest racing driver in the World, admits to having one-to-one chats with The Man Upstairs.
Then he starts to loop his hair into an elastic band first thing every morning.
You can see Senna's McLaren team spending days in the wind-tunnels testing revised helmet shapes.
the race-suit makers Stand 21 would immediately market a Nomex balaclava with a tonsorial condom tacked on the back: ‘Make sure your tail doesn't trail.’
But, alas, in the real world, Senna went back to a Rug Nightmare after Monaco and McLaren lost their way for a while, finally clinching the title late in the year.
It will be useful to check the length of Senna's tresses in South Africa this Sunday: if they are scruffy, he'll be quick.
Tidy, and he'll struggle.
Samson had nothing on Ayrton down at the barbers.
Nigel Mansell, the man whom Senna beat last season, has of course, a Rug Nightmare and a Moustache Nightmare.
This is a  depressing combination if you like your lap legends to have a modicum of grace along with a heavy right foot.
Gutsy and tough, Moustache Nightmare works wonders in the cockpit but under the media microphones amass, he always sticks his foot in the slot beneath the bristles.
And still the British press fawningly chronicles his every move — Nige plays golf!
Nige hurts himself playing football!
Nige is as fascinating as the average chap in the pub!
Pundits say that with a proven automatic gearbox and active suspension, Moustache Nightmare could well be world champion for Williams-Renault this year.
Those in the know say that unless he drops the square fringe and lets his locks grow he'll never get to pop the bubbly.
Unlike his team mate, who has what would be a Rug Nightmare except that he's Italian and so it's not.
It's, er, Italian.
Ricardo Patrese deserves some kind of award for simply hanging in there since petrol was 50p a gallon.
He's a perfect team player, too: how kind he was to allow Moustache Nightmare to cover himself with a race car and a spare last year, while Patrese had but one machine at his disposal.
He was probably grateful to drive something which didn't blow up every time the mechanics wanted lunch, which is what life was like for Patrese at Alfa Romeo back in the mid-Eighties.
Patrese, too, looks likely to represent the oldies in Formula One this summer along with fellow veterans Alain Prost and Nelson Piquet — men with six World Championships and two Rug Nightmares between them; one as nature intended, one a product of advanced crimperology.
This duo looks set to spend the summer fighting understeer, that invigorating condition which ensures your racing car heads straight on when you are attempting a corner.
Piquet is one of racing's great pragmatists.
If his car is good, which it was three times in the last two seasons at Benetton, he will win.
If it's not, he won't.
He is a man whose life has been defined by racing big-time wheel-to-wheel every other Sunday since 1978.
(Racing drivers aren't entirely normal nine-to-five peons.
Most of them only sound as if they are.)
Then there's silk-smooth speed of Teutonic trackmeister Michael Schumacher.
When he defected to Benetton last year after just one outing, his old boss Eddie Jordan still charged him £150,000 compensation per Grand Prix race for the privilege of confirming that he was the nearest thing to Ayrton Senna since, well, Ayrton Senna.
Schumacher has a sure-footedness to his moves in and out of the cockpit, but it has to be said that Schumacher's Rug is not just a Nightmare, it's a German Nightmare — efficient, expansionist, first to the sunbed.
There are nightclubs in the Reeperbahn which would bar him on sight if he turned up without a hat.
The other driver at Benetton, Martin Brundle, still has a Toyota Dealer's Haircut — which is to say it's reliable, functional and about as distinctive as a Camry — or is it a Corolla?
But then his dad flogs Camrys and Corollas.
Feisty on the tract, charming off it, Brundle's got everything he wants at Benetton, except a team mate who is demonstrably slower than he is.
The supplementary method of assessing a Grand Prix star's chances is to rate his amatory performance.
A couple of last year's sillier pieces of driving provide metaphorical weight to the rumour that at least one of our 26 heroes has a problem prematurely overheating and making an embarrassing mess.
(No names, no packdrill).
The Tatler recently took this amatory assessment route in an issue devoted to horizontal jogging — this was the edition which suggested that Prince Charles was Britain's sexist man.
So which racer did the society rag describe thus: ‘Forget the helmet: this racing driver is sensational unmasked.
The sensuous mouth can't fail to put you under starter's orders?’
You've got it.
On the track or in the sack, Ayrton Senna remains Formula One's only true winner.
Racing's top rugs
Nigel Mansell: such style, dash, élan…without doubt Grand Prix 's answer to John Major.
Oh yes
Alain Prost: here's one Gallic permster who's had more than his fair share of hairpin bends
Ricardo Patrese: the lire-laden Italian and top exponent of the bolognaise bouffant
Thierry Boutsen: Belgium's answer to Ken Barlow, he sports the Purdey pompadour
Ayrton Senna: the born-again Brazilian is a modern-day Samson.
The longer his hair, the more he wins
‘Of course, he'd never have made it if it hadn't been for the skill of our local doctor’
Charivari
Punch's weekly guide to the arts, entertainment, media and more…
Vox-popping the question
It was the best excuse that had ever been offered to a radio reporter in search of an interview; ‘No, I'm sorry, I can't speak to you.
I think I'm going to be sick.’
The woman in question, who was clutching an ominously small plastic beaker, bustled away into the distance.
Fortunately I wasn't close enough to see whether the prediction was correct, or if the beaker was in fact too small.
I was just left standing on the street corner, microphone in hand.
I was trying to tempt her to take part in a so-called vox-pop.
You will be listening to many of these as the election approaches as they are a wonderful invention of the broadcasting industry: a reporter stands alone with just a small tape recorder to protect him and leaps out in front of unsuspecting members of the public asking them an inane question.
Esther Rantzen is often seen making use of the genre when she asks elderly ladies to do impersonations of Tom Jones or perform an impromptu rumba.
Such events normally draw a large crowd but hers is very much the glamorous end of the market.
What do you think of the miners' strike? was my first ever searching enquiry.
Fortunately it coincided with the miners' strike of 1984.
I crept up to my first victim in the same way as I imagine a lion cub stalks it first wildebeest — clumsily.
I was consequently staggered to provoke a response of reasonable interest.
From there, I've never looked back.
Some issues are guaranteed winners.
I recall embarking on a ‘What do you think of your local buses and trains?’ encounter in the Cornish town of Falmouth in early spring.
The problem, people told me, was that there were barely any buses or trains within a ten-mile radius of Falmouth unless it was the holiday season.
And then they were full of holidaymakers.
I unwisely approached a bus queue at one stage and was nearly mobbed.
Other mistakes are easily made.
A man I recently stopped in the centre of Manchester to ask if he believed in extraterrestrials replied ‘What?’ then ‘No, I don't think so,’and then ‘Please would you come back to my flat to mend my faulty radio?’
It was difficult to convince him that my ability to hold a tape recorder didn't automatically furnish me with a degree in electronics.
He eventually lost interest.
It's also as well not to stand under the edge of overhanging buildings.
Self-confidence can be at a low ebb if you've just been told to p…off by an embittered pedestrian.
It certainly isn't then boosted by the contents of the illest and most incontinent pigeon landing only inches away from your feet.
I remember this happening outside a bank.
I'd just approached a woman (who, it emerged, could speak only Mandarin), to ask her about the joys of cycling.
As I stepped back, bemoaning my lack of foreign languages, a loud and colourful thwack reverberated from the pavement alongside me.
It was barely two feet away.
The nearest I've come to being arrested in the line of duty was when I was told to go out onto the streets, microphone in hand, and smile at people.
You'd be able to hear me on the radio, smiling.
I was then to ask what people thought about being smiled at by a perfect stranger.
It was all to do with National Smile Week.
I probably didn't help my cause by being so self-conscious about the whole exercise that I decided to station myself behind a bush.
I would then emerge, beaming, and expect people to warm instantly to me.
Frankly, I'd only have needed to brush my hand against my trouser zip before security guards would have been called for.
As it was, most people laughed, one bright spark asked if I was going to sell him something and a female student in a park scarf accused me of being a pervert.
I recently researched reading habits using copies of David Copperfield , Ben Elton's Gridlock and the the Best of Viz .
Ben and Viz received equal attention, while dear old Dickens was approached with the same enthusiasm as a postman views a front gate marked ‘Beware Of The Large, Fierce And Probably Rabid Dog.’
‘So what about the Dickens?’
I said challengingly to two lads.
‘I think I'll wait until the film comes out,’ one of them told me ‘starring Arnold Schwarzenegger.’
That's the joy of it all — just when you think you've narrowly avoided the incontinent pigeon, the same bird flies over once again.
Charivari wireless
No place to dispute the vital fax
WHAT IS HAPPENING TO Derek Jameson?
He seems to be thrusting up market.
Last week on The Jamesons (R2) he and his wife ditched the usual phone-in for a fax-in.
(We were not told why.)
It looks very much a way of screening out The Great Wonderful British Public and not having to endure any of their tiresome phone witterings.
The Jamesons themselves were obviously a little bit sheepish about this because Ellen (the wife) tried to ward off possible criticism.
They had just read out their fax number for anyone who wanted to send a comment to the show when the phone rang.
‘Is that the fax?’ asked Derek in mock surprise.
‘No it's the phone,’ said Ellen, who picked it up and had a pretend conversation in her undifferentiated monotone.
‘Nora, it's not élitist.
Oh don't be silly.
Lots of people have got faxes.
Of course we're not discriminating against you,’ Derek chortled in the background.
‘That word makes me laugh, ‘élitist’.
Get rid of her.’
(Nora is presumably a Wonderful Ordinary Person, a type of whom Derek has made such a great fuss in the past.)
as if that was not shocking enough, we later on found Derek giving us a learned address on the provenance and composition of La Bohème .
I think we have to watch this situation very carefully, don't you?
Furthermore, given this new plunge towards sophistication, I am worried anew about Ellen.
She is a good woman but does not seem particularly suited to the life and work of a broadcaster.
It is like letting your Aunt Violet go on the airwaves.
She always sounds more like a caller than the host.
It feels as if she is reading everything out, even when it is spontaneous.
Ellen may well be a marvellous wife for Derek and the solace of his mature period but perhaps he needs a different partner on air.
I believe that I have found the perfect person.
I refer, of course, to Julian Clary.
(This is an idea of genius, by the way.
See diagram to explain the creative process by which these powerful Bigearian weekly insights are composed.)
In fact, Julian has just started his own phone-in,Intimate Contact With Julian Clary (R1), and I have to say it is simply riveting.
His considerable appeal lies in the head-on collision between his apparent sweetness and his equally obvious gifts as a grade-one bitch.
Last week Julian discussed cross-dressing, his eye having been caught by an article in Family Circle headlined ‘I Found My Husband Wearing My Nightdress’.
In no time he had calls from husky security officers who liked to be called ‘Marcia’.
Julian has enormous strengths.
Not since Brian Hayes at his peak have we heard such a master of the phone-in put-down.
When Eleanor said she could never think up anything to tell the priest at confession Clary was like lightning.
‘So you don't do anything wrong and you haven't got any imagination either?’
He is tart, relentlessly superficial and completely lost if a caller has a serious problem.
What the show lacks is a bit of warmth and roughage.
And this is where Derek comes in (think how useful his fax would have been with the more timid cross dresser).
In my view a late-night show pairing Jameson and Clary would wipe out the entire listenership of Radios 1, 3, 4 and 5, not to mention all commercial stations.
These opposites would merge into a terrific show.
The whole world would tune in for this one.
I can hear the jingle now: ‘Wonderful Radio 2: Derek and Julian’.
Big Ears 
television
Spies who strain the intelligence
The Old Boy Network fails to connect
DICK CLEMENT AND Ian La Frenais have an impeccable track record in comedy from The Likely Lads to Auf Wiedersehen, Pet , and Channel 4's shameless nostalgia series TV Heaven resurrected their 1973 sitcom Thick As Thieves last Saturday.
This featured Bob Hoskins and John Thaw before the latter graduated to The Sweeney .
What Thick As Thieves offered was a chance to chart La Frenais and Clements's progress against their current offering Old Boy Network (ITV Sunday evening).
One doesn't want to wallow in the nostalgia trap so temptingly set by TV Heaven and its bebow-tied host Frank Muir (though they show Honor Blackman in her Avengers leather kit, it's hard to resist), but Old Boy Network is a long way from The Likely Lads .
Tom Conti plays Lucas Frye, a former spy, who teams up in business with a strait-laced ex-colleague Peter Duckham (John Standing).
The sources of friction between the two re-work most of the Le Carré books.
So Frye is a one-time KGB mole who's slept with drab Duckham's ex-wife à la Bill Haydon and George Smiley.
And half the scenes take place at the pair's Whitehall club, where they live.
Some of the details are nicely done such as the antiquated ceramic water bottle offered by the porter to enable them to cope with the freezing bedrooms.
But so far, the first two episodes have been bogged down with setting up the premise and too many location scenes.
Tom Conti: helpless in the face of leaden lines and flagging invention
The main problem is that so far the central battle seems unevenly pitched.
Conti is caddish in the brightly-coloured ties that top off his strictly-Establishment suits, and his upper-middle-class-accent is amusingly slurred in the manner of a drunk with a nasal complaint.
Duckham is a much more hapless figure: rather a constrained Everyman, almost a bore in fact.
His only source of superiority is that Frye fagged for him at school.
The main method, it appears, of giving Old Boy Network some zip is the gratuitous swearing.
‘Bonk’ is just tired, but ‘bull****’, ‘a***’, ‘s***’: once past the watershed it's into the water closet.
Duckham even gets to mix-up ‘buggery’ with ‘bugging’.
And, inevitably, an American misunderstands the word ‘fag’.
Is there no quality control on lame old gags anymore?
To be fair, there are some sharpish lines, such as Frye's indignant response to being told to keep his expenses down to £300 a week: ‘But I spill £300 a week.’
These, however, have to co-exist next to real lulus like, ‘Being a mole I felt as if I was living on burrowed time.’
The most distressing sign of flagging invention is the company secretary.
Tamsin.
She's blond, Sloaney, utterly vacuous and gossips on the phone.
Viewers familiar with Dr Latimer's assistant in Don't Wait Up will be forgiven for defecting to another channel.
Charivari music
The slow burn of Smokey's soul
SOMETIMES I FEEL THAT I've been sung to by Smokey Robinson for my whole life.
His voice has been a part of pop music almost since the beginning.
From ‘Get A Job’ with the Miracles in 1958, his high, crooning tenor had drifted through the Sixties, Seventies and Eighties like some ageless cupid with few apparent wrinkles.
Perhaps the voice has lost a little of its silky sweetness but he's used it in more varied and expressive ways since the clapalong Motown fun of ‘Mickey's Monkey’ and ‘Going To A Go-Go’.
On his newest album,Double Good Everything (Capitol) he measures out the steps a soul man must take to remain on top of the game.
Smokey was only 18 when The Miracles made ‘Get A Job’, and they had a million seller with ‘Shop Around’ less than two years later.
As fine a singer as he was, it was Robinson's writing and producing talents that would be valuable to Berry Gordy, boss of the fledgling Motown operation.
Bob Dylan called him ‘America's greatest poet’ and Smokey's mischievous couplets and metaphors have never been lacking in ingenuity.
‘What's So Good About Goodbye?’,
‘I Second That Emotion’ and many more are a roll-call of pop's wittiest lyric moments.
Nevertheless, it's the deathless ‘Tears Of A Clown’ and ‘The Tracks Of My Tears’which still define his place in the popular memory: odd that such a joyful singer should be best remembered for two helplessly sad little songs.
His work with The Miracles kept him in hits until 1972, when he finally went solo and delivered the gorgeous Smokey , which might have promised more than it delivered but which ultimately — on ‘Baby Come Close’, ‘Just My Soul Responding’ and the personal protest of ‘Holly’— established him as the great single Romeo of modern soul.
Or should it have: bad luck on him that labelmate Marvin Gaye was reaching a bigger audience with albums that sound overblown next to Robinson's persuasive bedside manner.
Smokey tracked a path through the next two decades with patient, gentlemanly  ardour.
Many of the 20-odd solo albums he's released have been lost from the catalogues but there isn't one that I'd be without, and the finest songs and performances talk of love and romance with more candour and grace than any other soul singer has mustered.
The difference between Robinson and, say, Luther Vandross is the difference between courtly, simmering emotions and great, unfettered outpourings.
In ‘What's In Your Life For Me?’ or ‘And I Don't Love You’or ‘Into Each Rain Some Life Must Fall’or a score of others, Smokey thinks through the problems of modern love and squeezes music out of them that drips like honey from a spoon.
In his clear, dreamy voice, words and melodies flow as one.
Can he still cut it?
There are a couple of duds on Double Good Everything but there's also a sharper sense of purpose.
This is his first for a new company — he left Motown after 30 years, following Berry Gordy's own departure — and the tracks have a fresh, live feel to them.
‘Why’ and ‘Rewind’are elastic up-tempo tunes, ‘I Love Your Face’is as shamelessly sweet as only Smokey can be and ‘Rack Me Back’is his most delicious slow-groove tune in years, reminiscent of a Bobby Bland set piece.
Can he still sing?
Listen to the way he sings the phase ‘Footloose And Fancy Free’, and the way he draws out that final ‘eeeeee…’
film
Prince disarming
Barbra tells of Tides in the affairs of men and women
With THE PRINCE OF TIDES (15 Odeon Leicester Square) Barbara Streisand crowns 30 years of success as actress and singer, and for the second time moves into another creative area — as director and producer.
The film is based on a long novel by Pat Conroy which deals with the excavation of the past, a current favourite theme.
At the centre is a man from South Carolina who is unhappy in marriage.
This man, played by Nick Nolte, is devoted to his suicidal twin sister, and joins a psychologist in an attempt to restore the girl's health.
The psychologist, herself married to a bullying husband, is played by Miss Streisand.
Yes, she stars as well as doing nearly everything else.
Investigations of family background provides some disturbing records but readers of high-class fiction do not need reminding how often, with the help of professional psychology, the distressed have been cheered up by facing past memories of ill-treatment.
Despite a certain aversion from yet another stirring of recollection I am bound to say that the material of the film is handled with command.
And the playing all through is notable.
Nolte in particular is transformed from a competent actor into a player whose every gesture is significant.
Is it really 40 years since Spencer Tracey played Elizabeth Taylor's father?
I still miss him and it is a struggle not to be unfair to Steve Martin, who now plays the exasperated central figure of Father Of The Bride (PG, Odeons West End and Marble Arch).
But the remake, ranging from farce to a touch of sentiment, isn't at all bad.
Mr Martin's barely-concealed rage at losing what he thinks of as his little girl (and having to pay through the nose for the festivities) is amusingly conveyed.
Afraid Of The Dark (18, Cannon Haymarket, Camden Plaza) tells the story of an 11-year old boy (Ben Keyworth).
He is the son of a blind mother in suburban London who hears from his policeman father (James Fox) of attacks on blind women.
Expecting an eye operation of his own, he is beset by fantasies of horror.
A confused treatment of a good idea, written and directed by Mark Peploe.
Filmlines
‘Stop shouting!
You sound like a moose giving birth to a hedgehog,’Kirk Douglas, The Vikings 
Mayor ‘Intent [to rape]?
How did you establish that?’
Clint Eastwood ‘When a naked man is chasing a woman through an alley with a butcher's knife and a hard-on, I figure he isn't collecting for the Red Cross,’Dirty Harry 
‘Alligators have the right idea — they eat their young,’Eve Arden,Mildred Pierce  
‘It is said of her grandmother that the only members of the cabinet who were not her lovers were those who had reason to believe they were her father,’Society Wag, Darling 
Agent Orange by Haldane
THE VERY BRITISH AFFAIR II
STORY SO FAR — AGENT ORANGE IS IN LONDON HELPING M.I.5 WITH AN ELECTION SMEAR CAMPAIGN
ACTUALLY WE THOUGHT YOU MIGHT LIKE TO WORK WITH TED HE'S OUR SMEAR CAMPAIGN GURU
TED WORKS DEEP IN THE BASEMENT — ERM, WE DON'T COME DOWN HERE VERY OFTEN
I SUGGEST WE WEAR THESE — IT CAN GET VERY RIPE IN TED'S INNER SANCTUM
I SPY FLIES!— COME INTO MY WEB OF DECEIT
HAVE I UNCOVERED A JUICY POLITICAL SEX SCANDAL FOR YOU ?…
SANDWICH?
YES, IT APPEARS THAT THIS KEELER WOMAN HAS BEEN IN A CLINCH WITH PROFUMO AND SOME RUSSIAN GEEZER
ON SECOND THOUGHTS, PERHAPS YOU SHOULD WORK ALONE — TED'S VODKA BILL TAKES A HEFTY CHUNK OUT OF OUR BUDGET
Charivari theatre
Redressed to kill
SET IN ‘A COUNTRY that is probably Chile,’ Ariel Dorfman's Death And The Maiden asks how a new democracy should treat its totalitarian past.
Forgiveness?
Forgetting?
Legal punishment?
Personal revenge?
Gerardo, a lawyer who has been named by the new president to investigate the old dictatorship's abuses, invites Roberto, a sympathetic stranger, to spend the night.
His wife, Paulina, recognises him, by his voice, as the man who tortured her 15 years ago while playing the Schubert song of the title (she was blindfolded and never told his name).
She knocks Roberto out, ties him to a chair, and, brandishing a gun, tells her astonished husband she wants a trial here and now.
Will she insist on a guilty verdict and mandatory death sentence?
Is Roberto correct when he insists that he is innocent and she has lost her mind?
For all Dorfman's emphasis on political questions, however, Gerardo and Paulina's marriage is a much more tantalising subject.
Despite repeated rape and electric shock, Paulina never mentioned the name of her lover, who married her after she was released, though he had taken up with another woman.
Paulina's exhilaration in dominating her husband, as well as Roberto, with the gun, suggests the glee of someone who has broken the bonds of mutual gratitude and resentment.
Yet the frustratingly small amount we are told about the marriage emerges in the form of Paulina's anguished revelations rather than as the outcome of discussion and challenge.
The language of Gerardo's pleadings is too forthright as well and more than a little familiar: ‘Imagine what would happen if everyone acted like you did’; ‘You're still a prisoner, locked up with them, in that basement.
for 15 years you've done nothing with your life.’
The result is a drama that remains more worthy than absorbing, despite the excellent performances of Michael Byrne as Roberto and Bill Paterson as Gerardo (is his Irish accent meant to indicate an application to application to events closer to home, or descent from Bernardo O'Higgins?).
Juliet Stevenson quite believably conveys Paulina's swings between level-headedness and hysteria but I cannot join in the general chorus of ecstatic praise.
When Eileen Atkins tells us her life story in The Night Of The Iguana , you are aware that the audience is holding its breath.
During Stevenson's confessions, you can hear quite plainly the shifting of bottoms.
LIKE THE CARIBBEAN life it views with a mixture of dismay and affection, Derek Walcott's Viva Detroit is amiable but lazy.
At the branch of a St Lucia hotel, Doc pulls his face into a welcoming rictus and steels himself for the Happy Hour invasion.
Sonny, a daytime tour guide and night-time gigolo, displays his latest haul of trinkets from unhappy Scandinavians and is downcast when the wiser Doc, on inspection, announces, ‘The only precious stones was yours.’
Dreaming of ensnaring a visitor who will whisk him off to fabulous Detroit, Sonny is completely unaware that ‘people don't go there.
It's a place you leave.’
The voice of reason belongs to Pat, a successful advertising photographer who has the power to make Sonny's dream come true.
But, if she does, will he realise just how dangerous dreams can be?
Except from a brief outburst from Sonny (when Pat urges him to face reality, he protests, ‘Reality is not life!’), you would never know this play was the work of a poet rather than a TV comedy writer.
Its weakest point is the character of Pat — while the two men are realistically observed, Pat (who has none of the shrewd  toughness of her profession), is a fluff-headed mechanical doll who inexplicably switches from initial dislike of Sonny to a lovestruck Shirley Valentine.
This weakness is heightened by Marlena Mackey's overemphatic performance — she holds an expression, goggle-eyed, like a tuning fork that vibrates long after being struck.
Norman Beaton's mischievous, avuncular Doc, though, squeezes all the gentle humour from the lilting, dialogue without succumbing to the temptation to twinkle.
But Walcott doesn't give his characters enough to do, or make us warm to Sonny so that we care whether he stays a tourist toy.
In the end it's little more than a Caribbean Cheers .
In MAKING IT BETTER , the improbably, coolly glamorous Jane Asher plays Diana Harrington, half of a couple who work for the BBC and have sex problems: her husband of 20 years tells her he is leaving her to set up as an homosexual, an announcement which seems to disturb her less than a wheel clamp.
Her reaction, though, is physical — in a bar, she picks up Josef, a very improbable sex partner.
This elderly Czech émigré, an unsuccessful literary man, is the godfather of her husband's boyfriend, Tomas, a sharp-looking little hustler with disconcerting ways (he asks for a glass of water as if issuing a command).
Tomas turns out to be sexually as well as politically opportunistic, resulting in vengeance, desperation and a lot of emotional broken glass.
James Saunders's drama is itself glassy smooth and tightly controlled.
The character of Josef (played with great skill by David De Keyser) is sadly amusing — a writer who has abandoned his country and family for freedom of expression, he cannot express himself in an artistic or commercial way.
But the whole affair feels superficial, too neatly ironic.
Everything seems to be happening some way off, as if behind glass.
Also runs — and rans
Our critic on what else is on in London
The Night Of The Iguana
Exquisite performance by Eileen Atkins in otherwise miscast production of this poetic but drawn-out play.
Bosoms And Neglect
John Guare's witty comedy of crazy lovers and crazy families encountering sex, death, and therapy.
Charivari drink
Rioja the dodger
Could a crafty change of grape mean a change in fortune?
A COMPANY DIRECTOR SHOWING off the expensive automatic equipment in his new bodega boasted that ‘Only three people work here.’
I asked what the rest did but he must have heard it before because he was not amused.
With more and more bodegas setting up in Rioja — there was 62 in 1985, 140 by 1991 — and with sales either static or declining, there seems little for recession-hit bodega bosses to laugh about.
Rioja's fortunes were high in the late Seventies and early Eighties, when flavoursome, oaky, mature wines were three times as old as anything from France and only half the price.
since then, our attention has been diverted by a barrage of wines from the New World, which a run of less than characterful Riojas has done little to recapture.
Deprived of either their oaky identity or price advantage, because new barrels are expensive, they have lost something of their sharp focus.
Whenever red wines get into a spot of bother, in whatever country, there is a tendency for the Red Adair of the wine world, Cabernet Sauvignon, to leap in and trouble-shoot them out of the difficulty.
It did this in Tuscany a few years back, when Chianti was in the doldrums.
As things turned out, Cabernet acted as catalyst, improving Chianti but forcing Sangiovese to show how good it really was under pressure.
Some of Tuscany's best wines, now made entirely from Sangiovese, would never have reached the drawing board had not an imported French variety got up a lot of Italian noses.
Could Cabernet do something similar for Rioja?
Unfortunately, it is not strictly legal.
Rioja is made from Tempranillo, Garnacha, Mazuelo, Graciano, and sometimes a little white Viura but never Cabernet.
Except on an ‘experimental’ basis.
In truth, Cabernet is beginning to creep in by the back door.
It gives body, colour and better tannic structure to Tempranillo, which can help the wines withstand the punishing barrel-ageing requirements: the current vintage will not be out much before Mike Tyson.
Of those who have introduced a proportion of Cabernet, only a very few — Baron de Ley, Martinez-Bujanda and the much improved Marques de Riscal — have the courage to admit to it.
They are hoping the authorities will turn their customary blind eye.
They are up against more than just the law though.
There is tradition.
‘If you add Cabernet, it will not taste like Rioja any more,’ complain those who have a point but who seem to have forgotten the Rioja has changed a number of times in the past.
Their short-sightedness is challenged by producers such as Jaime Echavarri Olavarria, managing director of Baron de Ley, who comments that ‘tradition is the king of mediocrity.’
In the long run, Cabernet will probably improve Rioja, if only by persuading traditionalists to make better wines from Tempranillo, just to prove that nobody really needs Cabernet.
Whether it will bring a smile to their faces is another matter.
‘He's confiscated our quoits’
Punchbag
Letter of the week
Until I read you feature on old people (‘Goutrage!’ 5 — 11 February) I had not realised quite how much of a burden they really are.
I can now see that old people are a real pain, wandering around in their leather jackets and publishing offensive material.
As a young person, I am often quite afraid to go out on the streets in case I am approached by one of these grey-haired vandals and informed how much worse the world is these days or interrogated as to why young people don't have any respect anymore.
Clearly they should behave with dignity and sit quietly at home waiting to die.
I only hope that when I am their age I will act a little better.
Get some practice with some aged and mellow Jim Beam
Let's get cynical
In her letter (‘Punchbag’ 12 — 18 February) Mrs H M Presley defends the monarchy and attacks Punch for being cynical: a trait unbecoming in what she describes as a ‘reputable’magazine.
As far as I am concerned the whole point of Punch is to attack those in authority when they are seen to be acting in a way not worthy of respect.
This means Punch should be cynical to some extent, As for‘reputable’, that's the last thing Punch should be.
Reputable to whom?
Not authority I hope.
Well, that 25-yard volley makes it two-nil to the young bloods.
Time for some refreshment.
Dipso facto
What are you trying to do to us?
First of all you offer Jim Beam for letter of the week, then the remuneration for ‘Country Life’ is supplemented by a bottle of Aberlour and now the caption competition is sponsored by J&B.
Are you trying to make dipsomaniacs of us all, or is the worldwide whisky industry in such a recession?
Market research has told us that the average Punch reader is an ABC1 25–40-year-old male with a suspiciously large collection of unopened bottles of soda water.
Age concern
I have been reading Punch since I was a kid.
Then I did not understand it but wished I did.
Now I am 74 and think that i understand it but wish that I did not.
Is that what is meant by growing up?
And the oldies get a consolation goal off the woodwork but the ref says it's all over.
Bargepole
On the one hand there's Little Liz, and on the other there's Lovebite; but just as I think I've made a decision, the image of Lord Lane comes into my mind and I get all confused again.
Little Liz is tempting.
She has had a bad time.
Spike proved to be a bad thing, as you or I could have told her.
Mad staring eyes, for a start, and odd habits.
Little Liz told me about some of them.
He beat up some woman who had to be put into hospital, but Little Liz forgave him.
‘He had just given up smoking,’ she said.
To hell with that.
It's nothing to do with smoking.
Spike is an amateur gynaecologist who has broken the code and does not deserve a delicacy like Little Liz, a Soho Bunny if ever there was one, all ankle-boots and skin-tight black; it's enough to make a judge take a dim view of things.
Mind you, Little Liz got off lightly.
All Spike did was call her back from Greece on St Valentine's day to say that he had to find out who he really was.
He was going to California to start a new life, and didn't want to see any of his old friends or lovers any more.
He wasn't averse to the odd one-night quality poke, of course, but that was that.
What do you think?
Little Liz thought it was a bit off, and said so.
Rather be back in Athens, stuck in the Hotel Abrawang with Fat Alex goggling at lesbian snuff movies while his wife pored over back issues of the Puzzler through her magnifying glass.
Anything would be better than Spike.
You cannot blame her.
It's hard to give your heart to a man who dresses up in his mother's ball-gown and corsets.
A man who mixes a cocktail of vitamins and sleeping pills to knock out Little Liz's predecessor after she had gone off her oats and then crawls around under the bedclothes with a speculum and a flashlight.
She went away after a while, did the predecessor, and Spike sat there, day after day, whittling a turnip.
By the time she got back, Spike had whittled his turnip just right.
Bent her over the bathroom stool, whipped out the Novocaine cream and Bob's your auntie.
Lord Lane would have taken a dim view, consent or no consent.
Yet, well out of it as she is, Little Liz remains miserable.
I thought of taking advantage, and went round to collect her from a dinner party.
You know the routine.
But there was Lovebite, my new victim, sitting there and thrumming gently like a dynamo.
There was a plaited stock-whip on the sofa.
Naturally I picked it up, performed a couple of swift and immaculate arabesques, culminating in a precise, sharp crack which removed the butter from her crumpet while leaving the jam undisturbed.
‘You've used one of those before,’ she said.
‘I love being tied up, too.’
For a brief and delirious moment, I could see no bar to our happiness.
Lovebite has the body of an Olympic athlete, the eyes of a Caroline libertine and the countenance of a dedicated erotomane.
Within moments I had decided to strip her to her expensive banker's underclothing, lash her to a Quattrocento day-bed with fur-lined leather manacles, and whip her with unimaginable delicacy until she handed over a full power of attorney and yielded herself totally in a frenzy of self-abnegation.
But then I remembered Lord Lane.
Could I risk offending Lord Lane?
Whether or not Lovebite consented in our Dionysian excesses, Lord Lane had declared them illegal.
And whether or not the House of Lords eventually overturned Lord Lane's judgement, there was no doubt that Lord Lane would disapprove.
And Lord Lane's disapproval is a man's disapproval.
Lord Lane speaks not only for Lord Lane, but for the whole of society, to which Lord Lane represents nothing less than Lord Lane himself .
So strongly does Lord Lane hold to his principles that he is prepared to face imprisonment in upholding them.
(Not his own imprisonment, of course; society could not tolerate the imprisonment of Lord Lane, but it could tolerate and indeed is baying for, the imprisonment of those whose private behaviour offends Lord Lane's principles.)
I think these animadversions were a turning-point in my life.
There was Little Liz, the rose-bloom on her cheek, avid for leather and narcotics.
There was Lovebite, for a night with whom any man might consider a sprained wrist a small price to pay.
And yet…any such encounter would be sure to leave its marks, and those marks would upset Lord Lane.
And it is not Lord Lane who counts?
Is it not Lord Lane to whom we should direct our innermost yearnings?
Lovebite would surrender joyously to the buckles of delight, and Little Liz would wake south London with her cries of consent, but where is the fun in that?
What I want, now, is Lord Lane.
I want slowly to remove his wig; gently to untie his gown; slowly, so slowly — and terribly, terribly privately — to whisper in his lovely, lovely ear, while he struggles in vain:‘De minimis non curat lex.’
Perhaps it will never happen.
But, God, a man may dream; at least until Lord Lane declares otherwise.
Pick of Punch
Laughter from the archives
February 22nd, 1956:Richard Gordon proved remarkably prophetic about the quest for efficiency in the NHS…
It is time for some original thinking on cutting the cost of the National health Service.
Recommended trying a scheme published in my own hospital journal over 30 years ago.
Most case histories begin, once the patient is comfortable in his chair, ‘Well doctor, it all started the morning I was cycling over Battersea Bridge on my way to work…’
The doctor can be freed to see twice as many patients by substituting for this interview a simple card, provided with a pencil, in the waiting room:
DEAR DOCTOR:
1
I have got a: pain/cough/girl into trouble.
2
I have not had a: wink of sleep/drop to drink/complaint from the neighbours/square meal for a) weeks, b) months, c) years.
3
I am worried because I have been: in contact with polio/on a blind in Paris/reading the Readers Digest .
Yours truly,PATIENT 
Even more time and money could be saved if the card — and the doctor's reply — were sent by post.
By return the patient would have a card saying:
DEAR PATIENT
1
This is to certify that in my opinion you are unfit to: work/join the Army/propagate your species.
2
All you need is a change of: air/diet/underclothes.
3
I think you should take more: exercise/time over your meals/care of your old woman/notice of what I tell you.
Yours truly, DOCTOR
February 22nd 1978:Tiens!
It's always been grim Up North…
‘He's utterly convinced that he's being exiled to St Helen's, poor devil’
Caption Competition
WINNERS Number 1149
WHAT PRETTY GREEN EYES YOU HAVE, MACTAVISH
AS I TOLD YOUR MUM, PREGNANT WOMEN SHOULDN'T SWEAR AT GYPSIES