

£1.80
The wild world of privately-owned jet warbirds
How to lean.
Rare, desirable Bölkow 207.
Island-hopping with Aurigny.
Flying in New Zealand.
Cover: pulling up through a steady 4g loop in Harry Prew-Smith's Fouga Magister.
Photograph by Mike Vines.
Turn to page 46.
Pilot Notes
Swingeing AOC charge increases threaten GA operators
A proposed radical change to the way in which the CAA's Air Operator Certificate charges scheme is administered poses a serious, perhaps catastrophic threat to air taxi and small charter operators, according to GAMTA.
For some time airlines, particularly British Airways, have been bringing strong pressure to bear within the CAA's Finance Advisory Committee (FAC) to reverse the present charging scheme, whereby 97.6 per cent of its AOC income comes from the Variable Charges, in favour of the majority of income being derived from the Fixed Charges element, which would then reflect the actual expenditure of effort by the CAA in respect of each company.
BA's contention is that it and other airlines are heavily subsiding smaller AOC operators.
Having reviewed the scheme, an FAC Working Group recommended no change for the year commencing 1 April 1993, but this recommendation was not accepted by the committee and the CAA has since notified AOC operators that it ‘has it in mind’ to raise AOC charges for operators of aircraft of less than fifteen tonnes maximum take-off weight by fifty per cent from April.
John Page, Head of Support Services Division at the CAA, told GAMTA’‘A data analysis…shows clearly an imbalance in charges made compared with resources employed between those operating aircraft in excess of fifteen tonnes MTOW and those operating below this aircraft weight…
The Authority is of the opinion that the scale imbalance is such that some adjustment to begin correct this should be made whilst the balance and extent of CAA regulatory activities is reviewed, the probable impact of JAA influence is assessed and the affect of these on the relationship of cost is determined.
‘The CAA estimates that a fifty per cent increase in AOC charges would cost the operator of a single Learjet completing 1,000 hours annually an additional £660.
GAMTA sees the fifty per cent increase —‘horrendous though it is’— as only the thin end of a very thick wedge which could spell ruin for many small AOC operators in the UK, already suffering the effects of recession and higher regulatory charges than their European counterparts.
While accepting that there may be cross-subsidy within the AOC charges scheme (figures for 1990/91 appear to show that 32 operators of aircraft weighing over fifteen tonnes accounted for 59 per cent of CAA regulatory effort but provided 96.12 per cent of AOC income), GAMTA says: ‘In that financial year the cost of running the AOC Charge Scheme was £21 million.
Assuming no overall change in the CAA's activities, no cross-subsidy, and a policy of full cost recovery of actual work done, we estimate that the additional cost to our sector of the industry would mean an increase in all AOC charges and C o A charges of more than 1,000 per cent — clearly a preposterous situation which would effectively kill off our AOC sector even if the increase was spread over a number of years, and would thus be self-defeating since it would leave the airlines to pay more of the CAA's overheads than they do now.
‘We believe that there are questions of interpretation as to what is a cross-subsidy in respect of operators of aircraft above and below fifteen tonnes.
We doubt the accuracy of the 1990/91 analysis as to the proportion of effort assigned to different sectors of inspectors’ activities, and reflect back to GAMTA's 1983 submission to the CAA review then taking place when we recommended…that there should be more delegation of record checking to junior staff and even greater delegation of inspection functions to authorised personnel within AOC operations.
At that time CAA AOC costs were in the order of £5 million, with a revenue of £8 million — a highly profitable activity, therefore.
Faced now with an AOC budget for 1993 of £24 million — a cumulative increase in charges of nearly twenty per cent per annum— we can see no relationship between this figure and the rate of inflation over the ten year period, or with the numbers of operators (21 in 1983, 246 currently) or aircraft involved’.
omitted foreign author
GAMTA has conducted a survey of AOC charges among its member AOC operators and is collating this information urgently to prepare a document for presentation to MP's Ministers and government departments.
‘The Chairman of the FAC Working Group, when recommending preserving the status quo, pointed out that CAA charges for Public Transport operations is by a ticket tax, each passenger contributing in equal manner to safety regulation and absolving individual operators from paying directly for any work which the Authority chooses to carry out.
Such a system would be relatively simple to introduce on a seat/flight formula.
Some JAA countries are already considering a ticket tax.
Logically, this would be the simplest way to harmonise European charges and improve the chances of achieving that elusive ‘level playing field’ for UK air taxi operators after 1 January 1993.
‘With the speed of integration of JAA and the Single European Market this issue  cannot be looked at in isolation from the overall harmonisation requirements which will influence the CAA's regulatory system.
There has to a meaningful comparison between the CAA's charging policy and those of its EC counterparts as we move into an integrated European system.
This is a fundamental issue which must be addressed by those who control our industry's destiny.
Without that, we have grave fears for the future survival of British General Aviation AOC operations’.
New Gulfstreams announced
At the Farnborough Air Show Gulfstream Aerospace formally launched its Gulfstream V long-range business jet, first mooted at last year's National Business Aircraft Convention.
Although it retains the overall configuration and shape of previous models, the BV will be a substantially different aircraft with a seven-foot increase in fuselage length over the Guylfstream IV, an entirely new wing of thirteen feet greater span with an airfoil section optimised for high-altitude, high-speed operation, an enlarged flight deck (the airstair door has also been moved five feet aft for easier cabin access), and new braking, nose-wheel steering and electrical systems.
The GV will be powered by two 14,450 lb st BMW Rolls-Royce BR 710 turbofans, which will be test-run in 1994 and certificated in August 1996.
Rolls-Royce will make parts for the engines in Bristol, Derby and Scotland, with final assembly taking place in Germany.
The BR 710 will have a 7,000-hour TBO.
Gulfstream signed $500 million contract for the purchase of 200 engines at the show.
Preliminary performance specifications announced at Farnborough by Gulfstream President and CEO William C. Lowe include a maximum operating Mach number of 0.90, an initial cruising altitude of 43,000 feet, certificated service ceiling of 51,000 feet, and an NBAA IFR range with maximum fuel, eight passengers, cruising at Mach 0.80, of 6,300 nautical miles, making nonstop journeys possible between London — Honolulu, London — Singapore, Los-Angeles — Moscow or New York — Tokyo, for example.
Gulfstream claims that with a single fuel stop a GV will be able to link any two capitals or business centres across the world.
Mindful of the aircraft's maximum unrefuelled endurance of more than fourteen hours.
Gulfstream has created what it claims is the most carefully conceived and designed flight deck and cabin interior ever for a business aircraft, based on extensive ergonomic, anthropomorphic and physiological research.
The GV's 45-foot long 1,905 cubic foot cabin will have room for crew rest areas, lavatories and galleys, while passengers will be afforded maximum room by a ‘wide inside’ interior which will include ‘super galleys’, rest and exercise areas and showers.
Lowe says his company went further than its original plans for a 5,000-mile range aircraft because customers wanted it, and that the GV and its performance figures are not a paper exercise or design concept, but a wind-tunnel-proven reality.
The aircraft will fly, be certificated and delivered to first customers in 1996.
It will have an ‘unprecedented’ twenty-year airframe warranty with ‘at least’six years warranty on other parts.
The cost?
In 1993 dollars, $29.5 million ‘green’, ready for outfitting to taste.
Gulfstream holds twelve letters of intent and initial deposits which it hopes to convert to firm contracts this month, and says that market studies suggest that the worldwide fleet of large bizjets will double over the next twelve years through increased globalisation of major businesses, fuelling demand for ultra long range aircraft.
While the GV is still several years away, Gulfstream has launched a new Special Performance version of the GIV, the 200th example of which was rolled out in August.
The GIV-SP supersedes the earlier model and features modifications to its wings, fuselage, tail surfaces and landing gear which have enabled ramp and maximum landing weights to be increased to 75,000 pounds and 66,000 pounds respectively.
As a result, payload with full fuel has gone up by eighty per cent, and range after a maximum weight landing is now 3,000 miles against 1,800 miles for the GIV, enabling the SP to make more intermediate stops without refuelling.
Gulfstream CEO William C. Lowe (left) and BMW/R-R chairman Albert Schneider at the launch of the GV at Farnborough.
Its 45 ft long cabin will have crew rest areas, for the aircraft will have up 14 hrs. endurance.
The aircraft's interior has been given a ‘wide inside’ look with increased cabin width and wider aisles, while onboard systems enhancements include IBM's PS/2 computer system as a cabin work station, providing in-flight database access via satellite link.
In-flight video conferencing will also soon be available.
The GIV-SP, which will remain in  production when the GV appears giving Gulfstream its first-ever two model range, is selling for $23.5 million ‘green’— the same as the GIV — with a five per cent discount for customers taking delivery before year's end.
Many of the SP's upgrades can be added in the field to current GIV's.
Forstmann Little, the New York investment firm which has controlled Gulfstream Aerospace since its acquisition from Chrysler in 1990, has invested a further $250 million in the company and repurchased the 31 per cent shareholding held by company founder Allen Paulson, who remains as chairman.
Forstmann Little and the Gulfstream management now own all of the company's equity.
Lightning strikes again
A moving map display made for GA aircraft by the Digital Sky division of U.S. electronics company Thermwood Inc has recently been modified to allow it to interface with the well-known Stormscope WX10A.
This latest colour-display moving-map (which already shows pilots where all airfields, restricted airspace, TMAs etc are located) is now also able to superimpose lightning strikes occurring in storms within the area of the map.
Storms up to 170 nautical miles away can also been monitored in a special ‘weather window’ that can be displayed as required in a corner of the screen.
The system also ‘stores’ details of the last 5,000 lightning strikes, and this data can be played back in accelerated fashion, enabling pilots to track the movement of thunderstorms.
Digital Sky point out that this interface does away with any need for the B.F. Goodrich FlightSystem Stormscope display head, so saving panel space.
—James Allan .
CAA Safety Evenings
The following CAA Safety Evenings have been arranged for the coming months:
An opportunity for Suffolk
The neighbouring RAF bases at Bentwaters and Woodbridge in Suffolk, to be vacated by the U.S. Air Force next year, will not be required by the Ministry of Defence when it takes over full control of the sites.
Consideration had been given to moving Harriers and Jaguars from Wittering and Coltishall, but the idea has been rejected on cost grounds.
Ipswich Airport is due to close, and even before it does lack of facilities at the grass airfield are causing problems for European industrialists planning to open plants in the area.
One, the German firm Clean Concept based at Augsburg, cannot fly its twin turboprop to Ipswich, but must land at Stansted or Cambridge on its regular visits, with executives completing the trip by car.
Perhaps it is too radical and imaginative a suggestion, but has anyone in the local government structure of Suffolk looked beyond their plans to build houses on Ipswich Airport and considered what a fine civil airport for the county either of the two unwanted RAF airfields might make?
And how much more attractive the area might then be to potential investor industrialists who appreciate the value of air travel?
Use of QFE and QNH at military airfields
QFE has replaced QNH as the standard landing datum for all RAF, Army and Ministry of Defence airfields.
For instrument approaches airfield QNH is to be used until approaching the Final Approach Fix or Final Approach Point, as appropriate, when QFE is to be set at the Initial Point and all flying in the visual circuit is to be conducted on QFE.
Pilots entering an airfield MATZ will be asked to set airfield QNH.
Not a Cessna Caravan but a Russian monoplane turboprop redesign of the old An-2, seen at Mosaero '92 near Moscow — story above.
Steelth technology
Ben Rich, who headed Lockheed's celebrated ‘Skunk Works’ for seventeen years and was part of the engineering team for the U-2, SR-71 and F-117, addressed the Aviation/Space Writers Associations's annual conference this summer and let slip one of the secrets surrounding the early development of the stealth attack aircraft.
Recalling the eve of the maiden flight of the ‘Have Blue’ proof of concept prototype which evolved into the F-117, Rich told journalists: ‘When that airplane was going to fly, the company was on strike, so we had to put all the management and engineers to work.
The day before we were going to fly we were putting the airplane together — it was a Sunday — and we found out that we had forgotten to make the flanges that held the tailpipe to the airplane.
We had one engineer on duty, so he went out and spent about hour drafting a whole bunch of Z-sections made out of steel.
‘The manager says, ‘Steel?
On a Sunday, and the company's on strike, where the hell am I going to get steel?’
Then he turned around and looked and there was a shop cabinet.
He turns to his deputy and says, ‘Is that made of steel?’
‘Yeah’.
And he says, ‘Cut it up’.
We cut it up and we flew the next day.
That was the attitude of the Skunk Works’.
More Tampicos for Embry-Riddle
Aerospatiale has received a follow-on-contract from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University in the United States for ten TB-9 Tampicos, with options for a further sixteen.
The order follows one placed earlier this year for fourteen Tampicos, and will make Embry-Riddle the world's largest fleet operator of Aerospatiale light aircraft.
Bells over Moscow
A Bell LongRanger helicopter is now in service with the Moscow Police Force.
It used for traffic patrol, accident attendance and for anti-crime patrols (an increasing necessity, apparently, with street crime increasing rapidly in the Russian capital).
A new life for Anushka?
The venerable Antonov An-2 utility biplane in production in Eastern Europe since 1948, may be given a new lease of life.
At the Moscow Air Show in August CIS design house Roks Aero displayed a full-scale mock-up of the T-101 Gratch (Raven), a radically redesigned monoplane version of the An-2 with a turboprop engine, clearly intended as a competitor for the Cessna Caravan I. A prototype of the twelve-seater is being built in a Moscow factory previously used for MiG-29 assembly.
If it goes into production the Gratch will sell for around $300,000 and will be available in landplane, floatplane and amphibian versions.
Wrong number for Wellesbourne
The 1992 Pooley's Flight Guide contains and incorrect telephone number for Wellesbourne Mountford Aerodrome in Warwikshire.
‘We are at our wits; end here’, say the airport management, ‘and this has caused considerable upset and annoyance to the lady owning the number published’.
The correct number for Wellesbourne is .
Bottlang goes East
A new edition of Jeppesen's Bottlang Airfield Manual has appeared, covering airfields in Hungary and Czechoslovakia (or Czechlands and Slovakia, as the separatists would have it).
It is as yet far from complete, with only half a dozen of the country's forty-plus aerodromes included, but subscribers are promised that the remainder will be issued them as soon as possible.
—James Allan 
Sukhoi designer sets sights on Reno
According to Aviation Week & Space Technology , a Russian design team headed by Stonily Kashafotdinov, who played a key role in the design of the Sukhoi Su-27 Flanker fighter, has a completed basic engineering work and wind-tunnel testing for a piston-engined Unlimited air racer which will have supersonic capability.
The project is being financed from the United States, where businessman Jim Hollister and racing pilot Skip Holm have formed American-Russian Industries (ARI).
Preliminary designs for the ARI Racer show a planform not dissimilar to those of the Su-27 and Gulfstream/SukhoiSu-21GSSBJ.
Initially it was planned to have two mid-mounted eight-cylinder 1,000 hp automobile engines driving two scimitar-shaped multi-bladed pusher propellers located aft of the tailplanes, but this arrangement has been dropped in favour of mounting the propellers on pylons above the wing trailing-edges apparently to enable the racer to be float-equipped for an attempt at the six-decades-old world airspeed record for seaplanes.
The aircraft will also attempt to break the piston-engined world airspeed record.
Also at Mosaero were mock-ups of the (no longer wingletted and V-tailed) Myasishchev M-101 Gzhel above, a 4–5 seater with a Czech Motorlet turboprop and a quoted 455 kph speed; and the Myasishchev T-102 Yamal amphib below , whose single pusher prop will be driven by a pair of 1,3000 shp turboshafts.
Quoted loads were 2,000 kg of cargo or 25 pax over 600 km, or 500 kg over 2,500 km, max cruise 420 kph.
Above : the Aeropract Solo single-seater is available as a kit or fully assembled.
With a 46 hp Rotax max speed is 190kph, range 400 km.
It is road-transportable, with assembly with two helpers put at 15 min.
Right : tethered hot-air balloon rides were popular.
Below : model of the sleek Kamov Ka-62, a fan-in-fin mainly composite 12-seater, to be offered in the West with R-R/Turbomeca RTM322 Turboshafts.
Israel's IAI are collaborating (David V. Stephens photos).
ARI predicts that the all-metal racer will be able to reach 500 knots at sea level, sustain 450 knots while pulling a 3g turn, and go supersonic at altitude.
Pilot Skip Holm is a former USAF and Lockheed test pilot who was involved with the development programme for the F-117! stealth aircraft, and is a regular competitor at the Reno Air Races, taking the Unlimited championship title twice.
as if its race/record plans weren't enough, ARI says that a modified version of the aircraft, with a single engine and two-seat cockpit, may be marketed as a homebuilt kit.
Hurricane Andrew destroyed an entire air museum
Among many hundreds of aircraft destroyed or severely damaged as Hurricane Andrew swept across southern Florida in August were those housed in the Weeks Air Museum at Tamiami Airport, which was itself totally destroyed.
The museum, owned by U.S. Aerobatic Team member Kermit Weeks, was totally demolished by winds reported to have exceeded 200 mph — so strong that a DC-6 which had been parked at the airport was found over a mile away.
The Weeks Collection was one of the most significantly privately-owned museums in the United States, and included many rare or unique airworthy antiques and warbirds, among them a B-17 Fortress, Douglas B-23 Dragon, Grumman Duck amphibian, Hellcat, Tigercat, P-51D Mustang, Seversky P-35, and the former Patrick Lindsay's Sopwith Triplane replica.
The ex-Strathallan Collection DH.
Mosquito B.35 was fortunately away from base, on loan to the EAA Museum at Oshkosh.
Even rarer treasures, such as a pair of early A- and B-model Mustangs, a Commonwealth Boomerang, Hawker Tempest II and a SPAD VII were in Weeks' storage and restoration facility at Tamiami, which was also destroyed.
A spokeswomen at the Museum told Pilot that not a single aeroplane had escaped destruction or serious damage, including Weeks' Solution aerobatic biplane, in which he competed at the World Aerobatic Championships at Le Havre in July.
How many are lost forever, and how many may be rebuildable, has yet to be established.
Also totally demolished by Hurricane Andrew were Homestead Air Force Base and its adjacent GA field.
At the USAF base virtually all buildings were razed to the ground, though seventy of the 72 F-16s stationed there had been flown out prior to the hurricane striking.
The remaining fighters, which were down for maintenance and could not be made airworthy in time, were wrecked when a hangar door blew down on top of them.
According to the crew of a USAF storm-tracking WC-130 Hercules which penetrated the eye of the hurricane just before it struck Homestead, peak wind speed was 170 knots and pressure dropped to 993 millibars.
The Hercules pilot reported turbulence so violent that he was unable to read instruments for five to ten second periods because of airframe vibration, recording ± 2g/-1g loads on the airframe, while pea-sized hail stripped paint off the aircraft and damaged its wing leading-edges.
Fuel?
Or water?
The CAA's General Aviation Safety Information Leaflet recounts the tale of a conscientious PPL who was pre-flighting his Cherokee Six prior to flying to the PFA rally at Wroughton this summer.
Sticking to the fuel sampling routine which had been drummed into him when training three years previously, the pilot filled his fuel tester, examined the colour of the liquid for a tell-tale bluish tinge confirming avgas, checked for bubbles that would indicate the presence of water, sniffed it for avgas aroma, and emptied it onto the ground to check that the sample evaporated rapidly, as uncontaminated fuel would.
Suspicious that the bluish tinge was a little too faint, and the whiff of avgas only slight, he took a further sample.
This time there were bubbles of water, and he concluded that his first sample — ostensibly uncontaminated fuel — had actually been nearly 100 per cent water .
The fourteen-gallon tank had been about one quarter full of fuel, and both it and a second partially-filled tank were each found to contain over a quarter of a pint of water, the result of condensation forming in the tanks over a six-day period.
Says the diligent pilot: ‘It is harder than you would have thought possible to identify fuel-contaminated water from avgas if your mindset is looking for globules of water in the bottom of a column of fuel.
Conditions of warm daytime temperatures and high humidity combined with much cooler night time temperatures are ideal for humid air to be trapped in tanks by day and condensed out by night’.
One at a time, please!
There isn't all that much in the world of aviation safety that is left entirely to luck.
But one thing is.
Even if you listen out carefully before you transmit, you have no guarantee that another pilot is not going to press his or her PTT at exactly the same moment as you do, with the probable result that both messages are drowned out and the Air Traffic Controller's ears are assaulted by a high-pitched screech.
Normally this is only a minor irritation (unless the controller suffers from migraine), and a few seconds later another transmission sorts the whole thing out.
But not always.
It has been estimated that about three per cent of all calls in busy TMAs result in conflicting transmissions.
In the London area in May 1987, a Concorde, callsign ‘Speedbird 01’ took off from Heathrow, and a DC-10, callsign ‘American 51’departed Gatwick.
Both switched over to London Radar to await clearance to climb.
This was given to the DC-10 as ‘51, you are cleared to FL180’ but was miss-heard by the Concorde as ‘01, you are cleared to FL180’.
Both aircraft acknowledged simultaneously, but because the DC-10 was much closer to London Radar's VHF receiver mast its call totally drowned out the Concorde's call, and seconds later the Concorde, climbing without clearance, flew through the flight path of and narrowly missed, a Twin Otter.
That is only one of a series of incidents in the CAA's files where conflicting transmissions have led to dangerous situations.
In an effort to rid aviation of this problem a Christchurch company, Penny & Giles Avionic  Systems Ltd, has produced a device called Contran.
This prevents your VHF from transmitting into a frequency that is already occupied, even if the other transmission has started only microseconds before your PTT is pressed.
Instead of your call drowning or being drowned by another, it is intercepted by Contran and you hear either an amplified version of the other call or a brief squelch-like sound in your headset.
An extra benefit of Contran is that it should eliminate the infuriating and potentially dangerous situation when a stuck PTT switch or mike relay in one aircraft blocks a frequency for a protracted period.
Contran illuminates a warning light if any transmission exceeds twenty seconds in length, and automatically switches the transmission off if it exceeds thirty seconds.
(Not many calls exceed twenty seconds, but if for any reason you should need to transmit for longer, you can override the cut-out by simply releasing the PTT for an instant, then pressing it again)
Contran has been conceived primarily with airliners in mind, but a GA version of it is also available.
Details from  
Left: another view of the CH-7 Angel which we showed at Oshkosh last month.
Empty weight is 170kg, useful 300 kg, max 140 kph, cruise 110 kph, endurance 3 hr., power a 65hp Rotax.
Lamborghini stylist Marcello Gandini had a hand in its looks.
Kits will be marketed by 
Below : also Italian is the Dragonfly, which comes in single or two-seat form, and was developed by two brothers, Alfredo and Angelo CAstiglione.
Power is a 130 hp Hirth, giving it a max speed of 150 kph, cruise 110 kph.
Empty weight is 230 kg, useful 300 kg.
Kits will be available from 
At your CIRVice
Among the latest technology displayed at the Farnborough Air Show was a little black motorised Rogallo-winged hang-glider designed for use as a self-fly escape kit for aircrew downed behind enemy lines or for clandestine special forces missions.
Called the Icarus Covert Insertion and Recovery Vehicle (CIRV), it is the brainchild of Philip Parsons, a Flight Lieutenant with the RAF Regiment at North Luffenham and experienced hang-glider and microlight pilot who has developed the craft in his spare time.
It consists of a hi-tech hang-glider wing mated to a rear-mounted 100 cc two-stroke engine driving an efficient carbon-fibre-bladed pusher propeller.
The CIRV de-rigs and folds away into two packages weighing only sixty kilograms which can be packed into an air-droppable container and carried by one man.
Assembly for flight takes twenty minutes.
The CIRV comes with a comprehensive instrument/avionics fit which includes triple altimeters, dual variometers, an ASI, clock/stopwatch, glide angle indicator, 720-channel VHF/VOR (for which a fully integrated pilot helmet system is available) and optional GPS satnav receiver and night vision goggles.
Modular fuel tanks (you literally switch tanks by landing, disposing of the empty one and clipping a full one on) give the CIRV a five-hour maximum endurance and a range up to 250 miles, or fifty miles unrefuelled, cruising at 30–50 mph after a take-off run which can be as short at two metres.
Parson sees the CIRV as ideally suited to use as an expendable military ultralight for high-risk operations such as infiltration missions, and for single-task one-way trips such as recovery of downed aircrew (he showed two of the craft packed into a standard Tornado drop-tank at Farnborough).
He plans to market CIRVs in packs of six for £50,000, and says that while potential users such as the SAS and RAF aircrew have shown great interest in the concept, Whitehall purse keepers have yet to be convinced.
Icarus shown at Farnborough with a dummy at the controls — story above.
MDD Helicopter division for sale
McDonnell Douglas has put its wholly-owned McDonnell Douglas Helicopter Company (MDH) on the market, either for outright sale or to find a joint venture partner to provide development capital.
MDH builds the AH-64 Apache military gunship, and the MD500E, 530F and 520N NOTAR for the civilian market, and is developing the new-generation Explorer (formerly MDX) twin-engine commercial helicopter, which will fly at the end of this year.
The company lags behind Bell and Sikorsky in numbers of helicopters delivered annually, but has a backlog of 165 orders for the MD500 series and 240 ‘certificates of interest’ for the Explorer, though only four firm orders.
MDH says it needs to develop an entirely new helicopter — either civil or military —‘to propel it into a leadership with another helicopter company (or several, possibly splitting civil/military business) in the USA or abroad to provide the necessary investment.
On-line Met service launched
The Met Office has launched its Meteorological Self-Friefing Terminal (MIST) system, which provides on-line aviation weather information via IBM-compatible PCs.
Developed in collaboration with British Aerospace, MIST provides UK TAFs and METARs (half-hourly updates) displayed in  text form, with European versions to follow; maps highlighting significant weather; hourly-updated weather radar sequences; analysis and forecast charts for the UK and Europe of mean sea level pressure, including fronts; an interactive display of surface wind, surface temperature, significant cloud and weather information for user-selected areas; and wind data for different altitudes for up to five locations along any route.
Satellite imagery for the Eastern Atlantic and Europe is under trial and will come on-line later this year.
Regional and European extensions of many other mist displays are also planned for the future.
The Met Office offers two methods of accessing its Cosmos ‘supercomputer’ using MIST, one with a dedicated line providing continual updates of user-selected information which arrives automatically, and a dial-up service which enables occasional users to access a database.
MIST will operate on any IBM-compatible PC with a VGA colour monitor and modem link to the PSS network; a decoder will be required for satellite transmissions.
Further details of MIST, including prices for hardware/ software as required, and licensing and operational charges can be obtained from The Met Office,.
Example of a Met Office MIST display — story left.
FAA calls for inspections, modifications to Saratogas
The FAA has issued a proposed Airworthiness Directive calling for inspections and modifications to parts of the airframe and engine mounts of Piper PA-32R Saratogas.
The proposed AD would require crack inspection/repair as necessary of engine mount cluster welds, and inspection and possible reinforcement of the nose gear actuator attachment bracket, which may not be securely attached.
The FAA says it has received ‘several reports’ of cracking of engine mount welds, which could lead to the engine separating from the airframe.
In the UK the CAA has drawn attention to a continuing problem with cracking of reinforced walkway panes on Piper PA-28s.
One maintenance organisation encountered two aircraft with cracked panels within a six-week period.
‘Everyone should therefore be vigilant, and pilots will notice the presence of cracked panels by creaking sounds when they are on the wing walkway’, says the CAA.
‘For engineers, the inspection panel just forward of the rear spar attachment provides an ideal inspection opportunity with a torch and mirror to check from the underside for cracks’.
The cost of flying neighbourly
We overestimated the cost of fitting the German-produced Gomolzig exhaust silencer to a Cessna 172 (‘Air Mail’, June).
That's the good news.
Getting such an installation — currently available for some forty GA aircraft types — approved by the CAA may add considerably to the cost of hardware and labour, as the British Gliding Association has been finding out.
Seeking a means to comply with a Department of Transport directive to reduce the noise created by tug aircraft, the BGA opted for Gomolzig exhaust kits and four-blade Hoffman propellers.
‘Extensive ground and flight testing in the UK, including the measurement of static thrust and endless climb performance, often measured with electronic recording barographs, has demonstrated that the fourblade propellers, correctly matched to the airframe, give some improvement and that the Gomolzig silencers do not reduce performance’, says BGA chief technical officer Dick Stratton.
Both propellers and silencers are widely adopted in Europe and fully approved by the German airworthiness authorities.
Alas, that wasn't good enough for our CAA.
‘The BGA has spent £5,000 on getting CAA approval for these German LBA supplementary type certificated modifications’, says Stratton.
‘After five years of battling it out with them, we have approval for Robin DR300/400, Ralye 180, PA-18-150/180 (exhaust only), Citabria and Pawnee.
Whereas the DoT almost ‘directed’ the BGA to take some action, they failed to direct the CAA, to co-operate’.
The CAA contends that, notwithstanding German and other European approvals, these environmentally-friendly add-ons constitute major modifications which must be investigated by its inspectors, whose time is charged for accordingly, and no airworthiness work, however worthy, can be subsidised.
So much for speedy adoption of common airworthiness standards throughout Europe.
Independent Pilots Association
With the main objective of looking after the interests of those professional pilots who work within the air taxi and commuter airline business, this British organisation, IPA, has recently been formed.
Among its aims are the maintenance of a job register and establishment of some sort of financial protection for member pilots who become unemployed or who are otherwise subject to hardship.
Readers who are professional pilots can obtain further information about IPA by calling  —James Allan .
Airfield opponents score own goal
We reported in May's Pilot Notes the extraordinary political and linguistic arguments that finally led this summer to the closing of Grimbergen, one of Belgium's most important GA aerodromes.
One of the main planks of the anti-airfield  platform was, as usual, aircraft noise.
But Grimbergen lies within the Brussels CTR and, until it closed, commercial jet traffic from Brussels National was required to avoid the Grimbergen ATZ.
Now the GA aerodrome is no more, the ATZ has vanished from the charts, and the good citizens of Grimbergen are finding they have exchanged the gentle putter of Lycomings and Continentals for the full-throated roar of northbound RR-, GE- and P & W-powered 747s and Airbuses as they thunder over their rooftops after take-off from Brussels' Runway 25R.
I can't say I feel much sympathy for them.
—James Allan .
Model of the Ilyushin II-103, to be marketed from North Weald
Ilyushin lightplane to be launched in UK next year
Mike Woodley, owner of the aviation film services and warbirds import/export operation Aces High at North Weald Airfield, has formed a new company to market the Ilyushin Il-103 light aircraft throughout Europe.
Euro Ilyushin Aircraft Sales (EIAS) will import Russian-made airframes, distributing the aircraft from a new 30,000 square foot hangar at North Weald.
The Il-103, first revealed in model form at last year's Paris Air Show and as a full-scale mock-up at MosAero '92 in August, is a low-wing four/five seat fixed-gear aerobatic trainer/tourer with a maximum take-off weight of 1,300 kilograms and a useful load of 350 kilograms.
A final choice of engine for the Il-103 has yet to be made, but it will be either a Lycoming or Continental in the 200/210hp class.
According to Ilyushin chief designer I.Y. Katyrev performance targets include a cruising speed of 113–127 knots and a with-reserves range of 770 miles.
A prototype Il-103 is under construction at Ilyushin's Moscow factory and is expected to fly in mid-1993, in time for the aircraft to make its debut at the Business & Light Aviation Exhibition at North Weald next September.
Subject to certification to JAR standards, customer aircraft should be marketed by EIAS during the second half of 1994 ‘at a very competitive price’, says Woodley, whose company will be providing up to $3.5 million for tooling and manufacturing start-up costs in the CIS.
EIAS signed a contract for an initial batch of twenty IL-103s at the Farnborough Air Show.
A UFO for 99p
Hot seller in seaside toyshops this summer was the UFO Solar, a ‘solar energy airship’ balloon intended to be flown kite-like on a sixty-foot line.
The ten-foot-long cylindrical plastic balloon rises as trapped air is heated by the sun, and according to the blurb on its packaging, it could reach extraordinary altitudes’ up to 30,000 feet if inadvertently released.
Quite likely one was.
Last summer the crew of a Britannia Airways Boeing 737 inbound to Gatwick filed an airmiss report claiming that a small black lozenge-shaped object, thought to have been a balloon, had passed within 100 yards of the airliner at FL140 over Surrey.
London Radar confirmed a small primary return in the vicinity, but despite exhaustive investigation of meteorological balloon launches and hot-air ballooning activity, the mysterious object — quickly dubbed a UFO by the popular press — was never identified.
The CAA believes it may well have been a 99p UFO Solar, and warns buyers to take note of Article 75 of the ANO which restricts captive balloon and kite-flying to a height of sixty metres agl and forbids it within five kilometres of an aerodrome.
From the Notams
Notifications for Channel Islands Airspace have reverted to the situation existing before the recent airspace classification.
The same scale of equipment, including transponders, applies, as do the Specified Minimum Weather Provisions for PPLs New charts of UK Airspace Restrictions and Areas of Intense Aerial Activity are published.
They are free from .
A touch of the sun(1)
The CAA newspaper Airway reports that a passenger whose holiday flight from Manchester International to Spain had been delayed was discovered by airport police making a start on his tan on the airport tarmac.
Gently advised that he shouldn't be there the sunbather retorted, ‘You're right, I should be in Malaga’.
A touch of the Sun (2)
Chopper pilot loses joystick ran the headline in (what else?) the super soaraway Sun .
Anyone expecting a story about inflight cyclic stick failure would have been disappointed, however: the piece concerned a helicopter pilot named Paul who had undergone a sex-change operation and is now known as Paula.
More that 100 sea and floatplanes gathered at Lake Winnebago's Brennard Seaplane Base during Oshkosh — among them this big Noorduyn Norseman.
First flown in 1935, this most widely used ten-seat Canadian bushplane was flown by the RCMP, RCAF, USAAF and USN as well as civilian operators.
(Geoffrey P. Jones)
CAA prosecutions
The CAA's Enforcement Section brought 33 prosecutions and issued eighteen formal cautions during the twelve months to 1 April 1992.
Of the prosecutions, 32 were successful, with one being quashed on appeal.
Several cases involved carriage of dangerous goods or offences under the Air Travel Organisers Licensing regulations, and one was the infamous trial of former British Airways Captain Glen Stewart.
These are not included in the summary below:
It is not just in the UK that illegal low flying brings the risk of subsequent penalties.
The CAA recently received a communication from the French Director of Civil Aviation advising that a British pilot who was alleged to have infringed height regulations while on a private flight over France was banned from acting as a crew member on any aircraft operating within airspace under French sovereignty for one year — inconvenient for a PPL keen on touring, potentially disastrous for anyone who flies for his living.
After Flt.Lt.
Phil Bell; and student Claire Taylor from Belfast's Queens University Air Squadron had pulled off a textbook forced landing when the engine of their Bulldog quit at 800 feet, a Puma from Leuchars was summoned to recover the undamaged trainer.
Spoilers were rigged to its flying surfaces to stop it trying to ‘fly’ during the lift.
(Dundee Courier & Advertiser.)
A handier hand-held from ICOM
We recently had the opportunity of trying out the latest handheld transceiver in the ICOM range, the IC-A20 MkII.
Of similar size and weight to the older ICOMs and King, Narco and Terra sets reviewed in December 1990's Pilot , it does however offer some distinct advantages over these earlier units.
The most obvious innovation is the alternative tuning method, via a rotating knob on top of the unit.
It isn't quite so quick to use as the knobs of a panel-mounted set as there is no way of rotating the full MHz figures separately from the decimals (it takes my fingers well over 150 twiddles to get from 118,00 to 136.975 Mhz), but there is a twenty-frequency memory bank, and you can cycle quickly through the stored frequencies.
You can also enter and recall any frequency you require by using the sixteen keypad buttons in the conventional manner.
A quick-scan function is also built in, adjustable to cover either the whole VHF air band or stored frequencies only.
The VOR function's CDI display is well designed, with a clear layout of triangular arrowheads indicating how far off course you are (two degree per arrowhead) when in CDI mode, and it has the usual options of radial or bearing readouts in what they call DVOR mode.
In CDI mode the desired course to steer can quickly and easily be adjusted by means of the ‘frequency change’ knob on top of the set — a much more practical use for it than its primary job of actually changing frequencies, in my opinion!
In the air at around 3,500 feet I found that, provided one held it with the antenna close to horizontal, the ICOM IC-A20 MkII could produce quite accurate VOR indications at distances of well over 25 nm from the VOR — rather better than my own King KX99 does.
Lower down, though, the bearing figures tended to wander about quite a bit, depending on which way the aerial was pointing.
Although the receiver part of the ICOM set worked perfectly when tuned to ground stations over 30nm away, the transmitter seemed to be at the extremity of its practical range at about 12- 15nm, almost regardless of height.
Since the set has two transmitter power settings, 1.6W and 5.0W output power, I had hoped to find that the higher power setting would overcome by 1.5W KX99's main failing — its inability to talk to ground stations farther that about 10nm away; but according to the controllers I tried to speak to using both hand-helds in turn, there was only a very marginal difference between the King and the ICOM unit on either of its power settings.
Farther than 12 nm away the reports were ‘Nothing heard’ on the low power settings (both sets) and ‘Weak and unreadable’on the high power setting with the IC-A20 MkII.
It appears that the in-cockpit antenna is the problem.
Coupled to an external VHF aerial the 5.0W setting is capable of giving a useful range equal to that of many panel-mounted sets, but on test in the cockpit it failed to offer me much real advantage over the lower-powered units when all were used with the standard screw-on flexible antennas as supplied.
But with its neat VOR design and other useful functions, the new ICOM certainly merits full consideration by anyone  making an investment in a hand-held.
James Allan 
Navigation reporting by satellite on trial
The CAA and British Airways have begun trials of an Automated Dependent Surveillance (ADS) system which provides ground monitors with an aircraft's precise position, in real time, via satellite link.
A BA Boeing 747–400 equipped with ADS inaugurated the sixteen-month trial in September while en route Heathrow-Boston.
Data derived from the aircraft's onboard navigation and position fixing systems was downlinked to the CAA's Air Traffic Control Evaluation Unit at Bournemouth-Hurn via an Inmarsat satellite over the North Atlantic and British Telecom's ground earth receiving station at Goonhilly.
The CAA is investigating the application and benefits of satcoms to meet anticipated growth in air traffic on North Atlantic routes, where position reporting is currently dependent on HF voice communications.
Using ADS. air traffic controllers will be able to monitor movements of suitably equipped aircraft automatically, building up a radar-like picture of their positions in areas beyond the range of radar cover, ADS is likely to be introduced into routine service over the North Atlantic between the mid-1990s and the turn of the century.
Restored in French Navy colours is Paul Cawte's 1962 Nord 3202 trainer, based at Brighton.
He is offering it for airshows next season
Airfield apartments take shape
Plans to build a ‘flying village’ of apartments complete with hangars at Amougies Airfield in Belgium (Pilot Notes, January 1992) appear to have received enough support for the developer to get started on the construction.
On a recent flight over the area a crane was to be seen alongside the existing hangars, and the timber-framing for the first of the new houses was already taking shape.
A good omen perhaps, for the success of the similar Skypark scheme planned for Bratton near Telford?
Lost mail
Job prospects for aspiring pilots have been dealt another blow this autumn.
The Royal Mail, which for a number of years has been transporting first-class mail overnight by air, totally reorganised its operation at the end of September.
Until recently the mail had been carried by a variety of aircraft ranging from Navajos and Cessna 404s to Shorts 360s and Dart-Heralds.
The stability Royal Mail contracts brought to their operators — particularly the smaller ones — enabled them to offer jobs to newly-qualified CPLs in a segment of the industry which traditionally been the first step in an aviation career.
Now, at a time when recession has badly hit ad hoc charter revenues, the Royal Mail reorganisation has thrown this sector of the industry into chaos.
While the new overnight mail routes will still be operated by charter companies, almost without exception the smallest aircraft used will be Shorts types, while the majority will be of HS.748 or Fokker F-27 size.
With the high costs of training and tight profit margins, operators have had to work hard to win contracts against fierce competition, and it likely that they will only recruit type-rated crews.
At present the pilot job market is, at best, static.
In normal times there is a steady movement of pilots up from small air taxi operations through turboprop commuter aircraft of the major airlines.
The spate of recent company failures has yielded a glut of unemployed jet-qualified pilots, so any vacancies among the major airlines caused by natural wastage or — as in Virgin's case — limited expansion are very soon filled.
This has a stratifying effect, keeping aspiring pilots stuck in their present market sector — not too bad for those still gaining useful experience on commuter operations and keeping their licences current, but a doubly hard blow for newly-qualified CPL/IR hopefuls who are unable to find any kind of commercial flying employment.
Apart from the personal debt many have incurred to gain qualifications, they also have the prospect of seeing ratings expire and hard-won skills dulled by lack of practice.
There is a glimmer of hope on the horizon.
Movement must start at the top, and there are signs that the pool of jet-rated pilots is being used up.
Ironically, this year's appalling British summer may have helped, with foreign holiday bookings receiving a boost.
Once new operators start to look towards the itchy-footed turboprop pilots to fulfil their needs, everyone can start moving up a step and there may again be room on the first rung of the ladder.
However, the danger is that the double  blow of recession and Royal Mail reorganisation could make that first rung very narrow.
Many pilots will drift into other careers and be lost to the industry for good.
In the past all airlines have relied heavily on self-improvers working their way up through the system.
Without pilots gaining experience at the lowest level, we will be shaping up for another chronic pilots shortage in a few years' time.
Haven't we seen all this before?
Andy Foan 
Gatwick JobCentre, which maintains a Professional Pilots Register created when Air Europe collapsed, says it still has 450 unemployed airline pilots on its books.
The prospects for newly-qualifieds seeking that first step up the ladder is unlikely to be helped by new EC regulations expected to be adopted next month which will abolish the ‘Age 60’ retirement rule.
In future EC airline pilots will be permitted to continue flying commercially between the ages of 60 and 65 years providing that they fly as part of a two- or three-pilot crew.Ed 
The pretty Swiss Trainer (Daetwyler) MD3-16- was widely demonstrated here after Farnborough.
It now has a full FAR 23 utility and aerobatic type certificate, and a full-scale wing is on fatigue test aimed at achieving an airframe life of 15,000 hours.
Production possibilities are being investigated in several countries, including Eastern Europe.
(Mike Vines)
Bölkow 207
A rare thirty-year old German taildragger that is ‘very desirable, capable and easy to fly’, with sports-car looks and respectable all-round performance.
By Peter Underhill.
There's an old saying in aviation: ‘If an aeroplane looks right, it invariably is right’.
Designs like R.J. Mitchell's Spitfire, the Hawker Hunter, the Concorde, even (en an angular, macho sort of way) the SEPECAT Jaguar, all look as if they were born to fly, and fly well.
You can probably think of several others, and mine is no means a definitive list.
But I hope you agree with me, the Bölkow 207 — like both the Frati-designed Falco and Nibbio, curvaceous masterpieces — is another such aeroplane designed, perhaps surprisingly, not by an Italian but by a German.
Many modern offerings are hard put to please the eye quite so much.
It is even more impressive when you realise that, far from using space-age composite technology in its construction, the shapely Bölkow 207 is constructed almost entirely from wood.
And that shouts ‘Craftsmanship!’ with a capital C.
The Bölkow company was founded in 1947 by Ludwig Bölkow (eighty this year).
It developed the two-seat KI.107 as a joint venture with Hans Klemm Flugzeugbau.
The KI.107 was originally evolved from the pre-war Klemm 35 and 105 designs, the prototype first flying in 1940.
Post-war, five further pre-production Ki.107 prototypes (the Germans are nothing if not thorough) were built.
The definitive version (D-EXKL) flew in September 1956, presaging a small run of 25.
KI.107B production versions before Bökow took over complete responsibility for the programme.
The KI.107C followed containing numerous detailed improvements; thirty were delivered.
Then Bölkow announced the Model F.207.
This was a significantly upgraded design, having four seats, wing fuel tanks, a more steeply raked and sleeker cockpit canopy and a bigger engine — the reliable 180 hp Lycoming O-360-A1A.
The prototype was converted from a production KI.107 and made its first flight over thirty years age, in December 1960.
Bölkow built 91 production examples, many of which were sold in a number of different European countries including the UK.
One was experimentally converted by Bölkow to a tricycle undercarriage configuration and designated the BO.214, but no production examples were ever built.
With such a relatively small production run, many of which sated in their native Germany, as the years have passed B.207 owners have  become awfully possessive of their sleek, quiet, efficient and, let's be honest, rather beautiful and hard-to-replace aeroplanes.
Trying to persuade a German owner of one to part with it is rather like trying the same exercise on a Frenchman with an E-model Jodel D140 Mousquetaire.
The answer in invariably in the negative — often quite rudely!
Indeed of the only two Bölkow 207s to have previously appeared on the UK register, G-ARYN (first registered 3/62) returned swiftly to Germany in November 1963 as D-EHUK, while G-ASAY (first registered 6/62) was damaged in Belgium of the same year and rebuilt in — you've guessed, Germany — becoming D-EGLU.
However, a couple of years ago Yorkshire-based vintage aircraft restorer David Fenton, having sold his beloved Tipsy B to a Belgian collector, succeeded in importing an immaculate 1961 model, D-EFTE.
Being a canny tyke, he wasn't about to spend his brass on paint, so it became G-EFTE, passing into the hands of present owner Nigel Heaton in late 1991, after he in turn had sold his beloved Jodel.
With me so far?
Good!
The opportunity to evaluate the only airworthy UK example of anything is a rare privilege.
With something as desirable as the Bölkow 207, I didn't need a second offer, and on a thunderstorm-laden day ‘TE turned finals onto Bourn's Runway 19 to rendezvous with an eager air-tester and an equally impatient photographer.
Having looked forward with anticipation to the Bölkow, I wondered whether I might find it an anticlimax.
I need not have worried.
You know how some sports cars manage to look like they are doing about a hundred miles while still parked at the kerb?
The cream and Ferrari-red Bölkow conveys exactly the same message.
The only discord, at first acquaintance (and for a very good reason) is the apparently overlong undercarriage.
That apart, from its shiny red spinner through the smooth tapering plywood-covered wings and fuselage to the tailplane-elevator assembly and simple but shapely fin and rudder, this aeroplane displays considerable thought in design and skill in execution.
The whole tailplane moves à la Piper Club to alter pitch trim, thus you don't get the flattened Z-shape (which is drag-producing) of tailplane-elevator-trim tab in extreme forward or aft C of G conditions.
It is almost as drag-free as the all-flying stabilator (as fitted to Piper Cherokees and certain other types, Jodels included) so despised in some circles.
There is hardly a protuberance to disturb the airflow, save for two half-pear-shaped castings (the step to wither wingwalk,), and small pairs of lifting handles by the tailplane and just aft of the cabin for the purpose of getting in.
An engine cowl flap sits below the rear edge of the lower cowlings and is opened as required, but normally sits level with the fuselage in flight.
The circular threaded nylon fuel fillers are flush-mounted, one above each 21-gallon wing tank.
A slot accepts a large diameter coin, or the special aluminium tool, to unscrew them.
Under the wings are two man-sized (9.15 square feet each) split flaps, which swing down to a significant drag-producing sixty degrees.
Unless a really short-field (e.g. a precautionary) landing is required, the manual recommends using only 45 °, and to confirm this a panel warning light illuminates once that setting has been exceeded.
The wide-track undercarriage is closely spatted, and so is the tailwheel.
The legs are oleo-pneumatic; small Schrader-type valves enable them to be kept to the correct pressure.
The reason for the long undercarriage isn't to provide adequate prop clearance as you might expect.
Rather, I suspect that with shorter legs the angle of attack in a three-point altitude would be insufficient, resulting in a ‘hot ship’ in the landing phase.
Side doors hinge up, and allow superb visibility for all occupants.
The panel is a ‘model of ergonomics’, the semi-circular yokes move controls of silky smoothness.
Huge wheels between the seats control trim and flaps.
The Bölkow is relatively easy to get into, bearing in mind that on taildraggers with vintage origins you don't get such niceties as car-type doors.
The wingwalk is easily attainable via the aforementioned step and grab handles.
On each side, a full length opening door/window assembly pivots upwards enabling pilot and passengers to step straight into the cockpit or rear seats.
This has the advantage that visibility to the side is superb, with no window frames to impair the view from either front or rear seats.
All four seats are extremely comfortable and well upholstered, with a central arm-rest for the rear passengers.
A large ‘clear-vision’ panel, pivoting inwards and downwards, is fitted to the left side window.
After the thunderstorms of the  morning, i hoped we were not going to need it in the improving afternoon weather.
Forward visibility on the ground is good, and the nose does not intrude.
The steeply-sloping highly curved windscreen extends from well forward of the instrument panel up to the windscreen hoop, and is optically almost perfect.
Forward and down to either side, the maximum clear viewing area is available outlined with the cream of the 207's primary colour.
Once installed in the left seat, your first natural is to rest your hands and feet on the controls to test for ‘fit’.
Nigel and I are about the same size, so no adjustments were needed, but the instant impression, on moving the black semi-circular yoke atop the long curving control column, was of absolute silky smoothness.
Rarely have I felt aileron and elevator controls that were so light on the ground and had such little friction.
My anticipation cranked up two more inches of manifold.
The panel is a model of ergonomics, with a full ‘blind-flying’ set-up immediately in front of the pilot and the secondary and radio displays to the right.
Each yoke carries a properly designed and built-in PTT button, unlike some of the Jubilee clipped-on afterthoughts I have seen on a great many Wichita and Lock Haven singles, with the associated ‘curly cable’ disappearing behind the lower instrument panel.
Many of the knobs and levers also display that rather nice handbuilt look.
You could almost imagine Her Schmidt (or, more likely, his apprentice) hand-filing the detent slots in the flat alloy rods which select the appropriate fuel tank or cowl flap setting.
A single switch/control row extends cockpit-wide below the panel.
This holds the ignition switch, half-a-dozen pull switches (which also double as circuit breakers), carb heat, master switch, mixture, fuel pump switch.
vernier throttle and prop control.
In front of the second dicky are the aforementioned fuel tank selector, cowl flap, cabin heat and air controls and parking brake.
Everything is easily accessible with little stretching, even across the cockpit.
Dominating the space between the two front seats are two grey painted wooden vertical wheels with chunky cut-outs around their periphery.
That nearest to the pilot is large , and controls the elevator trim working in the natural sense i.e. forward for nose down.
The linear trim position indicator runs immediately behind it a red pointer moving back and forward to markings numbered either side of a central zero.
The wheel nearest the P2 is huge (nearly as big as a Boeing trim wheel) and controls the flaps.
An identical red position indicator points at flap settings coloured up to the 45 ° setting in white, thereafter up to the maximum 60 ° in red.
Both wheels move easily, their large diameter giving plenty of turning moment.
Below the twin wheels is the tailwheel lock.
The tailwheel must be locked immediately before take-off and remain so until the completion of the landing roll, when it is unlocked for taxying and manoeuvring.
The height of the pilot's eyeline (always an essential thing to remember when flying an unfamiliar aircraft — you'll need it when you are landing) is about two feet higher than when sitting in, say a Cessna 172 or Cherokee, but was almost identical to by own ‘big’ Jodel Mousquetaire, so I was quite happy.
One further item is worthy of note.
With typical Teutonic thoroughness, the Bölkow's operating handbook is as comprehensive and useful a document as any I have encountered, with a proper alphabetical index and much more than just the bare minimum information required by the authorities.
It even contains advice on the avoidance of wake turbulence and on glider- or banner-towing, for which the 207 can be equipped with a hook/release mechanism.
A full list of gliders which can be towed in included, and the concluding paragraph in the fully detailed glider-tugging section states,‘Most of the numerous accidents that have occurred during glider-towing operations could have been avoided if pilots had better known and followed these basic rules of safety’.
Starting is Cycoming-simple.
As the engine was warm, a single prime and a turn of the key got us turning and burning and we completed the pre-taxi cockpit chores of plugging in headsets (sensibly, the sockets are located between the two front seats at elbow level, obviating tangles with any controls) and latching the doors.
I recognised the door catches: they fitted them to Jodels too.
The humble old Citroën 2CV probably never realised just how much it gave to European light aviation!
The Bölkow 207 is fitted with toe-operated rubber pedals on the P1 position only, so Nigel was being very trusting in giving me the only set of brakes.
Pre-take-off checks include the selection of fifteen degrees of flap and setting the tailwheel lock.
For take-off the tail should only be raised a small amount.
If this advice is ignored, the torque of the seven-foot-diameter propeller, and the airflow it sends corkscrewing down the fuselage and acting on the large fin, causes the relatively light 207 to suddenly aim for the left-hand side of the runway.
Lift-off occurs at fifty knots, and once airborne a climb speed of 65 knots is aimed for.
Two-up and with half fuel, we briefly was over a thousand feet per minute of the VSI before I had to throttle back to slide into position behind the struggling Cessna 150 camera ship.
The light controls on the ground were no heavier in the air, and the photo session formation was sheer joy, the Bölkow sitting wherever it was required.
My only minor niggle was that vernier throttle.
While ideal for touring, when flying in close formation you can't put in rapid throttle adjustments without first pushing in the centre button.
This makes the essential continual small power changes rather tedious.
The weather conditions had improved immeasurably and, as you can see from Keith Wilson's pictures (taken near Grafham Water), the sunlight was beautiful.
The air was calm and, once freed of the camera ship, we set up Nigel's preferred cruise setting of 2,200/25 inches, which translated into an indicated (and, at 1,500 feet, probably very close to genuine) 127 knots.
Control forces in all axes are feather-light but not too highly geared.
In other words, the Bölkow is not twitchy, just very easy to fly.
Left to its own devices and trimmed out, I could take hands off the yoke, making minor heading corrections with rudder.
A degree of rudder/aileron co-ordination is needed in turns, but steep ones, with the upper wing almost vertical brought forth no protest from the airfoil or warning beeps from the stall horn, even at quite high g-loadings.
Roll rate is satisfyingly rapid, and the 207 takes about three seconds to complete the reversal of a steep bank, one way to the other.
One rather novel feature, fitted by David Fenton just after the aircraft came onto the UK  register, is a Rockwell wing-leveller system which is linked to the turn & slip and the VOR.
By engaging the system the Bölkow can be relied upon to tract and accurately overfly any VOR, while in non-VOR mode the aircraft can, if wished, be turned onto a compass heading using a dedicated knob on the T & S in the manner of a full-blown airliner.
Since the Bölkow is designed to go places — Nigel had returned from Cannes only a few days before my flight — this is a most useful addition allowing the relaxed study of maps, approach plates etc, without the constant monitoring of the aeroplane.
It probably makes for more relaxed passengers, too.
In flight the aeroplane is quiet and the cabin doors seal well.
Lifting one Pelton ‘can’ off my ears the ambient cabin noise was well below even some modern designs.
I would imagine that rear passengers would be quite happy for several hours at a time in such an environment.
‘A curvaceous wooden masterpiece…many modern offerings are hard-put to please the eye so much’(Kieth Wilson photos.)
Slowing for a flapless stall, the loud horn preceded an indicated 48 knots drop by about five knots.
With 45 ° of flap and a smidgen of power, the stall occurred at an indicated 35 knots although, as the manual points out, there is some degree of pilot head position error to be taken into account at high angles of attack and low airspeeds.
The specification panel below shows the book figures at max AUW.
Nevertheless, the Bölkow 207 did not bite, dropping its nose smartly but straight ahead and responding instantly to normal recovery techniques.
I did not try one with the full sixty degrees, which is almost a full airbrake setting and would doubtless produce a still slower stall speed, but the Bölkow is obviously capable of getting into a very short field if required.
The problem might be getting it out again afterwards!
There simply remained the exercise of reuniting this lovely old bird with mother earth.
Once established downwind, a circuit speed of eighty knots allowed thirty degrees of flap to be selected while the normal litany was completed.
On finals, the approach speed was initially pegged at 65 knots and I was able to take hands and feet off to confirm that, like a true thoroughbred, the 207, with just a trickle of power, will go down the glide slope as if born to it.
The last few feet required only a very slight rearward movement of the yoke to arrest the sink, and she touched with just one stiff-legged little bounce.
Applying power, I forgot about the ‘tail low’ advice and she tried to dart off the left side of the runway before some firm right boot put us back in line for another go.
The second time round, Nigel suggested a final approach at sixty knots with 45 ° of flap.
This caused me to run out of aft trim i.e. I couldn't take my hands off — and she didn't feel quite so rock-like and stable coming down the last few hundred feet, but the resulting touchdown was smoother and shorter.
No doubt with a passenger in the back the trim would be sufficient, but the sink rate might need watching at that speed.
At the end of the rollout the tailwheel lock was disengaged to allow us to amble back round the peri-track; thereafter the shutdown followed usual pattern of a cooling-down period, a magneto check and the pulling out of the mixture to full lean .
The Bölkow 207 is a very desirable, capable aeroplane: able to carry four people and their luggage in excellent comfort for a reasonable distance at a respectable speed; capable of getting into and out of quite small airfields or airstrips; capable of fingertip handling which is both very stable or very sprightly; capable of convincing this air-tester that there is another 180 hp Lycoming-engined wooden aeroplane which might just, in certain areas, be equal to or (whisper it quietly!) even better than another, similar-powered, big wooden aeroplane with bent wings.
And that's as high an accolade as any I can give it!
Nigel, you're a very lucky man.
Let me know when you want to sell.
NEW BRITISH CIVIL REGISTRATIONS from Ian Burnett
The quietest month for some time on the Register, with very few in-sequence allocations — and o the rest no less than eleven are aircraft with changed marks.
The G-BUM series appears to have been passed over — with G-BUMF and G-BUMP allotted some time ago we cannot believe the CAA has turned prudish in its old age…!
Shorts register civilian Tucano G-BULU below which would logically have meant an appearance at the SBAC show, but it did not in fact appear.
Others include re-registered Learjet G-JETN (more familiar as the Dublin-based G-JJSG of the Jefferson-Smurfit Group), and Diana Britten's new Extra EA260 G-EXTR.
Most interesting vintage machine is undoubtedly J.Bygraves ‘WACO YKS-7-G-BWAC, while this is balanced by the cancellation of the Rearwin 9000L G-BGAU.
This was imported as N18548 in 1978, and was last understood to be on extended rebuild on the Isle of Wight.
Of a sizeable number of microlights by far the most interesting is the Mignet HM1000 Balerit G-MYDZ.
This is an ultralight version of the famous ‘Flying Flea’, and several are flying on the Continent.
Apart from Bob Cole's homebuilt HM293 G-AXPG which was a familiar site at PFA fly-ins in the early 70s, and believed to be still in store, no other versions of the Flea have flown in the UK since the War.
There are some thirteen examples of the original pre-War HM14 version (both genuine and replica) known to exist here — well known aircraft include G-AEBB at the Shuttleworth, G-AEEH of the RAF Museum at RAF St Athan, and G-AEHM with the Science Museum Collection at Wroughton.
Used imported aircraft.
Aircraft restored to the register.
Homebuilt aircraft.
Re-registered British-owned aircraft.
Surplus military aircraft.
Book Reviews mostly by Mike Jerram
THE COMPLETE BOOK OF BUILDING & FLYING YOUR OWN PLANE, by Geoff Jones.
288 pages, illustrated with black-and-white photographs and drawings.
Many's the time, when reviewing guides to homebuilts in this column, that I have lamented their authors' tendencies simply to regurgitate plans/kit suppliers specification tables and creative claims about ease of construction and building times, with no attempt to ‘tell it like it is’.
Geoff Jones, regular contributor to our photo pages and European correspondent of the American magazines Private Pilot and Kitplanes , hasn't fallen into that trap.
He opens with a history of homebuilts dating from Sir George Cayley (who would have approved the sage advice to get an experienced hand to make the first test flight of your creation, though in his case the unfortunate man was more adept at handling a coach-and-four than a flying machine) and proceeds through the Flying Flea era to the post-war rebirth in France and the USA, thence to Rutan and the foam/fibreglass revolution, and on to the 1980s emergence of IFR-capable alabaster-smooth hot-rod kitplanes that will blow the socks off anything Vero Beach and Wichita are (or more accurately aren't ) building.
A chapter on homebuilt organisations around the world is instructive, not least to learn that whilst amateur-built aircraft have had official blessing (or at least the blind eye treatment) in many Eastern Bloc countries for a decade or more, getting approval to fly a homebuilt in Italy and Germany has been a hard-won struggle against obstinate bureaucracy.
In that context we should therefore be grateful that our own dear CAA has delegated the regulation of homebuilding in the UK to the Popular Flying Association; but I still can't help feeling that the list of types approved by the PFA as reproduced in this book is ultraconservative.
Perhaps the PFA's newly-appointed Chairman and Pilot contributor Peter Underhill will be able to get things moving?
Where so many of this book's predecessors have failed their readers is in not providing honest appraisals of the effort required to complete and fly a homebuilt.
Geoff Jones has therefore devoted six entire chapters to ‘case studies’, split into structural groups: wood-and-fabric; metal; wood-and-foam; plans-built composites; kit-built composites and microlights, providing for each, one or more profiles of specific projects, warts ‘n all.
‘Many minor details turned into major tasks and the first flight date seemed to be drifting further and further away’ he says of Neville Langrick's Sequoia Falco, the first kit-built example to fly in Europe.
Show me any homebuilder who can't say the same thing about his project, but the finish-it-in-thirty-days-using-only-domestic-handtools! brochures never tell you that, nor that it may take you weeks just to create the right kind of workplace in which to build your masterpiece.
My expatriate Brit colleague Nigel Moll, senior editor at Flying magazine in New York, was recently delivered of a big box containing a Kitfox.
Having already made substantial structural changes to his garage to make room for the aeroplane's assembly, and storage when complete, he spent the first days after its arrival using some of the surplus lumber from its packing crate to build a workbench, only to discover on completion that it all had to come apart again to extract the stepladder he'd used to support it during assembly.
That's the reality of homebuilding, and in this book Geoff Jones hasn't shied away from recognising that patience and a sense of humour are as essential to the completion of a project as adeptness with bandsaw or metal shears.
Completing this substantial work are appendices on the approval procedures for homebuilts adopted in France, the UK and USA, a contact list of homebuilding associations around the world, and a comprehensive guide to homebuilt types, again with contact addresses.
The Complete Book of Building & Flying Your Own Plane isn't perfect.
For the second edition, which I am sure will follow, it would be improved by devoting less space to tables of registration letters and better proof-reading (Prof. Ing.
Winter's little parasol Zaunkoenig appears several times as ‘Zaukoenig’ or ‘Zoukoenig’for example).
That apart, the book is as encyclopaedic a work on homebuilding and homebuilts as you could hope to find, as befits the fastest growing sector of general aviation, and the one where the greatest innovation is now to be found.
THE CANNIBAL QUEEN, by Stephen Coonts
344 pages, illustrated with colour photographs
Regular readers will know that I have been a fan of Stephen Coonts since I reviewed his first novel Flight of the Intruder (now a major (?) film, as they say, though I'd make do with the book if I were you).
I felt slightly uneasy with the direction he took in his last book,Under Siege , in which Coonts' hero Jake Grafton forsook the jet fuel, grease and steam-slick decks of nuclear carriers for the even more treacherous corridors of the Pentagon, and The Cannibal Queen hasn't reassured me that he's back on track.
This one isn't a novel, but a personal travelogue whose scenario can be summed-up thus: successful, celebrated author buys an old biplane and sets off across America to recreate the old barnstorming days while rediscovering himself and his country and…
Whoa!
Hold on a minute.
Haven't we been here before?
Don't I recall a certain Richard Bach (literary father of J.L. Seagull) doing that self-same thing, and writing two beautiful books —Nothing by Chance and Biplane — about his bedsheets-and-bailing wire odyssey?
The difference, if I remember rightly, was that Bach made his trip before he'd become famous — indeed, took his agent's Congratulations!
You're a millionaire call while in a phone booth in Creeksville-in-the-Boondocks.
So, equipped with a newly-restored 1942 300 hp Stearman (the Cannibal Queen of the title) former A-6 Intruder pilot Coonts launches off with his teenage son aboard to set wheel in all 48 contiguous states, stopping en route to visit family, ex-wife, old squadron buddies, national monuments, places of pilgrimage (like Kill Devil Hills, from which the Wrights first flew), aviation museums, and pausing awhile en route to give rides in the big yellow biplane to anyone who asks, and to philosophise on racial equality, politics, religion, women the FAA, Disneyworld…
As a magazine article, any one of these chapters would have made good reading.
As a book The Cannibal Queen is altogether too Hey!
Are we having fun here or what ?
Coonts may not have got lost once in three months of eyeball navigation around the Lower 48, but his writing could do with a position fix.
1992 UNITED KINGDOM &; IRELAND CIVIL AIRCRAFT REGISTERS, compiled and edited by Malcolm P. Fillmore
‘Guess it's some kind of indigenous British bird, huh?’, suggested an American copy editor I worked with recently when he was checking the meaning of the term ‘reggie-spotter’.
‘Well, not exactly.
They're people who go around airports and airshows collecting the ‘tail numbers’ on aeroplanes.
Go out on the field (this was at Farnborough); there's hoards of them, the really sophisticated ones use little pocket memo recorders instead of notebooks’.
All attempts to explain just why anyone would want to do this failed.
‘You tell those guys they should get a life !
he roared, still not entirely convinced that it wasn't all some Limey hoax.
It is probably all to the good that I didn't have this book with me, since the ready availability of a thick volume containing every registration number ever carried by every aeroplane currently registered or based in the United Kingdom could only have prompted further unanswerable questions as to why anyone could therefore need to write them down.
Seeing just how comprehensive a work this is, with factory serial number, date of registration, date of next C of A expiry, owner's/operator's name and probable base all listed, I  can only surmise that the note-scribblers/pocket memo mumblers — many of whom seem not to have the slightest knowledge or interest in the type of aeroplane on which the letters are painted — are performing the latter-day equivalent of the sacred ritual which I and many others who have long since outgrown it once enacted in John W.R. Taylor's ABC of Civil Aircraft Makings .
This was a little pocketbook whose annual appearance heralded many a post-school evening of inky fingers and biro-smeared rulers when underlining ‘aeroplanes seen’.
This, and many companion volumes on overseas registers which Air-Britain produces, are much more serious volumes than those spotters' guides of yore, their contents likely to prove as useful to aircraft dealers, brokers, insurers, buyers (and tax inspectors?) as they do to the binocular-and-bobble-hats brigade, not to mention we scribblers, who occasionally have a compelling need to know how many PA-28s there are in the country (a lot) or whether the Miles Student jet trainer is still extant (it is).
Not only will the Air-Britain register answer many more such queries, but it also provides a comprehensive listing of foreign-registered aircraft domiciled in these shores.
Among them are a surprising (or is it?) number of aeroplanes bearing Cayman Islands letters, many of which I'll bet have never been near that tax; haven, the late Cap'n Bob's pair of liquidator-awaiting, Bermudan-registered Gulfstreams, appropriately VR-BOB and VR-BRM, and a host of N-numbered machines which no doubt the Gatwick-based FAA inspectors looking for illegally operated U.S.-registered aircraft will find enlightening.
All told, an exhaustively researched product which tells those who need to know it all they need to know…until next year.
I have never met editor Malcolm Fillmore, but I shall recognise him when I see him: pale of countenance, slight of figure.
How can I possibly know this?
Because no-one who so meticulously completes a task such as compiling this directory annually could possibly find time to emerge into sunlight, or to eat.
Maybe I could introduce him to my sceptical American editor friend?
Or then again, maybe not…
THE COMPLEAT TAILDRAGGER PILOT by Harvey S. Plourde.
It is a rare book that can keep me on the ground reading when the weather is good, but that is just what this little publication did.
I have always felt that most of the practical differences between the handling of tailwheel aircraft and those with their third wheel at the wrong end could be covered in a single comprehensive magazine article (like mine in March Pilot ), but after reading The Compleat Taildragger Pilot I concede that, if you want to cover all the relevant theory too, something this size is required.
Highly experienced taildragger instructor Harvey Plourde not only includes detailed theoretical and empirical information, he gives useful notes on handling peculiarities of a few of the more common American types.
The book leads the reader through a very thorough and practical taildragger conversion syllabus, covering preparation, theory, ground handling, take-offs and landings, with a vital chapter on crosswinds.
It contains much taildragger lore that is useful for any pilot, a wealth of good advice to tailwheel instructors, and the most comprehensive explanation of P-factor that I have seen.
It also has a detailed chapter on the handling of cross-wind landing gear that I'll bet Peter Underhill wishes he had read before testing the Helio Courier in our March issue.
I would argue with the author on the merits of the wing-down as opposed to the crab cross-wind landing techniques, and feel that he should have concentrated less on right-hand tractor American rotation engines, but other than that I can't fault him, and would class the book as absolutely required for anyone aspiring to be a tailwheel instructor.
Although perhaps a little detailed and daunting for the potential trainee, reading (and understanding) it will certainly speed the conversion process and consequently save time, money and unnecessary sweat.
However it is undeniably expensive for a paperback with simple line diagram illustrations and no colour.
I found it fascinating reading.
Having used a good CAVOK day absorbing its contents, I can't wait for the chance to get out and put some of Harvey Plourde's theories to the test in my Champ —Bob Grimstead .
A O P A IS FIGHTING FOR GENERAL AVIATION AND YOU
AURIGNY.
‘One of the last bastions of single-pilot public transport flying’— Ronald Liddiard recalls 800 happy hours logged in Aurigny's Trislanders around the Channel Islands
Island-hopping !
The very name of one of aviation's most prized activities conjures up visions of exotic and faraway locations, bright sunshine, sparkling clear seas, white sandy beaches and much else…and to be paid for flying in such surroundings?
That surely must be paradise!
What is the reality?
All too often it features stifling heat, incomprehensible local dialects, petty bureaucratic officialdom, elusive avgas, lack reliable repair facilities, no spare parts…the list goes on.
If only it were possible to avoid these difficulties, and go island-hopping where they speak English, where the controllers are friendly and helpful, where all kinds of services are readily available, taxes are low and fuel plentiful.
There is such an area near at hand.
Visit the Channel Islands and you will see Britten-Norman Trislanders happily buzzing between the islands and the two adjacent mainlands of England and France.
Their bases are Alderney, Guernsey and Jersey.
The company is Aurigny Air Services, which for over twenty years has been linking the islands with one another and the airports of Southampton, Bournemouth, Cherbourg and Dinard.
For a pilot, it is perhaps one of the most agreeable settings in which to ply his profession — even though fog, gales and ice do sometimes demand the limits of his skills.
Originally equipped with the ubiquitous BN2 — the Britten-Norman Islander — Aurigny has gradually replaced the type with its big brother Trislander.
Now the company operates ten of these cumbersome-looking but uniquely able aeroplanes, together with one Shorts 360.
Boasting a record of never having had a serious incident or accident in its history, Aurigny is careful about the selection of its pilots, most of whom are mature and experienced aircrew with backgrounds in airline and/or military flying.
Many have previous distinguished careers on fast jets in the Royal Air Force or in international long-haul operations.
What brings such (men (Aurigny only has one lady pilot — on the Shorts 360; all Trislander aircrew are male) to a job like this?
Certainly not the money; Aurigny's pay scales have traditionally been below the industry average.
It is the relaxed life style, the picturesque surroundings — but above all, interesting ‘hands-on’ flying.
Trislanders have no autopilot, and in most cases no dual control.
This is one of the last bastions of single-pilot public transport flying.
How long that will last is a moot point, but for the immediate future Aurigny continues its unique operation.
Pilots are based mainly at Guernsey of Jersey, with a small nucleus of four at Alderney.
The regular work pattern normally features an early morning start to a shift ending around two pm., or an early afternoon duty ending mid-evening.
Between four and eight sectors will be flown, but occasionally either more or less according to season.
Any of the standard seven destinations may be visited.
Stage lengths vary from about ten minutes or so inter-island to 45–50 minutes on the Alderney-Southampton run.
In the wintertime, schedules to France may include a day stop, whereas at peak periods a split duty might comprise both morning and afternoon round-trips to Dinard from Guernsey, for example.
The routine can be enlivened at any time of year by the occasional charter to other destinations.
Thus the work is varied and interesting, and the rapid changes in climatic conditions that sometimes afflict the islands ensure continuous concentration on the basics of safe operation.
The Trisland has to be hand-flown the whole time.
Basic but adequate instrumentation means that instrument approaches rely on good old-fashioned piloting skills.
No chance here of falling asleep on the flight-deck!
The inter-island sectors between Jersey, Guernsey and Alderney average ten to fifteen minutes each in VFR weather; slightly longer if instrument approaches are needed, which they often are.
Both Jersey and Guernsey have ILS on both ends of their east-west runways, but Alderney only boasts an NDB, giving real-life demonstrations of coastal refraction.
All the islands suffer from gusting caused by turbulent air currents over the cliffs.
Aurigny does not compete with the bigger companies on the direct from Jersey or Guernsey to the UK.
It concentrates on its niche market using the narrow 880 metre strip at Alderney where the Trislander triumphs because the bigger aircraft cannot use it, and smaller ones cannot make a profit.
The Shorts 360 specialises on the Jersey — Guernsey shuttle service.
Corporate strategy is cautious, slow growth.
The Shorts 360 comes into its own in the summer season, with frequent bus-stop services between the major islands, and it carries out some charters to the mainland to improve its utilisation.
It cannot operate to Alderney, where the Trislander remains king — and quite literally a life-line for the island to the outside world.
One aircraft is kept on permanent 24-hour standby to fly urgent medical cases to treatment off the island, and the airport can be opened for that purpose at any time at short notice.
All mail and newspapers arrive by air, and much of Alderney's urgent and perishable freight arrives on three engines.
The Trislander can rapidly be converted to an all-freight configuration, but it is more normal for seats to be removed towards the rear.
The passengers share their ride with holiday-makers' bicycles, fresh vegetables, or miscellaneous freight of all shapes and sizes.
The Guernsey-to-Dinard route was fairly recently revived by Aurigny after the demise of Air Sarnia, also a Trislander operator.
The traffic is steadily building up, both as a day trip or weekend outing, but also to cater for the increasing number of second homes in the north of France within easy motoring of the airport, whose car park is full of Jersey, Guernsey and GB-plated cars.
To a lesser extent these factors apply to the Cherbourg route too, although there is the added attraction of frequent express trains direct of Paris.
Waiting at the airport is the Mercedes limousine taxi of Monsieur Leclerc, one of the best-known local characters, whose wife runs a bed-and-breakfast business at her spotless guest house downtown.
You can even get a package deal weekend chez Leclerc through Aurigny.
Apart from being a major port and ferry terminal, Cherbourg also has an extensive yacht marina, and is of course gateway to the Cotentin peninsula, where many of the bloodiest and most important of the battles of the liberation were fought in the immediate aftermath of the Allied invasion.
Many journeys of pilgrimage are made to the invasion  beachheads.
The peninsula is peaceful and pretty now, and many go there for a gentle but gastronomic tour.
Food, wine and the French ambience , not to mention cheaper housing, attract the Brits to the peninsula, while the intriguing mixture of cultures in the islands brings many French people on day trips and weekend sojourns — the big UK stores in St Peter Port get plenty of their trade.
Aurigny serves both Cherbourg and Dinard direct from Guernsey, but Alderney residents and visitors have to change planes at Guernsey, as do Jersey travellers to Cherbourg.
Dinard is connected direct to Jersey by both Aurigny and Jersey European Airline.
‘Aurigny’ is the old French name for the island of Alderney, and it is fitting that this should have been chosen as the airline's title, since in many ways that rocky islet is the heart of the organisation.
Based in a purpose-built headquarters there are the reservations section and the operations officers, together with the commercial manager and his staff.
The managing director, chief pilot, accounts, engineering and administration department are all based on Guernsey.
The deputy chief pilot is located at Jersey and controls the day-to-day operation there.
Thanks to landline links, telephone and radio, this three-way split works amazingly well.
Customer-friendliness is a current buzzword in British business circles.
Perhaps unique amongst air operators Aurigny has a fan club for one of its Trislanders.
G-JOEY has a comic face painted on its long snout.
The airline sells T-shirts, teddy-bears and a series of children's books featuring the intrepid Joey, flown by the aptly-named Captain Keen.
If you are the right age and you fly in G-JOEY, the pilot will sign one of the prized certificates which enables you to belong to the exclusive Joey Club.
Hundreds of children do, and they vie to fly on the eponymous aircraft; their very own character plane from the pages of the Joey books.
A neat marketing ploy, and a good way of interesting children in aviation.
It keeps one of the commercial staff in Alderney pretty busy.
Her name is Jo, too!
Really .
Aurigny inaugurated services on 1st March 1968, flying a lone Islander.
First trip went from Alderney to Guernsey wearing the now-familiar bright yellow and red livery, a colour scheme which has survived ever since.
Sir Derek Bailey, a Gloucestershire businessman, picked up the route and formed the company when the former operator, British United Airways, pulled out of Alderney, leaving the island without the vital air link which so affects the island's economy.
Two more Islanders arrived shortly afterwards, and all the Channel Islands were linked.
By the end of the first year of operation over 45,000 passengers had been carried, reflecting the latent demand for air transport in that environment.
Loads have increased almost every year since then.
From left: climbing out from Guernsey with a visiting training sailing ship below; Trislander over Alderney, whose airport may be seen in the background; the island of Herm on a hazy autumn day, with Sark in the background; Trislander's single-pilot-panel — very functional, with mixture knobs oddly set on top
At the end of 1969 Aurigny picked up another challenge when with only one month's notice BUA ceased to operate their service from Alderney to Southampton, thus cutting the direct link with the UK.
Over the years, as the services grew, eight Islanders were put into use; but a larger aircraft became necessary.
Discussions took place between Aurigny and Britten-Norman; as a result the Trislander concept was born, and the first one arrived in 1971.
Twin Otters were tried for a while, but proved uneconomic on short routes.
Gradually the Islanders were phased out, the last going to Montserrat as recently as August 1990.
Meanwhile, in light of the increasing loads on the major route between Jersey and Guernsey, especially at peak times during the summer, a Shorts 360 was acquired from Maersk, gaining the registration G- OAAS.
This aircraft is also kept busy on charter operations, and may be seen at various UK airports in summertime.
Aurigny flies its Trislanders on a dispensation from the CAA, which allows continued single-pilot operation to familiar destinations, subject to more stringent visibility criteria for both take-off and landing.
An odd result of this ruling in the moist atmosphere of the islands is that it sometimes allows company pilots to land, but not take off — a reversal of the usual situation.
The great problem now is to find a versatile and economic replacement for the ageing BN3.
Already the two short-nose versions in the fleet are earmarked for disposal, probably as spares, because they are not so easily loaded and therefore less saleable.
Both examples offer 181 kilos of baggage/goods capacity in the rear hold.
The extra 136 kilos in the stretched long-nose type gives it both much-needed freight and luggage space as well as making the aircraft easier to balance — always an interesting exercise in pre-flight planning for the pilots.
It is surprising how much passenger loyalty is expressed towards these great old aircraft.
They are seen as very safe, with three engines — those dependable Lycoming 0-540-E4C5 piston units delivering up to 260 hp each.
Drawbacks are that they are carburetted, requiring much wristwork from the driver on the hefty levers which control the warm air intakes.
They are very noisy, especially towards the rear in the plane of the propeller arcs.
There is a lack of creature comforts that customers of other airlines tend to take for granted.
For example, not only is there no flight attendant, there is no toilet — and even if there were, there is no aisle to get to it.
Once you're on, you're in your cosy two-seater couch for the duration of the flight.
Tough luck if you get to sit next to an excessively bulky person!
Passengers like the informal atmosphere, the excellent visibility and the rapid loading and unloading through the aircraft's five doors.
Luggage is delivered within five minutes, pets can travel with you, and many weird and odd-sized pieces of impedimenta are carried without complaint.
Most of all, for regular travellers the sheer familiarity of the operation with its outstanding safety record and short check-in times are major plus points.
Many passengers specially request to sit in the row of seats immediately behind the pilot, and you can see them checking out the instruments with the guide published in the airline's in-flight magazine.
I suspect they award points for skill in flying and for artistic achievement too!
It is difficult to see what other aeroplane could deliver the combination of ruggedness, economy of operation, short-field capability and safety that this unusual aircraft can.
Yet it appears increasingly anachronistic in an age of multi-crew turbine commuters, none of which seem able to serve  an island like Alderney without requiring a total rebuild of the taxiways and runway there.
The airport already takes up a significant proportion of the island's land area, and lengthening the runway will be difficult and expensive for the fragile economy.
But for now, pilots like the Trislander as one of the few aircraft which allows real flying in today's increasingly automated world.
Skill counts, as does experience, particularly in the peculiar sub-climate of the islands.
Many would-be Aurigny aircrew, some very experienced indeed, have come, tried, failed and gone their way.
Those who remain, generally with long service, are a dedicated lot, proud of their unique service.
Long-time passengers of Aurigny tend to take the operation for granted; it is the equivalent of the old-time village bus to them.
Last-minute check-ins are common.
Newer customers are more cautious, and their reactions vary.
One American protested loudly, ‘Gee, Myrtle, ah've gotta getta picture of this-heah airplane.
They'd nevah believe it back home otherwise!’
Others enquire anxiously about the state of the sole pilot's health.
One recently refused to fly at all without two pilots aboard, even though it was pointed out to him that there was only one set of controls.
The vast majority recognise that the short sectors, three engines and stringent safety standards offer as much security as with more glamorous operations.
Consistently departing on time in a multi-sector, tightly scheduled environment requires considerable concentration of effort by the pilots, but also teamwork from the engineers and ground handlers.
Over the years Aurigny has honed this to a fine art, and new pilots have to work hard to get up to the requisite standard.
More recently, increased air traffic, tightened procedures, and stricter operating limits have made it harder to achieve.
Even so, on-time departures are made on a very high proportion of flights.
The co-operation of air traffic control is central.
Pilots and controllers in the Channel Islands understand one another 's problems very well and in a way which is perhaps without parallel in British civil aviation.
Other than for the first flight of the day, engine run-ups are not deemed necessary because the aircraft's engines are almost always warm, so off-chock to take-off times are often three minutes or less.
It all helps to keep to an extremely pressurised schedule.
Left: Aurigny's sole turbine type, a Shorts 360.
Trislanders are seen at Alderney's down home’ little airport below, and at Dinard's more palatial Pleurtuit right.
Note the tail support and dinky passenger steps.
Many people do not realise that the ancient bailiwicks of Jersey and Guernsey are not actually part of the United Kingdom, though they have chosen to be part of its air traffic control and aviation legislation systems.
It is a tribute to the smoothness of the operation that many private pilots do not realise that they have effectively moved into another country's airspace when they enter the Jersey zone.
It is in this environment that the Trislander has made its mark.
In a situation where many short sectors are to be flown, with minimal turn-round times, not only does the crew co-ordination have to be well-drilled, but also the aeroplane has to be right for the job.
It is here that the strange, but extraordinarily useful design of the BN3 scores.
There are eighteen seats in nine rows, including the pilot.
The seat next to him is usually left empty, partly for weight and C of G considerations, but also because some of the aircraft have dual controls.
No one has yet hijacked a Trislander, but theoretically it could happen.
Access to the row behind the pilot is gained from his door on the right of the aircraft.
The next two rows are accessed from a portside door, the next two from starboard, and so on along the aeroplane, except that the last row has a door to itself.
Rapid embarkation and unloading is achieved via metal steps shuffled around from door to door.
Passenger and freight door warning lights proliferate in front of the pilot.
Passengers have been known to release the door handles inadvertently in flight, and even to pull the quick-release emergency windows in mistake for door handles when they are in a hurry to disembark.
Fortunately, these are rare occurrences and capable of quick resolution.
On inter-island sectors when conditions are suitable, routes are flown on special VFR clearances, often not above 1,000 feet.
This is a splendid opportunity to enjoy the fantastic visibility from the Trislander's big windows, for many passengers the first time they have really had much of a view from an aircraft.
On a sparkling spring day the vista is quite superb, while the famed Channel Islands' sunsets can be enjoyed in all their technicolored splendour.
Left: village street near St. Malo, where many islanders have second homes within easy reach of the airport.
Above: forty knot winds batter the Guernsey coast — the islands have some interesting weather.
Right: Dinan, a pretty medieval town just under where you turn onto Dinard's localiser.
Routes to England and France are normally flown at flight levels 50 and 40 respectively, and present an opportunity for a reasonable period in  cruise mode.
Southampton and Bournemouth controllers are well used to the Trislander, and neatly slot its 130 knots into faster traffic.
The laid-back attitude of some of the French controllers takes a little getting used to, although it sometimes helps considerably.
Knowing enough of the language to understand what everyone else is saying is a decided plus.
There is usually less traffic around, but the sang-froid flying of some French private pilots makes for the occasional interesting arrival, with the Mark One Eyeball the Aurigny pilot's best friend.
Sadder occasions occur ambulance charters need to be carried out, typically to Southampton with a patient who cannot be treated satisfactorily in the islands.
Recently a French girl who was the victim of a (thankfully rare) brutal attack on the Guernsey cliffs was transported to intensive care facilities in this way.
The aircraft will take up to two stretchers with care attendants.
Now and then someone's final flight takes place when Aurigny undertakes a ‘coffin charter’ to transfer a corpse to another island or to the mainland for burial or cremation.
Not a place to be superstitious, when you are alone at night up there with a casket!
To complete the pilot's workload, there are sometimes freight or passenger charters.
The CAA has ruled, as part of the single-pilot dispensation, that the flight must be made two-crew if the destination has not been visited by the commander twice within the preceding six months.
As most of the Trislanders are equipped with only one set of controls, navigator/radio operators still live on.
It is difficult to imagine a public transport setting where the combination of infinitely (and rapidly) varying weather and interesting manual flying in arguably one of Europe's most beautiful areas can be bettered.
Certainly, these factors, combined with an agreeable set of colleagues and a relaxed but vigilant management style, have meant over 800 hours of the most enjoyable flying that I have experience.
For over five million passengers, Aurigny has become part of their holiday memories or a vital link with the outside world.
I like to think they found it fun flying, too.
ALL YOU WANTED TO KNOW ABOUT LEANING
Proper leaning gives you not just more mpg but a healthier engine too, says John Gratton.
Charles Lindbergh had an eventful war.
He helped Henry Ford set up the huge factory at Willow Run where B-24s were to be mass-produced.
Later he worked as a test pilot for Chance Vought, who arranged his secondment as an ‘observer’ with the USAAF in the Pacific.
He flew many combat missions with F4U Corsair and P- 38 Lightning squadrons…
‘…after my second run, however, I noticed that my wingman was circling overhead.
In reply to my radio query he replied that he was low on fuel.
I asked him how much was remaining in his tanks.
He replied, ‘About 175 gallons’.
It was more than enough.
I told him to pull his engine rpm down to 1,600, to put his mixture control to auto-lean and to open his throttle wide enough to stay in loose formation with me…
When we landed at Owi he had seventy gallons left — enough for a full hour's flight throttled down.
I had 260 gallons in my tanks, although we both had exactly the same amount of fuel when we took off from Wake Island in the morning.
The trouble is that the newer pilots, and many of the older ones, cruise their engines at too high an rpm and often leave their mixture rich during an entire flight…
We called the pilots for a meeting in the evening.
I talked to them for half an hour on maximum range and fuel economy.
Fifty years on, the message has been lost.
That many private pilots do not appreciate the advantages of leaning is often not their own fault.
Some textbooks imply that it doesn't matter; few instructors teach it; and some schools even have a policy not to lean.
Let's look at the fact, then the correct path should be clearer.
I believe that leaning, like look-out, is a basic technique which we should apply not only above 5,000 feet, not only on Tuesdays but every time we fly.
Some years ago a newly-qualified private pilot, trained at a school which taught mixture-rich , did a quick conversion onto a smart 300 hp six-seat retractable and took three friends overseas for the day.
He made several mistakes.
The accident investigation determined the duration of that fatal flight, the fuel on take-off (from the tanker driver), the cruising altitude and the wind, hence the speed and power setting.
Leaned, as per the flight manual, the cruise fuel consumption would have 12gph.
Rich, it was nineteen; and as a result two died, two were seriously injured and a beautiful aeroplane was needlessly written-off.
There have been several more such incidents since then.
The earliest aero-engines had only the crudest form of speed control, a ‘blip’ or magneto on-off switch.
Since then levers have sprouted to give pilots close control of increasingly powerful engines.
Carburation is the process by which air and fuel vapour are mixed in suitable proportions: the throttle controls the amount of mixture passing through the carburettor, and the mixture lever its quality.
Although air and fuel vapour will burn when mixed in proportions ranging between 8:1 and 20:1 (by weight), complete combustion occurs only at an air/fuel ratio of about 15:1.
With this ‘chemically correct’ mixture, all the hydrogen and carbon in the fuel combine with all the oxygen in the air to form carbon dioxide and water.
In practice, ‘chemically correct’ is not always appropriate.
On take-off, for example, it would result in excessively high combustion temperatures and detonation.
To avoid this and also to facilitate starting, engines are set to run about fifteen per cent rich on the ground.
The excess fuel cools the engine — acceptable for short periods in the climb but inefficient and expensive for extended cruise.
The details of leaning recommendations may vary in different makes and models of engine, but for Lycomings, for example, the rule is to use rich mixture at all times above 75 per cent but lean whenever at constant power below 75 per cent .
75 per cent of what?
Not of rpm but of ‘sea-level rated power’, i.e. the power produced at rated (or red-line) rpm at sea-level under ISA conditions.
On the O-235, some versions are rated at 118 hp at 2,700 rpm, most at 112 hp with 2,600 rpm corresponding to useful percentage powers at various levels — typically 55,65 and 75 per cent power at sea level, three, six and nine thousand feet.
In the climb, air gets thinner as altitude increases; as the mixture becomes progressively richer, combustion temperature and power output decrease.
The Old Wives' Tale ‘Don't lean below 5,000 feet’ resulted from the fact that above 5,000 feet, full throttle at red-line rpm gives less than 75 per cent of rated power, therefore one can lean.
When climbing at full throttle, the 2,300 rpm or so of your fixed-pitch propeller probably delivers less than 75 per cent.
The C152 flight manual allows a safety factor, and advises pilots to keep mixture rich when climbing below 3,000 feet but to lean above it.
Many pilots misread this as ‘do not lean at all below 3,000 feet’, which is quite wrong.
Lead, in the form of tetra-ethyl lead, is added when brewing avgas to improve its anti-knock or anti-detonation property, necessary for use in high-compression engines.
A scavenging agent, ethylene di-bromide or EDB, is also added to ensure that the lead compounds in the exhaust gases remain in vapour form, otherwise metallic lead would be deposited inside the engine.
Problem: EDB works well at high temperature/high power, but not when the exhaust is relatively cool, at low power.
Aero-engines are designed for long life, which is adversely affected by harsh throttle movements, rapid heating and rapid cooling.
‘Handle like eggs’ with care, understanding and consideration.
The following advice applies to normally-aspirated engines driving fixed-pitch propellers.
Starting.
Be quick to adjust rpm to 1,200 after start.
Until warm, high revs cause excessive wear.
Taxying.
Use not less than 1,000 rpm to minimise the risk of lead fouling, but no more than are needed to achieve the correct speed with minimum braking.
Take-off.
Always set rich unless the airfield elevation is above 4,000 feet.
Climb.
Keep mixture rich to 3,000 feet.
Leaning is permissible above 3,000 feet, but check in you flight manual to verify that climbing rpm gives you less than 75 per cent power at that altitude.
If in doubt, stay rich .
Cruise.
It is important to remember that the range performance shown in your aircraft flight manual will not be achieved unless the mixture is leaned.
The makers of continental engines recommend only one technique.
Lycomings offer the choice of two: ‘max power ’, defined as the ‘leanest mixture which produces highest IAS from a given rpm and manifold pressure’, and ‘best economy’m which defines itself, i.e. the cruise technique which will require less fuel for a given distance but will take more time.
The following is general advice for Lycoming operators; but  whichever make of engine you use, the flight manual tells you how to get the best out of your particular model — which may well differ in detail from what follows.
An EGT gauge makes leaning easy.
For best economy set your required power and lean to peak temperature.
Max power is a little more involved:
1
set throttle/rpm for 75 per cent power at that level
2
lean to peak EGT (but don't exceed 1,650 °); this is the reference temperature — set red marker to it
3
reset mixture rich and desired cruise power
4
lean until EGT is 125 degrees below peak
An EGT gauge provides accurate information, enabling the pilot to monitor and control engine conditions precisely.
The value of fuel saved should soon more than cover the cost of purchase and installation.
Older instruments use a single temperature probe in one exhaust pipe.
Modern electronic indicators have a probe in each exhaust pipe, and can show temperature individually or scan to give an average reading.
Not only this, the latest multi-function instruments can scan and monitor all engine conditions — oil T & P, CHT, OAT, etc. — and warn of any abnormality before it has time to result in damage.
If you have no EGT gauge, still lean.
At top of climb, set cruise power and clear any ice with ten seconds of carb. heat.
For max power , gradually lean until tacho and/or ASI readings peak.
For best economy proceed as above, but continue to lean until the engine begins to run roughly or the rpm begins to drop rapidly.
Richen to restore even running and to regain most of the lost rpm.
Descent.
A cruise descent is kinder than a glide for the engine: try to make this your normal procedure except when inappropriate e.g. on a practice forced landing.
Apply carb heat, then select the rpm to give your required rate of descent.
(Note: 100 rpm = approx 100 fpm.)
Carb heat makes the air less dense, and so richens the mixture without using the mixture lever, which should remain in its cruise position.
Before levelling:— at 200 feet to go, mixture rich , carb heat off — 50 feet to go, select cruise power and level off.
If continuing at this new level, re-lean as before.
This is the best procedure, and it is without risk to your engine for descents of up to 3,000 feet.
Going full rich at top of descent will combine very rich mixture with low combustion temperature, ideal for lead fouling which, unlike carbon, cannot be burnt off.
Cruise descents through more than 3,000 feet will require slight richening at intervals during the descent.
Approach and landing.
Mixture full rich in pre-landing checks, so that full power is available in the event of a goaround.
Whenever you lean, do so carefully and sensitively.
On the one hand,not leaning
wastes fuel
causes lead fouling on spark plugs
causes lead fouling on valves, with loss of compression and power, then rough running.
On the other hand over-leaning , particularly at high power can cause
burnt valve seats and faces
cracked cylinder heads
Damaged spark plugs and exhaust systems all resulting from overheating which you may not detect if your aircraft has no EGT gauge.
That's the bad news.
The good news is that proper leaning really does work.
The school at which I was CFI taught leaning in Exercise 4 and throughout the PPL course.
Plug-fouling was eliminated as a source of unserviceability, and no over-heating problems occurred in over ten years.
We also saved a lot of fuel.
Leaning matters .
A typical light aircraft cruising at 4,000 feet will burn about five gph in rich mixture, 4.5 when leaned.
The apparent eleven per cent improvement actually rises to sixteen per cent because the fuel is being burnt more efficiently, giving more power and higher speed.
Leaned, that aircraft will fly 116 miles on the same fuel which takes it only 100 miles in rich.
The higher the altitude, the greater is the gain in economy and efficiency from leaning: make it your SOP regardless of altitude.
Using Lindbergh's techniques, fighter squadrons increased their radius of action from 500 to 700 miles on the same fuel, a huge tactical advantage in that island-hopping war.
Lean, like Lindbergh, and watch your fuel-gauges smile.
FOUGA MAGISTER
The old French military primary trainer is still a very good machine for introducing pilots gently to jets, while giving them lots of fun too, finds Bob Grimstead.
‘If I close my eyes, I can still feel the g build as the world smoothly revolves and that bright red tip-tank carves its silent arc across the azure of my mind's eye’.
As the speed builds through 200 knots I feel the increased pitch sensitivity, my bottom lifting from the parachute pack as I press the twin pitots on this tiny nose further towards the gleaming layer of snowy stratocumulus below.
With 250 on the clock I heave the how-heavy stick to the right and when we have twenty degrees of bank I brace, pull and reverse the roll to watch our nose carve a lazy anti-clockwise circle around the sapphire sky.
Shadows and sunlight race about inside the confined cockpit while reflections of white and blue chase one another across the mirror-shiny canopy as we describe the laziest of barrel rolls.
Pulling up a little I check, relinquish the throttles and, using both hands, force the stick left against the air loads to again watch earth and sky revolve effortlessly as we describe the easiest-ever aileron roll.
No elevator input is required, there is no treadling the rudder to keep the nose above the horizon and the power is simply left at 19,500 rpm to describe this most effortless of manoeuvres.
We complete if five degrees nose-down, still hammering along at 250 knots, but I push harder to increase the speed to 3400, brace my stomach, and ease back until the g-meter reads a steady four .
For what seems like an eternity (but is in fact nearer ten seconds) the unaccustomed g crushes me into the seat, my peripheral vision suffering as the nose climbs inexorably up the sky.
A quick laborious glance left and right confirms the scarlet tip-tanks equidistant below the horizon.
Coasting over the top our weight reduces as I relax the back pressure.
I glance in at the ASI — still reading 150 — then throw my heavy helmeted head back to see the white skyline creeping forward along the canopy.
Increasing the now-substantial g, I clench previously unknown aching abdominal muscles to complete the longest, slowest, highest-g loop I ever flew.
All you have ever read about the delights of fast-jet aerobatics still can't prepare you for the utter, mind-blowing super-smooth, almost silent exhilaration of the real thing!
Today my black-gloved fist grasps the most interesting stick it has held to date.
Short and purposeful like that of the Spitfire, it pivots side-to-side about its middle, its intricately-moulded grip festooned with triggers, buttons and switches for machine-guns, rockets, inboard and outboard pylon stores as well as the more conventional radio transmit and elevator trim — or should I say, ruddervator trim, because this characterful column controls Harry Prew-Smith's V-tailed Fouga Magister.
Harry, director of a well-known Nottingham car hire and sales company specialising in vintage machines, chose the Fouga as his first jet warbird because it seemed the most appropriate aeroplane for his skills.
With 2,500 hours in his Cessna 414 Chancellor he felt the 1950s Magister to be within his capabilities, being small and strong with simple systems, twin engines, reasonable speeds, manual controls and the straightforward handling of an almost-straight wing.
No ejection seats reduced its risk and cost, and meant less to go wrong, while is being self-contained, needing neither ground air supply nor electrics, made it more flexible than higher-performance types.
Once a blue Patrouille de France aircraft, G-FUGA is now Red-Arrows scarlet, and the only one flying in the Uk.
Harry bought it last year to instigate an eighteen-month ground-up rebuild by a dedicated team of experienced Fouga engineers.
Since its 720- hour engines were time-expired, they replaced them with two low-time 200-hour ex-Belgian powerplants found in the USA.
During his search for parts he has built up a colossal spares stock, but as the type has been used by so many air forces around the world and is still in service in places, components are not difficult to obtain — although they can be pricey.
When one of the clocks failed Aerospatiale charged him £1,200 for a replacement!
Complaints about over-pricing tend to be met with a Gallic shrug, a disarming smile and the explanation:‘Mais c'est militaire!’
With an airframe life of 10,000 hours this 3,900-hour aeroplane has been relatively little used.
Since its second first flight from North Weald last September Harry has used his red rocket for both business and pleasure.
This summer he displayed it at air shows around the UK and in France and went to Malaga in it.
The standard cruise power setting of 18,500 feet equates to a TAS of 260 knots for a dry-tanks range of 300 nm.
Although there is no specific luggage compartment, bags go in a former radio stowage on its humped back, while the nose area (which now houses a 45- pound lead ballast weight replacing the guns) could be modified to take an overnight bag if needed.
‘Myriad instruments and switches initially make the cockpits look complex’.
Rear cockpit above features a periscope that seemingly makes the front occupant's head transparent.
Emergency external canopy release below resembles an office fire alarm.
This aeroplane is smaller and lighter than many piston twins; four of us easily pushed it from Donnington Aviation's hangar.
The sleek half-fish-half-insect-looking machine with its low snout, long canopy, slim double-tapered fuselage, squat trailing-link undercarriage and 110-degree V-tail immediately recalled memories of the shiny blue mounts of la Patrouille — though the ends of its tanks remain un-dented by the games of ‘tap-the-tip-tank’ which those characters played on boring transits.
As well as the obvious curiosity of the drag-reducing high aspect-ratio butterfly tails with their unusual quadrant-shaped mass-balance  weights, the Fouga has small plates on the trailing edges of its ailerons and ruddervators to increase control effectiveness.
The long, surprisingly thick mid-mounted wing, a legacy of the Fouga company's glider-producing background, should endow low induced drag, although the myriad accessory-cooling slots and intakes on the engine casing and odd lumps and bumps of antennas on the aft body must dirty the otherwise-clean tandem configuration.
With only thirteen degrees of wing sweep sea-level maximum speed is still an exhilarating 349 knots IAS (although  is 400 knots and max Mach is a surprisingly high .82).
The airframe is immaculate, with a wonderful paint job kept pristine with the help of a large bag of polishing cloths by the hangar wall.
Construction was clearly to a very high standard, with fine flush-  riveting on the thick wing skins' upper surfaces.
Harry demonstrated their strength by whipping off his shoes and walking from root to tip with neither give or wrinkling.
Turbomeca Marborés are ‘unsophisticated single-stage centrifugal-compressor straight turbojets’.
Jet-pipes are angled out ten degrees.
Short gear legs sit the aeroplane conveniently low.
The long wing with its integral airbrakes is a legacy of Fouga's glider-producing background.
‘This sleek, half-fish-half-insect looking machine…’
Drag-reducing high-aspect-ratio butterfly tail has unusual quadrant-shaped mass balance weights (Mike Vines photos)
Because the seats are austere military metal pans — and for prudence — we each donned parachutes before climbing aboard.
The aft-hinged canopies are held up by a pair of stays with knurled locking sleeves.
It is easy to put your left toe into the low fuselage-side kick-in step, swing your right foot over the sill and down onto the cockpit floor to settle into the surprisingly upright seat.
Their height is adjustable, and the rudder pedals can be wound fore and aft while the five-point harnesses have lockable inertia reels on their shoulder straps.
The myriad instruments and switches initially make the cockpits appear complex, but they are actually about as straightforward as they could be in a jet trainer deliberately well-equipped with supplementary systems (although the snug front cockpit demands good house-keeping discipline with charts and lwt-down books).
The flat left console holds circuit-breakers, lighting controls and a stubby, emergency, canopy-smashing ice-pick.
Ahead of it is the controller for the simple air conditioning and pressurisation system.
Unpressurised to 10,000 feet, from 10,000 to 20,000 feet cabin altitude stays at 10,000 feet, and above 20,000 feet a differential pressure of 211 mbs is maintained with further climb.
Cooled engine bleed air is controlled by a single rotary knob marked closed and pressurise , with spring-loaded positions either side for hotter or cooler and an over-ride demist position that ducts warm airflow to canopy and windscreen.
The insignificant flap switch is just behind the chunky throttles with their redundant rotating twist-grips for the gunsight's rangefinder and thumb-operated rocker switch for the six-segment airbrakes rotating out of both upper and lower wing surfaces.
Below them are the  fuel cock levers, and ahead of them are the emergency undercarriage buttons and extend/retract knob for alternate airbrake operation.
After selection, both these systems are manually pumped out using a fore-and-aft lever beside one's right thigh with an extending red-topped handle like a heavy walking stick.
Gear, flaps and airbrakes are all normally moved by the 250 bar hydraulics, but the flaps have no standby system.
The ASI reads from sixty to 600 knots, To its left a twin-pointer rev-counter has needles marked G and D for gauche and droit , indicating similarly enormous numbers up to 25,000 rpm (ten times a piston engine's revs)— and no, I never did work out which was which without stopping to translate.
Above this is the red-knobbed parking and emergency brake handle, to its right the Machmeter, the windshield alcohol de-icing pump, engine fire lights (as on a lightplane, without extinguishers), single fuel gauge and canopy unlocked light, HSI, artificial horizon and g-meter complete the second row, with twin jet-pipe temperature (JPT) gauges, altimeter, VSI, turn-and-slip and second altimeter below.
On the left, uncomfortably near the little flap switch, are the similarly small flat undercarriage selector and its red and green lights.
At lower left are trim and flap position indicators twin oil pressure and temperature gauges and a dual-pointer brake and hydraulic pressure dial.
The oxygen regulator is bottom centre, and to its right are switches for pitot heat, artificial horizon, the single 28-volt 2,500-watt generator and 40a/h NiCad battery with the RMI and gunsight controls.
That insignificant-looking £1,200 Breguet-made clock is clamped to the left windscreen stay and the standby compass to the right one, while a big red gear unlocked light sits atop the left glareshield in one's line of sight during the flare.
Below the main panel a tilted sub-panel holds voltmeter, transponder and radio selectors, while the right console carries the Bendix/King nav-com, ADF and KNS 80 RNav.
Behind the radios are the left-right starter switch, tip-tank fuel dump switches and more circuit breakers with lovely aggressive captions such as rockets, bombs, machine guns, sights and the like.
The rear cockpit is practically identical to the front, but does have one truly unique piece of hefty-looking ironmongery: a big black binocular periscope fixed right in front of the occupant's face to look over front seater's head
This thing gave me a shock on my first flight, a back-seat familiarisation flip.
When I started circuit work that periscope, completely forgotten during the flight, made me jump just before touchdown.
With a strong crosswind I sighted over my mentor's left shoulder during the approach, only moving my head from side to side in the final stages to get a symmetrical perspective for the flare.
Squinting again along the left of the nose I suddenly realised that his head had become completely transparent!
A quick check confirmed that, looking straight ahead, the threshold would appear where his helmet had been It took a dumbfounded second to realise that this illusion was caused by that blasted periscope, fulfilling its designed job, in the centre of my field of view.
Strange indeed to look through one's instructor's head!
Despite just thirteen degrees of wing sweep max Mach is a surprising 0.82.
‘Fougabatics in the clear upper air were an almost religious experience…low-speed handling is every bit as gentle and benign…’
Two other images from that initial sortie stick in my mind.
Totally unprepared for an unexpected 5g demonstration loop, I realised I had been caught napping, and glanced at the g-meter in time for it to disappear as my sight blacked out.
A belated attempt at abdomen-straining brought it swimming back into fuzzy focus, but that dial was all I saw during the remainder of an interminable fast-jet loop.
After a touch-and-go I was handed control at 200 knots in a typically military 75-degree banked turn onto downwind.
I commanded right hand and feet onto stick and pedals but got no reaction.
A second, more concerted attempt resulted in jerky, laborious movement of my fist from its parking-place on my thigh, but still no foot movement.
A glance at the g-meter again revealed the problem: if your feet weigh three times what your muscles expect they will take more effort to move!
One at a time I heaved them up onto the pedals, just in time to roll out downwind.
Back on the ground before start-up, helmets are donned and canopies closed and locked to keep out the engine noise.
The early Turbomeca Marbore IIs fitted to G-FUGA are unsophisticated single-stage centrifugal-compressor straight turbojets with minimal automatic controls, so the pilot is entirely responsible for their well-being at low rpm, and woe betide him if he tries to hurry them.
Since it carries the sole generator (and hydraulic pump) the left engine is fired up first.
Flick the switch left, watch the rpm build through 1,000 and, while pressing the igniter button in a bullet-shaped fairing on its top, inch the fuel cock gently forward.
As the fire lights the JPT rises and a hum of gradually increasing pitch and volume begins to pervade the area.
Above 200 ° C the flame is self-sustaining, so the igniter is released while the cock is gradually opened further and the hum builds through a howl to a shrill scream.
At 4,000 rpm the starter is switched off, its light checked out, the fuel cock is moved all the way forward and the engine stabilises at around 7,000 rpm and 400 ° C with the most unbelievably skull-splitting shrill piercing shriek.
If this is what we hear inside with the canopies sealed, God knows how it must sound out on the tarmac!
Now the throttle is carefully advanced to achieve 10,000 eardrum-battering rpm for the generator to cut in, and the process is repeated with the second engine.
With both stable the pressurisation is selected on to the accompaniment of popping eardrums, a whiff of  hot exhaust fumes and a reduction in noise.
Throttles are advanced to 13,000 rpm to start taxying, but once rolling, 10,000 rpm keeps us moving nicely.
Lacking nose-wheel steering, directional control is achieved by differential braking, but this was not difficult after a few initial experimental wiggles — although even at the end of the day I still found myself pointlessly pushing the rudder pedals on the corners.
Hugging the ground like a Lotus the Magister seems faster than it really is.
At the holding point we selected flap fifteen, exercised the airbrakes out and back again (they take a second or two to run each way), zeroed the tail trim, turned on the heaters for the twin pitot heads ahead of the windscreen and checked the cockpit for red lights, any of which means no-go.
That was it.
Slowly and carefully advancing the throttles, mindful that the fuel controller has no effect below 16,000 rpm or 110 knots, I wound the engines up to full power against the brakes.
Above about 17,000 rpm the horrible banshee wail is replaced by a more businesslike roar accompanied by a pungent, pulse-stimulating smell of burnt kerosene through the air-conditioning, while the nose-wheel strut compresses under the effect of 1,760 pounds of thrust.
Checking the revs at their 22,500 maximum, temperatures and pressures OK with no red lights, I released the brakes.
Rather than rip-snorting acceleration we got a gentle but smooth and steady push in the back.
Little dabs of left brake counteracted the crosswind for the first couple of hundred yards, but above sixty knots the rudders became effective and she was easy to align just beside the centreline lights to spare us their jolting.
The nose-wheel is normally lifted at seventy knots to rotate at ninety, but because of the wind I held her down to 95 for a clean lift-off at a hundred after a run of a thousand yards or so.
Checking a positive climb and flicking up the quick-retracting gear I concentrated on the slow process of building speed, getting the flaps in at 130 and maintaining a gentle increase in height with steady acceleration to 170 knots, when the nose can be raised for 3,000 fpm to show on the VSI as she really starts to go.
Without oxygen we were limited to 10,000 feet, but the published ceiling is FL360 at max weight, increasing well into the forties as fuel is burned.
Up at these dizzy heights the aerodynamic damping is much reduced and margins for airframe and engine are tighter, so both must be handled with care.
This unconventional-looking machine quickly gained my trust and deep affection.
You would never know by its handling that it had anything but a normal tail unit.
The similarly-configured Beech Bonanza suffers from an irritating snaking wiggling Dutch roll at higher speeds, but this flying V-sign ran straight as an arrow an as smooth as silk.
Although later Magisters had power=boosted ailerons all controls on this model are manually operated through push-pull rods.
Aileron forces are fine at low speeds, but as the IAS increases they get heavier, despite their balance tabs, until at 250 knots, using one's biceps most efficiently, one can just achieve an acceptable roll-rate of sixty or so degrees per second to the left, while backhanded right rolls are truly slow rolls.
Pitch control remains light and effective at all speeds; even in the tightest turns very little backpressure is needed, and you don't have to raise the nose much for bank angles up to 75 or 80 degrees.
At all speeds and in all axes the little red wonder is extremely responsive and agile.
Our Fougabatics in the clear calm upper air were an almost religious experience.
It confirms my theory that low-powered but aerodynamically-sound aircraft are generally far nicer to fly than those high-powered bricks whose great drag is masked by a big engine.
The Fouga's low speed handling is every bit as genuine and benign.
Having eventually been persuaded to slow down its clean stall occurs, after lots of buffet and some aileron snatching, at a little under ninety knots.
Airbrakes speed the deceleration, but their burbling tends to mask pre-stall buffet while the actual speed is increased a bit.
Fifteen degrees of flap induce marked buffet at 92 knots, with the stick very noticeably jerking from side to side at a stall  speed of 85 knots.
With undercarriage down and full flap these symptoms are further exaggerated, and the speed comes back to below eighty.
The book says the aeroplane has a normal spin, but this is only approved without fuel in the tips.
All positive-g aerobatics except flicks are allowed to airframe limits of  (we used & formula;) Unusually, aeros are conducted at the constant power setting of 19,500 rpm.
Like that other Magister this aircraft is supposed to have an odd, unpleasant nose-down pitching diversion with excess sideslip.
I found that moderate slip angles produce no nasty consequences, but was restrained from further experimentation with the admonition that the aircraft describes what sounds like a brisk departure into a fast outside flick roll with the nose going hard down to exceed its negative-g limit.
I decided not press the point.
Formation flying on the photographic Aztec was easier than I had expected considering the airframe's sleekness and the early jet engines' reputation for poor acceleration.
Once slowed with the airbrakes one could manoeuvre close in with great accuracy, but with fuel running low it was time to descend to base.
The foolproof fuel system has interconnected front and rear fuselage flexible tanks holding 255 and 475 litres.
The aft tank pump feeds the engines via an accumulator to give thirty seconds of full-power inverted flight at sea level.
When the combined level drops below 630 litres a float valve opens, allowing fuel from the 122-litre tip tanks to transfer to the front one under bleed-air pressure.
That's it.
Average consumption is around 15 litres a minute, which, with a total capacity of 974 litres, gives just over an hour's practical safe endurance.
If Fouga-flying's exhilaration makes you forgetful a low fuel Bingo light warns of twelve minutes remaining.
At Harry's specially-negotiated price of 20p per litre (less than a third the price of avgas and cheaper than we can buy heating oil — partly because there is no tax of avtur) his kerosene costs £180 per hour — not bad for Spitfire speeds and climb performance with twin-engine safety!
Clean, the Fouga glides well, so it is easy to throttle back to idle and float home.
Icing conditions should be avoided, though, because the first components to suffer a build-up are the throttle-rods in the intake ducts ahead of the engines.
Make a power adjustment with ice on these and chunks will break off, getting sucked into the compressors to the accompaniment of loud and expensive pops and bangs.
If you do encounter ice, you wind up the throttle friction and don't touch them until back on the ground.
Needless to say, the manual prohibits deliberate flight in icing.
Setting up an approach starts by controlling this clean machine's speed with the airbrakes on the 1,500-foot downwind leg.
Initially I found the switch confusing, assuming it worked in the (to me, obvious) sense up for out and down for in.
Finding things the reverse, at first I had to consciously think switch down for slow down .
Airbrake position can only be confirmed by looking at them.
Once the speed is below the 140- knot flap limit fifteen degrees can be lowered and the gear extended, smartly followed by a power increase to stabilise the speed at 130 knots.
This is maintained until lowering full (forty) flap on short final, when it is reduced to 120 with a further increase of power to hold it there.
Flap and gear cause minimal trim changes, but with the limits so close to the target speeds accuracy is needed — although the Fouga turned out to be quite speed-stable, making this less difficult than expected.
With her rather low power to weight ratio and low-tech engines, while being no Lightning the Fouga exhibits the classic jet characteristics of low drag, high wing-loading, slow spool-up and lack of instant propwash-induced lift with power.
Even with full flap the aeroplane is quite clean, so maximum drag is used to get the power setting up into the quick-response range for a safe goaround.
Similarly, the approach angle is a lot shallower than for other jets — about two degrees, judged by the PAPIs showing three reds and a pink.
As in any jet, thrust controls speed and elevator maintains glide angle on a continuous curving base leg to a four-mile final at a thousand feet or a little below.
Ten feet up at the threshold the throttles are closed and a token flare made almost incredibly close to the tarmac — the sensation of speed quite exhilarating at 120 knots and two feet — when the soft, forgiving kneeling-knuckle undercarriage absorbs any small residual descent-rate to give a smooth gentle touchdown.
At first I spent so long feeling for the ground the engines had run down to idle, and there was a long delay before they wound back up again to produce noticeable acceleration.
After a few touch-and-goes I was able to clean-up slickly: throttles carefully forward a couple of inches at main-wheel touch (no automatic fuel control below 16,000 rpm), hold the nose-wheel an inch or two off the tarmac and retract the airbrakes (thumb switch up for speed-up), a bit more throttle, flaps to fifteen (toggle switch on side console forward — don't even contemplate touching that too-obtrusive up-and-down flap-shaped undercarriage selector in the corner of you eye on the panel ahead), more power, the roar deepens with a steady push from behind, glance at the ASI, full throttle, speed building through ninety, rotate, positive climb, gear up , speed 120, flaps up speed 170, crank on the bank and we are downwind again.
After several normal circuits we sampled the failure cases, starting with the simple loss of hydraulics.
Twisting the rotary speedbrake selector on the front left console to out enables them to be pumped out easily, while pressing the red emerg undercarriage button alongside allows the right biceps to be exercised 26 times in cranking down the wheels.
With no back-up flap system the aeroplane is set up for a slightly flatter flapless approach at 130 knots.
Although the nose is a little higher and power a bit less the landing is still straightforward.
Because the Fouga's jet-pipes are sneakily angled outwards ten degrees a simple right engine failure is a non-event except for the reduction in climb.
There is hardly any yaw, and without the rudder input the slip ball barely moved half its width.
The engine-out approach is flown ten knots faster with only fifteen degrees of flap.
Losing the left engine is trickier since it drives both the single generator and the sole hydraulic pump.
The back-up handle is again heaved back and forth for undercarriage and, after quickly selecting press cold on the air-conditioning panel to combat the rising personal temperature, a curving 130- knot approach is flown with quite high power on the remaining engine.
I would not relish a low-level left-engine-out go-around since the undercarriage cannot be raised and single-engine gear-down climb would be earth-tangential.
On a full-stop landing the nose-wheel is  carefully held off (so as not to touch the dolly-wheel in the ventral strake) down to forty-ish knots when the stick hits the back stop and the nose gently subsides.
The brakes can be used fiercely to minimise the roll, but we let aerodynamic drag do most of the work, leaving them to slow us to taxi speed and steer onto the taxiway (still ineffectually prodding the rudder pedals).
Stopping the scarlet screamer on the apron we set the park brake despite a handbook note not to do so after a sortie, since this only applies to heavy-footed Gauls in hot countries.
Winding down this little jet Ferrari was a tremendous anti-climax — I would like to have gone on flying it all week.
The only oddities were the (apparently quite normal) clouds of smoke exuded by the Marbore IIs on shut-down and the speed with which the fuel bowser zoomed around the corner to refill our tanks.
The driver's eagerness must be something to do with Harry being a good customer, a hint to both turbojet fuel consumption and his enthusiastic utilisation.
The Fouga, designed as a primary jet trainer, was and still is a very good machine for introducing pilots gently to jets' special characteristics — while giving them lots of fun too.
If you want to see for yourself what it can do, keep your eyes open for Harry's flame-red Fouga on the display circuit.
One person could pull G-FUGA from its hangar; it is self-contained and now I can start, taxi and fly it.
Knowing how lovely it is the temptation is tremendous…
Unfortunately the canopies are locked by an odd-shaped chunky steel key, there is only one, and it stays firmly zipped in the pocket of Harry's red flying overalls.
But when I close my eyes, strain my stomach and clench my fist I can still feel the g build as the world smoothly revolves and I see that bright red tip tank carve its silent arc across the azure of my mind's sky and remember.
FLYING IN NEW ZEALAND
Volcanos, glaciers, forests, lakes, a golden ninety-mile beach and arid deserts.
James Allan flies economically with the air-minded Kiwis.
Ka u ki mantanuku;Ka u ki Matarangi.
In March 1992 I returned to New Zealand for the first time in over a dozen years, to sample again what light aviation there has to offer visitors.
A great deal had changed since 1980, but the general air of enthusiasm that pervades the New Zealand light aviation scene didn't seem to have diminished in the slightest.
New Zealand's inhabitants are colloquially called ‘Kiwis’ after their native nocturnal flightless birds, but the average Kiwi is a much more aviation-oriented creature than this pseudonym would lead you to believe.
Before using a UK PPL in a ZK-registered aircraft visitors must obtain a New Zealand licence validation.
This involves a visit to one of three major aero clubs.
In North Island you can get this validation near Auckland from the Auckland Aero Club at Ardmore aerodrome or from the Wellington Flight Centre at the capital city's airport.
In South Island where I happened to be, validation is available only from the Canterbury Aero Club at Christchurch Airport.
The procedure is to spend a few hours (as much as you feel you need) studying the NZ Visual Flight Guide (an officially-produced, loose-leaf sort of Flyer VFR Organiser or Pooley's Guide equivalent) and getting to know the various local vagaries of VFR, as well as learning to read an interpret the New Zealand half-million charts.
That seems to be not too difficult a task — although you will find there are several important differences between New Zealand and UK practices.
The problems came later, when you are given an exam paper: twenty questions to be answered within one hour ten minutes.
The first ten have to be done with no reference books (What are the local VFR Met minima?
What is the runway group rating system?
What symbol do they use out in New Zealand to mark a helicopter landing pad?)
The other ten require you to delve into the ICAO charts and VFR guide to find the answers.
That was all pretty straightforward too.
I ended with nineteen correct out of twenty (get just fourteen correct and you'll just scrape a pass).
In exchange for that and about £35 worth of New Zealand dollars, I got my validation from Canterbury AC's CFI, Murray Fowler.
I got a lot more useful background about flying around both North and South Islands from Murray too.
This New Zealand validation system doesn't give you a chit of paper.
If you make good use of the contacts it forces you to make in Ardmore, Wellington or Christchurch, you can get a very useful insight into the local scene that helps prepare you for the fascinating flying that lies ahead.
New Zealand has a land area some ten per cent greater than that of the United Kingdom.
Its population is around the 3.3 million mark compared with some 56 million in the UK.
So each square kilometre in New Zealand has just twelve people to support while in the UK the average density is 232.
(Even Scotland, the least densely-populated country of the UK, has 66 inhabitants per square kilometre.)
These wide-open spaces in New Zealand (and the many long kilometres of unsealed roads) have encouraged flying as an everyday means of transport, with scheduled services to over thirty airports being operated by a host of airlines, Air New Zealand, Ansett New Zealand, Mount Cook, Air Nelson, Eagle Air, Tranzair, Bell Air and Waterwings, to name just some of those.
I came across on this trip.
Light aviation is thriving too.
Every town worth speaking about seems to have its own aerodrome with a resident flying club of one sort or another.
Communities seem to want airfields and pilots around, so they don't load them with the penal rates and taxes that lead to high parking and landing charges as in this country.
In new Zealand I listened in some amusement to a heated discussion abut the diabolical liberty Milford Sound aerodrome was taking, putting up their landing charge to $7.60 (£2.30).
And that is for a popular tourist destination airfield, squeezed incredibly between mountain cliff faces in one of the most utterly spectacular pieces of scenery this world has to offer!
In general, to this visiting UK pilot, New Zealand landing and parking charges seemed to be negligible, on those occasions when they bothered to levy them at all .
Auckland (NZ's largest city, and the one into which most visitors are decanted from their 747s) has a fine international airport (with a statue to Jean Batten and a well-worth seeking-out small memorial corner in the terminal dedicated to this New Zealand pioneer pilot), but this is the last place you want to start searching for vacation VFR.
Auckland International is designed specifically for the needs of airline transport operators.
However, the facilities we private pilots require are provided quite close to Auckland by two very active GA airfields, Ardmore and North Shore.
The former has several aero clubs and schools,(Auckland Aero Club, Ardmore Flying School, Flightline Aeronautical College, Tasman Air Services etc.), with dozens of aircraft, Cessna, Piper, Grunman etc. available for visiting pilots to check out on and rent.
There is also an interesting warbirds museum (with attractions like an airworthy Dakota still flying regular pleasure flights) and an excellently stocked pilots' shop (Flight Accessories), all in an idyllic setting south of the city.
The Aero Club at North Shore Airfield claims to be the biggest in New Zealand, has an impressive, mainly Cessna, fleet, and like many other big clubs, offers fixed-wing and helicopter training, PPL, CPL, night, instrument and multi ratings, and aerobatics.
The Pilot Accessories Shop there will also supply you with any goodies you may find you need for you New Zealand flying.
North Shore's answer to Ardmore's museum is a fascinating collection of old-timers in various stages of repair, and a local squadron of the Confederate Air Force.
The capital of New Zealand is Wellington; its airport was built in the 1950s on a low-lying strip of land that emerged from the sea during an earthquake about a century earlier.
It is the only aerodrome I know where the control tower isn't on the airfield.
Instead, it stands a couple of suburban streets away from the perimeter track, complete with its house number above the door!
Wellington is a busy airline airport with several international services and connections to over thirty New Zealand destinations, but still happily accommodates light aviation activities.
There are several clubs and flying schools, such as Wellington Flight Centre with its Piper fleet.
You also find air taxi and charter companies, including the evocative Fieldair Freight which operates three Dakotas on regular freight runs from Wellington.
But the busiest GA airfield in this area lies about fifteen flying minutes north of the city, at Paraparaumu aerodrome on the Kapiti coast.
Here you  find clubs and schools like Associated Flying School, Paraparaumu Flight Training and Welair, with fleets of Pipers and Cessnas operating in skies less crowded than the air around the capital.
Near the cities of New Zealand's Mainland (as the proud inhabitants of South Island like to refer to their part of the country) you can enjoy your flying at Christchurch Airport with the Canterbury Aero Club, or not too far away at Ashburton, perhaps, piloting the Pipers of the Mid-Canterbury Aero Club.
Farther south, the city of Dunedin has two aerodrome nearby, Dunedin Airport and Taieri airfield.
The former is largely a commercial operation, but at Taieri you find the Otago Aero Club where, after a check-out by one of the instructor, you have the choice of Piper of Cessna aircraft to rent.
One thing that must strike every UK pilot visiting New Zealand is the feel of quality of the New Zealand Aero Clubs.
In Britain (with all too few honourable exceptions) we tend to accept as the norm, prefab huts equipped with smelly loos, worn carpets or line, tatty curtains and torn seat cushions.
Most of the New Zealand premises I was fortunate enough to visit were, in contrast, truly worthy of the name ‘Club’.
Solidly built, comfortably furnished, cleanliness and efficiency seemed to be their hallmarks.
Several can offer overnight accommodation to pilots socked-inn by weather.
Not many seem to go in for haute cuisine catering, but most have endless coffee available gratis, a fridge with soft drinks and beers, light snacks, and a comfortable room to sit and enjoy your refreshments while you watch others fly.
It is obvious, isn't it, that to be able to offer facilities of that quality, they must charge pretty sweetly for their flying?
Well, I hate to disappoint you, but flying in New Zealand can work out at less than half the average cost per hour in the UK.
I hired a Piper PA-28/181 Archer from the Otago Flying Club at Taieri for $130 an hour.
These are New Zealand dollars, currently $3.30 to the pound sterling, so that rate equates to just £40 an hour.
The Wakatipu Aero Club at Queenstown charge NZ$120 (£36.40) an hour to members for their Cessna 172s or NZ$150 £45.50) to non-members like you or me.
The cheapest rate I came across was right down at the southern tip of the country where Invercargill's Southland Aero Club were virtually giving a Tomahawk away for NZ$80 per hour solo (£24.25).
At Paraparaumu near Wellington you could a Cessna 150 for $90 (£27.30) an hour solo.
So how do they do it?
As Robin Burn pointed out in his article in Pilot's June 1992 issue, rental costs are affected by about five major factors.
These are the costs of fuel and oil, maintenance and spares, buying (and financing) the aircraft, insurance and finally, utilisation.
Above: neat premises of the South Island's Canterbury Aero Club.
Nationality letters ‘ZK’ are often painted.
Below: High spot of many a visitor's trip is aerobatics in a Tiger Moth.
Above: UK, U.S. and NZ rental prices compared.
Below: Scenic flights for tourists are big business.
This Cessna floatplane operates at Te Anau and over the Fiordland area.
Avgas works out at abut twenty per cent cheaper there than the UK, but at around 34 litres per hour for a C172 or a AA5, that accounts for only some £4 of the differential.
Maintenance labour cost vary somewhat around NZ, just as they do here, but against the UK's average hourly £15 to £25 or so for single-engine aircraft, NZ engineers seem to charge the equivalent of £12 to £15 on average.
That isn't enough to account for the  difference between £27.25 to hire a Cessna 152 for an hour at Canterbury NZ and £76.85 for a similar machine at Cambridge UK (just to take one example).
Second-hand aircraft are perhaps slightly cheaper to buy there than her, but not all that much, and the interest charged for finance is currently higher there than here.
New light aircraft are virtually identical in price world-wide, so there's no real saving there.
Likewise spare parts.
But direct operating costs are lower since the fees levied by aerodrome owners for landing and parking etc. are generally much more reasonable than in the UK
The main reason for the enormous price differential is possibly aircraft utilisation.
Most New Zealand aero clubs seem to lead double (or even triple) lives.
All instructors have CPLs, and all the aircraft are licensed to carry fare-paying passengers.
The very active New Zealand tourist industry is closely enmeshed with light aircraft flying.
Every motel, every tourist information office displays pamphlets advertising scenic flights, and many of these are flown in club aircraft, keeping utilisation high even when club members are not around.
The 172s at the Queenstown club all have Air Wakitipu emblazoned on their flanks and are regularly used by CFI Carlton Campbell and his instructor team to take tourists flying over Lake Wakatipu, the Remarkables range and other mountains and glaciers in the neighbourhood.
At Milson Airport, Palmerston North, in North Island, Bruce Farquar of the Manawatu Districts Aero Club showed me how they offer not only flight training but also aerial photography and with the slogan Time is money…flying reduces costs publicise their light aircraft passenger and freight services.
Across that airfield, United Aviation gives training at $123 an hour in 152s or Tomahawks and runs a charter service with | (as well as training for type ratings on) C172, C206, PA-32 and B58s.
To rent their six-seat Cessna 206 costs £69 an hour, or you can fly for an hour in the Beechcraft Baron for just £106.
At Invercargill aerodrome Southland Aero Club welcomes pilots for conventional training and renting, but Chris Thomson, the CFI also flies deer hunters or holidaymakers out to remote Stewart Island (NZ's uttermost southern extremity) or onto beach landing strips in the solitude of Fiordland's most inaccessible mountain territory.
At Taupo Airport, in the volcanic centre of North Island, vacationers and hunters again form part of the clientele of Christine Duncan's Taupo Air Services.
I flew with her into the bush, to land on a tiny crushed-pumice airstrip laid along a mountain ridge.
There we dropped off one hunter and his labrador, and collected two others who had been there for several days, totally alone with their guns, their butane gas stove, the deer and the eternal forests surrounding them.
Christine leases several tracts of totally uninhabited bush from the Maori owner and provides each area with an airstrip and a hut beside it.
This way she can guarantee her customers that they will have all the surrounding thousands of acres of bush totally to themselves for the duration of their stay.
Apart from her airstrips, there ain't no other way in or out!
My plans for flying around the beautiful Nelson and Marlborough Sounds area happened to be frustrated by the fact that Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands was visiting nearby.
This meant that all the Nelson Aero Club's aircraft were busy on lucrative commercial sorties, taking pressmen out to visit the royal hideway.
The CFI at Nelson, Jenny Frame (the only lady aero club CFI I met during my trip, though the proportion of female instructors and pilots seems much higher in New Zealand than it is in the UK) told me that although this state of affairs was unusual, a great deal of their flying did normally comprise scenic flights for tourists.
The Nelson club has a glossy brochure advertising Seaside Shortie, Southern Scenic and Mountain Meander as three possible touristic excursions by club Cessna.
They also keep their aircraft busy with training, rental, business charters, air ambulance flights, aerial photography and so on.
Is that why they can offer training at $110 (£33.50) an hour in their Tomahawks?
Left: city and harbour of Dunedin.
Below: Wellington, built on land that emerged from the sea after an earthquake 100 years ago.
Right: aptly-named Bay of Islands, seen from a hired 152.
Far right: Stewart Island's Halfmoon Bay, at New Zealand's southern extremity.
If it didn't cost quite so much to get there (typical return fare London-Auckland is currently about £1,150 it would make good financial sense to use the excellent training facilities that exist in New Zealand to obtain a PPL, and it certainly is a wonderful place to build up low-cost hours among some of the world's most magnificent surroundings.
New Zealand's weather pattern is much more like that of the UK than are the conditions normally found in Florida or California, two popular alternative training or hours-building areas.
So a NZ trained PPL would probably be much more at home with UK weather conditions after qualifying than one who had trained in the USA.
To get a PPL in New Zealand involves a minimum of fifty hours, and on average trainees log between 55 and 60 hours before they get their licence.
Assuming a normal split of dual and solo hours within this total, the flying cost is typically just under$6,000.
Add to that the landing fees (if you train at an aerodrome that levies these) and the usual books, maps and equipment, and you ought realistically to be able to come home with your PPL having cost about $6,600.
That equates to precisely £2,000, for which you would be lucky to log any more than 25 hours PPl training in this country.
Maybe Auckland air fares aren't really so expensive; for flying training a New Zealand summer beats a UK winter, hands down!
And what is there to do on holiday in New Zealand for the pilot who already has his or her PPL?
Well, to start with, you are quite likely to meet some fascinating flying men and women before you even get into an aircraft.
People like ex-British Airways captain Derek Ellis whom I met at Kerikeri airfield.
He has a 1932 Avro 631 Cadet under restoration at North Shore aerodrome, and currently flies a taildragger Cessna 152 instead of the Concordes he used to captain.
The man in charge of his Avro Cadet restoration is Stan Smith, a retired Air New Zealand captain, now an astounding jack-of-all-aeronautical-trades, and master of every one.
Rebuild an engine, Gipsy Major for a Moth, Genet Major for the Avro or a run-of-the-mill Lycoming?
Stan will do it.
If there are no gudgeon pins available he'll make them; likewise pistons, push-rods or you name it.
Rebuild a Fox Moth?
He's been doing that sort of thing for years.
Respray a spam-can?
Smith's Tech-Air (NZ) takes it all its stride, especially the really tricky work on old timers.
The dynamic Christine Duncan with her landing strips in the bush and Jenny Frame, CFI at Nelson, were only two of the interesting lady Kiwi fliers I met.
Another was LeeAnn Jecentho, instructor with the Bay of Islands Aero Club.
She is a vivacious young lady who combines instructing with commercial flying and club administration.
This Aero Club, in the centre of a thriving holiday sailing and big-game fishing area, maintains two life rafts ready for search and rescue work, and is also involved in photography, freighting and scenic flights as well as the training function.
While LeeAnn flies missions of these types, the CFI, Russ Howell is usually busy top-dressing crops and training new ag-pilots.
If your trip can include South Island (and it should, for the flying there is wonderful) you might manage to take in another interesting New Zealand aviation operation, that of Colin Smith with his production line of Tiger Moths at Mandeville, near Gore, not far from the south end of the Island.
Here the Croydon Aircraft Company has already turned out several ‘remanufactured’ DH-82As and has another half dozen Moths, including a Fox Moth, coming along the production line.
They even produce their own new wooden propellers at Mandeville.
Restoration of old cars is a way of  life in this country, with many beautiful maintained Morris Minors, Ford Anglias and Triumph Heralds still to be seen bowling along the roads, so giving a new lease of life to old aeroplanes seems to come naturally.
One of the Moths now at Mandevelle has been on static display in a motor museum for years, and is now almost ready to leap into the air again; an excellent idea.
Then, at Queenstown, South Island's most popular tourist town, you might be lucky enough to run across a former world-class exponent of the ski-slopes, Murray ‘Mo’ Gardner.
His 1938 Tiger Moth seems to be busy all the hours God gives, taking tourists into the open-cockpit air, aerobatting those who want, or simply showing the local sights to the others, with white silk scarves fluttering around their helmeted and goggled heads.
And in competition to ‘Mo’, Phillip Maguire, a BAe 146 captain with Ansett NZ, has set up another open-cockpit flying business, Pionair Adventures.
He has converted the hopper of a 1970 Grumman Ag-Cat, of all things, into a two-abreast cockpit in which couples can enjoy the Wakatipu scenery sitting side-by-side together.
The rasp of the Pratt and Whitney R985 radial engine is not quite so authentically nostalgic as the putter of the old Tiger Moth's Gipsy Major, but lost of people do like to do things in pairs while on holiday.
Above: Oamuru airstrip, 700 m of crushed pumice to the east of North Island's Lake Taupo.
Below: volcanic crater of Mount Ngauruhoe in North Island's Tongariro National Park.
When it comes to the flying itself, the choice of where to go and what to do is almost limitless.
Off-shore island airfields, city airports, little grass strips to visit.
Rolling hills sea coasts, with beaches, bays, harbours, cliffs; snow-capped mountain ranges, lakes, waterfalls and forests; arid deserts, active volcanos, geysers, glaciers, they are all there waiting for you.
Navigate to them, view them, overfly and photograph them, you'll never forget them.
Starting in South Island, you will find that flying in to land amid the snowfields of Mount Cook or the ice of Fox Glacier of Franz Josef in the Southern Alps is something PPL visitors can unfortunately only do as passengers in the fixed-wing or chopper flights that operate out of local airfields.
But even if you do have to pretend, just this once, that you are only an ordinary tourist, that trip will live in your memory, even if it isn't entered in your log-book.
Farther south, in Fiordland, it is possible to fly yourself in to that spectacular airfield I already mentioned, at Milford Haven, but to fly in as pilot in command you must first be cleared by an instructor.
And since most visitors have time only for one visit to Milford, you again will probably have to be make this trip as a passenger, either in an aircraft or a coach.
Even so, it is still a memorable experience.
Stewart Island, the southern extremity of New Zealand, is a place that most Kiwis have never visited, but one which it is quite possible for PPLs to fly in to.
Souther Air will happily fly you as a passenger in their Islander from Invercargill to their own airstrip close to tiny Halfmoon Bay, the only township.
(Stewart Island is roughly twice the size of the Isle of Wight, but has a population of less than 500 souls) Much more exciting though, is to rent a Cessna from Invercargill's Douthland Aero Club, get CFI Chris Thompson to come along as safety pilot, and to show you which of the beaches he recommends as landing grounds, since Southern Air a little jealous of other operators using their own airfield in competition to their service.
There is one other piece of New Zealand territory which even fewer natives have seen.
That is Chatham Island, and it too has an airfield.
To reach it you simply steer 090 ° from Wellington, or 070 ° from Christchurch; the snag is that Chatham is 413 nm from the former and 475 nm from the latter, rather farther than I was prepared to fly single-engined across the waters of the South Pacific.
But my personal highlights of New Zealand flying must include a North Island expedition, a long, low-level flight the entire length of Ninety-Mile Beach.
This is a glorious unbroken stretch of golden sand that ends up at  Cape Reinga, near the northernmost extremity of New Zealand.
Flying over Spirit Bay near there, where the Tasman Sea meets the Pacific Ocean, and where Maori tradition has it that the spirits of the dead depart New Zealand for their Polynesian resting place, was a haunting experience.
More majestic, in central North Island, was a flight over volcanic territory.
Cleared by the military Ohakea Control to climb into their airspace I coaxed a Grumman AA5 up to 11,000 feet, to look down into the crater lake of Mount Ruapehu, 9,175 feet high, to see steam and smoke coming from the crater within the torn and shattered peak of 6,517 foot Mount Tongariro (whose last major eruption was only a dozen or so years back) and to fly around the perfectly symmetrical cone of Mount Ngauruhoe.
This elegant 7,515 foot volcano, according to geologists wasn't even a hummock at the time the Romans were building their roads and walls in Britain.
It is one of the youngest major mountains in the world.
The geysers and mud pools of Rotorua are more striking seen from ground level than from the air, but the great geyser still looks impressive from 1,500 feet.
In the same area the awesome belching fumarole crater of White Island volcano at close quarters on foot, you can actually land on a strip along the edge of the crater of Mount Tarawera (although it would be best to clear this first with someone at Rotorua Airport who has up-to-date local knowledge).
Fly around this area even without landing there, and you can still look at unbelievably-coloured lakes, watch steam issuing from cliffs, see silica terraces, sulphur mines and geothermal power plants.
Rotorua is all a bit different from Rochester, Redhill or Retford.
In the Auckland area, both North Shore (until recently known as Dairy Flat) and Ardmore aerodromes offer good facilities, as mentioned above.
Ardmore's runway is more generously dimensioned and better levelled than North Shore's but North Shore is perfectly adequate too.
Either gives access to overflying Auckland city and harbour, perhaps visiting the airfield on Great Barrier Island.
Farther north Dargaville has a pleasant little club, mainly a weekend operation, but they make visiting pilots welcome.
Another small club at Warkworth, its airfield right out in the country, is easier to find from the air than by road.
And the Bay of Islands Club at Kerikeri is well worth visiting if you are in that historic and scenic area.
From there it is less than one Cessna hour to see from air the Bay of Islands, the Waitangi Treaty House (where the historic treaty between Maori and British was signed), Cape Brett (with its remarkable rocky island that has a hole in it you  can sail ships right through), and thousands of acres of primeval forests of kauri trees.
It was from KeriKeri I started the two-hour flight in a 152 that took me over Hokianga Harbour on the Tasman Sea, along Ninety-Mile Beach to the northernmost tip of New Zealand, and right above a school of dolphins swimming below me in the crystal-clear Pacific waters of Doubtless Bay.
What a wonderful country for memorable flying!
Maoris now constitute only about nine per cent of the population of New Zealand, but as the earliest inhabitants they have intertwined all of New Zealand with their folklore, traditions and place-names.
Near North Cape, as already mentioned, I flew amid departing Maori spirits.
Over the volcanic centre of North Island I gazed in wonder on the mighty peaks and craters, remembering some of the Maori tales of love and feuds and jealousy that surround these mountains.
But as the Air New Zealand 747–400 that brought me back home took off from Auckland International what came into my mind were the lines at the head of this article.
Maori tradition has it that these words were spoken by chief Ngatoroirangi when he first arrived in New Zealand from Polynesia in the great Arawa canoe:I arrive where unknown earth is under my feet; I arrive where a new sky is above me .
And I, for one, hope soon to be able to arrive there again, to explore more of that spectacular new sky above New Zealand and discover more of that unknown earth beneath my wings.
Idyllic setting of the Ardmore Flying School, south of Auckland on the North Island.
Air Mail
CANP's ‘many deficiencies’
Like your correspondent M.E. Smith (Air Mail , September), I was left with a feeling of confusion and disquiet after trying to use the CANP scheme recently.
Mindful of recent events in Wales and following publicity for the scheme in your pages, I contacted the Tactical Booking Cell four days before a planned photographic detail in Northumberland, to be conducted with a friend.
My first call was met with polite efficiency.
Details of the flight with map references, operating heights, times and working radius around a point were agreed, and I was given a reference number for future contacts.
Phoning the next day quoting my reference number to say the flight would not go ahead due to a change of circumstances, a long delay ensued.
Eventually I was asked if my reference number related to a low-level police helicopter flight planned in Wales.
No record could be found of my previous day's arrangements.
Phoning a third time to give details of the re-arranged flight, nobody seemed to want of know.
I was told the service was really only for pilots flying unaccompanied, who could not maintain a good lookout whilst otherwise engaged, and that the service applied essentially to commercial operations.
In the event, I re-arranged the flight for a weekend, when the level of military activity was likely to be low.
I would certainly appreciate some clarification over the use of the CANP service.
From my own experiences, I feel a more consistent and professional service could be offered.
I read with interest the correspondence in September's Pilot on the military/civil air collision in Wales.
As a retired crop-spraying pilot, I endorse the view that CANP is really window-dressing for a very difficult situation.
To those with no operational experience such as MPs, Courts of Enquiry, magistrates etc., it can appear a sensible and foolproof system, but in practice it has many deficiencies.
We tried to work the system, but at times of intensive spraying operations we were asked reduce our area of notification as large areas of the country were blanketed off to military operations.
Five miles radius from the landing strip was acceptable, which meant that some ferry flights and spraying operations outside this area were unprotected.
In spite of notification, on occasions low-flying military aircraft still passed through the notified area.
Due to the nature of our operations short-notice alterations had to be made to our notified programme because of weather or operational problems.
On many occasions our actual operation bore no resemblance to those notified to CANP the night before.
Pilots had little faith in the system and kept their heads and height down, preferring to risk prosecution by the CAA for low-flying rather than run the risk of killing themselves and another crew.
The maximum of pilots keeping a visual lookout for other aircraft has little relevance when fast and slow aircraft are operating in the lower airspace.
The chances of a 400mph aircraft at 250 feet seeing and avoiding other aircraft are slim.
Aerial work pilots such as crop-sprayers, aerial photographers, power-line inspectors etc. have to give great concentration to their work and have little opportunity to scan the sky for aircraft approaching at high speed.
I know little of military operations, but I am sure they have similar operational problems and that the crews have the same worries.
Do not let anyone — pilots, the RAF or the CAA — fool themselves that CANP is anything other than a hastily improvised system put together after the collision of a Phantom and a Pawnee in 1974, when it had to be shown that something was being done.
Unless operations are severely restricted the risk, albeit small, will remain as long as low- and high-speed aircraft operate in the same lower airspace.
Warm welcome from the Luftwaffe
Whilst flying back from visiting relatives in Denmark on my very first trip abroad, the second worst nightmare happened.
The crankcase on the Cherokee Six decided to split and squirt the oil out all over the windscreen.
Luckily we were over Germany and not the worst nightmare, over the Channel, as we would have been thirty minutes more into the flight.
We had to make a forced landing at Jever Luftwaffe Air Base just a few seconds in front of two Tornados on finals, making the runway a little slippy with the last few drops of oil leaking out of our crankcase.
I was amazed at how well we were welcomed — after their initial shock.
They provided my family and I with currency exchange at competitive rates, advice on aeroplane repairs, free landing and hangarage, free overnight accommodation — and even organised on-the-spot Customs clearance when a friend came to pick us up in a twin the following morning.
We are indebted to Herman of the fire engine department for initial communication and transportation help, Major Jantos for seeing we didn't get lost, and Lt.Col.
Behrend who entertained us in the Officers' Mess for an evening meal and breakfast.
A nightmare turned into an enjoyable part of our holiday, and although a very good excuse for landing is needed I can certainly recommend the hospitality of our German cousins.
Interfering NDBs
As it seems that the ancient and archaic NDB is to remain with us for the foreseeable future, this might be a good time to take a closer look at its failings as an aid to navigation?
Have you noticed that most NDBs in the UK have frequencies that end with point five of a kHz — i.e. 350.5, and maybe you have also noticed that almost without exception, the ADF receiver in light aircraft does not tune to these half kHz but only to whole numbers of kHz?
It therefore follows that to receive these beacons with the point five frequencies the aircraft equipment must have sufficient bandwidth to cover at least on kHz, and at best will have a much degraded performance with reduced usable range and accuracy.
Also with other beacons often within receivable range on frequencies only one kHz apart, sometimes if the aircraft is somewhere between the two, both become unusable.
‘…young lady, I do too know all about recession.
I've just had to sell my Spitfire…’
In a recent telephone conversation with the CAA I was connected with the department that  allocates frequencies for such beacons.
The gentleman I spoke with was unaware that light aircraft ADF equipment was unable to tune to the half kHz and seemed quite surprised to learn this.
He suggested that I spoke to the department that approved aircraft radio equipment, and I was duly transferred to that department.
I related the same story to a gentleman in this department, and he was unable to be of help — especially when I suggested to him that his department should not approve equipment that was unable to receive satisfactorily most of the NDBs in the UK.
He suggested that I contacted the frequency allocation department.
This problem has become very apparent in recent months at Humberside, where the beacon ‘HBR’ on frequency 350.5 kHz has at times been almost unusable due to interference from the NDB ‘LPL’at Liverpool on 349.5 kHz.
The ‘LPL’ ident can be clearly heard at times.
(The other NDB at Humberside, ‘KIM’ on 365 kHz, is no problem at all.)
A further problem has occurred with regard to marine beacons, which are now on full-time transmit and as such have become usable for aircraft.
Once again the problem of adjacent beacons, both powerful, with published ranges of seventy and fifty miles respectively.
With frequencies less than one kHz apart both are rendered unusable over a large area by light aircraft with the aforementioned ADF equipment.
It would appear that the above problems have been made worse by some of the recent frequency reallocations, and the lack of awareness of the Authority concerning these matters is quite astounding.
Obstacles to a pilot career
What a bitter individual P.S.R. Butler must be!
(Air Mail , August).
As I look around our crew room I see professional pilots, not upper class or lower class, Jaguar of Trabant owners, just pilots have achieved their enviable careers through ability, determination, hard work and in most cases some financial hardship.
All of us have had to undertake our training within whatever framework of requirements the licensing authorities saw fit to impose; that's aviation.
Rather than finance, the greatest obstacle he faces is his attitude.
Nobody commands respect; it is earned .
In CAVOK and a faultless aircraft or bad weather and engine out, teamwork is the key to a safe operation; there is no place on the flight deck for resentment or snobbery.
Change your outlook P.R.S. or ‘driving’ a 737 may remain just a dream.
It's not just the rich wot gets the pleasure
The British Aerobatic Team was somewhat saddened to read Mr. Thomas's letter in the September Pilot , and the suggestion that the participation of the British Team in the World Aerobatic Championships was a self-indulgent jaunt could not be further from the truth.
To earn a team place requires, primarily, supreme skill.
To acquire that level of skill requires talent, total dedication, application, huge amounts of training and an unfailing belief in yourself.
There can be no doubt that it takes gruellingly hard work to reach the top echelon in aerobatics, and each member of the British Aerobatic Team '92 has more than adequately demonstrated their worth.
Money may be able to buy flying time, but it cannot buy skill — and it most certainly cannot guarantee success in an aerobatic championship.
True, a state-of-the-art aerobatic machine is expensive, but if we are to represent our county at major championships in a competitive manner then it is required of to run competitive machines.
It is well proven that the stronger the team, the stronger the back-up and support system, the stronger are the chances of success — and you can't have all this without financial support.
Surely British aviation enthusiasts want to see their team doing well?
We are after all representing you, the British; we are your team.
In the history of British participation in world-class events there has never been any recognition or backing on a national scale.
Apart from the support (for which we were most grateful) of one or two companies and several individuals, it has always fallen on the team pilots to get Great Britain to the World/European Championships.
Few pilots are in this game for the glory or so — called glamour, but because we are inextricably dedicated to the sport of aerobatics, and we have an insatiable desire to one day bring home a Gold, Silver or even a Bronze.
Surely that can't be so offensive?
‘Incredible and somewhat offensive’, says Mr Thomas about the British aerobatic Team's search for sponsorship for WAC '92.
I don't know what his true politics really are, but he's sure right about the ‘bitter ramblings’.
Does he really think it's a ‘self-indulgent jaunt’ to represent one's country in a sport that demands total commitment, courage and the highest levels of piloting skill?
One of the reasons that Britain habitually trails in this sort of event is the culture of dogged amateurism that has grown up in recent years.
As a county we seem to have a need to make it as hard to succeed as we can.
Why shouldn't these people seek sponsorship?
They're not professional aerobatic pilots; they have to earn a living like the rest of us.
Mr Thomas needs to realise that there will always be degrees and levels of wealth and privilege, just as there are for piloting skill.
Crop spraying in Bulgaria
Bulgarian dusters.
An-2 above, twin-radial-engined Kamov Ka26 left, American Turbo Thrush below.
I read with interest the article on ‘Crop-spraying in the Sudan’ in September's Pilot .
I have just returned from a visit to Bulgaria, and I thought your readers might like to see their spraying equipment.
The Ayres S.2R-T34 Turbo Thrush is  of particular interest as six aircraft have recently been purchased from the West as part of a replacement programme for traditionally Russian-built aircraft such as the An-2.
The Turbo Thrush and the An-2 were photographed at Sofia, the Kamov Ka26 at Bourgas.
Liability within a flying group
We are a two-year-old flying group of five members, based upon a Piper 180 Cherokee.
The group has a fairly informal basis, but we feel there must be various ways of forming the group to mitigate the members from losses incurred over and above the level of liability insurance that may have to met in the event of a very serious accident.
We assume each member is individually and severally liable in what may be exceptional circumstances.
We have looked briefly at forming a limited company, but this we understand could give rise to our lower flying costs being treated as a benefit in kind by the Inland Revenue — and subsequently taxed.
Is there anybody out there who can throw some light on this seemingly awkward subject?
Rods, poles and perches
I have just read the article on the Cessna 172 in the July Pilot and I quote — spasmodically — from the last few paragraphs of p22:
‘…long steady seventy-knot approach…lifted off within 150 yards of touchdown…in the downwind leg at 800 feet…braking to a stop within about 100 meters of the runway start’.
What a mishmash of units!
And it's the same in the specification column at the end of the article, with inches, pounds, square feet, horsepower, knots and metres.
Now I'm not getting at you or Peter Underhill, both of being excellent fellows; but this is just the sort of thing I predicted would happen twenty years ago when we, as a country, started to ‘go metric’ and were assured that five years would see it done.
Hooray for progress, I say!
Bear in mind I became cynical after the introduction of Unified Threads in 1948.
You really must stop using horsepower (HP) and start quoting ‘PS’ instead, in order to come into line with the EEC.
The motorcar industry already do so.
‘PS’ stands for ‘pferdestärke’, the German for horsepower, and is identical with the French ‘CV’—‘cheval vapeur’or ‘steam horses’.
It is 1,38 per cent smaller than out hp figure, which is not really significant, but you have to be politically correct these days!
Keep up the good work with the mag.
I have been buying it since 1967, every single copy!
How pilot medicals will change
I have read with interest the correspondence concerning medical fees.
The recession also gets those of us who work totally in the aviation industry, as there are not so many pilots flying, and sadly, not so many learning to fly.
There are historical reasons why the CAA medical fees are less than those recommended by the BMA.
The CAA's fees are not recommendations, but the actual fees charged by the CAA itself.
We all hope that they will eventually be as the recommended ones.
The whole system in the UK however is in for a bit of a shock — a Eurostyle shock.
I thought your readers might be interested in the current JAA Proposed Medical Standards.
These will affect just about everyone who flies — and will certainly affect the fees.
I am privileged to sit on the Medical Group of the JAA.
I am not a National Delegate, but IAOPA, who have some hundreds of thousands of members, is entitled to send a consultant to the meetings, and I have the honour to be that representative.
The main changes are as follows:
a)
, All PPl initial medicals to have an ECG (electrocardiogram — heart test), and a blood test (haemoglobin — which shows if you are anaemic).
Lung function tests will also be carried out.
This will mean that an initial medical will cost not £50 but £100, depending on where you go, who you see and who has the equipment to do all the tests.
b)
, Renewal PPL medicals will be done every two years to age forty, then annually too age 65, then every six months.
This change takes us back to the UK position some five or so years ago.
c)
, Renewal PPL ECGs will be carried out at age forty, then every two years to age fifty, then  annually to age 65.
From age 65 they well be carried out every 6 months.
d)
, Renewal lung function tests are to be carried out at regular intervals.
A chest X-ray or more detailed tests can be done if there any indications.
e)
, Hearing tests (audiogram).
This test is required if anyone wants an IMC or IR, as now.
I is however to be repeated every five years up to forty and then every two years for as long as the rating is held, or if there is a hearing loss.
The actual standards themselves are much the same.
Some European nations have higher standards for vision and have had to change them.
Post-heart attacks can re-apply in nine months instead of a year.
There is some talk of putting all pilots, glider and balloon in the Class II group.
ALTP/CL Class I standards will remain almost the same, apart from a haemoglobin blood test every medical, and every five years a serum lipids (fats) cholesterol test.
These Class One pilots will also be required to have special eye, ENT and cardiological assessments.
Some senior AMEs will be allowed to carry out these extra assessments if properly qualified; otherwise the pilot will have to go and see the appropriate specialists at regular intervals.
As you can see there will be quite a lot more work.
Hopefully much will be computerised like the FAA's at present, where the form and the ECG go down the phone line to America.
This equipment is not cheap: my ECG machine cost %5,000; but it does store and transmit.
Add the cost of a compatible computer with a modem and the costs continue rising — plus a haemoglobin-measuring device, a lung function tester, etc.
Some AMEs will however not find it worthwhile continuing, faced with such costs.
The JAA has stipulated at least ten medicals a year.
Any AME who has to re-equip will have to do more than that to make it worthwhile.
We all know who will have to pay, and that is the pilots.
One test, fortunately not finally agreed to, would have cost the IAOPA membership £10,000,000 in the first year.
What cost benefit would have been made?
The answer, like the answer to some of the other tests, is none.
What is won on the swings is lost on the roundabouts.
Harmony is compromise in many cases, some countries doing far more than we do in the UK — full-range blood tests, for example.
Fortunately our CAA is doing its very best for all of us, but some of the smaller countries can outvote the UK, France and Germany and we together have more pilots than the rest.
I think common sense and sensibility will eventually shine through.
It may take a few more years to get there, plus some pretty hard negotiation.
Safety Matters
Electrical fires in flight in Pipers
While on a flight from Blackbushe a Seneca suffered an electrical fire accompanied by a very large amount of acrid smoke.
An emergency landing was made (just) at Dunsfold.
The Lamar Alternator Failure Warning Light Relays (Lamar Part No 00258, Piper number 587863) had catastrophically failed in that they had caught fire.
The units for each engine are mounted back-to-back on the PA-34, behind the right-hand instrument panel in the vicinity of the instrument air filter.
The latter and associated rubber air pipes caught alight and set the main avionics loom on fire.
There was an earlier fatal accident during an attempted forced landing by a Tomahowk near Walthomstow where an identical unit failed, resulting in severe smoke from the epoxy resin used in the encapsulated unit.
Another failure of the same part occurred during an  asymmetric training flight on a Seneca at Kidlington.
The part appears only to be fitted to Piper aircraft, and is known to be fitted to the PA-46 Malibu.
In order that the CAA and AAIB can decide on appropriate action, they need to know whether anyone else has had a similar failure or found signs of overheating on one of these units and not told them about it.
If anyone knows of further cases please tell them urgently.
Feeling his way
A Robinson R-22 helicopter was being flown in America on a clear day, with visibility 45 miles.
The pilot was flying the aircraft fairly close to the ground and was using road signs to help determine his location.
While he was trying to read one of the tail rotor struck it and anti-torque control was lost.
The aircraft began spinning to the right and crashed on the roadway, receiving substantial damage.
The pilot and his passenger received minor injuries.
The pilot had logged 95 hours, all on type.
Tiger Moth vandalised after forced landing
Because of intended aerobatic flight, the refueller had been instructed to leave the tank two gallons short of maximum fuel when refuelling a Tiger Moth; this should have provided sufficient fuel for two hours 35 minutes flying.
Three fifteen-minute sorties were flown.
These were followed by a fourth sortie of around one hour ten minutes, involving a display.
The pilot realised after take-off that he had less fuel than expected.
An unplanned twenty-minute hold prior to the display further reduced his fuel reserves, and the pilot intended to refuel at Denham before returning to a private strip at Pangbourne.
His fuel was exhausted after two hours flying time, and he made a successful forced landing three miles from Denham during which the chin cowling was dented and the propeller tip fractured.
The aircraft was left for two hours while the pilot was arranging for its recovery, and during this period it was extensively damaged by vandals.
Unfamiliar with weight-shift handling
A 58-year-old pilot with 155 hours held a PPL endorsed for Landplanes Group A and Self-Launching Motor-Gliders.
For six years he had remained current by flying a dozen hours a year, mainly on Cessna 150s; then between 1986 and 1989 he flew only six hours, with his last recorded solo flight in August 1987 and last dual in August 1989.
Until April 1992 all his flying experience had been on conventional three-axis control aircraft.
In December 1991 he often visited a nearby farm landing strip and talked to microlight owners and examined their aircraft.
Then last February he bought a second-hand Gemini FlashIIA microlight, a weight-shift control aircraft, direct from the manufacturer.
He was to receive the necessary flying instruction from a microlight instructor.
The aircraft was stored de-rigged in farm buildings.
In March the manufacturer's test pilot flew the aircraft for its annual inspection check flight.
The owner pilot accompanied the test pilot on this flight, but acted only as an observer.
After this flight the aircraft was de-rigged again and not flown for several weeks.
During April and May the pilot arranged for several lessons with a microlight instructor using the instructor's own aircraft; completed in a total flight time of four hours, these flights covered mainly upper air handling with little practice in takeoffs and landings.
His instructor reported some over-confidence in the air, with his student wanting to ‘run before he could walk’.
He advised his student that a comprehensive microlight conversion course was necessary as it was possible for conventional control (three-axis) pilots with insufficient weight-shift experience to make incorrect control inputs when under a heavy workload or in turbulent conditions.
However, due to unsuitable weather conditions the pilot did not complete any further tuition.
In May he prepared his own aircraft for flight from the local farm.
Following some discussion of the pilot's microlight experience, the farmer suggested that they fly together so that, he an experienced microlight pilot, could advise and assist if necessary.
During the subsequent flight the farmer, seated in the rear seat, was obliged to take control several times and particularly during the landing.
On the day of the accident the pilot prepared the aircraft for flight from a field adjacent to his house.
He secured a forty kilo sandbag, used as ballast, into the rear seat and was seen to check every part of the machine.
The aircraft was seen by several witnesses quite high but starting to circle to the left and commence a gentle descent.
One witness then saw the aircraft travelling over his garden and a nearby pine wood at 200 to 300 feet.
The witness reported that ‘the engine sounded normal and the aircraft appeared under control’.
As the aircraft continued over the wood it started to fly erratically, described by a second witness as ‘swaying from side to side as if under the control of a novice’.
It was then seen to pitch up for several seconds and then pitch down with increasing engine noise.
Realising that the aircraft had crashed, two witness made their way to the wreckage in order to assist the pilot.
The aircraft had come to rest inverted in a ploughed potato field with the sail and engine on top of the pilot.
His helmet had become dislodged in the impact, but he was still within the cockpit, restrained by his lap harness.
The emergency services were in attendance within 22 minutes, but he had received fatal injuries.
The Gemini Flash IIA is designed with wingtips that may be adjusted, when on the ground, such that the angle of incidence of the tip areas of the wing can be set to correct any inbuilt tendency of the wing to turn in flight.
The tips can be set at three reduced angles from neutral, but only one increased angle.
Instructions contained in the owner's manual state that adjustment should be carried out on the tip opposite to the direction of turn by reducing the angle of incidence, one setting at a time, following which a flight test must be carried out.
This microlight had been flying with the right wingtip set to maximum incidence, but with the left at one setting of reduced incidence from neutral.
When it had been examined and test-flown by the manufacturer's pilot prior to the revalidation of the microlight's Permit to Fly both wingtip adjusters had been set at the neutral position with no apparent need for any change.
No record of any such change was contained in the microlight's log book.
The wing would have had a tendency to turn left in flight unless the change had been made (incorrectly) to counteract an inherent right turn.
Advice from the BMAA is that a high positive incidence on the right tip, in relation to the left, is likely to precipitate a right wing-drop at the stall from which recovery would be difficult at low level.
An autopsy revealed that the pilot had been suffering from severe coronary artery disease.
Controlling the aircraft in moderate turbulent thermal activity, combined with out-of-trim forces brought about by  asymmetric wingtip incidences, would have demanded considerable  physical activity.
It is possible that this physical activity, combined with his medical condition, may have brought about some degree of incapacitation in flight prior to impact.
The pilot's licence and log-book showed that he held a valid medical certificate but his last recorded Certificate of Experience (valid for thirteen months) had been signed in March 1986.
A Group A Aircraft Rating entitles the holder to act as PIC of single-engine aeroplanes not exceeding 5,700 kilograms.
All microlights are included in Group A. However, because of the variety of microlight types and flight control systems it is important that pilots undertake adequate conversion training with a microlight instructor to qualify on each type of microlight they intend to fly.
Overturned by helicopter's rotor wash?
On the day of the British Grand Prix at Silverstone, Kidlington was in use as a feeder airport for helicopters to refuel and transfer passengers to and from the race circuit.
There was therefore, unusually, a large number of aircraft movements.
A Cherokee with an instructor and student on board was engaged in circuits and landings on Runway 22.
A Sikorsky S-61N helicopter came to the hover over Runway 27 and then commenced a left turn to hover-taxi clear of the left side of the runway and thence towards the helicopter refuelling point.
The Sikorsky's commander reported that the helicopter was heavy and that he needed to use high power (varying between 75 and 95 per cent torque) to hover-taxi.
Eye-witnesses observed the Cherokee descend on final approach to a height of thirty feet before the engine power was heard to increase as a go-around was initiated.
As the nose of the aircraft was raised and some right bank smoothly applied the aircraft was observed to flick suddenly to the right to ninety degrees of bank, whereupon the nose dropped and it descended steeply to the ground.
Both pilots received fatal injuries at impact.
The positions of the flying control surfaces at impact could not be established; however the rudder pedals were jammed in a position corresponding to a demand for full left rudder.
No evidence of any disconnection or malfunction of the aileron system prior to ground impact was found.
The Chief Inspector of Accidents has ordered a Formal Investigation into the circumstances of this accident.
Homebuilt helicopter rotor drive failure
A Rotorway Executive kit-built helicopter was in straight and level cruising flight at 1,100 feet with the owner/pilot and a passenger on board.
The pilot heard a loud clatter and experienced heavy vibration, and entered autorotation.
After transmitting a Mayday call a run-on landing in a field was made, but this was heavy and both skids bent, allowing the fuselage to contact the ground.
There were no injuries.
The pilot believed that the aircraft was unlikely to have survived had it taken appreciably longer to reach the ground after the failure.
AAIB investigation showed that the main rotor drive had been running for a period with the chain displaced downwards on the large sprocket (ie.e in the axial direction of the sprocket) approximately half a tooth.
In this condition the chain plates rode on the peaks of the sprocket teeth, thereby considerably increasing the radius of the arc travelled by the chain around the sprocket.
Additionally, the holder clamp for the lower bearing of the main rotor drive shaft had torn away from the bracket mounting it to the airframe structure.
The lower end of the main rotor shaft had moved aft before being restrained, while rotating, by contact of the shaft with the bracket.
The failures in the Lowe bearing support all exhibited evidence of overload and were fully consistent with the effects of excessive tension in the chain resulting from the chain having ridden on the peaks of the large sprocket teeth.
One of the large sprocket attaching bolts was found fractured at a position closely corresponding with the top surface of the sprocket (i.e. in the lower face of the plain washer).
The head portion of the bolt, the tail portion with nut attached in its normal fastened position and the plain washer had all been severely mangled, having been entrained between the chain and the sprockets.
The small undamaged portion of the bolt fracture face exhibited signs of fatigue.
Hardness testing and micrograph evidence showed that all three surviving bolts suffered from gross surface and sub-surface decarburisation, reducing both the static and fatigue strength of the bolts to go around fifty per cent.
The helicopter's builder reported that the bolts and nuts used to build the aircraft were those supplied with the kit.
Rotorway International reported that a number of aircraft had achieved, without sprocket bolt failure, many times the number of hours at which the bolt on this aircraft failed, but that several failures of these bolts had occurred at a life similar to that at which the failure occurred.
This had been attributed to failure to correctly torque-tighten the nuts on assembly.
Main rotor drive system damage somewhat similar had been reported in the case of an Exec that suffered in-flight break-up while in cruising flight over Quebec.
This had been attributed to loss of chain tension.
Collision of finals
A student pilot took off from Elstree with his instructor and flew three circuits ‘of a good standard’.
The instructor then left the Cheetah, having briefed his student about an impending change of circuit direction and having authorised him to practise solo circuits for an hour.
The student practised circuit flying for forty minutes.
During this time the circuit direction was changed from left-to right-hand; shortly afterwards the A/G radio operator broadcast that he would be suspending the radio service for a while.
The student continued his circuit practice, making the usual ‘downwind’ and ‘finals’radio calls for the benefit of other traffic.
On his final circuit he was aware of at least one other school aircraft in the circuit but he could see no aircraft ahead of him.
On reaching the threshold he closed the throttle and flared.
At the time he expected to touch down the aircraft suddenly ‘pulled down to his left’, he felt the back of the aircraft buckle and was aware of debris coming through the canopy.
He crouched down and braked heavily.
The pilot of the other aircraft, a Cherokee, had left Elstree two hours earlier.
He was aware that the circuit direction had recently changed and that there was no A/G radio service.
Hearing no other radio communication and seeing no other aircraft to his left or right, he turned finals.
Shortly before the threshold and a few feet above the ground he heard a loud bang accompanied by a violent nose-up motion.
He saw the propeller contact something and then appear to rotate in the opposite direction as the engine stopped.
He was unaware of the other aircraft until both began to veer off the side of the runway.
As soon as the aircraft had stopped he told his passenger to leave as quickly as possible and stay well clear.
The Cherokee pilot saw the Cheetah pilot slumped in his cockpit and immediately went to his aid.
Eye-witnesses saw the Cheetah and Cherokee on short finals, one above the other.
The Cheetah appeared to be slightly ahead of and below the Cherokee.
As the Cheetah flared to land the Cherokee was still in a nose-low final approach attitude and slightly to one side of the Cheetah.
The Cherokee landed on top of the Cheetah.
The A/G radio operator was not in the control room; he had gone to change the signals square to reflect the change from left-to right-hand circuits.
He had been on duty for nine hours without a break, and after changing the symbols had gone to obtain refreshment.
In accordance with local procedures, he had locked the control room door to prevent unauthorised access.
On seeing the crash, eye-witnesses outside the school raised the alarm by shouting.
The first person to arrive at the scene was a flying instructor who had run 300 metres carrying a fire extinguisher to the scene.
He approached the Cheetah and spoke to its pilot, who was still in his seat and conscious; the instructor turned off the master switch and instructed the pilot to turn off the fuel cock.
On hearing the Cherokee's electric fuel pump still operating the instructor asked the Cherokee pilot to return to his aircraft and turn off the fuel cock and battery master switch.
He was joined by several other people who assisted the Cheetah pilot from his aircraft.
The Cherokee occupants were unhurt and the Cheetah pilot, though shocked and bruised, was not seriously injured.
He was treated for shock by an off-duty doctor at the airfield before being taken to hospital, from where he was later discharged.
Meanwhile, the school's RFFS (rescue and fire-fighting service) person who had been standing outside the school ran 150 metres to the RFFS vehicle parked by the control room.
She was closely followed by a club instructor who had intended to sound the crash alarm using the button in the control room.
However the crash crew person asked the instructor to accompany her in the fire vehicle, and on arrival at the vehicle they asked a bystander to raise the alarm.
The bystander was not aware of the crash button on the alarm fitted to the hangar wall, and finding the control room locked, she was unable to sound the alarm.
Another male bystander eventually clambered through a control room window to sound the crash alarm.
Because she had to drive the RFFS vehicle, the crash crew person had to don the protective clothing after arriving at the scene.
She arrived after the majority of people who had run to the scene from the school premises.
On hearing the alarm the aerodrome operator's RFFS person, who had just refuelled an aircraft, ran to the control room.
There he met the A/G radio operator who, on hearing the alarm, had returned to unlock the control room and telephone the emergency services.
The RFFS person saw the crashed aircraft front he control room and drove to the scene in a spare vehicle.
How air-brained are you?
1)
, Which of the following definitions is that of a METAR?
a)
,a weather forecast relating to a particular aerodrome, generally valid for a period of four hours from its time of issue 
b)
,a report of the actual weather at a particular aerodrome, generally up dated every half hour (at H ± 20 and H ± 50)
c)
,a forecast of the weather expected at a particular aerodrome during the following thirty minutes, updated every half hour (at H ± 20 and H ± 50)
2)
, When flying under VFR in the open FIR at or below 3,000 feet amsl with an IAS of 140 knots or less, you remain legal in the UK provided you are clear of cloud, in sight of the surface and the visibility is at least three kilometres — but there is one exception to this: if you are carrying passengers.
In this case, how do the minima alter?
a)
,you must remain 1,500 metres horizontally clear of cloud 
b)
,visibility must be at least five kilometres 
c)
,you must remain 1,000 feet vertically clear of cloud 
d)
,visibility must be at least ten kilometres and you must remain 1,800 metres horizontally clear of cloud 
3)
, The Wind T in the signal area indicates that the direction of take-off and landing is parallel with the shaft and towards the cross-arm of the T. What is the significance of a white disc placed above the cross-arm of the T?
a)
,glider-flying is in progress 
b)
,the aerodrome is available only for emergency use 
c)
,the runway is temporarily blocked 
d)
,the directions of take-off and landing are not necessarily the same 
4)
, You enter the downwind leg while flying a Bonanza and find you are about 400 metres behind a Piper Tri-Pacer which is flying considerably more slowly than you are.
What is the approved method of overtaking it?
a)
,if it is a left-hand circuit, overtake on the left; if right-hand, overtake on the right i.e. make your circuit tighter 
b)
,if it is a left-hand circuit, overtake on the right; if right-hand, overtake on the left i.e. always remain outside the slower aircraft 
c)
,always overtake on the right, regardless of circuit direction 
d)
,overtaking in the circuit is never approved 
5)
, If you have the misfortune to find yourself airborne with a failed comm set and your aircraft is fitted with a serviceable transponder, which code should you select on the transponder?
a)
,7000 
b)
,7500 
c)
,7600 
d)
,4321 
6)
, The largest flying boat in the world only made one flight (of about a mile in length at a height of about eighty feet), and until recently has been preserved within an aluminium-dome museum, close to the Queen Mary in Long Beach, California.
It is known to everyone as the 'Spruce Goose’, but what was its official name?
7)
, While taxying on aircraft it is inadvisable to use carburettor hot air.
What is the reason for this?
a)
,because carburettor icing is unlikely to occur on the ground, and even if it does, it is not dangerous 
b)
,to reduce wear in the engine 
c)
,to avoid the oil temperature rising too high 
d)
,to prevent overheating the exhaust valves and cylinder-heads 
8)
, Your aircraft is cruising at a TAS of 120 knots and you find it takes 47 minutes to cover the eighty nautical mile leg from Bembridge to Lydd.
You have kept accurately on the direct track and maintained a steady height.
What has been the average wind component during the flight?
a)
,a headwind component of 14.2 knots 
b)
,a tailwind component of 7.0 knots 
c)
,a headwind component of 17.9 knots 
d)
,a headwind component of 10.1 knots 
9)
, What is the meaning of the abbreviation ‘EAT’?
a)
,expected approach time 
b)
,estimated arrival time 
c)
exact airborne time
d)
,emergency Approach/Tower frequency 
10)
, Current editions of the UK half-million ICAO Aeronautical Charts have scattered across them pairs of numbers printed in blue, one large figure followed by a smaller one, thus: for example.
What do these figures signify?
a)
,they give the minimum heights flown by military jet aircraft on training flights within the area concerned 
b)
,the large figures represent thousands of feet, the small ones hundreds of feet, and taken together they gave the safety height for the immediate vicinity 
c)
,the large figures represent thousands of feet, the small ones hundreds of feet, and taken together they give the height above sea level of the highest known feature (including terrain and obstacles) in the quadrangle bounded by half degree lines of latitude and longitude 
d)
,on a scale of  they represent the expected density of military traffic in each of these half-degree rectangles.
Thus, low figures around London and Manchester TMAs, for example, and high figures over Wales and the Scottish Highlands Answers below
1)
,b 
2)
,b 
3)
,d 
4)
,d (Slow down, make a wider circuit or extend downwind, as appropriate).
5)
,c (7500 is only for use in the case of hi-jacking).
6)
,Hughes H4 Hercules 
7)
,Hot air is not filtered before being drawn into the engine and while you are on the ground probably contains dust particles which can easily cause accelerated engine).
8)
,c 
9)
,a 
10)
,c (They are known as Maximum Elevation Figures (MEF) and are not safety heights).
QUIZ ERRATA
As many of you noticed, one single letter at the very end of the answers to our August quiz was incorrect.
There was no catch to question 10; after 12 minutes in the climb with a ground speed of 90 knots our aircraft was exactly 18 nm from the aerodrome, and the correct answer should have been printed as c and not as a.
Apologies to all puzzled readers.
Lightplane rescue
I learned about flying from that
Witnessing a helicopter ditch in the Irish Sea, Eddie Whittle helped save the pilot's life by pinpointing the position and dropping him the dinghy out of his 172.
Here both pilots tell their story to Paul Hughes.
Friday had been a busy day.
Eddie had already flown B-BRZS, a Cessna 172 Skyhawk, from the Isle of Man to Blackpool, picked up his friends Derek and Tim — both first-time passengers in a light aircraft — and returned to Ronaldsway.
By 4.15p.m.
Eddie was airborne for the third time that day, returning his friends to Blackpool.
Soon after departing Ronaldsway he changed frequency to Warton LARS, passed his details and was given a new transponder code.
A few minutes earlier a JetRanger helicopter had lifted-off from Blackpool bound for Ronaldsway.
It was flown by Geoff Dodd, a company pilot: ‘I picked up my survival suit, cleared Special Branch, and took off for the Isle of Man suited-up and wearing a life-jacket.
I don't carry a dinghy because I can't see there'd be time to get it out — and subsequent events weren't about to prove me wrong.
‘I climbed out of Blackpool and changed to Warton, who gave me transponder code and climb clearance to 3,000 feet — just below the cloudbase.
Visibility was good with just a little light rain here and there.
‘I passed over the gas rigs right on track to Ronaldsway.
Everything was normal: Ts and Ps in the green.
The outside air temperature was above minimum, but I switched on the engine anti-ice anyway, just to be sure.
An uneventful flight.
‘Warton warned me of reciprocal traffic — probably out of the Isle of Man bound for Blackpool.
They didn't have any height information.
Then Zulu Sierra came on frequency, spoke to Warton and reported 2,000 feet.
I was at 3,000; no problem.
‘Then, suddenly, the engine-out audio warning started.
The light was on as well!
Reflex actions: push lever down — enter autorotation; check the dials — the turbine needle was winding down.
‘I was in deep trouble!’
By this time Zulu Sierra was only a mile away.
I'd just squawked the new transponder code when I saw a helicopter ahead at two o'clock.
I was pointing it out to my passengers when I heard ‘Mayday!
Mayday!
Golf Charlie Charlie, engine failure’, then after a few seconds ‘Mayday!
Mayday Golf Charlie Charlie, engine won't start — ditching!
I heard the flameout warning quite clearly over the pilot's voice.
‘The helicopter I'd been watching suddenly veered to port and its rotor blades didn't look the same.
‘It's him He's the Mayday!’
I pulled Zulu Sierra into a steep right turn onto his tail’.
‘The JetRanger was going into the water.
I had to tell somebody — right now!
I called Warton: ‘Mayday!
Mayday!
Mayday!
Engine failed’.
I attempted an engine restart — no go.
I advised them I was ditching threw my headset off, opened the doors and pulled my suit hood up’.
In the right-hand seat of Zulu-Sierra Eddie had a worried passenger.
‘Tim asked me ‘What the hell is happening?’
I told him not to lose sight of the helicopter.
‘He's ditching’, I said, ‘going into the water’.
Behind me Derek said ‘Christ almighty!’.
The helicopter was falling like a stone.
I reasoned the pilot must be using descent speed to keep the rotor spinning in readiness for his ‘landing’.
I followed him down from 2,000 feet — put carb heat on — I was descending as quickly as the helicopter; we managed to keep him visual.
‘The radio was silent.
I waited for further transmissions.
Should I butt in?
I wondered if I was allowed to.
It's funny how the mind works at a time like this I couldn't hear anything so I called: ‘Warton, Golf Zulu Sierra.
We are following Golf Charlie Charlie down; request permission to keep transmitting!’.
‘Warton replied; ‘Warton — continue Zulu Sierra; report please what is happening.’
‘I told Warton about the descent, then the ditching ahead of us, which seemed to be a perfectly controlled set-down’.
’ My 3,000 feet disappeared very quickly.
As it landed in the water the Jet Ranger immediately rolled to port.
I unstrapped the seatbelt and scrambled out.
The machine turned upside down as I slid into the water.
I pulled the life-jacket inflation toggle and was very thankful to hear it and feel it inflating — but I realised immediately my suit zip wasn't fully up, freezing water was seeping into it’.
‘We passed 1,000 feet overhead the crash site.
Still descending, I started a left-hand orbit down to 800 feet, than carb heat off .
I levelled at 800 feet and transmitted again: ‘Pilot in the water, helicopter listing port’.
‘The pilot was looking up at us and started waving.
I asked Derek if he could see a life-raft.
Both Tim and Derek said ‘No!’
‘We waited what felt like minutes.
There was still no sign of a life-raft and I advised Warton of my intention to drop our own dinghy.
Warton acknowledged’.
‘I paddled away from the sinking helicopter and attempted to pull the zipper up.
No joy.
I couldn't reach the toggle under the inflated life-jacket.
My hands were numb with the cold.
Then I saw a light aircraft orbiting overhead and started waving to it, but he disappeared and I didn't know if he'd seen me.
The suit was saturating with water and the cold was simply unbelievable.
I can tell you I was feeling very sorry for myself’.
‘Before I dropped the life-raft I studied the sea trying to form some sort of mental picture of the current and wind.
Tell-tale signs were the oil slick form the helicopter and the pilot's progress in the water.
As we watched, the helicopter rolled over.
I reckoned the current was about 240 degrees with a strong wind from 210.
‘So I took up a hold on 210 overhead the ditched pilot using Rate 1s as crosswind and base legs.
I tried planning the drop.
I needed to fly dead into wind approaching the pilot, but keeping him on my right, and I'd drop the dinghy slightly upwind of him so it would blow downwind to him.
To minimise error I'd have to be low — very low!
‘I decided the wind would carry the dinghy north-northeast, and the  current would take the pilot east-northeast.
I wanted to get on with the drop — the pilot had been in that freezing water for long enough! i changed to a right-hand hold, then I talked to my passengers as much as possible to keep them calm and show that everything was under control.
It seemed to work’.
‘The aircraft appeared overhead again.
I waved frantically, but this time I could actually sense my body temperature falling rapidly with the physical exertion.
‘An eternity of time passed during which I had a blazing row with a nosy seagull which kept hovering over me.
I decided the bird was far better suited to the conditions than me.
The bird was right: I had no business being there.
I knew it was only a matter of time before I would die’.
‘It crossed my mind that I could push open the door and drop the dinghy myself, but I soon realised that the workload would be far too heavy, flying as low as intended for the drop.
Anyway, giving the passengers something to do would take their minds of the gravity of the situation.
I remembered that they had never flown in a light aircraft before today; I shuddered to think of what could happen if they panicked.
Keep 'em busy; they were probably nervous enough already!
‘Downwind checks (habits continue under stress); I descended to 500 feet, then continued descending with a Rate 1 onto final and continued the descent to 100 feet.
I held it at that.
Then I began to talk Tim and Derek through the proposed drop.
‘This time it's only a practice run; listen carefully; the door will have to be opened; that's your job Tim; Derek, you hold the life-line cord, drop the dinghy when I say, but forget what I told you at Blackpool — this time let go the handle when the line jerks tight!
Do you understand?’
Affirmatives received, I repeated: ‘Only throw out the dinghy when I say so; first wait for the jerk, then let go!
OK?’
More affirmatives.
‘As we neared the helicopter pilot I said ‘OK, this is where Tim will open the door’, and as we passed over the pilot ‘This is where Derek throws out the dinghy.
Understand?’
They said they did, and I started a climbing Rate 1 back to 500 feet onto 030 for the live run.
‘I briefed them again until they fully realised the one-shot nature of the exercise.
Then a Rate 1 back onto 210 and descend towards the pilot; the sun was low and that was causing me some problems; seventy knots, no flaps in case I had to move fast, 100 feet — hold it.
The ditched pilot was on my right: ‘Open door now Tim!’
The draught came in.
We were passing the pilot.
‘Dinghy out now Derek!’
I looked round for a split second.
Derek had the life-line handle in his hand — his seatbelt was restraining him — he had his other hand on the door frame and he was trying to reach the dinghy with his right foot.
‘The dinghy was wrapped around the front of the wheel strut and wouldn't leave the aircraft because of Derek's frozen grip on the life-line.
It had started to inflate.
There was only one option.
I roared ‘Let go!’ as loudly as I could into his ear.
He did, thank goodness, and the dinghy fell away semi-inflated.
‘Until then my main unspoken worry had been the dinghy swinging up into the tail.
At least that danger was past.
Thinking about it later I accept that fate intervened.
I'm sure that strut was put there to stop the inflating dinghy from swinging up into the tail when Derek froze on the life-line handle.
‘After the drop I applied full power into a climbing left turn and tried to see what was happening.
(I even fancied that the prop-wash from our full power had blown the dinghy back a bit to make up for the slight delay in the drop).
‘I took up a new hold at 500 feet over the pilot and was pleased to see the dinghy on the water, fully inflated, between the helicopter and the pilot — and upwind of him!
Bingo!
The pilot didn't appear to be moving though.
I reported the drop to Warton and asked what was happening with the rescue efforts.
They said, ‘We have a rescue helicopter on its way from Valley.
An aircraft has diverted and will be with you shortly.
There is also a further aircraft on its way.
Thank you Zulu Sierra’.
By now the helicopter had almost sunk.
Five minutes later a passenger aircraft appeared overhead and took up a hold at 7,000 feet.
The helicopter had vanished and the dinghy was much nearer the pilot, who appeared not to be moving.
I climbed to 1,000 feet and asked to resume our track for Blackpool and leave the area clear for the rescue.
Warton said ‘We have everything in hand Zulu Sierra, you may continue.
Thank you for your assistance’.
‘We climbed to 2,000 feet on track for home and continued to listen out.
The rescue helicopter still hadn't arrived when we were fifteen miles from the coast and Warton gave me Blackpool's frequency and wished me good day’.
‘as if by magic I saw a yellow dinghy about thirty metres away.
It seemed to be floating towards me, but to be sure I forced myself towards it.
I was utterly knackered.
It took my last reserves of strength and will to reach it and then to heave myself in.
‘I found myself shaking uncontrollably with cold.
Those who have not experienced this simply cannot imagine what it's like.
All for a few inches of bloody zipper!
‘The swell was increasing and it seemed like an eternity.
I was just convinced that they, whoever they were, would never find me.
I just couldn't stand the cold any more…all I'd have to do was roll over the side…it was time to end it all…anything would be better than this!
‘Then, more magic!
I saw a yellow rescue helicopter with this guy hanging on the end of a wire.
He grabbed at me, shouted instructions.
and eventually hauled me aboard as we set off for Blackpool.
While they were cutting the suit off me they asked ‘How many persons on board?’
‘One!’
I shouted.
‘Are you sure?’
‘Sure?
Yes, yes of course I'm sure’.
‘The flight-plan said two!’
Ah, yes!
I'd used the same plan as the previous day, but must have forgotten to change persons on board from two to one — dickhead!
I convinced them it was only me’.
‘We arrived back at Blackpool and after the usual checks with Special and refuelling I went over to the waiting ambulance to join the reception committee.
It was forty minutes before the Wessex arrived.
I managed to have a brief word with the rescued pilot as he was carried on a stretcher into the ambulance.
He was obviously in shock but managed to thank us.
I couldn't work out whether he'd used the dinghy or not.
Nobody else said anything.
‘All weekend I wondered what had happened.
Then, on Sunday evening, the pilot's employers telephoned to say their pilot had fully recovered and was going on a course the next day in London.
The dinghy had floated right down to him and he had used his last reserves of energy to clamber into it.
I felt a supreme elation’.
The crew of the rescue helicopter, in several press and television interviews, judged that dropping the dinghy and pinpointing Geoff's position almost certainly saved his life.
Since then he and Eddie have met again.
Geoff says: ‘Eddie's cool, calm and collected approach still amazes me, and I'm full of admiration for his flying skills — for which I will be eternally grateful!’
BRITISH REGISTRATIONS WITH NO VALID ADDRESS.
Pilot has been contacted by R.W. Ferris, Head of Aircraft Registration at the CAA, telling us that they have a considerable number of aircraft on file where the owner's correct current address is not known.
In most cases CAA mail has been returned by the Post Office as ‘gone away’, and further enquiries have been unable to establish the correct address.
Mr Ferris asks us to point out that one of the requirements of the UK Air Navigation Order is that the current registered owner of an aircraft must keep the Authority informed of any changes to their address or ownership details in order that the UK Register of Civil Aircraft can be kept up to date.
Notification of an address change can be down by returning the original Certificate of Registration with a note of any change to the Aircraft Registration Section  — and there is no charge for an amended certificate.
As well as being a legal requirement, it is also in the registered owner's interests to ensure that the information held on the UK Register by the CAA is accurate, as the addresses held on their computer database are used for the distribution of Emergency Airworthiness Directives and other safety-related material.
Additionally the excellent periodicals such as the CAA's GASIL and GASCO's Flight Safety Bulletin are also sent free of charge to the majority of registered owners on a regular basis.
At present there are almost 15,000 aircraft registered in the UK, and of these the CAA has no valid address for about one per cent of the total.
If your name or aircraft appears on the following list the CAA would like to hear from you, and for their part promise to place their mailing list for safety information from that time.
Pilot Flight tests
There's nothing like one of Pilot's thorough, independent flight test evaluations for telling you how an aeroplane handles.
If the type you're interested in is one of the more-than-300 listed below, we can supply a photostat copy of the original article for just £2.00 (we pay the postage).
If it is in an issue less than two years old, we'll probably send you the whole issue as a back number.