

£1.95
Edited by NIGEL STARMER-SMITH
Can the DRAGON slay St. GEORGE?
ENGLAND V WALES TICKETS OFFER!
RUGBY WORLD & POST
MARCH 1992
Can the Dragon slay St. George?
It's a tall order as the descendants of England's patron saint will be hot favourites to repeat their overwhelming victories of the last two seasons and lift the Triple Crown when the Welsh invade Twickenham in March.
On The Air…
WITH NIGEL STARMER-SMITH
Fear of xenophobia
At a time when one feels tempted to join in with the celebration of rugby as expressed by England and Ireland in the recent magnificent international match, it may seem churlish to focus on a theme that is no cause for euphoria by a source of concern for the future of sport — and rugby in particular.
As the political scene in Europe changes with each day and as political boundaries are in the process of being redrawn into smaller units, based on racial, religious or cultural differences, so one fears an increased intensity of nationalistic, as opposed to patriotic passions.
Whilst it may seem a far cry from the appalling civil war that has torn Yugoslavia apart or the collapse of the Soviet Union into an uneasy Commonwealth of Independent States, it seems that sport, and rugby in particular, can play its part in preventing the exaggeration and exploitation of nationalist feeling on international occasions.
Feelings of xenophobia — a fear or hatred of the foreigner — can so readily by whipped up, turning friendly sporting occasions when the ‘hype’ has been too great, when the passions have run too high and the pervading atmosphere has been too intense.
What comes to mind is a series in the Seventies between South Africa and New Zealand, a couple of unhappy England versus Wales matches, the crowd emotion at the Grand Slam decider at Murrayfield and the World Cup quarter-final in Paris.
But by and large rugby has much to be proud of as a vehicle for bringing nations together in a sporting brotherhood when political barriers threaten to keep them apart.
Diverse cultures, religions and races have often found common ground and contact in rugby and lasting bridges between nations or peoples have been supported by sporting encounters at all levels.
Nowhere is this better exemplified than by the way in which Ireland (Eire and Ulster) takes to the rugby field as one team.
It is my earnest wish that rugby continues to fulfil this role.
Although to some it may seem a trivial matter, I feel real concern over the escalation of nationalist fervour generated on international match occasions.
I always enjoyed the spontaneous bursting into song of the crowd at Cardiff Arms Park, reflecting joy, satisfaction or encouragement for the home team's performance.
This was not hype but hwyl.
But I sense that a male-voice choir leading the crowd, complete with their distributed song sheets, through Welsh anthems is a trifle zealous.
For that to be followed by the Welsh squad members being introduced by the crowd one-by-one in almost American Super Bowl style, and succeeded by an impassioned Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau led by an operatic soprano under spotlights on the half-way line, is likely to induce, ere long, too high an emotional state within crowd and players.
It must surely increase tensions and expectations and put too great an emphasis on nationalistic feelings.
Equally, emotions have never run higher at  Murrayfield than since Flower of Scotland was introduced as a ‘national anthem’ before kick-off.
In Edinburgh, as in Cardiff, is it not a case of pandering to the nationalistic element in the crowd who, albeit a vociferous minority, chose in former years to whistle and boo when the National Anthem of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was the only anthem to be played?
Was it not significant that — even following the Welsh songs and with the Welsh anthem to follow — when Her Royal Highness, The Princess of Wales, was introduced to the teams before the recent Wales versus France international the first lines of God Save the Queen were marred by an outbreak of hissing and booing?
It is interesting to note that only the Irish anthem is played in Dublin and that at Twickenham God Save The Queen — not any other specifically English song or anthem — is rightly played as the National Anthem.
In the interests of maintaining the friendly atmosphere and camaraderie of crowd and players that has been the hallmark of rugby union above all sports for so very long, we must minimise the confrontational aspects of these occasions, whilst respecting and enjoying the traditions and pride of the individual countries involved.
As John Dawes, Wales and British Isles captain and coach, would always insist: ‘It is, after all, only a game — it's not war’!
Fancy a wee dram?
Write in to POSTBAG in which the best letter in our judgement will earn its author a litre and half of WHYTE & MACKAY Special Reserve Scotch Whisky.
Don't hesitate to have your say on any aspect of the game!
LITRE LETTER!
Lawmakers got it right
THERE has been much written in your Postbag decrying the introduction of the Under 19 Youth Laws .
After a full term of playing to the changes I would like to applaud the lawmakers and suggest that the game may benefit by adopting some, if not all, in the senior game.
The techniques required for scrummaging have not changed and the sound scrummaging pack will still reap benefits from its skills.
In fact the Laws have encouraged the rebirth of the hooker who now has a genuine hooking duel.
Under the previous law the hooker was striking against no-one on his own ball and rarely competed on his opponents ball for he was involved in the eight man drive.
The paring of hooker and tight-head going for the opponents' ball is a great skill which will serve them well in the adult game.
The Australians have had this scrummaging law in their youth game for enough years now to see schoolboy front rows mature into the senior game and succeed to the World Cup final.
They don't seem to have suffered.
The youth laws prevent the back row from breaking until the ball comes out of the scrummage, with the exception of the no.8 pick-up.
This minor impediment for the flanker is just sufficient to allow a fraction more time and space for the half-back to get things moving and has gone a long way to assist in opening the game up.
The ruck and maul in youth Law has not changed.
The only change introduced was the criteria of which side gets the put-in after a stoppage.
It is frustrating on occasions when a side puts together an exciting movement of forwards interpassing to be concluded by a piece of driving play which eventually comes to a halt and the opposition get the put-in.
That frustration will pass when the old Law fades in our mind.
It is equally frustrating when you suspect that the opposition are killing the ball at every opportunity to win the put-in.
These frustrations will pass when we adopt a very positive approach and with practice become more and more adept at using the ball when it is in our possession.
At least in the youth game the referee has a very clear directive as to who should be awarded the put-in; the side who did not take it into ruck or maul.
At every stoppage in the senior game the referee is applauded or jeered depending on which arm he raises to award the put-in, and he is rarely considered correct by everyone.
The changes in Law at the scrummage were primarily concerned about making the scrummage shorter in duration and thus safer, which is very commendable.
However, it is an irony, that may referees are blowing up the ruck and maul situation much earlier than before, with the consequence of a plethora of scrummages which is killing the flow of play, and presumably increasing the chances of injury.
The youth Law changes are in their infancy and are an asset to the game if they are given a fair chance.
However, the lawmakers must make their philosophy clear to their custodians of Law for the youth game to gain the full benefits.
Please keep those feathers
PLEASE heed this impassioned cry for help from a far outpost of Active Rugby Enthusiasts!
We are situated on a tiny island out in the middle of the Persian Gulf and do not have the luxury of soft green surfaces to indulge in our love of playing the great game.
We are grateful of having the facility of hard, sand surfaces and look forward to our annual pilgrimage to the Dubai 7's.
Our club membership consists of a large number of ‘Taffs’, so we have been shocked and horrified that the W.R.U.
has sold out to the money men.
That means the famous three feathers, which have been proudly worn by greats of the past, will disappear from the Red Jersey.
How on earth can the W.R.U.
sell out over 100 years of tradition for such a thing as mere money.
Please help us to bring the men who have made this astonishing decision back to their senses before all is lost.
All white now
WHAT a relief!
After the awful strip which the England team wore for the World Cup we saw them back in their traditional all-white kit at Murrayfield.
I can't help but wonder why on earth they did have a different strip for the World Cup.
Surely being the country which gave rugby to the world, our all-white strip is part of the game and one to be proud of.
I know Fran Cotton has a business to run but it did spoil the World Cup celebrations for many.
Mind you, once again, England wore their tracksuit tops for the anthem at Murrayfield.
I hope that this whole issue can be settled soon so that rugby can be the great game it has always been.
Value of the try
THE VALUE of the try within the game could be increased without changing the Laws of the Game.
The change should be made to the scoring method used in the league, county, divisional and Five Nations Championships.
A new scoring method should give four championship points for each win, none for a loss and two for a drawn game.
Every try scored will be awarded an additional championship point.
The simple solution.
In the first division, after the first week of the league, there are six teams with two and six teams with zero.
The increased value of try would create a very different standing in league positions.
This shows three teams with no points, three with one, two and six, two with seven, one with eight and one with nine.
It can be seen after only one match the value of scoring tries against scoring penalties or drop-goals.
The introduction of the new scoring method should also include the double value of a try within a drawn game.
This is shown thus.
The points for a drawn game.
This is shown thus.
The points for a drawn game should be split based on the team scoring the most tries.
That team would get three points and their opponents one point.
At the end of the competition, the treble value of the try could result in promotion, demotion or the championship.
This occurs when teams have the same number of league points.
Then, the team that scored most tries in the competition would be awarded an additional ‘winning’ point.
This new scoring method lead to more tries being scored.
As increasing the winning margin by kicking will not increase the number of league points, a losing team that scores tries will reduce the difference in the number of league points awarded to themselves and their opponents.
Caledonian cheating?
A MAJOR feature of recent England v Scotland encounters has been the contest between Jeff Probyn and David Sole.
The pre-match encounters (via the pages of the press) have been ferocious to say the least.
David Sole has accused the Englishman of using illegal scrummaging the techniques, whilst Jeff Probyn has referred to the Scotsman's method of tripping his opponents.
Apparently David Sole uses his free arm to pull his opponent's legs from under him, thereby causing the scrum to collapse and invariably gaining a penalty.
Anyone associated with the game of rugby quite right abhors tactics which can easily cause injury.
It is interesting to note, therefore, that close examination of a scrummage during the Scotland v England match reveals Mr. Sole attempting the aforementioned manoeuvre and indeed winning a penalty.
The scrummage in question took place in the second-half underneath Scotland's goal posts.
As it was an England put-in, the referee was on the opposite side to Messrs. Sole and Probyn.
The referee was attracted by Mr. Simmonds the linesman and a penalty was awarded against Peter Winterbottom, thus relieving the pressure on Scotland's try-line.
The replay showed Peter Winterbottom pulling on the arm of David Sole, which presumably was the offence observed by the linesman.
What the linesman and the TV commentators failed to notice was that Peter Winterbottom was attempting to pull Sole's hand from Probyn's leg.
It was Sole's action that caused the collapsed scrummage, not ‘lowering’ by Probyn.
This sort of tactic, or cheating, clearly does not have a place in rugby at any level, and I trust that linesmen and referees will be more vigilant and that the TV pundits accept the evidence of their eyes and expose the practitioners of dangerous tactics.
Does rugby want spectators?
ON Saturday 4th January 1992 I took three of my sons to watch the Harlequins v Bath match at the Stoop Memorial Ground.
Our afternoon was not as enjoyable as it might have been because of a large number of supporters who had to stand alongside our seats in the east stand as they had purchased transfer tickets for seats and there were no seats for them.
A clear case of no room at the Stoop.
This group was constantly moving forward and as a result obscured our view of parts of the ground.
It seems that the stewards at the transfer gate to the east stand carried on selling tickets to the stand long after it was obviously full.
Even carrying on after being told that the stand was full.
The Harlequins ground is woefully inadequate to cope with the size of the crowd at such a big game, but they don't appear to help themselves.
Seats are not numbered and the transfer ticket merely allows entry to that part of the ground.
Surely all seats should be numbered and tickets allocated for individual seats as they are at other sporting and entertainment events.
This would have resulted in a much more enjoyable time for everyone.
Rugby has become big business and a spectator sport.
It is time to treat the spectators as paying customers and look after them.
If clubs don't act soon themselves spectators will flock away and the revival of interest after the World Cup will be gone.
Do something now before rugby has its own Taylor Report.
Penalty points
YOU asked for comments on the new proposals for points scoring.
First, I am against the value of the try being further increased.
This would only make for higher scores which can't be good for the game.
It is of course penalty kicks at goal which slow down play and I would deal with them very drastically, as in these modern days they quite often determine the result of a match.
I would both reduce their value to two points, the same for the dropped goal, and I would greatly reduce the number of offences for which a kick at goal would be allowed.
Off the shelf players
I WOULD like to post a question that has been troubling me for some time.
That is, ‘where do the good rugby players come from and how do they become established’?
The reason I ask is this; Last season my club achieved promotion in the Courage League and naturally all the players were very pleased and excited by the prospect of competing at a higher level of rugby.
I spent the summer in hard training in the gym and on the track in preparation for the coming season, as did many other players.
However, having started back at the club it has become apparent that the club has no intention of coaching last season's players to highlight weaknesses and prepare them for the higher level of rugby.
In fact the club has merely recruited already established players from other clubs, hence my original question.
This has transformed my initial excitement to disappointment and I find myself becoming disillusioned with the game to the point of considering giving up playing.
What is the point in striving to achieve when all my club wants to do is ‘buy in’ established players ‘off the shelf’?
It may sound like sour grapes but I assure you I feel no bitterness merely disappointed.
A fault in all nations
I FEEL I must write in response to Mr. D. Duggan's letter in RW&P February issue entitled ‘Welsh Thuggery’.
Firstly, violence of any nature has no place in rugby as I am sure the majority of players and spectators will agree.
But, unfortunately, as we are all too aware, it does rear its ugly head, whether as retribution to some  indescrepancy missed by the referee, or just downright dirty play.
Now Mr. Duggan may well have video evidence of Welsh dirty play in the past and also the statements of Will Carling, the England captain, may not be quite to his liking, but please gentlemen, come on!
Please take a look in your own back yard before pointing out the mess in others'.
I wonder if in ten years' time Mr. Duggan will be looking back at videos of ‘England's glory years’ and then be writing to RW&P to remind us of the lock forward who elbowed his opposite number from behind, perforating his eardrum, or the flankers who really don't seem to mind where their feet or hands come into contact with their opponents.
Please, don't get me wrong, I am not condoning Welsh (or any other team's) dirty play, nor am I saying that England are notoriously bad for it.
It exists in many games, in many nations, at all levels.
So, please, if we are going to constructively criticise this aspect of rugby, let's do it on the whole instead of singling out individual countries and then, perhaps, some progress in the right direction will be made.
Setting a bad example
I AM surprised to see that the England Colts selectors have included A. Jackson in the squad of 25 and also on training weekends, while at the present he is banned from playing for stamping.
Surely, with everybody concerned in rugby trying to protect a clean image within the game, the selectors should not encourage this type of play within youth rugby.
Kicking — another view
LIKE Nigel Starmer-Smith, in his comments in February's edition of RW&P , I too have felt concern over the continual use of the up-and-under and, indeed, the kick generally.
I have two possible ideas:
Firstly, to allow the mark, as it was, to be made anywhere in the field of play and subsequent kick to be allowed directly into touch, if so required.
This has the following points in its favour:
(a) With the concern for injuries this may afford protection to the catcher faced with two or three tacklers bearing down on him:
(b) The ground gained from the mark and subsequent kick may encourage teams to think twice about kicking.
My second idea is this, which is similar to the above.
The current laws on all kicking should remain except that any ball caught on the full from kick in general play can be returned directly into touch with the line-out at the point where the ball goes out of play — e.g. a scrum-half kicking for touch would still need to bounce the ball into touch but, should the kick be gathered on the full, then it can be kicked directly into touch.
This may also encourage teams to think more about their kicking plays.
Why single out Wales?
I WAS extremely disappointed to see the letter by East Yorkshire's Dennis Duggan in February's edition, and in your magazine for printing it.
The letter had no place in any magazine which seeks to promote rugby and to me it was an extremely biased and naive view of the Principality.
In my 25 years of watching international rugby I have seen many incidents of violence and cannot think of any country that is blameless.
It is often also the retaliation, not the provocation, that receives the punishment and the attention.
To single out Wales is entirely without justification and certainly the strong Welsh teams of the Seventies were sinned against on many occasions.
The names of Price (twice) and J.P.R. Williams immediately come to mind, having to leave the field after receiving serious injury at the hands of international opponents.
Mr Duggan is quite alone in his view that, to use his word, ‘most’ of Welsh players who did received the harshest punishments meted out by any R.F.U. — if you have any doubts ask Messrs Wheel and Moseley.
Finally, what I remember best about the Seventies were the close matches that Wales were involved in — e.g. 19–18 in 1971 at Murrayfield, where the result was in doubt until the final minutes.
Supporters of both sides could enjoy such matches and the crowd two years later back up in Scotland was enormous and was hoping for a repeat of the excitement.
No true supporter of any country would want Wales to remain in the doldrums, but would rather see them return to a competitive level because it is good for the game.
If your team wins by 30 points every week it soon becomes boring!
Why open old wounds?
AS a regular reader of Rugby World & Post , I had always assumed that your Postbag items were selected to instruct, inform, amuse or provoke constructive debate.
Why on earth, then, did you bother to print such gratuitous tripe as that contained, in the ‘Welsh Thuggery’ letter in your February issue?
Forgetting for a moment the totally illogical premise that Welsh teams get dirtier as they get better, I fail to see what useful purpose was served by raking up old controversies dating from a time when most of the current Welsh team were in primary school.
I'm not going to bother to comment on the individual allegations in the letter or cite examples on non-Welsh violence from the same period.
I'll leave that to those who seem to get their kicks out of harping on the negative side of this great game.
I'm more disappointed than angry…and a little saddened, too, to think that there's a rugby fan who can find nothing better to write about the game and a magazine that can find nothing better to print than such provocative nonsense.
Nick Cain's ROUNDABOUT
Monument to the Millennium
BY THE year 2000 Twickenham could be the biggest all-seater stadium outside the USA.
At that point, if the RFU's recently unveiled plans come to fruition, the ground will hold 75,000 spectators.
With the North Stand now completed work will begin on building a new East Stand as soon as this season ends.
The cost will be in the region of £26 million, although tenders for the work will not be submitted until March 2nd.
Completion date will be February 1994 with a final addition made in the summer of that year to blister the stand on to the north stand.
Capacity of the new stand will be 25,058, increasingly the ground capacity of 68,000.
Model manager: England's manager Geoff Cooke poses on the Twickenham turf next to the ground model for the year 2000.
Question of ergo
JUST to prove that there is life after rugby, last year's Grand Slam coach Roger Uttley decided to forsake this season's Paris showdown in favour of an altogether different sort of grunt-and-grind in Boston.
Uttley, Britain's over-40 Ergo champion (the Ergo is a form of torture disguised as a rowing machine and beloved of masochists everywhere), was in the States to compete in the World Championships.
Not that Uttley was allowed to completely forget his rugby past — also competing is fellow ‘crumbly’ Andy Ripley who, after taking the Ergo up in recent months, almost overtook Uttley at a recent head-to-head in a London gymnasium.
Come in no. 8!
The work will take place in stages and for the proposed South Africa international in November 1992, Baa-Baas v Australia and the Varsity match the ground capacity will be reduced to 44,000.
A lower tier of 10,000 seats will be ready for the 1993 Five Nations.
It's hoped that planning permission for the new West Stand will soon be granted with a view to completion by 2000 taking the stadium to 75,000 capacity.
To fund the East stand the RFU will reissue 1,000 business debentures to raise £6m. 10,000 individual debentures at a cost of £2,000 each will generate £20m.
There is also a proposal to issue car park debentures, 700 at £500 each.
All debentures are for a 10 year period.
Bucking the trend
DURING a year of economic depression RW&P has reflected the buoyancy of, and enthusiasm for, rugby football — with an official audited ABC circulation for 1991 of 43,556 — a leap ahead of 20 per cent in sales.
This stands in contrast to most consumer specialised magazine titles which have seen a fall in sales.
Thanks are in order to you, our readers.
Keep up the good work — and don't forget that this column and Postbag are here to provide you with the opportunity to air your news and views on the game!
Oh Dear!
THE DECISION of lock Simon Dear to join Quins, halfway through the season as Rosslyn Park — still without a league win this season — struggle to avoid relegation brought a strongly-worded response from Park coach Hugh McHardy: ‘The whole thing stinks — and I've told Simon so.
Why go now?
He cannot play in the cup or in the league games.
I'm very angry about all this and believe it's long past the time when serious questions must be asked about this form of recruitment’.
Dear, though, refuted any suggestions that his decision to leave Park, without a league win this year, was for any reason other than to win a place on the England ‘B’ tour to New Zealand — something he felt was unlikely if he stayed with Park.
Divide and rule?
THE French, as we all know, are a law unto themselves.
But the edict from Bernard Lapasset aimed at breaking-up and scattering England supporters to all corners of the Parc des Princes was plain barmy.
Lapasset, the newly installed President of the FFR, made this bizarre move in an attempt to muffle the sensitive ears of the French side from the  dulcit strains of ‘Sing Low, Sweet Chariot’ during their Championship showdown with England.
The French powers-that-be, smarting from four losses on the trot to ‘Les Rosbifs’, were clearly unhinged by the ‘England, England’ roar that drowned out the Dax brass band and its ilk during their World Cup quarter-final defeat.
Hence Lapasset's risible attempts to silence the English choirs.
Sing your hearts out!
Humble pie
BY crossing the Irish line six times at Twickenham, England in one fell swoop exceeded the total number of ties scored last year when winning the Grand Slam — and it's time for this columnist to eat humble pie, after criticising England, along with the other Home Unions, for inferior standards of back play to Southern Hemisphere sides.
Against Ireland the English backs showed wit, poise, passing skills and pace enough to set against the best.
Celebrity Squares!
Oh yes!
John Major with South African President F.W. de Klerk at Twickenham (left).
Bonjour Philippe!
Princess Di chats with French captain Sella at Cardiff Arms Park.
Cooking the ‘Boks?
WITH South Africa due to play at Twickenham on November 14 as part of a four-match tour, England manager Geoff Cooke gave an indication of the current thinking in the England camp.
‘I think it will take them a little while to catch up again.
I think they believe that all they have to do is to turn up and they'll beat the rest of us.
But you only get a certain impression watching television — you don't feel the pressure or the intensity.
‘It's easy to be critical by watching television and they may feel that they can just pick up where they left off.
But I don't believe that.
I may be proved wrong, but I think they will be surprised at the change in the pace and intensity of international rugby since they've been away.
‘And while we would expect to win that game at home, I'm under no illusions.
They will be big, powerful and very determined’.
Frosty reception Thumbs down at Sudbury!
Wasps skipper Mark Rigby.
THE WRANGLE between Wasps and Harlequins over whether or not they should have played their Pilkington Cup tie on January 25th raises important issues which the RFU needs to address.
In this instance Wasps skipper Mark Rigby, along with most of the journalists present, felt that by 12.15 p.m. the frost-hit pitch had thawed sufficiently to be playable.
Opposing captain Peter Winterbottom, one of six England internationals due to face Ireland the following weekend, disagreed.
The referee had stated previously that if the two captains could not agree he would err on the side of caution.
Said Rigby ‘consequently I agreed, reluctantly, to postpone the tie’.
Solution: have a suitably qualified RFU Ombudsman on hand to settle the issue irrespective of vested interests.
Sole sets his store
SCOTLAND captain David Sole has given short shrift to anyone who has blamed Martin Bayfield and Tim Rodber for the drastic change in Scottish scrummaging fortunes between the World Cup semi-final and the Five Nations opener, when his side scored their first pushover try against England for donkey's years, despite losing by a record score.
‘The criticism of our scrummage in the World Cup was unfair’, said Sole.
‘This time we pinpointed the English dangermen and concentrated on an eight-man push at every scrum.
The results were there for all to see’.
Sole gained personal satisfaction by redressing the balance in his personal — and often acrimonious — battle with England tighthead Jeff Probyn.
Sole also believes that ‘we should have had the game won by half-time’, and contends that Doddie Weir's perforated eardrum — caused by Wade Dooley's elbow — changed the course of the game.
Contentious stuff.
Sunshine coaster…
IT MIGHT not have seemed so at the time, but Troy Coker's sending-off for punching against Bath proved to be a blessing in disguise for the quarrelsome Queenslander.
Harlequins' prompt 30-day suspension of the Wallaby World Cup forward, which forestalled any further action by the powers-that-be, did lead to him sitting out the loss to Northampton in the league (although few of Quins' other internationals played anyway).
But the suspension also meant that Coker was able to whizz back to Oz for a two-week training camp in Brisbane with Queensland to return having served his time and he missed almost none of the domestic season.
Could news of his imminent availability have had anything to do with the controversial postponement of Quins' Pilkington Cup tie at Wasps?
Troy Coker heads for home after being sent off against Bath at the Stoop.
‘SEEN & HEARD…
‘I believe they wired it to a car battery and the body asked if Danie Craven is still President of the South African Rugby Board ’—UNNAMED SOUTH AFRICAN PLAYER on hearing that a Bronze Age body had been found perfectly preserved in an Alpine glacier.
‘Fred Howard is an excellent referee and showed his experience in the way he handled the situation.
Copsey is nor a dirty player and it would have been tragic had he been sent off in his first international ’—IEUAN EVANS (Wales captain) on the Tony Copsey incident in Dublin against Ireland.
It is a tough game, you expect these things.
It wasn't worth a sending-off ’—NEIL FRANCIS (Ireland lock) on the punch he received from Wales lock and debutant Tony Copsey.
‘Now Earle Kirton will have his ambition — he will be able to follow his television comments and play John Kirwan at centre ’—TVNZ COMMENTATOR after Kirton become New Zealand's assistant coach.
‘This is the best England team I have ever seen or played against.
There is no way they cannot go all the way yet again ’—CIARAN FITZGERALD (Ireland coach) after the 38–9 drubbing at the hands of England at Twickenham.
‘You can see right through Doddie's head now.
When he was in the bath his head just filled with water’ and ‘I am sorry, I can't hear you my head's full of water!’—IAN McGEECHAN (Scotland manager) and DODDIE WEIR (Scotland lock) on the eardrum Weir had perforated in the Calcutta Cup match.
‘I've made up my mind that I don't want to play league no mater what the money is ’—WILLIE OFAHENGAUE (Wallaby flanker).
‘I always used to wonder why so many players retired without putting anything back into their clubs.
Now I know ’—JOHN SCOTT (ex-England no.8) after being dismissed by Cardiff.
‘They say Eastern Province rugby is tough but, hell, this is different.
Sometimes both packs just kick and punch each other for the whole game.
Lucky I can look after myself ’—ADRI GELDENHUYS (Eastern Province lock currently playing for Tarbes in France) on French club rugby.
‘An All Black tour of South Africa is every coach's dream.
However, perhaps it would be best for us if the tour is not soon ’—LAURIE MAINS (new All Black coach) on future contests with South Africa.
‘The feedback I have had has all been positive.
People realise that these things come along and you have to look at them ’—CRAIG INNES (former All Black centre) on his signing for Leeds RLFC.
5 NATIONS
BAYFIELD — tower in the inferno
AT 6ft 10ins MARTIN BAYFIELD is the tallest man to ever to play for England.
But, height apart, does he have what it takes to fill Paul Ackford's boots?
MICK CLEARY investigates.
It was difficult to tell who was the more shocked — the Scots or the English.
The first half at Murrayfield had seen Scotland turn England over in the line-out by 13–2.
How come?
England had all the big men — Bayfield, Dooley and Rodber — yet the Scots had run away with the ball.
That it didn't cost England more dearly was due to the fact that the Scots simply hadn't planned for such a generous return and were consequently playing the wrong strategy.
Tall guy or fall guy?
Bayfield's line-out future will depend on quality timing and support.
They'll look back on that opening forty minutes as a period of massively missed opportunity.
Outsiders, particularly general sports feature writers, often look upon rugby as a fairly simplistic game.
The forwards grunt and grapple while the backs stand idly around and get cold hands.
Yet the events at Murrayfield illustrated just what a complex sport rugby union actually is.
Therein lies a lot of its appeal, if only you could be bothered to look for it.
(Why is it that American Football, an infinitely more static, convoluted sport should draw such paeans of admiration from the same sportswriters who condemn rugby union matches for being dull and boring?
Sophistication is in the eye of the beholder.)
The line-out is a case in point.
On paper England should have creamed Scotland.
Bayfield, 6ft 10ins, against Edwards 6ft 4ins, Dooley 6ft 8ins against Weir, 6ft 6ins, Rodber 6ft 6in against White, 6ft 4ins.
As has been pointed out many times in the past, sport isn't played on paper, it's played on grass.
And there Scotland out-thought and outsmarted England.
If the line-out were a simple matter of one man outjumping another, then England would have been in the driving seat.
Even with lead in his boots, Bayfield had a six inches start on Edwards.
Yet he failed either to get that first touch, or, if he did, failed to get it cleanly to Dewi Morris.
Why?
Let us call in two expert witnesses.
The first is Jim Glennon, who won half a dozen caps for Ireland in the eighties.
Glennon was a similar height and build to Edwards and in 1987 had to face a similar height problem when he came up against England's Dave Cusani.
‘It's all about the backside’, says Glennon.
‘I may not have been the tallest, nor the most athletic — Mick Doyle reckoned I only ever jumped from my shoulders up — but what I did have was the most effective arse in world rugby’.
The Glennon arse went to work, blocking, barging and obstructing.
Ireland won 17–0, and Cusani went back to playing for Orrell after his only cap.
Paul Ackford tells a similar tale.
‘Last one standing gets the ball’, is his familiar appraisal of the line-out jungle.
Ackford, though, suggests that brute force will only get you so far.
‘It's all nowhere near as easy as it looks’, he says.
‘My first cap was against Australia in 1988 when we won handsomely.
The teams praises were duly sung and I drew my fair share of the applause.
Yet I won only four line-outs that afternoon.
I bet Martin Bayfield took more against Scotland.
‘People have got used to England winning line-out balls over the last few years.
That's a compliment, of course, but it didn't happen just because I was tall or that I was particularly athletic.
It arose from a combination of factors.
The two key elements are  space and timing.
Firstly, you don't get much space, which is why I was so lucky to have Paul Rendall clearing the way for me.
‘The Judge was without equal in the line-out.
Never mind his scrummaging, or doubts about his fitness round the park, he was worth his ticket for his line-out work.
With him there you were never  baulked ; you rarely got a clout from your opposite number and you never had the middle jumper leaning forward to nab your ball.
He created space when you needed it and closed it when you didn't.
‘Secondly, timing is crucial and is something that you simply cannot work on alone.
You have to work constantly with your hooker.
In that respect again I was very fortunate in having Brian Moore.
We worked together at ‘Quins, with England and then on a five-week British Lions tour.
If we couldn't get our act together after all that, then we were never going to.
There are only really four principal types of throw: two different flat balls and two different lobs, the variation simply being the point at which you take the ball.
‘In the end Brian and I knew almost without saying where the ball would go to, particularly if the opposition tried a last-second diversion.
When that happened we worked intuitively.
We also worked out in the end a system whereby Brian would react to my jump rather than I react to his throw.
The advantage here is that your opponent can't really watch you because then he does not see the ball.
The disadvantage is that if the ball isn't in quickly enough you're on your way down.
‘It took a long time for all this to evolve.
The greatest lineout jumper in the world is not going to walk into any old team and have it happen overnight.
As with Martin Bayfield, I also had to get used to front jumping after a career spent in the middle.
The positions are totally different.
You need to be far more dynamic at the front, launching yourself at all sorts of angles.
‘You have far less time than in the middle to adjust your leap.
That's why the theory of the good little ‘un outdoing the mediocre big ‘un is valid.
Height is not everything here by any means.
The best jumper I came across was the  Argentinian , Llanes, who outfoxed me time and again.
With regular top-level practice he would have been a world beater’.
England did finally come to terms with their first-half lineout problems.
They realised that they had to tighten everything up, an approach which was helped immeasurably by the mid-second half arrival of Dean Richards.
They also stopped switching the jumpers around, allowing Bayfield, in particular, a bit of time to settle.
Even so they could have done with cutting the lineouts more, even though this strategy runs the risks of cluttering the midfield.
There's no doubt that there is a case for saying that Bayfield is too big for front-jumping.
As Edwards showed, there are all sorts of ways of getting in front of the bigger man.
Hard as he is working on the switch, it may be that Bayfield is being groomed in the rigours of international rugby so as to be better able to step into Dooley's shoes when he finally retires, probably at the end of this season.
Bayfield himself is keen to build on these early experiences.
‘No matter how well briefed you've been’, he says, ‘nothing can prepare you for the shock of international rugby.
It's faster, harder and, if you lose concentration for a second, you've had it.
I had problems in the first half against Scotland.
In part this was a tribute to the Scots, who disrupted brilliantly.
‘It doesn't matter how tall you are, if you can't get your feet off the ground, you're no better than anyone else.
There's no such thing as a text book jump and catch in international rugby: I was naive in thinking so.
You have to get the ball by any means you can.
‘There's still a lot of work to be done on the timing of the throw.
At times I was on the way down and the ball was on the way up.
It will take the time to perfect.
But I know that there is not much time.
I'm not in the side simply to learn.
You only get a limited number of chances.
If I can get through this season and maybe onto the ‘B’ tour to New Zealand, then I would hope to be in a position to start having a big influence on matches, rather than just reacting to events as they happen’.
Sydney shut-out: Martin Bayfield got the better of Wallaby John Eales this time, but discovered that there is more to winning line-out ball than being the tallest man on the park as Australia waltzed away 40–15.
ROGER UTTLEY ON THE RICHARDS CONUNDRUM
There is no better player to have alongside you than Dean Richards.
He is a player's player.
If it's a wet, horrible day and the opposition are messing you about, then there is only one man which every side in the world would pick in their back row — Dean Richards.
What went wrong then?
Dean did lose some of his form.
When that goes, he hasn't great reserves of fitness with which to compensate.
The first signs came in the opening match against Wales last season.
Have you ever seen Dean Richards fumble a ball?
He did it two or three times in that match.
The slide continued.
When I talk about a slide, it was minimal and from the highest of heights.
Even then Dean was at a point most players would never dream of reaching.
He has an immense influence on a match.
His strength is unbelievable and is a crucial asset in close-quarter exchanges.
He gives a definite shape to a side in that he gets his hands on the ball and keeps moving forward.
It's almost impossible to put him down in the tackle, and there are few players about who you an say that.
You saw that when he came on against Scotland.
He had his hands on the ball three times in one spilling maul.
At the line-out he's not the tallest or the springiest jumper, but yet again he gets his hands on the ball, snapping up all the ricochets.
However, Richards is a reactive rather than proactive player.
He plays in a definite way, dropping off scrums into a defensive pocket.
In the modern game, as the Australians proved, that can be a liability.
Dean also likes the game to be stop-start; England wanted more continuity, hence the change.
Tim Rodber would have to be a brilliant player to get near Dean's standard in his first game.
Rodber has huge potential, however, a great physique, a fair turn of speed and good hands.
He knows, though, that he has still a lot to learn, particularly about the  unglamorous side of things.
He needs to do more of the toiler's work and not hang off.
There's a danger when you're inexperienced of wanting to make a visible mark just in case people don't notice you.
That's commendable in some ways but good forward play depends on honest commitment with everyone getting stuck in.
At the line-out Tim needs to make sure that his first touch goes to hand and not just anywhere.
He also cannot afford to get pulled out of position in the line-out.
All this criticism at the highest level.
Rodber is a definite player of the future.
The pressure is on him, if for not other reason than he knows that Deano is on the bench.
There can be no greater spur.
I'm sure he will rise to it.
5 NATIONS ROUND 1
SASSENACHS FOLLOW SCRIPT!
The Murrayfield throng was strangely muted.
After the World Cup semi-final defeat and the retirements of Calder and Jeffrey pessimism reigned.
How could Scotland withstand the might and height of the Sassenachs?
A remarkable first-half line-out ascendancy (11–2) provided the answer.
But apart from embarrassing the English pack with a pushover try, Scotland had no counter to the pace or defensive strength of England's backs.
Tries by Underwood and Morris were backed-up by Webb's boot as the English pack bolstered by Richards, came back in the second-half for a record victory.
in the eye of the storm, England prop Jason Leonard gets to grips with debutant scrum-half Andy Nicol as England begin to take control after a shaky opening half.
Halliday settles the score
WHAT on earth did Scotland do with that ball in the first half?
They would have planned to have won only about half the amount of possession that they did actually get and still hoped to have been in front.
Yet, despite dominating the line-out and even pushing England over their own line for a try just before halftime, they still turned round 10–7 in arrears.
Goal-kicking was one factor.
Gavin Hastings had a frustrating afternoon.
He didn't miss by much, but he missed.
Such failures are not only reflected on the score board — Scotland could well have turned round at 16–10 — but also in the morale of the side.
All that effort and so little reward.
There was a feeling, however, that even if Scotland had nudged ahead, it was only a matter of time before England got their act together.
They took a long time to settle, missing more than they realised the wise, old heads of Ackford, Teague and even Richards.
When Richards finally emerged — as ever it was no gladiator's entrance; just the usual shambling, dishevelled Deano — the game seemed to suddenly shift England's way.
Rodber was taken off with spinal concussion midway through the second half, and within minutes Richards was shepherding a maul forty metres downfield.
As Richards generously admitted however, the match was already beginning to turn in England's favour.
Maybe, but there's little doubt that England had missed Richards' tight control in the first half.
Rodber, though, will learn.
How lucky England were also to have a footballer of Halliday's ability in the side.
He created both tries.
The first, in the 27th minute, showed tremendous vision and courage.
Rodber and Winterbottom dislodged the ball from Gavin Hastings just outside the England 22.
As halliday received it, the safe option was to kick.
Instead he linked with Guscott, forcing his former Bath colleague to get behind him.
Guscott passed on and Underwood did the business from 70 metres.
The second effort was another wonderfully alert piece of rugby.
Only minutes before the final whistle, Halliday weaved his way infield, causing the disruption from which Morris was to score.
The scoreline flattered England.
But, if they can play as indifferently as this and still win by a record margin, then the Gods are obviously with them.
Someone up there must have wagered a few bob on them for another Grand Slam.
Simon Halliday's sensational defence-splitting run is brought to a halt by Gavin Hastings' tackle — but not before the England winger gets his pass away to set up Dewi Morris's try.
BEAUMONT AT LARGE ‘Dewi Morris has made a tremendous difference to England.
Even when he makes mistakes he still gets results and makes the gain line.
He's always looking to take on the back row and his sheer physical strength is phenomenal…
I have never seen England play better than they did against Ireland and I'm sure few other people would argue about that.
England played a fine open game with the backs being absolutely tremendous.
Carling has possibly his best international and Guscott was just as good.
Add in a marvellous performance by Dewi Morris and good efforts from the other backs and you had one of the greatest running displays I've ever seen.
Ireland had to watch and suffer.
Morris, in particular, has made a tremendous difference to England these last two games.
Even when he makes mistakes he does it in a way that still brings results and takes him over the gain line.
He can take on a back row and come out trumps, giving good ball sooner or later for his backs to benefit.
His sheer physical strength is phenomenal.
Again, what a bonus Webb has become since he was restored to the team.
His incursions into the line are always well-timed and his goal-kicking has been immaculate so far.
If he does retire to concentrate on his medical duties it will be a big loss.
Underwood has been, well, plain Underwood.
Rob Andrew had a quiet game, which is meant as a compliment because whatever he did was done efficiently and without fuss, whilst he always took the right option.
As Simon Halliday is a fine footballer and made his own contribution with a try you can say that it was almost a perfect backline.
Perhaps I would be a bit churlish if I said that they could have scored even more in the second half, but that's a minor complaint.
They lost concentration at times with a big lead behind them.
However, I do have a few reservations about the display of the pack.
The forwards were again beaten in the line-outs during the first half.
although Wade Dooley had a fine game after the break.
Martin Bayfield has yet to convince me that he is answer to the no.2 jumping position, although his work in the rucks was good.
Tim Rodber had a much better game that at Murrayfield and won his share of the ball at the tail of the line-outs, but it remained an area where Ireland did hold their own through the excellent play of Neil Francis and Brian Robinson.
The back row played well and so did the front three, so any optimism I may feel about the future is well grounded.
In fact, England should go from strength to strength if the England ‘B’ performance against Ireland ‘B’is any guide.
With almost half the present team threatening to retire at the end of the season — and who can blame them if it means that they go out on a high note — this was excellent news.
I am sure other countries would be happy to field the England ‘B’ side for their top international XV.
Great expectations
In fact, the present strength in depth of the England set-up and the fine organisation nationally bodes extremely well for the next few seasons.
I will be extremely disappointed if we don't go on winning.
Barring accidents, we should win another Grand Slam.
And the ‘B’ tour to New Zealand will be an admirable opportunity for the fringe men to gain valuable international experience.
I would include in the party the current inexperienced members of the full squad, particularly Dewi Morris, who would reap huge benefits from making the trip.
If I sound euphoric I make no apologies, It has been a superb period for English rugby and will also be a hard act to follow, but after the weekend of the Irish visit I am sure that we can go on to even greater things from here.
SCOTLAND
PIECE OF CAKE for the laddie from Dundee
ANDY NICOL couldn't have had a harder act to follow than Armstrong.
But, in BILL McLAREN's view, the new Scotland scrum-half looks as if he's made-to-measure.
There hardly could be a harder act to follow  than Gary Armstrong, universally rated the outstanding scrum-half in the world game, but Andrew Nicol of Dundee High School FP made an impressive stab at it when thrown to the English wolves at Murrayfield on January 18.
Considering that he was the youngest player on the field at just 20 he had a memorable cap debut and seems destined to enjoy a lengthy career in Scotland's senior squad.
Perhaps his initial success shouldn't have been all that surprising for he comes of good rugby stock.
His grandfather, George Ritchie, played prop for Scotland against England at Twickenham in 1932 and, still a lively 82, takes a keen interest in his grandson's fortunes and indeed watched his international debut from the Murrayfield stand, his first visit there since 1988.
Grandfather and grandson and Scotland's 1984 Grand Slam flanker, David Leslie, are the only players to have been capped when playing for Dundee HS FP although internationalists J.S. Wilson and Chris Rea also are former pupils of the school.
Andrew's father, David played lock for the club and has had two two-year spells as the club president, while his mother, Kathleen, a physiotherapist at Kings Hospital, Dundee, has had a big influence, not least in ensuring speedy recovery from injury, notably from the sprung collarbone sustained in the ‘B’ international against Ireland on December 28.
Having just returned from Scotland's weekend squad sessions at St. Andrews, two tough dollops of over three hours each, he was feeling the effects, but clearly revels in his involvement: ‘National sessions are at a higher intensity than those at club and district level in that you are working with very good and experienced players but it is just so enjoyable setting hard challenges whilst you are learning so much from players who have been through it all so often before’.
From the start of his rugby involvement he has been marked down as one of very high promise.
He joined the mini-section of the Panmure Club in Dundee as an 8-year-old, is one of only two players to have represented Scottish Schools over three seasons, he played for Scotland Under-19, led Scottish Schools over three seasons, played for Scotland Under-19, had a brief spell with Heriot's FP before sharing in the National League successes of Dundee HS FP.
That led to his selection for the 1990 district championship in the North and Midlands side and also this season he has played twice for Scotland ‘B’, scoring a try in each match.
His try-scoring feats this season have been remarkable.
Indeed, it is a matter of pride for his club that in the February issue of Rugby World & Post Andrew led the try-scorers in Britain and Ireland with 23 (he now has 26) and his partner at stand-off, Jonathan Newton, led the point-scorers with 267 (now over 300);
‘The number of tries I have scored is really a tribute to the way that our club side have been playing.
I have been helped a great deal just through playing for Dundee High.
They play a genuine 15-man game and I enjoy that kind of style.
It has helped my try-scoring, too, that I am responsible for scoring our pushover tries.
We have a signal when we are going for them and it is up to me to go in and score.
It means that our no. 8 can stay down and help the shove.
Perhaps there is a slight disadvantage in playing in Division 2 in that you do not play against the very top sides and players week in, week out, but hopefully Dundee High will earn promotion to the top division before very long.
I've been very fortunate also in having Rob Moffat as coach to the Scottish Schools side.
He taught me a lot and was also a good type of person for whom I always have had a very high regard.
‘So too for Sandy Hutchison, my games teacher at school and now coach to the Dundee High backs.
He has been so encouraging.
Once when I was at school he told me that I should spend the entire summer working on improving my passing off my left hand and my kicking off my left  foot.
Well, I really did slog at it and once back in school I said to him: ‘Tell what you think of this’.
He was amazed with the improvement I had made and it showed just what can be achieved with hard practice.
I am relatively happy with my passing and kicking.
But you always have to be seeking improvement.
I think that I am probably a bit sharper in the burst than over the long distance but during the two ‘B’ games I felt really sharp and I have been working on my speed and strength with the SRU fitness specialist, David McLean’.
Undoubtedly one of the most important milestones in the Nicol career was his selection for the Scottish tour to North American in May 1991, during which he played in three of the six games and scored a try in each one: ‘That really was the start of things.
It was a tremendous experience and I loved every minute of it, daily training, the fact that you were in company of really good players all the time.
Dougie Morgan and Richie Dixon, the coaches, have my highest regard and Dougie was specially helpful as a former international scrum-half and captain.
Then, in missing the trial because of my collarbone injury, I thought I might have missed my chance because Greig Oliver played very well in the trial.
But I was picked for the bench against England and was in the clubhouse on the Saturday night before when someone said: ‘Have you heard the news on the radio?
Gary Armstrong has been hurt in today's game’.
‘It wasn't until the national squad session the following day that Ian McGeechan announced that I would be playing against England.
It was desperately bad luck on Gary but, in a typical lovely gesture, he came across on his crutches to congratulate me and wish me well.
I would have been quite happy just to have been on the bench for the entire championship but, as it turned out, I had another big incentive in that as Gary might not play for the rest of the Five Nations there would be four internationals available if I proved good enough’.
On the day Nicol fitted in as to the manor born, his electrifying pace very much in evidence, notably in a touchline burst that almost led to a try by Gavin Hastings and in a scorching bit of cover to save a certain try by a scything tackle on Jeremy Guscott: ‘That first cap game was an amazing experience.
I was nervous in the dressing room but once on the pitch and with the thrill of being presented to the Princess Royal it felt just great and I have never been so proud in my life, especially when I saw my sister, Kirsty, up in the stand.
That did settle me because it was such a nice feeling to think that I was sharing this memorable day with the rest of my family.
‘I didn't really find any problems in jelling with Craig Chalmers.
Actually, I hadn't played with Craig on the North American tour but we had trained together and he is such a very good player, and, of course, in playing district and other representative rugby you just have to fit in with different stand-offs.
In fact my own club stand-offs.
In fact my own club stand-off, Jonathan Newton, keeps my on my toes because he moves around a lot, in fact all over the place, and I just have to find him wherever he is!
‘Ambitions?
I just want to play against Ireland in the next match.
Once you have experienced and enjoyed the particular flavour of playing for your country in a cap international you just want to do so again and again.
I've often wondered how chaps with 50 caps could keep themselves going for so many international commitments.
I know now.’
Away from the English wolves: Andy Nicol, bloodied from the fray, fires the ball from a ruck.
JIM RENWICK OF THE SCOTTISH STARSHIP ENTERPRISE
Now it seems that percentage rugby is the name of the game.
You must not take risks and the idea is to hit the opposing tackler and keep the momentum going through second phase, which is not pretty to watch — and not always effective if the other team can tackle, as England showed us recently at Murrayfield.
Alternatives are needed — players with flair who can outwit defences with jinking and sidesteps and cause plenty of confusion.
But where are they?
On the international scene there are David Campese, Jeremy Guscott and Philippe Sella but few others, which could be bad for the future of the game as a spectacle.
After all, nothing gives a player more pleasure than being able to put his head back and run with the ball.
This is also the best advertisement for encouraging kids to take up the game.
In Scotland there are only a few who might in the future provide this at the top level.
I can think of Graham Shiel, Gregor Townsend and Rowen Shepherd and I've also heard good reports of Fraser Harrold of London Scottish.
It's a sad state of affairs.
The recent match against England saw our pack provide plenty of good possession until England got their act together — and even for a time after that.
I'd give the back row another chance to establish themselves.
The new flankers could make the grade, but their efforts will be wasted if the backs rely only on crash ball to make ground.
If you take no risks, in the end nothing is achieved.
A wee bit of enterprise — and I'm not advocating the selection only of people with flair, but just one or two to keep a proper balance — must pay dividends in the long run.
It's a great feeling when you try something and it works out as it did in Cardiff back in 1982 when we beat Wales 34–18 and ended their 14-year record of home invincibility.
The whole team caught the bug and you know the rest.
We need inspirational backs.
We don't need to have their flair coached out of them.
BUCK'S BROADSIDE
The Five Nations brings serious domestic club competition to a standstill.
But why?
WAYNE SHELFORD puts the case for the capped élite being involved in non-Championship weekends and argues that league games on international days would bring out the best in clubs.
It's been difficult to get a game in these last five weeks what with the weather and the Five Nations.
I'm not quite sure why the Championship actually disrupts things the way it does.
I know the system is different in New Zealand but the principle is surely the same: why shouldn't there be league games on the same days as the internationals?
If the fixture list is so crowded it would be one way of freeing some space.
I can already hear the objections from those clubs who have a few players tied up with the Championship.
Why should we play with a weakened team they say?
Because that's the way you develop players, give them a chance of first-grade football and get them used to operating in the big time.
It would encourage a lot of talent.
Clubs have to have strength in depth if they want to prosper.
If clubs are that concerned, then why not switch the match to Sunday and get the international players to turn up.
I've done that a few times back home and, although you're nowhere near full throttle, you can still have an influence on those around you.
As I've said many times before, pressure is only a condition of the mind.
If you think that you're going to be tired by playing so much, then you will be tired.
I've played back-to-back rugby for four years now and I feel as fresh as the day that I started.
Players have to learn to control their minds, learn how to switch on and off.
It seems to me that part of the problem of players complaining about the pressure of the modern game is that they have not attuned themselves properly to what is required.
Sure, an international is intense, but if you learn how to come down from it as well build up for it, the problems simply will not develop.
Different players will find it harder than others to come down from a game.
If you've lost, then some might never come down.
However, it's all about adjusting yourself psychologically.
If you think it's all going to be tough — international, cup match, league match — it will be tough.
We were very grateful to Tim Rodber for turning out for us against Harlequins the week before he won his first cap.
Six of the ‘Quins were missing for various reasons.
Obviously the City boys are a bit fussier than the country boys about when they play.
Suffice to say that Tim won a lot of respect from a lot of people that day.
He appreciated that he got his international chance because of his club and he wanted to give something back.
I thought that he had a good international debut.
As even Dean Richards admitted, the game was beginning to turn when Tim had to go off.
He's a different player to Dean, more in the Murray Mexted mould: taller, a bit more athletic, but without the bulk that either I or Dean can supply.
There are disadvantages to being too tall, as Martin Bayfield is also finding out.
Tall men cannot drive as easily as smaller men.
All that is needed, though, is a shift in body angles.
Tim in particular will have to learn how to lower his centre of gravity by spreading his  legs, making it harder for people to knock him over.
The opening games did not go quite as I expected in that I was surprised to see Wales beat Ireland.
Mind you, who can work out with any degree of accuracy just how the Irish are going to perform?
England were perhaps flattered by the scoreline against the Scots but did well in the second half to get the game moving in the direction that they wanted.
They should never have shifted their line-out men around the way that they did in the first 40 minutes.
Martin needed a bit of time to settle down and should have been given a couple of throws in his usual position in the middle before going to the front and staying there.
Line-out ball is crucial.
If you're good in that area you control the game.
You can kick the ball off the park when and where you want.
To lose your own ball in a line-out is more damaging than losing a strike against the head.
There are so many more options to be taken from a line-out.
I would like to see England be more adventurous in their strategy from these set-pieces.
Their prime option still seems to be to kick.
In a way it's understandable in that they've got the height to win lineouts.
But there comes a point when you have to move on from there.
They've got the ability to score from 70 metres out, as they showed against Scotland, so why not go for it?
The boot is still the dominant feature of the game, more so now that we have this tactic of kicking deep for position.
The antidote to this has to be the counter-attack, as I'm sure we'll see from the French.
Players will argue that with six men spread across the field just ten metres from the catcher, there is little scope for the counter.
There is always scope for the counter-attack.
To effect it, though, you need support.
Support play has been poor these last couple of years everywhere except Australia.
As soon as a fly-half passes, he should drop back and prepare to loop, or take an inside pass.
And so too with the inside centre and so on across the field.
It's the way to breach the drift defence — change direction or swamp them by numbers.
Finally, a look to the future.
The next World Cup in South Africa?
I'd be quite happy to see it there.
What a marvellous chance for half a million visitors to see what changes there have or haven't been.
If not there, then what about Canada and the States mounting a joint operation?
I would symbolise a desire to promote the game worldwide.
It might just give the game the boost it needs over there.
It might also show the Americans that not everyone in a contact sport wears padding.
Whitbread RUGBY WORLD Player of the Month SIMON HALLIDAY
Back at the beginning of the eighties Bath coach Jack Rowell was looking to build a side for the future.
He was to base it around one man —SIMON HALLIDAY .
Rowell saw the tremendous influence a player like Halliday would have on any team.
England, too, came to realise his significance which is why, since the Carling-Guscott partnership began, they have tried somehow to work him into the side.
That he is not a wing by inclination matters little.
Halliday has the vision to size up virtually any position in the backs.
At Murrayfield, his talent shone through.
He made both England tries, having the nous as well as the courage to launch a counter-attack from deep inside his own half.
His athletic, shimmying run then set up the second-try for Dewi Morris.
He has won 21 caps, five cup winners’ medals with Bath and one with Harlequins whom he joined at the beginning of 1991.
His career has been hampered by injury, most noticeably a broken leg in 1983.
Aged 31, the 6ft., 14 stone Halliday won three rugby Blues at Oxford University (1979–81) as well as two cricket Blues.
A stockbroker, he wins the award ahead of Robert Jones (Swansea), Martin Haag (Bath), Rory Underwood (Leicester), Neil Edwards (Harlequins), Richard Webster (Swansea) and Ben Clarke (Bath).
DOWN THE LINE with PHIL BENNETT
Predictability our problem
As the French were favourites to beat us again I should not really be disappointed by the Cardiff result.
But I am because we dominated in so many respects — especially at the line-out — and had enough ball to have won.
It was not a very good French side, but they showed many of the basic national virtues and that was what gave them their narrow victory.
The Welsh problem was the poor way we used the ball we received.
It was a good idea to loft a few garryowens at their defence, but it was a tactic that was over-used.
And when it was employed it wasn't done well enough.
Lafond was never put under enough pressure.
Once the French had worked out the tactic, it gave them a chance to run the ball back at us.
This was there the captain would have done well to change the plan.
He did eventually change things, but by then it was too late.
Sella and Mesnel had the midfield defence far too well organised.
However, there is a good chance that this inexperienced Welsh side will have picked up plenty of tips from the loss.
They will have seen from the French try how even a moderate French team was able to launch Cabannes and Cécillon at our midfield and, once they had been committed, spread the ball for Saint-André to score a classic try.
In Stuart Davies and Emyr Lewis we have two forwards in the same mould who could do the same to France one day.
For any backs to progress they must receive the ball quickly.
Robert Jones — in contrast to Galthié — did not have one of the better games.
This was made worse because most of our second phase was from ruck ball as opposed to their reliance on mauls, which kept forward momentum going.
With ruck ball you must get it speedily or else the opposition — as the French did — will be able to lie flat and close you down.
If Jones has learned from this moderate performance the long-term problems won't be too bad.
I am encouraged by the two opening games of this Five Nations campaign.
The pride, passion and commitment are back again.
But I have one major reservation, which is the total absence of ‘B’ and Under-23 games.
The WRU has to arrange such matches — the more the better so that the selectors can see up-and-coming players in the proper environment.
I can't see anyone stopping England.
France will just about be able to hold them in the line-out if Roumat plays, but the so-called hard men in the pack don't look that tough to me.
England — even in Paris — should win that one, which will leave Wales at Twickenham between them and the Grand Slam.
I just can't see us managing it, although we should finish off our season by beating Scotland in Cardiff.
What our boys badly need is a few wins.
This could be done if the WRU were to organise a summer tour of four or five matches to one of the lesser European nations.
Italy would be ideal, although from World Cup form they will be no pushovers.
A less exacting tour would be good for blending a team and producing the kind of team spirit I was lucky enough to sense when I played under John Dawes.
He operated with the confidence of a winning captain and could almost instinctively change tactics when necessary.
I would avoid changing this team.
The players need to have a chance to settle down.
If they are given a vote of confidence this season it could bring dividends.
At least it will be no whitewash this season.
If we can break even — as I think we will — it will be a qualified success.
With Copsey and Gareth Llewellyn improving all the time, we could just have a bright future ahead of us.
5 NATIONS ROUND 1
DRAGONS BREATHE AGAIN
The men in red punched the air as referee Howard's whistle shrilled no side.
The Welsh famine was over.
Alan Davies' men had good reason for jubilation as a spirited fight-back earned a first Championship win since 1989.
Despite trailing 15–6 with thirty minutes left the Dragons were well worth the win secured by debutant no.8 Stuart Davies' try, so comprehensive was their second-half determination.
Traditional Irish combativeness was nowhere to be seen as they allowed Robert Jones and his back row to steer Wales out of the doldrums.
IRELAND 15 WALES 16     
Saunders scuppered.
Wales hooker Garin Jenkins collars Ireland's Rob Saunders to complete a dismal afternoon for the scrum-half as his side cave in at Lansdowne Road.
Looking on are (l-r)Griffiths, Popplewell, Gibbs and Smith.
Direct Clement closes debit
THERE was a great line published in a Dublin newspaper on the eve of this game.
It warned that: ‘One wallow doesn't make a summer’, a reference to the misleading optimism being gleaned by those who kept harking back to Ireland's great performance in the World Cup.
How prophetic it proved.
After the heights scaled in that quarter-final, Ireland plunged to six feet under in this match proving, in the course of the game, that the only predictable thing about them is their unpredictability.
Expect them to be hammered and they hold the eventual World Cup winners to a point: expect them to see off a side which had not won in the Championship for three years and they submit weakly.
Forget the close scoreline.
Wales were convincing winners even though they trailed 15–6 with half an hour to go.
Wales, of course, will have to heed the lesson of the Irish and not assume that all their troubles are over.
The signs of a revival were there, however.
The forwards had a genuine hardness and solidity about them, a welcome sight after the pathetic shaven-headed posturing of recent years.
The back row of Webster, Lewis and debutant no.8, Stuart Davies, was an impressive force throughout, the letter rounding off a good first match with a try.
Robert Jones sparkled, Tony Clement was constantly in the thick of things at fullback, whether kicking long and meaningfully or surging through on the counter-attack.
Wales still struggled for possession although Copsey's aggressive involvement ensured that Ireland's ball was not delivered as smoothly as it might have been.
Copsey should have been awarded a Lonsdale belt for his first-half haymaker on Francis.
The Llanelli lock confessed afterwards that: ‘I knew it was a mistake before the punch ever landed’.
Colin Stephens did not quite convince that he was the Messiah in waiting at flyhalf although his coolly taken first-half drop goal showed that he can perform under pressure.
As for Ireland, short of trip to Lourdes, it's not easy to see where the instant cure will come from.
Fitness was, as ever, a big problem and is a deficiency which will not be easily made up during the Championship.
The half-backs had a wretched afternoon, the result of which was the demotion of Saunders.
All in all it could be a long haul this season.
But, there again, just when you thought it was safe to write the Irish off…
Stiffening the sinews.
Wales fullback Tony Clement typifies the never-say-die spirit that has underpinned a revival in Wales fortunes as he dips his shoulder in an attempt to avoid Brendan Mullin's cover tackle.
WALES
LIFE THAT SPRINGS ETERNAL FROM THE SCRUM
The nascent Welsh revival has been sparked by a pack at last able to impose itself upon both the French and the Irish.
But, asks STEVE BALE, could the new steel up front be undermined, as one critic said, by ‘Too many walkers, not enough runners…
It's too early to talk of a rebirth of Welsh forward play but at least, in victory over Ireland and defeat by France, there have been some stirrings of life.
After the mortal blows administered to Wales in recent dismal times by international sides far and wide, big and small, perhaps Welshmen should sigh with relief as much as satisfaction — at any rate until the Wales pack have to confront England's magnificent eight at Twickenham.
On the other hand, not everyone is convinced.
Brian Thomas told me in the wake of the 12–9 French win in Cardiff: ‘Too many walkers, not enough runners’.
In those words the Neath guru encapsulated the debate that has raged and lurched from one side to another while a succession of coaches have sought in vain to establish a definitive Welsh style, during the years of consistent defeat since the 1988 Triple Crown.
So where, under Alan Davies, are they going now?
Back to basics, certainly, though anyone who imagines the ‘basics’ of forward play are any longer confined to scrum and line-out is wildly off the mark.
These days it is imperative — if you want success, anyway — to be able to get about the field and give and take a pass nearly as well as a back.
Dare one say that the England pack, in the defeat of Ireland, had these attributes to a greater extent than the Wales backs in the defeat by France?
You have to start somewhere — but where?
When John Ryan became Welsh coach in 1988, the shattering tour of New Zealand having instantly expunged memories of the first Welsh Triple Crown in nine years, he had no compunction about picking old-style tight forwards who, if they did nothing else, would scrummage till the cows came home.
Neath, the leading Welsh club side of the moment, were more or less ignored because although their forwards could get around better than anyone else's there would not have been much point if they could not win the ball in the first place.
The result: division, geographical and stylistic, and so balefully profound that Neath supporters were quite happy to see Wales lose at home to Romania.
At the time it seemed things could get no worse but, inexorably, they did.
Eventually Ryan appeased Neath by choosing more of their players but it made no difference: whatever kind of front five was chosen, static or mobile, Wales were beaten, and then when rugby league lucre had begun to attract an increasing number of his better players Ryan gave up the unequal struggle after the devastating defeat at Twickenham in 1990.
Welsh forward play, a problem he had tried to address, was in as bad a state as ever.
‘There are things that aren't quite right with Welsh rugby’, Ryan had said — a euphemism if ever there was one, and it has taken all these years even to begin to rectify them.
The paradox was that Ryan's starting  point was no different from that of coaches in the prosperous days of the Seventies.
Wales had all those great backs but they could have done nothing without their forwards.
We remember the dazzling tries of Gareth Edwards, Gerald Davies and the rest but what tends to be forgotten is that they needed the Welsh forwards to pulverise their opponents into submission first.
This recollection by Graham Price, non-pareil prop of the golden years, makes the point: ‘The early parts of each game were taken up in establishing a platform up front.
Wales used to win a lot of games in the last 20 minutes; that's how long the wearing down could take’.
And if, as Price recalls, this late expansion failed, Wales always had their original Plan A to fall back on.
‘We were playing a percentage game and as the points came so we expanded.
But when we were in full flow things could come unstuck; it's just natural that, if you start to take risks, more and more things go wrong.
It didn't usually matter because there was always the alternative of going back to where we started and tighten the game up’.
Which is where Wales would love to be now — though, not withstanding the obvious improvement, there is a long way to go before the benefit of a more productive line-out provided by Anthony Copsey and Gareth Llewellyn and more solid scrummage based on Mike Griffiths, Garin Jenkins and Laurance Delaney is complemented by corresponding forward mobility and the consequent winning of clean, quick loose ball.
England get people there in numbers; Wales do not.
After Ryan the agony continued, but from a totally different perspective, during the ill-starred Ron Waldron years.
When Waldron succeeded Ryan, mid-season, his philosophy (a word he frequently used) was along the line expressed by Brian Thomas above.
He wanted runners in his pack, so Neath — Waldron's club, as his antagonists accusingly pointed out — came into vogue even though the evidence was swiftly adduced that outstanding club players do not necessarily make  adequate internationals.
But it did sound good.
‘Pace allied to skill: if you start by having players of pace in most positions, you will win more matches than you lose’, he said.
‘You also need a flexibility of mind and attitude, the ability to change your strategy and tactics to suit the occasion’.
Alas for Waldron, his Wales achieved none of these aspirations, least of all the last and, as the recent French match showed, to this day muddled decision-making infects Welsh play.
Waldron wanted forward fluidity so badly he was prepared to forgo scrummaging power and the result, particularly as shown in Welsh humiliation by New South Wales and Australia last summer, was chaos.
Because Wales could not win the ball there was no purpose in having gadabout tight forwards.
This is where Alan Davies came in, and if the latest coach's previous career with England B, the Midlands and Nottingham had proved anything it was that pragmatism — what you have to do — comes before even the noblest notion of what you would like to do.
So he has got the scrum right, just as if he had been listening to Graham Price all along.
Here is the prop's definitive advice: ‘If you concentrate on the scrum and get your own put-in right without being shoved back and disrupted, everyone from the back row through to the threequarters can work off that.
But if the scrum is retreating no one can do anything.
It's not attractive or exciting but you have to do a basic job’.
Which might just be Alan Davies' test for 1992.
The steam and sweat of the scrum — the source of all endeavour!
The Welsh pack hold the French in Cardiff.
‘PANTHER’ MARTIN'S PSYCHOLOGY SEMINAR
Allan Martin's analysis of Wales' gradually improving forward play has a poignancy born of happy memories of the halcyon Seventies.
In those days the towering Aberavon lock was surrounded by quality and experience — a luxury successor generations have not had.
Still, things are looking up.
‘The improvement and the form suggests it's the best Welsh pack since the Triple Crown in 1988, so yes I'm more optimistic than I've been for some time’, said the 43-year-old ‘Panther’, who is now a schoolmaster in Swansea.
‘On the one hand, the England game could be make or break.
But on the other hand it's just another part of the learning curve that these lads are having to go through the hard way — in international rugby rather than before they reach that level.
‘Playing against a side at the top of their form and peak of their confidence ought to help this Welsh side now that they're playing with commitment and determination.
If they can come out with pride and a creditable performance it's another block in the building process and will be vitally important for confidence.
The game is psychological as well as physical; once you have your physical bits together you have to work on the psychological aspect and this seems to be the stage we're at’.
When he was becoming Wales' most-capped lock with 34 appearances from 1973–80 Martin was the principal ball-winner for the likes of Edwards, Bennett, JPR and Gerald.
In other words, without him the aura of greatness around these famous players would have been considerably less bright.
The lesson is not lost on Martin.
‘The first criterion is that you have to be big: once you're big there is something to work on and mobility, strength, athleticism, agility, determination and not least pride can be developed.
Then you need a pattern — exactly what Wales haven't seemed to have in recent years.
We've tended to look very immature as forwards, not at all streetwise.
‘But this is changing.
Alan Davies has done a very good job in a short space of time and if he remains as coach for three seasons or more Wales will be in with a fighting chance for the future — and certainly in the next World Cup’.
WHISTLE STOP!
THE CLIVE NORLING COLUMN
It is always a great disappointment when, either as a referee or player, you have to miss a game through injury or illness.
It must be the first time ever in the Five Nations Championship that two referees have dropped out of the opening games, with England's Ed Morrison missing the Ireland v Wales game through a rib injury, and Yours Truly having to watch the England v Ireland game on television through a ‘flu virus.
It is not the first occasion that I have had to accept the disappointment of missing an international.
In 1978 fog at Heathrow airport prevented me from flying to referee the first ever game between France and Russia, and in 1981 a leg injury picked up in the First Test prevented me refereeing the Second Test between France and New Zealand.
As I have written before, referees must be 100 per cent fit to control a game at any level, but even more so when it is an international.
Looking on the positive side, my absence allowed one of Wales’ exchange referees to get a taste of the international arena both at Murrayfield and Twickenham.
I am sure it will benefit Gareth Simmonds when he eventually becomes a panel referee.
Talking about Gareth, he refereed the Scotland v Spain game in December and had an interesting situation with a Spanish try.
Near the end of the game one of the Spanish players fell over the Scottish goal-line with the ball in his possession, but dropped the ball as he fell on it.
On the television replay it was pretty clear, and even the doyen of television commentators, my old friend Bill McLaren, sounded slightly surprised as Gareth awarded the try.
However, there is nothing in Law which prevents a player dropping the ball and then falling on it for a score.
It is not an infringement to drop the ball anywhere in the playing area so long as the ball does not go forward.
Law 17 Knock-on or Throw-forward states: ‘A knock-on occurs when the ball travels forward towards the direction of the opponents’ dead-ball line…
A throw forward occurs when a player carrying the ball throws or passes it in the direction of his opponents' dead-ball line’.
Now I am sure that some readers will write to say that if the player is moving forward then if he drops the ball it must be moving forward also.
I do not agree with that point of view.
In my opinion the ball must clearly go forward for it to be an infringement.
Several readers have already contacted me regarding foul play and the role of the touch-judge.
In both the Ireland v Wales and the Scotland v England games, visiting lock forwards were clearly guilty of foul play under Law 26.
In Ireland, the offence was missed by the referee but spotted by the touch judge, whereas in Scotland the offence appeared to be missed by all three officials.
The touch judge is allowed to inform the referee of any act of foul play that the referee has or has not seen himself.
If the referee has missed the offence then the touch judge not only informs the referee of the act of foul play but will also advise the referee on the appropriate course of action, which could include a sending-off.
My advice to my touch judges on the action to take is ‘what would you have done if you had the whistle in your hand instead of a touch flag’?
Another development which appears to be gaining ground, if not acceptance, is the substitution of players rather than the replacement of an injured player.
Both in the Grand Slam game against England last season and in their recent match against Wales, French players have appeared to leave the field on a tactical basis rather than an injured basis.
Before our readers in France point to another plot against their team, the same issue was raised in the Heinekein League game between Newport and Llanelli, when the replacement warmed-up on the touchline before replacing an ‘injured’ player.
Personally, I have no strong views on substitution or replacement, but it would be better for the image of the game as a whole if sham injuries were removed by allowing teams to substitute players if they so wished.
As with replacements, there would be a maximum number allowed and, unlike rugby league, once a player has left the field he cannot return.
Players can always fake injuries to be replaced so why not remove this sham before it gets out of control and causes real problems for the game's administrators?
Finally, my early nomination for Referee of the Year is my old friend Derek Bevan, who has built on his excellent World Cup final with a great Calcutta Cup game and an even better England v Ireland.
Derek's nickname has proved to be spot-on this season,The Sizzler has really been sizzling on the field!
5 NATIONS ROUND 2
THE TORTOISE GATHERS MOMENTUM…
Berbizier's new look garçons, short on height but strong in the arm, dominated the close-quarter forward combat, but a steady stream of set-piece gave Wales the lifeline they craved.
France, however, moved 12 points clear following Saint-André's try as the Welsh midfield foundered on the rock-solid defensive rampart  provided by old campaigners Sella and Mesnel.
But as the Gallic rolling maul —‘the tortoise’— faded, Lewis spearheaded a sustained assault which saw their lead whittled away by three Neil Jenkins penalties.
The French applied the tourniquet just in time to stagger to a winning start.
WALES 9 FRANCE 12  
French raiders!
Debutant fly-half Alain Penaud is about to initiate the switch which put Saint-André (mouth open) over for the only try of the match as a Welsh posse of Neil Jenkins, Davies and Webster cover across in vain.
NOT unexpectedly, with both sides in various stages of reconstruction, this game never managed to acquire any sort of pattern or fluency.
It was a disjointed, unpolished affair, full of unenforced errors and collapsed scrums.
The singing, the pomp and the pageantry may have galvanised Welsh emotions, but it did little for their skills or tactical awareness.
With France searching for a style and an identity, their performance looked at best stilted and, for most of the time, muddled.
With eight players new to the Championship, France looked pedestrian.
At times they were almost inept.
Berbizier's decision to start the game without a recognised line-out jumper was a controversial one, even if the French scored all their points in a first half when they were dominated in the line-out and nearly lost the game in the second half when the lanky Roumat redressed the balance.
The abrasive challenge expected from the notorious Bègles front-row duo failed to materialise.
Uncharacteristically, France even looked unable to combat the streetwise tactics of the Welsh.
In a poor international, the difference between the two was the French centres, Mesnel and Sella, who played a storm.
The decision to centre the French game around the two was a pragmatic one.
They are the most experienced and talented men in a weak French side and could, between them, secure the survival of any team.
France, in an early state of development, were unable to exert any degree of authority up front and had to spin the ball wide just to survive.
Unlike France, Wales did not have any world class performers able to change the pattern of the game single-handedly, and were consequently unable to utilise the unexpectedly large amount of possession they won.
The most significant Welsh weakness though, was the comparative lack of match fitness.
‘We are only 70 per cent fit for international rugby — and the players are well aware of that’, said coach Alan Davies.
But Davies also pointed out that a new programme of scientific research into fitness and conditioning had been launched by the WRU to bring the Welsh team up to the required standard for international rugby.
A revival will take a long time, warned Davies, but spirited performances from players like Copsey and Lewis must give some cause for optimism.
Tordo turns the screw…
Mister Electric.
The focal point of the tortoise, French flanker Jean-François Tordo, in the thick of it.
FRANCE
BEASTS OF BÈGLES or just harmless little pussycats…?
PHILIPPE GIMBERT, VINCENT MOSCATO AND SERGE SIMON stepped onto the international scene last summer, leaving a trail of blood from Bucharest to Denver.
With Gimbert and Moscato making a disciplined if muted Championship debut, CHRIS THAU sought their side of the story.
LONG before they emerged in last year's French Championship final as an intimidating three-headed monster, breathing fire and brimstone, the Bègles-Bordeaux from row of Simon, Moscato and Gimbert had acquired a rather unsavoury reputation as a hard, mean trio who took no prisoners and believed in the virtues of swift, unsophisticated retribution.
In April 1990 an all-out battle between Bègles and Montferrand raged on for a while before the referee could stop the slaughter.
In front of the television cameras which were transmitting the game live, the two hookers, Bègles' Moscato and Mallaret of Montferrand, tried to strangle each other.
The statement by the Bègles coach Yves Appriou, prior to the game, that violence was part of the process of rebuilding a side, sent a shiver down the spine of the rugby community.
Serge Simon, a medical student at Bordeaux University, claims that Appriou was misunderstood.
‘The journalists concerned used the ambiguity of the statement.
What Yves meant was that in every act, in every gesture in the game, there is a degree of aggression.
There is violence in a tackle, violence in a scrum, violence in a forward charge.
It has to be controlled, but Yves never actually said that violence was part of our game, or that he condoned violence’, said Simon.
In the summer of 1990 Moscato and a third Bègles prop, Verges, were sent off after a series of clashes with Agen players.
In December Philippe Gimbert broke the jaw of a Rodez player, Armand Proietti.
Taken to court by Proietti and his club, Gimbert was found guilty of bodily hard and fined FF8,000 (£800) according to Paragraph 308 of the French penal code.
Last month the fists of Moscato, Simon and Gimbert did the talking again against La Rochelle and two players, full back Sebastian Paillat and prop Claude Olivier, had to be carried off injured.
The La Rochelle coach, former international scrum-half Jean-Pierre Elissalde, was outraged.
In an interview after the game he said, ‘In La Rochelle we never start a game with the intention of doing harm.
I don't understand referees and officials who take no action against such behaviour.
Bègles is a super team and does not need such nonsense.’
Moscato, Gimbert, lock Mougeot and flanker Courtiols were hand-picked by wily talent scout Appriou three or four years ago and have developed into a formidable outfit.
‘I looked for young, ambitious players.
They were all in their early twenties when I asked them to join Bègles’, said Appriou.
Simon arrived at Bègles from Nice the year that Appriou started his recruitment drive.
Intelligent and articulate he became one of the driving forces in relaunching the fortunes of the Bègles club.
Gimbert came to Bordeaux after an early flirtation with Biarritz, where he played alongside his current front row partner in the French team, the Agen police inspector, Gregoire Lascubé.
Together with hooker Vincent Moscato he forms the heart of ‘La Tortue’(The Tortoise), a driving maul similar in its deadly efficiency to that employed by Shelford's All Blacks during the late '80s.
Moscato, the son of an immigrant from Calabria, was born in Paris in July 1967, but he retains the hard-bitten philosophy of his peasant forebears; ‘Men and boys are aggressive’, says Moscato.
‘This is part of out genetic make-up.
Historically man has been the fighter — for food, for survival, for land.
You name it.
Nowadays our aggression is channelled into sport.
My family comes  from a region where people are very poor and very tough.
Life makes them that way.
‘I am an aggressive player but I am not violent by nature.
I am a winner — but not irrespective of the means.
I like boxing and when I was suspended in the summer of 1990 I took up boxing and accepted, perhaps too quickly, a fight against the then French light-heavyweight champion.
I live the sheer physical challenge of the sport.
‘But I want to make it quite clear that we don't go out there to harm anyone.
Because of our reputation many needle us in the hope of that we will retaliate.
At Bègles we love the physical challenge of the forward battle.
It is simply because we are fitter and tougher, harder and stronger, that we come on top on so many occasions.
We all know that we are under the microscope after various events in the past, but I think we can control ourselves’.
An under the microscope they certainly are.
Their international debut was controversial.
The three Bègles men, still parading their French Championship final shaven heads (Moscato's idea to increase the bond between the three), had a storming game against the Romanians.
They roasted the Romanians in the scrum and outplayed them in the loose.
But following the fracas between the two front rows, the Romanian hooker, Ion was viciously punched (no-one could identify the perpetrator) and suffering from blurred vision, had to be replaced at half-time.
A few weeks later, on tour in the USA, a series of violent incidents raised questions about the wisdom of their being included in the World Cup squad.
USA hooker Tony Flay had to be replaced following an ugly facial cut and a few minutes later replacement hooker Pat Johnson had his nose broken by a punch.
Simon was lucky not to be sent off.
His luck ran out for the French students against their English counterparts when, though captain, he was given his marching orders for, guess what, stamping again.
Simon explains: ‘As far as the USA game is concerned, we were not aware that there was a problem.
No-one complained.
We only found out about it in the British press when we arrived in Wales.
Much of it is media hype.
We are very hard — but not violent.
The French press often ‘create’ a story.
Perhaps our idea of shaving our heads before the Championship final was counterproductive because we were then singled out and called skinheads, or fascists.
But I don't think we are any harder or meaner than any good front-row forwards in the game’.
No-one knows exactly what Daniel Dubroca and Jean Trillo told the Bègles trio, but it appeared that in the aftermath of the American tour Simon and his pals lost their ‘flavour of the month’ tag.
Simon denies that anything was said in private or that they were criticised by the coaches or management.
He maintains that their image as a bunch of violent thugs is a misleading byproduct of a sustained media campaign.
After the USA tour Ondarts questioned their effectiveness against seasoned scrummagers.
‘It's OK against the likes of Romania and the USA, but I don't think they'd be as impressive as that against England or New Zealand’, said Ondarts.
Pretty strong words from a fellow player and prop forward.
Then, out of the blue, Simon and Moscato announced after a considered assessment they had decided to opt out of the French national squad's World Cup preparations.
To his surprise Moscato found out that Gimbert had broken an earlier pact and chose to place his country and the World Cup ahead of their friendship.
‘I refused selection, as did Simon, but Gimbert accepted.
It was a bit of a blow, a bitter pill to swallow.
But I guess that's life!
It was his decision and we have no further comment to make on it’, was Moscato's verdict.
French failure in the World Cup gave the Bègles dissidents greater credibility, although their earlier behaviour has not been forgotten.
New coach Pierre Berbizier is a noted disciplinarian, and whilst selecting ‘Les Bèglois’ for their ability and strength he also issued them with a stern warning against any brutish excesses.
‘I want a team of aggressive players but I don't want violent men in my team’, was the advice he gave to Gimbert and Moscato, who made their Five Nations debuts against Wales in Cardiff, while Simon was made captain of the students side.
Gimbert and Moscato failed to impress that afternoon.
Moscato was obviously hampered by a sprained elbow, acquired early in the game.
He carried on playing despite the pain and was singled out for praise by coach Berbizier who thanked him for his dedication and courage.
Gimbert, on the other hand, had a difficult game against Griffiths and discovered that life in the international front row is more difficult than expected.
Both Gimbert and Lascubé argued that it was Griffiths who was responsible for the collapsed scrums, but obviously Gimbert's inexperience played a part in his inability to work out a solution.
‘Griffiths kept dropping his shoulder and the whole scrum collapsed’, said Gimbert.
‘Physically he is not so strong — but he is shifty.
We could do nothing to sort him out because we had decided not to do anything foolish.
We want to show that we can prevail through sheer strength and technique.
The English are the same as us and that's why I enjoy scrummaging against them’.
Indeed the game against England will tell whether Ondarts was right and the Bègles men were vastly over-rated following their summer campaign in Romania and the USA, or whether they really are tough (though raw) customers who are about to become a force to be reckoned with.
PAPA KNOWS BEST — ROBERT PAPAREMBORDE
Mike Griffiths, the Welsh loosehead prop, is a con-man.
He collapsed the scrum regularly and the referee fell victim to his tactics.
Gimbert is young, this was his first real international match and he didn't know how to handle it.
For reasons which baffle me, the referee thought that it was Gimbert who was pulling down the scrum.
This is not an excuse, but a fact of life and we need to improve our scrummage 200 per cent if we are to survive against England.
I played against the English nine times and they always had a very strong scrum.
They are hard, but they would not use cheap tricks.
Mind you, Moscato played with a sprained elbow for virtually the entire game and we often packed down with only seven men.
I we want to win in Paris we must strengthen our set-piece play — both our scrum and line-out need to be better organised.
For the Welsh game there were different priorities.
The great satisfaction was that the aspects we concentrated on in training — defence and winning loose ball — worked out well.
That was what we targeted during the four days prior to the Cardiff match.
Aggressive defence allowed us to survive when the Welsh were dominant and transform their ball into counter-attack options for us.
For this we needed to win quick ball in the loose where Tordo was excellent.
We wanted to move the ball wide to allow Sella and Mesnel some space.
They are match-winners and we made a special effort to involve them.
In this, Alan Penaud's debut was a success because he responded well to the task and swiftly set his line moving.
Another achievement was the new spirit and discipline of the side.
Not only were they very receptive from a tactical viewpoint, they also kept their cool under pressure.
Don't forget, this is a young and inexperienced side with eight players new to the Five Nations.
Trying to mould together a side in only four days with eight players coming together for the first time is a pretty difficult task.
Although I was not entirely happy with the quality of our game, I was pleased with the outcome.
The Welsh failed to take advantage of some poor kicking and Lafond's mistakes.
Galthié had a solid game and is likely to develop into a fine player, but he needs more tuition.
He has to work on synchronising with his no.8.
Everyone made mistakes, but they all contributed to the team effort, which was a satisfying aspect of the game.
Front-row union for Bègles and France:(l-r), Gimbert, Moscato and Simon.
ENGLAND FEAST IN PASTURES GREEN!
Effective but boring was the non-English verdict on the 1991 Grand Slam, but that's out of the window after this stylish demolition.
Six tries were scored despite dogged Irish resistance — all of them by backs.
This haul exceeded last season's total in one match alone.
The English backs, with Morris and Webb outstanding, were razor-sharp.
But the previously all-conquering pack creaked at the set pieces, where the much-improved Irish achieved parity.
With backs like these, England Expects — but can the donkey carry the load…?
ENGLAND 38 IRELAND 9   
Carling carve-up!
The England captain, who had an outstanding match, is eventually halted by Aherne after a powerful midfield burst — but not before Geoghegan and Matthews are sucked in…
THERE'S little point in speculating as to who could have lived with England in this sort of form.
Australia's hand would be the first to shoot up with New Zealand not far behind, both of them, of course, recent victors over England.
There's little point either in conjecturing as to whether this is the best England side of recent times.
Certainly after yet another record victory, and the third highest of all time by anyone in the Championship, a strong case would be made for saying so.
But if so, how do you account for the fact that the forwards were yet again beaten in the battle for primary possession.
No, as Geoff Cooke admitted, ‘this side had some flaws.’
But what is really relevant is to state that against Ireland they played absolutely the right sort of game and they played it with utter conviction and quite brilliant execution.
They had not need to worry about tidying up some of the ball from the forwards.
If they'd spent time doing that, once against the backs would have stood idly around until the forwards reckoned that they'd got their act nicely in order.
Significantly, England scored direct from a five-metre scrum.
Not by pushing Ireland over their own line, or using a back-row move, but by flashing the ball out to Guscott.
How often have backs had a say in what happens from five-metre scrum?
Jon Webb's 22 points equalled an English Championship record set by Dan Lambert in 1911.
Dewi Morris capped an outstanding afternoon with a superb try before half-time.
Rory Underwood stretched his record to 34 tries, diving over from a tap penalty move.
Only Carling of the three-quarters did not get on the scoresheet, ironic in that he had one of his finest games for England.
His dynamic power and ability to stay on his feet in the tackle kept his side on the move throughout.
Winterbottom, who led England out in honour of his 50th cap, was as vigilant as ever in defence and always to hand in attack.
The forwards' support of the ball-carrier was out of the top drawer.
Ireland must have left Twickenham shell-shocked.
If they'd played badly they might have expected a hiding.
As it was, they'd improved markedly on their performance against Wales, yet had got nowhere.
They simply could not live with the pace and power of the English game, well as forwards such as Francis and Robinson played.
Submerged!
But England fullback Jon Webb doesn't mind eating turf as he skids over for the first of his two tries as part of a record-equalling 22-point haul.
IRELAND
SILVER BANTAM WITH SPURS OF STEEL
Embattled after defeat by the Welsh, Ireland called in Lansdowne's FERGUS AHERNE to face the English.
SEAN DIFFLEY talked to the gritty scrum-half.
This season Fergus — Gus to his friends — Aherne has warmed the bench much more assiduously than he has passed the ball from the base of the scrum.
Being a replacement had become almost a way of life.
In Namibia in July last year Gus had all the time in the world to admire the African sunsets, and even the rosy dawns.
But there were no test appearances, just the constant training and training and more bench sitting.
And then the warm-ups in September for the World Cup were followed by the best seat in the house for the World Cup, the ideally placed bench for the Irish replacements.
So last February 1 at Twickenham was a hugely welcome break in what was becoming a sort of personal Aherne tradition.
In their wisdom Ciaran Fitzgerald and his selectors decided to dispense with the incumbent, Rob Saunders, and bring Aherne back for his thirteenth Irish cap.
It was a very bright day in the Aherne household in Dublin.
Gus' wife, Elaine, a fashion buyer sampling the wares of the Paris salons, made certain her itinerary embraced a salon or two in London, too, that would neatly coincide with the activities at Twickenham.
It was almost like a first cap.
The twelve before were marvellous, of course, but that thirteenth would have a special niche in the Aherne gallery of household goods.
It marked an upsurge in the family fortunes in every way.
Gus, a civil engineer, had been finding the job situation pretty difficult and during the period of the Namibia tour and during the World Cup was on the unemployed roster.
It was hardly a situation conducive to producing a relaxed and committed rugby player, just newly married.
The upshot was a story which appeared in a tabloid newspaper during the World Cup headlined: ‘Gus: Love on the Dole’.
But 1992 has seen changes for the better.
Gus Aherne B.E.
out on the sites again, doing his engineering stuff and playing with so much more composure for Lansdowne in the All Ireland League.
And it was form good enough to persuade coach Fitzgerald and his advisors to change horses, so to speak, at scrum-half.
Aherne hasn't got the remarkably crisp and long pass of Saunders, the man he ousted, but then few in international rugby have.
But Aherne, on his game, has the considerable virtues of gritty defence, stretching far beyond the normal demands on a scrum-half, so often turning up to save situations as the last line in the defensive fortifications.
And, when he isn't tending to overdo it, his searing breaks, demonstrating a rare turn of speed, can be devastating.
And he is a more consistently accurate tactical kicker from the base of the scrum than the man he replaced.
The suggestion of a silver thread among the dark men in green makes Gus appear a distinguished elder statesmen, far too distinguished-looking for a man who has only just reached 29.
Back in his hometown of Cork, Fergus always seemed to be floating in the wake of  the other noted Cork scrum-half, Michael Bradley.
Even with University College Cork — whom he captained to a Munster League title in 1985 — and with Dolphin, the man over in Cork Constitution always seemed to hold the edge.
But in 1988, in the Millenium International in Dublin, Aherne at last got his chance.
England had won the '88 Championship duel by a considerable margin at Twickenham but Aherne, now living in Dublin and throwing in his hand with Leinster, got his chance.
He played against the touring Western Samoa and Italy sides that same season and it was not until 1989 that he got his chance for a full tenure for the Five Nations games.
In 1990 he appeared against England, Scotland and France.
Mick Bradley returned to favour against Wales that season at Lansdowne Road.
But Aherne, on the bench, came on to replace his friend and rival in the Irish victory.
That was that, it seemed.
Ciaran Fitzgerald brought in Rob Saunders, not only for his first cap but as captain in that Championship last season.
But Saunders’ somewhat volatile displays have led to a gradual disenchantment.
Maybe he was rushed too soon.
Irish scrum-halves tend to arrive on the scene than at 22.
‘I was very disappointed indeed not to get a World Cup game’, Aherne says.
‘Being the eternal replacement is not only a bit boring in itself but it does damage.
Idleness is not good for your game.
‘I sat on the bench for seven international games in a row.
Running out at Twickenham was a refreshing change’.
Growing up in Cork, the great hero for Gus was Gareth Edwards.
‘He was the great all-round scrum-half, a great player in every respect.
As a kid I dwelled on his every move’.
But it's the All Black, Dave Loveridge, he admires as ‘the sweetest passer of all’.
As for Nick Farr-Jones; ‘I admire him, he's the best in the world at the moment for his reading of the game and for his organisation of the team on the field’.
Like all Ireland's leading players, Gus Aherne is a great devotee of the All Ireland League in its second season.
‘It will improve the standards of Irish rugby but it will require a few more seasons until we see the real value of the hard competitive stuff’.
And if Aherne has a criticism it is on the standards of school and club coaching.
‘At international level coaching is hardly required.
There, it is more a matter of organisation.
But at schools and club level, where it is vital, that simply is not good enough’.
WILLIE-JOHN McBRIDE — WHERE DID THE PASSION GO?
It was just like Ireland to have a disastrous afternoon against Wales when we had been set up by the bookies as firm favourites.
We just can't bear not being the underdogs.
They should have gone into that game against Wales having forgotten the close match against Australia in the World Cup.
Even against a country in the doldrums you just can't expect to turn up and automatically win.
Too many players had taken a rest after the World Cup and there's no substitute for playing if you want to stay match fit.
That was all too apparent against the Welsh.
Ireland's play was far too static with the pack never taking the game to the Welsh.
There was no quality ball and what ball there was went to halfbacks — Ralph Keyes and Rob Saunders — on a collective off day.
Once the Welsh realised that the opposition was not all that great they took heart and the result was a late try which put their tails up.
That kind of morale booster is  infectious and they could well have won by a bigger margin.
Ciaran Fitzgerald and the team will be all too aware that they let the fans down and so a repeat of that disaster in the remaining matches is most unlikely.
The attitude and commitment shown against the Aussies will return and then you'll see a pack once again with all the old Irish fire and passion, which has made moderate (on paper) teams look like world-beaters.
Irish rugby is notorious for peaks and troughs, so look forward to a few peaks from now onwards.
We have an old saying over here: ‘Things can be critical, but they are never serious’.
And remember that no two referees are alike.
Another assault on Neil Francis could have serious consequences for the perpetrator.
Back from the bench.
Aherne may not have the long, quick pass of Saunders, but his all-action as Ireland were overwhelmed at Twickenham proved that the Silver Fox makes up for in tenacity what he lacks in technique.
BIG MAC, MAORI WANDERER
PLAYER PROFILE
With Scotland's side fast becoming a league of nations, PAUL NELSON talked to DALE McINTOSH, a Scot from New Zealand via South Wales…
As befits a New Zealander, Dame Kiri Te Kanawa did her bit for the game during the World Cup.
Yet while her stirring rendition of World in Union, the tournament's theme song, remained faithful to the tune that inspired it, I Vow To Thee My Country, it was hardly surprising that it was decided to alter the words.
So many players seemed to have nothing to do with the nations they were representing that asking them to picture their country would have been difficult enough, let alone vow anything to it.
In the most extreme case, Abdelatif Benazzi even managed to play for two countries in the competition, turning out for Morocco in the qualifiers and France in the final stages.
Despite widespread criticism, the trend is on the increase in the Five Nations Championship.
It comes as some surprise, therefore, to hear one of the men likely to benefit turning his nose up at the prospect of winning a ‘cheap cap’.
Dale McIntosh might sound as through he comes from North of the Border, but one look at the young no.8's Maori features makes you wonder how he found his way into the Scottish squad.
Originally from Turangi, in King Country, New Zealand, McIntosh now lives in South Wales, where he has been quietly making a name for himself with his performances for Pontypridd.
Not so quietly as to escape the attention of the ever-vigilant Scottish recruitment machine, however.
‘I guess it was my name that alerted them’, said McIntosh whose grandfather emigrated from Edinburgh to New Zealand after the war.
‘I had a phone call from the Anglo-Scots asking if I would interested in playing for them or for Scotland.
At the time, playing for Scotland didn't seem very realistic, but I was happy to play for the Anglos’.
Without doing much more he found himself in the Scotland ‘B’ team to play Ireland at the end of December and the Scottish trial a week later.
Yet despite admitting that would love to play for New Zealand, and that he had no intention of using his Scottish connections when he first came to play in Britain, McIntosh fiercely defends his right to play for Scotland.
‘What no-one can deny is that I have Scottish blood in me, and I have always known it was there’, he said.
‘I would feel the same sense of pride and commitment as the other guys if I was to run out at Murrayfield with a Scottish shirt on.
If I didn't feel that way, I wouldn't have wanted to get involved in the first place.
‘What I wouldn't agree with is someone coming over here to play and picking up a cheap cap.
If it's in your blood, your ancestry, then I think that is fair enough.
But it is quite right that Wales have decided you should have to live and play in the country for a good few years’.
Mindful of his compatriot, Hemi Taylor, one of three New Zealanders playing no.8 for first-class clubs in South Wales, McIntosh concedes that the six years of continuous residence demanded of Tony Copsey and Rupert Moon was perhaps too stringent.
‘I can see that it's tough for Hemi’, he said of the Newbridge back-row forward.
‘He's married a Welsh girl, has two Welsh kids and has been here for five years.
He's 26 or 27 now and that final year of waiting to qualify could tell against him.
But, if they were to reduce the time it takes to qualify, I definitely don't think is should be any less than four years.
Otherwise it would devalue a cap’.
There is plainly no risk of McIntosh taking a cap for granted.
The 22-year-old may have only recently started thinking about playing for Scotland, but it has quickly become the most important goal in his life.
‘For the past few years I have built my life around rugby and I am happy to go on doing that until I can't go any further in the game’, he said.
Although work is pretty thin on the ground for the construction labourer, he plans to go on living in Pontypridd until the end of next season, and then decide where to stay in this country.
‘To be honest, it will depend how the rugby is going and how far I have progressed with Scotland’.
At the rate he is going, that could be quite a way.
After only playing a couple of games for the Anglo-Scots, due to injury, he made a successful impact in the ‘B’ game at Murrayfield, where the back row went well enough to be picked en block for the Reds, the junior side in the Scottish trial.
Then fate took a hand.
For two of the trio, the paved the way for a place in the Scotland side to play England.
David McIvor came in on the blind-side and Ian Smith was called up when Graham Marshall injured his knee.
McIntosh was not so fortunate.
Twenty minutes into the game, he jolted a disc in his back and went off to see his replacement, Rob Wainwright, come on and make a name for himself.
Given that the man in possession of the no.8 jersey was Derek White, the injury could, in any case, be viewed as incidental.
The 6ft 3ins, 16st McIntosh provides forceful opposition to the argument.
‘I felt that it was going really well out there and I was enjoying it.
The Reds were well on top and I am sure that if I had lasted the game I would have given the selectors something to think about.
Derek White is a very good player and I respect him, but at the end of the day he's only human’, he said.
It is the type of attitude you  would expect from a man who cites Buck Shelford as his role model and who learned his trade in the best of all  academies .
McIntosh moved from the midfield to the back row when he went to st.
Stevens in Auckland at eh age of 13.
The noted Maori boys college was not so much a rugby school as a school of rugby, fielding 13 rugby teams, one football side and one hockey team from its 350 pupils, as well as producing the best school XV in the country.
After leaving school he quickly progressed into the King Country provincial side, where he found himself playing alongside Ceri Jones and Garin Jenkins, the Wales hooker, from Pontypridd.
the pair were spending a season in New Zealand at the invitation of McIntosh's elder  brother , Shane, who had himself played for Pontypridd and has recently returned to Britain to play for West of Scotland.
When Jones and Jenkins returned three seasons ago, they brought the younger McIntosh with them.
Moving from the provincial game in New Zealand to the club circuit in South Wales proved to be a real eye-opener.
‘I was amazed at how fast the game was’, he said.
‘They used the ball so much and there was all this running out of your own 25.
Physically, though, it was much easier.
‘The game in New Zealand is far more technical.
They make sure they can do the basics well before experimenting, where in Wales they tend to spin the ball straight away.
The whole emphasis is different and the tackling is nothing like as good here.
I don't think enough emphasis is put on tackling — if you make a 30-yard break at home you get some polite applause, but if you put a really big hit on someone they are up on their feet shouting in the stands.
Here, it is the other way around.’.
The other big difference that he found concerned rucking.
What sort of difference exactly?
The answer came with a laugh.
‘Well, New Zealanders ruck and you don't.
If a man lies on the ball and is given a good rucking he will think twice about doing it next time.
As long as the feet are moving backwards it's fair — providing you leave the head alone.
It slows the game down so much when you have people killing the ball, but it's not the fault of the players, it's the referees who allow it’.
Despite harking back to the New Zealand way of doing things now and again, McIntosh is happily settled in Wales.
He enjoys the closeness of the Pontypridd club and relishes the opportunities that the British game gives him.
‘The style of rugby here suits me because I love to run with the ball in the hands’, he said.
He may need to do a bit of work on the accent, but McIntosh is beginning to sound like a natural Scottish no.8.
Seeing Red.
The Blues' Graham Marshall gets one in the eye as McIntosh of the Reds goes for broke during his impressive Scottish Trial performance.
Hopes of a cap disappeared, though, after McIntosh limped off.
ENGLAND ROUND-UP
January and February are difficult months for clubs.
If the Five Nations doesn't get in the way, the weather invariably does.
Almost the entire Pilkington Cup fourth round programme was wiped out by frost at the end of January.
Only Bristol and Saracens went ahead, the West Country club ploughing forcibly through the mud at the Memorial Ground to see off their opponents 13–6.
So severe was the weather that many of the ties had been postponed by the Friday.
One clubs,Wasps , decided to wait until Saturday to make their decision, much to the annoyance of their opponents,Harlequins , who had forked out £1,500 for an overnight stay in a hotel.
When the Quins arrived at Sudbury at midday they took one look at the pitch and declined to play.
Wasps captain Mark Rigby gave way, even though he felt the pitch was perfectly playable, a view shared by all the journalists at the ground.
Rigby reckoned that the referee, who had the casting vote, was sure to side with Harlequins given that they had six players in the England side for the following week.
Every year this argument comes up and every year noting happens.
The international players reason that the pressures of going from international to big club game to international are almost unbearable.
‘Quins again suffered from this syndrome in their league game against Northampton , the only full Courage played during the month.
Six ‘Quins players were unavailable, their reasons ranging from injury to illness.
Coach Dick Best ruefully remarked: ‘I guess if they'd been Gloucester boys half of them might have turned out’.
Their absence cost ‘Quins, who lost 25–14, a victory which enhanced the Saints’ title ambitious as they moved to third in the table, one point behind leaders Orrell .
Sandwiched between them are Gloucester who lost their 100 per cent record at Saracens, the London club holding them to a 12–12 draw.
In fact, Gloucester were lucky to get away with that as Tim Smith only slotted the equalising penalty in the last minute.
Is this to be the beginning of a demise for Gloucester, the only unbeaten side in the first division?
Who, though, would write Bath off?
Just when it seemed they were on the slide they nit Leicester with all they had, running in seven tries in a 37–6 victory.
It was a stunning performance, and certainly one of the finest that the league has ever produced.
Down in the dungeon of the first division,Rosslyn Park and Nottingham are still to get off the mark.
In the driving seat to replace whoever goes down are London Scottish .
Their 7–6 win over previously unbeaten West Hartlepool leaves then as one of only two unbeaten teams in the Courage national divisions.
Sale' s 16–6 win over Bedford hoists them to the second promotion slot.
Liverpool St Helens' fall continues, a 9–6 defeat at Blackheath leaving them clamped to the bottom of Division Two just a year after they dropped out of the first division.
Might they do a London Welsh?
The Exiles are bristling to get back on the scene and currently lie third in the Division Four South , tucked in behind Havant and Basingstoke .
It'll also be very tight for promotion from the third to the second with three teams —Fylde ,Exeter and Richmond — tied at the top with nine points.
Richmond coach, Kevin Boroevich, will have to eat some humble pie at training after being sent off for punching in the 21–15 win in a friendly against Fylde.
Finally, one way and another Dean Richards has had a poor return from the month.
Left out of the England side, Deano was also knocked back by Leicestershire police force who vetoed his £5,000 share of the Run With The Ball campaign.
Gloucester on the up and up!
Nigel Scrivens wins a line-out as they draw 12–12 with Saracens at Southgate.
IRISH REPORT with Sean Diffley
The 15,000 crowd at Limerick's famed Thomond Park for the All Ireland League key match between Shannon and Garryowen was it own testimony to the grip the competition has gained on the Irish game.
It was a record attendance for a club game in Ireland and further illustrated the remarkable devotion to rugby of the city of Limerick.
Nowhere in these islands, outside South Wales, is there such across-the-board enthusiasm, from the professional classes to the ‘cloth-capped’ brigade.
But nowhere will be found a more sporting, fair-minded spectator.
In the fiercely contested Shannon-Garryowen tie there was not even a hint of unseemly conduct and the silence afforded the placekickers was, as usual on this ground, total.
The Thomond Park crowd, proud of their reputation in this regard, have elevated the silence almost to the status of a fetish.
One wonders, indeed, if the raucous atmosphere of other grounds would not be a relief to Thomond Park kickers.
The silence must be unnerving, to say the least.
Shannon, with their vaunted pack, were the favourites and the leaders in the first division of the All Ireland League .
But, in a tremendous game that thoroughly entertained the big crowd, Garryowen played a storm.
They owed much to their New Zealand coach,Murray Kidd , for a 20–9 victory which put them a point ahead of the rest, Shannon being thrust down to second place.
All the previous week Kidd had exhorted his forwards to concentrate on winning the battle up front and not simply live in hope that they could gain a few crumbs and hope their more skilful backs would steal a march on Shannon.
What transpired was a superb display in the line-outs and the driving rucks, where Garryowen's Waikato lock,Brent Anderson , gave a typical display, well backed by no.8 Ben Cronin and Robert Costello at lock, but particularly by an astoundingly good all round performance by the 20-year-old hooker,Keith Wood .
Wood was something else!
His late father Gordon Wood , will be well remembered by an earlier generation.
He played for the British Lions , winning at least two test places on the 1959 side in New Zealand .
Young Keith looks a great prospect, a fast and astute runner with the ball, hard as nails in driving play, a good kicker and passer.
Some hooker!
But what impressed most viewers of the deliberations at Thomond Park was the crisp passing of the  Garrowen backs when the opportunity arose for spreading the ball wide, something that doesn't often occur in local derbies at Thomond Park.
That was the Murray Kidd influence or, to be more correct, the New Zealand coach's adoption of Australian methods.
He had his Garryowen backs lying flat like the Aussies and the ball flashed through hands — such as Garryowen's internationals,Phil Danaher and Richard Wallace — with all the uniform speed of a baton expertly passed without pause by a well-trained sprint relay team.
That was the missing element that has been missing among the Limerick teams, especially in the AIL .
Shannon have freely admitted that, in the inaugural year of the competition last season, they fully realised that their traditional forward style would not be enough to win.
They have made efforts to run the ball a bit more and not just rely on the forwards to force the opposition into defensive errors and  batton on penalty kicks or pushover tries.
But they, like the third Limerick club dominating the league —Young Munster — are only gradually coming to terms with the demands for 15-man attacking play.
So, Garryowen's fine, expansive game was a shot-in-the arm for Limerick and, indeed, Irish club rugby.
BRENT ANDERSON from Waikato is not the only foreign player doing his stuff for an Irish club.
PIETER MULLER from South Africa — mentioned in those pages by John Robbie as one of the future ‘hopes’ when the Springboks are back on the international scene — is starring in the centre for GREYSTONES , Robbie's former Irish club, in the AIL second division.
Blackrock College's fly-half is STEVE BACHOP , who filled that role fairly impressively for Western Samoa in the World Cup and is in his second season with ‘Rock.
GEORGE HOOKS, the London Irish coach, in a recent interview in the Irish Independent , told Irish readers to ‘make no mistake about it.
The days of the soft underbelly of English rugby are gone forever.
What the Courage League has done is produce the best club rugby in the world’.
Hooks was critical of Irish rugby's coaching approach down the years — including his own contributions in the general condemnation.
‘We've got to face the disconcerting fact’, he told his interviewer, ‘that Irish rugby has never innovated anything with the possible exception of the garryowen’.
From his experience with London Irish, he praises highly the coaching standards in top-class English clubs.
‘The Courage League first division is the Harvard Business School of rugby’, he claims.
‘It's taking me to the pin of my collar to keep up in the matter of sheer technical knowledge.
That's not easy for me to admit, after twenty years coaching, but it's the reality’.
SCOTTISH NOTES by Bill McMurtrie
JOHN RUTHERFORD , the former Scotland and Lions stand-off, and his fellow Selkirk coach,David Bell , will be in charge of the national Under-18 team this season as well as guiding the Scottish Students ’ XV.
They succeed Hugh Campbell , now the Scotland ‘B’coach, through he has lost his partner,Bobby Easson , who is now assisting Johnny Brown with the national Under-21 team.
Roy Laidlaw , Rutherford's former international partner, now the SRU youth development officer for the South district, will give Christie ‘general assistance’ at that level.
SHANE McINTOSH , brother of Dale , the Scotland ‘B’no.8, has joined West of Scotland and staked a regular first-team place at centre.
The Scottish Rugby Union are considering imposing a limitation on the number of overseas players that any club can field.
Early in the year official figures showed that 41 ‘foreigners’ were playing in Scottish rugby.
Last season the figure was 40, and in 1989–90, the first sign of a large influx, it was 45.
SCOTTISH SCHOOLS had a notable victory when they beat the French 10–6 at Murrayfield.
It was the Scottish boys' first victory after 14 defeats in that series.
JIM HAY ,Hawick 's Scotland ‘B’hooker, has been appointed as the Scottish Sports Council's Team Sport coordinator for rugby.
DEREK LEE , who played fullback for Scottish Schools last season, has nailed his colours to the Glasgow even though he is playing standoff for Watsonians in Edinburgh .
Both districts selected him for their under-21 practice matches in January, but the youngster, who played for Ayr while he was still at Kyle Academy , opted for his home district, Glasgow.
ROWEN SHEPHERD ,Edinburgh Academicals' stand-off, who was back-up to Craig Chalmers on Scotland's tour to Canada and the United States last year, is turning to a new career at fullback.
His first run there was for the Scottish Students in the match against their English counterparts at Myreside the day before the Calcutta Cup match in January.
He initiated a brilliant try with a break from his own 22, a defiant retort in a 32–9 defeat.
RICHIE DIXON , the former Scotland ‘B’coach who is a new national selector this season, and David Johnston ,Watsonians ’ former international centre, will be Scotland's coaches on the tour to Australia in May and June.
They were also in partnership on Scotland's tours to Zimbabwe in 1988 and Japan the following year, and Dixon was Douglas Morgan 's assistant on the trip to North America last year.
Johnson, who had been assistant coach with the national under-21 team, is now the backs' mentor with Scotland ‘B’ as well as succeeding Dixon as Glasgow 's district coach.
SELKIRK have suffered a double blow to their plans to have a successful second half to the season.
They have lost not only Graham Marshall , the international back-row forward whose right-knee ligaments were torn in the January match against Watsonians , but also Scott Nichol, the enterprising, fast midfield back, who broke an ankle in the same game.
Garryowen scrum-half Ian Barry tests the Shannon defence.
WELSH LEAGUES
Before the Heineken National League kicked off in September 1990, BLAINA were installed as 2–1 favourites to win the Second Division.
However, a strong cup tradition backed up by five Monmouthshire titles in seven years and 18 Ben Francis Cup wins counted for nothing as Blaina struggled to find the consistency necessary to mount a successful promotion campaign.
Blaina always felt that they had the ability to go up last season so, to ensure that they do not miss out a second time, a new team manager was recruited and given the task of harnessing the club's talent.
Steve Lewis, who won a Welsh Schools cap from Albertillery GS at scrum-half and went on to gain an Oxford Blue in 1973 and play for Ebbw Vale and Bath , was approached and took on the job last summer.
‘I hadn't really been involved with rugby since 1984 when I retired at Bath but I was delighted when Blaina contacted me’, he commented.
‘The top five teams in Division Three are all good sides.
I was particularly impressed with Mountain Ash when they beat us — they were having a bad run but they remained motivated, very organised and very competitive.
They've won six matches on the trot since their victory at Blaina and could get even better.
‘Llandovery have great pace behind the scrum and Narberth were solid in all respects.
This League has brought us new friendships as well as new rivalries’.
The First Division leadership has changed hands twice since the turn of the year.
Llanelli went into the 1992 at the top but two consecutive defeats at the hands of Newbridge (13–9) and at home to Bridgend (17–12) saw The Scarlets slip back to third.
Swansea took over following a 14–0 win at home to Newport, as Stuart Davies celebrated his call-up to the Wales squad with a try, but were replaced the following week by a determined Pontypool .
Swansea led Pontypool 7–0 in terms of Welsh squad members when the top two met at Pontypool Park but that counted for nothing as Pooler stormed to the front with a 27–4 victory.
Neath are almost out of it.
The race for the two promotion places in the Second Division is between South Wales Police ,Aberavon , newly promoted Llanharan and a resurgent Cross Keys .
Abertillery and Glamorgan Wanderers , who were in the top division, last season, are some way off the pace.
WALES WALL-TO-WALL by Brian Wall
South Wales Police hooker COLIN HILLMAN has been asked to join The Marauders — an invitation team that includes England stars Will Carling and Jeremy Guscott — for a 10-a-side tournament at the Hong Kong Festival early in April.
Hillman will make the trip if his club are not involved in the Schweppes Cup .
Prop PAUL PRICKETT has returned to Glamorgan Wanderers after a spell with Cardiff .
Prickett, a former captain of the Wanderers, has been warmly welcomed back at the Memorial Grounds.
BRIDGEND helped to raise more than £2,000 for charity on their recent trip to Ireland — and thoroughly enjoyed themselves as they scored 13 tries in a 64–15 win over a Wexford President's XV .
Four tries went to flanker Mike Budd , making an impressive return to action after prolonged injury problems.
Not guilty:Ebbw Vale flanker STUART GRIFFITHS , sent off for an alleged head-butt in the Schweppes Cup game with Dunvant , was cleared after a personal hearing before the WRU's disciplinary sub-committee.
A rugby victim of the recession is GARETH THOMAS , who recently parted company with Glamorgan Wanderers after seven months as the club's professional administrator.
With costs rising and income harder to come by, the Wanderers found that a £20,000 a year official was something of a luxury.
IAN McKIM , former schools and youth international back row forward, has rejoined NEWPORT from CARDIFF — and gets a trip to Tenerife for a week's warm weather training with the Black-and-Ambers.
Another recent recruit to the Newport squad is Oxford Blue Richard Jones .
ADRIAN DAVIES ,Cambridge Blue and Welsh International fly-half, made his debut for CARDIFF in the Schweppes Cup win over Pencoed .
Fellow international Mike Hall believes that Adrian will be as influential for Cardiff as Gareth Davies was in the 1980s.
Tip for the top…
NEWBRIDGE have an outstanding prospect in 19-year-old ANDREW GIBBS .
This 6ft 4in flanker has the talent to add senior honours to his schoolboy and youth caps.
International Crossroads with Chris Thau
Aussies cave in
I AM reliably told that the AUSTRALIAN RUGBY UNION has eventually accepted the tour itinerary of Ireland and Wales as initially suggested.
The last detail, the identity of the third Welsh club to be played after Neath and Llanelli has also been decided.
Initially Pontypool 's name was on the tour itinerary for one of the mid-week matches.
The WRU, however, thought that it would be fairer (and also act as an incentive) to pitch the Wallabies against the highest placed club in the Heineken League, other than Neath and Llanelli.
That could be Pontypool anyway, but at least there is the competitive element.
SA's tour tariff
THE Australians have not yet reached an agreement about their projected short visit to SOUTH AFRICA .
As a New Zealand tour to South Africa looks increasingly likely,Australia will want a share of the cake.
That will be worked out when the South African representatives meet the Australian and Kiwi officials at a meeting of Southern Hemisphere nations in Sydney this month.
One aspect is clear — South Africa's coffers are empty after several years of isolation.
Developing rugby in the deprived areas, previously under SARU tutelage, is a top priority of the new administration.
SARU will need a lot of money to develop the infrastructure in those areas and the unions willing to play Springboks will have to pay up.
If England want to play South African they will have to contribute towards the development of the game in the Republic, otherwise they will have no-one to play against.
It's as simple as that.
The same is true for France , Australia and anyone else willing to take on the Springboks.
In fact, why not a couple of charity matches between the Southern Hemisphere and the Norther Hemisphere to help the SARU speed up the development process?
Captain Kirk's think-tank
FORMER All Black captain DAVID KIRK , who narrowly missed a seat in the New Zealand Parliament representing the constituency of the former Prime Minister,Sir Robert Muldoon , has been offered a job in the office of the New Prime Minister in Wellington.
Until a suitable parliamentary seat is found for the ‘future prime minister’ Kirk will be administrative assistant in Jim Bolger's think-tank.
Romanian exodus
OVER 50 ROMANIAN players, nearly half of them internationals, have joined French clubs.
A few of them, including Larentiu Constantin , jumped ship before the revolution.
Most of them, however, left Romania before the last few years in an attempt to capitalise on what's left of their playing careers.
During the World Cup in Brive I met my friend and former Romanian No.8 George Dumitru , who captained Romania against Wales in 1979 and is now playing and coaching in Limoges .
Five of the current Romanian international squad are playing in France, including loose-head prop Gheorghe Leonte who has joined Constantin in Mielan .
The exodus is not confined to  players alone.
Former technical director,Valeriu Irimescu , who coached Romania during the late 70s and early 80s, has also left for France.
The old ‘bear’Theodor Radulescu has been appointed interim National Technical Director in his place.
Recruitment scandal
PETER FATIALOFA , Western Samoa's captain during the World Cup , has commenced his ‘contract’ with the Italian club L'Aquila .
L'Aquila's previous foreign player, Wallaby fullback Greg Martin , has left the club.
The absurdity of the Italian ‘recruitment’ system is revealed by what could safely be described as the ‘Aquila paradox’— the man sidelined by Martin was none other than the successful Italian fullback Luigi Troiani .
Fatialofa is L'Aquila's ‘foreign player’ but on the other side of the scrum there is a South African of Italian descent,Gerardo Lepera , who does not count as a foreign player and has the right to play as what the Italians call an oriundi .
This legal loophole has been eagerly exploited by the Italian clubs who have been ‘importing’ loads of oriundi , mostly from Argentina.
The Italian Federation is fighting a rearguard battle against this trend, which is slowly but surely killing Italian rugby.
All Blacks hang around
THE prospect of a tour to South Africa has fired up the imagination of senior ALL BLACKS said to have been contemplating retirement after the World Cup .
I am quite pleased that Auckland fly-half Grant Fox has changed his mind and made himself available for international action.
He is such a fine player and tactician.
The Whetton twins too have said they are ready if needed.
John Kirwan has also changed his mind after he was heard on TVNZ after the World Cup saying that he was not prepared to play for New Zealand unless John Hart was nominated as coach.
With Hartie mortally wounded by the vengeful NZRU council, Kirwan has now made himself available and the newly appointed backs coach Earle Kirton has been heard suggesting that ‘King John’ might be assigned a new role at centre, a position he is successfully filling for his second division Italian club Thiene who are coaches by another Kiwi,John Boe .
Experiment continues
The FIVE NATIONS COMMITTEE has agreed to carry on with the successful recent experiment of having the referees ‘wired’ to the commentators' headphones during games.
Although introduced during the World Cup , it was not such a revolutionary advance as had been claimed.
The first referee to be wired in an international match was France 's René Hourquet during a game in South Africa in the early '80s.
Rowlands on a roll
OVER 550 proposals concerning changes in the laws of the game have been received by the IRB so far, says secretary Keith Rowlands.
After a four-year moratorium the IRB is expected to make sweeping changes in the laws at their meeting in Wellington in April, during the NZRU Centenary celebrations.
After that, says Mr Rowlands, another four-year moratorium will follow.
Contrasting fortunes
MICHAEL LYNAGH , who has been playing with increasing success for Italian club Treviso under the hand of magician Pierre Villepreux , has been offered a job with the PR department of Benetton , the club sponsors.
The playing fortunes of David Campese , on the other hand, seem to have taken a turn for the worse.
Last year his club Mediolanum Milano , sponsored by the media magnate Berlusconi and coached by Mark Ella , won the Italian Championship undefeated.
This season Milano has already lost three games (two in a row to Padua and L'Aquila ) and could miss the final.
Campese, I am told by journalist Paolo Catella , is having tantrums.
In Padua he threw the ball at an opponent's head, while in L'Aquila he was warned by the referee for his loud protestations.
There is no doubt that Campese is one of the most talented players to have blessed a rugby field and the Australian rugby writers have voted him the Player of the Year.
However, he may not be that popular in England after his ungracious comments before and after the World Cup final and his decision to drop out of the Barbarians game — not to mention the ‘try that never was’ against England in the 1987 World Cup .
Wallabies target sevens
THE AUSTRALIANS have decided to concentrate on sevens with the same single-mindedness that won them the 15-a-side title last year.
Naturally their target is next year's World Cup Sevens in Scotland.
I understand that of the 24 nations scheduled to take part 20 have already been nominated and four will have to qualify at the Catania tournament in Sicily this April.
The first stage in Australia's build-up is this year's Hong Kong Sevens in Scotland.
I understand that of the 24 nations scheduled to take part 20 have already been nominated and four will have to qualify at the Catania tournament in Sicily this April.
The first stage in Australia's build-up is this year's Hong Kong Sevens .
Both Michael Lynagh and David Campese have made themselves available for the tournament.
Nick Farr-Jones who was last month awarded the highest Australian decoration,The Order of Australia , has confirmed that he will be unavailable for international action this season.
Fullback Marty Roebuck could also miss out as an ankle operation is likely to sideline him for six to seven weeks.
However, the great Wallaby no.8,Tim Gavin , after missing the World Cup — and being sorely missed there — has recovered and made himself available for selection.
‘Boks to tour England
YES, it's official.
I am delighted to tell you that the SPRINGBOKS will, after all, be at Twickenham in November.
The South African Rugby Football Union has accepted an invitation to tour France in October and has also given the nod to the RFU invitation.
The Springboks (I hope the name will be kept) are to play eight matches in France and four in England, including one against England ‘B’.
The international against England is scheduled for November 14th.
Scotland is not included in their touring plans this time around.
I am genuinely happy that South Africa are coming out of the cold and I see in their choice of countries some kind of divine justice.
Both France and England stood by the SARB in their hour of need.
England was the last nation to tour the Republic in 1984 (I discount the Cavaliers ’ tour as a pirate operation), while France sent the largest contingent of international players, including the then captain and now national coach Pierre Berbizier , to play the SARB Centenary tour a couple of seasons ago.
NEW ZEALAND ALL BLACKS
Trouble brewing over S. Africa
As the South African issue rears its ugly head again, DON CAMERON asks who would lead any tour of the Republic.
The injury to All Black captain-in-waiting Mike Brewer just before the World Cup was a severe blow for coach Alex Wyllie, who relied heavily, who relied heavily on the South Islander's on-field tactical authority.
Playing contact with South Africa has been a continuing problem for New Zealand rugby for over 30 years — and the problem will not go away.
Even while the various rugby groups in South Africa are heading for unification, the New Zealand Rugby Football Union still cannot quite make up its mind how quickly it should bridge the gap which has existed since the tumultuous Springbok tour of New Zealand in 1981.
The NZRFU council discussed South Africa and its touring plans late in January.
No decision is likely to come from that avenue until New Zealand have had their regular meeting with the Australian officials in the near future.
Eddie Tonks, the NZRFU council chairman, has been in the forefront of the renewal of playing contact with South Africa.
Even when the subject was off-limits and the unification process had not started, Tonks made several personal comments that South Africa should be re-admitted to international rugby as soon as possible.
Now the NZRFU seems more intent on marking time on the South African issue.
They have already arranged a rigorous season for the All Blacks, beginning with three centenary ‘Tests’ against the World XV in April, two against Ireland in May-June and now three against the Wallabies during an 11-match tour of Australia in June and July.
The home season will have a top-level start with the South Pacific contest (involving Auckland, Wellington, Canterbury, Fiji, New South Wales and Queensland) and the CANZ contest (Otago, Canada, North Harbour, North Auckland, Waikato) in March and April, and finish with the first semi-finals and final of the National Championship.
There have been estimates that a leading Auckland player's season could start in March and finish in early April, with a first class match every weekend, bar one.
Obviously the NZRFU could not fit in a tour to South Africa in the second half of that heavy programme.
The Plan B mentioned last year was for the All Blacks to make only a fleeting visit to Australia, thus opening the way for the South Africans to make a short tour to Australia and then for the All Blacks to go to South Africa.
That plan has not been mentioned recently,(although it must still be a live prospect) mainly because New Zealand are not yet convinced that rugby in South Africa will soon be integrated to the satisfaction of all sporting groups in the Republic.
At least once a fortnight there have been confusing signals coming from rugby in South Africa, in contrast to the clear-cut campaign that South African cricket conducted on their way to entry in the World Cup in New Zealand and Australia in this southern summer.
And even if the political tangle in South Africa is unravelled quickly there are many leading rugby people in New Zealand, including the new All Black coach, Laurie Mains, who suggest that now is not a good time for the resumption of New Zealand-South African contests — New Zealand have to recover a lot of the ground lost at the World Cup before they would feel comfortable of having a winning chance against South Africa.
However, at NZRFU level there is also the feeling that the sooner the better for the All Blacks to go to South Africa.
The basis for that is that over the next few years the South Africans will be on an upward learning curve after being without international competition for so long.
It would be better to try and beat them at the bottom of the curve rather than when the South Africans were improving.
Returning to the All Blacks' 11-match tour to Australia, the NZRFU has bowed to Australian pressure and loosened the grip on the Bledisloe Cup, for many years the symbol of Trans-Tasman supremacy, but which has only regained popularity in the last decade or so when Australia have been able to break the All Blacks' hold on the Cup.
In the past New Zealand have insisted that the Cup would be at stake only over a Test series, or in a one-off Test.
When the All Blacks managed to square the rubber at one-all when they won at Eden Park last year — after losing at Sydney — the All Blacks retained the Cup.
Now the NZRFU has agreed with the Australian request that the Cup will be at stake whenever the two countries play a test, so the Cup could change hands three times during the coming All Black tour of Australia.
There could be an Otago triumvirate in charge of the All Black team this year.
Laurie Mains, the former Otago and All Black fullback who nursed Otago to win the national first division championship last winter, has already been named as coach of the All Blacks in place of the unavailable Alex Wyllis.
Now Earle Kirton, the former Otago and All Black fly-half who regained his place on the All Black selection panel late last year, has bee picked as Mains' assistant coach for the coming season.
The third leg of the Otago treble is expected to come in March when Mike Brewer, Mains' Otago captain in recent years, is chosen as captain of the All Blacks, even though Gary Whetton, captain for the last two years, is again available.
The Mains-Kirton pairing may seem odd, for Mains played all his major rugby at fullback and Kirton as an inside back.
However, Mains regards himself more as a forward coach these days, and will obviously make his strongest impact there — especially if Brewer is there to help.
For Kirton, the assistant-coach position may fall slightly below his highest expectations, but will be a satisfactory position from which he can expand, if not introduce, his sometimes exotic ideas about back play.
Kirton first achieved coaching prominence in London and, on his return to New Zealand, eventually took over the Wellington side.
He won the national championship in one season and finished fairly high in another season.
Kirton, though, achieved rather more fame for the fact that he took his own lemons to Athletic park when they did not have the appropriate fruit to go with his gin-and-tonics, and that he watched the game from the in-goal area, puffing on a cigar with a long checked scarf around his neck.
There was the time, too, when he kept a Wellington side very much under wraps before a Ranfurly Shield challenge against Auckland, and then took the hugh gamble of removing his best five-eighths, Steve Pokere, from fly-half to centre, and bringing in a new youngster — a gamble which failed quite spectacularly.
Kirton regained fame when he gained a place on the All Black panel, after John Hart had virtually lost  be default, for one year, but was removed the following year when Hart made a more orderly bid to become an All Black selector.
Peter Thorburn, the other new face on the All Black panel, has been given the bread-and-butter jobs, while the Mains-Kirton tandem takes the top side.
Television commentator Earle Kirton, the assistant coach, has a chance to implement some of his more ‘spectacular’ ideas on player selection.
Provided he is fit, Brewer seems certain to be Mains' new captain.
Whetton seemed to move into the All Black position more or less on the grounds of seniority and his experience of captaining Auckland.
However, Wyllie soon found that he and Whetton were not exactly compatible, especially when it came to matters tactical, and during the 1990 tour of France, Wyllie turned the more often to Brewer for tactical analysis.
This system seemed likely to carry on through 1991, until Brewer was injured during the early-season tour of Argentina.
Wyllie suddenly found himself without Brewer's expertise, and Wyllis was incandescent with rage when a medical panel ruled Brewer out of the World Cup campaign.
Brewer had had only occasional playing time with Otago late last year, but he was still very much a central feature of the Otago championship-winning efforts.
Brewer, in fact, may do a double-Whetton act in the coming season.
Both the Whettons, Alan and Gary, have announced that they will again be available for major rugby this year.
However, there is more than a chance that Brewer will take over Gary's role as captain, and Alan's place on the blindside of the scrum.
Neil Gray, a burly farmer from Morrinsville, has taken over the post of All Black manager from John Sturgeon, who was not available.
It may be a sign of the times, but Craig Innes' switch to rugby league in Britain did not draw much newspaper comment in New Zealand.
About 12 months ago Innes mentioned that he could be interested in a rugby league offer after the World Cup, and so it was not a surprise that he was tagged by the cheque-book boys in Britain.
The story contained the usual will-he-won't-he changes of direction, but when the amounts of cash involved began to escalate no-one was surprised when Innes took the money.
He had earlier notified Graham Henry, the new Auckland selector, and Peter Thorburn, the new All Black selector of his plans.
They seemed to agree that £275,000 spread over four years would have been hard to ignore.
WILLIE or won't he?
WILLIE OFAHENGAUE is pestered day and night by rugby league clubs.
The big question now is…
On the boil.
Ofahengaue gives All Black Bernie McCahill a taste of the explosive power that has captivated league clubs.
Willie or won't he?
That has been the latest Australian sports game featuring powerhouse backrower Willie Ofahengaue.
The question which has been asked in rugby union and rugby league circles ad nauseam since the World Cup is whether Ofahengaue will make the switch and play league with Sydney's famous St. George club.
It has been a question which was first asked prior to Ofahengaue making his Wallaby debut when a late inclusion in the touring party on the 1990 tour to New Zealand.
And, despite untold pressure from within his own circle of friends and from rugby league officials, Ofahengaue has shown remarkable strength to resist the most tempting of offers.
Ofahengaue was first linked with rugby league when the Manly-Warringah coach Graham Lowe, who spent several seasons coaching in England, spotted the Tongan Torpedo when attending a rugby match involving Ofahengaue's Manly club.
Lowe happened to have a Manly Rugby Club official building his house at the time and the official acted as an intermediary between Lowe and Ofahengaue.
Manly-Warringah chased Ofahengaue's signature prior to the Wallaby tour of New Zealand but without success.
When in New Zealand, Ofahengaue made his Test debut and proved to be a dynamic forward whose powerful running and block-busting defence earned instant attention from the wealthy league clubs.
After the tour, Manly was joined in the chase for Ofahengaue's signature by St. George.
Manly-Warringah had earlier missed out on signing All Black no.8 Zinzan Brooke and were desperate to gain Ofahengaue.
But their price had its limits as the club already boasted a number of highly-priced internationals on its books.
When Manly-Warringah dropped out of the chase, St George stepped up the pressure and have never really let off.
Throughout last season, Saints officials tried every trick to sign Ofahengaue, but the big forward resisted and continued to produce devastating displays despite the external pressures.
St. George realised that there was every chance that Ofahengaue would become one of the best players of the World Cup and went to the extreme to sign Ofahengaue before the Wallabies set off for London.
By this stage Ofahengaue was sick and tired of the phone calls and the meetings.
On the eve of the Wallabies' departure, St George officials visited the Wallabies' hotel to seek his signature.
By this stage, Ofahengaue had had enough.
Instead of staying with his team-mates at the hotel, he slipped away and stayed privately with friends in a bid to avoid the St George officials.
The Wallabies had an early morning departure so Ofahengaue returned to the hotel at 4.30a.m. — only to find St George officials waiting in a car in the hotel car park looking for Ofahengaue to return.
Word of St George's high interest has been well publicised but they still have failed to gain Ofahengaue's services.
Prior to the World Cup, Ofahengaue and the Manly Rugby Club president Ian Macdonald were invited to Italy to discuss the possibility of Willie playing with Rovigo.
But, despite Ofahengaue's interest in playing with Rovigo, Italian rugby has a one import rule and South African goal-kicking wizard Naas Botha was already the club's overseas player.
So Willie would have to wait until the 1992–93 season to play with Rovigo.
St George have been unmoved by the Italian threat and have still chased Ofahengaue.
The pressure again began to take its toll so Ofahengaue slipped away to visit his family and relatives in Tonga.
Despite his absence, the headlines that Ofahengaue was set to sign with St George still appeared.
A solicitor from Wellington in New Zealand was quoted as saying that Ofahengaue had agreed to terms and was 99 per cent sure the forward would sign a three-year deal worth $800,000.
But despite everything, Ofahengaue continues to hold out.
The simple reason is that he doesn't like rugby league.
In addition, he has never been accustomed to wealth, nor is he interested in making vast sums of money playing league.
‘I don't want to play rugby league’, he said.
‘It's not my game and I don't think I would like it much.
I want to go on playing for Australia’.
Now Australian officials are moving to secure a more attractive employment position instead of his current job as a piledriver with a construction company.
Without doubt, Ofahengaue is a key man in the plans of coach Bob Dwyer this year when the Wallabies face World Cup semi-finalists Scotland and New Zealand at home prior to touring Ireland and Wales later in the year.
Dwyer told the players how he wanted to win the two-match series against Scotland and how he not only wanted to reclaim the Bledisloe Cup from the All Blacks but complete Australia's first ever 3–0 series whitewash.
‘I think we have the team to do it, and this is the opportunity to do it’, he told the players.
Against this background has been the fight between the Australian Rugby Football Union and the Committee of The Four Home Unions over the proposed Wallaby tour of South Africa prior to the Wallabies touring Wales and Ireland.
The Home Unions have steadfastly refused to alter the timing of the tour to accommodate the Wallaby tour to South Africa and have  also denied the ARU's request to permit the Wallabies to tour South Africa prior to arriving in Ireland and Scotland.
ARFU officials and Wallabies cannot fathom the Home Unions' inflexibility on the issue, particularly since the ARFU allowed England to interrupt their tour of Australia last year to play two matches in Fiji before returning to play a Test in Sydney.
The other fact annoying the ARFU is that a precedent had already been set when the All Blacks played in Canada before touring Wales and Ireland in 1989.
While the Home Unions are seemingly trying to protect their own interests, the whole issue could blow up in their faces if the Wallabies made a separate tour of South Africa immediately before the tour of Ireland and Wales.
If there is a separate tour, there is a distinct possibility many players would opt for the four match South African tour instead of the 12-match tour of Ireland and Wales.
AUSTRALIA
THE MOUSE THAT ROARED
MARTY ROEBUCK might look like a man who wouldn't say ‘boo’ to a goose, but his slight frame hides a huge heart.
GREG CAMPBELL talked to him
‘I've never been too big in the courage department’, said Wallaby fullback Marty Roebuck.
With this statement, Roebuck was answering a question about his defence and, in particular, an unforgettable head-on tackle he effected when the All Black's runaway rhino, no.8 Wayne Shelford, was huffing, puffing and snorting for the tryline when North Harbour played New South Wales just under 12 months ago.
Shelford was at full throttle and all that stood in his way to a four pointer was the frail-looking frame of Roebuck.
From the sideline it looked like a rottweiler up against a chihuahua.
Roebuck positioned and braced himself and at the precise moment drove his shoulder into Shelford's midriff, stopped him instantaneously, before driving him into the Onewa Domain turf.
It was another victory for David over Goliath.
In just the few seconds that it took Roebuck to de-rail Shelford, a whole new Marty Roebuck fan club was born.
And among the first to register were his 14 New South Wales team-mates.
While Roebuck may wish to play down his football courage, the proof is there for all to witness.
Two years ago, when playing for NSW Country Origin against Sydney Origin, Roebuck badly damaged his right ankle sidelining him for over four months and ruining any immediate aspiration to claim a Test team berth.
Roebuck's ankle required surgery to repair the lateral and medial ligaments.
As a physiotherapist, Roebuck knew how painful, demanding and difficult the recovery period and rehabilitating process would be.
Manfully, Roebuck kept exercising and treating his ankle.
After all, they say that doctors make the worst patients (so he had a point to prove).
But the results were forthcoming and he managed to squeeze in a couple of lower grade games for his Sydney club Eastwood before the end of the season.
The injury was a severe setback for Roebuck as he had gained a taste of international rugby when he toured France and Canada with the Wallabies at the end of 1989.
There were many who had predicted that Roebuck would claim Greg Martin's Test fullback position after that tour.
So Roebuck square up to 1991 well behind the pace after virtually a season on the sidelines.
Eastwood had lost the services of fly-half Scott Johnson and coach Geoff Johnson looked to Roebuck to play the important brains and link role instead of the custodian role at fullback.
Tim Kelaher, who eventually claimed the Eastwood fullback position in Roebuck's absence in 1989, was the latest hot property as he won selection for a Sydney XV against a combined New Zealand second and third division provincial team in Sydney.
But the day before this fixture Kelaher suffered kidney damage in his opening club match for his new Randwick and was forced to withdraw.
Roebuck was visiting his family at Bathurst, about five hours drive west of Sydney, when he received the SOS call.
He responded, drove all the way back to the city, laced on his boots and proceeded to play a blinder.
‘I was always hopeful that I would be able to fight my way back into the representative scene but that was the early chance I needed’, recalled Roebuck.
Roebuck has a new aim — to whitewash New Zealand in the Bledisloe Cup.
Roebuck immediately claimed a place in the NSW team and marched into the Australian team making his Test debut against Wales at Ballymore where he scored a debut try in the Wallabies' record slaughter.
In a season which, for many, would be fantasy rather than reality, Roebuck played in all 10 Tests, won the World Cup and was voted the Sydney Rugby Union's Rothman's Best and Fairest Player Of The Year.
It took tremendous courage for Roebuck to fight back from his crippling injury, but there is a further chapter to the story.
The right ankle which he damaged was supposed to be his good ankle.
It was his left ankle which always seemed to cause problems.
The wear and tear of the 1991 season began to take its toll on Roebuck's bad ankle — the left one — and he began to suffer slight dislocations during training while on the World Cup trail with the Wallabies.
Then, during the World Cup final, he clashed heads with England winger Simon Halliday and suffered a cut above his right eye — an injury which can be quite bothersome for a full-back, especially when attempting to gather high balls.
Then his ankle began to cause severe problems.
Roebuck revealed that his ankle dislocated no less than four times during the World Cup final.
‘It happened once or twice in the semi-final against the All Blacks and then even more in the final’, he explained.
‘I would roll over on my ankle and it would pop out for a few seconds and click back in again’.
Needless to say, Roebuck underwent another ankle operation in December and hopes to be back playing by the first Sydney competition match for Eastwood against defending champions Randwick in April.
‘The recovery is taking a little more time than I'd hope for but I'm rather impatient.
I want to play in the first competition match and then make sure of my place in the NSW team.
I'm sure there is going to be a lot competition for places this year’, he said.
Looking back on a memorable 1991, 26-year-old Roebuck thinks he was a very fortunate man.
‘I just happened to be around some great players and be part of a great team’, he said with typical modesty.
‘After each Test there was never any great sense of elation but rather that a step towards the ultimate goal was taken.
‘I was much like Nick Farr-Jones after the World Cup final when he said he felt a sense of relief rather than anything else after we had won.
That night I was just too tired to go to the team party.
I just went to bed for a sleep’, he revealed.
Roebuck said that coach Bob Dwyer taught him several new attacking options and running angles in 1991 which he aims to perfect in 1992 when the Wallabies host Scotland and the All Blacks before touring Ireland and Wales towards the end of the year.
‘Bob is very demanding in what he wants and he added another dimension to my game.
He paid particular attention to me finding my support players and changing the angles of my entry into the backline’, he said.
Despite his own success in 1991, Roebuck said he isn't guaranteed the fullback role at Eastwood when the season begins.
‘Matthew Burke, who toured Britain with the 1990 Australian Schoolboy team, is a brilliant young player and he may be used at fullback.
He can play anywhere in the backline and, if he can stay injury-free this year, then I believe he'll be touring with the Wallabies at the end of the year.
If he doesn't then I'm a bad judge’, predicted Roebuck.
But despite Roebuck's tip the Wallaby fullback is sure to be at the top of the list when Dwyer and his fellow selectors sit down to choose the first Test team to play Scotland in June.
‘We've already had a talk about the year ahead and what the aims and goals are.
We want to go that step further and win the Bledisloe Cup after narrowly missing it in the Second Test against the All Blacks last year’, he said.
SOUTH AFRICA
MOVERS AND SHAKERS
Frenetic close-season transfer activity is new to most rugby countries, but in South Africa it's become part of the furniture…
Last month the grapevine was fairly quiet on the tip of the world.
There were very few rumours about top players moving from province to province.
Since then the pace has picked up and, as usual, there are wild stories circulating with talk of offers, contracts and incentives.
As usual we await the start of the new season for final confirmations but, for the record, there are the top stories in this glorious amateur game of ours.
Northerns scrum-half Robert Du Preez is off to Durban.
You may remember he was dropped by the Blue Bulls amid speculation that Naas Botha considered him too selfish.
Robert was a replacement in the Currie Cup final and came on for young Johan Roux in the second half.
Despite his disappointments he starred for the South African side which played as Springboks against the Juniors late last season.
The choice of Natal is strange as captain Craig Jamieson, the man who led them to the Cup in 1990, is still very much involved in rugby.
What a choice for the selectors.
Du Preez is also reported to be joining Harlequins in Durban who already boast Vleis Visagie and Wahl Bartmann.
Mind you, rumours also link Wahl to Northern Transvaal, although Transvaal, the side who ditched Wahl in 1989, will make a strong bid for the flanker's services.
Hell, it's a bit like Dallas isn't it?
While we're on the Natal trail, many were shocked at the resignation of popular general manager Roger Gardner.
The likeable Welshman, who came via the coaching route from Western Province, says he is fed up with the intrigue and politics of rugby.
A sad blow, and he may be followed by coach Ian McIntosh who, as a paid official, is no longer allowed to be in charge.
Western Province are in the same boat, and rumour has it that the little general, Dawie Snyman, will replace Hannie Bekker this season.
Snyman was the man who coached the almost unbeatable Province side in the early Eighties.
Perhaps he will be able to get the best out of Springbok centre Faffa Knoetze who has been battling with injury and actuarial exams for the last few seasons.
On form the little centre is one of the best attacking players in the country, and with captain Tiaan Strauss they could spark a revival down Newlands way.
Rumours also say that Eastern Province fly-half Hennie Le Roux is on his way to Cape Town.
He forced his way into the Junior Bok side last season and on form is an  irresistible play-maker.
Great speculation surrounds the future of Eastern Province lock Adri Geldenhuys.
He is currently slugging it out at Tarbes in the company of Stellenbosh back row player Dries Van Heerden.
The selection of Van Heerden, now a naturalised Frenchman, for France is reported to have whetted the appetite of Geldenhuys.
However, many suspect that he will head North this SA season and in South Africa that doesn't mean to rugby league.
Rather it means to the wealthy provinces of Northerns or Transvaal.
He has already played for and left both.
What an acquisition he would be, provided he can curb his over-robust tendencies.
No panic.
Jannie Breedt has seen it all before in his long career at Transvaal.
Northerns utility player Theo Van Rensburg is reported to be heading to Johannesburg.
With Gerbrand Grobler playing so well at fullback and backing up Naas as a place kicker, it seems the fifteen spot is tied up.
Van Rensburg perhaps fancies his chances in the red and white.
Where would that leave giant fullback Hendrik Truter you may ask?
The answer is ‘who knows?’
Following defeats like the final last season the Transvaal hierarchy have a reputation of blaming it all on a few players.
In the past brilliant players such as Schalke Naude, Chris Rogers, Hampas Rademeyer and Charles Pieterse have suffered and perhaps Truter will be the same.
Rest assured that he will still be a match winner, wherever he plays.
On the move.
Talented scrum-half Robert Du Preez has left the Blue Bulls of Northern Transvaal for the greener pastures of Natal, the first shot in a heated close-season transfer market.
Transvaal captain Jannie Breedt will resist the temptation to panic.
He remembers the great side of 1987 that was destroyed by poor selection.
This season a benefit dinner is being arranged for the  inspirational no.8 and certainly no player deserves it more.
Free State, if they can keep their stars, will once again be a major force next season.
They are to South African rugby what Cambridge University were to the English game in the mid-Seventies and, indeed, Llanelli were to Wales in the early Seventies.
The back line is unbelievably fast and talented and half-backs Jannie de Beer and Hentie Martens, both under twenty, will surely feature in future south African selections.
It remains to be seen if Free State will be able to keep stars like fullback Andre Joubert and centre Pieter Muller.
Muller, in fact, played off-season for the Greystones club in Ireland and by all accounts has been one of the most successful migratory players to visit the island.
What a prospect he is.
Yes, it's all go on the rumour exchange and let me stress that these are but a few of the juiciest.
The wise veterans nod their heads and wait for the first whistle.
With hopes of unity in the Western Cape there is a real prospect of international rugby once again this season.
To be happy and settled in a winning province is therefore very important to the top players and for once this may count more than attractive job offers and other benefits.
We watch and impatiently wait.
U.S.A.
Toks — Man on a Mission
A spate of spinal injuries have saddened everyone involved with rugby Stateside.
TOKS AKPATA is a man whose love of the game and whose own sad injury have spurred him on his one-man campaign to make the rugby pitch a safer place.
After nearly two years without a major catastrophic spinal rugby injury in the United States, there have been four in the last half of 1991.
While everyone in the U.S. rugby community is greatly saddened by these injuries, and are doing what they can for the crippled players and their families, no feels quite as upset as Toks Akpata.
And no-one can empathise with what these players are going through quite like Toks.
That's because Toks, a 31-year-old Scottish-born son of a Nigerian father and a Jamaican mother, was himself a victim of one of these injuries in August of 1986.
Toks was hooking for the Windhover (NY) RFC in the B Division final of the Saranac Lake (NY) Tourney — America's largest, with about 100 teams — when the front row of the touring Broad Street RFC, from Coventry, violently charged into a scrum from over two yards away.
It was about 20 minutes into the game, and the English team was reportedly frustrated at losing all the put-ins to that point.
Whatever the reason, Toks' tighthead failed to get down and his head smashed against his opposition's shoulder.
He has been a quadriplegic ever since.
For one team's desperate desire to establish its worth in the scrums, Toks has had to  play the price of a life confined to a wheelchair, a need for 24-hour-a-day attendants, and an almost total loss of his business and social  aspirations .
But despite his permanent paralysis and great physical and mental suffering, Akpata has not lost any love of the game or rugby, which he had first viewed as a boy in Scotland.
He didn't begin playing, though, until he began pursuing a bachelors and masters degree in civil engineering at the Universities of Prince Edward Island and New Brunswick in Canada.
Yet by the time he migrated to the U.S. to work as a traffic engineer in 1985, he was a true devotee of the game.
‘I'm not bitter at the sport’, said Akpata.
I love rugby and if I had the opportunity I would pull on my boots and play tomorrow.
‘I really believe rugby helped mould my character into the man I am today.
The sport has also given me many friends.
During the 15 months I lived in New Jersey before my injury, just about everybody I knew was connected with the game.
‘However, I think it's quite tragic what has happened to me and what continues to happen to young men like myself.
There's no reason why a fellow who wants to spend a pleasant afternoon playing a decent game of rugby should have his life ruined.
‘And, while these injuries are often due to unfortunate accidents, too many times they are the result of unsafe rules which need to be changed.
The people making the Laws think only of first-class rugby, with first-class players and referees.
They fail to realise that not everyone playing or refereeing rugby is competent, and they don't build enough safety protection into the rules’.
The crusader.
Toks Akpata has devoted himself to changing the Laws to reduce the risk of spinal injury.
Illustrating his continued love of the game, Toks has been a  columnist in Rugby U.S. for the past two years, commenting on a wide variety of topics.
He also developed an exhaustive database on U.S. rugby spinal injuries in 1990, and has tried to use the information to suggest Law changes that could help prevent catastrophic injuries.
For example, Toks believes that the injury suffered in September by Matthew ‘Jojo’ Moore (a 44-year-old father of four daughters aged 7 to 13), in an Old Boys match in New York, could have been prevented.
‘I'm told the front rows in the Moore tragedy were so close that they had to bend at the waist to get in’, said Akpata.
‘Moore, a fit powerful and experienced hooker, just couldn't squeeze in his head in time.
‘When the ref makes the scrum come up and back again, like in the Moore case, the packs must be given the time and position to reset properly.
The front rows need to get back into their customary crouched stance.
‘To ensure this Law 20(2) , which states the front row must be positioned ‘no more than one arm's length from their opponents’ shoulders.’
Among the many finding that Akpata uncovered in his landmark study.
‘Spinal Injuries in U.S. Rugby: 1970–90’, was that many more catastrophic scrum injuries come from ‘colliding’ scrums (57 per cent) than collapsed scrums (26 per cent ), and that hookers accounted for 81 per cent of  scrummaging injuries.
‘Hookers owe it to themselves and their loved ones to refuse to play if crouch-touch pause-engage isn't being enforced’, he said.
‘Don't be stupid.
Spinal cord injuries have cruel way of leaving your mind intact so that you can think long and hard about the way you wanted to live’.
Another interesting Akpata suggestion concerns reducing serious, open-field injuries.
He feels the ref should be empowered to demand a substitute for a player guilty of non-malicious, dangerous play.
‘Anybody guilty of deliberate, dangerous play should, of course, be sent off, with his team having to play short-handed.
But for non-intentional but dangerous acts, refs are reluctant to punish a whole team for one man's folly.
‘However, we can't have players leaping over defenders, tackling head-on or high tackling.
No-one, especially referees, should tolerate a player's dangerous open-field antics.
Serious injuries and deaths occur, and all of us must do what we can to prevent them.
In this light, a substitution rule in worth considering.
Another point that Akpata has brought up is that match and event organisers need to be aware of the ‘trauma hospital’ closest to their area, and should have a person capable of performing triage at the ready.
Akpata's condition was made worse, as were those of three other seriously-injured U.S. players, when they were taken to small hospitals ill-equipped for major trauma.
In an uncomfortable, but revealing article in July of 1990, Akpata described some of the medical, social and financial hardships of quadriplegics.
Among the subjects he detailed were the attempts of U.S. insurance companies and the {Mediaid}system to pass much of the burden of care onto families; the great strain placed on family and personal relationships; hardships in adjusting to residential situations; and medical difficulties with such things as bladder and bowel management, skin diseases, constant pain, spastic muscle movement, regulating body temperature and resistance to respiratory complications.
‘All of these men know these things’, he said.
‘Notwithstanding, they forge ahead’.
Akpata does acknowledge that the greater playing and coaching knowledge in the more  established rugby countries lessens the possibility of such injuries, and that socialised medicine and/or established insurance coverage reduced the material hardship to those injured in the Home Countries.
However, because catastrophic injuries are more worrisome to the emerging rugby nations, Akpata thinks that the IRB powers are doing the game a disservice by not acting enough to change the Laws for safety purposes.
He also contends that the senior rugby nations do not disseminate enough information on rugby injuries to protect everyone playing this game in all 120 or so countries.
‘A lot more research, based on reliable date, is essential if progress it to be made in rugby safety’, summed up Akpata.
‘It's high time influential people got serious about the root causes of injuries, instead of being satisfied with taking care of players once they're in a wheelchair.
‘The victims of such injuries are relatively young.
They have desires, goals, ambitions and lives to live.
Money and medical services can make a person's life less miserable, but no amount of money can compensate for a crippled player's loss of freedom.
The damage is done, and in most cases, the damage could be prevented’.
If anyone would like to share research or an opinion with Toks, he can be contacted.
RUGBY CANADA
Testing time ahead
As Canada break new ground in their struggle to remain a ‘top eight’ nation, PETER McMULLAN outlines the developments designed to see the Canucks succeed in the CANZ series and beyond…
As the '91 World Cup unfolded Canada 's strength in depth, at least as represented by the 26 players who travelled to France, emerged as a major asset.
A winning team against Fiji was changed and won again against Romania .
And there were further revisions against France and then New Zealand , games where Canada finished behind on points but earned widespread acclaim for their performances against two of the world's leading powers.
That's history now and already the planning process is under way to take Canada on to 1995 and the next World Cup, wherever that may be.
It's obviously far too early to be starting to think about Canadian prospects but, at the same time, it has to be realised that we are now probably little more than three years away from the '95 opening ceremonies, assuming a Southern Hemisphere location.
With this in mind the Canadian Rugby Union has confirmed that Ian Birtwell's appointment as national coach will be extended for another four years, placing him in firm control of the key decisions relating to player selection as he looks ahead to 1995.
It has also been decided that continuity will be best served by developing a much closer working relationship between Birtwell and the respective Canada under 21 and under 19 coaches, Paul Horne and Don Burgess (under 21s) and David Docherty and Doug Sturrock (under 19s).
This will enable the current coaches, now established as a so-called cluster, and their successors in the years to come, to identify and monitor the development of present and future Canada players as they work their way up through the system.
No doubt computers will be utilized to manage and track the inevitable masses of information and to provide comparative fitness testing data on what could be a pool of more than 100 players in the three categories.
Established internationals Gord MacKinnon and Pat Palmer represented the national team squad at the CRU's recent three day planning meeting in Vancouver and were most supportive of a decision to implement fitness testing for all the country's top players as an ongoing requirement.
Until now testing has been carried out prior to major events, such as the World Cup; the new plan will build on the success of the original programme and, as both Palmer and MacKinnon noted, will provide the younger players will an incentive and standards that must be met if they want to win full international caps.
Planning for the rest of 1992, and indeed for the foreseeable future, will be driven b; y the Canadian Rugby Union's new mission statement: ‘To develop the potential of rugby in Canada to maintain our competitive position in the top eight countries in the world .’
It's a challenging objective and there is general recognition among the senior administrators that it is going to take a tremendous effort, one that is both concerted and coordinated, for Canada to qualify for the 1995 quarter-finals.
The build-up to such an event will be largely dependent on the outcome of the upcoming IRFB meetings in New Zealand, with Canada concentrating its immediate efforts on the four games CANZ tour to New Zealand in late March, the annual trip to the Hong Kong Sevens in April and the possibility of internal tours for both the national team and the under-19s later in the summer.
WITH; some World cup players retired, others assisting clubs in France and Japan and a number unable to travel, Canada has come up with a new-look squad for a four-game visit to New Zealand in late March.
The CANZ series, which this years sees the Canadians hosted by Otago (Dunedin, March 22 ),North Harbour (Auckland, March 25 ),North Auckland (Whangarei, March 28 ) and Waikato (Hamilton, March 31 ) is going to provide an interesting test for a squad that features eight original World Cup choices.
The front-row component, critical at any time and especially against tough New Zealand provinces, includes hooker Mark Cardinal and uncapped loose head prop Paul Le Blanc, both late withdrawals from the World Cup group.
Also included are props Dan Jackart and Paul Szabo, who showed well in France, along with flanker Al Charron, now fully recovered after breaking ribs in the last game against the All Blacks, and centre Tom Woods, like Cardinal a 1987 World Cup starter in New Zealand.
For centre David Lougheed and uncapped lock Jeff Knauer, the CANZ series will be a special challenge for neither had a game during the '91 World Cup.
In addition to Cardinal, Szabo, Jackart, Charron, Woods and Lougheed, the capped players in the 22-strong party are outside-half Bob Ross and lock Ian Gordon, a replacement for Charron late in the second half for last year's famous win over Scotland.
Overall this looks to be a group with the physical and mental resources needed to play at the top level in New Zealand.
All but five of the players are from British Columbia which means they should be match hard and fit after a full domestic season.
Those who will have to work a little bit harder to reach their full potential, coming from east of the Rockies where rugby is a spring and summer game, are Alberta scrum-half Tom Liddle, Newfoundland flanker or no.8 Rod Snow and the Ontario trio of Charron, Lougheed and Scott MacKinnon, a fullback or centre and brother of Gordon.
New Zealanders will be taking a special look at Mick Doyle, the hard-running Vancouver Kats centre who learned his rugby in Auckland.
He came to Canada six years ago after playing for Grammar Old Boys, Auckland Maoris and various representative schools and colts teams.
Another interesting choice is that of the big (6ft 7ins.)
Vancouver Rowing Club lock Andy Wilson, who moved to Canada from South Africa about four years ago.
With national coach Ian Birtwell unable to travel for business reasons the management was still to be finalised when the squad was announced as follows (all from B.C. unless indicated).
Their finest moment.
But can the Canadian World Cup side continue the upward trend in their learning curve during the coming CANZ series?
THERE is a cosmopolitan look to the team that will carry the Canadian flag at the Hong Kong Sevens on April 4 and 5.
First-time cup semi-finalists last year after a 24–4 upset of Scotland , father of the seven-a-side game,Canada will again have a particularly strong representation with World Cup coach Ian Birtwell in charge.
World Cup no.8 Glenn Ennis will be travelling from Tokyo, where he and massive lock Norm Hadley are working for the Suntory Corporation , while Scott Steward, who won four caps during the World Cup, two on the wing and two at fullback, will fly from the south of France, where he is playing for Dax .
Ennis, Gordon MacKinnon and Bruce Breen, Canada's first choice forwards last year, will be joined by Ian Stuart, a former Canada scrum-half and centre who will be used primarily as a hooker.
The backs are Pat Palmer, Steve Gray and Chris Tynan, who all played in 1991, along with Alberta's Julian Loveday, veteran of two Middlesex Sevens with London Irish and visiting Hong Kong for the third time with Canada.
Palmer, with six previous trips, has seen the most tournaments followed by Breen, Ennis, MacKinnon and Ian Stuart, with three each, Gray (two) and Tynan (one).
For Scott Stewart it will be a whole new experience.
LONDON IRISH folk will remember Cork born Pat Parfrey as a successful coach in the eighties.
Back in Ireland, he made his name as a Munster and UCC wing or centre in the late Sixties and early Seventies.
Now a kidney specialist living in St. John's, Newfoundland, he is the driving force behind the extraordinary success of rugby on ‘The Rock’, a province where he jests ‘good weather is when it doesn't snow before half-time’.
Making the point that Newfoundland, beaten finalists in the Canadian national championship before Christmas, offers the best touring environment and hospitality in all of Canada, Parfrey captured headlines across the country with a unique venture.
Already supported to the tune of some $50,000 a year from the proceeds of annual art auction, local rugby earned high praise when Parfrey's club, The Swilers, donated $2,000 to help cover the costs of a month long exhibit of work by the French master Marc Chagall at Memorial University.
Rugby and art may seem strange bedfellows, but as Parfrey says: There should not be this artificial divide between culture and recreation.
International exposure is as much a requirement for cultural development as it is for sport’.
While comparatively few in number, Newfoundland rugby players are obviously on the right track and Parfrey, an enthusiastic provincial coach, can point to solid recent growth.
Five local schools are now involved and the province has started teams at the under 17 and 19 levels.
Masters of mimicry
Taiwan have set their sights on World Cup 1995.
And, says ALVIN SALLAY, the copycat kings of the world aim to copy best.
Finding out the hard way.
Taiwan's Kwang Hua Taipei learn the All Black way at first hand.
Imitation, they say, is the sincerest form of flattery, and the Taiwanese, masters of mimicry, are going ahead with an ambitious plan to copy a style of rugby that until now has been alien to them.
The copycat kings of the world will apply the formula which has benefitted them immensely in the everyday world of trade and commerce to rugby.
Everyone know the tale behind the ‘Made in Taiwan’ label which appears on everything from designer apparel to high-tech equipment.
The canny Taiwanese have perfected the technique of ‘shadow dancing’.
Now, having strutted their stuff so successfully in the business arena, the Taiwanese want to show their arch-rivals — Japan and South Korea — that they had also better watch out when it comes to rugby and September's Asian Rugby Football Tournament in Seoul.
The Taiwan Rugby Football Union is taking the adventurous step, one which has not been contemplated before, of sending a national squad overseas solely for training purposes.
And the destination — New Zealand.
‘To us, they are still the best when it comes to forward play’, says Taiwan national coach Jason Lin.
‘And no other country has a tradition of rugby like the New Zealanders’.
A puff it may be to the deposed kings of world rugby, but the Taiwanese are taking the training stint, which will be used as a build-up to September's Asian tournament, in deadly earnest.
With their eyes on entering the 1995 World Cup qualifiers in the Asia/Pacific Zone (the top two teams in September's tournament will automatically qualify) Taiwan are pinning their hopes on a two-week visit to Wellington, New Zealand.
‘We want to place more emphasis on forward play.
Forwards control the game today.
New Zealand have always been good in this department and that is why we are going there’, explained coach Lin.
The Taiwanese will be billeted at the Porirua Peace College from August 20th to September 6th where they will have intensive training sessions all day and watch videos of the All Blacks all night.
Preparing the way for the 30-strong squad will be Lee Smith, development officer of the New Zealand RFU.
‘Lee is a close friend of mine and he will help us when we get to Wellington.
He has been to Taiwan on two or three occasions and it was his idea that we come to New Zealand and develop our forward play’, said Lin.
Quick to latch on to a good thing, the Taiwanese have already started to adopt the All Black style of play.
A two-game tour Hong Kong in January, including one international, ended with the embarrassed hosts wondering how the Taiwanese had learned to roll mauls and ruck with such proficiency and ferocity.
The first game was a shock 10–6 victory over a Chairman's XV, comprising of the British territory's second string.
Three days later, though, shock turned to amazement when the Taiwanese displayed great grit to defeat a full-strength Hong Kong team 17–13.
The Test was an acrimonious affair, not helped the least by Japanese referee Shiguero Yoshida's poor handling of the game.
Things got so out of hand that at one stage the entire Taiwan team walked off the pitch after flanker Tse Zen-chieh was felled by a punch from Hong Kong prop Dave Lewis.
Lewis was retaliating at the sight of captain Leighton Duley being head-butted and then kicked while on the ground.
It was never clear who was to blame for starting the niggles, but there could be no argument that, on the day, the Taiwanese were the better team.
Their two-try victory was built on a solid performance by the forwards and inventive play from the backs.
Having harvested a quick crop (Hong Kong's pride), the Taiwanese are now ken to learn more — even if it means going to the length of copying someone else.
And having proved that, in rugby as in business, they are quick learners who are very adept at recycling ideas, the Taiwanese could well be the team to look out for come September.
ASIA
SHIGGY STEALS A MARCH
When it comes to planning ahead, the Japanese are masters of the game.
Already looking at playing in the 1995 Rugby World Cup, Japan stole a march on emerging Asian rivals, Hong Kong, by bringing forward the dates of next year's Asian Championship.
At November's 23rd interim meeting of the Asian Rugby Football Union in Bangkok, the Japanese delegate and long-time rugby heavyweight of the region, Shiggy Konno, suggested that the biennial Asian tournament, which is traditionally played in November, be brought forward by two months.
His reasoning was that Seoul, the venue, would be too cold in November, even though this is the regular season of the South Koreans.
After much discussion, the other delegates, including Hong Kong, agreed, and the new dates of the 1992 Asian Championships became September 19–26.
These dates have now become a bone of contention in Hong Kong as rugby administrators in the British territory have belatedly realised — even though they are not admitting it — that the Japanese have outsmarted them and gained a precious advantage for the next World Cup.
It is expected that the 1992 Asian tournament (the next one in 1994 will be too late) will also be used to find the two qualifiers from Asia who will play in the Asia Pacific Zone 1995 World Cup preliminaries.
At the 1988 tournament, held in Hong Kong, South Korea and Japan emerged first and second respectively and went on to play Western Samoa and Tonga for two berths in the 1991 World Cup.
(Western Samoa and Japan qualified).
The Japanese know only too well of the dangers that can be posed by Hong Kong's ‘expatriate’ rugby community in their bid to tread the same path for the next World Cup.
Not wanting to take any risks, they brought forward the dates for the 1992 tournament to September.
So what?
The crunch is that in September, Hong Kong's rugby players, like most other expatriates in the Colony, will be enjoying their summer holidays — many of them scattered all around the world — and the rugby season would still have not begun.
Japan stumbled on the truth when they invited Hong Kong to play two games in early September as a build-up for the recent World Cup.
Lacking preparation, not possessing match-fitness and missing key players (on holiday).
Hong Kong easily succumbed to 32–6 and 42–3 defeats.
It was a contrast to performances in recent Asian tournaments (Hong Kong in 1988 and Sri Lanka in 1990) when the territory finished third, behind South Korea and Japan, and showed that with a bit of luck could have entered the finals.
With the South Koreans proving to be serious challengers, the Japanese obviously do not want to contend with another team for Asian supremacy.
Only the winner and the runner-up in Asia will get the chance to play in the next World Cup preliminaries.
South Korea have won the last three tournaments.
Japan has had to settle for second best.
Not surprisingly, they do not want Hong Kong in the equation.
But Shiggy Konno denies that the move to bring forward the dates stems from any Machiavellian motives.
He simply says that it is due to the climatic conditions in Seoul at the time, adding ‘Not only does Hong Kong start their  season in late September, but so do we, the Koreans and Taiwan.
All that one has to do is to start training earlier.
‘One needs to be dedicated to play rugby nowadays’, added Konno.
Although there is a growing awareness and pride in playing for Hong Kong, the territory's rugby player is still ruled very much by other commitments, which do not include a national flag.
Here Japan and South Korea, both of whom have a  surfeit of nationalistic fervour, have a huge advantage.
These two countries have dominated Asian rugby for so long, and they do not want to relinquish their hold.
Especially when the prize could mean a berth in the next World Cup.