

AUSTRALES SAXONES AND THE NORMAN YOKE
Invasion
A.D. 477.
This year came Ella to Britain, with his three sons, Clymen and Wlenking, and Cissa, in three ships; landing at a place that is called Clymenshore.
There they slew many of the Welsh; and some in flight they drove into the wood that is called Andred Sley.
The well-known statement in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle is seen traditionally as the beginning of modern Sussex, the land of the South Saxons, or ‘Australes Saxones.’
Yet the earliest known usage of ‘South Saxons’ does not appear until a royal charter of 689 names them and their king, Northelm, although the term may well have been in common use for some time before that.
The monastic chronicler in later Wessex who wrote up the entry classifying the invasion seems to have got his dates wrong; recent scholars have suggested he might have been a quarter of a century too late.
The exact chronology is, however, less important than the recording of a definite Saxon tradition, the inauguration of a new political unit.
Although, as we have seen, Saxon infiltration into the Sussex area took a more peaceable form in the fourth and fifth centuries, Ella's invasion may not have been the first.
What made it worth recording several centuries later was that Ella was successful; for the next fifteen years or so he established his authority in the south by force of arms, firmly ‘pacifying’ recalcitrant Britons.
The Chronicle describes his besieging ‘the city of Andred’ in 490 and slaughtering all the defenders.
What happened around these few listed events sadly is far from clear; we do not know how many battles Ella and his offspring lost.
Apart from those who died in conflict many of the Britons must have fled into the Weald, or further west, but the idea of a mass exodus is probably rather overstretched.
Many probably stayed, either as neighbours or immediate subjects to their new lords.
What neither the historian nor archaeologist can reconstruct is the time taken for the two cultures to mingle, with intermarriage and innovations in the languages.
It seems apparent that this was a very long process in the Sussex area; some scholars have argued that the Germanic groups stayed much more distinct for far longer than their counterparts elsewhere in the new England.
They came in  small units, sometimes settling on deserted Romano-British sites, elsewhere using new ground.
The situation is complicated by the fact that most of the settlers replaced the existing place names with their own.
That the names have survived with little alteration to the present day suggests both a greater stability in continuity than before and a stronger cultural impact than the Romans had had on the local native population.
It also masks the fact that Anglo-Saxon ‘villages’ probably moved about in roughly the same area from generation to generation.
Coming as they did in organised groups around strong personal leaders, the Saxons tended to name their settlements with a combination of local place features and, more importantly, a worthy's name.
They seem to have moved firstly to the coastal places of the west, and then inland along the river valleys — natural enough for groups who rowed across the North Sea and the Channel in open shallow-draught boats.
Certainly, the limited penetration of the Weald in the early centuries of Saxon occupation was along the tributaries of the greater streams, on the banks of the eastern and western Rothers and the Brede, in the hinterland behind Hastings.
What the Saxon invasion did primarily was to reorganise most of Sussex as a distinct political unit, firmly independent for the first time since the Regni.
But it seems to have corresponded, at least in the early years, more with the older political boundaries than with the administrative frontier of modern Sussex.
With the land round Selsey and Chichester as an administrative base, the authority of the early kings of Sussex spread westwards into Hampshire and only partially east of the Ouse.
Between the Cuckmere valley and the kingdom of Kent settled a group whose identity remained fairly coherent until the days of the Norman conquest but of whose political influence we know but little; these Haestingas seem to have come within the South Saxon ambit but served also as a buffer in the continued kingly wars of the early centuries.
It was to take some time before a distinct and overall Sussex people could be forged by the strength of the rulers.
The importance of this latter factor is one of the prime reasons why Ella featured in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle .
He not only  subdued the local Britons but appears to have stamped his authority fairly firmly upon his neighbouring kings.
In his History of the English Church and People , the eighth-century monk and historian, Bede, named Ella as the first ‘High-King (Bretwalda), of all the provinces south of the Humber’.
In a society where power depended on military prowess, Ella was no mean figure, imposing on the Midlands from a Sussex base.
But it was to be a short-lived glory; with his death the Bretwalda -ship passed elsewhere, and Sussex reverted from being prime among Saxon kingdoms to a minor position, on the periphery of the long-drawn-out struggle for national leadership between the rulers of Northumbria, Mercia and Wessex.
Over the next few centuries it shifted from one to the other of the latter two until, with the establishment in the tenth and eleventh centuries of an ‘English’ monarchy, it served only as a minor shire, more quoted in tax returns than in high politics before the advent of the Normans.
But the early experience of monarchy had its advantages, at least from the viewpoint of those trying to impose a more central control; the ‘ealdermen’, or earls, eventual successors to the ‘kings’, were expected to collect quite considerable taxes at the behest of their overlords.
There were compensations; more so than Kent, Sussex was brought into the embrace of the ‘law givers’, kings attempting to codify the wide variety of regional customary differences to give an element of stability to Saxon society.
It was Ine, king of Wessex, who first mentioned the kingdom of the ‘South Saxons’ in a charter of 687, and Offa, who succeeded as king of Mercia in 757, whose charters defined the rights of thegns , minor nobility, in eighth-century Sussex.
For all the turbulence of the sadly mis-called ‘Dark Ages’, the drive towards stability and authority was never far distant.
Eventually it allowed the emergence of institutions not too distant from our own political and legal understanding of the term.
A New Religion
The most significant of these new features, at least to the monastic chroniclers, was the introduction of Christianity, the overwhelming  unifying force of Western Europe, although the number of local problems its followers produced might have made its success seem rather remote.
There is still a perverse pride in the modern county that it was the last area in England to be converted from paganism.
Little is known about the religious beliefs of the earlier natives, and the sparse information that survives about the Saxon traditions comes from the hardly objective pens of monastic writers.
With their emphasis on a world of forest spirits and magical dominations, they seem to have differed little from the experiences and practices of mainland Northern Europe.
Despite Augustine's mission to Kent in 597, the Christian message had not penetrated the Weald, turning northward instead to the realms of more important kings.
It was another seventy years before it arrived in Sussex, then more by accident than design, at least in human terms; Bede recounted that a Scottish monk, Dicul, had set up a small monastery with five or six brothers at Bosham in the 660s but none of the natives were willing to follow their way of life or listen to their teaching.
It was on to this scene of uncompromising paganism that the erratic bishop Wilfrid of Ripon came.
Arguably the most turbulent priest in the Anglo-Saxon experience, Wilfrid spent a great deal of his mature life entering into and returning from exiles imposed by English kings with whom he had quarrelled.
It was one such return that he arrived in Sussex by accident in 666.
Cast ashore with his retinue in a storm, he found himself surrounded by a ‘huge army of pagans’ bent on plunder and murder.
It is best to let Wilfrid's eighth-century biographer, Eddius Stephanus, tell the story thereafter.
The chief priest of their idolatrous worship also took up his stand in front of the pagans, on a high mound, and like Balaam, attempted to curse the people of God, and to bind their hands by means of his magical arts.
Thereupon one of the companions of our bishop took a stone which had been blessed by all the people of God and hurled it from his sling after the manner of David.
It pierced the wizard's forehead and penetrated to his brain as he stood cursing; death took him unawares as it did Goliath, and his lifeless body fell backwards on to the sand.
The pagans then got ready for battle, but in vain against the people of God.
So St Wilfrid the bishop and his clergy on bended knees lifted their hands again to heaven and  gained the help of the Lord…who straightway bade the tide return before its usual hour, and while the pagans, on the coming of their king were preparing for a fourth battle, the sea came back and covered all the shore, so that the ship was floated and made its way into the deep.
Wilfrid came back again in 681, driven out from the rest of England by Ecgfrith of Northumbria.
Only Sussex, not yet exposed to his political style, offered a refuge and he spent the next five years there, converting the natives and negotiating his return.
There the conventional piety of the monastic writers added a secular point to Wilfrid's preachings.
Bede tells the story that, so backward were the heathen South Saxons that although a maritime race, they did not know how to fish and were given to mass suicides from convenient cliffs when the corn harvest failed after a terrible drought.
On the day Wilfrid converted the king Aethilwalh, it began to rain; Wilfrid followed this up by teaching the people how to use nets.
By this good turn the bishop won the hearts of all, and the people began to listen more readily to his teaching, hoping to obtain heavenly blessings through the ministry of one to whom they already owed these material benefits; Eddius Stephanus then pointed out that those ungrateful enough not to convert willingly did so at the king's command.
How true the tale of this lemming population might be is beyond verification; certainly a great deal of the monastic retelling of it could be put down to the strong regional bias of Northumbrian biographers against the strange races of the deep south.
But the point of central authority effecting a conversion is important, both in terms of the role of local kings in a noble society and in raising the question of how deep the conversion went.
Scattered later evidence suggested that Wealden superstitions died hard; indeed, it may have been as potent a force in determining local beliefs as organised Christianity at least until this present century.
Formally, however, Sussex had come into the mainstream English religious experience.
That experience was to prove singularly rich in its diversity and in its legacy of Sussex church architecture.
It began with the creation of a new bishopric of Selsey for Wilfrid, and the founding of a monastery there, endowed with landed income for its monks.
Most early Saxon churches had a monastic core; the loosely knit followers  of St Benedict used their ‘minster’ churches as bases for evangelising the surrounding areas, preaching and celebrating mass in the open at first.
The rigours of the English winter soon drove them indoors, and the next few centuries saw the minsters linked up with a series of local ‘parish’ churches.
The parish boundaries were often indistinct until after the Norman conquest, but there may have been 150 of these by 1066.
Although the smaller Saxon churches were usually wooden and have not survived it was not long before more ambitious priests and their patrons turned to stone buildings.
Of the latter Sussex has an especially fine collection, using a mixture of freestone, inset flint and brick and tile work removed from derelict Roman buildings.
Regrettably, the cathedral at Selsey no longer exists, but the church at Bosham serves as a reminder of the continued importance of the trading creeks in the area throughout Saxon times.
Sussex's most remarkable Saxon church, Sompting, illustrates well the process of extension and adaptation which went on over several centuries, and particularly as South Saxon society reached  its peak before Norman infiltration.
Unfortunately, we have little continuous idea of the quality or quantity of church life; the bishops and local abbots occur in any records only as witnesses to charters and other documents.
After Wilfrid's eventual return north, although Christianity stayed in Sussex it seems to have formed one of the less distinguished and lively dioceses of the English church, closely tied to the features and experience of the county generally but not emerging to direct secular life.
With the movement towards churchyard burial in the early eighth century, one of the last great sources of information about early Saxons, the pagan cemetery, was lost to archaeologists; the overlay of later burials has destroyed much of the evidence of early Christian Sussex.
The minster at Beddingham seems to have lasted from 750 to 880, but we know little or nothing of it, save its Abbot Plegheard named in a charter of 825.
We can assume that the Norse invasions of the later ninth and tenth centuries had some influence on the more vulnerable coastal churches, but there was nothing like the disruption which drove many northern bishoprics southwards for over a century.
Nor do we know to what extent the  ‘Reformation’ instituted by St Dunstan in the tenth century touched the county at all.
The church in Sussex lasted over four centuries with a minimum of influence upon surviving historical records, although the scale of its eleventh-century church towers at Sompting, Southease and other places, illustrate that authority if not the people supported it.
Even that may represent some revival after its Viking sufferings; in 955 king Eadred had bequeathed 400 pounds to relieve the people of the south, the money to be distributed by the Archbishop of Canterbury and his clergy.
At the least, the clergy provided the kings, ealdermen and thegns of Sussex with a literate group available for the limited use of their services Saxon society required: drawing up charters, promulgating laws and formulating tax demands.
In religion as in so much else the daily life of the South Saxons was conducted over several centuries by word of mouth and the group memory rather than by letter and record.
When William the Conqueror came to ‘reform’ the local church, that transformation may have been based as much on political as doctrinal and ritual considerations.
We can only assume that Sussex did not diverge too far from the rest of the southern English religious experience, after its rather late entry into the fold.
South Saxon Farmers
Just as difficult, in many ways, is the attempt to reconstruct the Saxon impact on the daily life of rural Sussex.
Certainly, for all their passion for fighting the South Saxons were men of the land.
Their eye for a likely spot and its potential undoubtedly influenced their early settlements alongside or away from the earlier British sites.
Since so many of their coastal farms have now disappeared beneath a raft of asphalt and concrete, we have tended to forget the minor variations in the landscape which so influenced the earlier farmers; even in the ‘rural’ Weald modern urban man finds it hard to distinguish the overlay of later centuries from Saxon patterns.
Yet they put this knowledge to good advantage, both officially and in more mundane matters.
Among the 87 hides (or taxable units) of land  granted to Wilfrid for his monastery at Selsey was the following:
…the lands belonging to Pagham, firstly from the West of Withering, by that harbour to the place which is called Bonar Stream, and thus it leads to the long village.
Thence northwards to Mina's land, so eastward to the stream and over it at the place called Ufa's ford, thence to the place called Lagness, thence to Laxley, and so to the place called Balsham, thence to the bridge at Ellridge, and thus northwards besides the marshy places, over this to the stream called (Aldingbourne Rife) and thence east to Waermund's enclosure, thence to Wador's barrow from that place to the fishpond, and from there to (Ryebank Rife), and so the line runs to the sea…
The description continues, but the essential point emerges of the close relationship of man to locality on which the Saxon economy and social order was based.
Again, as with the earlier settlers, the multiple diversions of the Sussex landscape forced the invaders to develop regional differences within their kingdom.
The rich coastal plain continued to provide the base for great estates, ruled by their thegns, some of whom had their possessions ratified by charters like the one just quoted, whose boundaries can often still be traced.
The Downs were more deserted, but more important was the Saxon impact on the Weald.
Along the north scarp of the Downs runs a series of parishes with land evenly distributed from the foot, and across the different soils to their northern boundaries.
In the West Sussex examples, at least, the villages themselves were placed firmly on the Greensand belt.
The parishes were more or less equal in area, around 4000 acres; their layout says a great deal for the Saxon ability to recognise and exploit soil features and for their respect for mutual rights of neighbouring communities.
However these communities were organised, agricultural practices depended very much on common agreement and a shared policy.
At the same time, there was the paradox of a growing lordly authority among the stronger thegns who could impose their will on the rival groups.
Apart from the movement over the Downs, the Germanic settlers moved inland along the rivers; the attack on the Weald already had the Romano-British experience to build on and, given the distribution of the rivers, can be seen as a pincer movement rather than a direct push northwards.
The military analogy is important; although the ‘campaign’ lasted several centuries, it was organised by determined groups following a general strategy with disciplined organisation and strong leadership.
Often, the new Wealden areas were frontier points of the strong coastal estates; in the east particularly, the estates round Bexhill had ‘inland’ and ‘outland’portions.
It was the latter which represented new clearings.
There seems to have been a generally similar scheme of attack, if similarities to the Kentish experience are anything to go by.
The arable coastal estates used the forest land as extensive swine pastures, with large herds roaming under the eye of swine-herds, whose camps occasionally provided the base of modern hamlets.
In the northern Weald, some of these men seem to have come from large Kentish estates round Tonbridge rather than from the Sussex coast; there must have been several centuries of discussion before Wealden boundaries were finally sorted out.
The historian's problem is that there is insufficient archaeological or documentary evidence to establish the chronology of this process.
Where the swine eroded the lighter heath and woodland, the farmer followed.
This was a long struggle indeed, small fields being literally carved out of the landscape by fire, hacking and sheer brute force.
As boundaries between them, wide ‘hedges’ of natural woodland were often left, the ‘shaws’.
The South Saxons whose numbers we shall never know with any accuracy, built up a complex Wealden farming system, backed by a communication network that can only have been an extension of the lesser economic roads of the Romano-Britons.
The distribution of their later stone parish churches may give some indication of their more profitable achievements; they are most numerous and closest in the area north and west of Arundel, with a scatter round Worth and rather more diffuse in the area of the Haestingas , whose forest ridge was less well served by an island river system.
There are few north of Bramber and Hailsham.
Overall, we can see groups moving out from Selsey — Chichester, along the Ouse valley from Lewes and out from Hastings, in search of the more fertile areas, creating at least a parish, village and hamlet pattern that later men could build on.
How these settlements and farms were run is another matter  indeed, one more for speculation than evidence.
With the exception of parts of the coastal plain, the late Saxon ‘open field’ pattern, with two or three large units divided into strips scattered according to a complex local hierarchy, was practically unknown in Sussex.
Communal organisation must still have been necessary, however, for the system of clearing and farming to occur at all.
There was, throughout the Saxon period, a tension between the activities of smaller groups, the ‘free men’ of Saxon warrior society, the need for communal organisation and a tendency towards domination by a chain of increasingly powerful lords, the thegns, ealdermen and earls, the equivalent of modern dukes.
Political uncertainty, after the Norse invasions which began in the ninth century, forced a need for protection for which services were given in exchange.
It was a pattern common throughout Europe, but with substantial regional variations.
Inevitably, the growing scale of war organisation demanded more services and more taxation; in return for protection and a common system of laws, most freemen gave up some of those freedoms.
It is unclear how far this happened locally, although the family of Godwine, Earl of Wessex, had come to dominate Sussex by the eleventh century.
There was no local version of the Rectitudines Singularum Personarum (Rights of Individuals), the eleventh-century code of legal and rural practices drawn up as a guide for the country as a whole.
It represents the peak of Anglo-Saxon rural organisation, a carefully differentiated but far from rigid series of social groups, well developed before the Norman ‘feudal’ additions to it.
At its peak, in each shire were the bishops and ealdermen, with a supporting group of local gentry, the thegns.
Beneath them came the cearls (churls) the heads of substantial rural households, many of whom were free.
Below them was a larger group, sometimes called geburs (origin of the modern ‘boor’) or freeman cottagers owing more services to their thegns than they had freedoms.
The base of the social pyramid was a substantial slave group.
When Wilfrid received his 87 hides of land at Selsey, part of the package was 250 male and female slaves, whom he converted and set free.
Some historians have estimated a slave population in eighth-century Sussex of almost twenty thousand.
Although a slave  could earn ‘manumission’, freedom or gebur status, or be granted it, the slaves remained a substantial if decreasing population of South Saxon society.
How each thegn organised his estates must have varied considerably, but a typical gebur should have had, according to the Rectitudines , seven acres, two oxen, one cow, six sheep and his tools provided by the lord.
For this he paid ten pence a year at Michaelmas and performed a number of other duties on the lord's land and paid tithes to the church.
Both his economic independence and his essential servitude were thus, at the same time, guaranteed.
With such a carefully structured order, village life and farming in good times could be free from drought and civil disturbance, be secure and highly profitable, particularly for the thegn.
In the case of malicious damage, where compensation could be got under the carefully defined Saxon laws, it was the local thegn who usually benefited; we shall never know how much of this was passed on.
Around the work of pasturing, clearing and ploughing, much of farming seems to have been little different from that of Romano-British society, although the contrast in lordly life styles is at least obvious to the historian.
The coastal plain in Sussex produced a wheat and barley surplus, the Wealden farmers probably grew sufficient for their own needs, whilst concentrating on stock raising.
Frequently, some seasonal movement of stock between the forest and coastal marshes seems to have taken place.
food produced by agriculture and pasture could still be augmented by hunting and collecting the berries and fruits of the Weald.
One ‘natural’ product may have been particularly important, the honey of wild bees used in the Anglo-Saxon ceremonial drink, mead.
For common use, home-brewed ale probably sufficed.
The autumn sowing produced wheat and rye, the spring barley and oats.
Some of these crops, at least that part due to the thegns, were collected in central granaries, the barley enclosures, or berwicks .
Most of the lesser English people probably lived in sunken timber huts little different from their Romano-British and Germanic predecessors.
The thegns lived in increasing grandeur but in wooden halls rather than masonry villas; although tapestried and heated by a central fire they must have been both dirty and draughty.
Sussex's archaeological evidence for these  is unfortunately sparse.
Each central village was probably reasonably self-sufficient in terms of weaving for its own clothing, although the wool may have come from downland farms specialising in sheep.
Likewise, the evidence for Anglo-Saxon pottery is much less adequate than that for British and Roman settlement.
Towns and Government
The network of great estates — Bexhill, Ticehurst, Climping and so on— produced a surplus, and, together with their wider economic and social needs, trade was catered for by a network of market centres.
This network was far more complete than the Romans had needed, emphasising the local focus of much of Saxon life.
By the tenth century, few South Saxons can have been more than twenty miles from a market place, but these were rarely ‘towns’ in any later sense, or even comparable with their Roman predecessors; Saxon society remained essentially rural, except in its very greatest centres.
But the basis of a later network was laid, particularly after the Norse attacks began.
To cover the valleys and principal settlement areas a series of burhs , specially constructed fortified settlements, was in hand by the early tenth century.
Chichester, Burpham (covering the Arun valley but replaced by Arundel after the Conquest), Lewes and Hastings were backed up by the ports at Bosham and Pevensey and the episcopal centre at Selsey.
How their defences were organised and their life run remains a mystery — in fact the only significant mention of the burhs is to be found in the Burghal Hidage , a tenth-century taxation list.
Lewes alone seems to have grown to any great importance in the pre-Conquest years.
By the reign of Edward the Confessor, its population may have reached 2000.
By the 1060s, it supported a cattle market and a mint, and may have been the shire's legal centre; across the river from the main town, a growing suburban hamlet formed the nucleus of the modern Cliffe.
Undoubtedly the river was navigable; the separation of Sussex from much else of mainstream English experience should not hide the richness of Saxon trade with other parts of Europe and  even further afield.
At some stage in the late tenth century, Lewes had supported two mints, as had Chichester.
The permission to make coinage was an important mark of a town's regional importance and of the acceptability of its trade status among local people; conversely, failure to maintain that rightful respect brought hard retribution.
The eleventh-century punishment for causing inflation by reducing the value of coins (usually by using base metals or clipping off pieces of silver) was the loss of the right hand and castration.
It is an interesting speculation whether the reintroduction of such draconian legislation might reduce more recent economic problems.
Around the towns, but more particularly the small rural communities in Sussex, the Saxon monarchs built a careful legal and local government structure, reinforcing the social hierarchies but carefully giving each man rights and dues according to his place.
The peak of this system was the separate but often closely coordinated authority wielded by bishop and ealderman over the total shire.
Below them came the jurisdiction of the thegns, apparently already organised by the early eleventh century in the districts that, as Norman lordships, were to form the later rapes .
These were in turn, composed of groups of hundreds .
Essentially these latter groups of parishes provided a nucleus and recruitment to the fyrd , the local militia responsible for the defence of the kingdom.
This careful combination of royal with local authority could prove a two-edged weapon, reinforcing local bonds on the one hand, but offering opportunities for the disenchanted to cause trouble on the other.
In variety of forms, it caused tension until the later nineteenth century.
The early hundreds often lacked the formality of later attempts at local government: frequently they met in the open, at a convenient central spot, perhaps marked by a tree, as at Easebourne.
Dill, the ‘boarded meeting place’, was one of the few Sussex hundreds that seems to have had any accommodation specially provided; what effect the winter conditions had on the conducting of business can only be imagined.
Only later did hundreds normally keep written records.
Under the ‘hundred man’, the chief official, the hundred court was supposed to meet every four weeks, chiefly to bring  thieves to justice and round up stray cattle; more serious problems went to the ealdermen.
Groups of ten men, the tithings, provided witnesses and a pale forebear of the modern jury.
In most cases, decisions would be based on local custom, disputes often being referred to the oldest men present, those with the longest memories.
Royal attempts, such as Ine's in the seventh century or Edgar's in the tenth, to promulgate codes could only meet with success where local practices were not too obviously threatened.
The growth of central authority and regional stability in later Saxon Sussex can be overestimated, and the last two centuries before the Conquest saw much of that order threatened repeatedly.
Apart from conflict between different royal factions for the control of England generally, there were increasing external pressures for change.
In many ways, Sussex escaped the wholesale rearrangements of life and customs which the Norse invasions were to have on the northern shires.
The Germanic culture of the South Saxons remained much more intact than that of the rest of the country.
But the oft repeated Saxon prayer, ‘From the fury of the Norseman, Good Lord deliver us’, must have been echoed along the Channel coast many times, where the wealthy minsters and settled farms stood open to repeated pillage.
The earliest recorded raid took place in 895, when a Danish force on its way to lay siege to Exeter was heavily beaten in an attack on Chichester, losing a great part of its numbers.
Eadulf, a Saxon noble, was appointed to organise the defence of Sussex but died from the plague before much could be done.
The development of the burhs , however, by their unknown instigator suggests a considerable awareness of a repeated problem, although the next recorded raid did not take place until 994.
In that year, the Norwegian Olaf and Swegan the Dane vented their fury on the shire, having been driven back from an attempt on London.
The most serious attacks occurred in the decade after 998 when the Norsemen set up winter quarters in what was to become their favourite location, the Isle of Wight, and ‘lived off the land’ by repeatedly plundering the south coast.
It says a great deal for Saxon resilience that the Sussex settlements do not seem to have reverted to wholesale  waste, and the pressure was greatly liked in 1017 when Cnut was elected king of England and the country passed under a Scandinavian aegis for the next half century or so.
The Conquest
The re-establishment of political order of a kind masked a growing tension in which Sussex inevitably moved to the forefront.
The Danish monarchs ruled with the consent of the powerful regional earls, and the family of Godwine of Wessex established hegemony over the south coast as far eastwards as Kent.
Regarding themselves as kingmakers, Godwine and his sons strove repeatedly to maintain an ‘English’ identity, free both of too much Danish interruption and of the new factor in political life, the influence of the Duchy of Normandy.
It was a struggle which came to a head in the reign of Edward the Confessor, which began in 1042.
Edward was pro-Norman, his court filled with barons and clergy whose French possessions were swelled by grants of English land.
Edward gave the abbot of Fécamp, a great Benedictine monastery, land in Sussex in Hastings, Rye, Winchelsea and Steyning; to his chaplain Osborn, later William I's bishop of Exeter, he gave the harbour and other dues at Bosham.
Prize English possessions were passing into ‘foreign’ hands and the disgruntled Saxon nobility found voices for their jealousy in the Godwines.
From 1049 until 1065 there was a repeated conflict between these turbulent nobles, their king and the ambitious Norman infiltrators.
Godwine and his second son, Harold, had kept the peace off the Sussex coast by using Bosham and Pevensey in the later 1040s to drive pirates from the seas.
In 1049, the eldest Godwine son, Swega, slew his cousin Beorn in a family squabble at Bosham; the upshot was the banishment of the entire family in 1051.
They returned from Europe in force in 1052, receiving a tumultuous welcome in the Sussex ports, and Edward was forced to reinstate them.
But the rivalry smouldered on and came to a head as the king advanced in years, without an obvious successor.
Given the elective nature of the late Saxon monarchy the  interests and support of the Godwines would be essential to any claimant, and it was here that the well-known story of the Conquest was to have its impact on Sussex.
In 1064, Harold sailed from Bosham; a storm cast him up in Normandy where he was apparently tricked into giving his oath on saints' bones to pledge support for Duke William as the next king of England.
The Confessor's death in January 1066 sparked off a crisis.
As premier earl, Harold was able to secure his own election to the throne, but was forced to defend it almost immediately against Scandinavian and Norman claimants.
Duke William, essentially a warrior of the European mainland, found himself in a quandary: he must either renounce the claim or mount a once-for-all amphibious operation which would stretch his resources to the absolute limits.
As justification for claiming strong Norman support he could advance the wickedness of Harold, the ‘backwardness’ of the English church, the increasing separation of Scandinavian — English politics from the mainlines of central and southern European development and, perhaps most immediately attractive to his baronial supporters, the promise of considerable territorial gains if the gamble came off.
It was a matter of individual rather than mass persuasion, and it worked.
With this support and Papal backing, he went ahead.
The summer was spent in building almost 700 ships and assembling the army, of at least 11,000 men, although the exact numbers are beyond recall.
The English do not seem to have taken this too seriously; the fyrd , or coastal militia, was disbanded and the fleet paid off at the most crucial time in late summer, only to be hastily recalled when Harold Hardrada, the Norwegian king, invaded the north.
William set sail late on 27 September 1066, landing near Pevensey the following morning with little apparent opposition.
Not that he was welcomed, by any means, but English military attentions were turned elsewhere.
William's choice of Sussex as his base can hardly have been random; the pattern of Norman landholding and trade in the shire was already well-established and the comparative ease of establishing a military foothold well-known.
After devastating some local villages, perhaps as much to gain additional supplies  as for any military purpose, the Norman forces had to prepare for battle with a formidable Saxon army.
Despite the inevitable toll of the fight at Stamford Bridge and the long march southwards, Harold's troops still represented one of the finest forces in Europe.
They came together near the hamlet of Senlac, on the most convenient road from Pevensey to London.
Harold and his men rendezvoused at Caldbec Hill on 13 October: it was probably a tactical mistake to choose such a southerly site when the North Downs must have been easier to defend.
The land over which the question was to be decided was heathy, with scrub alternating with marsh in the valley.
William was forced by the lie of the land to come at the Saxon strongpoint from the south.
The armies varied in style; whilst the Saxon thegns rode horses, they invariably fought on foot, with axes, and the defensive position forced relative immobility on their troops, with the central professional nucleus, the housecarls , surrounding the king.
The Normans, by comparison, were led by armoured and fairly mobile knights, backed by a barrage of archers and organised groups of spear and swordsmen.
The battle took place on a Saturday, 14 October: because the armies were so evenly matched and the ground so difficult it lasted eight hours, a great time in a world where a decision was usually reached in just over two hours.
The Bayeux tapestry gives a magnificent cartoon report of the action, but it needs to be seen as a piece of victorious Norman propaganda; it is to be doubted that the English spent the previous night in carousing whilst the Normans engaged in earnest prayer.
Well might they have done, since not merely England but probably William's future authority back in Normandy depended on the outcome.
After several hours of futile combat, in which the Norman minstrel Taillefer perished in a glorious suicide ride and the knights were unable to smash the fyrd 's defensive rings, the battle turned, the Saxon ranks broke line under their own enthusiasm rather than the Norman ruse always reported, and Harold was eventually mortally wounded by the repeated rain of arrows which, lacking sufficient archers, the English were unable to return.
With the slaughter of the king, the English turned and ran, pursued and hunted down by the knights.
After a last stand further  north, Europe's finest army was destroyed; although they had lost many men, the Norman nucleus survived.
The victory did not, however, mean the immediate defeat of England; that was to be a rather longer process.
Sussex bore a considerable brunt of the next stage of the Conquest and was the first area to be systematically ‘Normanised’.
After regrouping, William headed for Kent and London with his main army but seems to have sent detachments out into Sussex to subdue the countryside and act as a rearguard.
The details of this action are rather scant, but Domesday Book (see below) showed a distinct drop in recorded values along a line of country which suggests that the Normans moved quickly to subdue Lewes and then marched westwards to join up with secondary Norman forces landing in the Selsey area to take Chichester before moving towards the Saxon treasury at Winchester.
Both the armies of this pincer movement probably travelled quickly, without extensive commissary, relying on what they could pick up as they laid the land waste.
Plumpton, Keymar, Hurstpierpoint, Steyning and Arundel were all on the line of march; harsh policy at first would lessen resistance later.
With his hold on the south complete within a year, William had both to confirm it as a long-term fact and reward his followers.
Since Sussex offered the most direct line of communication with Normandy, it received special attention.
The areas of the five Saxon burhs were reorganised into Norman landships, the rapes , and given to the more powerful and trusty lay barons.
Robert of Eu received Hastings, Robert of Mortain Pevensey, William de Warenne Lewes, William of Braose Bramber and, the most important, Roger of Montgomery, got Arundel, which included Chichester as well.
Each covered his river valley with a new castle, wooden at first but soon replaced with a substantial stone structure.
Undoubtedly, ‘voluntary’ Saxon labour was used to expedite these tasks.
Robert of Mortain was lucky, in that he had the substantial Roman site at Pevensey on which to build.
Probably the most spectacular of the new castles was that built by William de Warenne at Lewes, towering on its two mounds above the surrounding town and the wide flood plains of the Ouse.
Visibly, the Normans had come to stay.
Their military hold complete, they turned to exploit their newfound lands.
In Sussex, as we have seen, they inherited a complex manorial system of dues and services which only need slight modification and a rather harsher lordly hand to yield good returns.
How far those Saxons who disagreed were able to flee into wilder parts of the Weald may be doubted; there seems to have been none of the resistance in wild areas which the Normans met when Hereward fled to the Isle of Ely and Yorkshiremen fought back.
Norman consolidation was systematic.
Aethelric II, the Saxon bishop of Selsey, was deposed and the centre of the diocese moved to Chichester in 1070, with a Norman enthroned in his place.
The Anglo-Saxon earldoms were allowed to expire; in place of the influence of the Godwines, Roger of Montgomery was made Earl of Sussex in 1070.
Order can be overestimated; the next twenty or so years saw repeated squabbles among the Normans, in which, after William's death in 1087, Sussex played a vital part.
Rufus seized the kingdom in 1088, separating it from his brother Robert, who remained as Duke of Normandy.
To achieve this, he had to secure the support of Kent and Sussex against the risk of a retaliatory strike by Robert.
William of Warenne supported Rufus, Robert of Mortain held Pevensey against him and Roger of Montgomery (now also Earl of Shrewsbury), played a waiting game at Arundel.
The combined forces of Rufus and Warenne starved Pevensey into submission.
How far the local English were affected is beyond discovery.
As far as most Sussex people were concerned, it was probably a struggle which only affected them if they got in the way of one of the opposing forces.
For the bulk of them, ordinary life went on as before 1066 except that the collection of rents and other lordly dues was now much harder.
The epitome of this process was William's great taxation record, the Domesday Book of 1086.
Despite its many inadequacies, it gives us some picture of Sussex life as the Normans strengthened their hold.
Many of the villages which had been on the line of march were still depressed; Hurstpierpoint was worth a third of what it had paid in the days of the Confessor.
But many other manors had recovered, although not entirely.
One  problem was that the Normans were taking far more out in payments than their predecessors.
A number of manors, such as Patching, complained repeatedly that they could not cope with such demands; there is little evidence that they got any cuts.
Lewes and Chichester had continued to grow in dignity, no doubt helped by their lords who could see the tax potential.
The balance of farming, pasture, fishing and minor industry was still largely as before; only one iron works, near modern East Grinstead, was mentioned.
Despite major omissions, such as Hastings, most places that could be taxed were there, 337 of them.
Details varied, but the entry for Hooe, near Battle, gives some idea of how the Normans saw their acquisitions.
The Count of Eu holds in demesne a manor which is called Hou.
Earl Godwine held it, and in the time of King Edward, as now, it was assessed for 12 hides.
There is land for 44 ploughs.
On the demesne are 2 ploughs and 44 villeins with 12 borders have 28 ploughs.
There is a chapel and 1 mill yielding 7 shillings and 71 acres of meadow, and 30 saltpans yielding 33 shillings.
Wood land yielding 10 swine from the pannage. from the pasturage 7 swine.
Of the villein lands of this manor Reinbert holds half a hide, Robert 2½ virgates, Osbert 2 virgates, Aelred 2 virgates, Girald 2 virgates, Withert 4½ virgates, Wevela 2 virgates and Robert 2 virgates.
Between all they have on demesne 3½ ploughs, and 12 villeins and 3 borders with 7 ploughs.
The whole manor at the time of Ring Edward was worth 25 pounds and afterwards 6 pounds.
The count's demesne is worth 14 pounds, that of his knights 7 pounds and 7 shillings.
Despite the scattered details, this was not a description of topography or social structure, but a collection of legal and fiscal rights.
The hold tightened as Saxon thegns and clergy gave way to Normans.
Across the landscape the castles emerged, new French styles of architecture began to affect the parish churches, the great abbey of St Martin de Bello (Battle) started to rise on the site of Harold's defeat at Senlac, and a new cathedral grew in Chichester.
For the South Saxons, the Norman yoke was firmly on.
MEDIEVAL COUNTY
Frontier Zone
More than most English counties, Sussex was emphatically a French possession for much of the Middle Ages.
It lay across the most direct if not always the quickest route to Normandy; in peace, wine and wool crossed the county, adding significantly to its wealth.
In war, more common as the Dukes of Normandy used their English kingship to press their rather doubtful claims to the French throne, Sussex found itself in the front line, convenient both for intended invasions and retaliatory expeditions by licensed French pirates.
The variations in fortunes thus produced saw changes in the county's position relative to the rest of England over long periods; more immediately, there was often a considerable contrast between wealth and poverty in different parts of the area.
Social relationships in medieval Sussex were based on military needs as much as economics, at least until the later fourteenth century.
William I had introduced knight service, a repeated drain on local resources.
At its height the ‘feudal’ system meant that Sussex could muster over 300 fully equipped mounted men, 84½ of whom were the responsibility of the Earls of Arundel and another 60 of the de Warennes; the bishop of Chichester had to find four.
These were supported by a ‘levy’ of foot soldiers; repeatedly in the fourteenth century, Sussex was faced with royal demands for five hundred or a thousand troops.
The disruption of daily life may well be imagined; it dragged men away from work and posed increasing demands for their upkeep on those who remained.
In addition, during the ‘Hundred Years War’ which began in 1338 it meant there was a constant coming and going across the county by a not particularly well disciplined soldiery.
The maintenance of armies on this scale and the continued uncertainty of medieval political life had other effects too; although it escaped the large-scale violence which affected much of Northern England during the Wars of the Roses, Sussex had an ample share of earlier troubles.
Pevensey in particular had a strategic importance in the protracted family rows among the Angevin kings, Henry II, Richard and John.
The latter's favourite hunting box was Knepp Castle near West Grinstead; so fond of it  was he that he eventually seized it from William de Braose, an action hardly guaranteed to increase baronial support; when the French invaded England in 1216 to support the barons against John, it was Sussex which bore the brunt.
William de Casingham fled to the denser Weald with a thousand men, emerging to harry the French until the Earl Marshal could muster enough support to drive the invaders out in 1217.
For the next century or so, the county was relatively free of French harassment, but the situation worsened considerably after 1360 when a French fleet burnt Winchelsea and followed this up with a regular series of raids on the coast.
The older castles were patched up and redefended but the raids continued, increasing in severity; it took almost twenty years before the authorities finally awoke to the extent of the problem.
The peak year for French activity was 1377 when, like the Vikings before them, they used the Isle of Wight as a base to harry the whole south coast.
They took Rye and then attacked Winchelsea, but found it heavily defended by the Abbot of Battle.
Leaving it, they marched to Hastings, to find it deserted and on fire; in retribution for this ‘scorched earth policy’ they burnt Rye to the ground.
Another group had landed at Rottingdean and marched inland towards Lewes; on the way they met fierce resistance from an armed band led by another warlike monk, Prior John of St Pancras.
The French won but it was a Pyrrhic victory and their victorious momentum was lost; they contented themselves with sailing up the Ouse, burning settlements on the way and anchoring within sight of the town before they withdrew.
These depredations and the lack of a firm response by corrupt local magnates were to have a violent sequel to which we shall return.
The French menace produced a more immediate response which had a remarkable effect on the Sussex landscape, although it seems in retrospect like bolting the stable door after the horse had fled.
Typically, it was an attempt to defend access to London rather than the Sussex coastline.
In the later 1370s and early 1380s, two new castles rose above the surrounding countryside, both defending the upper reaches of navigable rivers.
Bishop Rede of Chichester rebuilt his manor house at Amberley in a new, more sophisticated  style.
It was matched in the East by Sir Edward Dalyngrydge's creation at Bodiam, ‘crenellated’ in 1385, a great square surrounded by a wide moat on the upper reaches of the Rother.
The French came again, but concerned themselves with piracy rather than invasion, burning Rye and Winchelsea in 1448.
The long-term effect was to damage severely the profitability of the county's coastal trade, to raise the levels of taxation and to cause a lengthy period of economic decline.
Paradoxically, the wars that helped seal Sussex's decline as a maritime commercial county gave its eastern parts a dignity on whose memory they have traded ever since.
Hastings had showed an interest in the Yarmouth fisheries, with the four main Kentish ports, long before the Conquest; what the latter did eventually was to weld them together in a loose federation for supplying ship rather than knight service in return for limited privileges.
Hastings, like Dover, was to provide 20 ships out of a total of 55 when the king demanded.
In many ways, this was symbolic rather than actual; by the fourteenth century, the town could only supply three of its quota, the rest coming from Winchelsea (ten), Rye (five) and some surrounding manors.
In no way could they hold back the French when the test came, and pomp and dignity increased as real ability diminished.
Religious Life
The French connection was not confined to war alone.
The great abbeys established as a thank-offering by the victorious Normans were complemented over the next four hundred years by a number of smaller foundations, dictated by the tenets of fashion and individual piety.
Most of the 34 religious houses, and 40 other foundations in the county depended on one founder, such as Sir John de Bohun of Midhurst who founded the Augustinian nunnery at Easebourne, but almost all enjoyed, in varying degree, support from quite minor benefactors such as this gift to Lewes Priory,c .
1230.
I Jordan de Blossevilla give in free alms to God and St Pancras and the monks…for the welfare of my soul and of my ancestors and successors a portion of my land in Bevenden lying by my well on the south side containing 4 perches in length and 2 in breadth; to hold in tree alms, with a tree way of going in and out with the easement of drawing water in any well.
The smaller houses, particularly nunneries, never did very well in Sussex; theirs was a story of brave foundations, continued poverty and deprivation.
By the fifteenth century they seem to have become dumping grounds for unwanted, unmarriageable or troublesome genteel ladies of little fortune.
Rusper, founded for twelve nuns and a prioress in the twelfth century, was down to two by the sixteenth century, both of whom were very aged.
A number of the male houses were little better; the Benedictine house of Sele had a non-resident prior in the 1460s who was given to selling off the moveable goods to keep up his life style.
One group of houses in Sussex with particular problems was that of the ‘aliens’, foundations of great French houses whose loyalty was suspect during the French wars; even great foundations, such as Lewes Priory, came under suspicion, having to be relieved of their dues and obedience to the mother house at Cluny.
Undoubtedly, it was the great monasteries which set the style, with an importance far beyond their immediate locale; the priory church of St Pancras in Lewes was far larger than Chichester Cathedral, and its monks major landlords.
Probably the grandest, in terms of prestige and style, was Battle.
It is the one about which most detailed information has survived, with the great collection of Chronicle, account books and charters.
With estates scattered across the country and freedom from episcopal and royal jurisdiction, its mitred abbot was one of the great barons of England.
His word was law within the leuga , an area of 1½ miles radius from the abbey gates; despite the monastic contrast of personal poverty and corporate wealth, the monks had great influence on the economic life of their new town and Sussex estates.
Appointment to such positions came as a mark of royal regard, and the quality of abbots varied considerably.
Most were reasonably conscientious in combining the religious life with extensive secular responsibilities; few  rose to quite the heights which the abbey's chronicler noted in Odo, who ruled from 1175 to 1200:
And now he began to be more devout than ever in his prayers, more ardent in divine contemplations, more frequent in his vigils, more energetic in exhortations and in works worthy of imitation and more frequent in preaching; thus becoming a pattern in word and deed of a holy life to all, Rich in the bowels of compassion, he relieved everyone who sought his assistance.
His hospitality knew no respect of persons; the abbey-gates stood open for all comers who needed either refreshment or lodging….
In all divine offices in the abbey, in reading and in meditation, he associated with the brethren in the cloister.
From the extent of the praise it is clear that Odo's virtues were unusual in one of his station.
He preached in Latin, French and ‘often for the benefit of the unlearned common people, in the mother tongue’.
Indeed, his only problem seems to have been chronic constipation.
The abbey he lorded was essentially a preserve for the well-endowed; thirty or so monks surrounded by a staff of several hundred servants, controlling the life of a substantial area.
Although their main purpose in life was the Opus Dei , the nine hours or more a day spent in the choir of the great church, the abbey was the centre of a complex industrial and social organisation.
‘Poor’ in person, the monks enjoyed nevertheless a standard of living far above the Sussex norm, a situation made clear by the accounts of the late fourteenth-century cellarer, Brother Thomas Ellam, who bought the bulk provisions the monks needed:
WINE.
From which he accounts for 2 pipes of wine bought at Canterbury from Preston, 1 pipe at London, 1 tun at Canterbury by J. Boteler, 3 tuns at Sandwicum , 1 other tun at Canterbury and for the carriage of the same, £41 12s.2d.
For payments to the convent of wine for various feasts of the year.
£4 9s.2d. for honey bought.
15s. for oil bought, 20s. for the brothers' gifts, 14s. for wine for those being bled in Advent and Lent, 8s.4d.
And for 4 treets, 9.4d….
FISH.
And for salt fish,Stockkfishe , salmon, White and red herrings bought at London and elsewhere this year and for the carriage of the same, £47 (2s.
For fresh fish bought at Winchelsey , Hastings, Rye and elsewhere this year, £51 2s.3d.
The list continues: saffron, figs, veal, sucking pig, and so on.
But this was by no means all consumed by the brethren in an orgy of  gluttony; most of the larger monastic records in Sussex would have shown a similar pattern, since there was a constant coming and going of important visitors and benefactors with extensive retinues.
The monks of Battle usually ate the poorest meat from their own estates; the best was sold to pay the recurrent costs of the abbey buildings and staff, and to run the hospital and almonry maintained for the local poor.
The religious houses had a considerable importance in Sussex life for four centuries or so.
Apart from the greater urban houses, they spread out into the more rural areas.
When the Cistercians, ‘White Monks’, came from Burgundy in the twelfth century they sought ‘wildernesses’ for their life of vigorous contemplation.
Most houses were in the distant and wild north, Yorkshire in particular; the only local equivalent was Robertsbridge in the high Weald.
After some initial trouble with flooding from the Rother they moved to higher ground, building a large abbey which has now almost entirely vanished, and running an extensive sheep farming practice around it.
Alongside them, in other parts of the Weald, came Augustinians, other Benedictines and the Premonstratensians whose house at Bayham is one of the most complete to have remained in Sussex.
All offered amended versions of the same basic life enjoined in the Rule of St Benedict.
Inevitably as they settled and built, their life was more integrated into than separate from that of local communities, not always to the improvement of either, as the Visitors of Bayham found in 1472 when the Canons, life style had led several to abscond and the buildings lay ruinous.
We have precious little information about the internal life of most of these establishments; it was only the scandalous that was reported.
The wealth and pride of the monastic communities provoked an eventual reaction, and lay favour shifted in the thirteenth century to supporting the new orders of wandering preachers, the Friars.
The principal bodies, Franciscan and Dominican, established houses in Winchelsea, Chichester, Lewes and Arundel, to be followed by lesser orders, such as the Friars of the Sack in Rye.
Although they eschewed the large houses and endowments of the monks, they frequently attracted considerable wealth because of lay support for their fiery preaching and their concentration on the towns.
But even  they were affected in the fourteenth century by the repeated crises of Sussex life, the French, the sea and the Black Death from whose effects no Sussex religious house ever fully recovered.
Together, most of the bodies lost ground in the fifteenth century, and were often forced to ‘appropriate’ neighbouring parish churches in order to swell their incomes from the tithes due from the laity; this frequently became a source of bitter dispute locally, and lay patronage shifted away to the parish churches in the fifteenth century.
Although there are few Sussex equivalents to the great wool churches elsewhere, the wealthier endowed chantries in a number of churches for saying masses for the dead, or funded the numerous leper hospitals and almshouses around the towns.
In a society where poverty was regarded as the will of God, its relief could only bring grace.
By comparison with the religious orders, the secular church went much closer into the life of ordinary people.
Although only a few churches were listed in Domesday Book for Sussex, there must have been many more and the growth of towns and Wealden colonisation saw the establishment of a fixed parish system by the early thirteenth century.
The peak of this pattern of medieval order was the diocesan authority, the bishop himself.
Although most of the medieval bishops of Chichester were conscientious enough men as diocesan administrators, they were usually barons, royal servants and judges rather than benign fathers in God.
Richard de Wych, appointed bishop in 1244, stood far above the run of them.
Initially important for his courageous preservation of papal and episcopal authority against royal depredation, he was best remembered for his generosity to the poor, simplicity of life, devotion to parochial cares and his miracles.
In the tradition of Wilfrid, he seems to have taught the men of Lewes and Bramber how to fish (they must have been very forgetful), or at least blessed their nets.
His death, while preaching a crusade in 1253, robbed the diocese of its best-loved leader, a welcome change from some of his more avaricious fellows on the bench, and gave it its greatest religious and, ultimately, financial asset.
His canonisation in 1262 gave the cathedral the second most important shrine in the south-east after Becket's at  Canterbury.
Although its ultimate destruction has left no trace of the shrine's location or size in the cathedral, it is recorded as being amply covered in gold and jewels.
Little information has survived about the scale of the pilgrimages, usually at their greatest on the Saint's Day, 3 April, but it seems to have been in the usual boisterous medieval tradition, both sacred and profane.
So lively did it get on occasions that Bishop Story had to order the pilgrims to carry crosses and banners in 1478 instead of the coloured staves with which they were prone to hit each other at the height of their religious fervour.
The bishops may have enjoyed considerable temporal authority but their role in Chichester and the diocese itself was restrained considerably by the complex overlap of local jurisdictions which medieval society developed.
In the city itself, the cathedral was the province of an autonomous dean and chapter; further afield, the extensive deanery of South Malling cut a swathe through Sussex to Kent, and the diocese of the archbishop, whose ‘peculiar’ it was and whose palace at Mayfield dominated the north-eastern Weald.
Battle stood outside the authority of both.
Depending on the degree of enthusiasm shown by the bishop and his ‘eye’, the archdeacon, the level of spirituality in Sussex fluctuated.
Laxity among the parish clergy was a continual problem, not least their habits of taking wives or, after the legislation for priestly celibacy, ‘concubines’.
Given the pressures of external demands, the size of the diocese, and the problems of travelling to over 300 parishes, most bishops and their officers had to content themselves with regular exhortations and punishing the worst, or least skilful, clerical offenders.
One great monument towards which most bishops did contribute was the cathedral.
When the early, possibly wooden, convent of St Peter in Chichester was replaced in 1075 by a college of secular priests a new church became essential, if only to reinforce the image of episcopal authority.
It was a far from smooth process, and the resulting agglomeration of styles and patchwork efforts was by no means the largest church in the county, although probably the most interesting.
Bishop Ralph de Luffa began a complete rebuilding in 1091, but it was badly damaged by fire in 1114.
After Bishop Seffrid  consecrated the completed building in 1184, it was severely damaged by fire in 1187 and had to be substantially reconstructed, using the existing framework.
Even then, it was not free from disaster, and the central and the south-west towers collapsed in a storm of 1210 and had to be rebuilt.
Thereafter it was continually in need of repair or subject to minor alteration until the Reformation, given a Lady Chapel for the cult of the Virgin in the later thirteenth century and, most obviously, a spire in the fifteenth century, making it one of the best landscape features of any medieval building, far less uniformly oppressive than Salisbury.
If Chichester Cathedral represents the peak of secular church activity it must be seen against the whole range of minor church building which accompanied the extension of the parish system.
Although the county possesses few equivalents of the great churches built by wealthy communities elsewhere in England, it has a wealth of small-scale buildings in a range of styles imported in the latest continental fashion and modified by local needs and customs.
From the small and poor downland churches like Coombes to the grander Wealden settlements, there is an almost uniform simplicity of styling, the product as much of local pride and parochialism as of poverty in the small communities, often with limited building materials.
The parishes they served varied considerably, from the single streets of Chichester to the 9000 or more acres of Battle.
Of the priests we know little, except where their transgressions brought them to episcopal notice.
In common with the rest of English society the richer livings were usually held by absentee grander servants of the king or even inmates of the Vatican.
Whilst these alien prebendaries, rectors and abbeys took the main pickings, the ‘great tithes’ on corn and so on, their vicars drawn from the local people usually had to make do with the remainder.
With the establishment of parish boundaries and other rights, these were increasingly closely defined; one of the most common medieval records for Sussex as elsewhere is that recording a tithe dispute either between different clergy or priest and laity.
It is difficult to say how many of these men were as fortunate as the vicar of Henfield, who in 1209 was to receive all oblations and legacies, a tithe of any new land to be  cleared and ‘tithe of calves, lambs, wool, pigs, chicken, geese, ducks, eggs, honey and wax, mills, fisheries, venison, hemp and flax, gardens, garlick, onions, leeks, and all pot-herbs’.
In practice, many clergy found it as difficult to collect the full tithes as the Inland Revenue and Excise do their latter-day exactions; increasingly the payments were commuted for cash rather than kind.
The aliens and absentees who pushed their claims too far fanned the flames of popular revolt in Sussex in the later fourteenth and fifteenth centuries and bore the brunt of the explosions that followed.
For most people the church provided the main consolations in a short and hard life: devotions, ritual and, occasionally, the feasts of Scot ales, where the parson paid for the drink, and on great occasions, such as the Feast of St Pancras in Lewes, festivities and public ceremony.
To some it gave help in sickness and consolation in poverty.
But it was as much a legal body as a spiritual one, although occasionally this could work for the individual's unexpected benefit as in the laws relating to sanctuary or ‘abjuring the realm’.
One case in 1278 was singularly melodramatic:
Philip son of Adam le Lechur was hanged at Petworth for theft, but by the breaking of the rope escaped alive, and flying to the refuge of the church abjured the realm.
The king at the request of Eleanor de Percy pardoned him and cancelled his abjuration.
If the people of Sussex did not support the church in the middle ages with overmuch piety, nor did they reject it openly.
Heresy in the shape of Lollardy in the fifteenth century had only a few adherents in the county, but they were rather spectacular.
Thomas Bazeley, a clerk, was the only man in Sussex to die for his beliefs, at the stake in 1432, but the most singular convert was Bishop Reginald Peacock of Chichester.
He was arraigned for heresy in 1457, after publishing his The Repressor of Overmuch Blaming of the Clergy , ‘A secular doctor of divinity, that had laboured many years to translate Holy Scripture into English, passing the bounds of divinity and of Christian belief.
On being offered the choice of recantation or the stake he chose the former and, deprived of his see, lived out the rest of his short days as a prisoner in Thorney Abbey.
Few followed him, for most  people the church remained the symbol of external authority, its beliefs and teachings intermingled with the deeply rooted superstitions and essential paganism of most small rural communities.
Rural Life
It was these communities that saw the greatest pattern of change during the middle ages although, with a couple of notable exceptions, this was a very long process indeed but with some sudden shifts of direction.
The well-established agricultural divisions of the county were reinforced by medieval practices, but perhaps the greatest contribution to Sussex life was the extension of settlement much deeper into the Weald, the piecemeal annual clearings going much farther than before.
By the end of the twelfth century the modern distribution of settlements was firmly established.
Wheat and cattle existed side by side in the Weald with a wide variety of local wood-based industries.
Through the ports of Rye, Winchelsea and Shoreham the men of the Weald exported an increasing amount of timber, both as ‘billets’ of fuel and, in large oaks, for building; one major ancillary of this was the ship-building industry which flourished in most of the county's ports until the later fourteenth century.
Much of the lesser wood was converted on the spot into the staple medieval fuel, charcoal.
Conditions for a Sussex ‘miner,, or factor carbonis , can have been little different from that of later centuries, a nomadic life lived in the woods, shelter in bad weather being provided by the simple turf-covered pole shelters that were still in use forty years ago.
The combination of oak and stock breeding saw the growth of another major Sussex industry, tanning, very well developed in the Uckfield region, with the specialist ‘whittawares’ or leather-dressers kept very busy.
Much of Sussex's early medieval wealth was built on the close relationship between farming life and industry; although many villages had specialists in each there must have been many with dual occupations, men able to shift from one to the other as the season or demand dictated.
Although the Wealden pattern suggests a density of population  and activity far greater than used to be thought, it was the great coastal and scarpland estates that had the most highly organised agriculture.
As one of the great landowners, Battle Abbey operated in both areas and its estates are particularly well-documented, as Mrs Brent and Dr Brandon have shown in their studies of Alciston and Barnhorne, near Bexhill.
The former manor spread over several parishes, with a particular emphasis on sheep farming backed up by a large wheat crop.
Half of the latter was sent each year direct to the abbey at Battle, the rest consumed on the manor.
Normally, a flock of almost 3000 sheep was kept, producing a better grade of wool than the usual run of scraggy downland animals.
Alciston itself acted as the gathering place for surrounding parishes, and it was there that the wool merchants went to do their trading until the mid-fourteenth century.
To run the manor, several grades of men were used: the famuli or regular servants, the customary workers and hired labourers.
Each of the famuli , the skilled elite of this larger manor, had a specific job, be it swineherd, shepherd or goose keeper.
Barnhorne was not quite so impressive, set as it was on the shifting, sea-threatened, marshland east of Pevensey.
It specialised in wheat and stock production, with a sophisticated system of cooperation, based on no regular method but on an annual assessment of the needs of particular fields and crops.
Like Alciston and most other Sussex parishes it seems to have had a fairly prosperous time until the mid-fourteenth century; the early over-large tax demands of the Norman overlords had been replaced by a much more balanced local appreciation of the revenue possibilities.
It was the outside authorities who asked too much.
Most of the rest of Sussex seems to have enjoyed the prosperity which peaked in the late thirteenth century.
The rebuilding of the older Saxon churches which illustrates this was accompanied by a significant shift in the lifestyle of the better-off villages, particularly in the sheep-rich Downland areas.
As far as can be gathered from the limited archaeological research so far done, there was a move from the older timber cottages to new stone-walled housing.
This was common to much of England but the local feature was the use of flints as  a building material rather than the freestone carved out of quarries elsewhere.
Flint walls, often up to three feet thick, were usually built straight on the ground without foundations, with a central hearth, the fire either laid on the earth floor or, if better off, a large stone slab.
Out in the Weald, it is probable that wood rather than stone was still used, not so much because of local backwardness as of the easy availability of building materials.
The smaller houses were usually rectangular, up to fifteen feet by twelve if one-roomed, or thirty feet long if with two rooms.
One sign of the increasing prosperity of some farmers was the appearance in Sussex of the ‘long-house’, with a byre at one end and two-roomed living quarters at the other.
Those even better off had a separate house and barns.
Much of this picture has been surmised from the pioneering excavation of Old Hangleton by Mr Holden: surprisingly, given the common image of medieval squalor, there was none of the rubbish which is usually so rich a ground for archaeologists.
Possibly, the medieval Sussex peasant was much more fastidious than we have been taught to think.
The agriculture that made this growing wealth possible was highly organised, although with considerable variations within Sussex: all men worked not just for themselves, but for a lord.
Occasionally, we have a picture which survives at some depth, such as this description of the work the smith owed his lord, the Archbishop of Canterbury, on the manor of Tangmere in 1285:
John Marscal holds ½ a virgate and owes yearly, omitting Christmas and Whitsun, 100 works.
And he shall thresh 1 measure of corn of which 4 make a bushel for one work, and thresh two measures of barley or pease retch, or beans or 1 quarter of oats for one work.
He shall break clods or hoe from deep for 1 work and as much he shall make of them hedge for 1 work.
Be shall ditch 16 feet in length, 4 feet in width and 2 spits in depth for 1 work.
Be shall mow with other tenants the meadow of Ersanyre and shall have his bundle of hay.
He shall make hay with the others in that meadow and the lord shall give them 12d.
Be shall mow two meadows in Wodemed for 7 days and on Westmede for 2 or 3 days until it is reped, and what is mown in 2 days there he shall make with his companions…and the lord shall give the mowers of the two meadows 4s. for making the hay.
He shall enclose in the field 32 feet length of fencing which he shall cut and gather in the park for 1  work.
He shall put 1 row of dung on 1 furlong for 2 works.
He shall spread a row for 1 work.
Be shall carry a cartload of hay from the park for 1 work, and 2 cartloads of hay from Westmede for 1 work.
Be shall plough a strip [Sellion ]in winter and another strip in spring without harrowing and without counting a work.
He shall do carrying service on alternate Saturdays at Louyngton or elsewhere within the mannor, without counting it a work, and he shall carry to Midhurst, Arundel (or) Emmesworth, that is to the bridge at those places, without counting it a work.
He shall make half a seam of malt for one work and the lord shall provide firewood.
And if in carrying he is delayed out for the night it will count two works.
He shall make 1 quarter of flour and when he carries the flour to the house he shall have his food.
He shall provide 2 men at the harvest boonwork at the lords food and if he has a plough he shall plough 1 acre as a boon work.
Be cannot marry himself or marry his sons or daughters without leave, nor sell for himself a foal he has foaled, if male.
And after his death the lord shall have his best ox or cow, and if there be neither he shall have 5s.
And his widow shall pay relief and shall remain in the said tenement undisturbed, doing the services.
In addition, as smith, John Marscal had to repair the lord's ploughs, and shoe the lord's horses; in return he got more land and a cow.
The Archbishop held other considerable estates in the county, of which the largest was the Manor of South Malling, a solid block of land stretching from the Ouse outside Lewes to the Kent border.
Divided into borghs , ‘within' and ‘without the wood’, it was described in the same details as Tangmere although pasture and wood crafts were more important.
In the ‘custumal’ of 1285 the tenants were divided into ‘free’, ‘virgaters’(unfreemen owing services as detailed as those of John Marscal) and ‘cottars’, the landless bulk.
But this neatly organised hierarchy of the document is misleading; the listing was made because the archbishops were unsure of their rights after years of maladministration when many of the services had ceased or been exchanged for cash payments.
In Wadhurst, ‘within the wood’, this had reached such a pitch that ten of the largest farmers were listed as unfree men, leasing their land from others; there was also a substantial number of women farmers, such as Agnes at Wyk.
It would seem that the ordered feudal society, insofar as it ever existed, was already broken up by the late thirteenth century and that the small Wealden peasant, who will  recur frequently later, was already a common phenomenon.
As far as can be gauged, Wadhurst had a population at the time of about 1000.
This cannot have been untypical — the late medieval Weald was far from being the empty desert so often described.
Perhaps few manors detailed their work as much as Tangmere; many were probably worked from oral instructions, but the complexity of daily organisation in a society often unpredictable and expanding becomes clear.
Almost as this detailed organisation reached its peak in the fourteenth century it was, as we shall see, to break irreversibly.
Old Towns and New
John Marscal went weekly to a local market; few medieval peasants were as bound to their immediate localities as we were once taught.
The Saxon burhs and larger villages were augmented by a considerable growth in Sussex towns, a pattern matched across much of Europe.
These were anomalies in the rural landscape, with customs and life styles often quite distinct from their  agrarian surroundings.
About daily life in the first established, Lewes, surprisingly little has remained; it never really achieved the independence many other similar towns acquired, remaining essentially a manorial borough of its lords, the de Warennes, for most of the middle ages.
Even this status was the cause of repeated problems, since the Prior of St Pancras enjoyed separate jurisdictions and there were repeated conflicts between the lord's men and those of the Prior.
In 1278 at least one of these ended in death when Guideard, the Prior's sergeant, killed Robert Wodecock and Laurence Cook during a brawl in Roger Tympan's tavern.
He found sanctuary in the Priory church.
Lewes was run for its lord by the Reeve, later called the bailiff, whose principal job was to collect the market tolls and other dues which made it so valuable.
Perhaps inevitably, with such wealth and diversity an oligarchy of local tradesman emerged, organised into a merchant guild.
Unfortunately, we know little of their ‘customs and dignities’, and the extent of their authority  remains unclear.
Until the thirteenth century Lewes built on its earlier good fortunes, spreading well outside its defensive walls into the suburbs of Cliffe, down the hill where the warehouses of the small port bordered the Ouse, and along Southover outside the Priory gates.
The latter was recognised when the former religious hospital became the parish church of St John the Baptist in the fourteenth century.
Although Lewes provided all the administrative and craft sources which the small rural communities, far from self sufficient, needed its chief prosperity was based on its substantial markets, fairs, and the trade of wool.
This was collected from surrounding manors and exported direct from the port, checked carefully for weight by inspectors called tronagers .
For the prosperous merchants, substantial timber-framed houses were built around the gates of the Castle and Priory.
Their wealth and that of the lords was augmented by the tolls of the daily provision market, a general Saturday market and the great Whit week fair, which sold the cattle from the surrounding areas.
The latter was, with the feast of St Pancras, the great time for Lewes festivities, with some lively apprentice celebrations in November, the distant precursors of the bonfire societies.
Prosperous though Lewes was, it shared with the rest of the county in the long-drawn-out agricultural recession of the later fourteenth century and was, for much of the fifteenth century, a shadow of its former glory as the wool trade declined.
Chichester, by contrast, acquired a considerable dignity from its role as a religious centre.
Expanded considerably, at least in population, during the early Norman periods it continued to grow.
Although the line of the Roman walls and grid layout determined much of the shape of the medieval city, it soon acquired its own imprint.
Whilst the cathedral and precincts occupied the southwestern ‘quadrant’, the trades and craftsmen concentrated in the eastern half of the town.
Surprisingly, for much of the middle ages, the ‘city’ area of Chichester was very unevenly settled, with large open spaces between many of the buildings.
Instead growth spread outside the walls into the suburbs, particularly in the thirteenth-century area of Westgate.
The nucleus of communal life was the central market place, where the crossroads dividing the ‘quadrants’ met, a fact finally recognised by Bishop Story's magnificent market cross of 1501.
To augment this, and the trade in the shops, a fair was granted to Bishop Ralph by Henry l.
Usually held in October, it lasted for eight days and met outside the North Gate near the sloe tree which gave it its name of Sloe Fair; discipline and disputes were enforced by a ‘pie-powder’(dusty feet) court which sorted out the inevitable problems.
Later in the thirteenth century a Michaelmas Fair was held in the eastern suburbs, a source of perpetual disagreement about jurisdiction and tolls.
Chichester's wealth was also built on the normal Sussex pattern of exporting wool and importing wine.
For some time it stood as the seventh ‘port’ in the kingdom, despite the fact that its quays were some distance away; its merchants had exclusive rights over trade in much of western Sussex for most of the later middle ages.
The affluence made them exceptionally important and they were not slow to demand the ‘communal’ rights held by other important medieval centres, many of whom gained privileges similar to those of London.
For some time there was a conflict of jurisdiction between the bishop's reeves and the interests of the Gild Merchant.
The earlier charters after 1135 gave rights to the latter but it was not until the 1220s that the authority of the episcopal servants was finally replaced by elected bailiffs, soon to become the mayors.
The Gild Merchant was a close, self-selecting body with its own hall, effectively the centre of urban government.
Not that it had all its own way.
The election of the mayor was usually a popular occasion, and an attempt by the leading citizens to exclude the craftsmen and servants from the ceremonies in 1408 met with a riot which forced the dignitaries to step down.
The Gild Merchant was remodelled in the fifteenth century as the religious Gild of St George, but the power of the principal citizens continued to increase.
Henry VI gave them a court leet in 1451, which concerned itself largely with the minor social offences common to any medieval town; poor-quality weaving and leaving dead animals lying about the streets seem to have occurred fairly commonly.
Their wealth was assured by the profits from tolls on the Wednesday and Saturday markets, acquired from the Earl of Cornwall in 1316.
With their clerk and  common seal, they were a proud body; only one area, the Pallant, escaped their jurisdiction, until 1532 when the Dean and chapter relinquished it.
Yet, for all its self-importance late-medieval Chichester was only a quarter the size of Salisbury in terms of its taxpayers, 869 of them in 1377.
Below these small regional centres came the multitude of larger market villages — Petworth, Horsham, Hailsham and so on— for which ‘town’ is perhaps too grand a description.
But Sussex saw a series of other medieval townscapes, the deliberately ‘new’ town; there were eleven of these, with East Grinstead as a possible twelfth.
Towns, as we have seen, gave wealth to their rulers, and founding new ones became a quite fashionable activity if not always a successful one.
Newbridge, for instance, is now only a farm near Pulborough, and very little is known of its foundation.
The two earliest, Arundel and Battle, grew around the focal point of the new lords, the castle and abbey respectively.
Of the two, Battle is still the better preserved, the triangular market place outside the abbey gates leading into a single high street, with the regular burgage crofts (or gardens) running out at narrow right angles from the face.
Each burgess paid 7d. a year and some service for his croft, men like Lambert the shoemaker and Orderic the swineherd.
There were 115 such burgages, and two guild halls for the merchants and craftsmen, a third catered for the rustici , or out-of-town traders.
At no time did the abbey relinquish to these groups any of its tight control over economic life.
High on its waterless ridge, Battle grew with the fortunes of its abbey, but never achieved the sort of wealth that allowed Chichester to assert its independence.
Of the other ‘new towns’, apart from Hastings, Midhurst, Pevensey, Rye, New Shoreham, Wardour and Westham, the most interesting for the historian is New Winchelsea.
This original small port and fishing village had been down on the marshes adjoining the Rother, not far from Rye, and given to Fécamp Abbey by Cnut.
With the outbreak of hostilities, it had been too strategically placed for alien ownership, and the king had reclaimed it as a royal demesne.
Increasingly severe storms from the 1240s had swept away large parts of the town, drowning it finally in 1287.
Far too valuable  to be let go, it was resurrected by Edward I who acquired in 1280 the manor of Iham in Icklesham, a plateau overlooking the old site.
On it he laid out a simple grid of streets with a central site for the new church of St Thomas, surrounded by 61 1 house plots.
Although for a while the new venture flourished, far outstripping its neighbour, Rye, it was never the success its royal founder had hoped.
Plagues and continued French raids in the fourteenth century halted its growth.
The church of St Thomas was never completed and the town site remained only partially developed within its half-built walls.
As such, it remains a gem for the landscape-conscious historian.
For contemporaries, the charm must have been less impressive than the sense of half-realised ambitions.
Breakdown
It was not only towns that failed in later medieval Sussex.
The agricultural and urban prosperity of the county, together with that of the rest of England, received a severe blow in the later 1340s when the Black Death finally reached England from the continent.
A virulent form of the endemic bubonic plagues of medieval Europe, it swept across the country from the south-west and down from London.
Very little is known in detail about its immediate effect in the terrible year of 1348/9 in Sussex.
The Abbot and over half the monks of Battle perished, eight of the thirteen canons of Mitchelham, most of the heads of religious houses, and up to half of the rest of the county's population died within a few months, although the effects varied from community to community.
Although it struck after the spring corn had been sown, the immediate effect on agriculture was catastrophic.
In the manor of Alciston, the bailiff of Battle Abbey had to raise wages by up to 75 percent to get the year's work done by the survivors.
Although they dropped again later, the long-term effects were considerable.
Labour was increasingly scarce and individuals were able to bargain a better position in many cases than the complex previous agreements we have seen.
Marginal land had to be given up either to waste or to sheep and cattle, since it was no longer profitable to plough it.
The assault on the remaining Wealden woodland was probably halted.
New land-working agreements frequently had to be negotiated, and enclosure into small fields for peasant cultivation may have replaced open land and the strip system of some villages on the coastal plain.
There particularly, a number of communities which had only been partially viable now began to disintegrate.
In Sussex there are known to be some 43 sites of deserted medieval villages.
Not all can be traced to the Black Death, but it must have been a significant factor.
In the high downland north-west of Chichester, the four neighbouring villages of Up Marden, North Marden, East Marden and West Marden effectively lost the first two communities, whose small thirteenth-century churches now stand magnificently isolated.
Similarly, only the church of Coombes in the Adur valley remains.
Almost all the lost villages were in the coastal, downland or scarpland settlements; only two, in Isfield Parish and Buxted, are known in the deep Weald.
Isfield itself seems to have shifted from its old site, up near the parish church, to a new site almost a quarter of a mile south-eastwards; the moated manor near the church was abandoned and replaced by a new separate dwelling.
But we shall probably never be able to trace this process of desertion in any detail in most of the Sussex cases.
Only Hangleton, now buried beneath Hove, has been adequately excavated and the archaeological work related to documentary evidence.
The settlement was already declining by 1340, with sheep flocks one-third of those the village had boasted forty years earlier.
In the words of the religious of Shulbrede, ‘the last wonderful pestilence’ must have carried many men away.
Hangleton and many other villages survived only as a single house or two into the next century.
Occasionally, as in the case of Heighton, in Firle Park, only a few mounds remain to illustrate that once men lived and worked there.
To the disorder caused by pestilence, other pressures were added in the late fourteenth century.
The ravages of the sea continued: Broomhill, Bracklesham, Aldrington and others joined Old Shoreham and Old Winchelsea beneath beds of shingle.
Repeated  French raids also continued.
The pressures of acts of God and war produced their own troubles; agricultural poverty found itself pressed with increasingly heavy taxation and baronial exactions from a monarchy and feudal lords anxious to recoup their losses and being none too scrupulous about their methods.
In 1381, the depressed peasantry exploded in revolt, appealing with singular naivety to the king for help.
Although it was the men of Kent and the other home counties who took leading parts Sussex did not escape.
Murder and crowd violence there was, although we have little real information about it.
Harsh repression firmly put it down, outlaws taking as usual to a scattered and precarious existence in the Weald.
Rather more is known about the similar outbreak in the fifteenth century, Jack Cade's rebellion of 1450.
Again this began in Kent, and spread to Sussex through that village of perpetual peasant troubles, Brede.
In this case there was widespread support and sympathy from the overtaxed gentry and clergy.
The mayor and citizens of Chichester, the prior of Lewes and many others joined in the public outburst against royal exactions, although after Cade was murdered at Heathfield it was not they who suffered when the repression came.
These outbursts were exceptional, directly attributable to increasing distress, but they were extreme symptoms of the ready violence of much of medieval society.
The power-struggles which went on across much of the period were reflected right through society, and the surviving court rolls for Sussex often illuminate activities of considerable violence.
The dividing line between acceptable and anti-social behaviour was often blurred.
The most notable example of this occurred in the county in 1264, when the troops of Simon de Montfort defeated Henry Ill at the Battle of Lewes.
The reasons for the conflict, the struggle of royal versus baronial liberties, were of wider importance than Sussex issues but it left a real mark on the county's experience.
De Warenne at Lewes was a royalist, as were the lords of Arundel, Pevensey and Hastings; as usual the French connection gave Sussex a strategic importance, as a bridgehead against the forces of de Montfort.
He marched south to destroy the royal army rather than waste his time in taking  castles; the king came westwards from Tonbridge and Battle, doing considerable damage en route .
They met at Offham Hill, now the boundary of Lewes old racecourse, on 14 May 1264.
De Montfort's men had to march up the northern scarp, but they still seem to have taken the royal forces, camped down in the priory grounds, by surprise.
Rapidly organised, 3000 cavalry charged up the hill to engage the rebels, and a great number of them went over the cliff into the Chalk Pits.
De Montfort's troops were able to rally and drive back the king's perspiring infantry, labouring up the downs in the wake of the cavalry.
The king was finally besieged in the priory, the King of the Romans in a windmill, and de Warenne in the castle.
Across the river and through the streets of Cliffe men fought in close combat before the royalists scattered.
In the history of English parliaments it was a decisive encounter, although in terms of Sussex where commoners rather than knights or lords died it may well have been one of the familiar disasters around which ordinary life had to continue.
Lewes managed to thrive notwithstanding.
Medieval society was already in transition by the fourteenth century.
Elsewhere in England, during the Wars of the Roses, it saw a reversion to murder, violence and a demand for a new type of lordship.
Readers of the Paston Letters will know how far East Anglian life was disrupted; in the north it was worse.
Sussex escaped most of this; if there were switches in allegiance, as there must have been, they were subsidiary to the conflicts elsewhere.
Local violence continued in the uncertainty caused by still undefined areas of jurisdiction.
To take an example, in Setyscombe (Sedlescombe) in 1415,
Item that Richard Curteys of Battle…entered the liberty of this lordship and made an assult on Richard Knyght against the peace by night; and with a strong hand, with force and arms, to wit, with swords, bows and arrows, they unjustly took him outside the aforesaid lordship and carried him off to Battle, within the liberty and town of the abbot of Battle, against the peace.
Why, is not clear, nor what eventually happened.
But the disruption of plague, of Frenchmen and English squabbling was helping a new move towards prosperity and stability.
In the Weald, small  farmers were showing their new-found freedoms and minor prosperities with a new type of house-building.
Perhaps the best symbol of the paradoxes of late medieval Sussex is the great castle of Herstmonceux.
Its builder, Sir Roger Fiennes, fought alongside Henry V at Agincourt and became Treasurer of the Household to Henry VI.
To complement the system of defence in depth against the French provided by the towns and Amberley and Bodiam, he began his new castle in 1441, with a licence ‘to enclose, crenellate, and finish with towers and battlements’.
With its wide moat and narrow approaches, it was indeed a castle, but in spirit it was some distance from Amberley and Bodiam.
Surrounded by its great park and built in brick, it was a new venture, half-way towards an elegant country house, the home of a new breed of magnate, more gentleman perhaps than knight.
Around it, the society of a recovering Sussex was undergoing considerable transformation.
TROUBLES IN A ‘QUIET COMMONWEALTH’
Insulated as it was in many ways from the rest of the country, fifteenth-century Sussex developed institutions which dominated its life until the eighteenth century brought other forms of change.
Not that this made the county unique, for Tudor and Stuart England was essentially a federation of strongly developed provincial societies in which county patterns of life and social and political allegiances were often far stronger than the tenuous links with a central monarchy in Westminster.
It is in that light that the notorious tales about Sussex's impenetrability must be seen.
The road system built up since the Romans had come to serve a much heavier traffic load in the later Middle Ages as the county became wealthier.
Heavy Wealden clay made wet-weather travel an unenviable experience, but it was often little worse than much of the rest of England.
Although responsibility for road maintenance lay with local parishes, they rarely carried out this duty with any degree of efficiency, let alone enthusiasm.
Reluctant farmers filled the winter's potholes in with any available earth; despite repeated demands by the justices of the peace, hardcore was rarely used.
It was far easier to travel east to west rather than north to south in Sussex, except where the roads crossed the rivers, for the bridges were usually in as poor a state of repair as the highways.
Tudor and Stuart travellers wrote their well-known complaints about the Sussex mud, and the late Caroline and Jacobean judges refused to travel south of Horsham for the winter assizes.
But one ought to remember too that outsiders and the representatives of central authority were usually scathing about any county other than their own, and locals invariably took a perverse pride in any peculiarities.
Although the centre of gravity in Tudor and Stuart England stayed in the more open Midlands and East Anglia, the fringe counties produced strong variations to the general stability and prosperity of these two centuries.
Despite its roads Sussex prospered, both as an almost self-sufficient country, and in its contacts with the outside world.
Given the apparent turbulence of much of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, with religious Reformations, agricultural  riots and the Civil Wars that stability and prosperity may seem elusive to the historian but they were very apparent to many contemporaries, at least among the higher ranks.
The accession of the Tudors was fairly smooth in Sussex, and the sixteenth century saw a reasonable degree of internal political order under the powerful influence of the great local noble families — the Arundels, Montagues, Sackvilles, Lumleys and de la Warrs — whose dependent gentry kept the peace at parish level.
Only as Elizabeth's reign ended did their influence wane, to be continued by those lesser gentry, the key figures of Stuart Sussex.
It was the latter's religious and political disaffection which took most of the county over to Parliament in the Civil Wars.
Immediately, under the early Tudors, there were more pressing problems.
While Henry VII had kept the peace and filled his treasury, Henry VIII had grandiose European ambitions and a passion for war.
This eventually fostered the birth of Sussex gun-making but it meant an inevitable increase in local tension and a continued vulnerability to French attacks.
Sussex provided both ships and men as well as money for Henry's disastrous ventures, weakening the already frail economic health of its ports.
Strong as it was, thy Tudor monarchy had a healthy regard for the risk of European retaliation, and Henry VIII continued the intermittent policy of his predecessors in using the Sussex coastal belt for a system of depth-defence.
To the decaying line of older castles and fortified manor houses he added one new prestige building, Camber Castle.
This was part of a new chain of coastal castles from Cornwall to Kent, and stands proud in its military symmetry against the flat marshland of the Rother estuary.
Built initially around 1511, it was extended to its present shape in the early 1540s when Henry's religious policies had given added risk to the policy of a invasion based on claims to the English throne.
Admirable as it was architecturally, it was a vast white elephant; the £23,000 spent on its rebuilding was wasted, partly because the river it was designed to protect shifted its channel in the later sixteenth century leaving Camber perched well inland.
When the French came, it was in the usual late medieval pattern, for summer plundering expeditions rather than invasion.
They burnt Brighton in 1544, forcing the  settlement to grow finally upon the cliffs rather than down on the beach, threatened by the French and ‘Neptune's insatiate womb’.
The Reformation
These incursions were, however, small-scale and localised compared with the first major upheaval in the life of Tudor Sussex, the Reformation.
This complex mixture of reforming zeal, high politics and unrestrained greed affected the whole of England, but with considerable local variations.
The late medieval church had become, with exceptions, rich, arrogant and lax; increasingly divorced in attitudes and practices from the leaders of lay society who were both more literate and self-assertive as the values of the European Renaissance spread to England.
The first and most obvious targets for this new spirit were the religious houses, estimated to own a sixth of the land in England, which were losing vocations as the sterility of many of their practices became increasingly apparent.
Although they had had several centuries to grow into the landscape, they still represented a foreign intrusion for many increasingly xenophobic Englishmen, and the growing attack on their position made little real attempt to differentiate between ‘good’ and ‘bad’houses.
The first onslaught came with the ambitious attempts of Cardinal Wolsey to found his new Oxford college, financed from the seizure of the property of smaller monasteries and convents.
Among those closed and appropriated was the Premonstratensian house at Bayham in Sussex.
It was already deep in debt, after repeated maladministration and corruption amongst its earlier inmates, and Wolsey seized it in 1525.
Surprisingly, it seems to have been the only instance of monastic dissolution in the county which was resisted by the locals.
The people of the district rose up in arms and reinstated the abbot, but their triumph was short-lived.
Government forces put the riot down, the ringleaders were imprisoned and the dissolution went ahead.
If Sussex people were greatly upset by the closure of the monasteries, they did not show it openly  thereafter, and the county avoided the troubles of 1536 which affected the north of England.
Bayham left what is perhaps the best preserved monastic ruin in the country.
Wolsey's attack was partial, disguised as a ‘reform’ of those houses which were beyond redemption.
The same justification was used by Thomas Cromwell in the mid-1530s when he began the dissolution of all those bodies with an income of less than £200 a year.
If this policy was genuine, it soon gave way to a much wider attack which meant that no religious order survived in England after 1540.
The smaller Sussex houses were investigated by commissioners in 1534, and the closures began.
The initial proposal for transferring the religious to the larger houses to ensure a strengthened reformed monasticism was short-lived and the great houses began to surrender in 1537, as an insurance policy against wholesale deprivation.
The prior of Lewes surrendered his house on 16 November 1537, Robertsbridge went in April 1538 and Battle the following month.
The friars followed suit.
We know remarkably little about the process of dissolution in Sussex, but it seems to have gone fairly peaceably.
The monks and nuns, virtually pensioned-off gentry, could see little future except death in resisting the royal will and threw in their lot with a change that would guarantee them reasonable security.
A few went abroad to Catholic countries but most merged fairly easily into the new order.
Contrary to the old view that monks and nuns were brutally discarded into the roads to swell a growing army of miserable vagrants, most of them did remarkably well, with posts in the new Church of England or pensions.
The scale of these rewards varied with the importance of the house they left.
The Abbot of Battle, John Hammond, took an annual pension of £100, worth possibly £10,000 in our currency, almost tax-free to boot, and settled in the town where he died in the later 1540s.
Other monks of the house became parish clergy.
The Prior of Lewes, Robert Peterson, collected a number of cathedral offices around England to keep him in comfort.
Most of the friars became parish priests, and nuns received pensions, although they were probably more vulnerable to the change in fortune than their male counterparts and there were no church posts for them.
Some of the  displaced religious married, although they had to separate during Mary's reign.
What we cannot know is how deeply they felt the break-up of their communal life and the removal of the prestige attached to the greater foundations.
Even more obscure is the fate of the indeterminate number of lay officials and servants the communities had employed.
Apart from the household staffs, many of them must have stayed on since it was the houses themselves that were dissolved, not their economic base, the estates.
These passed into royal administration, through the Court of Augmentations, and steadily thereafter into the hands of the nobility and gentry, greedy for land and status.
Many were sold to raise funds for Henry's wars, but some went as gifts to royal favourites, to strengthen the bond between monarch and greater subjects which was so important a part of the Tudor mystique and popularity.
Perhaps the best-known Sussex case of this was Sir Anthony Browne, Henry's Master of the Horse.
Apart from estates elsewhere, he was given the lands of Battle, Easebourne and Bayham in 1538.
The first of these was converted from the abbey to great house in a very short time, a transaction made easier by Browne's use of the abbot's lodging as the centre of his new house.
In the process of dissolution, the royal officials had stripped the church, as all others, of its valuable ornaments; Browne completed the process with the help of the townspeople, by using the church and many of the conventual buildings as a convenient quarry.
Henry gave Lewes Priory to the minister responsible for the dissolution, Thomas Cromwell, who used what remained of his life before his execution for treason in 1540 to pull down as much of the buildings as possible.
This was done ruthlessly by an Italian engineer, John Portinari, who burnt everything, leaving only a few stumps of walls.
Boxgrove Priory, with its de la Warr chantry, survived as a noble parish church, but many lesser buildings in Sussex either became manor houses, as at Michelham, or storehouses, as in Rye.
Robertsbridge, the great Cistercian house, disappeared entirely, torn down by the local people.
What the dissolution meant, beyond a new fund of building material, it is difficult to gauge, impossible as it is to quantify the impact upon  religious feeling, charitable works and education the monasteries and nunneries had had.
For the tenants and farmworkers, it probably meant little change, since the religious were rarely benevolent landlords.
The payments of rents and services went on as before, only to new masters.
Only one certainty remains: in future the great buildings of Sussex would be secular, and a new form of patronage would appear for local artists and craftsmen.
Henry's Reformation had a far wider and deeper significance in Sussex than the original legal moves and seizure of estates had implied.
The king's original intention, goaded by the Pope's refusal to grant him a divorce, had been to effect a greater lay control of an uncertain church.
In this respect, it was only another, if rather drastic step in the long medieval controversy between the spiritual and temporal authorities.
But the king's cause attracted a motley crew of discontents and zealots, and placed many moderate men in a dilemma over their allegiance to state or church which dominated politics for the next 150 years.
It was an issue particularly acute in Sussex, filled as it was with supporters of the new order, and very open to a new type of continental invasion, that of the Protestant ideas of the European Reformation.
When Sussex gentlemen and townsmen began to question the practices of the church, they found new allies in the Flemings and Frenchmen who fled for asylum in the 1540s from persecution by Catholic monarchs abroad.
These weavers and craftsmen brought new skills to the country but they also imported radical ideas about the role of the church in society and its organisation.
They settled principally in the towns of East Sussex, particularly Rye and Lewes, where their new gospels found a welcome reception among men who misinterpreted the speed with which Henry VIII was prepared to change the church.
The story of the 1540s is a confused one.
The conservative Bishop Day of Chichester was unable to extend his authority because of the weakness of the episcopal machinery and the relative isolation of his palace outside Chichester.
With the overtly Protestant policies of Edward VI's ministers, the new groups were given a much freer rein, casting out images, decorations and the old vestments where  they could, damaging many churches in the process.
Day was removed by the government in 1551, to be replaced by Bishop Scory, a man of more Protestant tastes.
But the extent of change at parish level depended on how far the local partnership of parson and squire was prepared to go, and how much the people would tolerate.
When the labourers around Arundel rioted in 1549, although their main grievances were economic, they also protested at the changes in the familiar rituals.
There were considerable differences within the country at all social levels about the new religious practices; aristocrats like the Montagues tried to compromise but it became increasingly difficult.
The religious divisions in Sussex came to a head when Mary Tudor's brief reign brought a return to hard-line Catholicism.
Bishop Day, a vengeful man, was reinstated and the more conservative clergy and gentry were given a chance to reassert the old authority.
As an estimate of the drift of religious change and of what was acceptable to local people, the tactics they adopted proved a hideous disaster whose memories have scarred the country to the present day.
Mary, backed by her new husband, the hated Philip of Spain, and the draconian Bishop Bonner of London, embarked on a series of persecutions across England which drove far more people to the Protestant cause than they removed from it.
To the executions for heresy, Sussex made a gory contribution, twenty-seven men and women being burnt between 1555 and 1558.
One, perhaps, the best known, was the Flemish brewer, Derryk Carver of Brighton who was burnt in Lewes in July 1555.
The greatest holocaust took place at Lewes in June 1557 when ten Protestants, five men and five women, were burnt together in the market place.
Although the most prominent of these was Richard Woodman, a Warbleton ironfounder, most of the Lewes martyrs were fairly ordinary people.
If it did anything this mass burning ensured that Lewes remained a stronghold of Protestantism, and the people of Cliffe still celebrate Bonfire Night at the Martyr's Memorial with a sectarian fervour far exceeding the mild anti-Popery of other marchers.
The Lewes victims were matched by others in Chichester, Brighton, Steyning, East Grinstead and Mayfield.
Mary's death and Elizabeth's accession brought the Protestant extremists out into the open again, and the new breach with Rome was to prove permanent.
Protestant rioters desecrated Hailsham parish church in 1559, and the old practices were driven steadily underground.
Although a sixth of the clergy of the diocese's 272 parishes were deprived because they refused to take the oath of allegiance to Elizabeth's church, the remainder stayed on, modifying their public practices if not their private beliefs.
In this they were probably supported by the majority of their parishioners, insofar as the latter cared very much at all.
As long as they conformed outwardly, they were fairly safe, for Elizabeth and her ministers had to tread carefully to repair the breaches of confidence in the Tudor monarchy that Mary's policies had opened.
They relied heavily on the readiness of the local aristocracy and gentry to go along with them.
At first this was forthcoming, social stability mattering for more than religious principle, but the next forty years saw a growing split in the ranks of the Sussex leaders as Puritanism spread and the remaining Catholics came under suspicion for their dual allegiances.
The first real test came in 1570, with the appointment of Richard Curteys as Bishop of Chichester, succeeding the elderly Bishop Barlow.
Curteys was a new type, learned, reforming and zealous, a man with a consummate lack of tact.
He had been Dean of Chichester since 1567, during which time he had succeeded in alienating almost the entire chapter by his forthright attacks on venality, pluralism and spiritual laxity.
As bishop he widened his onslaught to the practices of the parochial clergy.
Much of what he attempted was undoubtedly justified, since he came to a diocese in a state of confusion after the upheavals of the previous twenty years, with many of its churches staffed by ignorant time-servers.
As such Curteys represented the new voice of Elizabethan England, combining a zeal for spiritual regeneration inspired by the Swiss Calvinists with the new theological learning of Cambridge.
Unfortunately for his cause he succeeded in alienating many of the gentry who might otherwise have supported him and in tying himself up in the increasingly convoluted legal knots with which the later Tudors  sought to define their rights.
The support he found amongst gentry and townsmen in eastern Sussex was not yet strong enough to guarantee victory.
To circumvent an entrenched clergy and arouse the spirituality of those whose livings were so poor that they combined their priesthood with farming, shoemaking or fishing, he brought in ‘lecturers’, unbeneficed clergy who provided a new preaching tradition, and organised sympathetic clergy into ‘classes, or ‘prophesyings’ where the tenets of the new faith were discussed.
These were particularly strong in the Lewes area, with its European links.
In the long term this was to have a marked effect, but the immediate result was to be Curteys's deposition in 1580, after the infuriated gentry had appealed to the Privy Council to stop his assaults on what they regarded as their own just rights.
He had summoned all the county gentry to two consistories in the Cathedral in March 1577, accusing those who did not wish to attend of Popish disloyalty.
as if this were not bad enough, he used his powers on the Commission of the Peace to attack their secular rights, in the name of social justice.
One man in particular bore the brunt of this assault, Thomas Lewkenor of Selsey, a key figure in the life of the Rape and City of Chichester.
Undoubtedly much of Lewkenor's commercial activities verged on the illegal, but few of the Sussex coastal gentry were probably uninvolved in the piracy and smuggling which flourished in the troubled international scene and which, in the guise of ‘sea-dogs’, has long been acknowledged as one of the great Elizabethan attributes.
When Curteys hit at Lewkenor's and his associates' involvement in corn speculation he acted in the tradition to which we shall return, of the magnate's dispensing reasonable justice, but it was a politically fatal manoeuvre.
The bishop compounded his felony by supporting his brother Edmund, vicar of Cuckfield, in a protracted struggle with a local ironmaster and squire.
It was too much, and the central government, worried about the gentry's identifying Curteys with royal intentions had no choice but to first suspend and then remove him.
His Elizabethan successors were weak men; it was a victory for local gentry which was eventually to have profound results when the royal interests of the 
The Gentry
There were other forces at work in the later Elizabethan experience which asserted the growing political importance of the Protestant gentry.
At the Queen's accession authority in the county centred on the peerage as represented by the Earl of Arundel and Viscount Montague, both of whom were Catholics.
The former, who had succeeded to his title in 1543, had maintained a strong feudal authority at the service of three Tudor monarchs with divergent religious attitudes.
When economic distress forced a widespread unrest among the lower agricultural ranks at the height of Edward's Protestant reforms in 1549, Arundel had coped with it without overt force, using his traditional authority, with ‘the people, having no small experience of his honor, and bearing dutiful affection unto him, as their ancient and chiefest lord of that country’.
Hearing the complaints of labourers and gentry in the Great Hall at Arundel he has dispensed summary justice, accepted by all, but dependant on his authority as feudal lord, not that of monarchy.
It was probably the last example of its type in Sussex.
With the growing pressure of the gentry and the increasing anti-Catholicism of Elizabeth's ministers, the power of the old nobility declined steadily.
Lord Montague, the master of Cowdray and Battle, succeeded Sir Thomas Browne, his father, who had profited so much from the dissolution.
Unlike Arundel and the Howard family, his essential loyalty to the Tudor cause was never doubted but he remained a Catholic and had to face a compromise which lessened his personal authority.
Initially he was supported by at least two-fifths of the county gentry, but the growing threats of trouble from Spain and Catholic plotting forced them into a position of defensive decline.
After 1577, the central authorities mounted a growing attack on these recusants, forcing them to abandon apparent conformity at greater cost.
The fines on non-attendance at church were increased from 12d a week to £20 a month, although it would have been a courageous churchwarden who presented the local landlord to account for Popish practices.
Nonetheless, leading Sussex Catholics, including John Gage of Firle and Richard Shelley of  Warninghurst were imprisoned in 1580 for recusancy; they still continued to pay the heavy taxes and fines demanded of them.
The leading Sussex Catholic families became a centre for a religious underground, harbouring the seminary priests who slipped into England from the Continent.
It could be dangerous — Edward Shelley of Warninghurst died at Tyburn in 1588 for hiding a priest — but by and large the penalties were not too heavily enforced.
Even the more Puritan gentry found it hard to bring themselves to prosecute their neighbours and relatives, for at this stage the sense of solidarity among the gentry was usually greater than their religious differences.
Two Catholic priests, Ralph Crockett and Edward James, were executed on Broyle Heath outside Chichester in 1588 but most others escaped.
Although the leading Sussex nobles flirted with treason in 1569, it was a short-lived romance.
When the Armada came in 1588, all supported the English cause, not least Lord Buckhurst who protested against a Privy Council enquiry into the loyalty of Sussex Catholic gentry on the grounds that it was distasteful.
Catholics and Protestants united to raise over 4000 troops for the English defence, although in the event they were not needed.
Meanwhile, Catholic worship continued in many great houses; Sir Thomas Leedes at Thorne House, Steyning, was only one of a number who kept a priest's hole against the chance of being given away by an informer.
But such was the strength of their local authority that most of the larger Catholic households were able to maintain their liturgical tradition, although in a way that was increasingly isolated from the mainstream of local life.
With the exception of the towns, to whose special case we shall return, most ordinary people seem to have followed the lead of their local squire, where one existed.
Caesar was probably far nearer than God for most of them.
Through all the religious and political troubles in Tudor and early Stuart Sussex the county's upper classes as a whole experienced a prosperity and an increasingly self-assertive sense of authority.
We have already seen some of the fortunes of the Browne/Montague family; as the aristocracy waned later in the sixteenth century, it was the gentry who grew in strength, particularly in the eastern half of the county.
These were not great landowners, and less than half had more than four manors, even fewer parks around their houses.
Historians have long argued about the ‘rise’ of this group, but basically it was the collective experience of nearly fifty individual families who became the pacesetters of Elizabethan Sussex.
Among the most significant were the Lewkenors of West Dean, the Pelhams of Laughton and the Palmers of Parham, men whose estates grew steadily as they bought in a good market and judiciously married their sons and daughters.
While many had been in the county for several generations the group as a whole showed remarkable resilience and a powerful capacity for accepting newcomers, men who replaced declining families.
The Palmers were city merchants, who bought respectability with the Wiston estates; the Bowyers of North Mundham began as ‘grocers’, though on a rather greater scale than a corner shop.
Others, including Sir Richard Lewkenor of West Dean, came in by that most profitable entrance in a chronically litigious society, the practice of law.
One powerful source of fresh blood came from new men to whom we shall return, the Sussex ironmasters, like the Bowyers of Cuckfield who disputed so effectively with Bishop Curteys.
Although the new men frequently brought considerable skills to the management of their estates by no means all the gentry prospered.
Within the group as a whole and within individual families, there were considerable fluctuations in fortune.
Too many daughters needing dowries or annuities if they remained unmarried could spell disaster, as could an attempt to emulate a life style they could not really afford.
The Shirleys built Wiston in the 1570s, worked effectively in raising money to support the Armada and then went broke, as did one branch of the Pelhams at Buckstepe.
As Richard Whalley wrote to his sister in 1624, many quite wealthy local gentlemen: ‘had opposed their parents…consumed their whole estates, even to one foot of ground, five of them with much ado to get winding sheets; some died under hedges’.
The prudent escaped this fate, and their possessions showed it, not least in the wide range of glorious Elizabethan and Jacobean tombs scattered through local parish churches.
In Isfield, Sir John  Shurley and his two wives lie side by side on a mighty tomb of alabaster with their children carved kneeling around the base.
Of the gentry, only the Catholics who were cut off from public office and subjected to heavy fines retreated entirely into their localities and found difficulty in profiting as much as the others, yet their authority as squires remained largely untouched.
The new men extended their authority far beyond their own estates.
As justices of the peace they were burdened by central government with a growing number of responsibilities; the more prosperous also intruded into the market towns, maintaining houses in Chichester or Lewes as well as the lesser centres, and replacing townsmen as Members of Parliament as the costs of the job became more onerous and the social distinction of election more desirable.
Having bought West Dean with their profits from the law, the Lewkenors built up a considerable wealth from the corn trade around Chichester and then took over as M.P.s for the city.
Whatever their spheres of extended influence the gentry's power was based on the land they owned, and they formed the cap of a local social pyramid down which prosperity spread.
Below the gentry another group made a particular mark on the developing Sussex landscape, the ‘husbandmen’ and ‘yeomen’.
They were the descendants of the ambitious late medieval farmers, such as we have seen in Wadhurst, who had expanded their holdings as the older hierarchies broke down.
One estimate has put their numbers at almost 4000 in the reign of Henry VIII, with property worth on the average between £5 and £19.
These were frequently tenant farmers but many came to own their own land, especially in the Weald.
On the whole they had a much more restricted influence than the gentry but they occasionally emerged, as during the troubles of 1549 and the Clubmen's riots of the 1640s, as a powerful conservative and stabilising force in county politics.
Their farms were usually small, often less than a hundred acres, and we know much less about them than about the gentry.
Apart from their occasional appearances in taxation records and as ironfounders their two best-known memorials are their houses and their wills.
The latter reveal a general growth in prosperity, with more solid goods to be left after death.
John Colbround of Bodle Street, in Hurstmonceux, a husbandman, left in 1540, 14d to his parish church and the cathedral, 4 kine, a mare and a third of his household goods to his wife, 40s to each of his three sons and two daughters, a heifer, ewe and two lambs between them and 20d to the poor.
Men like him became lynchpins in Sussex rural society, serving not only as tenant farmers but also as parish churchwardens and constables, helping to maintain a semblance of order and to interpret the gentry's will in their communities.
They also paid a substantial proportion of the increasingly heavy taxation the Elizabethan and Stuart campaigns on the Continent demanded.
Below this group came by far the largest and the least known group, the common people of Sussex.
For them the extent of the new prosperity may be doubted, although their relationships with their masters had come to be based on the basis of cash rather than service.
The rampant inflation that followed Henry VIII's currency speculations and which his successors could hardly limit hit them most of all.
Rioting in 1549, they remained a troublesome and mysterious element in the eyes of their superiors: little more than working machines, violent and expendable.
Those away from the greater estates scraped a living in the Weald, combining small crofts in the extensive waste lands with casual labour for the more established farmers or iron masters.
The presence of such a large and migrant casual labour force remained a major social problem in Sussex until the 1850s, adding considerably to the county's general reputation for isolation and wildness.
There is little to suggest to us that the housing or goods of Sussex labourers varied much from those of their late medieval predecessors.
The Great Rebuilding
It was in the homes of the more prosperous that Tudor and Stuart Sussex saw the greatest physical and social changes.
The ‘great rebuilding’ which affected most of England between 1540 and 1640 saw some of its finest manifestations in the county, as a wealthy and more educated secular leadership diverted funds and investment  from religious ends to their own grandeur.
Although buildings such as Hurstmonceux had already marked a shift from the primarily military dwellings of the middle ages, the later sixteenth century saw in Sussex a flowering in great house-building which has never been equalled since.
There are so many fine examples in the county that selecting typical instances is invidious.
Although they represented a new wealth and social authority, they were far from extravagant, representing instead a restrained order, often at odds with some of their more flamboyant inhabitants.
Parham, begun in 1577 for the Palmers, incorporated part of the monastic grange of Westminster they had bought after the dissolution but set a totally different style.
E-shaped, as was the fashion, it centred round its Great Hall, a reminder still of the public life lived by many Tudor leaders.
Just as plainly effective were Danny and Wiston; different though they were in minor detail and execution, they all shared that plain symmetry and order which the Tudor gentry sought to give to a turbulent society.
By far the greatest of the new houses was Cowdray, built over several generations by the Earl of Southampton, Sir Anthony Browne and Viscount Montague.
Sir Nikolaus Pevsner has called it ‘an absolutely consistent epitome of Tudor architecture at its plainest and most sober, very English in its understatement’.
Although long deserted, it still gives a superb picture of the power and ambition of these Tudor ‘new men,.
More nobly ornamented and furnished then the castles they replaced, these houses still shared the abysmal sanitation of the latter, with poor privies and rush-strewn floors.
Although their long galleries and multitude of rooms provided a greater degree of privacy for the gentry families, the homes were still very much public places, the more so according to the rank of the owner.
Lord Dacre kept twenty-eight indoor servants at Hurstmonceux who, with a constant stream of visitors, needed prodigious quantities of food both from the estates and from farther-flung markets.
The hospitality of the religious houses had become the responsibility of the gentry.
At Hurstmonceux, it has been calculated that every one of the forty inmates and servants, man, women and child, consumed eight gallons of beer each every week.
It had to be brewed, kept and  served, together with the accompanying mass of food, on a regular basis.
In one week in the 1640s Hurstmonceux had nineteen visitors in residence, apart from others engaged in repair and building works.
By comparison, and much more numerous, were the new-style houses of the middling men of Tudor and Stuart Sussex, the yeomen and husbandmen.
While Parham or even Cowdray have almost exact equivalents elsewhere in England, the houses of these lesser persons developed a regional vernacular style which is a unique heritage of the country.
Although, as we have seen, they emerged in the latter half of the fifteenth century it was under the Tudors that they reached a peak of development.
The relatively simple early house, with its common hall and few private rooms in a single storey, gave way to a more complicated pattern of two-storeyed dwellings with a number of much more specialised rooms.
The impetus came with the appearance in the market towns of the ‘Continuous Jetty’ house, an intermediate stage of development.
It yielded in turn to the peak or vernacular building, with a whole range of housing types carefully adapted to the varied needs and ambitions of their builders Probably for the first time, minor differentiations in social rank had a lasting impact on architectural development in Sussex.
In these new houses the open hall with its central hearth and hole in the roof was replaced with specialised fire-places, and most distinct of all, chimneys.
Some of the buildings were entirely new, others were adaptations of older ones as their occupants rose in prestige; the High Street in East Grinstead shows clear examples of this pattern at work.
Common to most of the new houses was their careful use of local materials, particularly in timber-framing.
Around the frames were hung walls of lath and plaster, with the upper storeys occasionally protected by hung tiles, and the roofs covered in the same materials or, in some cases, with Horsham Slate.
What all pointed to was the growth of a considerable Wealden timber and brick industry, another attraction for the casual labour for which the area was becoming notorious.
Most of the houses outside towns might justly be described as ‘peasant’ accommodation, for Sussex is one of the few English counties where the term  had a real and continued significance.
The Wealden mixed agriculture encouraged both owners and tenants of farms of modest size often combining the hard work of farming on clay with other occupations.
One parish in particular shows to perfection the careful status differences in these ‘vernacular’ houses.
Northiam, on the Kent border, has three important examples of prosperous timber-frame building.
Over on its west, the modest yeoman's house of Strawberry Hole nestles in an undulating pastoral farmscape; further inwards, the timber-framed fifteenth-century manor house of Great Dixter hides behind an Edwardian rebuilding, and, not far from the parish church, stands Brickwall.
The latter was begun in 1617 for William and Mary White, but rebuilt in 1633; when the iron-founding and gentry family of Freeman acquired it in 1666, they refashioned the interior with some of the finest stucco work in Sussex, masking the simpler tastes of its earlier owners.
The new styles marked a major change of direction at the time of the Civil Wars; although they often impinged only indirectly on local farming life, the upheavals of the 1640s were enough to halt the great rebuilding almost entirely.
Economic Life
The century's economic expansion reflected perhaps more than anything else the rapid growth and partial diffusion of wealth through the upper reaches of the Tudor and Stuart social pyramid.
This was the result of a combination both of increased farming skill, a growing sophistication in the demand for agricultural products and galloping inflation which pushed up both prices and profits.
In one much-quoted case a holding of 30 acres in the manor of Plumpton, increased in scale value by nearly three hundred per cent in the first half of the seventeenth century.
Inevitably, with inflation, only a small group profited but they were the men who directed some important changes in the country's agricultural and industrial patterns, and whose conspicuous consumption we have already seen.
For the most part, the activities they followed confirmed the earlier  divisions, and what the Tudor and early Stuart gentry and yeomen did was to exploit much of the local potential more fully.
For the Downland, sheep remained dominant; it was in the coastal plain and Weald that a new impetus was given.
Over a century and hall after the break-up of the great ecclesiastical estates, the coastal plain was subjected to a steady process of ‘enclosure’, the larger ‘open’ or ‘common’fields being replaced by the hedged and ditched rectangles we still see today.
Usually enclosure was forced through at the instigation and will of the greater landowners.
Where a similar pattern occurred in the parishes north of the Downland scarp there was some resistance from the local interests of lesser men, displaced as they often were from what they had come to regard as their ‘customary’ rights, particularly grazing on the extensive wastes.
In Laughton, Hoathly and other places there were riots, the precursors of repeated Wealden troubles over the next three centuries when local magnates moved against what was seen as local backwardness.
They did not halt the process of change, and the riots only assumed major proportions in times of wider crisis, such as in 1549 and during the Civil Wars.
The other main area for an attack by the new economic order occurred in Ashdown Forest.
This vast stretch of woodland, heath and scrub of uncertain ownership and disputed use saw repeated social and economic conflict until the very end of the seventeenth century, Officially or not, the inhabitants of surrounding, or even quite distant, communities had established grazing and foraging rights in the forest over several centuries.
But they stood in the way of ‘improvers’, usually great landowners like the Earl of Bristol in the 1660s who were greedy for the easy expansion of their estates which forest enclosures could offer.
It took violent protest by the commoners, Parliamentary Commissions and repeated royal intervention before a compromise was reached in the decree of 1693 which fixed substantial areas for grazing free from intrusion by land-hungry magnates.
On a lesser scale the clearance of the Weald continued much as before, with the slow, back-breaking burning of scrub and grubbing-up of tree stumps the task entailed.
Rather than plant new hedgerows, these rural pioneers continued to leave extensive  ‘shaws’, banks of trees and shrubs between the small fields.
It was a cheap, ready-made form of hedging, but if took up almost an eighth of the cleared land and remained an unfortunate legacy for succeeding farmers.
The cleared land, a broken and undulating mix of heavy clay and difficult sands, was by no means rich.
Those who could read may have taken advantage of some of the ideas of a local Elizabethan agricultural writer, Leonard Mascall of Plumpton, who wrote three textbooks on the arts of husbandry; most farmers probably continued much as their forbears had done, producing a growing farming surplus more by accident than by conscious design.
Yet, the bad years apart, there was undoubtedly a general increase in yields.
On the coastal plain, the boost in corn harvests eventually encouraged the development of a major sea-borne exporting trade which made a new fortune for many Chichester merchants in the later seventeenth century.
The other great development was a noticeable and gradual spread in the breeding of cattle, particularly the red Sussex cow, augmenting extensive sheep farming.
On one extensive gentry estate in the 1560s, that of Sir John Gage at Firle, there were 181 cattle and 1940 sheep.
While only a few farmers could cope on this scale, there was a growing body of men whose individual holdings might have been small but whose collected wealth in terms of stock was vast, although sadly beyond accurate calculation by later historians.
With the manure provided by so many beasts, there was some hope of success in making productive the marginal soils of the Weald, particularly where natural fertiliser was augmented by a wide variety of other fertilisers, lime, meat and even scraps from the villages.
But it was a hard, uphill struggle which the very tenacity of the Wealden clay and sand defeated and contained.
Apart from the rich variety of new housing the most plentiful evidence of this economic explosion in Tudor Sussex is the number of triangular ‘hammer-ponds’ and small slag mounds which dot the Weald.
These were the product of the expansion in an already established local industry, ironmaking.
As we have seen, this had occurred on a small but steady scale since pre-Roman times but new pressures forced a rapid growth in the sixteenth century.
The increasing sophistication of urban demands for consumer goods  such as pots and ironwork for house-building, the problems brought about by the steady withdrawal from continental sources of supply and the need for stronger defences, combined with the entrepreneurial spirit of many local landlords and the increased flow of capital from farming and trading profits to encourage a very rapid development indeed.
An idea of the complexity of this process can be gauged from the events which led to the first successful casting of iron cannon in Sussex, at Buxted in 1543.
The works were owned by the local rector, William Levett, tenanted by Ralphe Hogge and worked by an exiled French specialist, Peter Baude.
For the first time the new cannon offered relative ease of production, and a greater degree of safety in use, unlike the former practice of building up the guns from iron bands held together with loops.
It needed not only a revolution in organisation but in technology too.
Until the sixteenth century most iron had been produced in ‘bloomeries’, rough hearths where the iron ore was melted in what amounted to puddles; it could only produce the metal in lumps in small quantities.
Gradually, these inefficient hearths were replaced by primitive blast furnaces from which the molten iron flowed into moulded sand ‘pigs’.
The iron ore came from local surface working, the fuel was charcoal from the local woodlands, and the cooling water was provided by the many small but quite fast-flowing streams of the broken Wealden landscape.
The ponds provided by damming these streams were used to build up pressure to drive heavy tilt-hammers through wooden water-wheels.
The early skills were brought by French exiles, lured by high rates of pay or driven out by religious persecution; labour was provided by the considerable fund of casual workers who dragged a living from squatting in the woods and heaths.
Despite the importance of the industry as a whole, it was essentially a combination of small, scattered units merging very closely into local life.
In many cases the foundries and forges were widely separated, even where commonly owned; the sites were often little more than a combination of untidy wooden huts with the occasional brick emplacement.
It cost nearly £80 to erect the furnace at Worth in 1547 — in the early days at least there was plenty of free money to be put into the new ventures.
Growth in iron founding was not without problems although the history of many individual sites can never be written.
Expansion itself caused troubles, not least in terms of fuel.
The furnaces were far from economical in their use of charcoal and it soon became necessary to replace the heavy drain on established woodlands with the careful use of coppiced underwood.
Arguments raged then, and have done so ever since, whether or not the industry was responsible for the long-term destruction of much of the Weald's best timber.
Certainly, prices of fuel doubled in the later sixteenth century although this may have been only part of the general inflation.
At the least, the ironworks contributed to the steady clearance of the scrubbier parts of the local woodland; by the later seventeenth century like the much more wasteful and mobile glass industry of Tudor and Stuart Sussex, they had exhausted much of their best local fuel, and the increased use of coke took the industry elsewhere.
After reaching its early peak the Sussex iron industry went into a very long decline, which only finished when the Ashburnham forge closed in 1810, at the height of the Napoleonic wars.
Throughout its existence, however, it made a rich and varied contribution to local life.
The more successful ironmasters built houses like Batemans at Burwash, constructed about 1634.
While the larger estates like Ashburnham or Sheffield controlled almost all aspects of local production and distribution, the pattern elsewhere was one of a widespread use of individuals, contracting as suppliers, carters and labour.
Not least among the contributions was the continual damage done to the terrible local roads by the movement of heavy carts carrying ore and finished products.
Most went by road to distribution ports on the local rivers, including the Ouse and Rother, for the long voyage to London or other selling points.
Guns were only a small part of the Sussex output, and much better known were the ornamental cast-iron firebacks much in demand for the more sophisticated housing of the middling and upper ranks.
Although both sides in the Civil Wars provided custom for the various works the decline could not be halted.
A petition of the 1660s referred to the entire dependence of many local people on the trade, particularly ‘ye constant imployment of at least 50,000  lusty able workman ready for defence of your Majesty and ye Nacion in case of general needs’.
Like most such documents it was probably an exaggeration but it marked the approaching end of a peculiarly rich period of vitality in the county.
Urban Pride
Fluctuations in agriculture and rural industries were matched inevitably by those of the towns.
The hub of such localised society was the small market centre, grouped in a hierarchy of towns within the county.
For much of the Tudor and Stuart period there were twenty-one of these.
Some, such as Chichester, Arundel and Lewes are still familiar as centres of rural life, but others such as Ditchling, Cuckfield and West Tarring have since lost most of their importance.
The fortunes of individual towns varied considerably over the sixteenth and seventeenth century but many still bear considerable marks of their former prosperity.
The rebuilt merchants' houses in East Grinstead have already been noted, but there were similar examples to be found in Petworth; North Street in that town served as the principal thoroughfare and the more prosperous tradesmen expanded their accommodation when individual and urban fortunes allowed.
As a study of their wills has shown, over eighty percent of these middling townsmen lived in houses with five to ten rooms, no small sign of prosperity.
The actual pattern varied from town to town and decade to decade but there is abundant evidence of a modest and continued prosperity in the smaller centres such as Petworth, Midhurst and Steyning where a large number of the houses have survived.
Although some of the Wealden towns may have been regional centres for craft specialisation, such as Battle with its leather working and shoemaking, most of them provided a wide range of services which allowed a high degree of virtual self-sufficiency to their surrounding areas.
Glovers, shoemakers, tailors, chandlers, masons and others provided a firm nucleus of skilled trades.
Few were large enough to support the very specialised and restrictive craft gilds of the greater regional centres.
Among the  most important figures in this complex but small-scale economic set-up were the inn-keepers.
These men and the general merchants needed capital to keep going; as borrowers and lenders they formed a powerful nucleus in the life of the small provincial town.
An inn-keeper like H. Goble of Petworth was worth £561 when his will was proved in 1670; the local glover, N. Warner, died in 1645 worth £1539, most of which was held in mortgages on other men's property.
They were usually a long way from the London merchants who set up as gentry, but this group represented nonetheless a significant local urban aristocracy.
Petworth, with about 900 people in the 1640s, was a middle-rank town in Sussex.
The two largest, Lewes and Chichester, both with over two thousand inhabitants, had very contrasting fortunes under Tudor and Stuart rule.
The former has the longest and most consistent record of prosperity.
With a port virtually within the town and well-placed for access to the coastal plain, Downs and Weald it had become a significant trading centre.
Imported wine and European luxury goods were treaded for wool, wood and iron; local farmers came in to sell their sheep, cattle and horses at the annual fairs.
At sessions time it attracted the gentry and London professionals for what was both a legal highlight and an important focal point of social intercourse.
At no time in the Tudor and Stuart period was its prosperity really threatened, a fact clearly visible in the steady physical redevelopment of the town.
Its three parts, Lewes, Cliffe and Southover grew closer together along their respective high streets, with a complex number of minor streets and ‘twittens’, or narrow lanes, filling the spaces between.
The sixteenth century saw a significant shift in authority in Lewes.
The de Warrenes had died out in the later middle ages, the priory was pulled down in 1538, and with the disappearance of traditional authorities attention turned to the lesser but more numerous town houses of prosperous local merchants and the gentry who needed homes for the legal and social seasons.
Behind the impressive Georgian facades of much of the present High Street lie substantial Tudor timber frames.
Sir Nicholas Pelham lived in what is now the White Hart, the Gorings of Danny built ‘Pelham’ House  in 1579; even now it hides one of the finest Elizabethan  panelled rooms in the county.
The priory was plundered of its stones for Southover Grange, built for William Newton in 1572, and Southover Manor was constructed for the Earl of Dorset's steward to live in suitable style.
These two new houses were paralleled by the lesser houses of local merchants, men who formed a powerful, self-elected oligarchy after the older authorities had been removed.
As ‘the council of twelve’, selected from the ‘council of twenty-four’, they formed an exclusive survivor of the traditional merchants gilds, even to the extent of their liveried cloaks.
They imposed a new regularity on Lewes life, meeting in the now-vanished Town House they built in 1564, set apart with style from the lesser people.
Their decisions have lasted in the shape of the Lewes Town Book which has survived from its inception in 1542, unlike the older records which have vanished.
Their corporate possessions in the year of the Armada, 1588, included, among many others:
The Town seal and the vacabond seal…
Item two statute Books…
Item one Antient and two drums with the sticks…
Item two Towne hookes of Iron with there staves [for pulling down burning buildings]…two Towne Bookes of Recorde…
Twelve Shovelles.
The civic pride survived the crisis of the Armada and was reinforced in the seventeenth century by the acceptance of divine predestination given by the popularity of Puritanism in the town.
Its roots were both theological and caused by the revulsion of the burnings in Mary's reign.
As we shall see, it was important in the Civil Wars, but the spirit was kept alive by the annual bonfires to celebrate Elizabeth's accession and the Gunpowder Plot of 1605.
The latter became increasingly ritualised, with processions and effigies of the unpopular to be burnt.
Encouraged by the pride of the town authorities, the Guy Fawkes celebrations provided an annual explosion for the town's poor: deprived as they had been of saints' days with the advent of Puritanism, they came from the miserable hovels cramped in the town's back alleys to protest not only against the symbols of oppression but also, in bad years, against the local oligarchy.
By comparison with this vitality, Chichester made a comparatively poor showing.
The troubles which surrounded the bishop's authority in the 1570s were matched by growing economic uncertainty for the next eighty years or so.
The earliest known map, of 1595, shows a scatter of houses but much empty land, although the east and west suburbs huddled poorly outside the walls.
The dissolution of the religious houses had removed patronage, and the authority of the close was much diminished by the venality and interference of the successive incumbents.
Although the port prospered in part, particularly as a base for privateering  depredations on foreign ships, the dues which might have increased the town's wealth were hard to collect, and attempts to extend port rights over much of the coastal plain met with little success.
Fairs were held regularly with the markets but they were by no means profitable.
A complaint of 1596 painted a gloomy picture:
…the city of Chichester doth so fast decay and run to ruine, and the multitude inhabiting there so fast growe too beggary that except for remedy thereof some speedy order bee taken it is very likely the multitude of poor in the liberty of that city increasing will cause the better sorte (being few that can contribute towards the releefe of the poore) by reason of charges to wex weery of inhabiting the city.
The poor were a growing problem in Tudor society, violence was never far from the surface and wealth, it would seem, could only be decreased.
The squalor remained through the troubles of the Civil Wars until a new prosperity was built on the growing export of corn in the later seventeenth century.
Chichester was not the only Sussex town to feel the pinch of economic decay.
Slipping episcopal grandeur was matched by a wholesale decline in the ports.
Seaford, Hastings, Winchelsea and Rye suffered from the old Sussex enemy, the longshore drift that silted up their harbours relentlessly.
Seaford was virtually dead as a trading centre by the time Henry VIII granted it a charter in 1544.
Winchelsea had ceased to function and, although Rye carried away some of the iron from the Weald, the trade went increasingly in ships from other ports.
Its troubled inhabitants turned to Puritanism.
One new port appeared when a new cut was made to by-pass  the shifted mouth of the Ouse in 1539: the little village of Meeching emerged as Newhaven.
Brighthelmstone, without a natural or even man-made harbour, became the principal fishing town of the central Sussex area.
With fifty deep-sea fishing boats and a growing trade in sea-coal, this small town on the cliffs grew steadily in prosperity.
By the mid-seventeenth century, Sussex's heyday as a major maritime county was well past; importance had shifted eastwards and westwards, with a new continental and world focus.
Civil War
Against this background there emerged in the 1620s a new series of troubles in this ‘quiet commonwealth’, the religious and social disagreements which culminated in the Civil Wars of the 1640s.
One major contribution, if not the most important, was the growing disagreement which raged around the loose Elizabethan compromises of religious conscience, which could no longer work when the personalities involved changed.
Charles I and his new Archbishop, Laud, were as anxious to reform ecclesiastical society as the growing numbers of Puritans, but their remedies were diametrically opposed.
The two ‘Arminian’ bishops of Chichester in the 1620s and 1630s, Richard Montague and Brian Duppa, clashed as surely with the local squires as had Bishop Curteys fifty years before, but this time the enraged Sussex gentry found no support in their appeals to the king; not surprisingly, a substantial number of them saw Charles's pretensions as a growing threat to their own social position and local prestige.
Montagu and Duppa attacked ‘error’ in all its forms, whether as birds nesting inside the neglected parish church of Lancing, or too much ‘popularising in the pulpit’, the hour-long sermons by Puritan clergy unwilling to toe the episcopal line.
This latter group had an increasingly strong lay support, particularly in those strongholds of a very fundamental  Puritanism , Rye and Lewes.
Perhaps few of the inhabitants went quite so far as the parents of Fly-Fornication Richardson of Waldron or Small-hope Biggs of Rye in their statements of religious principle, but a  dominant number of the eastern rural and urban elite found their religious and political sympathies increasingly divorced from the fumbling attempts of the Stuarts to impose their image of the monarchy.
Essentially the disputes which led local men to side predominantly with Parliament in the 1640s grew from their ideas of social control.
The lower orders eventually expressed their political preferences rather differently.
A number of incidents in the early 1640s were crucial in determining the pattern of local allegiances.
Not least was the king's promotion to colonel of one of the most notoriously renegade local gentry, Thomas Lansford of East Hoathly, who had been fined £9000 and obliged to flee abroad after shooting firstly at the deer and then at the person of Sir Thomas Pelham.
In the closely knit ranks of the Sussex gentry such a royal action could only further enhance growing doubts of Stuart intentions.
Another phenomenon which took many of the gentry by surprise and swept some of them along with it, albeit protesting, was an outbreak of Puritan fanaticism in eastern Sussex in 1642; it encouraged paradoxically a tendency to religious broadness of mind seen as quite distinct from the narrow views of Archbishop Laud.
The king's declaration of war in 1642 came as no surprise, but forced splits in local communities which many of the leaders had been anxious to conceal.
John Ashburnham and Christopher Lewkenor declared for Charles, Sir Thomas Pelham, Anthony Stapley and Herbert Morley of Glynde for Parliament.
Individual families found themselves divided; the most troublesome and devious of the Sussex Royalists, Sir Edward Ford, was the brother-in-law of the Parliamentary General Ireton.
The relationship protected Ford from some of the more severe consequences of his own activities and allowed him to prolong his plotting long after the king's cause was effectively lost.
By and large, Sussex escaped a very direct involvement in the war since the main battles were fought elsewhere.
Apart from odd skirmishes between small reconnoitring groups in the west during the early months of the war, there were three main incidents in the county.
In November 1642 Ford led a small force of hastily impressed locals on a rapid march to attack Lewes.
He was routed at  Haywards Heath by a local Parliamentary contingent, and the bulk of the soldiery melted away to their homes.
About the same time, a group of Royalist gentry seized Chichester from its more Puritan aldermen and Ford retired there to lead a force quickly besieged in the city by the Parliamentary troops commanded by Sir William Waller.
The latter set up his artillery in the Broyle and bombarded the defendants for eight days before resistance collapsed.
Considerable damage was done both by the defenders, who had burned the suburbs before retreating within the walls, and by the Parliamentary troops who wreaked vengeance on the houses of Royalist gentry and upon the hated cathedral.
As the Dean, Bruno Reeves, put it:
The Commanders having in person executed the covetous part of Sacrilege, they leave the destructive and spoiling part to be finished by the common soldiers;[who]broke down the organs and dashing the pipes with their pole-axes, scoffingly said ‘hark how the organs go’.
A garrison was kept there until it was felt that peace was restored in 1646.
A year after the capture of Chichester the Royalists, helped by the irrepressible Ford from his house at Up Park, seized Arundel.
Waller returned, captured the town on 20 December 1643 and laid siege to the Royalists in the castle with 6000 Parliamentary troops.
It was a civilised affair, conducted according to the rules of aristocratic war, a form of extended duel.
The Royalist ladies were allowed out to dine with Waller and offered alternative accommodation or be escorted safely back.
The male defenders were rather less fortunate and the thousand or so Royalists were starved out after eleven days; half joined Waller immediately.
The castle was badly damaged during the exchange of fire, and the outcome meant the end of Sussex's importance in military terms.
It did not, however, mean the end of local troubles directly related to the wider conflict.
Until the formation of the highly disciplined Cromwellian New Model Army in 1645 both sides relied essentially on impressing unwilling locals as troops, usually the tenants and labourers of the participating gentry.
Both also operated as armies had done for many previous centuries by finding their supplies from the land as they moved about.
In the eyes of many  yeomen and labourers, the principles of either side were far less important than their economic menace.
The ever-present potential lawlessness of the Weald was married to the strongly expressed parochialism of small farmers to resist both King and Parliament.
A Parliamentary recruiting officer was beaten up during a riot at West Hoathly fair in 1643, and the spate of troubles increased.
As Colonel Morley, a Parliament man put it, the wider conflict ‘may raise a storm in Sussex, which county is full of neuters and malignants; and I have ever observed neuters to turn malignants upon such occasions’.
Inchoate anger seethed on in the Weald until it exploded in the autumn of 1645 when the ‘Clubmen’ appeared, basically a ‘confederacy with the vulgar multitude’of tenant farmers.
They were easily dispersed by the small bands of Parliamentary troops led by Colonel Morton.
More serious was the outbreak of protest from the ‘stout rustics’ in Horsham and Pulborough in 1648, a response to the government's five percent excise tax on food which, linked with bad harvests and low agricultural wages, increased desperation at the base of the social pyramid.
Although the troubles were as easily put down as their precursors they formed part of a traditional pattern of protest which only disappeared some two hundred years later.
The Civil Wars remained a matter of conflict among the gentry and clergy.
Royalists were often heavily fined or, like John Ashburnham, had their entire estates sequestered, but the concern of the gentry for its own solidarity modified much of the bitterness which might otherwise have damaged the county further.
Some of the clergy were less fortunate, becoming victims of persecution by Puritan divines with few wider sympathies; predominant among the latter was Francis Cheynell, a man instrumental in depriving a number of the cathedral and rural clergy.
Not surprisingly, many gentry and clergy modified their public pronouncements accordingly, surviving both Parliamentary rule and the Restoration.
Under Cromwell's Interregnum Sussex remained fairly peaceable, the only real intrusion being the Dutch attacks on coastal towns during the wars of the 1650s, and this was nothing new.
Rye stood out from most other towns in that it became for a while a Puritan  ‘Common Wealth’, a centre of social experiment and rigorous public morality under its two vicars, Joseph Beeton and his successor John Allen.
The strict sabbatarianism enforced by the constables seems to have been more ignored than conformed with by the populace in general, particularly where ‘immoderate drinking’ was concerned.
Elsewhere in the county Quakerism emerged in the 1650s to be fairly firmly suppressed by a gentry worried about its revolutionary tendencies; Thomas Haycock of Horsham went to gaol in 1656 as its first Sussex victim.
The violence of the early Quakers contrasted noticeably with the reputation for gentle non-conformity they acquired in the market towns over the next century or so.
Ten Sussex gentry served among the king's judges in 1649, led by Herbert Morley and Anthony Stapley, but they abstained from signing the death warrant.
When Charles II fled across the country after his defeat at Worcester in 1651, it caused a minor flurry but no more.
Generally, the Sussex men were more concerned with good government and the maintenance of reasonable religion than major social change.
With some exceptions, the gentry and clergy readily accepted the Restoration in 1660; few went as far as the Reverend Dr William Oughtred who, at the age of 86, ‘died of excess of joy when he heard of the restoration of the monarchy’.
Inevitably some retribution followed for the county's Parliamentarianism but it was modified by the need to maintain good government and social order.
The ‘regicides’ either went to prison or, like Goffe and Whalley, settled safely in America.
While the Sussex gentry who had gone to war for religion had to adjust to the need to maintain stability, many of the Puritan clergy could and would not.
Precisely how many were ejected in 1662 is unknown but possibly a third of the ministers became ‘Nonconformists’ or ‘Dissenters’.
Some may have left the area but many found continued support among dissident laymen and a strong, if scattered, Dissenting tradition grow in Sussex, particularly in the eastern half.
A rough survey of 1669 listed 49 ‘conventicles’ in the county, 11 of them Anabaptist; 38 were licensed by the crown ten years later.
The strength of religious deviation can never be precisely established, and one problem is the  unknown number of people who used no church or conventicle.
When Bishop Compton of Lichfield carried out a national survey in 1676, it was estimated that five percent of the county's population were ‘sectaries’.
Such a figure may seem insignificant but it represented a strength of purpose and feeling which made the small groups men and women of courage.
There were estimated to be 260 in Brighthelmstone (Brighton), 173 in Lewes and 300 in Rye, held together by their own sense of righteousness.
Life must have been rather harder for the one Dissenter in Walberton.
For meeting places they had private houses such as that of Richard Key at Eastden; pride and strength in their chapels came later.
The ejected ministers continued to teach and preach; men like Christopher Snell, formerly vicar of East Grinstead or Matthew Woodman of Slinfold, grandson of a Marian martyr, who ‘preached gratis’ in Horsham and kept a faith alive.
Their congregations of ‘Independents’ were justly named in a society settling down to a long period of outward conformity and growing indifference to religion.
ARISTOCRACY, DEPRESSION AND RIOT
The Magnates
In 1688 Charles, sixth Duke of Somerset, began to rebuild an untidy country mansion he had acquired through his marriage to a member of the Percy family, the Earls of Northumberland.
The result was a new symbol of aristocratic authority, Petworth House, whose very long and quite low facade looked away from Petworth across the tightly packed rural landscape to the Downs.
Its interior used some of the finest craftsmen of the day, not least the woodcarver Grinling Gibbons who decorated one room with a welter of natural images.
All in all, it was a fitting country seat for a magnate; even before the rebuilding it had needed 160 servants to run the house and grounds.
But the new house signified something else, the powerful hold over Sussex life which a few very great landowners exercised for the next two centuries or so.
Their dominance stood in clear contrast with the much more diffused influence of the county gentry in the earlier seventeenth century, yet it was an almost logical outcome of the steady pattern of estate aggrandisement and judicious marriages which the more prudent of the local squirearchy had pursued over several generations.
The restoration of the monarchy and its patronage proved a particularly valuable source of wealth and position to those who had remained faithful or changed their allegiance with a careful eye to the future.
John Ashburnham, the friend of Charles I, had gone into exile on his patron's death; at the Restoration he returned to be given several signs of royal favour, particularly in leases of valuable property.
He died in 1671, but his son John, born in 1655, remained a royal favourite.
He extended the family fortunes by marrying a Welsh heiress, and built up a considerable personal wealth by acting as a mortgage broker to less fortunate or less thrifty members of the gentry.
He also served the Crown cause particularly as a Baron of the Cinque Ports and M.P.
for Hastings.
The result was a peerage granted by William and Mary in 1689, when he had helped them through the troubles surrounding the deposition of James II.
His descendant, John, the third baron Ashburnham, served as a soldier while following the family tradition of dynastic marriages; in his  case, he excelled his inherited duties by outliving the three heiresses he married, bringing him £30,000 in dowries.
If was for service to the monarchy, however, that he was made the first Earl Ashburnham in 1730; for a family that had begun as modest farmers in the medieval Weald, this was no mean achievement.
As spectacular was the rise of the Pelhams of Laughton and their relatives.
One of these, Thomas, eldest son of the first baron Pelham, married a Hollis; the match eventually brought him £40,000 a year in landed income and in 1715 the title of Duke of Newcastle.
Until his death in 1768 the Duke was the most powerful man in England, the monarch apart.
It was a power used locally as well.
On his death, his Sussex estates and titles passed to Thomas Pelham of Stanmer who changed his barony of Chichester for an earldom in 1801, another reward for royal service.
Alongside Ashburnham and Pelham there stood other great Sussex families in the eighteenth century, particularly the Dukes of Richmond at Goodwood and the Earls of Egremont at Petworth.
After Newcastle died in 1768 it was the latter who became the arbiters of the county's taste and public behaviour.
Although these families rose further than any since the sixteenth century, many of the Sussex gentry were caught up in the process of aggrandisement.
At Glynde the Trevor family built on a steady base of modest local prosperity, although not without incident and setbacks.
John Trevor the fifth was M.P.
for Lewes in 1741 as a nominee of the Duke of Newcastle; unfortunately the death of his wife the following year drove him mad and he died in 1743 after a series of suicide attempts.
His cousin Richard inherited thy Glynde property but made his fortune elsewhere, in the church.
He ended up as Prince Bishop of Durham in 1752 where his saintliness (he was nicknamed ‘The Beauty of Holiness’) made him a rare figure amongst the lax Georgian episcopate, concerned largely as it was with political intrigue and careerism.
Other local gentry families were less fortunate in overcoming the crisis produced by some of their members.
In 1721, a London financier and speculator purchased the partly derelict Battle Abbey estate from the Montagues, 8000 acres in the area for £56,000.
The purchaser, Sir Thomas  Webster Bart, was the son of a ‘new man’, Sir Godfrey, whose commercial success masked his past.
Although Battle had been brought to complement estates in Essex where Sir Thomas had been M.P.
for Colchester, it soon became the family's principal, indeed only, country seat.
His passion for speculation in land and stocks overburdened him, and Sir Thomas's good fortune turned rapidly downhill, a pattern that dogged the Websters until they sold the estate in the 1850s.
He died heavily indebted in 1751 and his two sons, Whistler and Godfrey, just managed to keep the estates solvent.
What really marked the end of Webster fortunes was the policy pursued by the fourth and fifth baronets, both Godfreys.
The former shot himself in 1800 after the disastrous breakdown of his marriage to Elizabeth Vassall, the daughter of a Jamaican planter whose wealth had done so much to preserve Webster ambitions.
His son, Godfrey the fifth, was a gambler, friend to the Prince Regent; given to grandiose building schemes and political adventurism, he ruined the estates and died abroad in 1836, having encumbered his property with an incredibly involved series of mortgages before fleeing from his creditors.
Much of his downfall came from an over-zealous and extravagant interpretation of his role and duties as a landowner and grandee.
Battle became unusual as a town whose squire ceased to have any effective local influence.
As in so much of eighteenth-century Sussex local patterns depended on the experiences of one family, yet overall the role of the aristocracy and gentry remained more or less unquestioned.
If this social ascendancy depended on land it was reinforced by the widespread rebuilding of country seats in the eighteenth century and the reordering of the ornamental parks which surrounded them; the symmetrical English formality of the grander Tudor houses and gardens gave way to a new Italianate classicism which combined with an image of the countryside often quite distinct from the comparative agricultural disorder which remained outside the pales of their civilised owners.
Petworth epitomised the process particularly after its second rebuilding by George, Third Earl of Egremont, in the 1780s.
This patron of the arts, ‘ideal landlord, agriculturist and generous host’ as a recent historian has described  him, seems to have found his greatest happiness away from the London circles to which his rank entitled him, in bringing a civilised, Renaissance quality to his estates.
His Sculpture Gallery was the personal  museum of a connoisseur; for years J. M. W. Turner was the Earl's ‘painter in residence’.
Art extended outside the house; the Third Earl's predecessor had hired ‘Capability’ Brown to landscape the park, and the subtle mixture of woodland, serpentines and neo-classical temples is possibly the finest created landscape in England.
This was a sense of order that had to be worked hard for and was created with considerable effort.
At Ashburnham, Brown created a late eighteenth-century sense of ‘wilderness’ that could only come from the utmost ingenuity; sudden ‘surprise’views of the house replaced the structured avenues and rigid vistas of earlier occupants.
Not all Sussex landlords could afford, or even wished, to effect such a wholesale reordering of their immediate surroundings.
At Glynde Place, Bishop Trevor modified his Tudor house by carefully inserting the new Italianate style alongside sixteenth-century English features; Tuscan columns in the Great Hall and a magnificent new entrance belied the fact that this was a small house.
At Stanmer, the earlier Pelhams created a well-balanced ‘Palladian’ house in the 1720s; in order to preserve a sense of proper grandeur, the village was moved further north in the downland valley to hide it from view.
Despite such a use of power, the result was far from extravagant to behold: ‘It is a structure of considerable dimensions, auguring the residence of nobility, but at the same time laying no claim either to grandeur or antiquity…the park is pleasingly undulated’.
Modesty belying considerable power was a similar keynote of the Duke of Newcastle's manor house at Bishopstone.
‘The timber, in which the mansion was embosomed’ sheltered ‘The Duke's Walk’in a windswept valley; the house was eventually demolished by Lord Chichester in 1831.
by no means all the Sussex hierarchy had such restrained tastes, however.
Part of the Webster ruin was brought about by the fifth baronet's attempts to reroof many of the derelict Battle Abbey buildings in 1812 — 13.
Others indulged in more  permanent fantasies.
The first Earl of Sheffield, John Barker Holroyd, employed James Wyatt to create a new Wealden house for him in 1779; the result is a charming Gothick creation that served as one of the earliest positive reactions against the classical formality of much eighteenth-century building.
Sir Bysshe Shelley went one better in the 1790s when he commissioned a new house at Castle Goring.
The north face was Gothick, the south strictly Classical, and the interior was divided in the same way; the whole effort was a considerable visual pun on the pretensions of many of his neighbours.
He also ‘improved’ Chanctonbury Ring by planting the ring of trees within the hill-fort.
The houses and parks in Georgian Sussex represented leisured society at its peak; their owners lived essentially on the basic work of others but paid for their cultivated sensibilities and elegance with a carefully defined series of public responsibilities.
The greater houses still served as general assembly rooms for a host of petitioners, relatives, friends and hangers-on.
On great occasions the third Earl of Egremont would entertain 6000 people at Petworth and his 160 servants would be hard-pressed; by contrast Bishop Trevor managed his retreat at Glynde with a combined staff of 16, including a trainbearer, a French cook, and a ‘jolly old coachman’.
Personal eccentricities apart, the exercise of public duty was defined by an increasingly sophisticated code of conventions.
Apart from political intervention and law-giving, to which we shall return, a steadily more onerous pressure emerged in the form of military service.
Repeated European hostilities in the eighteenth century reinforced the county's particular vulnerability; with the revival of local militias after 1758, the aristocracy and gentry were expected to serve as officers.
To be a colonel required an income of £1000 a year and a captain needed £200; the intermediate ranks were suitably graded.
The whole operation was supervised from the 1780s from Goodwood by the Duke of Richmond.
A general in the regular army, he could only serve as lieutenant-colonel of the Sussex militia.
This he did as a public duty until the early nineteenth century, despite the problems of growing age; his subordinates included the zealous Lord Pelham, later Home Secretary.
The latter's captaincy  gave him some pleasant social summers at camps near Brighton but rather less desirable autumn duties elsewhere.
The responsibility which the aristocracy took most seriously was that of political life, and the eighteenth century saw the virtual elimination of the fierce independence shown by Stuart gentry and townsmen, particularly in East Sussex.
What began as a logical extension of growing aristocratic authority became by 1800 a byword for jobbery, corruption and intimidation.6 Until the partial reforms of 1832, Sussex as a whole sent 24 representatives to the House of Commons.
Two served for the county as a whole, the remainder came from eleven boroughs.
With rare exceptions, they were nominated essentially by the local aristocracy, particularly by the Duke of Newcastle.
Where more than one patron existed or disagreement looked probable every step was taken to ensure compromise.
Contested elections were expensive, not merely in bribes or gifts to electors, but also in the distribution of largesse to the vast mass of the population whose frustrations could result in violence.
The latter was usually given anyway, but became far more expensive if disagreement rose.
One of the county M.P.s was always a Pelham nominee; for almost half the eighteenth century he was usually the eldest son.
The other member was usually produced by an agreement between the Pelhams and the other magnates.
Only in 1774 was this pattern questioned with the brief success of Sir Thomas Spencer Wilson; for a short period the independent part of the county exerted themselves.
If authority in the country depended on the quiescence of almost 4000 qualified electors, then the towns represented the real fiefs of nobility and gentry, often returning members on the basis of a long-departed medieval splendour.
Seaford, a Pelham town, was one example of this, and Bramber was perhaps even more notorious.
That perceptive government spy, Daniel Defoe, said in the 1720s:
Bramber…hardly deserves the name of a town, having not above fifteen or sixteen families in it, and of them not many above asking you an alms as you ride by; the chiefest house in the town is a tavern, and hear, as I have been told the vintner, or ale-house keeper, rather, for he hardly deserved  the name of a vintner, boasted, that upon an election, just then over, he had made £300, of one pipe of a canary.
Nearly two-thirds of the town's 36 property qualifications were owned by a Warwickshire gentry family, the Goughs of Edgbaston.
In Chichester, with 500 voters, nomination of one member remained in the hands of the Duke of Richmond.
The Dorsets and Websters controlled East Grinstead and in Lewes, after the death of the all-powerful Duke of Newcastle, the Pelhams and the local oligarchy provided a representative each.
For most voters, when an election was contested, it was a case of staying with the safest, and strongest, patron.
by no means all were as enthusiastic as the song-writer who lauded the Pelhams in 1741:
At Bishopstone Near to The Sea
Upon the Sussex Coast
As good a Duke as Duke can be
lives there — the County's Toast
….
Then fill your Glass.
full let it be
Newcastle drink while you can see
With Heart and Voice all Voters Sing
Long live Great Hollis — Sussex King.
Newcastle's death in 1768 merely removed the most accomplished practitioner of the system; the word ‘party’ only had political significance as far as it related to the following of great magnates.
When voices were raised against scandal in Sussex electioneering, they actually reinforced the role of the aristocracy in defining the boundaries of permissible behaviour.
When George Ill and his supporters questioned the local authority of the Duke of Richmond by attempting to remove him from the lord-lieutenancy in 1779, they were firmly repulsed by a well-organised but short-lived local movement for ‘reform’.
The Duke presided over a county meeting in Lewes in January 1780, which prepared a petition for ‘Public Oeconomy’.
He even went so far as to demand universal manhood suffrage and annually-elected parliaments.
But Richmond was an unlikely precursor of the later Victorian socialists.
When the government pulled back, his demands diminished and there was no sudden ‘democratisation’ of Chichester's nomination procedures.
Only in the years after the Napoleonic Wars was there any threat to this pattern, and that came from a maverick member of the group.
Sir Godfrey Webster, the fifth baronet, was elected as a Tory member for the county in 1812; almost immediately he voted against the government whose friends had put him in and became increasingly radical in his demands for electoral reform and the abolition of political sinecures for the supporters of ministers.
In 1818, the outraged county magnates forced his withdrawal but he was swept back in by a temporary swing in support from the freehold voters.
It was a short-lived success, and the principal landowners in both East and West Sussex forced him out in 1820 by putting up one of his neighbours, Curteis of Windmill Hill against him.
Webster's increasing debts pulled him back from a contest, but he again bounced back to contest the Chichester borough elections in 1823, 1826 and 1831.
Although he dispensed hospitality lavishly to the townspeople, he had no success; political folly only compounded his incompetence as a landlord, and some Chichester tradesmen were still waiting for their bills to be settled ten years later.
This was far from the last fling of the old system.
Although the worst boroughs, including Bramber, Seaford and Midhurst, were disfranchised by the 1832 Reform Act and the county was given four M.P.s for its two halves, much of the old pattern continued until the 1870s and 1880s.
Changes in political form could do little to erode the power of the local aristocracy.
‘Leisure'
If it depended for government on the whims of its grandees, Georgian Sussex owed even more to their changing habits as members of leisured society, the relatively small but wealthy group whose fashions determined large areas of the economy in pre-industrial England.
Between the formalised rigours of the Court and the relative torpor of much estate living, the European aristocracy in the seventeenth century had generally developed another pattern of diversion, combining pleasure with a certain degree of purpose.
The  latter was served by the pursuit of health through drinking or bathing in natural mineral waters at inland spas.
In England these varied in scale from the magnificence of eighteenth-century Bath to quiet Tunbridge Wells on the Sussex borders, ‘a place in which a lady however virtuous, yet for want of good conduct may as soon shipwreck her character as in any part of England’.
The obsession with health in a disease-ridden society explains part of their attractions, but equally important were the opportunities for social and sexual intercourse, flirtation, gaming and marriage-broking which were essential to the more ambitious and less well-established members of the landed orders and their imitators.
Sussex became involved when Royal and aristocratic interest shifted in the mid-eighteenth century from inland to coastal pleasure resorts, largely as the result of a new series of health fads.
Prominent in this development was a Lewes-born doctor who had studied at the University of Leyden and returned home to marry into the local gentry, combining estate management with medical speculations, and systematic enquiry.
He was Richard Russell who published in 1750 his A Dissertation concerning the use of Sea-Water in the Diseases of the Glands , originally in Latin.
By drinking and bathing in the sea, he claimed, tuberculosis, tooth decay and intestinal disorders could be prevented or largely cured.
Unlike many of those who followed him and profited from pirated editions of his works, Russell was not a quack and his treatments were not to be taken lightly, the firm physical and mental regimen he prescribed being not far from the modern practices of hydropathic establishments or the health clubs beloved of overweight executives.
Russell's fame grew and so did his practice; in 1754 he moved permanently to the nearest local sea-town, Brighthelmstone, to encourage its development as a major treatment centre until his death in 1759 when others, less scrupulous, followed.
He found a ‘poor fishing town’ which had retreated on to the cliffs to avoid the winter storms; but it was far better situated than Daniel Defoe allowed when he visited the coast in the 1720s.
It was a town of about 2000 people which in the 1750s served a wide inland area, with a deep-sea fishing fleet and a reasonable coastal trade, considering that it lacked a harbour.
The  old town clustered untidily round its market and the inns, shops and professionals' houses which any flourishing centre required.
On the east, an open stream ran down the Steine to the sea, an area where the fishermen dried their nets and the inhabitants dumped their refuse; it was near the outlet that Russell built his house, now the site of the Albion Hotel.
The fame of his treatment spread, bringing four hundred visitors or so a year to swell the local income.
But, despite the fact that it has capitalised on an unproven reputation ever since, it was not so much health which eventually transformed Brighton as royal patronage and high fashion in which the exercises of the spa served largely as a formal excuse for other, equally demanding, pleasures.
George, Prince of Wales, liked the climate and the local ambience much more than that of London, Windsor or Weymouth.
When the Prince moved to a small lodge on the edge of the Steine in the 1780s fashion followed, and Brighton over the next fifty years provided perhaps the ultimate example of the marked contrast between attempts at a classical social order and a barely restrained chaos whose uneasy juxtaposition opened wider chasms in late Georgian society.
The 400 yearly visitors of 1760 increased to around 11,000 by 1821, the 2000 inhabitants to nearly 25,000 in the same period.
To accommodate the former a whole range of speculative buildings appeared, largely the product of individual estimates of need and attempts at a quick profit.
While Brighton has a superficial symmetry of appearance when viewed from the beach, or in early nineteenth-century engravings, close examination shows almost the exact opposite.
There was practically none of the systematic planning and oversight which so characterised Bath and many other spas: that could only come from the implementation of a single plan by a great landowner and architect, and Brighton had a few of these.
Its available agricultural land, the Tenantry Laines spread out along the downland valleys, was largely in the form of scattered individual strips and, although attempts were made to consolidate holdings in the 1780s, these were still on a small scale.
The buildings of the years of expansion reflect the wholesale exploitation of a myriad of individual properties; only in recent years has the preservation of the  medieval field pattern by direct overbuilding been removed as ‘urban renewal’ has occurred.
The result was urban chaos but a richness of building styles which redeemed Brighton from the overbearing formality of its more classical contemporaries.
Its jewel, albeit a controversial one, was the Prince Regent's reconstruction of his modest coastal seat and its metamorphosis into the Royal Pavilion at the hands of John Nash in the decade after 1815.
As a monument to extravagance of taste it has few equals in England, although it may not entirely justify the descriptions of a series of upended turnips stuck on boxes or St  Paul's pups which two irreverent contemporaries, William Cobbett and Dean Smith, bestowed on it.
Around it and along the sea-front the more fashion-conscious or sycophantic aristocracy and gentry provided their own residences, usually in a much more restrained classical idiom, such as that of Royal Crescent.
Only in the latter days of the town's life as a centre of county magnificence were any real attempts made to establish an overall urban form and both resulted in failure, at least as financial ventures.
By the 1820s Brighton had sprawled along several miles of cliff top, almost to the edge of its parish boundaries.
Charles Augustus Busby of the Busby and Wilds partnership that had already provided a number of distinguished buildings in Brighton laid out a plan on the west side for a new, almost self-contained, estate with its own church and markets, to be called Brunswick Square.
It was built successfully but two attempts to emulate and balance it soon ran into difficulties.
At the town's eastern extremity the idiosyncratic Thomas Read Kemp began in 1823 to create another self-contained unit, Kemp Town, to centre round a magnificent crescent.
Wilds and Busby laid out the general design and the facades of the houses; others were left to finish the interiors and tidy up the edges.
The facades of 106 houses were rapidly built, but it was another twenty years or more before many of the interiors were begun and Kemp Town stayed for some time rather like a giant film set with the image of grandeur propped up by heavy wooden beams.
Kemp went bankrupt, and there were insufficient purchasers to complete the grand design.
A similar fate befell Adelaide Crescent, begun in the  west in 1830 to complement Kemp Town by Sir Isaac Lyon Goldsmith on his Hove estate.
For all their mock grandeur, Regency Brighton's buildings were poorly executed and when George IV (as ‘Prinny’ had become) died in 1830 he left a rather tatty urban memorial on the Sussex coast.
Yet the facade of high fashion was highly developed by the time of his death; there were over three miles of carriage road along the cliff top and a promenade at the foot for the elegant and aspiring to see and be seen during the height of Brighton's mild winter and spring seasons.
Conduct at the round of balls and concerts was highly regulated by a master of ceremonies, the fashionable chapels were packed by elegant preachers, quieter walks could be had amongst the groves of Queens Park, opened in 1829.
To service this phenomenal demand, however, another Brighton emerged.
Such an economy was highly dependent on a vast mass of skilled labour and a greater horde of the lesser skilled.
In the depressed countryside there was a considerable fund of labour to be tapped and people flowed from the uncertainties of seasonal rural poverty to the equally depressing conditions of the Brighton back streets.
Cramped into the narrow property boundaries of the old farming strips, the alternative Brighton was built rapidly with little or no conscious design or realisation of the longer-term implications.
Simple cottages of compacted chalk and flint with front walls the depth of a single brick were flung up in rows of squalid terraces with neither drains nor water supplies; what had been normal in rural Sussex soon became a trap of disease and hopelessness.
Little is still known of the designers and speculators of this part of the town's growth, save that they were often little more than smallholders or jobbing builders who saw the possibility of some quick profits on their small capital.
The most notorious of these streets, Pimlico off Church Street, was a derelict slum within ten years of its building around 1820, and by the 1870s it had to be demolished.
The cumulative effect was to make Brighton the fastest growing town in England between 1811 and 1821; the new inhabitants soon gave the resort an ‘artificial’ unhealthy climate to add to its more ‘natural’freshness.
A principal sea-side town had become a large and squalid  town by the sea; not only did fashion begin to desert it by the later 1820s, but medical opinion could no longer treat it with the blind enthusiasm of earlier decades.
Brighton set a pace which was copied all over Britain, usually, as in Kent at Margate, with more popular results.
Elsewhere in Sussex other attempts were made at resort development, not so much to provide rivals but to offer alternatives to those who preferred either greater seclusion or a more systematic consideration of health.
The earliest and most disastrous of these emulations took place in the isolated village of Bognor.
A London speculator of great fortune, Sir Richard Hotham, began work in the 1780s, ‘to render it a select and quiet abode, distinguished from all other places of a similar description’.
He invested £60,000 in his obsession with a venture which broke his health and gave him only £12,000 back.
Apart from the Dome, built as the focal point for Hothampton (a name rapidly forgotten) little else remains, for little was built.
Few came to share Hotham's enthusiasm.
Hastings was more successful in its entrepreneur; to accommodate a growing number of visitors, the Earl of Chichester had Pelham Crescent built below the cliffs, with the church of St Mary as its centre.
The contrast with the squalor of the old Cinque Port provided a rather romantic paradox.
But most noticeable was Hastings' neighbour, the new town of St Leonards, built by another London speculator, James Burton, a builder.
His son was Decimus Burton whose designs gave to the scheme a wholeness much more successful than any of the other attempts in the county.
It worked because it offered the combination of style and leisure which more refined sensibilities found coarsened in Brighton.
For the smaller group who wanted a Romantic wildness for their seaside interludes, one other place made provision: Seaford began in a modest way around 1810 to house less well-off visitors in its one sizeable inn.
An unknown speculator built a small terrace of classical elegance, but it was a good hundred yards from the sea, separated by the old harbour site, wild with grass, the home of grazing cattle and the dump for local refuse.
All in all, the grandiose hopes of the 1760s had petered out in the Sussex of the 1820s.
Apart from Brighton and St Leonards, Jane Austen's  ‘Sanditon’, set in Sussex, was probably more common, observed as it was with the author's customary bite:
The village contained little more than cottages, but the spirit of the day had been caught…and two or three of the best of them were smartened up with a white curtain and ‘lodgings to let’— and further on in the little green court of an old farm house, two females in elegant white were actually to be seen with their books and camp-stools — and in turning the corner of the baker's shop, the sound of a harp might be heard through the upper casement.
If the resorts brought fashion and income to a small part of Sussex they were partly instrumental in the steady opening-up of the county to outside influences.
Problems of access and transport remained until the 1750s much as they had for centuries, the roads miry and troublesome in winter, the tidal river valleys well-nigh impassable.
But the almost perverse acceptance of this backwardness began to wilt before the spirit of improvement which gripped much of English society after mid-century, although Sussex gave up its secrets only with a hard battle.
The growing number of learned topographies produced by the Georgian gentry's taste for travel rarely had much praise for the Sussex roads, however beautiful they found its landscape.
Daniel Defoe ‘came to Lewes, through the deepest, dirtiest, but many ways the richest, and most profitable country in all that part of England’.
It was Dr John Burton, however, who left the classic example of outside prejudice when he observed that the local roads bred two memorable creatures, ungainly spindle-shaped oxen and beautiful long-legged women.
Major changes in these conditions came with the ‘turnpiking’ of many of the major roads in the later eighteenth century, the creation of metalled highways by local trusts who paid the costs from tolls exacted on the users.
Most turnpiking was done on the north to south roads, although some cross-country in-filling occurred later; they were less new roads than improvements on old ones, designed particularly to ease the movements of goods and the aristocracy to their country estates.
Much of the initial capital was probably raised by local grandees like the Duke of Somerset at Petworth from the profits of estate management.
One side effect was, of course, an  increase in the traffic to the new resorts; from the 1760s a number of local coach firms competed on the London to Brighton run, with fares from 16s (80p) for an inside seat.
The early coaches went via Lewes but a new turnpike through Cuckfield in the later 1770s speeded up the journey considerably and the trip was down to six hours by 1820.
The new roads gave a fresh life to the old towns on their routes, with a considerable demand for labour, horses and fodder.
Coaches on the way to Hastings made their last stop for horses at Battle's George Hotel, where the ostler lived in a tiny cottage which still stands in the yard, to be roused by the bell outside his front door.
At the height of the turnpikes' use in the 1830s, 36 coaches plied the Brighton run, needing 1200 horses en route , and a comprehensive system had emerged from essentially local perceptions of changing need.
The resorts gave an undoubted boost to the opening up of Georgian Sussex but their importance is easily exaggerated and the turnpikes were probably more important in servicing and emphasising the continued status of the network of local market towns.
There were few changes in any of them as obvious as those which overtook Brighthelmstone, and their populations remained quite small, Chichester, the largest, having only about half Brighton's in 1801.
Nor was there a considerable shift in the direction of the services, economic, administrative and professional, which they provided for their territories.
Instead, most of them saw a steady confirmation of their existing position.
Defoe said of Chichester:
This city is not a place of much trade, nor is it very populous; but they are lately fallen into a very particular way of managing the corn trade here, which it is said turns very well to account.
Defoe was much more impressed with the vitality of Lewes, or even Petworth, ‘a large and handsome country market town, and very populous, and as it stands upon an ascent and is dry and healthy, it is full of gentlemens families, and good well built houses both in the town and the neighbourhood’.
It was this latter comment which indicates the most obvious external change in most of the Sussex market towns, their ‘gentrification’ both in buildings and in  style of life.
Not only the peerage but many of the more prosperous country squires in the eighteenth century came to maintain houses in their local market towns, to serve both the needs of trade and of society; as Joseph Seagrave remarked in 1804, ‘the domestic building in every part of the kingdom, is greatly improved within the last forty or fifty years; but in few places more than Chichester’.
Many still survive, the pedimented Marriott House in Westgate, and, best of all, almost the entirety of North Street with Nash's Doric Market House of 1807 as its focus.
In Lewes, the Pelhams built Newcastle House, now buried in the reconstructed facade of County Hall, and Amon Wilds designed Castle Place in 1810, sealing it with his Ammonite motifs, so familiar in his Brighton houses.
But refinement did not stop with the genteel residences, it extended to the social life of the towns they inhabited —.
a pattern of change and influence in considerable contrast to the more widely held image of the Georgian squire as a wine-swilling glutton intent largely on the pleasures of the chase.
Chichester was provided with a rebuilt theatre in 1791, patronised by gentry and officers, and served with a round of melodrama and comedy by Mr Collins's touring company.
This and other theatres elsewhere were at their peak when the gentry came in for the Quarter Sessions; for wives and marriageable daughters, there were the balls and concerts of the Assembly Rooms specially built at the back of the George Hotel.
‘Gentrification’ only went so far in most of the Sussex towns.
In few cases in the later eighteenth century did it extend to improving the housing of the urban poor, crammed in their squalid suburbs in Chichester and Lewes or in the back yards, behind the better houses, in Battle.
For the fortunate almshouses were occasionally provided, as in the six Percy houses in Brighton, built in 1795 in the Lewes Road, then well outside the town.
More emphatic and repeated was the steady attempt to refine the habits of the lower orders by repressing the more brutal of their popular recreations, an uphill battle in which many Sussex gentry were involved from mid-century onwards.
The Chichester antiquary and Baptist pastor, James Sparshott, left a powerful description of the more common pastimes:
On Shrove Tuesday the most unmanly and cruel exercise of ‘cock scailing’ was in vogue everywhere…
Scarcely a churchyard was to be found but a number of those poor inocent birds were thus barberously treated.
Tying them by the leg with a string about 4 or 5 feet long fastened to the ground, and, when he is made to stand fair, a great ignorant merciless fellow at a distance agreed upon and at two pence three throws, flings a ‘scail’ at him till he is quite dead.
Cock-scailing, bull-baiting, and the disguised gang warfare of street football, all came under attack from local justices of the peace.
In an essentially aggressive society the boundaries within which public violence were restrained became steadily narrower.
In Lewes, as in many other Sussex towns, the patriotism of the Bonfire displays, heightened during the wars with France, could spill easily over into a week of repeated apprentice riots, with the participants throwing bricks through the windows of unpopular employers or threatening personal violence and arson.
By the 1820s this concern for public behaviour had become less an attempt to refine the sensibilities of a ‘swinish multitude’ than an increasingly desperate fear of social upheaval produced by major threats to local economic life.
Depression
The agricultural base that had offered wealth and apparent stability to Sussex life was steadily weakened in the course of the eighteenth century.
It was the county's misfortune to have few real alternatives, holiday-making apart, to its dependence on an increasingly inadequate farming structure.
The iron industry was effectively dead by mid-century as England's economic centre of gravity shifted northwards to the textile and iron towns of the Industrial Revolution.
The bulk of the iron-making sites fell derelict, offering a romantic landscape but little else.
Battle and a handful of the Wealden centres managed to develop a small-scale alternative: making the finest gunpowder, perhaps the best in Europe.
It imported saltpetre from Sicily, used local charcoal and exported its produce over the bumpy roads to Maidstone, a rather hair-raising journey.
The industry  lasted until the 1870s when more efficient technology elsewhere replaced it; the great millstones now form part of the garage walls and garden decorations of Powdermill House and Peppering Eye Farm, south-west of the town.
It left very few records and, even at its height, seems to have employed no more than a handful of men.
Those who had previously found part of their income from ironmaking were thrown back on the less adequate resources of Wealden farming, although a small number of nomads continued to burn charcoal for the London market, camping in branch and sod hovels as they migrated from wood to wood.
The broad regional divisions with the county's agricultural structure remained more or less unaltered through the period and the local differences in prosperity grew even more acute.
Exact patterns of change will remain a matter of controversy for historians, as they were for contemporaries, but what emerges from the inadequate farm records and welter of subjective comment by biased and often condescending outside observers is a marked contrast between the fortunes of a few well-organised and prosperous landowners and the general backwardness of their counterparts and tenants.
In the later eighteenth century the problem appeared particularly serious because of the wholesale adaptation of arable farming in the Midlands and East Anglia to meet the demands of a rapidly growing population and the food-supply problems caused by the wars.
This was largely done by the process of ‘enclosure’, the breaking-down of the medieval strip-farming system and its replacement by relatively compact holdings of almost rectangular fields; it was not so much dependent on new farming techniques as on the more intensive use of ploughland and labour.
Enclosure proved profitable, but needed capital and organisation.
With a few exceptions along the coast (such as Seaford in the 1770s) it proved more or less impossible in Sussex where the land was largely enclosed already and the soil of much of the county ill-suited to highly profitable wheat farming; so there was little of the trauma produced elsewhere by the restructuring of the rural landscape.
One outstanding local example was the Broyle in Ringmer, 2000 acres of scrub and clay mire, an old deer park.
It was enclosed after 1767 at the behest of the Duke of Dorset  who acquired 700 acres as a result.
It was not quite the act of immediate robbery it may sound; rather than dispossessing local people of much-cherished common rights, it merely reinforced the long-drawn-out process of their gradual erosion.
As a local observer remarked before the event, ‘They seem to have now become totally disused’.
The enclosure turned the Broyle into the landscape of ploughland bisected by long straight roads that it still remains.
Much more frequent was the enclosure of waste land in the Weald by local landlords which, in the long term, displaced a number of squatters.
Where men like Bradford of Pippingford Warren attempted to enclose the remaining wastes of Ashdown Forest and succeeded, it was a  comparatively rare event; unlike the Midlands enclosure, which frequently redistributed arable land, the sand and clay of Wealden waste required wholesale draining and massive injections of capital before they could be used for profitable corn-growing.
The few who tried and succeeded stand out; most were defeated by the land itself, their lack of funds and deep local resistance to change.
One crop that seems to have flourished in the late eighteenth-century Weald was hops; the rapid expansion of the Georgian population produced an urgent demand for more beer, not only to escape the worst features of contemporary living but as a very basic foodstuff for the poor.
The oasthouses dotting the north-eastern part of the county are a tribute to this thirst, although, since hops usually paid a dividend only every third year, it was an uneasy base for an agricultural fortune.
The plants needed up to 3000 poles an acre to grow, a fairly intensive demand in itself on the exploitation of Wealden underwood.
When the government, concerned to organise all its resources against the risk of a Napoleonic invasion in 1801, organised a survey of the crop acreages throughout the country, Sussex produced very sparse and inadequate returns.
Battle and a whole belt of Wealden parishes produced no response at all; since the data were collected by the local parish clergy, the low level of response is hardly surprising, farmers as a rule having a dim view of requests for information which might lead to a rise in taxes or tithes.
Generally, the small Wealden farmers seem to have had little  incentive or commitment to improvement.
If they were landowners, they had insufficient capital, if they were tenants the local practice of yearly verbal agreements with landlords offered them little security for a return on any considerable investment.
By the end of the eighteenth century, the Sussex yeoman had become less of a symbol of traditional English independence than of a recalcitrant inbred backwardness, perverse in his outlook.
He had cause to be; a number of the clergy who compiled the 1801 Returns saw the improving larger farmer as a mixed blessing, likely to be more interested in maximising his profits than in keeping prices reasonable, ‘the cause of the dearness of Butcher's meat, cheese, etc. etc…. it destroys the comforts of the lower class of society’.
Against this gloom a few heroic individuals stood out, both for their ingenuity and their concern for agricultural well-being.
The Third Earl of Egremont, like Lord Ashburnham, took an almost daily part in the detailed management of his estates, building model dairies, attracting his tenants with favourable long leases and using, by 1810, one of the first threshing machines in Sussex, although this was to cause trouble later.
It was John Ellman of Glynde, however, who was responsible for the most significant advance in local farming.
Inadequate as its arable was, Sussex managed to build a considerable eighteenth-century prosperity on stock- and sheep-breeding, with an intensive use of downland and marshland grazing to complement the smaller Wealden pastures; the beasts were moved from one to another as seasons changed.
John Ellman, born in 1753, was largely self-taught, but he developed a technique of selective sheep-breeding, boosting the inadequate grass stocks in winter with artificial food.
The result was the meaty and woolly Southdown sheep, whose extensive use kept the local downland primarily as pasture, unlike chalkland elsewhere, which was largely given over to the plough in the later eighteenth century.
The great flocks of sheep and herds of cattle on their way to grazing or market locally, or in London, proved a marked contrast to the apparent poverty of many Wealden fields and Lewes, in particular, built a steady prosperity on them.
Another government survey in 1801 listed almost 350,000 sheep in Sussex (over twice the number of people), nearly  60,000 cattle, 63,000 pigs and 22,000 horses; in one area at least, the county's more progressive farmers had few external rivals.
Their prosperity depended, however, not so much on their skill as on a distinctly artificial market situation in the years around 1800 which even made Sussex corn-growing profitable.
The twenty years or so of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars produced a very rapid rise indeed in food prices.
It was a situation whose benefits went largely to the richer tenant-farmers and the landowners rather than to the ordinary yeoman or labourer.
Many of the gentry and aristocracy revised their rentals at the peak of this prosperity around 1810 and land values almost doubled as a result.
The Earls of Egremont and Ashburnham wisely ploughed much of the new profits back into estate improvement; others, particularly Sir Godfrey Webster of Battle, spent it on a round of pleasure that meant disaster when the boom eventually ended.
Even for the more careful managers, their decade or so of good fortune had far too weak a base to survive.
When agricultural improvers visited Sussex in the war years they had little favourable to say about the situation in general and the Weald came in for wholesale condemnation, although there was some disagreement about the details.
The Reverend Arthur Young was by far the strongest critic, particularly of the retention of ‘shaws’ of natural woodland as field boundaries, not surprising since they took almost an eighth of a field acreage of the Weald:
A system, of greater barbarity can hardly be imagined; the country being generally so wet, the means to air and dry it here used are, to exclude the sun and wind by the tall screens of underwood and forest around every field, and these being so small, a great number are so wood-locked, that it is a little surprising how the corn can ever be ripened.
At the same time that this mischief is done, the wood itself is (timber excepted) but of a miserable account, as any one may suppose, when he is informed, that these shaws have a fence only on one side, and consequently are exposed to be eaten by the cattle that graze in the fields; hence there is an imperfect system of wood, an injured one of corn, and wretched fences; by aiming at too much, nothing arrives at perfection.
Men like Young, a sycophantic admirer of Egremont, had little to say that was favourable about anywhere they visited.
It was not  Sussex backwardness alone that brought trouble but the collapse of the artificial prosperity across England when the wars ended in 1815 and were followed by a series of disastrous harvests.
Improvers and locals were plunged into a confusion both economic and wider.
As John Ellman described it:
General complaints are made by blacksmiths, wheelwrights, collar-makers and indeed of all trades that are much dependant on agriculture of the great difficulties of getting their last years bill paid….
I consider the distress of the farmers so great that nothing can be done to save many from absolute ruin.
‘Riot’
The crisis of confidence in the future went far deeper than the economic agonies of a restricted prosperity in society's upper ranks.
It combined with a pattern of events that rocked local life for the next twenty years and reiterated a strong belief in Sussex's particular backwardness.
The troubles had deep roots in the previous hundred years and represented a breakdown in much of the aristocratic social order which the classical forms of houses and estates concealed rather than coerced.
Social control depended for respect on agencies which proved increasingly inadequate.
One concomitant of the close link between landed patrons and Anglican clergy was a growing divorce between the church and people which was made worse by the generally lax state of the eighteenth-century diocese of Chichester.
When Bishop Bowyer conducted a visitation in 1724 he found widespread non-residence, poor and ruinous churches and an inadequate performance of formal services, by under-paid curates.
There were some individual exceptions but the state of the Church of England seems to have changed little in Sussex over the next ninety years.
Occasionally some provision was made for local needs, as when Bishop Trevor rebuilt Glynde parish church in 1763, but he was possibly a rare exception.
The expansion of Brighton provided a number of new churches but they depended for the clergy's livelihood on rented pews and the poor were  virtually excluded.
The clergy were not so much wicked or immodest as bound up too closely in the social hierarchy to have much direct contact with their parishioners.
Nor did the Nonconformity which had survived the later Stuart period serve much as a form of social control, except for the small numbers it served.
When John Wesley visited the county in 1773 he found support at Rye, as might have been expected, but little elsewhere: the locals were too fond of the smuggling and intemperance he preached so strongly against.
Where Methodism succeeded locally it tended to be of the brand, Lady Huntingdon's, which appealed most to middling townsfolk.
The revival of Evangelicalism in the later part of the eighteenth century was taken up by the groups whose passion for reform, restricting drunkenness and violent sports, were opposed to the whole basis of the Sussex labourers’ principal recreations; simple religious faith in fundamentals among ordinary people may not have been much affected, but organised religion was probably largely irrelevant to the pattern of daily life.
Where the church impinged it was as the representative of property and coercion rather than as a meaningful organisation.
Less widely organised but feared rather more was the operation of the machinery of justice.
The powerful position in which the landed gentry had established themselves on the Commission of the Peace served to deal with the obviously unacceptable infringements of the law, provided that wrongdoers could be apprehended.
In individual cases catching criminals depended on the usually less than willing readiness of the village constables to act; since they were chosen by vote annually from middling tradesmen and farmers they had little hope of dealing with many common incidents unless the rest of the community felt sufficiently outraged to support them.
In many areas even organised crime went unaffected, and the seasonal recreations of local people could pose a major threat only to be dealt with by the wholesale swearing-in of special constables, as the magistrates pointed out to the Home Secretary in 1835:
The inhabitants of the village…are annoyed and their property and persons endangered by a practice which has prevailed of late years of great numbers of persons resorting from Brighton to Patcham under pretence of  a holiday on palm Sunday filling the Ale Houses and Beer Shop, getting intoxicated, becoming riotous and creating disturbances in the village street.
In a contest which arose from such proceedings about five years ago a Man was killed.
The only resort in such cases was to the severity of High Court proceedings.
One major problem occurred repeatedly, that of smuggling.
The romantic charm of so much Sussex folklore has concealed the basic violence of smuggling, its support through many levels of society, and the fact that it was possibly the largest single local industry after agriculture until the repeal of protective tariffs in the 1840s killed the need for it almost immediately.
Sussex smugglers traded in luxury goods, particularly wine and tea, essential to the maintenance of genteel civility and it took rare, almost obsessive, members of the landed hierarchy to take a consistently firm line against it.
One such was the Duke of Richmond who found Sussex in the 1740s in the midst of what a number of local historians have rightly described as a ‘guerilla war’.
The authority or aristocracy and armed excise officers came face to face with the fact that a substantial part of the rural and urban population alike either connived at, or were intimidated by, the activities of well-organised armed gangs.
Policing the extended coastline all the time was well-nigh impossible, and few of the upper classes were prepared to face the tax loads an efficient preventive service would require.
Customs officers were shot dead in open conflict or ambush, an armed gang openly terrorised Rye in August 1747 and informers were beaten up or kidnapped.
A West Sussex gang, led by William Carter, kidnapped, tortured and murdered a revenue officer, William Galley, and his informer, David Chater, in February 1748, throwing the latter's body in a well in Harting.
The Duke did all he could to track down the miscreants, using his great wealth to bribe informers.
When the ringleaders were captured they were tried by a special Assize Commission in Chichester in January 1749; judges and witnesses were protected by troops of soldiers who were also detailed to prevent a feared rescue attempt by large bands of smugglers which did not materialise.
Six smugglers, including William Carter, were hanged together on the Broyle outside Chichester on 19 January 1749 and  their bodies gibbeted in chains around the county as a grim warning to other would-be smugglers.
The Duke's success achieved a temporary lull in the violence of local smuggling activity but the enterprise continued more or less unabated.
The law reports and local press for the next century made repeated references to armed affrays, and a large armed and mounted coastguard became a regular feature of coastal life, a ready source of special constables for panic-stricken magistrates in years of depression.
It came to be seen as yet another instance of the depravity of the Sussex poor, firmly pointed out in 1834:
Labourers have acquired the habit of acting in large gangs by night and of systematic resistance to authority.
High living is become essential to them, and they cannot reconcile themselves to the moderate pay of lawful industry.
The lawlessness inherent in such a situation was only one contribution to a scene of increasing social and political disorder which made a poignant contrast with the sensitive order of genteel life in Georgian Sussex.
Reaction to the overt corruption of much aristocratic politicking in the form of organised Radicalism had little consistent support in the area but its presence contributed both to the increasing strength of popular protest and to the fierceness of the gentry's reaction to any form of mass criticism.
It is perhaps only incidental that one of the most distinguished fathers of modern political thought, Tom Paine, spent a turbulent six years in Lewes; he came to the town in 1768 as an excise officer, a job he combined with a local tobacco business.
One of the numerous tradesmen's debating clubs of market-town life, the White Hart Evening Club, provided the first forum for what became an increasingly devastating critique of the corruption of English government, and Paine was the most frequent recipient of the Headstrong Book, given to the most obstinate debater at each meeting.
When the local excise officers, oppressed by smugglers and low pay, persuaded him to present their case for improvement he was dismissed and left for America.
As the apostle of revolution against unjust government he became the bête noire of the Sussex establishment, burnt in effigy by  the very groups whose conditions he hoped to improve in a series of loyalist demonstrations in local market towns during the 1790s.
There was virtually no support in Sussex for the French Revolution when it broke out in 1789, and the wars which followed produced a widespread patriotic fervour which was matched by an equal growth in exploitation and popular desperation as the twenty years of conflict had deeper affects on local economic life.
The most obvious impact was in directly military terms since the county stood yet again in a front line of European conflict and this led to a growing strain on the traditional method of local defence, the county militia.
The European Wars of the mid-eighteenth century had seen the militia revived from its moribund state, but the quota of men and equipment on each Sussex village became a heavy strain.
Patriotic fervour expressed by burning effigies tended to stop short of much deeper involvement and although 14,102 men were liable to be called up by 1805, another 9630 claimed exemption.
Some discounted themselves by obvious self-mutilation, such as chopping off the top joint of a finger, while others managed to find substitutes by bribing members of the lower orders.
This was understandable in the fear of being sent for service abroad, and there were riots in 1778 when enforced recruitment was tried.
Even in the peak of recruiting in 1800, a substantial number of men were sent home at the behest of the Duke of Richmond, to stop the harvest from being spoilt.
Equally ambivalent were local attitudes to the wholesale billeting in Sussex of regular troops and other county militias during invasion scares.
When the Surrey militia descended on Rye and Winchelsea in 1793, the local publicans promptly went on strike and the only answer was the construction of special barracks.
These buildings became a common feature of the market towns as the numbers of soldiers increased; at one stage there were 15,000 troops in Brighton alone and large contingents in most of the other towns.
Apart from the problems of provisioning they brought additional difficulties.
Although as far as can be established they were not as licentious as myth has claimed, their presence increased the risk of drunkenness and brawling.
Worse still, the camps were breeding  grounds for fever, and Battle in 1809 suffered severely from a typhoid outbreak which began in its barracks.
The most controversial feature was the building of new fortifications at considerable cost and, as it proved, an almost total waste of money and effort.
On the eastern extremity of the county, the Royal Military Canal was built in 1804 from Rye to Shorncliffe in Kent; its function was not for transport but to provide a moat across the flat marshlands where invasion was most expected.
Similar fears led to the construction across Pevensey Levels and eastwards of the Martello Towers (an anglicisation of the Italian ‘Mortella’).
Work commenced in 1805 and continued long after the massive French defeat at Trafalgar.
Sussex had forty-seven of the 103 built in England, spaced at 600-yard intervals to provide a cross-fire from the cannon mounted on top.
Only ten of them now survive, the rest having succumbed to the sea.
when the wars finished in 1815, the greater part of the military presence in Sussex was soon withdrawn; the towers were left to crumble and much smaller garrisons of troops remained in the principal towns, both for ceremonial duties and as a deterrent to the possibility of physical violence among the growing population.
For reasons still unclear to historians, the population of England began to increase rapidly after 1750.
The 60,000 or so people living in Sussex in the sixteenth century had become 160,000 by 1801 and 260,000 by 1831.
The rise in overall population was actually lower than it might have been.
For all the increase, over 21,000 people left Sussex altogether in the first thirty years of the nineteenth century.
Although the growth of Brighton accounted for some of this expansion, most of the burden fell on an economic base too narrow to cope adequately, there being few alternatives to agriculture.
Since 1601 there had been a system of parochial poor relief designed to cope with a small residue of the aged and unfortunate, financed by occasional and relatively infrequent rates on the principal landowners, and given sometimes in cash, frequently in kind.
Some parishes with a larger problem maintained workhouses or poorhouses, ranging from relatively well-run institutions to vermin-ridden dumps for the poor and insane.
The system worked well enough in a society where ‘poor’ meant eighty per cent of the  population and harshness was common.
It began to break down by the 1790s when the pressure of a growing population and insufficient work meant that over a fifth of the labour force was virtually permanently unemployed.
Every Sussex parish adopted its own temporary expedients, gradually to be woven into a complex ‘system’ of permanent relief with 37,000 regular recipients by 1801.
The county had the highest poor rates in England, the highest per capita expenditure and the lowest proportion of aged and infirm amongst its paupers.
An agricultural labourer in full employment earned about £28 a year in 1797, which bought a diet of bread and not much else.
More or less universal was the practice of allowing cash or kind allowances to married men with children, to bring their basic earnings up to a bare living; in return they could be hired out in gangs, work on the roads, or if the critics are to be believed, do nothing.
When the end of the wars deflated the artificial boom the general situation deteriorated rapidly, with a steady series of bad harvests after 1815.
Poor rates mounted, and many magistrates and overseers continued their moral obligations but in a spirit of growing hopelessness.
The labourers were drawn into a pattern of early marriages, large families and demoralisation which expressed itself in a growing surliness and a readiness to explode into violent, but contained, protest.
When Stephen Shoesmith and the labourers of Bexhill were refused additional payments by the Battle justices in 1821, they stormed the George Hotel to press their demands.
The ‘riot’ was easily dispersed by the local gentry but it was one of a growing number of incidents.
It is easy at this distance in time to explain the pattern away as an inevitable feature of the wider transition from one form of economy to another, but there can have been little pleasure for families like the Eldridges or Mepkins of Battle whose members appeared regularly in the poor-relief accounts over several generations.
Discontent simmered and a new element, political Radicalism, appeared in the shape of peripatetic agitators, critics like William Cobbett who spoke to crowded meetings on his ‘rural rides’ through Sussex in 1825.
In many ways the movement was a distant bogey but it worried many landowners whose rent rolls were hit by the heavy  load of poor rates, now a quarterly impost almost everywhere.
Some tried specific local remedies; the Earl of Chichester reformed Falmer in the 1820s, denying relief to all but the infirm and forcing the labourers to work or leave.
At Petworth, Lord Egremont instituted a ‘voluntary’ emigration policy, ‘shovelling out paupers’which set people up in a new life in Canada, 1456 of them in five years.
But these were local efforts and as landlords, tenants and labourers were locked in a situation whose extent was only just becoming apparent, endemic poverty came to be seen less as the will of God than as a widespread indication of human failure.
A new urgency came when the depressed labourers exploded into protest in the autumn of 1830, part of troubles that swept much of England in a few months.
The ‘Captain Swing’ riots began in Kent and spread to Sussex in November.
In two months Sussex saw 103 separate incidents, two-thirds of them in the eastern half where the restrictive paternalism of the great landowners was less pervasive than in the west.
The most common form of protest was arson, particularly damaging in view of the rich and dry stacks of the harvest just gathered.
Only in rare cases was there personal violence, although not a few farmers received threatening notes, often from illiterates with individual grievances.
Many of the actions were symbolically linked with older rituals, often used in the past to give the demands of the participants an acceptable face.
On 5 November the labourers of Brede, where the Sussex riots began, demanded an increase in their wages, to which the farmers agreed, and then carried Abel, the overseer of the poor, out of the parish in a cart followed by 300 men.
Apart from his injured feelings, little harm was done but subsequent protests became more violent and many landowners panicked.
The landowners' letters to the Home Secretary revealed the extent to which they were initially unable to accept that their labourers were more than usually discontented; according to the more alarmist gentry, ‘travelling incendiaries respectably attired’ were racing round the area in fast carriages, firing incendiary pellets from slings or crossbows into haystacks.
It was one of the more bizarre pieces of colouring but the spread of the riots indicated that the problem was even more fundamental.
While  the Duke of Richmond and a few others remained calm, seeing the essentially limited nature of the outbreaks, some landowners, like Sir Godfrey Webster, temporarily returned from exile, thoroughly enjoyed themselves galloping around the country at night with troops of dragoons or coastguards to hunt down troublemakers.
Despite claims of outside political intervention and an inflammatory speech by Cobbett at Battle the riots were essentially spontaneous local outbreaks with distinct objectives, particularly the modest raising of wages, which was largely successful, with many labourers receiving another 2s a week.
Repression followed, in the form of a special Winter Assizes at Lewes; fifty-two men and women were tried, one was executed, seventeen transported to Australia, sixteen jailed and eighteen acquitted, sentences rather less severe than in many other counties.
The crisis had wider effects, and the old techniques of social control had to be revised for rural England.
The next few years saw a number of sporadic attempts by the gentry to defuse the situation, with a limited provision of allotments to enhance the self-sufficiency of the more respectable labourers.
An agricultural commune was established at Lindfield but seems to have been short-lived, and Lord Chichester helped 300 people to emigrate.
But these were only partially successful and a much more systematic assault on the question of poverty came from the capital, with a mixed reception from the local gentry.
The new Whig government of 1832 instituted a Royal Commission on the Poor Laws whose agents pieced together the first really comprehensive picture of the situation and a single answer to it.
Eighty-five Sussex parishes received a questionnaire with a number of queries specifically aimed at the 1830 troubles.
Strong among the answers from the Rape of Hastings was blame for infiltration from Kent and the continued presence of ‘wantonness, spleen or illwill’.
Particular opprobrium fell on the new Beer Shops (inaugurated in 1830) which were:
resorted to by the most abandoned characters — poachers, smugglers and night depredators who pass their time in playing at cards for the expenses of the night, in raffling for game and poultry, and concocting plans for future mischief…and not one in ten sells home-brewed beer.
These radical discussions during gang labour on the roads, and smuggling paled into insignificance when compared with the worst of all seen by the investigators, the widespread encouragement of idleness and vice by regular poor relief in cash.
1834 saw the legal end to this practice (at least in theory) when Edwin Chadwick drafted, and Parliament passed, the Poor Law Amendment Act.
Henceforth, unreformed parishes were to be grouped into Unions, with Boards of Guardians directing policy, and relief was to be refused outside the workhouse.
Despite the myths which surround the Act, it turned out in the long term to be quite efficient and reasonably humane, but the threat of transition sparked off another series of troubles in Sussex, the last concerted fling of desperation.
Despite the trials of 1830 trouble had continued, particularly in the east, where labourers' trades unions had met in Lewes, Uckfield, Seaford and Rye to keep up pressure for higher wages, placarding the towns with posters.
But this activity was less influential than the rumours which began to circulate about the New Poor Law.
What little the labourers often had they sought to preserve, supported frequently by local tradesmen and small farmers who feared the end of their contracts with the parish overseers.
Matters came to a head when the central government began to form the Unions, a process more important in the east of the county than the west where much reform had already taken place.
The assistant commissioner reported troubles with the farmers, but much more with the labourers.
In May 1835, the relieving officer of the new Chailey Union was set on by thirty men in Ringmer, demanding ‘money or blood’; they got their relief in cash instead of the food tickets he offered.
In July, Tilden Barham, the Battle relieving officer, was carried out of the parish as his Brede counterpart had been in 1830, a fate shared with the officer at Willingdon, who was led out by jeering women and children.
Although there were some other demonstrations and arson, particularly at Seaford, the scale of these new troubles was much more confined.
The most serious was at Steyning where the real hopelessness of the labourers became apparent.
When the guardians proposed moving some families to Henfield, a few miles away, a fight broke out which could  only be stopped by troops from Brighton.
At his subsequent trial, Benjamin Hayler, a 23 year old labourer, married with two children, gave one of the rare insights historians have into the individual perceptions of the poor:
We were in our own parish and had never been to Henfield at all…we said we would obey the law, if they would show us any part that empowered them to take a man from his own poorhouse and put him into one of another parish.
He and the others got six months' hard labour — the repression in 1835 was much gentler than in 1830 because the problem was so limited.
The scale of poverty in Sussex meant that the new poor law had to be introduced slowly although the transition was no less painful.
For a short while, the threat drove some Sussex labourers to pull free of the restrictive local consciousness and join the mainstream of English social protest in the 1830s.
In 1835, a year after the persecution of the Tolpuddle Martyrs in Dorset, the ‘United Brothers of Industry’ or ‘Agricultural Labourers’Conjunction Union Friendly Society' appeared in the east of the county.
With headquarters at Sedlescombe it claimed a string of branches stretching from Seaford to Dover, although it was strongest in the triangle bounded by Battle, Rye and Lydd.
For a while it organised mass meetings outside Eastbourne and Rye and sought to push up wages during the harvest season.
The movement collapsed, however, when the local farmers threatened to lock out any labourer who joined it and the leadership split between the militants and the more timid:
We invoke the name of Omnipotence, humbly imploring his power and approbation; to our countrymen we say, cease from your ribbons and banners; support party struggles no more; leave them to die, to exhaust themselves; support those men of all parties who will espouse and maintain the good old rule of Christianity…we must ourselves be the great instrument of our regeneration.
For a while, Sussex men were linked in spirit and organisation with the radicals of Birmingham and London, a pattern which continued into the 1840s with Chartist marches in Brighton.
But the wider appeal failed, largely because local men were still too rooted  in the past.
Some individual protests continued when the mass subsided.
At Icklesham in 1838 a disgruntled individual, never caught, shot at the local magistrates and sporadic arson continued throughout the 1840s.
Sheep-stealing swelled in spurts —.
over fifty disappeared from Hurstmonceux alone in a couple of weeks in 1838.
There was one deterrent, the formation of a new rural police force in 1839.
But this was limited to the eastern half of the county since the Lord Lieutenant, the Duke of Richmond, felt that it would interfere with the traditional authority of the magnates, and local opinion in the west deferred to this view until 1856.
Sussex labour lost its collective voice, submerging into the sullen secretiveness, ‘We wunt be druv’, which amazed and entranced late Victorian writers.
The last fling came when the Lewes Bonfire Boys fought a pitched battle in 1847 with troops and the Metropolitan Police after Lord Chichester had read the Riot Act.
The following year, the local middle classes organised the new Bonfire Societies and controlled popular effervescence became a tourist attraction.