

SHE
NOVEMBER 1992 £1.50
Ever been conned in love or in life?
How to become a better judge of character
‘I'd kill for some chocolate!’
What your food cravings really mean
Are you too sexy for your job?
WE'LL MAKE YOU FEEL SO YOUNG
Bring on the big 0s.
Turning 30, 40 or 50 can be the start of something great Sex with a younger man — it ought to be on prescription!
Why we still think men are better than us
Could their Ecstasy be your agony?
The issue no family can afford to ignore
The cohabitation crunch Marry at leisure, repent in haste
ALL ABOUT SHE
Marriage has been much on our minds in the SHE office of late.
Features assistant Jayne Dowle, 24, married sound engineer Dave Elliott in a humanist (strictly non-religious) ceremony for which she wrote her own marriage vows.
Because a humanist marriage is not legally recognised in Britain, Jayne and Dave went through a civil ceremony first.
What they did not do is cohabit in advance of the wedding, which could well be a good thing if we choose to take seriously a recent report which says cohabitees who subsequently marry are 60% more likely to divorce than those who marry without first living together.
At about the same time as Jayne and Dave were tying the knot, creative director Nadia Marks was limbering up for the 20th anniversary of her wedding to writer husband Graham, whom she met at art school.
As far as modern marriages go, 20 years is quite an achievement.
And it gives those of us with a history of less stable relationships a certain amount of hope for the future!
Like Nadia, I married young — at 19 — and was divorced by the time I'd reached my mid-20s.
For nine years, I've been living in unwedded bliss with my partner Christian.
Marriage has certainly been on the agenda but as neither of us feel compelled to get wed on either moral or religious grounds, we simply haven't got round to it.
And it's quite likely that we never will.
The only complication, from my point of view, is how on earth we refer to one another—‘boyfriend’ isn't serious enough, ‘lover’sounds too exclusively sexual and ‘partner’, which is what I generally end up calling him, makes it sound as though we're in business together.
The truth is, for simplicity's sake, I sometimes find myself referring to him as my husband!
This month we explore the modern dilemma of marriage versus living together.
See page 120.
For the six months leading up to my 40th birthday last April, I felt decidedly morbid.
On the day I hit the big Four-O, the fog suddenly lifted and I celebrated non-stop.
It's funny how emotional we get at the turn of a personal decade.
It wasn't so much the ageing process itself that sent my spirits plummeting — although greying hair and wrinkles weren't exactly adding to my self-esteem — as the realisation that time is marching on and I had better not waste a moment of it.
The turn of a decade is a time to reassess the past and re-think the future.
All positive stuff, as Madeleine Kingsley points out on page 82, if only you approach it in the right way.
Shopping as therapy?
Absolutely, says one in three women who took part in our Gallup survey to discover the stresses and strains of juggling it all and how women deal with them.
Sixtyone per cent of women sink into a hot bath in order to wind down, half have tried exercising as a means of relieving stress rather than simply getting fit, and one in four has a stiff drink when the going gets tough.
Two-thirds of women questioned say their lives are stressful and that they accept stress as an unavoidable part of life in the 90s.
One in three has consulted their family doctor during the past five years about stress-related symptoms.
A shocking 79% of women say men do not take their stress levels seriously, and only half believe their partners help enough around the house.
Our survey also discovered that the majority of women work to live rather than live to work, thus dispelling the myth of the selfish working mother.
When asked which of all their various roles gave them the greatest satisfaction, 47% opted for being a mother, 22% simply being themselves, 15% being a partner/lover and just 10% being a working woman.
Life may be stressful but you're handling it magnificently.
Ninety-three per cent of women believe themselves to be fairly or very successful at balancing all the roles demanded of them.
I've always thought that women were great copers and now you've confirmed it.
Three cheers for jugglers everywhere!
Linda Kelsey 
NEXT MONTH'S SHE
Oh no, he's having a mid-life crisis.
Social confidence for the newly single.
The flying doctors who save sight.
Honesty, celebrity and the press — has the media gone too far?
The lovers in your head (not in your bed)
What a true friend should do for you.
Party dresses for under £100.
Don't celebrate anything until you've read our guide to party etiquette.
We'll do Christmas for you!
Our 26-page special section is packed with inspired ideas for stunning gifts, decorations and table settings, traditional and modern children's toys — and the easiest dinner you'll ever serve.
Plus Gold Glamour — your extra 36-page magazine.
DECEMBER ISSUE ON SALE NOVEMBER 19
HOW FEAR RULES OUR LIVES
Our survey shows that fear is taking away our freedom.
By Sharon Maxwell Magnus
Women in Britain are living in fear.
That's the finding of our survey, run in July SHE, on how you feel about your personal safety.
Approximately one third of you feel a lot more worried about your safety than you used to and would never walk home alone in the dark, while a quarter never use public transport after dark.
Even in the daytime, the majority of you feel worried if you walk through a subway or are in a multi-storey car park.
The precautions you take to make you feel safer often result in you restricting your life, following a self-imposed curfew, unable to go out unless you can be sure you can drive — or get a lift — back.
We may live in a free country but you don't feel free.
You feel scared.
But surely we're right to be terrified?
After all, the newspapers are brimming with reports of horrendous attacks on women, so the risk must be considerable.
Not so, says Helen Peggs, spokeswoman for Victim Support, which aims to support those people who have been victims of crime.
‘Young men are far more likely to be victims of violent crime than women and the risks of being raped by a stranger are very small indeed (approximately one in 25,000) but most women would put the risk at a lot higher.
There are several theories about why that is.
One is that women's fear of rape by a stranger is inborn; another is that crime reporting tends to focus on violent crime, particularly against women.’
During the week of July 20 to 24, picked at random, the Daily Mail reported 12 violent crimes against women and one against men.
The Daily Express reported ten against women and one against men.
Property crimes rated only two mentions apiece and yet crimes against both property and men are far more common than attacks against women.
‘People ought to be able to decide whether they want to take risks on the basis of information which gives them an idea of how much risk there is,’ says Helen Peggs, ‘but at the moment the information they get is often distorted.’
Her views are backed up by a 1989 Home Office report on fear of crime, chaired by Michael Grade.
The report found that there is a strong emphasis in crime reporting on ‘violent and unusual crimes and on particular types of victim (notably young women and old people)’.
The report also criticised the current boom in real-life crime re-enactments, which again tend to concentrate on the most violent crimes.
Ostensibly, the purpose of these programmes is either to elicit public help with solving the crime or to show how the police work.
However, sometimes, these seem less important than terrifying the public.
Indeed, according to our survey, 77% of you read crime reports in newspapers and 63% watch real-life crime television programmes.
However, 44% of you feel that these reports should leave the gory details out and 39% feel they encourage copycat crimes.
Although we might over-estimate the risk of crime, it has grown steadily since the last century.
Until the 1920s the annual recorded level was under 100,000.
By 1950 this had risen to 500,000, by 1980 to 2.5 million and by 1989 to 3.7 million.
This bears out the view of 77% of our respondents that society is more dangerous nowadays.
There is a host of theories about why crime has increased.
Some experts believe that the fact we have more material possessions these days means that there is simply more to steal — after all, car theft is the most popular form of theft.
Sociological explanations include the increasing emphasis on individualism in our society and the breakdown of family and community ties.
On the other hand, various practical reasons are cited.
New offences are constantly being created and the police point out that we are also actually reporting more crimes.
For instance, the incidence of reported rape has gone up dramatically in the last five years but this has also coincided with a change in police policy designed to give victims support and to take every allegation seriously.
Twenty years ago, a woman who reported a rape could expect to have her name splashed across the papers, her misery often compounded by the insinuation that she'd ‘asked for it’.
Now only the most outmoded judges believe that.
Similarly, reporting of domestic abuse doubled in the London area between 1991–92.
Could it be a coincidence that this huge increase came after the formation of a new police policy designed to encourage victims of violence to report?
Certainly, one theory as to why crime appears to be going up is that as a society we are more intolerant of certain types of violence than we were in the past.
For instance, domestic violence is now seen as unacceptable, whereas until recently it might have been considered a ‘private’ affair.
‘There aren't many men who would attack a woman on the street but there are plenty who would attack their wife or partner in the privacy of their own home,’ says Shirley Tulloch of the Community Affairs Branch of the Metropolitan Police.
As a policewoman, she feels that ‘you should take sensible precautions but that doesn't mean being so fearful that you have to change your lifestyle.
For instance, after that dreadful murder on Wimbledon Common, we didn't say to women that they shouldn't go there but that they should stick to main paths, with other people rather than alone.’
Although crime might not be as common as we think, there is no doubt that people who have experienced it find it changes their outlook radically.
‘It's as if the skin that separates you from those horrible things in the newspaper has been ripped away,’ says Alexandra Campbell, who six years ago was the victim of an attack in her own home.
She woke to find four men by her bed, who beat and knifed her.
She screamed and was saved when her brother, hearing the noise, lunged towards her bedroom.
‘When I read reports in newspapers I get terribly upset, because I know what it feels like, that those are real people experiencing those things,’ says Alexandra.
Now she feels she is ‘no more nervous than any other nervous person, but I've had to work at feeling safe again.
At first I couldn't walk down the street on my own.’
Alexandra points out that men often find it hard to empathise with their partner's fear of crime.
‘If you get the average man who doesn't feel under threat married to the average women who does, he can dismiss her fears.’
Sarah Clarke, who has been burgled twice in one year, also feels much more vulnerable.
‘You feel that no-one really cares, that if they can do that to you then they can do other things.
The thieves also went through my clothes and, although it sounds stupid, I hate the feeling that someone knows what underwear I've got on.
I resent the fact that now I worry if I'm travelling late by bus.
I'm going out tonight and I'm already worried and it's only morning!’
Sarah's fears are not unusual.
The 1989 Home Office report found that victims of burglary become more fearful of street crime as well.
It's as if having been a victim once, you suddenly realise you could be vulnerable again.
So what could be done both to protect us from crime and to make us less fearful?
Eighty per cent of you feel that having more police officers on the beat would certainly alleviate your fears.
And 70% would like to see more conductors on buses and guards on trains.
The Metropolitan Police says that it and other forces have increased ‘sector’ policing — putting an office in charge of a small area where he or she gets to know everyone.
It is hoped that this will make people feel safer and encourage them to report crimes.
But on the downside, many bus companies have cut conductors from more and more services.
‘We have to keep costs to a minimum and one way to do that is to have driver-operated buses on some routes,’ says Morag Petrie, press officer for London buses.
Her advice is for women on driver-only buses to sit near the driver, a request that isn't always possible and doesn't necessarily increase your feeling of security.
So is there anything you can do to feel safer?
Carrying a rape alarm will certainly give you confidence that you can do something if you are attacked.
Similarly, taking self-defence classes will not only give you confidence but could actually help if you were attacked.
Recent US research has shown that women who resist assault, either by showing aggression or physically fighting back double their chances of avoiding rape.
These are things that every woman can do.
The question is whether, in a society that's meant to be as free for women as for men, we should have to.
89% were allowed to walk to school as a child.
Only 33% of you let your child do the same.
74% took public transport alone as a child.
Only 28% of you let your children do this.
82% believe our society is increasingly violent.
49% of you are more afraid of driving alone in the dark than you used to be.
73% believe that increased unemployment has contributed to violent crime.
70% believe poor discipline is a significant factor and 66% believe violence on TV is also important.
49% believe the increase in divorce is significant but only 22% of you believe the decline in religion is a significant factor.
FURTHER SURVEY RESULTS
HEADLINES
Books for Giving is a present giver's delight — a compilation of the best books for Christmas with more than 200 titles.
We have 15 sets of books from the catalogue to give away — £100-worth of books for each of five winners and £50-worth each for ten runners-up.
Pick up your free Books for Giving catalogue at bookshops or call 071–834 5477 (ask for marketing) for a copy.
There are 11 categories of books to choose from: fictions, humour, children's, arts, sports, food and wine, gardening, travel, reference, biography and nature.
To enter the book draw, just send your name and address on a postcard, and don't forget to state whether you would prefer books from only one category or a mix of all (please give the age of child if applicable), to SHE/Books for Giving Offer, BA Marketing, Minster House, 272 Vauxhall Bridge Road, London SW1V 1BA, by November 30.
Look out for the Mexican Day of the Dead, celebrated on November 1 and explored in an exhibition at London's Museum of Mankind until next year.
Plus a sumptuous new book Mexico: Feast and Ferment by Tom Owen Edmonds (Hamish Hamilton, £25).
Dazzle, an exhibition of jewellery and clocks at the Royal Exchange Theatre, Manchester (from Nov 7) and National Theatre, London (from Nov 16), both until Jan 2.
Admission is free and the pieces are on sale.
The Phoenix Dance Company , scintillating at Aberystwyth, Hull and London during November.
Tel: 0532 423486..
One of the many clocks on display — and for sale — at the Dazzle exhibition
Did you know?
Nearly three out of four adults own a video recorder but only one third of women use them without any problems, compared with two thirds of men and half of children.
Domestic arts is housework,sex-care provider is a prostitute and a shoplifter is really a non-traditional shopper .
Or so says The Official Politically Correct Dictionary and Handbook (Grafton Books, £4.99).
Read it and be right-on.
Only 29% of British workers choose a salad for lunch — steak and kidney pie and fish and chips are almost as popular.
They care The RSPCA launches its first Cruelty-Free Weekend, November 7 and 8 at Regent's College, London, including vegetarian cooking, fashion shows and make-up demonstrations from Beauty Without Cruelty.
Tickets cost £12 per day.
Tel: 0403 64181.
The Evergreen Trust supplies cookers to Uganda and Zanzibar.
These countries have electricity but people can't afford to buy cookers, so still burn wood fires and stoves, depleting acres of precious forest.
If you have an old cooker to donate, or would like to help in other ways, call Janet Kelly on 801–668 1233.
Mencap is re-launching with emphasis on campaigning and promoting positive images of mental handicap (071–454 0454 for details).
People Join in the toe-sucking antics of Fergie and David Mellor without the risk of athlete's foot.
Blackpool rock-maker John Olsen is making sweet toes in red, white and blue.
Kim Basinger is in trouble with her neighbours.
She recently bought six giant maple trees to replant in her back garden but the crane hired for the job was so heavy the road caved in.
Angry neighbours couldn't get out for two days.
Spender star turned pop person Jimmy Nail is now planning to form a part-time band with fellow Geordie Sting.
GOOD BOOKS
WIG AND WISDOM
Controversial QC Helena Kennedy makes an impassioned and cogent plea for judicial change in Eve Was Framed (Chatto & Windus, £16.99).
She explores the smooth, subtle and sometimes staggering ways in which the law mishandles women as victims, defendants, murderers — and lawyers.
Because women often lack the means to pay fines, they are more likely to be imprisoned.
And while acknowledging that some women wreak inhumanity on others, Kennedy argues that jailed mothers are crushed by a double burden; not only have they broken the law, but they feel (as does society) that they have failed their children.
SUMMERTIME BLUES
A breath of sea air, summer fun and no ties is Barbara's prescription for romantic recovery.
But Leaving the Light On (Gollancz, £14.99) obliges its heroine to sift through the dark dynamics of relationships instead.
Barbara, jilted by her unfaithful boyfriend/boss, loses home and job in one unfortunate swoop.
She falls in with a tawdry crowd and finds her values jolted and sympathies unwillingly engaged.
Self-pity evaporates as she's drawn to playground attendant Billy, unhealthily in thrall to macho pack leader Len.
Catherine Merriman has rightly won laurels for this bitterly perceptive first novel of sex, friendship and power games.
TALES OF THE TIMES
Femmes de Siècle (Chatto & Windus, £11.99) is a beautifully produced anthology of women's stories from times past and present.
Collected by Joan Smith under an umbrella title that puns the phrase fin de siècle , half the stories remind us of what preoccupied women writers (including Charlotte Mew, Edith Wharton and Ella D'Arcy) at the turn of the last century.
Optimism and the call for greater opportunity are the keynotes of many of these tales in which servant girls are ill-used, wives spoiled and runaway adulteresses struggle to cast off bourgeois convention.
South African Olive Schreiner's Three Dreams in a Desert presents a Utopian vision of gender equality which, a century later, is still unrealised.
Nor, judging by the bravura new stories, do the women writers of the 1990s expect as much from the future as their forebears did: old age is portrayed as painfully grim and burdensome in Candia McWilliam's twilight home tale; the classy heroine of Emily Prager's Moonwalk still weeps over wrecked love and dreams.
True, we have seen the evil of fur coats (those in Lynne Truss's story bite back rather than coset the wearer), but we have yet to heed Helen Simpson's caution that even New Men may well be beasts in gourmet cook's clothing.
How much more positively our great-granddaughters will have changed the world by 2092 is another story.
LOVE THROUGH THE LETTERBOX
Griffin Moss is a contented artist until he receives an enigmatic note from Sabine Strohem, a stranger from a South Pacific island.
For reasons Griffin & Sabine (Macmillan, £12.99) cannot fathom, she has second sight.
Everything he draws, she sees as it unfolds thousands of miles away in Hampstead.
Sabine makes the initial contact in a correspondence that flowers into an exchange of life stories and, eventually, hearts.
This little tale is haunting enough, but it's the pictures that turn the book into an art treasure.
Nick Bantock is the Canadian artist who brings this long-distance love affair to life through a series of decorative postcards and real letters.
Griffin & Sabine leaves you wishing for a missive as exotic through your own front door.
STUNNING SUSPENSE
The Secret History (Viking, £9.99), an addictive tale of student scholarship, murder and cover-up in a New England college, unfolds with brutal elegance.
The narrator, Richard Papen, longs for entry to the college's charmed but destructive inner circle — a clique of privileged students fired by their classics professor's admiration for the ancient Greek mysteries of bucolic visions and violence.
But there's a terrible price to pay when the students decide to sample Dionysiac frenzy for themselves.
In Donna Tartt's hair-raising game of consequences sinister links are forged between learning and loss of innocence, academic excellence and arrogance.
She warns of thirst for knowledge tipping over into dangerous greed, and of youthful promise lost for one fatal flaw.
AND IN PAPERBACK THIS MONTH
In Her Master's Voice (Penguin, £8.99) by social critic Tama Starr is a witty demolition of the female inferiority theory.
The Lights of Manchester (Arrow, £4.99) shine upon Tony (Coronation Street ) Warren's cast of lovers and losers.
Tales of the Master Race (Minerva, £4.99) is Marcie Hershman's chilling début about small town tyranny in the Third Reich.
Martha, Jane and Me (Corgi, £5.99) bitter-sweetly records Mavis Nicholson's Welsh girlhood.
The Choir (Black Swan, £5.99) forfeits harmony when Joanna Trollope drives the organist into the arms of a soprano's mother.
ART BEAT
FILM REVIEW
PETER'S FRIENDS Kenneth Branagh's third film confirms the emergence of a major force in the British industry and one that should be active for many years to come.
At 32, the actor turned producer-director has proved that he has the clout to raise money for stage and screen and the artistic talent to ensure that it's well spent.
Peter's Friends is not only witty, intelligent and relevant, it is also completely different from Branagh's previous films,Henry V and Dead Again .
Its format, six friends locked into a reunion ten years after their graduation, and its analysis of contemporary concerns recall The Big Chill .
So too does its preoccupation with the shadow of death, looming in their own generation for the first time.
The host is Peter (Stephen Fry), a kindly, work-shy aristocrat who has recently inherited his father's stately home.
His guest list is headed by Mr and Mrs Branagh — Ken as a Hollywood-based sitcom writer with a faddy Californian wife (played by Rita Rudner) and Emma Thompson as the good hearted and love-starved spinster.
Peter's Friends (15) opens in London on November 13.
THE CRYING GAME Irish director Neil Jordan's latest film takes him back to his best territory, the shadowy world of terrorism, crime and sexual deviance.
His old associate Stephen Rea heads the cast as Fergus, an IRA activist who forms a bond of sympathy with a black British soldier (Forest Whitaker) he is supposed to kill.
When circumstances force a move to London, he becomes obsessed with the soldier's girlfriend (Jaye Davidson) with very unexpected results.
Miranda Richardson plays effectively against type as his cold-eyed colleague in arms in a film that retains its hard-edged sense of danger to the end.
The Crying Game (18) opens in London on October 30.
SINGLE WHITE FEMALE Films entirely devoted to murderous women are not exactly common but, when anyone does take the risk, the results can be rewarding, as Barbet Schroeder's white-knuckle thriller proves.
The acting honours go to Jennifer Jason Leigh, daughter of Pyscho star Janet Leigh, but she takes the role of villain rather than potential victim.
That slot is reserved for Bridget Fonda's software designer, a New York Yuppie with terrible taste in men.
When she learns that her fiancé is sleeping with his ex-wife, she advertises for a roommate and selects the seemingly sympathetic Leigh.
The film charts her transformation from soulmate to psychopath with relentless logic and a fine eye for creepiness and is only let down by its over-the-top climax.
Single White Female (18) opens nationwide on November 13.
The Gerard Depardieu Film Season starts with an interview with the charismatic Frenchman, and a screening of Cyrano de Bergerac .
It also includes TV premières of Trop Belle Pour Toi and Camille Claudel .
(C4, from Nov 7)
Look At It This Way is Justin Cartwright's adaptation of his own satirical novel about London life in the late 80s.
Tim Curtiz (David Dukes) is an ex-pat American who writes about a rose-tinted Britain for a New York literary magazine.
His commentary is contrasted with the backbiting reality of the City and advertising.
With Nathaniel Parker and Kristin Scott Thomas.
(BBC1, 3 weeks from Nov 22)
The Golden Years , an Arthur Miller play about the brutal conquest of the Aztecs by the Spanish, was written over 50 years ago, but never shown.
This debut performance has Ronald Pickup as Montezuma and Robert Powell as Cortez.
(C4, Nov 5)
TV CHOICE
The Hand That Rocks the Cradle An excellent role for Rebecca de Mornay starring as the nanny whose smile hides a multitude of potential sins.
With Annabella Sciorra as the housewife she schemes to destroy.
(Hollywood Pictures, November 3)
Basic Instinct The unabridged version of Paul Verhoeven's sexy thriller about a murderess with Michael Douglas as the policeman in pursuit and Sharon Stone as the lethal enigmatic beauty who steals his soul.
(Guild Home Video, out now)
Hook Steven Spielberg's lavish Peter Pan stars Robin Williams as the child grown into stressed-out middle age and Dustin Hoffman as an Anglicised Captain Hook.
(Columbia Tristar, Oct 26)
Medicine Man Sean Connery stalks the South American jungle as a crusty Scots scientist on the brink of discovering a cancer cure in this fast-paced adventure.
(Guild Home Video, Nov 12)
MALESPEAK
‘What's my ex got to do with us?’
BY ANDY BEVEN
‘She is bound to have longer legs, a sexier smile and better bedroom manners’
Sitting on the sofa with my loved one, browsing through the TV pages of the paper, I said innocently,‘A Room With A View 's on tonight.
I wouldn't mind watching that again.’
There was a slight pause and then my other half said, ‘I've never seen it.
You must have been with someone else.’
A clammy hand gripped at my intestines.
Shivers ran up my spine.
That ‘been with’ was significant.
Sharing a film with a third party, it implied, was tantamount to infidelity.
Now had it actually been infidelity — me having watched said movie from the back row of the local Ritzy with my bit on the side at my side — then I would have deserved whatever was coming to me.
But I was faithful — so why the sudden surge of guilt?
Hurriedly I glanced at the year of the film's release.
No matter how little else they tell you about TV movies they always tell you this.
Is it to avoid confusion with other films of the same name or is it to give hapless viewers an idea of who they were dating, or supposed to be dating, at the time?
As it happened, this picture was out years before my partner and I met.
By definition I must have seen it with someone else, but the fact that, at the time, our own coupledom was predicted only by Nostradamus was irrelevant.
To have shared the experience of Simon Callow's bottom with another was a betrayal.
For many women, it seems, the power of the ex continues from beyond the long-filled grave of romance.
It is understandable that the very existence of an ex, or exes, may be an unwelcome reminder of the mortality of relationships, but that doesn't explain why the ex herself is such a hate figure.
I agree that it would if I constantly compared her with my current partner, or wistfully mentioned her name from time to time.
It might if dust never gathered on the old photo albums full of the ex and I whooping it up in Corfu circa 1980.
I can see how those faded images might suggest sultry nights of Mediterranean passion even if to me they now evoke only memories of sunburn and Retsina hangovers.
But the fact is that the very lack of evidence seems to fan the flames of suspicion.
This confused me until I realised that the more shadowy the figure of the ex then the greater her power, because no-one can compete with a phantom.
A phantom is bound to have longer legs, a sexier smile and better bedroom manners than a real person.
And the more scared you are of her, the more perfect she becomes.
It's not long before an ex who in reality was a size-12 middle manager who played badminton and cooked a moderately engaging moussaka has become Super Ex — the international top model and cordon bleu squash champion with a masters degree in astrophysics.
The logic of this suggests that we blokes should introduce you to our exes just to show what perfectly normal, likeable girls they are.
But somehow I can see that not working out.
Some women find ways of diminishing the demonic power of the ex.
The wife of a friend of mine always refers to his as Doris.
At a stroke this reduces the marauding husband-kidnapper to an unthreatening figure of fun.
But it's not always possible.
Somewhere inside you may know that Super Ex is a stick you have created to beat yourself for imagined inadequacies.
Alternatively it may be that you hanker after some lost love and are therefore convinced that we are doing the same, when in most cases nothing could be further from the truth.
I can hardly remember why I stopped going out with some of my exes but that doesn't mean that I brood about them and their later and surely unsatisfactory relationships with men unable to hold a candle to myself.
Instead, I simply assume that there must have been a valid reason for the cessation of emotional hostilities between us and have no desire to resume them.
I don't suffer from ex-hatred myself, assuming that my partner must prefer me to any of her previous lovers or else she would be with one of them.
Only once have I had to put my indifference to the test by meeting an ex-boyfriend.
He was taller than me, handsome, an athlete of repute.
As I looked up into his steely blue eyes I admit I did wonder what disparaging thoughts he was thinking about me.
But I can honestly say that I never worry about him now.
It's just that Daley Thompson and Seb Coe will keep intruding on my dreams.
‘Chariots of Fire?
You didn't see that with me.’
BEAUTY NEWS
Cleansing is one area of skincare where you can save money.
We love the Aapri approach: seven good-value, gentle products with a luxurious apricot fragrance.
We have 130 sets (worth around £10 each) to give away: Gentle Facial Scrub to use weekly, Gentle Foaming Wash Gel, Gentle Cleansing Lotion and alcohol-free Refreshing Toner.
Name and address on a postcard to Aapri, SHE November Treats, PO Box 501 Leicester L99 0AB, by November 20.
The softly, softly approach to make-up has been extended to pencils, with flattering new ranges:
The best lip pencils are by Chanel (£11) and Givenchy (£7): both have a brush at one end.
Liplines fade with age, so outlining improves definition.
Use the brush to soften the outline, then pencil over lips before applying lipstick.
For fast, easy emphasis, try the blendable eye pencils from Chanel (£10), Guerlain (£7.50) and Shu Uemura in Harvey Nichols (£14).
Stroke across the eyelid close to the lashes, and from outside corner halfway along lower lashes, then lightly smudge.
‘Highly professional but relaxed and personal,’ said our impressed tester of Max & Co, a new hair salon in central London.
Talented owner Martin Maxey has created a stylish and friendly environment with first-class service.
Cuts start at around £36.
Tel: 071–245 0008.
‘The salon was relaxing, the staff pleasant and I really loved my haircut,’ was the verdict on Windle Hair Salon in central London.
Cuts start at £27.
Tel: 071–497 2393.
L'Oréal has selected leading professionals from all over the UK and Ireland for its Portfolio of Artistic Hairdressers.
We have compiled a list of those included — for a copy, send an sae to Beauty Dept, SHE, 72 Broadwick Street, London W1V 2BP.
A cut above the rest
BY SARAH CLARKE 
HOT TIPS
Taking to Water (July), in which Jeannette Kupfermann described her stay at a thalassotherapy centre, had a huge response.
Edwards of Westminster Travel is offering a special three-night package at the four-star Hotel Metropole in Italy, departing November 20 1992 and March 4 1993.
Priced £400 approx, it includes return flight, full board and mud-based treatments.
Tel: 081–904 2202.
Flaunt the new fragrances:
Feminite de Bois by Shiseido is alluringly woody.
From £20 for a perfume pen small enough to keep in your purse.
Rich, spicy and dramatic, Gala Loewe is our favourite for winter.
From £33.
If you like old-fashioned, powdery scents, then you'll adore Sublime.
Jean Patou's exquisitely bottled newcomer is warm and sweet.
From £33.
Giò is for extroverts!
This vibrant fruity floral scent from Armani is altogether a real sweetie.
Priced from £27.95.
Estée Lauder's spicy and floral Spellbound is bold and bewitching.
From £16.50.
Yardley's White Satin, a warm and feminine fragrance, has a new look.
A trial-size Parfum de Toilette costs £3.99
BEAUTY NEWS
handle with care
Clean up your act While some dermatologists argue that you can't beat soap and water for cleansing, others claim that it's too drying and recommend cleansing creams, milks and facial bars or washes instead.
The truth is that the best cleanser for you depends largely on your skin type and how much make-up you wear.
Creamy cleansers are most effective at removing makeup, regardless of your skin type (always use two applications for a thorough cleanse), but they do tend to leave a greasy residue.
This may not be a problem for drier skin types but if yours is oily, be sure to use a gentle toner afterwards or rinse with lots of warm water.
If you use ordinary soap and water, you are probably applying more moisturiser than your skin actually needs.
‘Soap temporarily changes the skin's pH balance, leaving a feeling of tautness,’ explains Dr David Fenton, a dermatologist from London's St Thomas's hospital.
Although this subsides after about 15 minutes, during that time you've probably applied lashings of moisturiser.
We therefore recommend that soap and water lovers opt for a less drying cleansing bar or facial wash instead, such as Vichy Aqua Tendre Transparent Cleansing Bar (£4.80), Clarins Gentle Foaming Cleanser (£10.25) and Neutrogena Facial Cleansing Bars (£1.89)
Roughing it Many of us believe our skin will look better if we slough off dead cells by using a facial scrub.
In fact, skin does this by itself, although a gentle exfoliator can leave it smoother and more radiant.
Problems arise when scrubbing is taken to extremes, particularly common among sufferers from spot-prone skin.
‘Acne suffers tend to exfoliate daily in the hope that blocked pores and spots will be prevented,’ says Dr Fenton.
‘But all this does is cause irritation and possibly spread infection.’
Don't use facial scrubs on spotty areas or if your skin is sensitive (ie it flushes easily and is prone to broken veins).
On normal skin, a mild exfoliator used once a week will do no harm.
RoC, Clinique, Synergie and Clarins have gentle versions.
More than moisture Less is best when it comes to moisturising.
‘Most women apply too much cream,’ says beauty therapist Janet Filderman.
‘Skin absorbs what it needs within around ten minutes, so any greasiness left after this means you're applying too much.’
Using an excessive amount or too rich a moisturiser on combination skin will congest it and lead to blocked pores and spots.
Try moisturising cheeks and neck but avoid the naturally oily T-zone (ie forehead, nose and chin).
If your skin is dry and you have to slather on moisturiser to soften it, check your cleansing routine before you buy a heavier moisturiser.
Harsh weather and central heating make skin drier and cleaning with water can exacerbate the problem.
Try using a creamy cleanser instead
The eyes have it Many women write to us complaining that they have puffy eyes.
Occasionally, this problem is genetic but more often it is caused by using too heavy creams around the eye area or not removing cleansing cream properly.
Use a light make-up remover specifically for the eyes and, if you like to use an eye cream, choose a light formulation.
We suggest Vichy Restructure Eye Contour Gel (£14) or Laboratories Garnier Synergie Bio-Contour Eye Gel (£6.29).
Use morning and/or night and dot a pinhead amount underneath and around the outside edge.
The lid is naturally oily and doesn't need extra lubrication.
Spot reduction Don't be too harsh on spots!
It's tempting to squeeze but by doing so you can cause infection and scarring.
Avoid over-the-counter medication containing benzoyl peroxide and alcohol — it dehydrates the area surrounding the spot.
Use a gentler anti-bacterial formulation, such as RoC Treatment Lotion (£5.95) or Samuel Par Formula B pen (£4.49).
If your problem is ongoing, ask your doctor to refer you to a dermatologist.
Louise Pearce and Marcia Menter 
HEALTH NEWS
Bouncing babies
Pregnant women whose babies are overdue may be better off being induced rather than waiting for a spontaneous birth.
One study of women whose pregnancies had run to 41 weeks or more showed that those who were induced were less likely to have a Caesarian.
Like mother, like grandmother: research shows that big babies have big grandmas, even though their own mothers may be small.
Constipated?
Get mad!
A group of constipated patients who were hypnotised then made to feel angry soon got rid of their problem.
Others, who were made to feel excited, also found some relief.
But a third group, induced to feel purringly happy, remained blocked up for longer than patients who had no treatment at all.
FACE, a new self-help group for women with hair they'd rather be without, aims to provide information and counselling about hirsutism.
Send an sae to 3 Prince William Court, Victoria, Road, Cambridge CB4 3NL.
Keep it up!
A gas which is usually found in car exhaust fumes might soon be used to cure a certain type of male impotence.
US scientists have just discovered that the gas, nitric oxide, is produced in the main nerve of the penis, where it triggers the blood flow which causes an erection.
Some men with permanently limp members may suffer from an inability to secrete nitric oxide, and researchers are now trying to develop a treatment which would stimulate its production.
They are also working on ways to turn off the gas supply in men who produce too much of it and, as a result, suffer from priapism — painful and embarrassing erections in the absence of sexual desire.
The Donor Insemination Unit at Sheffield's Jessop Hospital, urgently needs male volunteers to donate semen.
It has all the latest technology to help childless couples, but not enough first-class semen.
Willing men should call 0742 766333, ext 343.
One in five British GPs believes that homeopathy is better than Western medicine.
This is the astonishing result of a survey of 282 doctors, carried out by their trade magazine Doctor .
The GPs also showed a strong belief in other forms of complementary medicine: 90% think that acupuncture works; 80% believe in hypnotherapy; and 85% approve of both osteopathy and chiropractic.
More people claim to know more about a condition called gonaditis than about chlamydia — despite the fact that gonaditis doesn't actually exist.
The fake illness was slipped into a list of sexually transmitted diseases which Health Education Authority researchers showed to 1,600 people as part of an awareness survey.
They found that while nearly everyone had heard of gonorrhoea and AIDS, only a few had heard of the far more common chlamydial and trichomoniasis infections.
More than half a million people are treated for sexually transmitted diseases each year — and many more go untreated because they either do not recognise symptoms or are too embarrassed to go to their doctor.
But anyone can bypass their GP and go straight to an NHS GUM (genito-urinary medicine) clinic for immediate and confidential treatment — or even just for a sexual health ‘MOT’ between partners.
Three out of four PMT sufferers say that they overspend in the days before their period starts — the average ‘blown’ is £39 — and some women spend more than £100, premenstrually, on unnecessary extras.
HEALTH NEWS
‘I'd kill for some chocolate’
What causes this crazy cupboard love and is there a cure?
By Beth Weinhouse
For Sarah, it's a chocolate fit every month just before she has her period.
After a tough day at the office, Nancy covets a packet of crisps.
Debbie suddenly can't resist cheese — one reason she's slowly regaining the three stones she lost recently.
Most of us have experienced a strong, nearly uncontrollable urge for a certain type of food.
And while we've struggled to keep ourselves from the fridge, we have wondered why we long so intensely for one food.
Research is currently being carried out into cravings — why they start, what they mean and how to control them — and we can gain some reassurance and help from what has been learned so far.
Yearnings are as individual as yearners themselves, but nearly all are for foods which are high in sugar, salt or fat.
When was the last time you would have sold your soul for a stick of celery?
‘People just don't crave vegetables or a slice of wholegrain bread,’ says nutrition expert Audrey Cross.
This has been supported by tests: when a group of subjects was shown pictures of chocolate cake, they salivated; pictures of broccoli, however, had no effect at all.
But our cravings may not be as depraved as they seem — they start out as healthy needs in our childhood.
For example, breast milk is sweet and salty, so it makes sense that we're born liking these tastes.
With sodium, too, we may be fulfilling a need for this vital nutrient which controls the movement of fluid in and out of body cells.
Most animals will instinctively seek out salt when they need it, while people will choose to eat a packet of crisps or salty snacks.
As for yearnings for high-fat foods, these are the foods necessary in our very early years to sustain rapid growth.
But even when children outgrow their biological needs, their tastes persist as passions turn to chocolate, cheeseburgers, chips and milk shakes.
For the more sophisticated palate of adults, it's Häagen-Dazs ice cream and rich chocolate mousse.
Raiding the fridge is not a gender-linked activity, but cravings do seem to be more common in women.
And, although both men and women will seek fatty foods, we like ours to be packaged with high-sugar carbohydrates — such as sweets, cakes and biscuits.
When men crave, they usually want foods which combine high protein with high fat, such as steak and chips.
For years, researchers assumed that these preferences were learned, and that men simply thought it was more manly to choose meat over ‘wimpy’ treats such as cream cakes and pastries.
But it seems as though animals show the same preferences.
In one study, female rats selected carbohydrate-fat mixtures, while male rats selected protein-fat mixtures, which suggests that these choices may be purely physiological.
Menstrual cycles can set off specific urges.
When we suffer premenstrual symptoms, such as severe mood swings, our desire for sweet and starchy carbohydrates may surge.
Research shows that something as simple as a bowl of cornflakes can improve moods dramatically, one researcher saying that the dose of carbohydrate acted on women like a tranquilliser.
The lift is provided by serotonin, a brain chemical which is produced after eating starches.
It can cause those feelings of pleasure that people experience after a good meal.
And since serotonin levels drop just before your period, your body will look for ways to pump it back up.
Premenstrually, metabolic rates go up, with the result that our bodies are burning calories faster and want more fuel.
If we eat very high calorie foods, it's likely that some fat will be stored — one way nature prepares the body for pregnancy in case of conception.
We may also have a heightened sense of smell before periods, exaggerating any food preferences.
The food premenstrual women crave most is chocolate.
No-one knows why, but the theories range from the obvious — that chocolate is high in fat and sugar and it tastes good — to the more esoteric — that chocolate contains chemicals which act as antidepressants.
Once our periods begin, many of us crave food which is high in iron, such as red meat.
Is the body trying to replace the iron lost through bleeding?
Researchers say that there's no evidence for this, although it may be some conscious or subconscious nutritional knowledge at work.
As for the cliché about pregnant women lusting for pickles and ice cream, this has never been backed up by research.
Ice cream is high in fat and sugar, which would reflect the body's need for more calories; pickles are high in salt, and as pregnancy increases the blood volume, more salt might be needed to maintain the proper balance of sodium.
But there's little evidence to suggest that a pregnant woman's cravings reflect her nutritional needs any more than anyone else's.
Broccoli still isn't the object of desire.
Food preferences during pregnancy may also be caused by hormonal influences on the sense of taste.
In many pregnant women, this shows up in the form of food aversions — a strong dislike for dishes or drinks previously enjoyed.
Occasionally, some pregnant women want to eat non-food substances; baking soda, coffee grounds, even coal or chalk.
These unnatural cravings, called pica, may indicate a dietary mineral deficiency and are very rare.
All cases of pica should be referred to a doctor.
Although nearly everyone experiences an occasional craving, some people have them intensely and often.
Such people have been dubbed ‘carbohydrate cravers’ by researchers, but many now think that the primary craving may not be for carbohydrates but for fats.
Their reasoning is that, if people wanted pure carbohydrates, they would eat bread or pasta.
Instead, people crave foods which are high in both sugar and fat, such as cakes biscuits, ice cream and chocolate.
Again it may be chemicals produced by the brain which affect our moods, such as serotonin and endorphins, at work in these extreme cases.
By altering the brain's ability to absorb these chemicals, researchers believe they can reduce cravings and binges in women who have intense food desires.
These chemicals may be one reason dieters have so much trouble maintaining their desired weight.
After a certain period of time denying the cravings for fats and carbohydrates, the mind and body simply rebel.
The whole phenomenon of yo-yo dieting — losing and regaining weight — could be a cycle of withdrawal from and addiction to the pleasurable brain chemicals which some foods produce.
People who don't have a weight problem may simply not be as sensitive to these shifts.
Researchers found that thin people also experienced food cravings, but not nearly as much as those who were overweight.
Eating can also be an antidote to anxiety.
For some, it's the chewing itself that relieves tension.
Not surprisingly, the foods stressed-out women tend to crave are crunchy, such as biscuits and crisps, or tough and chewy, such as toffee.
For others, soft, smooth creamy foods, such as puddings, porridge and ice cream, are the most soothing.
These so-called ‘comfort foods’ may relieve stress because people associate them with pleasant feelings they had when fed these foods as a child.
(If you're in this category, turn to our recipes for sponge pudding and porridge in Cooking for comfort on page 168).
Other cravings are born of habit.
Many of us became accustomed to highly salted foods in childhood, for example, and so learned to prefer the taste.
It is a preference which is relatively easy to unlearn: when patients with high blood pressure are put on a low-sodium diet, within six to eight weeks many discover that the foods they used to eat seem unpleasantly salty.
To a degree, cravings also reflect cultural preferences.
A Chinese woman is unlikely to develop a longing for ice cream and chocolate, since dairy products do not feature in her diet.
And, to a large extent, affluence is a precondition.
In societies where people face a constant struggle against starvation and have a plain, unvaried diet, cravings are virtually unknown.
But when such people are exposed to a high-fat Western diet, they develop the same type of preferences as Westerners.
Scientists are studying ex-smokers, people with depression, athletes and those recovering from prolonged illness in an attempt to sort out the complicated physical and psychological cues which lead us to crave specific foods.
One day we may be able to satisfy all our food longings and still maintain a healthy diet.
Now that would be having your cake and eating it.
Healthy ways to handle cravings
In most instances, it's fine to indulge your food desires.
But some people do need to exercise constraint: diabetics, people with high blood pressure, those who are very overweight or who have high blood cholesterol, those who binge if a craving is indulged.
For these people, here are some strategies.
Substitute plain biscuits for filled or chocolate-covered ones; frozen yoghurt for ice cream; a banana for chocolate.
Try eating a small amount of a low-fat, high-carbohydrate food before each meal, otherwise you may stuff yourself in a futile attempt to be satiated then eat a rich pudding anyway, since all you really wanted was the carbohydrate.
If you embark on a diet, be sure it includes carbohydrates
Use low-sodium salt in place of ordinary salt at home.
Use herbs and spices to stimulate your taste buds instead of salt.
Try leaving the salt out when cooking vegetables — you'll soon prefer them without
If you crave carbohydrates or sweets
If you crave salt
Stress busters
If you crave crunchy, chewy foods, eat carrot and celery sticks, liquorice, popcorn, sugar-free chewing gum or fruit.
Vary your daily routes to work etc, so you don't pass bakers or sweet shops which trigger your cravings.
If you always crave the same food at the same time, change your routine.
Exercise regularly.
Active people tend to eat a lower-fat diet than non-exercisers.
To help resist temptation
GREAT EXPECTATIONS
What does John Taylor, the defeated black Tory candidate, teach his daughter about racial prejudice?
By Madeleine Kingsley
John and Kathie Taylor represent everybody's idea of the perfect mixed marriage.
John is a Birmingham-bred barrister of West Indian origin who will hit our screens early next year as the legal correspondent for GMTV's new breakfast TV programme.
Kathie is a doctor who tracks the source of illness outbreaks in the community and was raised in Cornwall by a Scots mother and a Polish Jewish father.
They have a four-year-old daughter, Laura.
See them in their toy-filled Kensington town house and you would assume they are a family for whom everything falls effortlessly into place — until you remember John's surprise defeat in the April election.
He had seemed certain to become the first black Tory MP, representing Cheltenham — Norman Tebbit had tipped him as the first black cabinet minister and there'd even been the odd hint that he might one day inhabit No 10.
Right up until ten minutes before the result was announced, John's victory seemed to be in the bag.
Only the last two ballot boxes overturned his lead.
So the reality is that, in the last seven months, the Taylors have had to make a radical reassessment of family expectations.
Westminster has not beckoned and, despite hundreds of encouraging letters, John is unsure if he'll stand again.
After the immediate hurt and disappointment, the Taylors say they bounced back with resilience.
‘I didn't cry,’ says Kathie.
‘In my work I am involved in life and death situations so, on the scale of things, I decided that losing an election was not a matter for heartbreak.’
‘Kathie and Laura have helped me to keep my feet on the ground,’ says John.
‘In 1987, when I was chosen to fight my first election at Birmingham's Perry Barr, I was on cloud nine, even though it was a safe Labour seat.
But Kathie put life into perspective when her mother telephoned and, instead of enthusing at my achievement, Kathie said, ‘The cat's had a boil on its head.’’
Exhilarating as John's 15-month campaign was, it also demanded considerable family sacrifice.
‘We'd always planned to have three children,’ says Kathie.
‘Four seemed too many and two not quite enough!
My mother had four children in six years, and we were a very close-knit family.’
But soon after John was selected as the prospective Cheltenham candidate, the Taylors concluded that there were too many pressures to introduce a new baby.
‘It clearly wasn't the right time to make any additional changes in Laura's life,’ says Kathie.
‘John was away a great deal, Laura and I travelled to join him in the constituency when we could and inevitably there was uncertainty and strain in the air.’
John adds, ‘There was very much a sense of us being on show.
Even Laura felt it.
After a particularly long photo-session, the photographer wanted one more shot and her patience gave out: ‘Hurry up,’ she said firmly, ‘I'm busy.’’
The Taylors wanted to include Laura as much as possible in constituency life, primarily so that she would not miss out on time with John.
But, in politics, even a natural desire for family togetherness can be misconceived, as John was baffled to discover.
‘We took Laura to one evening reception where she spent most of the time entertaining folk in the kitchen.
She was in bed by nine.
But someone wrote to say we'd lost their vote because they were so appalled by Laura's late hours!’
John discloses that there were also practical problems about adding to the family while standing for Parliament.
‘Exhaustion, for instance.
Love-making's not easy when you're driving back from an evening meeting in Cheltenham to reach London by 1.30am and you both have to be up early for work the next day.’
Like every other candidate, John accepted that certain sacrifices had to be made.
‘One was financial — loss of earnings, keeping a second home and campaigning expenses set us back a great deal over the 15 months.
We didn't go under, but it wasn't easy on our relationship.’
From John and Kathie's first meeting at a church Christmas party 15 years ago, it was clear that their partnership would prove one of idealism and challenge.
‘We knew we couldn't ignore the race issue.
We decided we'd confront it head on.
You have to.’
Within the family, John's father was the only one to express reservations, ‘and not because Kathie is white, but because she is a committed career woman.’
The Cheltenham campaign couldn't have tested the Taylors' stance on racial issues more.
John has always said that prejudice is hard to combat because it means changing people's inner feelings, ‘their hearts and minds’.
But he has had personal success at triggering such changes.
He once defended a racist skinhead who'd committed a burglary while on parole.
It was more than a legal victory for Taylor when the judge told the skinhead that it was only his brief's eloquence that had saved him from prison.
‘Thanks, mate,’ said the skinhead, extending a hand on the courthouse steps.
Meeting Taylor, he admitted, had changed his attitude to black people.
It was, therefore, all the more depressing for the Taylors to find colour more of a front-page issue than the fact that John raised nearly £1 million for Cheltenham's unemployed and for local crime prevention.
Or that, as a former Home Office adviser on the police and prison sentencing, women's issues and the family, he would bring a powerful voice to Parliament.
As soon as he was selected, Bill Galbraith, a Tory local, announced that ‘bloody niggers’ were not wanted in the town.
Later, an anonymous cartoon depicting Taylor with a bone through his nose arrived at his home.
‘As it happens,’ says John, ‘I have more respect for men like Galbraith who are at least prepared to speak their minds, than for those who smiled in my presence but protested I was ‘not a local man’.’
Kathie has never directly encountered prejudice.
Her nanny, though, was once stopped in the street by someone demanding to know how she could possibly have a child by a black man.
‘Plainly this was a daft comment based on ignorance,’ says Kathie.
‘Still, if it had happened to me I would have been angry.’
‘I don't think Laura is aware of racial prejudice yet,’ says John, ‘although she may come across it in the future.
But we want her to grow up with a positive attitude.
So much ignorance and pride gets in the way of race relations.’
Meanwhile John and Kathie are boosting Laura's bookshelf — and her positive self-image — with stories about mixed race and black children.
‘Laura will often point to an illustration and say, ‘That's like me.’’
As a mélange of nine nationalities, Laura should, John hopes, prove more understanding, tolerant and willing to learn about other cultures, ‘Which is a good thing for the future.
Laura is mixed,’ John adds, ‘but she's not mixed up.’
John stresses that, he is determined always to encourage Laura in her own chosen areas of ability.
‘My father, who was a professional cricketer, desperately wanted me to be a doctor.
It was hard to resist that pressure.
I also remember proudly coming home to tell Dad I'd been made head prefect of my grammar school.
All he said was that the other boys must have been useless.
I see now that it was just his way of keeping me on my mettle and making sure I didn't get big-headed.
Behind my back he was singing my praises.
Still, at the time I found it very demoralising.’
‘I hope we'll allow her to make her own mistakes,’ says Kathie.
As far as values are concerned, if Kathie could endow Laura with John's finest virtue, she'd choose ‘his determination and his optimism’.
John, in turn, would like Laura to inherit Kathie's ‘intelligence, of course, but still more important her compassion for other people and her gentleness.’
‘That sounds like a lot to live up to,’ Kathie says, with a smile in her daughter's direction.
COUPLES counsel
Sex wasn't a problem in Sarah and Tom's marriage — they just wanted confirmation that it was OK to do without it.
As told to Cathy Troupp
‘A lover is illicit — the whole point of being married, it seems to me, is that everything is above board and clean’
Sarah, 31, was an attractive, stylishly dressed woman who worked part-time as the manager of an interior design shop, and spent the rest of her time looking after her daughter, Zoe, aged two.
Her husband Tom, 32, was an economist.
However, she came for her appointment alone.
She quickly explained that she had come less on account of an actual problem in her marriage than because she wanted to ‘consult’ an expert.
‘Tom and I have hardly had sex since Zoe was born — once or twice, maybe.
But, the thing is, it doesn't particularly bother me.
I wanted to know if that was all right— within the bounds of normality, as it were ?’
‘You want me to confirm that something you feel is all right is truly all right,’ said the counsellor.
‘How would such a confirmation make a difference to you?’
‘Well, the received opinion seems to be that you should have sex and that it's not all right not to have it.
All the women's magazines go on about it.
They say that it's OK not to want sex just after your child is born.
But no-one says anything about what to do, or whether to do anything at all, when you simply don't miss it.’
‘And you don't miss it?’
‘No, but I suppose I'm a bit worried.
You know, why don't I miss it?
We don't even have sex on holiday, when from what some of my friends with young children say, that seems to be a time when they catch up.
I suppose, too, that I'm a bit surprised Tom doesn't seem to want to have it either.’
‘So, you are saying that, although you don't miss sex now, you are worried about it and wonder if you ought to miss it?’ said the counsellor.
‘Yes, that's about it,’ said Sarah.
‘And does Tom know that you have come to see me?’ asked the counsellor.
‘Oh, yes.
We agreed that I would go.
It's not that I've come on my own because it's something that is seen as just my problem, because as I said, Tom doesn't seem that interested either.
But I think he was too embarrassed to come.’
The counsellor picked up on Sarah's choice of words.
‘At the beginning, you indicated that the absence of sex in your marriage was not in itself a problem.
But just now you said that it is not something seen as just your problem.
Are you saying that, in fact, not having had sex for so long is a problem for you?’
Sarah blushed.
‘It feels so vulgar,’ she said.
‘And I haven't missed it that much.
But perhaps it's like, if you've never tasted a mango, you won't miss it either.’
‘Are you saying that sex between you and Tom was never very good, even before Zoe was born?’ asked the counsellor.
Sarah blushed again.
‘But I didn't mind that,’ she said, ‘it didn't seem important.’
She looked away.
‘I had a boyfriend before Tom.
He was called Richard.
It was never a serious relationship, really — I never took him home to meet my parents or anything like that.
But he was a very good lover…
I learned a lot from him, but I didn't love him.
Then I fell in love with Tom, who is everything I've ever wanted in a partner.
He's kind, loving and affectionate — we touch and hug a lot — and he's intelligent, reliable and very sweet.
He's wonderful!’ she said and looked at the counsellor like someone confessing to her girlfriend that she has fallen in love.
‘What I feel you are saying to me is that this previous relationship is something you don't want to talk about in front of Tom.
Is that right?
That you are wondering whether it is safe to come here with Tom?’
‘I don't want to hurt him,’ said Sarah.
‘Of course, my relationship with Richard isn't a secret, but it wouldn't be tactful…’
‘When Tom comes, we'll talk about him and you,’ said the counsellor reassuringly.
Tom turned out to be a charming, polite, affable man, perhaps slightly exaggeratedly so in the counselling room, to cover up his embarrassment.
It was clear that he and Sarah could not easily talk to each other about sexual issues.
When the counsellor asked him how he felt about not having sex, he replied that he thought that sex was often ‘overblown’ and that, anyway, he did not want to bother Sarah with his attentions, because she had so much else on her plate.
‘Sarah is a wonderful woman,’ he said.
‘Oh, Tom,’ Sarah said, but he continued, smiling at her, ‘No, no, I want to put this on record.
You are beautiful, stylish and warm, and a fantastic mother, a brilliant organiser and an attentive, loving wife.
What more could any man wish for?’
He turned to the counsellor.
‘Now I suppose you are going to say that I have not mentioned the word lover, but I always think it's ludicrous to call one's wife one's lover.
A lover is illicit — the whole point of being married, it seems to me, is that everything is above board and clean.’
The counsellor said, ‘You are describing Sarah in a very loving and respectful way — but you sound angry when you say that you expect me to pull you up for not describing her as a lover, too.
You say a lover is illicit.
Can you explain that?’
Tom said that he could never be sure, but he suspected his father had had affairs throughout his marriage, perhaps with prostitutes.
His father was also an economist and spent most of the week in London, coming home at weekends.
He was always very protective and gentlemanly towards Tom's mother, but as long as Tom could remember they had slept in separate bedrooms.
Tom had always believed that there was a lot he didn't know about his father, although naturally, he said, he had never broached the subject with his mother.
The idea that his father might have visited prostitutes came to him years ago, during a spate of murders of prostitutes.
His father's comment had been, ‘Fallen women, that's what they are, and they have to take the consequences.
They get what they deserve.’
Tom couldn't quite explain why he felt his father's comment was revealing.
Sarah said, ‘Do you mean, Tom, that you think your father despises women who aren't married and so on?
I've often heard him call women ‘tarts’ when they are just young, attractive and dress a bit sexily.’
‘Yes, I suppose so,’ said Tom.
‘He was always very strict with my sisters, about what time they had to be in and clothes and make-up and that sort of thing.’
‘It sounds as if , in your family, there was a message that being sexy equalled being tarty, and that the consequences of that might be dangerous — even to the point of getting killed,’ suggested the counsellor.
‘Mmm,’ said Tom.
Then he linked the counsellor's comment to his experiences as a student in America.
‘The girls there were very forward.
No doubt my father would call them tarty.
I worried about whether they would be safe just walking down the street, the way they looked and acted.’
‘You went out with some of them, didn't you,’ said Sarah good-humouredly.
Tom looked embarrassed.
‘Just a couple,’ he said, ‘but never anyone serious.
Never anyone I'd have brought home.’
‘Like me and Richard,’ said Sarah.
Then she blushed.
‘What do you mean by that?’ asked Tom.
Sarah hesitated, then seemed to decide to take the bull by the horns.
‘Well, I suppose what I mean is that Richard is someone I would never have introduced to my parents — and he is someone I had quite a…sexual relationship with.
And it sounds as if it is the same for you.’
Tom looked puzzled.
‘You mean,’ said the counsellor, ‘that for both of you, sex was only all right away from your homes and your parents.’
‘Perhaps we were afraid our parents would be shocked,’ said Sarah.
‘Sex was never mentioned in my house.
You know, I was embarrassed to tell my mother that I was pregnant, because it showed that I had had sex.
Even though I was married!’
‘And I wonder what is happening now?’ asked the counsellor.
‘You are married, and you love and respect one another.
I wonder if your relationship can contain a ‘tarty’, sexy feeling as well— without ruining your home, threatening you as good parents and leading you into danger.’
This was a challenge to both of them.
For a while neither spoke.
Then Tom said, very politely, ‘It's an interesting idea, though I'm not quite sure I understand you.
We will think about it, and be in touch.’
He made as if to get ready to leave.
‘You sound as if you might be angered by my suggestion,’ said the counsellor.
‘Why should I be angry?’
Tom replied.
However, they agreed to come back for their next session, in which Tom said, ‘We have thought about what you said last week, and neither of us likes the idea of having ‘tartiness’ in our relationship, as you put it.
I don't want to see Sarah in that way, and I wouldn't want her to see me in that kind of light either.’
They said they had decided to stop counselling, because they felt they needed to think about and digest what they had talked about so far.
By discussing their family backgrounds, they had achieved some insight into why they had excluded sex from their relationship.
But they did not yet feel able to go through with changes in their actual behaviour.
So they reverted to their original position: that as neither of them missed sex, it was OK for them not to have it.
The counsellor made it clear that if they wanted to come back at a later stage, they would be welcome.
Cathy Troupp was talking to a specialist couples counsellor about this month's case history.
Names and details have been changed to protect identities.
If you would like a copy of SHE's counselling fact sheet, please send an sae to .
it's SNOW FUN around here!
To ski or not to ski — there are plenty of great ways to enjoy your family holiday in the snow
Fly to New York and skate on the Rockefeller ice rink before trudging through the snow to see The Nutcracker Suite at the Lincoln Center.
Whisk your children off to Rovaniemi on Finland's Arctic Circle to see Santa's reindeer and his elves in the toy workshop.
Rent a wooden cabin in Norway for a week of cross-country skiing.
Spend an arty weekend in St Petersburg — at its most ravishing once snow has fallen.
Shop for gilded wax angels and nativity figures at the Christmas market in Germany's prettiest town, Rothenburg.
A holiday in the snow doesn't have to mean skiing, and if you want to go away before Christmas, it's hard to find a resort with enough snow to make skiing possible.
But if you do want to ski, you can start thinking about where to go — especially if you're going as a family.
Taking small children to a ski resort is perfectly feasible if you consider all the pitfalls.
It's important to go somewhere with a good kindergarten where they can just be looked after or taught to ski.
Check that the childcare staff speak English, that there isn't a mile of icy path between you and the lifts, and that the self-catering apartment ‘bed’ isn't a ‘put-u-up’in the living room.
American facilities are undoubtedly the best, with the play centres providing day-long care, children-only ski areas, and children's menus in restaurants.
Among the best are Breckenridge and Park City, and Canadian resorts Whistler and Blackcomb.
In Europe, the best children's facilities are generally in purpose-built resorts.
Good ones are La Plagne, Courcheval, Flaine with the outstanding Les Lindars hotel, Avoriaz, Mayrhofen and Les Arcs.
The Canton de Vaud in Switzerland also has a lot to offer.
Along with fully equipped sports centres, resorts Villars and Leysin offer paragliding, mountaineering and mountain biking, as well as excellent facilities for teaching children to ski.
And for the hot-air balloon flight of a lifetime, take an hour-long trip from Chateau d'Oex.
(Swiss National Tourist Office, 071–734 1921).
The Good Skiing Guide (Consumers' Association, £12.95)— essential reading for skiers — lists other good family resorts.
Family-orientated ski tour operators include.
Clockwise from above: See the snow from above in a hot air balloon; many resorts have entertainments for children; take a cruise around Stockholm; cross-country skiing enables you to reach remote areas; downhill skiing is still a big favourite.
TRAVEL
Skiing with children
I greeted my cousin's suggestion that I drive with him and his family to Italy for a skiing holiday with some apprehension.
In the event, it was a great pleasure.
The Hotel Girasole in Bormio 2000, high above the medieval town of Bormio, is the perfect destination for pre-teen skiers.
It is a concrete bunker of a place, no more than a corridor of shops, a cable car station and a hotel, all indestructibly functional.
The public areas are huge and informal, the rooms family combinations of double beds and bunks, the food substantial and well-cooked.
The skiing is mainly intermediate but, above all, safe for children.
Weekly highlights at the Girasole include a toboggan race, a slalom race, a kids' disco and a torchlight descent.
This follows an après-ski dinner at La Rocca mountain restaurant, accompanied by singing and, so far as the adults are concerned, much passing of the ceremonial grolla , a multi-spouted loving cup containing a potent alcoholic brew.
From December 19, Neilson is offering a self-drive holiday at the Girasole: seven nights half-board and return ferry crossing from £389, with a £55 reduction for under-11s, £120 reduction per person for accommodation only.
Or travel independently with Sally Ferries' ski-drive package: return ferry crossing for a car and up to five passengers, snow chains and RAC Eurocover from £139.
Minty Clinch 
Christmas in Stockholm
The Swedes have a great enthusiasm for Christmas.
Visit around December 13 for the Festival of Santa Lucia, when girls in white gowns and candle headdresses lead troupes of attendants into homes, restaurants, hotels and offices to sing a traditional song.
Stockholm, often called the Venice of the north, is built on 15 small islands, all linked by bridges.
Wander round the car-free streets of the old town on Gamla Stan and find Christmas markets with stalls selling decorations, candles and mulled wine.
A fall of snow makes the festive setting complete.
Food plays an important part in the festivities, especially the Christmas smörgåsbord which offers the best of the country's cuisine.
Self-control is the key — take only a small amount for each course and you won't miss out on anything.
Add to the pleasure by taking your Christmas smörgåsbord on a gentle cruise round the nearby islands.
Sightseeing in Stockholm is limited, but children will love Skansen, an open-air museum with activities, farm and aquarium, and the nearby Gröna Lund amusement park.
And do as the locals do and have a sauna — every hotel has one.
NSR Travel has short breaks at the Sara Hotel Reisen from £362 per person for bed and smörgåsbord breakfast, which includes Scandinavian Airlines return flights.
Sally Brown 
Cross-country skiing
Cross-country skiing, once the preserve of elderly but fit Europeans, has become a chic alternative to the increasingly high-tech and overcrowded sport of downhill skiing.
It uses few resources except your own leg-power and is enjoyable, easy-ish and infinitely cheaper.
Cross-country skiing is a sliding walk, with feet fixed to the skis only at the toe.
Balancing is easy, the skis are light and shoes comfortable and you can get by with jogging pants and a jumper.
Within hours, a first-time skier can move quickly and confidently.
There isn't the thrill of downhill skiing, but you can enjoy the quiet of woods and mountains that are otherwise inaccessible.
If you want to head off into the higher mountains, cross-country skiing isn't the best sport for children: the effort, though not strenuous, is constant, and children under ten could tire if asked to ski for longer than a half-day.
I learned the ski cross-country in the south of France, where a distinctly relaxed attitude is taken to active sport.
I stayed at the Hotel Corrieu in peaceful La Llagonne.
For more active types, the nearby Font Romeu has shops, bars, a crèche and a ski school where children can be left all day.
More remote, but lovely, is Valcebollère, a stone village perched at the end of a valley, where M Lafitte and his wife run the cosy L'Auberge les Ecureuils hotel.
It has a small fitness room, sauna, wonderful food, a bar and the sort of dining room you can linger in, which is just as well, because in Valcebollère there is nowhere else to go.
Inntravel has: 7 nights' half-board at Hotel Corrieu from £369; 7 nights' full-board at L'Auberge les Ecureuils, with ski hire, a half-day lesson and a full-day trek, from £449.
Both include flights and transfers, and offer substantial reductions for children.
Cleo Hall 
Turn the page for a chance to win a skiing holiday.
Details and prices correct at time of going to press .
WORK SPACE
are you too sexy for your job?
Will wiggling your bottom help you make it to the top?
By Vanessa Feltz
I do it, I confess.
When deadlines are deadly and a male editor is breathing fire and brimstone down the phone, I go all giggly and silly-little-me-late-again-ish.
Am I proud of resorting to stereotypical womanly wiles when I am supposed to be a postmodernist feminist egalitarian?
God, no!
So why do I carry on jiggling my earrings and cleavage simultaneously whenever an editorial planning meeting gets rough?
Because I'm not prepared to look two gift double D-cups in the mouth, that's why.
No-one's ashamed to admit that a good mind is a business plus, not to mention a smooth tongue, cool head and rock-solid handshake.
I'm just exploiting something else we all know — a slick of lip gloss and a smile are bankable assets.
Isn't it career illiteracy not to use them?
Don't get me wrong, I'm not suggesting slap and tickle sessions or pre-board-meeting  tussles .
What I advocate is exuding an aura of femaleness.
The same aura, in fact, that you bring to everything else you do, from bathing the baby to reading a novel.
You are a woman, for heaven's sake.
You react like one when you burn the toast, so why shouldn't you react like one when you are pitching for a new account?
Of course, there is a school of thought that says mascara and the office experience shouldn't mix, and that spraying Eternity behind your ears before a conference devalues your contribution.
Women who adhere to this go for the tailored suit and no-nonsense haircut routine.
They drink pints, work longer hours than any man on the team and practically pee standing up to convince the chaps they're ‘one of them’.
They regard a last-minute request to spend the weekend collating figures in Darlington as proof positive of their triumph against chauvinism.
No concessions are made to their infant's chicken pox or wedding anniversaries.
Not for me, thank you.
I'm perfectly happy to plead a two-year-old's birthday and then wiggle, flatter and schmooze to get myself off the hook.
Sandra, a full-time barrister and a mother of three, says some judges are known to be partial to women in wigs and gowns.
‘If you get the right judge, it can help enormously to be a woman.
There's no question that the high heels and blusher go on if there's the slightest chance that they'll do any good.
If you didn't, you'd be prejudicing your client's chances.
You still have to be on top of your stuff, though — judges expect a certain level of competence to staging a little-girl-lost act in court will do no good whatsoever.
In the office it's a different story.
I often smile wearily and say, ‘Oh, dizzy me.
I really can't cope with this mountain of admin,’ and it's amazing how many men can't wait to wade in to rescue me.’
Sandra dresses for maximum impact.
‘Court dress is sombre, but black needn't be dull at all.
And there's no question that crossing a black-stockinged leg at the crucial moment can attract a lot of lucrative briefs my way.
My butcher thinks I'm sexy, so does my daughter's teacher.
I'd be insulted if my colleagues hadn't noticed.’
Ros, a 34-year-old accountant, married for 11 years, is convinced that her greatest asset is her femininity.
‘People expect this to be a male-dominated field and female accountants are expected to be dreary number-shufflers.
I love overturning preconceptions.
I wouldn't be seen dead in a navy suit and I'd rather give a peck on the cheek than a mock-male handshake.
Sometimes colleagues may read my signals wrongly; they think that, because I wear short skirts and I'm not afraid to let the conversation get personal, I must be looking for an affair.
I'm very upfront about being happily married — I've brought Nick into the office a few times and I mention him in conversation whenever it's appropriate.
Nonetheless, an element of mild flirtation makes office life more pleasant.
I comment on their ties, cars and aftershave, they give my outfits points out of ten.
On a more cynical level, business-wise it really helps to be popular.
You become the natural choice for promotion.’
‘A woman's touch is unbeatable for taking the heat out of potentially aggressive moments’ says advertising account executive Diana.
‘It is no cliché that creative people are temperamental, and when tempers get frayed, the air can really turn blue.
If a confrontation gets out of hand, the damage to agency/client relations could be devastating.
That's when it helps to cast your eyes down demurely and start blushing.
I model myself on Princess Di.
Sometimes I cough, as if I might be on the verge of tears.
Or fish around in my handbag for a handkerchief.
Then one of the blokes remembers there's a woman present and apologises, the others shake hands and make an effort to be polite to each other.
Of course, I'm never really shocked — being ladylike at work just strikes me as a valuable power tool.’
The iron hand in the velvet glove approach works for mini-cab boss Nicole.
‘Cabbing is traditionally a male business.
There's no question about it, most men hate having a woman boss.
They usually deal with the situation in one of two ways — they patronise you and try to take control on the assumption that you must need their guidance to do a decent job; or they undermine you by making obscene remarks and deliberately causing problems.
I've been deceptively gentle from the beginning.
I didn't want to behave like some foul-mouthed old broad, but I didn't want to be a pushover either.
I suppose you could describe me as ‘headmistressy’.
Sex appeal doesn't come into it, but femininity certainly does.’
On the other hand, Gillian, a personal assistant, tries to leave her gender at home.
‘A boss/PA relationship can be far too much like Master and Geisha if you're not careful.
I'm not here to be a dolly, dabbing his temples with eau de cologne and picking up his wife's laundry.
I'm here to do a job of work and if dressing conservatively and ignoring his attempts at seductive banter are what it takes to remind him of the fact, so be it.’
Maxine, a futures market broker, went so far as to put ‘single’ on her CV, although she is married with an 18-month-old baby.
‘It's vital to me to be an indispensable member of the team.
This is a highly competitive field and I didn't want them to rule me out when it comes to promotion because they think I lack commitment.
So far, I've managed to get away with it.’
She's not alone.
A spokesperson for the Equal Opportunities Commission said, rather sadly, ‘In our experience, many women are still so unsure of their foothold in the workplace that they don't feel they can admit to having families and responsibilities out of the office.
They are under pressure to negate their femaleness and they don't dare give up their suits.
Unfortunately, we can only chip away at attitudes bit by bit.’
Mild, mutually enjoyable flirtation is a reasonably safe game to play because the parameters are agreed and you both know where you stand.
But is there a limit to the amount of sex appeal you can dish out before the whole thing gets out of hand?
Can you seriously expect, for example, to ruffle a colleague's hair and not be patted on the backside in return?
Can you grind pelvises throughout a company dinner dance and expect to return to your hotel room unambushed?
Can you lean over the desk, flashing the contents of your bra, and be amazed when he makes a grab for you?
Lia, a senior personnel manager, has seen some office encounters end in embarrassment, others in disaster.
Convinced that some women are playing a dangerous game, she advises her staff to stick to six safety guidelines, developed during the course of her 22-year career:
1.
Keep all touching to a minimum — jokey punches, pinches and fondles can be more arousing than you think;
2.
Never allow greeting kisses on the cheek to gravitate anywhere near your lips;
3.
Don't let the conversation get too raunchy — talking about sex in general is all right, but going into details about your own sex life is way off the mark;
4.
Beware of dangerous situations — take a taxi rather than late-night lifts home, never stay late at work alone with a male colleague, or accept an offer to escort you to the door of your hotel room;
5.
Femininity is fine, but suggestiveness isn't — the office is not the place for braless nipples or knickerless minis, and if you've any doubts about whether an outfit is unsuitable, don't wear it;
6.
Don't get drunk on duty.
Statistics show that when sexual liaisons occur between colleagues, it's usually the woman who loses out.
The aftermath of an affair turned sour can be downright hostile.
Despite massive strides made by women, men still occupy most of the powerful positions.
So when his interest in the affair peters out and he'd rather not bump into you at the photocopier on a daily basis, it's you who'll be left with a P45 and a broken heart.
Women who sleep with the boss usually claim the attraction was the poetry in his soul, not the promotion prospects.
Just as well, because as a career move it stinks.
Sex causes complications, and in this interminable recession, just staying put on the payroll is quite difficult enough.
Remember that, at work, your sexuality is to be used as a shield, an entrée, a civilising influence, but only by one person — you.
Devoting an effective negotiating tool to someone else's temporary fulfilment is career suicide.
Don't do it.
Business and pleasure only mix when you're wielding the cocktail shaker.
WORKSPACE NEWS
Bully for you
‘He was always moving the goalposts so that we could never anticipate what he wanted.’
Suffering from the aggression and deviousness of a workplace bully leaves people feeling hurt, angry and impotent — because the guilty boss is usually the one to be believed.
In Andrea Adams' Bullying at Work (Virago, £6.99) the author exposes this demoralising problem, and suggests some remedies.
Survival means one of three choices: resignation, acceptance or fighting back.
If you decide on the last — and best — option, she suggests you:
Log accounts of meetings where your competence or character was attacked.
Know your job description and ensure that your work is in line with it.
If you are new, decide which senior colleagues would support you in your work.
Seek out others who might be suffering too; suggest you band together.
Keeping some form of consistent documented proof of bullying is essential, says Adams, because many firms fail to recognise it as a problem and suspect the victim may be acting out of malice.
Send the bully a memo, outlining the incidents and keep any reply.
Inform personnel, your union or the bully's boss (with copies to senior executives you can trust).
Request confidentiality.
Then use your pent-up anger to fight back.
ME AND MY JOB
Lorna Fettes is a franchise holder.
If the image suggests running a burger bar or dry-cleaning shop, think again.
Colour Counsellors is an interior design company whose franchises help you put together fabrics, carpets and wallpapers without tramping round the shops for samples.
‘The system works through eight black boxes, each focusing on one colour harmony,’ explains Lorna, who bought her franchise 18 months ago for £10,000 (plus VAT).
‘The fabrics are from top manufacturers such as Osborne & Little, but we can use others to make up sample boards for our customers if we prefer.’
Her enthusiasm is infectious.
After giving up teaching home economics, because ‘it went sour and, at 40, I felt the need to take stock,’ Lorna started up on her own, designing curtains.
‘But, as a loner, I couldn't get trade discounts from the best fabric manufacturers.’
The initiative foundered and Lorna, who has always had a talent for design, remembered an advert she had seen for Colour Counsellors.
With the support of her police officer husband, and three children (aged 13, and twins of ten), she visited CC founder Virginia Stourton in London, and was impressed.
‘There was no suggestion that someone with young kids couldn't cope, and she didn't seem to be forever breathing down your neck.’
Last spring, Lorna signed up for the fortnight's training course, and was allocated a large portion of the Glasgow and Clyde area, with 12,000 potential customers.
‘Scots do tend to be rather inhibited about interior design,’ she acknowledges.
‘They think I will waltz through their house saying ‘Get rid of this, buy that’.
But I work closely to any budget I'm given and in effect my service is free, because although I charge a £30 flat fee, it's deducted when an order is placed.’
Lorna's income derives from buying at trade and selling at retail price.
Working from her converted garage, Lorna makes up sample boards, organises exhibition stands, creates promotions, and visits her clients, many of whom come via word of mouth.
After the evening meal she returns to her office but tries to have ‘one day off at weekends’.
Franchising isn't a licence to print money.
‘You are self-employed and make of it what you will,’ says Lorna.
‘But you get great support from head office.
When you work for yourself, and see a job well done, you really feel you have achieved something.
Novel approach
What kind of novels do publishers foresee readers buying?
No more ‘family sagas’, but a return to detective stories, police crime and ‘good stories about people you care about’.
In The Fiction Writer's Handbook  (Piatkus, £7.99), Nancy Smith offers masses of good advice — including more than 100 alternatives to the word ‘said’!
Heated debate
How the electoral system fails female candidates plus other subjects, including the role of the media and other countries' systems of government, should make Can democracy work for women? a hot weekend of debate.
This, the first UK women's conference on the constitution, is at .
Fingertip fax
Help your secretary to get to grips with company personnel and routines with ‘PROfile’, a slick new deskfax system from Hill Tallack (tel: 081–948 5093).
It costs £168 but we have two to give away.
Send a post card to PROfile .
the great decade debate
feel younger, longer
Our special section takes a look at how growing older affects our attitudes, careers — and looks.
Can a younger lover beat the ageing blues — or would a change of style do the trick for you?
Plus our exclusive workshop to help you feel younger much longer.
First, Madeleine Kingsley takes a look at milestone birthdays.
I have reached that perverse age in life (why be coy — it's 46) when contemporaries start growing younger.
Already two friends who were heading towards the key of the door well before I sat A-levels have shot time's arrow into reverse and now they are 43 and 44 respectively.
If they carry on confounding chronology in this mendacious manner, they are likely to hit 30 as I reach 60.
It doesn't feel like fair play, but I have to forgive them.
Their single-minded preoccupation, you see, is to hang on to their present decade and hold off the Rubicon-crossing birthday beyond which grandmotherhood and whiskered chins threaten to throttle the last vestiges of good-time glamour.
I could try reassuring them that over in Holland, the half-century is toasted as the age of wisdom, that women are dubbed Sarah (the biblical matriarch) and men Abraham for a day of high celebration.
But it probably wouldn't help.
Fifty is a toughie.
‘The very thought of it makes me want to press the panic button, crawl under the bed and call for HRT,’ says one friend.
The truth is that my women friends really wouldn't feel much better if they were 19 going on 20, 29 approaching 30 or nudging the big Four-O.
There's something about those milestone birthdays that brings out millennial gloom rather than the gaiety in us all.
It's daft really, because it's not as if you suddenly develop crow's feet or memory failure.
You might be 37 or 42 when you suddenly see your reflection on a bad day and are shocked to discover you're not the 32 you feel inside.
And chances are that this haglike vision is simply advance warning — it could be years before your face finally settles into the low-slung, wrinkly cast you previewed with dismay.
So the advent of a big birthday is more a focus for feeling older — but it certainly hits you in the heart.
I've heard of women so depressed that they spend their 40th birthday incommunicado, having a mini nervous breakdown in bed.
But not everyone sees 40 as the prelude to falling apart.
Annie, now 41, has a rare and lucky sense of times getting better, not worse.
‘I welcomed the run-up to 30,’ she recalls.
‘I felt newly sophisticated and was ready to wear black with aplomb!
Thirtynine was also good because I wasn't yet middle-aged, but had a bit of living under my belt and authority above the neck.
Nobody was going to call me young and silly any more.’
‘I welcomed the run-up to 30; I felt newly sophisticated and was ready to wear black with aplomb!’
‘On the other hand, nobody is going to call you full of promise again,’ says Laura, who is heading for 30.
‘I think the German poet Goethe was overdosing on irony when he wrote, ‘If youth is a fault, one soon gets rid of it.’
‘I cried a lot coming out of my teens,’ says Charlotte, now 22, ‘because I realised that I no longer had an excuse to play out the role of mother's beloved charge.
All the goals I'd met so far — O-levels, A-levels, university — had been pre-planned for me.
But from 20 onwards, I would have to take responsibility for managing my own life.’
For many of us, the approach of 20 signals the end of childhood and 30 slams the door — if not on youth then certainly on the licence to mis-spend it.
And as Gail Sheehy, author of Passages (available in libraries), points out, the run up to 30 seems to inspire a yearning for more, no matter what you already have.
‘I've loved being single and independent in my 20s,’ says Anthea, ‘but, as 30 beckons, I'm asking myself if not having a life partner by now means that I may never have one.
I'm looking for proof that I am long-term lovable.’
For those who already have a settled partner, home and children, says Sheehy, the runway to 30 often leads to first infidelity.
Partners may feel stuck and ‘found out’ in their faults, failures and fears.
A lover lends a fresh vision to your potential and your charm.
And so it proved for Paula, whose father died when she was 29 ‘leaving me with no senior protector and no-one to love me unconditionally.
My marriage was a disaster but, with three small children, I didn't have the confidence to leave — until I took a lover of 50.
I'm not saying I chose an affair expressly to ward off the 30th birthday blues, but my age and stage contributed more than mere chance.
It was worthwhile, though — not only did he make me feel young and raunchy again, he left me with enough self-esteem to believe in my capabilities as a single mother.’
Forty, more than any other landmark birthday, seems to mark the moment when we make a reassessment of ourselves.
Says Tricia with a sigh, ‘Forty marked the moment when I finally turned the magnifying side of my make-up mirror to the wall.’
‘Forty marked the moment when I turned the magnifying side of my make-up mirror to the wall’
‘The months coming up to 40 brought me right down,’ recalls Ingrid.
‘Educationally and professionally, I'd been a bit of a prodigy — always the youngest in my league.
Suddenly I was the mature woman, faced with new kids in the workplace.
And I was very sad to face the fact that, having hoped for four years, I might now never have a second child.
My view has long been that 40 ought to be the cut-off age for parenting or you'd be unfairly old for your child.
I'm usually quite clear-minded, but it was strange the way my unconscious set to work, pushing back my maternal goalposts and persuading me that another year or two would do my hoped-for child no harm.’
It's strange, too, thinks Ingrid, that once you've actually passed the dreaded date, perspective shifts and the dread of leaving your 30s evaporates.
‘Forty-one now feels rather good.
In this decade I'm once again a junior.’
‘Creeping up to 40 wasn't the main reason I wanted a third child,’ says Saskia, ‘but I was certainly aware that it would keep me back in the young-mum sphere along with the 25-year-olds.’
Why does contemplating the end of an era feel so painfully like waving a loved one off to war?
Worse, really, because with ageing there's not the least possibility of a safe return.
If you take an historic perspective on lifespan, then our sisterly generation ought to be on its knees with gratitude — 28 was the equivalent of 70-plus to an Iron Age woman.
Only a century ago, a fair proportion of us would have died in childbirth, or been dubbed dowagers by 40.
So we ought to be cheering as the big round numbers go by, leaving us healthy and whole.
But instead we worry about heart attacks and hardening of the arteries: human nature is too concerned with contemporary ills to measure past progress.
As psychologist Halla Beloff reminds us, ageing is a weighty preoccupation in the West.
‘The passing years represent a kind of negative capitalism.
As you grow older, so your capital decreases, especially at the turn of a decade.
You are forced to acknowledge that you have spent another whole chunk of your total threescore-years-and-ten investment.’
Part of the attendant upset of passing the Big-O barriers stems from early stereotypes.
When I was about 14, I remember my sister and I pledging quite seriously to grow up and defy convention; to be women who still wore jeans and long hair at 30.
All the 30-something women we knew then seemed about the limit beyond which you went into suits and Burberry raincoats.
And I can only have been about nine when a schoolfriend proudly showed snaps of her mother fancy-dressed as ‘No-one loves a fairy when she's 40’.
In the photographs, Freda wore drooping organza wings, a bent wand, crinkly grey hair and large specs that Edna Everage would later die for.
It was a prize-winning joke, but I didn't get it.
It seemed to me then, in my gymslip innocence, quite obvious that nobody would love (in any passionate sense that mattered) any female over 40, whether she came from Fairyland or Finsbury Park.
At 40, you developed something flabby, disgusting and unavoidable called middle-aged spread and your waist disappeared along with your energy.
Now, of course, I go along with the perception that being 40 these days is like 30 used to be.
But in some corner of my heart, those childish stereotypes of 40 linger on, just waiting to mock my sagging curves.
And let's not shrink from the truth about Big Birthday blues: we have genuine cause to feel depressed because the calendar chronicles what, most of the time, we prefer to forget — that life is finite.
With each passing decade, the chances of losing our parents increases, as does the awesome inevitability of taking our turn at what Gail Sheehy describes as ‘the front of the generational train’.
‘The sobering thought, as decades turn,’ says social psychologist Duncan Cramer, ‘is not only that we have less time to live, but that options also narrow.’
That's true of every passing year, but it strikes you more powerfully when you reach a nice, round watershed number.
Women maybe have to realise that they won't quite so easily have children after 40.
And a lot of people realise that the things they thought they were going to do (marry for love and have three children) or hoped to do (swim for Great Britain) are less likely to come true.
So you find yourself, as the O-birthday approaches, trying to reconcile your aspirations with your achievements.
‘The very thought of reaching 50 makes me want to press the panic button, crawl under the bed and call for HRT’
Cramer stresses that, no matter what your age, this exercise can be valuable as a springboard for future plans, and the urgency of time passing can actually galvanise you into making changes.
Says Charlotte, ‘I'm embarrassed to admit that it was an agony aunt who finally dispelled my end-of-teenage doldrums.
I heard Claire Rayner say what a good thing it was we weren't immortal because, without the ultimate threat of death, we'd never have the impetus to use life fully.
That was the point when I decided not to use my 20s for a ‘proper’ career.
My passion was for the stage and I was going to go for it.’
If, of course, you reach the end of a marvellously sweet decade, it feels all the more threatening to leap pretty well blindfold into the uncertain next.
Duncan Cramer says, ‘We're aware, in the process of living it, that life is often pretty mundane.
But looking back, we seem to have a selective memory for the best bits of the past.
So you can fall into the trap of reviewing a decade as retrospectively fantastic.’
Ageing phobia, too, often dulls one to the very real prospect of things getting better as time goes on.
‘The inexperience of youth,’ says Cramer, ‘often leads to fears, uncertainty and a general unease with life.
As you grow older, some of those uncertainties — such as whether or not you are lovable — are settled one way or another.
And most of us, gaining in wisdom and experience, find ways of coming to terms with this.’
Alice may feel reassured to hear it.
Married but childfree, she's gearing herself for a sad goodbye to her 20s.
‘Facing 30 is not all negative,’ she says, ‘because I scour the mirror for signs of deterioration and see none so far.
In fact, I look better now than I did at 20 and I'm still pretty fit.
My career has taken off, I've married and made a home.
But I had to recognise that there have only been a couple of traumas in ten years and the trouble rate is likely to hot up as I move towards 40.
I have to face the fact that, now we have a mortgage and want to start a family, I'll never enjoy the year off travelling that I couldn't afford before university.
And reaching 30 in a recession is a special problem in itself — I may have to tread water in my career for some years because there is no chink of promotion in my business.
Everyone who is ahead of me is hanging on like crazy to their rung of the ladder.
The unspoken and unacceptable reality is that when I do decide to have a baby, my bosses will regard me as less promotable than a childless woman or a man.’
Alice's confusion about starting a family is common to many women at her age and stage.
Friends of hers who already have babies tend to speak frankly and moan openly, with a lengthy litany of ‘nevers’: ‘You'll never go out for an impromptu evening…sleep through the night…read a book in the bath…go to the loo in peace again!’
It feels to Alice that motherhood means overturning ‘almost all the marital, housing, professional and personal progress I was expected to make in my 20s.
It's unnerving.’
It may be human nature to dread each turn of the decade, but it's equally so to grin and celebrate the Big Birthday when it comes.
Georgia, who'd planned to keep her 40-year-old head down and let the day pass unmarked, felt quite differently when it dawned.
She went to a high-level management meeting wearing a button badge proclaiming her news.
A bottle of champagne was magically produced and, to her surprise and satisfaction, she was toasted as the ‘baby’ of the gathering.
Hannah, too, decided that, since she couldn't beat 40, she might as well flaunt it with a party.
She wore an outfit she'd always wanted to try but felt she was too plump to risk — a scarlet bustier and a black net skirt.
A friend treated her to a pukkah drinks-dispensing butler who asked if he might make a personal remark before teetering off into the small hours.
He might, said Hannah.
‘Loved the dress, loved the look,’ he confided.
And suddenly 40 seemed not tribulation, but triumph.
hello, young lover!
feel younger, longer
He's 27 and you are 43?
So what — you're as young as the man you feel.
By Jenny Forbes
He was married and I was divorced.
He was 27, I was 43.
I have two children.
He is the sort of person who says he will come for lunch and arrives at 3.30, just as you are heading down the road to collect the kids from school.
His view of the world is derived from the News at Ten , whereas politics is the stuff that I live and breathe.
We are totally incompatible, yet after ten minutes in the same room as him I felt as though I had been plugged into the mains.
The affair started not so much as a head-first plunge as a mesmerised topple.
The major barrier was not conscience but total disbelief.
I would look at myself in the mirror, check out the grey hairs, trace the emerging lines and fading lip line and ask myself, ‘Why?’
What would a dishy young man like that want with middle-aged me?
Not that disintegration has entirely taken hold.
I am not spreading or sagging, the glow of an early sun tan had probably removed a year or two and I've discovered that lipstick does wonders, but there could have been little doubt in his mind that I was closer in age to his mother than to him.
I suppose, looking back, that that was precisely what attracted him.
Early maternal deprivation had clearly left him with a hankering for mother figures in his life and I wasn't the first.
(A note here to working mums: depriving your sons of a little mothering might just be doing a middle-aged woman a favour in years to come!)
But I expect that you all want to know how I could do it — how I could have walked in and scooped up this yummy young man from the arms of his loving and lawful wife.
Well, the answer is really quite simple.
Imagine you had been living on bread and water for three years and then someone put a large bowl of cherries on the table in front of you.
You might feel a little guilty about taking someone else's cherries, but you might also take one or two from the side and hope that the rightful owner wouldn't notice.
That's how I felt.
I vaguely knew his wife — I even liked her.
But I managed, with little difficulty, to convince myself that she wouldn't miss a handful from a whole bowl.
I had no intention of swiping the lot.
I consulted my conscience but it didn't put up much of a fight.
It just whispered feebly, ‘He's married and, what's more, he's 16 years younger than you.’
So then I checked it out with my common sense which said, ‘Stay away, it will end in tears.’
When it came to my libido, I didn't have to enquire.
It was already leaping up and down saying, ‘Go for it, you may never get another chance like this one.’
So I went for it.
Having an affair is not easy when one of you lives with a partner and the other with children.
There was no way I was going to let my children in on this one.
I couldn't square what I was doing with the view of the world I have tried to transmit to my pubescent son: sex is a wonderful thing but it should be part of a loving relationship.
This wasn't part of anything.
It was driven by pure lust.
It was sex for its own sake, pure and ungarnished by civilised preliminaries such as visits to the cinema or candlelit dinners.
It was being swept off my feet as soon as I opened the door and having my clothes removed before I had time to make coffee.
In some ways, it was like being 16 again.
We snatched opportunities when we could, when my children were staying with friends or even, once, and extra dangerously, when they were asleep (though the fear that one of them might wake put me off so I didn't try that again).
Often it was in the afternoon, bodies overheated by the sun and work abandoned.
But while my mind was being 16, my body didn't feel that way at all.
The practised assurance of those long years of marriage came into its own.
Gone was the girl who worried about whether she was doing it right.
This body knew what it wanted — and how to get it.
The disbelief lent an urgency to it.
Every time we made love I was convinced it was the last time, so every time had to be wonderful.
There was no question of saying to myself ‘better luck next time’— there might not have been a next time.
I had to get everything I could out of this time.
Of course, there was a down side.
When my marriage ended three years earlier I had been left an emotional pulp.
I knew that I had to protect myself from another pounding — if I let him into my heart I would be done for.
I had always been appalled by the ease with which men seemed able to separate sex and love and now here was I building a high wall around myself and saying, ‘I will let you into my body but stay out of my mind.’
It might have been callous if the situation had been different, but it seemed to suit him, too.
I was a port in the storm of a marriage to which, fundamentally, he was totally committed.
It wouldn't have worked without his disarming honesty.
He wanted what I wanted and it wasn't love or commitment or really even friendship (although he called it that).
It was for both of us a temporary refuge from a reality which wasn't giving either of us much joy.
His marriage was in a mess but, to give him credit, he never once uttered the words, ‘My wife doesn't understand me.’
In fact, rather tactlessly, he would ask my advice, try to get me to help him understand her point of view.
It wasn't hard.
In her place I would have been not only up the wall but out of the door!
He was clearly impossible to live with: erratic, self-absorbed, neurotic.
Sometimes listening to him talk sounded like someone quoting from Couples counsel .
The words sounded fine but it was someone else's story.
He could feel and he could think but he couldn't connect the two.
It was sex for its own sake, pure and ungarnished by visits to the cinema or candlelit dinners
The fact that he was such an emotional mess helped me to keep the necessary distance.
I already had two children, and the last thing I wanted was a third.
I knew that I hadn't been kidding myself when he turned up one evening looking exhausted, miserable and defeated, to tell me his wife had threatened to start divorce proceedings.
My heart did not leap with joy, it turned cold with panic.
I knew with absolute clarity that this was not what I wanted.
Good-humoured, sporadic sex had lightened the load of my life.
A drowning man escaping from the wreck of his marriage would drag me down.
For the first time I refused to provide him with the refuge he so obviously wanted and the uncritical comfort that he craved.
I found myself saying, ‘If you genuinely want to save your marriage, go home.
Pain has to be faced, to be gone through, you can't make it better by getting into bed with me.’
He went and I had a few miserable weeks.
I missed the joy of knowing, in the back of my mind, that someone wanted me, that sometimes, when we could manage it, I could escape from the world of work, washing and worrying into a place of pure pleasure.
I feared that without him I would batten down the hatches of the physical part of me and crawl back inside the shell which I had built around myself in the three years before he blew through my life.
He came back once.
I think he just wanted to know that he could.
He needed to feel that he hadn't been rejected.
I am glad he came.
It was better to end as we had begun — with pleasure.
He told me that his marriage continued, shakily.
I don't know if they will make it but, either way, I doubt if I will see him again.
I was never going to be a replacement for his wife, just a diversion, and I hope that, if he thinks of me at all, it is with the same shiver of half-remembered pleasure with which I think of him.
Looking back, I feel no regret and no guilt.
I had begun to shrink, become half human, to lose touch with my body and mentally cut off the bits that hurt so that they couldn't be hurt any more.
He allowed me to feel again and, if that can happen once, then it can happen again.
The cherries were most certainly stolen, but would I really have been a better person if I had left them on the plate?
feel younger, longer
can your age work for you?
You don't have to lie about your age — with some forward planning and good presentation you can get back into the workforce.
By Annie Claypole.
Angela MacKeith has a degree in English from Oxford.
She led a battle to keep local nursery schools open (and won), campaigned for a skateboarding bowl for neighbourhood children (now up for a community award) and produced a Parents' Guide to Oxford Pubs .
She has worked, on and off, as a freelance proof reader and copy editor for a national publisher.
Angela can't get a full-time job.
She has three children, aged 16, ten and six.
Her first crime is that she hasn't clocked into an office for 16 years.
Her second is that she is 45.
‘When my husband was made redundant, I said blithely, ‘Don't worry, darling, I'll get a job.’
I thought you simply sent off your CV, got interviewed and there you were.’
That was two years ago, and she's still looking.
Increasingly conscious that her age was held against her, she dyed her grey hair and bought a suit that hangs in the wardrobe beside her jeans and sweaters.
‘It's a gesture of faith; that one day my life will be so different it will be an appropriate garment.
‘I did get some interviews but I would be so paralysed I couldn't do myself justice.
I'd come out cringing and demoralised.
And as I went on not getting jobs, I felt my credibility was on the line.
I was even more nervous because it mattered so much, and then I couldn't stop talking and didn't answer the questions.’
Only three years ago women returners were the flavour of the month.
They had to be wooed back into the workforce because, with a shortfall of school-leavers, the British economy would be on its knees without them.
Well, the British economy is on its knees, thanks to the recession and, with nearly three million out of work, people like Angela — who are over 35 and whose CVs, as far as employers are concerned, have large gaps — aren't exactly in demand.
Employers think short-term and they think young.
A 1990 Gallup survey into ageism for Brook Street Bureau revealed that 86% of employers regarded under-35s as most appropriate for their recruitment needs.
Younger workers are not set in their ways, employers believed.
They are quicker-thinking and have a grasp of modern technology.
Two in five employers said that a woman the same age and with the same skills as a man would be more likely to be turned down because of her age.
Four in five employees surveyed believed they had been turned down for jobs because they were too old, even though they had the right skills.
In the US and Australia it is illegal to put age limits in job advertisements and Brook Street Bureau has deleted age from its application forms.
Last year the Institute of Personnel Management warned companies that reluctance to hire older people was inefficient and harmed competitiveness.
Sue Hill was 35 when she started looking for a job nearly two years ago.
‘I answered ads in the newspaper and joined every agency in three towns.
Some didn't even reply, others told me not to expect much.’
Her three children, now 15, eight and six, were handicap enough, but the fact that her last job as a bookkeeper was in 1983 was seen as a severe liability.
‘I went from feeling useless because I couldn't get work to feeling defiant.
I can do the job, so why won't they give it to me?’
Some personnel directors speculate that young male managers have problems relating to older women, who may remind them of their wives or even mothers.
But it's not only men.
‘The personnel officer insisted I saw this 41-year-old woman when I was interviewing for a new secretary,’ says Gina, a 30-year-old manager in a retail company.
‘I know it sounds awful but I felt she would criticise what I did and how I looked or try to organise me.
Just like my mum.’
So what can be done?
Employment agencies, personnel officers and development consultants all declare stoutly that people over 35 can be as adaptable and able to learn as anyone else.
In fact, maturity has advantages such as being reliable, loyal and better at dealing with people.
It's just that particular stereotypes seem to partner ‘mature’— such as grey hair, wrinkles and being a bit slow on the uptake.
‘Sometimes employers' eyes just need opening,’ says Anita Higginson, marketing and training director of Brook Street Bureau.
‘One employer was going on about wanting someone under 35 and I said, ‘Could I do the job?’
He said, ‘Of course,’ and I said, ‘But I'm 42.’
He saw my point.’
These days, an employer can receive 400 applications in response to one job ad.
Convincing him or her that you are the one to fit the bill is a challenge.
But you can't sell yourself unless you know what you can offer and this is where you may need help.
There are several excellent courses for women returners.
Look in the phone book for your local TEC (Training and Enterprise Council); many sponsor short courses with development consultants such as Dow-Stoker's Women into Management, or Jane Goodwin's Professional Updating for Women in Management held at Westminster College, Oxford.
Both arrange work placements — invaluable experience that can lead to permanent jobs.
‘You will have matured while you were away with the family,’ says Linda Stoker of Dow-Stoker.
‘If you were a secretary, you can probably be a manager or even run your own business.
Do you really want to go back and make tea?’
Springboard, on the other hand, is a personal development programme for all women, not just returners, with a network of trainers who run groups all over the UK.
All these courses offer help in preparing a CV, the first hurdle in a job search.
Date of birth causes endless angst for those over 35.
Some consultants suggest leaving it off, but others think the omission simply begs the question.
It is tempting to lop off a discreet year or so but be careful with other dates; will they believe you took your degree at 15?
And then, of course, there's the pension scheme to remember.
Careers adviser Julie Bayley suggests structuring the CV so that your date of birth comes last and the interesting things you've done recently up front— and that includes voluntary work.
Others suggest attaching an attractive passport-size photograph of yourself.
‘Recently, we received an application from a woman of 44,’ said one manager.
‘Her qualifications were adequate but what hooked us was the photo she included.
She looked alert and approachable, just the type of person we were looking for, so we asked her in for an interview.’
A little image-making — such as a good haircut and up-to-date make-up — doesn't go amiss.
Beware the hackneyed navy suit, unless you can brighten it with a colourful blouse or you're applying for a job in the City.
If you're overweight, opt for a flattering loose jacket rather than a tailored suit.
For individual advice, try an image consultant such as Carolyn Miller of House of Colour.
‘During an interview, make eye-contact with everyone,’ advises communications expert Philippa Davies of Voiceworks.
‘Sit back in the chair so that you look confident.
Link your fingers in your lap so that you're not tempted to twiddle them.
Give yourself plenty of time to answer questions.
Anticipate any tough questions and rehearse your answers.’
I see from your CV, Mrs Spring, that you graduated in 1972 — so you would have been just TWELVE?
Er, yes…
I was one of MENSA's great White Hopes…
These may include references to your age.
‘Prepare beforehand by thinking about what the employer wants and what you have in your background that fits this,’ suggests occupational psychologist Ros Heaton.
‘With an older woman, they might be concerned that she won't take orders from young managers.
Will she be flexible?
Show you can cope with these issues.’
Ros doesn't recommend bringing age into the open, unless you're certain that it's on the interviewer's mind.
‘Why bring things to people's attention unless they've noticed?’ she asks.
If the questions seem to have a clear age-related bias, however, then you could ask: ‘Are you a bit concerned about my age?’
And smile , she insists.
‘Research shows that non-verbal cues can affect an interviewer's prejudices.
A confident, positive smile will assure them you are motivated and energetic.’
‘Employers look for someone who will slot into the office culture,’ says Shirley Coates, managing director of Bridford Career Management.
‘Someone who'll give a bit extra.
Job knowledge can be less important than willingness to learn.’
Employers shouldn't ask you questions about childcare but chances are, they will.
Swallow your principles and try to impress on a potential employer, especially if it is a small business, that you have arrangements for all eventualities, including if your child is sick.
The signals you put across at the job interview can flag your future ambitions.
Shirley Coates recommends reading up on the company and preparing a list of questions that go beyond pay and holiday.
At some point the interviewer will probably say, ‘Is there anything that you would like to ask me?’
You answer, ‘What training programmes are available?’(meaning, ‘I'm interest in a career progression’) or ‘Do you plan to expand?’
The only returners that some companies regard as worth training are young high-flyers coming back from maternity leave; it won't hurt to shake them up a little.
Brook Street Bureau sent Sue Hill to an interview for a job as a telesales clerk with a publishing company last autumn and, after months of rejections, she was offered the position.
‘I couldn't believe they found me acceptable.
If Brook Street hadn't convinced me I could do it, my confidence was so low I think I might have turned it down,’ she says.
‘On my first day I felt so self-conscious, like a country bumpkin.’
She found herself in a department with two men in their early 20s.
‘They were super, but I was lucky.
Some of the chaps in other departments talk about things that are quite alien to me and I would have felt left out.’
The first weeks in a job can be daunting — and irritating for women who are used to running their own lives.
How should you behave?
What do you wear?
Who's who in office politics?
‘Training courses go on about assertiveness,’ says Angela MacKeith, ‘but we're actually quite assertive in our own worlds.
What we want to know is how to use that assertiveness in situations where we don't know the rules.’
It doesn't help when the rules seem silly — nurses returning from a break, for instance, can be driven spare by the nit-picking hierarchies in hospitals.
Sometimes all one can do is remember ‘when in Rome…’ and bear in mind some dos and don'ts.
Do:
Listen.
How does the organisation work informally?
Where are the real power sources?
Network.
Join colleagues for lunch or for drinks after work.
Ask younger people for advice; they'll be flattered.
Don't:
Talk about your children.
Dress as you would at home.
If you're ambitious, dress for the job immediately above.
Rush to make coffee or clear up, even if you have to fight the instinct.
Play mother or counsellor to younger colleagues, unless you want the role for life.
Make references to your age.
Six months on, Sue Hill has been promoted to another department where she sells advertising and loves her job.
‘I have changed in every way,’ she claims.
‘I feel a person in my own right, instead of an appendage to the family.’
As for Angela, she has completed a course at Westminster College which she found revelatory.
‘I needed to sharpen up,’ she says.
‘Now I'm much more focused about what I can do.’
I think any employer would be lucky to have her.
feel younger, longer
how to have youthful hair
Don't let your hair lie about your age.
By Marcia Menter
Just when we reach the prime of our lives, our hair has a midlife crisis.
As we age, our hair undergoes dramatic changes — some hormonal, some self-inflicted, others caused by time — which can make us look older than we are.
But by rethinking our approach to haircare, we can keep looking younger for longer.
Our teens and 20s are the best years of our hair's life; colour is at its most vibrant and abundant scalp oils keep it shiny and conditioned.
But once we turn 30, our hair follicles become less efficient and produce hairs which are smaller in diameter and in length.
Such shrinkage is gradual.
‘Because each shaft is slightly thinner, hair starts to feel as if it has less body and volume,’ says trichologist Philip Kingsley.
Around this time, the scalp's sebaceous glands start producing less of the oil that provides healthy shine, and hair begins to lose its hue as the production of melanin (the pigment that also colours skin and eyes) slows down.
Blonde hair fades and becomes more ‘opaque’, brunettes lose their natural gold or auburn highlights and redheads turn brown.
When melanin stops being fed into hair follicles altogether, any new hair grows in white.
Body-building
Many women begin colouring their hair in their mid-30s.
Colouring not only covers white hair but, by swelling the hair shaft, it gives hair extra body and texture and makes it easier to style.
If you've been lightening your hair for years, this is the time to rethink your shade.
‘Many women start adding highlights as teenagers then get blonder and blonder — it's like an addiction,’ says colourist Bonnie Hundt.
‘But because your skin is also losing pigment, staying blonde can make you look washed out.
The most flattering effect is no more than one to two shades lighter than your natural colour.’
Perming is a favourite body-builder.
But even though the newest treatments are gentle on hair, they still take their toll.
Permed hair can be as much as 30% weaker than virgin hair, while colour-treated hair is eight to ten per cent weaker.
Combine the processes, or perm the same tresses more than once, and the result can be hair that's dry, brittle and plagued by split ends.
Another side-effect of even the gentlest processing is reduced shine.
Chemicals which colour or perm hair work in its cortex (middle layer).
To do this, they penetrate the cuticle (outer layer).
Once the cuticle is ruffled, it no longer reflects light so efficiently.
You could try using a serum — these non-sticky liquids are excellent for smoothing the cuticles and wrapping hair in shine.
Just rub a few drops between your hands and slick lightly through freshly washed or dry hair.
Try Hayashi Hi-Shine.
Good conditioning
Because of on-going damage, conditioning is increasingly important.
It can't reverse the effects of processing — hair is made of dead cells and can't ‘heal’— but conditioner can temporarily fill in cracks in the hair shaft, smooth cuticles and coat hair with a moisturising film.
‘You should use a conditioner regularly, but processed hair may need extra,’ says Philip Kingsley.
He suggests using a deep-conditioning treatment once a week for dry hair and twice a month for oily hair.
We recommend Tigi Linea Conditioning Pack.
Conditioners with sun-screens can help guard against ultraviolet light which weakens and bleaches the hair.
City dwellers should use a light conditioner because heavy ones can leave residues which attract grime.
Hair also gets dirtier in cities, so you need to wash hair more often.
Gentle shampoos which cleanse well are Lancaster Very Mild Shampoo.
Colour choices
There are many ways to disguise grey hair.
We advise you to ask your hairdresser about these:
If you have a few grey hairs and want to blend them in, lowlights are subtle with a natural result.
They should be redone about every 12 weeks.
For hair that is up to 30% grey, a vegetable rinse (semipermanent colour) will add both vibrancy and shine while giving natural-looking highlights.
Good if you are nervous about making a permanent change.
Hair should be recoloured about every six weeks.
Colour baths are a diluted form of permanent colour and cover up to 50% grey, but the more grey you have the more noticeable the regrowth will be.
They should be redone about every 12 weeks.
We recommend L'Oréal's Diacolour and Redken's new Shades EQ.
Hair which is more than 50% grey needs permanent colour, but it doesn't have to look unnatural: some stylists will combine lowlights with permanent tint to give a more textured look, rather than a block colour.
Root touch-ups are required every four to six weeks.
Feed your hair
An unhealthy diet can go straight to your head.
Drastic dieting puts stress on the body, leaving less energy for synthesising non-essential proteins — such as hair — and this can lead to temporary hair thinning.
Anaemia, caused by iron deficiency, also makes hair sparser.
While there's no one vitamin or mineral which will make hair stronger, a balanced diet containing protein, calcium, zinc, iron, folic acid and the B vitamins is important for hair growth.
Dairy products, fish, leafy green vegetables, nuts, beans, and fresh fruit provide these but vegetarians may need extra vitamin B12.
Hair today…
It isn't only men who have to worry about losing their hair; temporary hair loss (telogen effluvium) is common among women.
Normally, each hair follicle goes through a resting phase (telogen) every few years: hair stops growing, falls out and isn't replaced for a few months.
Up to 12% of the hairs on your head are ‘resting’ at any time.
But when the body's hormone balance becomes disturbed — during pregnancy, for example— the hair's normal growing cycle is disrupted.
Pregnant women often have thick and luxuriant hair because unusually high oestrogen levels extend the growing cycle, preventing individual follicles from entering telogen.
In some women, however, all those hairs go into their resting stage at once, causing hair loss after the birth.
‘Although the loss is temporary, I've noticed that women who have had many pregnancies seem to wind up with thinner hair,’ says Kingsley.
Coming off the Pill can have the same effect.
Protracted illness can force hair into telogen en masse, and stress can also cause temporary shedding.
If you've noticed that your hair parting seems to be getting wider, seek the advice of your GP or a trichologist (hair and scalp expert).
To find one, send an sae to the Institute of Trichologists, 228 Stockwell Road, London SW9.
About a quarter of women in their 40s have some degree of baldness (androgenic alopecia).
Instead of receding hairlines, women have an all-over thinning which gets worse as they grow older.
Caught early enough, it can be held at bay.
Thin hair can be made to look fuller by using the right products.
‘Heavy products really drag the hair down,’ says stylist Charles Worthington.
He recommends L'Oréal Kérastase Re-Tonique Energising Conditioner Gelée.
We also suggest Sebastian Thick Ends — a leave-in conditioner that seals and thickens hair ends.
Another common mistake with fine or thinning hair is to use a strong-hold mousse.
‘Opt for a light-hold mousse, applied to the roots, for bouncy hair,’ says Charles.
Changing faces
By 35, our faces have undergone structural changes, so that the hair-styles which suited us throughout our 20s may suddenly seem severe and make us look older.
Now is the time to experiment with softer hairstyles, and find new shapes to frame the face and soften features.
Below-the-collarbone lengths tend to drag your face down when it's already suffering from the effects of gravity.
Tight perms also tend to look harsh, so you might opt for a softer, wavier look.
What hair really needs as you get older is some extra care.
With a stylist who understands your hair type and lifestyle, and a colourist who will adjust your shade to suit your changing needs, your hair can be radiant for life.
time for a change
When your life has changed but your looks have been left way behind, you need an image update.
We showed three readers how.
By Louise Pearce
Juliana Gill, 31, readily admitted she wasn't making the most of herself.
Since having her daughter Chiara, five, and son Joshua, three, she has been a full-time mother in rural Wiltshire, and her looks have taken a back seat.
With a wardrobe comprising jeans and sweatshirts, a make-up bag containing an eight-year-old foundation and a hairstyle that hadn't changed in ten years (husband Steve never noticed when she'd been to the hairdressers), Juliana felt in a rut ‘I feel I'm 30 going on 40 and would love to look more stylish, but I just don't know where to start.’
While Juliana couldn't be objective about herself, we instantly saw her potential.
She has striking Italian looks, a model height of five feet ten inches and long slim legs — all attributes which she hadn't been taking advantage of.
Hairdresser Daniel Hersheson made an instant transformation, cutting Juliana's hair into a shorter, face-framing bob to emphasise her heart-shaped face.
‘Her old style was pulling her face downwards,’ he explained.
A vegetable rinse disguised any grey hairs and gave shine to her new style.
Jane Cristofani of image consultants Public Persona had plenty of style guidelines for Juliana.
‘Steer clear of insipid colours and choose strong shades,’ she advised.
‘Emerald green, red, purple and royal blue really complement your dark colouring.’
She also recommended strong neutrals, such as black, charcoal, navy and white rather than softer creams and beiges.
Juliana's self-consciousness about her hips had always restricted how she dressed.
However, although she has a pear-shaped figure, her height makes it easy for her to disguise the fact that her shoulders are narrower than her hips.
Jane surprised Juliana by pointing her towards leggings and tapered trousers worn with outsized cardigans and sweaters.
She added that Juliana would also look fabulous in the new long, straight skirts rather than her usual full skirts, which only emphasised her hips.
‘Always be bold with your jewellery and accessories,’ summed up Jane.
Juliana had mistakenly believed that large earrings and wide belts would just draw attention to her size (being tall makes her feel big) but, in fact, anything too small looks insipid and unnoticeable.
Juliana doesn't have much time to spend on her make-up and indeed doesn't need to because she has a beautiful clear skin.
However, she was very keen to learn some quick and easy techniques.
For daytime, make-up artist Judith Pallan suggested she try Colourings' foundation and powder in one compact (£5.75) to even out darker skin under her eyes.
She highlighted Juliana's cheekbones with a pinky brown blusher and added a hint of warm tawny colour to her lips.
Lovely shades she could invest in include Almay Moisture Rich Lipstick in Copper Leaf (£4.55), Boots No 7 Luscious Lipcolour in Polka Dot (£2.75) or Revlon Moisture Lipstick in Bajan Brown (£6.96).
For special occasions, Judith showed her how to define her eyes by applying a taupe eyeshadow to her eyelids and a dark brown shade to the outside edges and along top and lower lashes.
Rimmel Silks Shadow Trio in Natural Earth (£3.45) would be a good compact to buy.
By the end of the day, Juliana was brimming over with new-found confidence.
And her husband Steve, who had been planning to treat her to a new look for her birthday, wholeheartedly approved of her dramatic transformation.
Helen Carpenter has always taken an interest in clothes and has a good eye for colour but, approaching 40, she felt it was time to rethink some areas of her looks.
With the youngest of her three children now at nursery school near their home in Somerset, Helen works part-time in the business she set up with a friend, organising helium balloon decorations for parties and weddings.
She and her husband, Andrew, enjoy an active social life in the evenings.
‘During the day I tend to wear classic, comfortable clothes, but knowing what to wear for evening poses a real problem,’ she explained.
‘I am always drawn towards feminine frocks which, I feel, suited me a lot better when I was younger.’
Jane Cristofani steered Helen towards soft separates instead, explaining that her curvaceous figure should be echoed in the shapes of her clothes.
Jane recommended scoop-necked bodies worn under silky shirts, which Helen could team with flowing trousers or skirts for a stylish but relaxed look.
‘Avoid high necklines,’ advised Jane.
‘Anyone with a short neck like Helen's will find lower-cut clothes far more flattering’ Her warm complexion suits soft colours, such as cream, gold, terracotta, chocolate and sandy brown — all ideal classics for evening.
Next, Helen was put in the capable hands of Daniel Hersheson who reshaped her hair.
‘Hair that's as thick and luxuriant as Helen's needs a definite style and regular trimming otherwise it grows outwards, making the head look bulky,’ he said.
Colourist Maria added golden lights to add texture and movement to her hair, which before had looked rather solid due to its thickness.
Helen admitted that she rarely wears much make-up in the evening, apart from a little gold eyeshadow, blusher and lipstick.
Judith Pallan recommended she try a light matte foundation, such as Estée Lauder's Lucidity Light Diffusing Makeup in Sun Beige (£16.50), to tone down the natural  ruddiness of Helen's complexion.
Then a light application of silky Lucidity powder (£18.50) would prevent shine and help her make-up last longer.
While Helen's usual choice of lipstick and blusher were a good match for her skintone, Judith showed her how to make more of her eyes.
‘Shimmery shadows can look lovely in the evening as long as they're subtle,’ she said.
‘I suggest that you try a warm brown shade instead of sparkling gold.’
We recommended Rimmel Silks Shadow Single in Bronze (£1.99) or Chanel Ombre Couture in Jersey Topaze (£15).
Judith blended it over the lids and showed Helen how to give the illusion of larger eyes by outlining them close to the lashes with a dark pencil (see Beauty News for recommendations).
We also like Helena Rubinstein's new Colour Fusion Mono Eyeshadow-Liner in Rich Bronze (£19).
The overall verdict?
‘I've really enjoyed the whole experience,’ said Helen, ‘and have learned to adapt my existing routine so that I look more polished overall.
It's amazing how a few simple changes can make such a difference!’
With her teenage son on the brink of independence, Pamela Constantinides has returned to full-time work for the first time in 16 years.
Her demanding post as a health service manager has presented Pamela, now approaching 50, with a new challenge — how to make her appearance more of a priority.
‘Now that I'm earning again, I want to invest in some good quality, classic outfits,’ said Pamela, whose standard work clothes were drab navy skirts teamed with various coloured blouses.
Pamela's job has dress constraints, and comfort is very important, so Jane Cristofani suggested she invest in skirt and trouser suits which could easily be mixed and matched for variety.
‘Pamela is small-boned and straight in the body with narrow hips,’ said Jane.
She explained that this figure type suits straight rather than fitted jackets but suggested Pamela avoid short boxy jackets, which would draw attention to her bust.
Jane also pointed out that Pamela has the ideal figure for trousers and when shopping for skirts, she should choose straight styles that end just below or above the knee.
And Pamela's best colours?
Strong, striking classics — black, bottle green, red, charcoal grey, navy, purple and white.
Daniel Hersheson then set to work on Pamela's hair, cutting it into a more tailored and modern style.
Colourist Maria tinted it and added lowlights to give a natural-looking golden colour, which also had the effect of warming up her rather drained skin tone.
The result was a striking contrast to the dull brown tinged with grey that Pamela had when she came into the salon.
Make-up was a mystery to Pamela who had only ever worn lipstick.
Make-up artist Ya'nina kept her guidelines simple, showing how a basic make-up bag of Clarins Revitalizing Tinted Moisturiser (£12.50), Givenchy's Sun Prism (£18.50)— bronzing powder for cheek definition — and a slick of berry or rusty lipstick flattered her features.
Having started the day keen for a new look but reticent at the same time, Pamela was overwhelmed by the dramatic changes to her appearance.
‘I thought my family and colleagues would faint when they saw me but they loved the new me instantly,’ she said.
‘It's definitely put me on the right tracks for the future.
Changing your hair cut and/or colour can be a great looks-booster.
We have a list of recommended salons you can send for, see Beauty News , page 33, for details.
Take a critical look at your clothes — do they flatter your best points or draw attention to your worst?
Do the colours enhance your skin tone?
An image consultant such as Public Persona could point you in the right direction.
If you are big-boned or tall, avoid small jewellery, belts and handbags.
The opposite applies if you are petite.
Are you in a rut with your make-up?
Try the helpful consultations offered at cosmetic counters, eg Clarins and Helena Rubinstein.
Do your own make-over
feel younger, longer
we'll work wonders workshop
Revitalise your image with the help of our experts
Do you find it hard to be objective about your looks as you grow older?
Have you gained inner confidence but lost your way as far as your hair, makeup and clothes are concerned?
Would you like to change some aspects of your image but don't know where to start?
If you relate to this, then our We'll Work Wonders workshop is exactly what you need.
We have linked up with L'Oréal Plénitude to bring you an exciting, friendly and informative day packed with inspirational ideas to help you make the most of yourself.
The event will begin with a witty and uplifting account from one of our regular writers, Jeannette Kupfermann, on why life begins at 40.
Next, leading London hairstylist and salon owner Charles Worthington will present a lively session.
Whether you've stuck with the same old style for years, want to find out the options for covering grey or simply want to learn how to manage your hair better, Charles will demonstrate practical ways to help you make the most of your hair.
Trichologist Glenn Lyons from the Philip Kingsley Trichological Clinic will join Charles to talk about specific hair and scalp problems, and what you can do to improve the health of your hair.
During the coffee break that follows, you will have the chance to chat with these two experts.
How to avoid becoming fat after 30 will be one of the issues addressed by SHE's food correspondent Janette Marshall, who is also co-author of the bestselling Eat for Life Diet (Vermilion, £8.99).
She will suggest delicious and inspiring ways to eat more healthily without going hungry.
From food for thought to fitness!
Stay active and your body will reward you with suppleness and agility.
Dynamic Susie Dinan, fitness expert from London Central YMCA, will convince you that you're never too young or old to start exercising — and never too busy to fit it into your life — before guiding you through simple revitalising exercises.
After a healthy buffet lunch, attention will shift to skincare, style and make-up.
An expert from L'Oréal will talk about what happens to skin as it gets older and explain how to keep up with its changing needs by choosing from the extensive Plénitude range, which helps to combat the signs of ageing.
Clever use of make-up can greatly enhance your appearance and leading make-up artist Teresa Fairminer will give you expert advice.
Teresa, who has regularly been called on by the Clothes Show and TV-am as well as many famous faces, will demonstrate simple application tips and talk about how to choose make-up from the bewildering choice available.
Do you tend to play safe with your clothes?
Whether you feel in need of a change of image or affirmation that you're getting it right, top style consultants from Public Persona will leave you buzzing with new ideas and eager to experiment.
Knowing what your best colours are and what styles will suit your figure can open up a whole new wardrobe — and make shopping a great deal easier.
The day will end with a prize draw, but no-one will go home empty-handed.
You will receive a wonderful goody bag which contains four full-size L'Oréal Plénitude skincare products, a 25% discount voucher for Worthingtons hair salons, a bottle of Aqua Libra, the natural, sparkling herbal fruit juice drink (worth around £25).
The workshop will take place on Saturday November 28 from 9.30am to 5.45pm at the luxurious five-star Edwardian International Hotel, close to Heathrow.
If you would like to stay overnight on Friday or Saturday (or both), we have arranged a special price of £54 per night, including continental breakfast and use of the first-class Pegasus Health Spa with its beautiful heated pool, gym, sauna and solarium.
The cost of the day is just £37.50 per person, with proceeds going to Age Concern, and includes morning coffee, lunch and afternoon tea.
There are only 100 places available so turn to page 216 and fill in the coupon right away to book your place.
FEELING BROODY
Male broodiness is not manifested in the need to make a child but in the need men have to remake themselves.
By John Diamond
English may well be the most nuance-rich language in the world, but when it comes to describing the difference between the sexes, there is a page of the dictionary missing.
Sure, the anatomy is easy, and there are plenty of women who with a straight face will describe their own post-workout shininess as delicate perspiration and mine as rough sweat.
But what is the male word for broodiness?
It might be, of course, that the male version of broodiness is broodiness, but I doubt it.
There are, you see, two conflicting arguments about what atavistic urge motivates the male of the species to perform his mating rituals and the female to respond with hers.
One says that, like all animals, everything we do is dedicated to the maintenance of the species.
On that basis, the male is programmed to go from nightclub to nightclub and bed to bed, scattering his seed about the place to produce as many new disco-dancing Lotharios as possible.
To that same end, the female, it follows, is programmed to stay at home with the tiny disco-dancers, wondering where the hell the father has got to at three in the morning.
If it is the case that we are motivated by nothing more than the need to reproduce, then it makes sense that women are programmed to be broody and men to satisfy that broodiness.
Men, under these circumstances, would have no broody gene of their own.
The other argument says that we are a higher and more socialised form of beast and that our urges are informed by something more subtle than base instinct.
In this model, the male has as much interest in forming a stable family unit as the female and gets just as broody.
The true model is probably somewhere in between the two.
Take me, for instance.
Here I am, knocking 40 any year now and sharing my life with a woman who is seven years my junior.
Theoretically, her biological clock is ticking away, although in practice, there is still enough time for us to split up, find new partners, get to know them and start a family.
Of course, nature being unjust as ever, I have no biological clock of my own.
In theory, you could see me in the Sunshine Home for Impoverished Journalists in 40 years' time, tripping the nurses over with my Zimmer frame in the hope that they'll let me father their child.
All that apart, the fact is that I do want children.
Or, as much to the point but slightly differently, I want to be a father.
The difference is that, while women see motherhood in emotional, hormonal terms, men see it as some sort of role-play.
When I close my eyes and imagine fatherhood, I see all the standard clichés: John Jr walking with me in the park, a football dribbling at his chubby little feet; John Jr passing me a spanner as I lie underneath the motorbike; John Jr asking me to read him that story one more time because I read it so well.
(Not, by the way, that I have my heart particularly set on a boy but, having grown up with only brothers, I don't quite know what the female clichés look like.)
Dynastic?
No.
I feel no real need to fill the world with more Diamonds.
Aggrandising?
Well, probably yes.
Men tend to see children as annexes to their own selves.
A child, I feel, will make me a better person and draw the attention of others to my good character.
And so I see the fathers in the park or the supermarket with their little charges and I am jealous.
It is partly, it goes without saying, that I'd like another sentient being who imagines me to be the centre of the universe, but it's more than that.
Like all fathers, I see fatherhood as a chance to turn over a new leaf.
On the one hand, I want fatherhood to make me a better person because I believe that, once I have the responsibility of looking after a child, giving up smoking and drinking and spending money on the motorbike will be a doddle.
On the other hand, I imagine that under my sublime guidance, this child will in some way be me but without the less desirable bits that I have so many problems divesting myself of.
My broodiness is not manifested in my need to make a child but in my need to remake myself.
But self-aggrandisement is not the only element of male broodiness.
There is a newer one born of our mortgage-sharing age.
In the old days, which is to say five years ago or so, the phrase you would most often hear issuing from the yet-to-be father was, ‘Yes, of course we'll have children.
But when the time's right.’
The fact is that the time is never right.
There is always a promotion pending, a last great childless holiday to be taken, a car loan to be paid off.
Having a child will always interrupt these things.
But at the back of the yet-to-be father's mind was the belief that his professional life would continue while his wife did some mothering.
Now things are different.
Over the past year, I've come across a dozen or more men of my age who are with women who simply aren't willing to give it all up for a baby.
Now, as often as not, it's the women who are saying, ‘Yes, we'll have a family — when the time is right.’
And they don't mean when we can afford a bigger house or when we've had the big-deal holiday, but when I've risen high enough on the corporate ladder to be able to take six months off without everyone forgetting who the hell I am.
The other thing they mean is, when my partner has grown up sufficiently for me to believe there's a fair chance of him changing nappies and giving the 2am feed.
I meet men now who say things like, ‘I'm worried that if she doesn't get a move on, it'll be too late.’
And it's because of these changes that the nature of male broodiness has changed.
It's the men now, as often as not, who hear the biological clock ticking loudest.
Answer our survey and you could receive a free mobile phone on the Cellnet Lifetime service
KEEPIN in touch
For many women, bringing up children while also working outside the home represents the ultimate fulfilling lifestyle — as well as contributing towards (or solely providing) financial security for the family.
But a busy life inevitably leaves little time for social contact.
With demands made on your time by employers during the day and children in the evenings, months can slip by before you manage to see friends and family.
Jane, a 40-year-old systems analyst, sums it up when she comments, ‘Sometimes weeks can go by before I even get a chance to have a proper conversation with my husband!’
Time management is the key here, something that most women are very good at — by necessity.
And for many women, a pivotal factor is the role of the phone.
‘Calling my partner in a spare 15 minutes during the day is the best way to get important things discussed — it's certainly quieter than at home,’ says Andrea, who runs her own catering business.
And even though visits to friends or family may be months apart, especially if they live some distance from you, regular phone conversations mean you need never lose touch.
Beyond social contact, the phone has a practical role to play in the lives of working mothers.
‘It's a great comfort to me, knowing that I'm on the end of a phone, should either of my children be taken ill,’ says Elaine, 34, a part-time marketing consultant and mother of two girls under four.
‘But what really annoys me is when I'm stuck in a traffic jam, and can't let my childminder know I'm going to be late.’
Elaine's feelings are echoed by many women, and this is where the mobile phone comes in.
Lifetime, a new service from Cellnet available from November, ensures that the mobile phone is no longer the preserve of people in business.
The mobile phone has much to offer the family in practical, social and security terms.
If your car breaks down or you need to get a taxi home late at night, the last thing you want to do is wander round looking for a phone box.
A mobile phone eliminates this problem and also means you are instantly contactable by your partner, childminder and children — wherever you are.
The service is specially priced to be affordable to domestic users.
A Sony mobile phone costs around £299, subscription to Cellnet Lifetime is about £15 per month, and calls are generally charged at 20p a minute off-peak and 50p a minute peak time — all in all, a reasonable price to pay for peace of mind.
In addition you could benefit from a messaging system which turns your mobile phone into an answerphone when not in use.
For information on Cellnet Lifetime, tel: 0800–214000.
Offer We have a complete Cellnet Lifetime package to give away (all the winner pays for is outgoing calls).
Just fill in the following survey and send it to the address below.
The closing date is November 22, and the first survey picked out of the bag after that date will win.
RED IS DEAD but are Russian women any better off?
They have glasnost and perestroika but not an easy life.
By Fiona Cameron
‘You can't imagine how nervous I get wondering how to feed my family and whether the food I can find is even edible.
Sometimes I may spend a week just looking for something I want.’
Larissa, 40, became a teacher so that she would have more time with her children, but she spends most of her spare time in queues.
Ever since the 1917 Revolution, Russian women have been waiting for things to improve — and they are still waiting.
Mother Russia, the babushka and the chubby nesting ‘matrioshka’ doll are powerful images and, from an emotional point of view, Russia is a matriarchal society.
A woman without children is considered abnormal, yet nine out of ten adult women also work or study full-time outside the home, and women constitute just over half the total Russian workforce.
It is not unusual for women to work a 40-hour week, followed by a further 40-hour week of domestic chores.
They are the ultimate jugglers, but they have to manage without the help of disposable nappies, supermarkets and freezers.
Most women are resigned to this and some use their martyrdom to manipulate their men.
When they rebel it causes trouble, as Natalya, 40, found out when she became a successful property dealer in St Petersburg.
‘My husband hates me being a businesswoman.
He would far rather that I acted the good housewife instead.
But the drudgery of standing in queues for hours or doing housework is awful.
Now I make enough money to pay others to help at home and queue for me.
I love my success.
My husband feels threatened but he will have to put up with it.’
For women, communism has always been a double-edged sword.
In the early days after the Revolution, prospects for women looked hopeful.
Principles of sexual equality and equal pay for equal work were enshrined in early Bolshevik legislation in the 1920s.
Abortion was legalised, divorce was made simple and marriage became a civil, non-religious affair.
Since it was generally believed that emancipation depended on women's participation in production, demands were made to free women from domestic slavery by the provision of communal facilities for childcare and cooking.
The first part of the equation was relatively successful.
While women in the West have been fighting for the right to be accepted as builders, train drivers, engineers and scientists.
Russian women take these things for granted (although they still earn, on average, 25% less than men).
Communism did have considerable advantages, as Tamara, 70, a pensioner from Moscow, points out.
‘I came from a poor family in the countryside and communism gave me a chance for a better life.
It gave me free education, a home and free medical care.’
Nina, 84, cannot imagine life without a career.
‘I was born in St Petersburg and worked all my life as an engineer.
In 1941, all factories were moved out of Leningrad (as St Petersburg was called from 1924 to 1991) and I took my son with me but I had to leave my husband behind.
He died during the blockade (when the Germans cut off supplies to Leningrad and almost one million people died) but I rebuilt my life through my work.’
Nina had paid help to look after her son and help with housework.
But it was a luxury few could afford and the intentions of the Bolsheviks to free women from domestic slavery were conveniently forgotten as Stalin put emphasis on heavy industry rather than consumer goods.
While the state could not develop without female labour (at one time, as a result of Stalin's purges and World War II, there were 40% more women than men in the working population), equally, it could not afford to replace the role of the wife and mother in the home.
The state pushed the idea of the heroic mother, with career and children.
Despite subsidised kindergarten facilities which would be the envy of most Western countries, the fact remains that school hours are invariably shorter than working hours and there is always the problem of what to do when the children are sick.
This is where the babushka (grandmother) comes in.
The bond between mother and daughter in Russia is a very strong one and it is still very common for a family of three generations to live together.
Nina herself retired early, to help look after her grandson.
‘When women are young, their careers and pension rights would be damaged if they took time off for their children, so grandmothers must help.
The result is that you often know your grandchildren better than your own children!’
The problem of childcare is aggravated by the high divorce rate (over 60% in Moscow and 33% elsewhere) which has led to a large number of single parent families.
Tatiani, 31, is an economist.
She divorced her alcoholic husband four years ago when he started beating her up, and has custody of their six-year-old daughter, Anna.
‘I have my own flat, a country dacha and a good job.
But after my divorce, I moved back into my parents' home because I couldn't cope with Anna Alone.
My father takes her to and from school and my parents both help at the weekends.’
It also solves the eternal problem for single parents of developing new relationships, something that Tatiana is the first to admit to.
‘The real problem here is privacy.
I'm lucky, but few single people have homes of their own and it's illegal for an unmarried couple to get a room in a hotel.
It's ironic that a prostitute can get a hotel room by bribing someone but if you're a respectable woman you are likely to be arrested if you even try to get through the front door.
Lovers must rely on the discretion of parents or ask friends to lend them a room.’
Until a few years ago, sex education was left to parents.
Then, concerned about the divorce rate, the state instituted sex education in schools.
According to Larissa, it is not the solution.
‘A very bright 17-year-old pupil of mine got pregnant last year, the result of a one-night stand at a party.
It would have been better for her to have an abortion, but by the time she told her mother it was too late, so she kept the baby.
I had hoped she would go to college but now it's not possible.’
Russia doesn't have a monopoly on unwanted teenage pregnancies but one statistic that does shock is the high abortion rate.
Abortion is free and Irina, 32, a gynaecological surgeon, thinks that if women had to pay they might think about it more.
‘It makes me angry that women think so little about their bodies that they use abortion as a means of contraceptive.
One in every four women here has an abortion every year.
In the world as a whole, about ten per cent of all pregnancies are terminated.
In Russia the rate is 22%.
Not all women can use IUDs and they complain about the side effects of the Pill, but the Pill is much safer than an abortion.’
Irina herself often has to correct the mistakes of illegal abortion.
‘A 28-year-old girl came to me with terrible complications.
She died on the operating table.
It made me sick with anger.’
Illegal abortions should not be necessary in Russia, but a married woman having an affair might want to keep the abortion quiet.
Or a pregnant girl may wait too long to be able to have one legally, or may be afraid of what her family will say.
At least things are improving, believes Irina.
‘Until four years ago, doctors had to state the type of operation on a woman's work-leave papers.
But an abortion is a very private affair.’
Where do men come in?
‘Russian men are very lazy; they sit back and wait.
They just want another mother to look after them,’ claims Tatiana.
Irina, whose first husband walked out, leaving her with a toddler and a four-month-old baby, has another view: ‘I owe everything to my second husband.
Without this help and support, I could not be a surgeon.’
‘My husband doesn't do any housework or cooking but he is marvellous with the children,’ says Larissa.
In the current situation in Russia, few women can afford the luxury of thinking about themselves.
However, there is a growing gulf between old and young.
While women with older children are frightened that they will have to pay for college education and hospital care and are preoccupied with day-to-day living, the young have a completely different set of values and expectations.
They have grown up with glasnost, rock music and Western fashions.
They tend to rely on their parents to put up with the drudgery of queues and are only interested in capitalism and the rewards it can bring.
But they are not feminists.
Masha, 20, is training to be a fashion model in St Petersburg.
She lives with her boyfriend, Vadim.
‘I don't need feminism.
We are equal.
I don't worry about who should play what roles.
We just live.
I hope to make enough money as a model to live well.
I have girlfriends who have resorted to prostitution to make money.
It's nice to have money for pretty clothes and makeup, but I prefer other methods!’
Svetlana Petrova, 29, is an avant-garde fashion designer who lives with her philosopher husband in a squat in St Petersburg.
‘Russia is like a horror movie,’ she says.
‘Things are changing too slowly.
I've just spent two days looking for thread.
If I go out in search of a long white zip, I end up having to make do with a short blue one.
It takes two months to make one costume; the machines are old and Russians don't know how to work.
The last seamstress I used tried to commit suicide twice and I don't think my designs are that depressing!
It is just that we Russians are living in unbearably horrible conditions.
There is panic buying of food, air tickets, train tickets, everything.
It will take 100 years to change the mentality here.
People do not understand that no-one will pay you for your blue eyes in a capitalist society.
They don't know what work is.
‘I'm absolutely not a feminist.
My dream is to be a housewife, perhaps in France or the Canary Islands, where I wouldn't have to think of work or money and could go on excursions to supermarkets.
When I see my French and German friends complaining, I get angry.
If I had what they have, I would consider myself in heaven.’
Fortunately, not everyone is quite as cynical as Svetlana.
Perhaps one of the most surprising things about talking to Russian women now is their underlying optimism and hope.
The prospect of real freedom after so many years of oppression is exciting as well as daunting.
Russian women are tremendously strong and are used to finding inventive solutions to everyday problems.
However fast and unpredictable the changes to their world, this resourcefulness will help them make the best of it.
Clockwise from top left: Masha hopes modelling will bring her money; queues form quickly after rumours of new supplies; a farmer selling her produce; Larissa (left), spends her spare time in food queues; career success for Natalya means she can pay someone to queue for her; Svetlana is a fashion designer with no materials.
Clockwise from above: Tatiana is a single parent; Irina, a surgeon, at work; Tamara, 70, is grateful to communism.
tie me up, tie me down should cohabitees get wed?
Living together before you marry is no guarantee of future happiness.
By Trudy Culross
Fifty years ago, when the world was younger and sex was an altogether simpler if scarcer commodity, there was a popular song, the lyrics of which brooked no argument: ‘Love and marriage, love and marriage, go together like a horse and carriage.
Let me tell you, brother, you can't have one without the other.’
Changed days, huh?
Now, anything goes.
You can take your pick from love with or without marriage, sex without marriage, marriage without love or sex, or sex without anything.
A recent Office of Population Censuses and Surveys report concluded that marriages between couples who had previously lived together were 60% more likely to break down.
Since over 50% of us seem to opt for a period of co-habitation before we take the marital plunge, these findings are pretty sobering stuff.
Why do so many of us feel the need to test the water first?
Is a period of living together any indication of how the marriage will fare?
Why do some women see marriage as an absolute priority from the start of a relationship, yet others wouldn't sashay down the aisle if their lives depended on it?
Sarah has tried it both ways.
Twenty-one when she met Peter, she married him two years later and left him six years after that.
Now 34 and divorced, she has lived with Geoff for three years and isn't contemplating marriage again.
‘When I moved in with Peter, I expected us to marry.
It was something I had been raised to believe in, so the idea of living with him, even temporarily, had an illicit feel to it.
We married 18 months later and I thought I knew him fairly well.
‘In fact, I didn't know him at all and he'd managed to slip in and out of affairs before I even tumbled to the fact that he was playing around.
For the next six years, our marriage was constantly threatened by his other women.
I can't help thinking that a lot of it was because he felt trapped.
Most of his friends were still on the loose while he had to come home eventually and he felt he was always answerable to ‘the wife’.
I think he began to resent marriage first and then he began to resent me.’
By the time she was 29, Sarah had had her fill of Peter and married life.
‘By then, all my romantic ideas about marriage being special and forever had bitten the dust.’
Does she anticipate a second marriage with Geoff?
‘No way!
I love him to bits but I'm long past the stage of believing marriage is what makes a relationship real and holds it together.
Going through that rigmarole wouldn't protect what we have at all.
Now I really believe that getting married can place unspoken demands on people, which sooner or later they'll kick against.
I don't ever want Geoff to drive home at night feeling he's got to be with me whether he wants to or not.’
Zelda West-Meads of Relate understands Sarah's reservations.
‘If you have already experienced a bad marriage, you may feel that to marry again is to end up in the same sorry state.
Your psychological view of marriage is that it can destroy a relationship.’
Even previously unmarried women can hold this view if they experienced the break-up of their parents' marriage.
And a fear of commitment itself is a real possibility for those of a parent or loved one during childhood.
However, there are some women who display total commitment to their men without appearing to need the safety net of marriage.
Gail is 37 and has lived with Stephen for nine years.
Marriage doesn't figure in their plans.
‘We'd been seeing each other for a year when he suggested we should move in together.
I can't say that I looked too far ahead, probably because I'm the kind of person who lives for today.
‘To be honest, I think that people who need marriage are emotionally inferior — it's a sort of weakness.
They seem to have the idea that getting married will make the other person their property.
Maybe if I was really hard up with no career or opportunities in life I might feel differently.
Or if I wanted a child, that might change my attitude.
‘We never talk about the future.
We just have this easy-going assumption that we'll always be together.
But I'm also very cynical.
People change — you see it all around you.
So it's not a good idea to take anything for granted, especially your relationship.’
Zelda West-Meads is aware that more and more women hold views similar to Gail's.
‘There is a growing number of people who see cohabitation as a complete alternative to the married state — particularly among well-educated women with promising careers, who regard the more traditional role of wife as getting in the way.
Cohabitation seems to offer them more freedom.
Not necessarily sexual freedom but more time and space to pursue their goals, without being restricted by the domestic role.’
Warren Colman of the Tavistock Institute of Marital Studies agrees.
‘Most cohabiting couples either break up eventually or else go on to choose marriage.
But there are some couples who have taken an ideological stance against it.
They've decided that marriage ceremonies have nothing to do with how they feel, even though they regard their relationship as being every bit as permanent as marriage.’
But it's undeniable that, for many women, the status which goes with being a wife is important.
And marriage is the only state which affords women some measure of protection under law, which is why many women insist on it even when they suspect their relationship might not last the distance.
Marianne is 33 and she married for the third time two years ago.
‘I know friends think I'm a bit outdated in my thinking but I don't understand women who just live with men.
Why settle for such a temporary arrangement?
It never occurred to me to live with my first husband.
We both lived with our parents while we saved up to get married.
I don't think living together first would have changed the outcome — we were just too young and unsuited.’
By the time Marianne's first marriage was breaking up, she had a three-year-old son and had already met Brian, her second husband.
‘I agreed to move in with him just until my divorce came through and I insisted we married immediately after that.’
Five years on, their marriage ended.
‘Basically, I was bored.
Brian never wanted to do anything.
Life was stagnant.
So Mike, my present husband, was a breath of fresh air.’
They met through work and had an affair for five months until Mike, who was divorced, suggested Marianne should leave her husband.
‘Again, I lived with Mike for as long as it took to get the divorce and then I arranged the wedding.
Two failed marriages didn't put me off.
What I would find off-putting is the idea that people would see me as a divorced man's bit of light relief.
‘In this part of the world, being Mrs So-and-So makes all the difference to the way people treat you.
And, to put it bluntly, marriage means security.
Any solicitor will tell you, if you're cohabiting and the man leaves you, you haven't got a leg to stand on.
He has no financial obligation towards you, unless you go to a lot of trouble to prove otherwise, and that could take years.
‘There are disadvantages to marriage.
You do have to compromise a fair bit and I suppose that I would like more freedom than I've got.
But these are nothing to the disadvantages I see to just living with a man.
They're fickle sods, after all, and I think it's already too easy for men to shirk their responsibilities towards us.
With marriage, at least you have some come-back.
I think women who forgo that are incredibly naive.’
The fact that Marianne places a great deal of store by marriage but not its permanence comes as no surprise to Warren Colman.
Her attitude typifies a growing dilemma.
‘There's an interesting schism developing between marriage as a relationship and marriage as an institution.
Over the last 30 or 40 years, the actual quality of marriage has grown in importance and this may well be reflected in the higher divorce rates.
For some people, the state of marriage is all-important, so they will stick it out whether they're happy or not.
For a growing number, being in a good relationship is what matters so if the relationship — and therefore the marriage — deteriorates, couples choose to separate.
Possibly the pendulum has swung too far in that people have gone from feeling that somewhere in a marriage there should be room to accommodate their personal feelings, to believing that their feelings are everything.’
The other interesting scenario is when a woman who has lived with a man at some stage in her life subsequently opts for marriage, either with this partner or a future one.
Pattie is living proof that if you live with a man, you discover a lot you didn't know when you were just dating him.
‘I knew that Alan liked the odd drink but it wasn't until we were living together that I realised her was more or less an alcoholic, and violent with it.’
Three months later, Pattie decided to leave him, only to discover that she was pregnant.
‘I'd always known Alan was mad about kids and I wouldn't deny him his chance to be a father.
I hoped the baby would bring out all the good things Alan had the potential to be.
And more than that, I'd grown up with divorced parents and I do think kids need a mother and a father.’
Pattie finally called a halt to the relationship 18 months later when Alan, drunk and angry, knocked over the baby in an attempt to attack Pattie.
Once she moved out, Pattie discovered that she could take care of herself and the baby and the sense of freedom was fantastic.
Then she met Stuart.
‘I liked him the moment I met him but I never dreamed we'd end up like this .
I had dismissed marriage as being unsatisfactory.
Even people who managed to stay married seemed to do it only by making incredible compromises which I thought was contemptible.’
But Stuart got serious quickly and popped the question six months later.
‘I was so terrified that I fought him all the way.
I didn't want to place myself in the hands of someone who might insist on more than I was prepared to give.
It was Stu's persistence that wore me down.
I married him without much hope that it would come out right.
‘Three years later, I can't believe how happy I am or how much being married has changed my life.
I feel very secure and strong.
Marriage isn't about being ‘in love’, it's a deep and lasting friendship which far outweighs passion.’
So, once we have cohabited, why do many of us feel the need to change our status?
According to Zelda West-Meads, the reasons why women make this decision are complex.
‘It seems to be that as they get older the prospect of cohabitation is less exciting for women.
There isn't the same need to fly in the face of convention or oppose the wishes of parents.
‘Once they have decided that they are committed to one man, they seem to want to acknowledge this publicly and to receive public approval in return.
Marriage is a rite of passage and does actually give credence to loving and being loved by someone exclusively.’
While it may still be a rite of passage, it's clear that marriage is no longer regarded as a journey without end.
Neither recently married Pattie nor thrice-married Marianne seem to have illusions that marriage is a lifetime affair.
Women like Sarah, on the other hand, who do have high expectations of marriage, are likely to be sufficiently disillusioned by the reality of wedded bliss not to want to repeat the experience.
Yet the conclusions of the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys report are still disturbing.
Why should living together, in particular, be the kiss of death to hopeful marrieds?
It may be that some couples cohabit initially because they are uncertain about the strength of their relationship so their subsequent marital breakdown could be attributed to these underlying doubts, rather than the ‘destructive’ experience of cohabitation.
Possibly, couples who cohabit view marriage in a different light to those who don't.
Recent survey results suggest that cohabitees have more liberal views towards marriage and divorce than marrieds.
They are emphatically against making divorce more difficult to obtain and unsympathetic to the idea that society should do more to protect marriage.
Whatever the explanations, one statistic is undeniable.
Back in the mid-60s, only a small percentage of couples chose to live together prior to marriage.
By the late 80s, this figure had spiralled to more than 50% of all marriages — and it is still rising.
‘I take thee…to have and to hold…’ was once thought of as the beginning of a romantic and loving vow, which women could hardly wait to take.
Today, it seems, for many of us, these words hold an altogether different promise and more than a few terrors.
‘To be honest, I think people who need marriage are emotionally inferior — it's a kind of weakness’
Is Michael Palin PERFECT?
The ex-Python turned world explorer seems just too good to be true.
By Suzie MacKenzie
It is axiomatic that Michael Palin, former Python, actor, writer and, most recently, on-television explorer, is Mr Nice Guy.
His friends attest it.
‘So nice he's bound to feel guilty about it,’ says theatre critic Robert Hewison, a close friend since Oxford University days.
The exigent journalist Lynn Barber, in her collection of interviews Mostly Men , singles him out as the sole male representative of a type she describes as ‘nice, straightforward, feet on the ground’.
And Alan Bleasdale, author of the award-winning drama series GBH in which Palin memorably played neurotic headmaster Jim Nelson, maintains, ‘Michael hates it, I know, but nice is what he is.
Nice, honourable, well-mannered, lovable.’
Even Helen, Palin's wife of 26 years, was once heard to warn him, ‘If you get any nicer I shall have to leave.’
It hits you straight away, the niceness, in the warm smile, the firm handshake.
Even his classic boyish looks seem to proclaim his good humour and openness.
He laughs a lot.
We are in London's trendy media haunt, the Groucho Club, where he has that day become a member, his celebrity enabling him to jump a one-year waiting list to his evident delight, and where he is promoting his new BBC travel series Pole to Pole , a sequel to the successful Around the World in 80 Days .
At my request the BBC publicity person chaperoning him is despatched.
‘Much better.
I prefer it that way, too,’ says Palin, for all the world as though it were his idea.
‘A glass of water — I'm so sorry there's no ice.’
Charmed by so much solicitude, it is a bit of a surprise when, as we begin to talk, he immediately diverts his attention to something else, autographing a pile of cards with, ‘Excuse me.
I must just finish this.’
Later he explains that he dislikes talking about himself, ‘I'm not eloquent that way’; that his talent is for observation.
And that, like all natural observers, he has developed a knack of deflecting curiosity about himself.
‘I like to watch life and I guard my ability to stand back or to move in very jealously.’
Which is why, I suspect, though he hates it, he will tolerate ‘nice’.
Because, in most circles, nice is synonymous with dull, not worthy of examination.
And Michael Palin cannot bear to be scrutinised.
Which rather begs the question why he became an actor.
His own, slightly flimsy explanation is, ‘It was the only job I could have done with my vague, easily bored, butterfly mind.’
But there is also a suggestion that, left to his own devices, it might never have happened.
‘I'm not an instigator.
People ask me to do things,’ he says.
But this is to ignore his considerable talent to inspire the friendship and devotion of others.
Palin's history, from his marriage through his professional life, is a history of successful and enduring partnerships.
At university it was initially Robert Hewison who persuaded him that ‘we can make money out of telling jokes.’
Later, via a university revue at the Edinburgh Festival, he met Terry Jones and began co-writing with him for The Frost Report .
This led, in turn, to the Pythons, the idea of John Cleese.
‘Terry and I had written a six-part series The Complete and Utter History of Britain for LWT.
And one day John rang and said, very Johnish, ‘Well, you won't be making any more of those for a while.
Let's get together.’’.
Three series later it was Cleese's decision to dissolve the group.
‘John felt we'd done enough.’
Palin wasn't even angry.
Or not as angry as the others.
His response?
‘John was probably right,’ he says.
What he characteristically does not say is that it was he who kept the Pythons together.
Hewison remembers, ‘There was tremendous in-fighting, egos, strong will, and Michael was the lynchpin.
He had the friendship of Terry Jones and the respect of John Cleese.’
Palin's own version is, ‘Terry and John were the animated pair.
Eric was the quiet one.
I don't like shouting so I was in the middle.
And Graham was usually late.’
Modest he may be but soft he is not.
At one point I ask him if travelling through Africa for Pole to Pole was disturbing.
He looks at me hard and says in a voice that can only be described as arch, ‘Do you mean do I cry when I see children with flies round their eyes?
The answer is I can cope.’
What has irked him, I suppose, is what he construes as ill-informed, indulgent Western empathy.
He could have said, ‘Of course it's upsetting…’ and later he does try to waffle his way into a gentler position.
But his instinctive response is direct.
It's the same when I ask if he is a romantic.
‘I don't buy my wife flowers, if that's what you're asking.’
So for all his ineffable niceness there is something unyielding about him.
Bleasdale saw it: ‘There is a steeliness there.
Something proud, passionate.
Michael's always controlled, deliberate, intelligent.’
It is a truism that charming people often have something to hide — usually their total dependence on others' good opinion.
With Palin this doesn't seem to hold.
If he needed external ratification his lifestyle would be more designed to impress.
For 18 years he has lived in the same house in London's Gospel Oak, though he could easily afford the neighbouring and more upmarket Hampstead.
‘Probably,’ he says.
But it's all too monotonously similar.
‘Boutiques and people who frequent boutiques.’
He doesn't drive a flash car, He has sent his children to state schools.
All of which suggests a person who knows his own mind and makes his own decisions.
So where do they lurk, I ask him, the neuroses, the insecurities?
He seems to think this is funny.
After all, isn't it obvious?
‘It's all in the work,’ he says.
Which it is, in a way.
From Monty Python onwards, Palin has specialised in playing a recognisably English eccentric — the ordinary man who is extraordinary.
‘Playing minor characters has always interested me more than playing heroes.
The bank clerks, waiters, shopkeepers — I enjoy their obstructiveness.
They're not poor, powerless people, they can make you wait as long as they like.’
Bullies, in other words — as Palin's father, an unsuccessful Sheffield businessman with a calamitous stutter, was a bully.
Palin never says this himself but talking to him and reading through previous interviews, one thing is striking.
In marked contrast to his reserve about himself and his immediate family — his wife Helen and their three children — there is a wealth of information about his father.
He says he ‘could be cruel and hurtful’ to his mother who was ‘sweet, loving, warm’.
He was a doctor's son, Cambridge educated, and had certain class expectations which he failed to realise.
‘He was never promoted, he just stood still.’
Palin sometimes explains his father by saying that he was a sad man who did not pursue the career he wanted.
‘He loved singing in the choir, playing the organ, ringing church bells.
He should have been a choir master.
He was told he couldn't do it by his forceful parents.’
Which is interesting because he also tells me that his father expected him to follow him to Cambridge University.
Palin failed to get in and went to Oxford instead.
Did he do it to thwart his father?
‘Oh, no,’ he replies almost blithely.
He never did anything to thwart his father, ‘Except to become an actor.
He thought it was degenerate, that he'd have to support me into my 30s.’
It's worth noting that Palin's eldest son Tom is a musician and he supports him.
‘I'm happy to do it.
If you believe in your children you don't want them to do a dull job just to earn money.’
His other son, William, has followed him to Brasenose College, Oxford.
His daughter, Rachel, is still at school.
So it could be said that Michael Palin's whose career went against what his father wished for him — All the more unforgivable because, unlike his father, he has followed ‘my natural inclination’— and succeeded.
He obviously feels guilty about this.
A guilt compounded by the suicide five years ago of his sister Angela (nine years his senior), with which he admits he has not yet come to terms.
It is strange how so many of Palin's characters, from Pythons' Mr Gumby through to the stuttering animal-loving crook in Cleese's A Fish Called Wanda , seemed to be based on his father, almost as if he was persecuting himself by playing infinite versions of the man.
But more recently this seems to have changed.
Palin is moving closer to centre stage, as the two BBC travelling series reveal.
And perhaps this also explains why he was so keen to play the leading part as villainous Michael Murray in GBH .
Bleasdale had written the role expressly for Robert Lindsay but when Lindsay dropped out at one point, Palin enthusiastically stepped in.
We will never know what Palin would have done with this part because Lindsay returned and Palin graciously stood down.
Bleasdale admits he was frankly amazed.
‘I asked Michael, point blank, to relinquish the role.
I knew if it had been the other way round, if it was Robert I had to ask, he would have said, ‘On yer bike.’’
The point being that even Bleasdale who knew Palin well hadn't expected him to be quite so nice.
‘I tell you,’ he says.
‘We're talking about a guy who's almost faultless.’
Michael Palin has written a book , Pole to Pole (BBC Books, price £16.95), about his latest journey .
are you a LOUSY JUDGE OF CHARACTER?
We all like to think we know an honest face when we see one, but few of us can really tell friend from foe.
By Lauren Young
It was a throwaway remark.
We were discussing people.
My best friend said, ‘What do you think of so-and-so?’ and I said, ‘Um, I don't know really.
Nice, I suppose.’
And she protested.
Spent the next ten minutes itemising all aforesaid so-and-so's deficiencies.
And then, after a long and thoughtful pause, she hit me with it.
‘Well, you're not a very good judge of character, though, are you, Lauren?’
Ouch, that hurt.
What did she mean?
OK, I often employ builders on the basis that they've got an honest face only to find they've nicked my buckets, added unnegotiated noughts on to their invoices and buggered up the plumbing but…
‘I meant with men,’ she said, backpedalling fast to save our friendship, ‘and, of course, when you were younger.’
Yes, well.
When I was younger my mother would say, with a wrinkling of her nose, that she thought my friends were ‘riffraff’.
That hurt, too.
And I defended them.
Men who failed to wash up, wash themselves, get jobs, remember birthdays or talk on any subject but themselves had ‘good hearts’, I would insist.
They were ‘all right, once you got to know them’.
They'd had ‘bad experiences as children’.
They were…yes I now concede, complete and utter bozos.
So I am improving.
But I still want to know, how do you judge a character?
I live in Kentish Town, you see, and Denis Neilsen, the famous head-boiler of Muswell Hill, worked in our neighbourhood Careers Office.
Had I met him in the grocer's, I'd probably have thought him ‘nice’ as well.
It's worrying.
Everybody likes to think they are good at judging character, of course.
That's why you meet so many people at parties who are falling over themselves to recommend their accountant, dentist, gardener or solicitor, as if having a good one automatically bestowed a halo of good judgement on the one who found him first.
It's not like the old days when people lived in villages and knew whose great-great-grandad was a horse thief or whatever.
These days most of us meet so many different people from so many different backgrounds.
How can we possibly begin to work them out?
Even in the past, of course, they must have found it hard.
Why else have people through the ages been obsessed with finding methods to reduce complex, individual human personalities to ‘types’?
In medieval times you would have been a Sanguine, Melancholy, Choleric or Phlegmatic type.
In the late 19th century, they studied bumps on heads (phrenology) and if you were unfortunate enough to have a large protuberance on your forehead — well, you wouldn't have got as far as nice chats in the grocer's with a friendly-going-on-gullible type like myself.
They'd have put you in an asylum and featured your aggressive, dangerous-looking profile in a textbook for the medical profession.
Now, as then, we've got astrology.
But is this valid?
I know an American whose child appears to anybody with a bit of common sense to be a perfect reincarnation of Attila the Hun.
But his mother had his horoscope chart done.
‘His chart says he is passive, gentle and inclined to dream,’ she tells me in her West Coast drawl, ‘so I am pushing him.’
She judges everybody by their star sign, too, avoiding Scorpios because they've got a sting in their tail, Geminis because they've got split personalities and Taureans because they're stubborn, irrespective of the staggering complexity of human nature.
Body language is the modern thing, as well.
‘Ah ha!
He rubs his nose and fiddles with his ear, he must be insecure!’ we say.
And the on-going tabloid obsession with Charles and Diana's marriage: ‘Oh, they must be going through a bad patch.
See the photo where his knees are angled away from hers, while her knees eloquently express her sadness at the distance that has come between them.’
Really!
If those knees could tell a story it would probably be an angry diatribe against the paparazzi.
There's a lot in body language, though.
Possibly it's the very thing we all draw on, unconsciously, when we judge a character.
I went to a clairvoyant once, when I was young and needed to be told, by anybody, who I was and where I was heading.
She said the most amazing things, I thought.
‘You're very sad,’ she said.
‘What is this thing about your body?
And your husband, tell me, what's he doing to you?’
Gosh, I thought, she knows .
But later a friend pointed out that, knowing me, I was probably sitting hunched up, with my arms crossed over my fat belly, fiddling with my wedding ring.
And had I answered all the clairvoyant's questions?
Yes, I had told her everything.
So what did I expect?
I once hitched a ride with a delightful man whom I trusted because he said, ‘Life's lovely, isn't it?
I'm going to have a nice steak for my tea tonight and then it's dancing with the missus.
There's some mints in the glove compartment if you want them, love.’
I would have staked my life on what I called my ‘gut feeling’ that he was — and even in my mother's terms — a thoroughly nice man.
But looking back, it all came from the way he spoke so affectionately about his family.
There's a saying that ‘a man never reveals his character more vividly than when portraying the character of another’.
And this is obviously very true.
Pride, envy, selfishness, resentment, kindness, self-respect, good-heartedness, ambition, every quality of character there is will be revealed in the way that someone talks — about their mother, say, their colleagues or their wife.
According to Allen Pease, in Body Language — How to Read Others' Thoughts by Their Gestures (Sheldon Press, £4.99).
‘Whenever we call someone ‘perceptive’ or ‘intuitive’, we are referring to his or her ability to read another person's non-verbal cues and to compare these with verbal signals.’
When we have a hunch that somebody is telling lies, for instance, ‘what we really mean is that their body language and their spoken words do not agree.’
Women are generally more perceptive in this way than men, he says, but it is something anybody can develop.
He advises setting aside 15 minutes a day to study and consciously interpret her own and other people's gestures and he promises that we will be amazed to find how much our ‘intuitions’ about people can improve.
However, most of us are pretty bad at paying analytical attention to other people.
And even if we do, we're fallible.
Especially with men.
I mean, if someone says you're beautiful or smart, you want to believe that they are a good judge of character, don't you?
You don't want to think they're only saying that to get you into bed.
You close your ears to the small voice within, the intuition whispering, ‘He's using you.’
Lots of people turn off as soon as the person they're talking to reveals an interest in or opinion on something they dislike or disagree with.
Many's the time I've been with people whose eyes glazed over when I've said I was a feminist and I've done the same with people who say they love to play golf.
It's easy to misjudge a person, too, not understanding — and how can you, without years of intimate friendship?— all the contradictions and complexities of a person's character.
I know I'm seen as an untidy person, for example, but I'm not.
I'm naturally very tidy.
But I'm also a perfectionist and I'm a bit lazy so, with two small children, when things start to slip into the chaos zone, I just give up.
Result?
Untidy house.
But me?
I'm tidy.
I've got a good friend, too, who's a bit of a do-gooder.
People say that she's ‘so selfless’.
She would disagree.
‘I'm as selfish as a pig, deep down,’ she says.
‘But being brought up in a strictly Christian home, I'm so disgusted with myself I feel I've got to hide it and atone for it with ‘good works’.’
Dear, oh dear.
Aren't people complicated?
Can we ever know one another well?
And if not, is it fair to judge at all?
This was one of the great questions of my youth in the 60s, of course.
We wanted to believe that everyone was beautiful.
We didn't think we had a right to judge.
And, if the truth be known, we were afraid of being judged ourselves.
But even now, I still believe that if you trust someone you're giving them the chance to prove that they are trustworthy.
I think it's worth the risk.
And life experience helps you to see through people — watching children grow up, gathering character as they go; hearing your friends' life stories, working out what makes them tick; reading and travelling.
Thank God for people who are naturally astute, as well, I don't know where I'd be without my husband whose precise, unfailing, streetwise insight into people knocks spots off my long-winded shots at psycho-analysing them.
Perhaps it takes an artist's eye as well; the cultivation of a quiet receptivity to the essence of a person beaming out like light from the chinks in the defences we all construct to protect ourselves.
Perhaps all that's needed to be a good judge of another person is the art of listening, not only with our ears but with our whole attention.
Words of wisdom
‘It is only shallow people who do not judge by appearances.’
Oscar Wilde.
Never trust a man who speaks well of everybody.
‘One must judge men not by their opinions but by what their opinions have made of them.’
Lichtenberg
You can't judge a book by its cover.
‘All else failing, a man's character may be inferred from nothing so surely as the jest he takes in bad part.’
Lichtenberg
He who fondles you more than usual has either deceived you or wants to do so (French proverb).
‘A patronising disposition always has its meaner side.’
George Eliot
To get to know a friend you must share an inheritance with him (German proverb).
‘It is with trifles and when he is off-guard that a man best reveals his character.’
Schopenhauer
If you want to know what a man is really like, take notice of how he acts when he loses money.
‘It is always safer to assume that people are more subtle and less sensitive than they seem.’
Hoffer 
ALL for one!
SHE PROMOTION
Creative cooking for one is easy with Dutch Edam
When you're cooking for one, please yourself with easy-to-make stylish meals based on Dutch Edam.
Made by time-honoured methods, Edam is high in protein, vitamins and minerals.
Plus, it's lower in fat (and therefore calories) than most other hard cheeses and is better for you than many starchy, sugary snacks.
Team it with high fibre beans, bread or pasta and you have a supper or lunch dish of real potential.
Easy to use (it grates, slices, shreds, cubes and melts in seconds), it has a mild, smooth flavour and performs well with whatever it partners.
For instant edibility and the best of health, reach for Dutch Edam every time.
(All recipes below serve one.)
HOT EDAM MEDITERRANEAN SANDWICH
Preparation and cooking time: 5 mins. 2 slices white bread butter for spreading 65–85g (2½ –3oz) Edam cheese 2 thin slices red onion 1 egg (size 2) beaten 1 tbs extra virgin olive oil 1–2 ripe tomatoes 1 tbs sun-dried tomatoes in oil, drained fresh herbs and salad leaves
Butter bread and cover one slice with sliced Edam.
Add onion, cover with second slice of bread.
Beat egg in shallow dish.
Dip sandwich, both sides, then leave for 30 seconds or so to soak up egg.
Heat oil in non-stick frying pan and cook sandwich for 3 mins, pressing down firmly with fish slice before turning over.
Serve topped with sliced tomato, scissor-cut-sun-dried tomato, herbs and salad leaves.
EDAM BEAN BONANZA
Preparation and cooking time: 12 mins. 432g (15.2oz) can Mexican-style chilli beans 4 tbs sour cream 6–8 springs fresh coriander 125g (4oz) Edam, half coarsely grated, half cubed 2 sticks celery, sliced 1 head chicory, red or white 5cm (2in) length cucumber, sliced 40g (1½ oz) tortilla chips
Heat beans in their sauce for 4 mins or until very hot.
Pour pan contents into heatproof sieve over a bowl.
Put strained liquid, sour cream, half coriander and grated Edam into a food processor or blender and whizz until smooth.
Pour sauce back into pan, adding beans and celery.
Heat briefly, pour into shallow dish.
Top with cubed Edam and remaining coriander.
Set the dish on a large platter and surround with cucumber, tortilla chips and chicory leaves.
SPICED EDAM SALAD WITH PENNE
Preparation and cooking time: 15 mins. 85g (3oz) penne (pasta quills) 4 tbs low-fat mayonnaise ½ tsp tandoori spice mix 2 tbs mango chutney 2 tbs fruit juice 125g (4oz) Edam, cut in strips raw spinach leaves, spring onions
Cook pasta in boiling salted water for 10–12 minutes until bite tender.
Briefly heat a quarter of mayonnaise with spice, then add remaining mayonnaise, chutney and juice.
Stir well.
Drain pasta, add to sauce with half the Edam.
Arrange salad on a plate, pour pasta into centre.
Decorate with remaining Edam and spring onions.
Libby Purves loves her SHELLSUIT
Whether it's a boilersuit or a power suit, what you wear speaks volumes about you
Do you speak the language of clothes?
Or rather, do your clothes speak for you?
Are your cuffs, at this moment, making a clear statement about your nature and intentions?
Are you threatening the world with your collar, or bamboozling it with your black tights?
If so, congratulations.
Me, I don't speak clothes language at all and am beginning to wish that I did.
Fashion editors, after all, are forever exhorting us to express ourselves in every peplum, to use checks to tell the world where we are at, and to affirm our commitment to the modern lifestyle with Lycra.
Clothes-speak is the coming thing.
Alas, although I can read it, the nearest I get to delivering any coherent message is a faded ‘Share the world’ T-shirt with tigers on it, and trousers which certainly look recycled.
And I have an uneasy feeling that this stance is becoming a handicap in the modern world, like not being computer-literate.
The modern woman should know just how to disarm suspicion with a floppy silk collar, how to imply kindliness with a tasteful floral print, or intimidate with a well-placed lapel.
Curiously, it is today's liberalised fashion atmosphere which has made the language of clothes become ever more subtle and essential to master.
I never thought it would work like this: having been a small child in the 50s when women dressed more or less identically and according to their age and class (gymslip, good suit, housecoat, then cardigan and pinny), I used to think that it was beautifully liberating in the 60s and 70s when convention began to permit a woman of any age to dress in virtually any style, from hooker to schoolmarm.
I thought this would put an end to the tyranny of clothes.
I should, of course, have guessed that it would do the opposite.
We now have so many choices, so many ‘looks’, that there is not much you can wear without making a statement of some kind.
And people like me, who prefer to communicate with words while flinging on random bits of any ‘look’ that happens to fit and be cleanish at the same time, are right out in the cold.
Non-communicators.
Or, even worse, horribly misunderstood.
Just because I happen to like my shellsuit trousers, people come to all sorts of unflattering conclusions about me, generally involving Essex.
If you want to study the most refined version of clothes-talk, just look at all the elegant women who have been turning up in court recently.
Mary Archer dressed brilliantly as a witness in her husband's libel case, in a girlish print dress which said, ‘Am I not fragrant?
Am I not radiant?’ and drove the judge to rhapsodise about her in just those words.
Koo Stark turned up for one case wearing a short and flowery little-girl's party frock with velvet cuffs, which said, ‘Gee, I am gentle, I am vulnerable in the big bad world.’
Lindka Cierach took the opposite line, and won her recent case dressed in a tight red damn-your-eyes jacket and no-nonsense sunglasses.
And Jani Allan — although she lost her libel case — put on a fine show of brittle, asexual sophistication in a cream linen suit and austere black blouse.
It may well be that all these ladies simply grabbed the first thing in the wardrobe before rushing off to court, but I somehow doubt it.
They were speaking the language of clothes, fluently.
As fluently as the Princess of Wales does when she switches between diamanté sophistication (‘Look what a queen you might have in me!’) and heart-breaking droopy cottons.
Or Fergie did when she hopped in and out of cars wearing Honest-Jill-Ordinary leggings and sweatshirts which said, ‘Hey, forget Bali, I'm just a working mum like you!’
I doubt whether the language of a woman's clothes has ever had such a large vocabulary before, in any society.
The West, and particularly the UK, now draws from the idioms of the whole world and of every class.
It has been expanding ever since those 70s feminists took to wearing boiler suits to prove they didn't care about being attractive to men.
(Ah, but they were frauds!
If they really didn't care, why not just opt for a serge skirt or Crimplene slacks on special offer from the back of the Radio Times?
Boiler suits were actually pretty attractive, especially to men who had fantasies about Chinese girl soldiers.)
Today, it is equally acceptable in most settings to dress like Heidi — or a lady weightlifter, a tart, a 50s magistrate, a navvy, a two-year-old fresh out of the sandpit in vivid flowered dungarees, or an exotic refugee from Kubla Khan's pleasure dome.
So there is no excuse for ignoring the chance to communicate.
Take Nell.
Nell wears those large white Peter Pan collars much favoured by the wives of men involved in sex scandals, when they get photographed on their way to church the Sunday after the story breaks.
What she is saying, with her big white collars, is, ‘I am a clean, controlled and decent Christian woman.
I believe in marriage and the family.
And smacking.
You, frankly, are a bit of a slut.’
This never fails.
Every time I meet her I am thrown on the defensive.
Louise, on the other hand, wears all her clothes extremely tight and plunging, with oopsy little earrings and brooches from EuroDisney, and her message is, ‘I'm fun, fun, fun, and much younger than you think.’
But she has this threatening jacket, a dark linen one which she can pop on over the Lycra, and it has big shoulders and big assertive buttons and nips in at the waist, and this means, ‘Fun I may be, but business is business and I will rip your arms and legs off in the boardroom if you let me.’
All she has to do is slip the Mickey Mouse earrings in the pocket, smooth down her short hair so that it looks less like Just William and more like Tony Slattery, and the personality change is complete.
A similar dazzling double-take is achieved by Moira, who works as a secretary in a big office and wears bog-standard floral Laura Ashley trousers and cotton jumpers like the rest of us, but when she leaves work pulls on a very old duffle coat — white at the seams, so old that it can't be accidental — which screams out, ‘I am an intellectual, actually.
I shan't be down at Europa Foods tonight like you lot, buying frozen lasagne and chips for some motorbike messenger to eat in front of The Darling Buds of May .
I shall be going with Oleg to see a new Russian opera at the Round House, so there.’
It is quite masterly.
But it's no good.
I can't do it.
The messages get garbled.
I wear a greenish Barbour jacket with tight op-art leggings.
Or a school sweatshirt with Chinese silk trousers.
The only messages that I give off are of faint delirium and desperate indecision.
Possibly the only answer is to grey up my hair and start a new post-modern clothing movement, modelling myself rigorously on Hilda Ogden, complete with a fawn cardigan and a flowered pinny and curlers.
Thus I will be delivering the message, ‘It wasn't trollops in leggings that won the War, young lady!’
It would, at least, be different.
And that, surely, is the essence of oneupmanship, is it not?
Women idealise male qualities of aggression, ambition and sexual confidence so that we don't have to confront them in ourselves.
By Rosalind Coward
why we still think MEN ARE BETTER THAN US!
In many important ways, men still seem to have great advantages over women.
They still earn more on average; their careers often take precedence, especially after children are born; they still do too little childcare; some still expect to be waited on.
Women grumble about these inequalities, and sometimes men complain that they too feel restricted by the roles they have to play.
But both sides tend to assume that men keep things this way because they benefit so much.
What we never consider is whether women really want men to change or whether we take an active role — both as lovers and mothers — in keeping traditional expectations of men alive.
The ways in which women project on to men are, in fact, important and unexplored areas of how male/female relationships stay in familiar, repetitive and traditional patterns.
While carrying out research for my book,Our Treacherous Hearts: Why Women Let Men Get Their Way (Faber & Faber, £14.99), I found that men are not only often let off the hook by women, but are actively ‘idealised’ by them.
The result is that, when relationships break down, women's disappointment is often accompanied by extraordinary, uncomprehending bitterness.
It may seem strange to talk about women idealising men.
Certainly many men, especially those who have had close contact with feminism, initially find my suggestions preposterous.
One said, ‘I thought all women thought all men were the lowest form of human life.’
But when we come to more intimate revelations, a completely different picture emerges.
Among women of the professional classes especially, individual men are still the focus of potent fantasies.
Women no longer talk so explicitly about men as distant providers who should be obeyed and serviced, but many women often talk as if they don't expect much better.
They describe their partners as more balanced, more confident, more secure and stronger than themselves, both emotionally and in their sense of direction at work.
And because their partners are seen as naturally more ambitious and less compromising than themselves, the women then go on to describe themselves as lucky and ‘grateful’ if their partners make even the smallest contribution to household affairs.
These perceptions are more than a sad reflection of how little sex roles have changed: women seem to have much invested in keeping things the way they are, in seeing their partners as stronger and saner.
Many don't want men to have vulnerabilities, hence the scorn poured by women on the idea of the New Man.
Women's attraction to successful men is well known and already well explored.
Women are attracted to men who will be the most efficient ‘mates’: the more money or power, the greater his capacity to attract women.
But it is surprising how prevalent such feelings still are, even among so-called career women.
Time after time, woman admitted to me that their partner's success not only mattered to them in terms of money, but was a crucial component in their respect and desire for these men.
One woman I spoke to is a very successful designer.
She is married to a freelance writer who is struggling to get work.
At first, she insisted that the difference in their incomes was irrelevant.
‘We are both pleased I've done so well — we have got a high standard of living, better than we expected.’
But later she told me, ‘I do worry about Ian.
I keep trying to suggest where he could get work.
He just won't sell himself, and that's what counts.
Yes, I do nag him to try to achieve more.’
Is that for you or for him, I asked.
‘I don't know.
I suppose I would like it if he was more successful.’
Crucial to women's desire for successful or careerist men is the desire for men to carry all the ambition and careerism of the family, because women can be extremely ambivalent about their own ambition and aggression at work.
Career women, especially those who are more successful than their partners, are sometimes weary because they feel they cannot escape from competitiveness and aggression.
One childless career woman described the scene when she discussed having a child and giving up work for a while.
‘He responded bitterly, saying, ‘That's not fair.
I'd like to just opt out of my career, too.
If I have to go on working I don't see why you shouldn't.
You earn more than me.
Everyone thinks you're successful, but you want me to keep you.’
It brought me up against the fact that I'd like him to be better off so I could have more options.
If he was more successful than me, I could say it made sense for me to give up my career.’
In this case, it is difficult for the woman to pretend her partner is naturally more ambitious than herself, but many other women buy into this fantasy because it justifies the sexual status quo.
These views are surprisingly common among women who were extremely ambitious in their own careers and subsequently transferred those competitive and careerist feelings on to their partners and children.
At an obvious level, women are projecting on to men (and on to children) various aspects of their own personality about which they feel uncomfortable.
The splitting up of attributes between men and women makes the division of labour seem easier and more natural, but it can be a damaging process for both sexes when men are made to carry aspects of themselves which have been denied or have not been fully explored.
Lynn's relationship with Stuart is a good illustration of this.
Lynn, now in her late 30s and divorced, says she was a very shy and awkward young woman with particular anxieties about her sexual appearance.
In her 20s, she met Stuart, a post-graduate at the university where she was a student.
They shared political and intellectual interests and were often thrown together.
Lynn says she was attracted to Stuart ‘because of his confidence, especially his sexual confidence.
He was very fluent, very funny and lots of women found him attractive.
For a long time, I adored him at a distance and couldn't believe my luck when he started showing an interest in me.’
But not long after their relationship started, Lynn got pregnant.
She readily admits that she did so deliberately: ‘I don't think I ever really believed he would stay with me unless we had a child.
Deep down I really couldn't believe anyone found me attractive.
I was obsessed with being flat-chested and unglamorous and I used to harp on about how he must be hankering for someone more glamorous.’
But for seven years Stuart was a visibly devoted father and Lyn supported and promoted his career.
Their relationship was peaceful and satisfying.
Things started to go wrong when Stuart became increasingly dissatisfied at work.
He failed to get an expected promotion and started drinking heavily.
Lyn says, ‘He went off sex and I used to carry on and on about whether he was after other women.
Actually he was drinking too much and feeling sorry for himself.
But then he started getting angry, with the world, with me.
He started saying all the things I'd said about myself.
I felt as if I'd handed him a loaded shotgun and said shoot.’
Although Stuart did get another, good job, it was too late for the relationship.
Lynn says, ‘I know now that Stuart is vulnerable, that he was very depressed.
But at the time I still saw him as all-powerful, especially sexually.
It was important for my self-esteem that he was a successful, sexually confident person who wanted me.
Without that, I just felt self-dislike.’
Lynn is a vivid example of how women are often attracted to men who express parts of themselves which have been buried or destroyed — in her case her sexual confidence.
The process described is common: women who often suffer from low self-esteem, frustrated creativity or an inability to assert themselves can — subconsciously at least— look for someone who will express confidence, arrogance, purposefulness, ambition and success.
Finding a man who will carry all these attributes is a perfect solution to women's own discomfort about having those feelings themselves.
And, if this is an element in male-female relationships, it is not really surprising that women have such minimal expectations of male domesticity.
They already feel grateful towards men for doing another, more serious job.
But finding a person to express this attributes doesn't necessarily take care of them.
Typically, when Stuart ran into problems and his own vulnerabilities came to the surface, all Lynn's old problems and self-dislike came to the surface, too.
Any process based on fantasy and projection is risky because women often confuse ambition and single-mindedness with emotional security, and men's apparent knowledge of where they are going in career terms with knowing where they are going and what they want emotionally.
It means that women buy the whole package and cannot either understand or cope when their partner's emotional limitations emerge.
This ‘misrecognition’ of men occurs because many of men's common pathologies, weaknesses and vulnerabilities are accepted as ‘normal’behaviour.
Fear of intimacy, especially with the same sex, overdependency on sex as a source of comfort, resorting to forms of physical and emotional bullying are rarely even noticed in many work set-ups, and it's unlikely they would ever become a real obstacle to career advancement.
When a woman exhibits extreme forms of stereotypical feminine behaviour, however — emotional displays, sexual wiles or manipulative behaviour — these are likely to count against her.
In other words, society endorses in men what are actually manifestations of their emotional weakness and limitations.
Even feminism bought into this myth by seeing men as all-powerful and invulnerable.
It insisted that men were always in positions of power.
And many women still believe this — in spite of evidence that suicide rates and homelessness are greater among men.
No wonder that women in their private relationships often mistake one set of characteristics for another: violence for strength, careerism for inner purposefulness, emotional distance for emotional balance, and sexual confidence for inner strength.
But if women do want change, they may have to give up what they have invested in men — the idealisation which (temporarily) allows them to avoid uncomfortable things in themselves.
Women seem to have much invested in keeping things the way they are, in seeing men as stronger and saner
LIVING
English ROSE
The shabby chic of country-cottage elegance is being rediscovered — in California
For Rachel Ashwell (pictured left), everything's coming up roses — both in her home and her working life.
British-born Rachel, who now lives in LA, has decorated her California home in English country style (but more cottage than grand manor), at the same time as launching a number of furniture stores which reflect her personal taste.
Her shops are called Shabby Chic and the most successful one to date is in New York, where ‘life is so hectic and claustrophobic that people aspire to making their home as comfortable and pleasant as they can.’
Then lived-in look that Rachel has cultivated in her own home is a happy marriage between practicality and her English roots.
People who have children may blanch at the idea of those cream sofas, but Rachel has two young children of her own and the slipcovers can go straight into the washing machine.
‘Every evening, the living room gets converted into some kind of camp by the children and smeared in food and footprints,’ she laughs, ‘but what's the point of a home if you have to be precious with it?’
As a blueprint for relaxed and comfortable living, Rachel's home gets our vote.
Top left: Rachel isn't averse to peeling paint or chipped objets d'art.
She scours flea markets and will either repair her purchases or leave them, depending on the extent of the damage.
Left: Rachel's living room reveals the world of difference between shabby chic and just plain shabby.
And although it's beautiful, it's also child-proof — the slipcovers are machine washable and none of the ornaments are valuable.
Main picture: Faded furniture, old-fashioned fabrics and flowers combine to create a country cottage feel.
Rachel's Shabby Chic shops look as inviting as a comfortable living room (except that yours probably isn't covered in price tags!).
Customers are encouraged to sink into the oversized sofas and chairs, surrounded by time-worn accessories — rugs, paintings, tables and candlesticks.
pots of winter colour
Cheer up a gloomy garden with tub, sink or bowl of brilliant bright blooms.
By Polly Bracken
Opposite: Vibrant shades of polyanthus — colourful relatives of that cottage garden favourite the primrose — bring some early sunshine.
Above: Terracotta pots filled with grape hyacinth bulbs in autumn promise a brilliant blaze of blue come spring.
Right: Common box takes on grand airs with a little elementary topiary, particularly suited to town gardens.
Far right: The earliest spring bulbs of all, snowdrops, look elegant in pots
When the garden is looking its best in summer, our containers are positively spilling over with brilliant plantings.
Pity, then, that at a time when we need colour most — the grey winter months — these same containers, for the most part, are left to languish empty.
Despite the lack of vibrant bedding plants in winter and early spring, there is a multitude of options to delight the eye and cheer the spirit.
The ground rules, however, are slightly different.
Plantings must be bold if they are to be appreciated from a house window.
To last through the bleakest of winters, terracotta pots need to be tough and frostproof.
Water your containers less frequently than in summer, but do not let pots dry out.
Evergreens are invaluable all year round, but come into their own in winter when branches are bare and the landscape bleak.
Use them as solo shrubs or as permanent backbone for pot or windowbox, with some seasonal plant infills.
Shrubs such as holly, box, privet, euonymus and yew can be clipped into formal tiers, trained or bought as mopheads — lollipop trees — or shaped into amusing foliage statuary.
Train ivy, variegated for choice, into a spiral shape by trailing the plant around a heavy wire spiral attached to a stout stake.
Consider conifers such as golden thuja, spruce, dwarf pine and juniper as bold container statements or permanent windowbox contributions.
The lime green leaves of compact shrub Choisya ternata Sundance provide a welcome splash of light to the winter garden; keep in a sheltered spot, along with an aromatic bay tree, clipped to a classy pyramid or box shape.
Enjoy the jolly red berries and glossy leaves of Skimmia reevesiana or Solanum capsicastrum , a familiar houseplant at Christmas, on a protected patio or windowsill.
You can even grow herbs in containers throughout the winter.
Wiggly santolina, rosemary and clipped lavender provide evergrey foliage, but wrap pots in hessian and move them to a sheltered corner to protect these Mediterranean plants against the coldest weather.
Thymes gold, green and silver can be grown in a hanging basket near the kitchen door for visual and culinary colour.
Wonderful winter-flowering pansies provide the essential riot of colour and bloom relentlessly from late autumn through to the beginning of summer.
Buy them cheaply in small plugs, growing them on before planting out.
Jumble up the shades cottage-garden style or choose a cool colour such as cream that will show up on dark wintry days.
Cram wallflowers into containers now to be moved to centre stage in late spring.
Pale lemon primroses and polyanthus in paint-box colours herald in spring joyfully.
But the winter container's secret weapon, planted in layers under showy pansies or polyanthus, is the spring-flowering bulb.
In the bottom of a deep pot, nestle tulip bulbs.
Alternate them, next row up, with trumpet daffodils or papery-fine narcissi.
Higher up, position a ring of grape hyacinth bulbs.
Forget them till spring, then watch out for fireworks.
Above: Golden Tête-à-tête daffodils make a cheerful choice for spring containers.
Left: Universal winter-flowering pansies are indispensable for adding colour splashes during the bleakest months of winter.
Below left: Rockery primroses Primula marginata add charm to a weathered stone sink.
Below right: Coloured carpets of thyme make imaginative — and fragrant — plantings.
scotland's finest
Scottish salmon is regarded as the finest in the world.
Fresh from the pure, clear waters of Scotland, it is now available from leading supermarkets and fishmongers all year round.
And now you can easily spot the best quality Scottish salmon by looking for the tartan Brand Quality Mark.
Scottish salmon is excellent value for money and, because it is so quick and simple to cook, it has become a regular feature on family menus.
As health-and-money-conscious mums increasingly reduce the amount of meat in the family diet, Scottish salmon makes a delicious and affordable alternative,.
Boneless salmon fillets are especially popular with children who enjoy its delicate, fresh flavour.
The health benefits of eating salmon add to its attraction: low in calories and saturated fat, it is an excellent source of minerals, vitamins, protein — and natural fish oil, believed to help reduce the risk of heart disease.
The easily identifiable tartan mark is your guarantee that the salmon you are buying is genuinely Scottish and produced in accordance with a stringent set of quality standards, enforced by Food From Britain inspectors.
You'll find the quality mark on pre-packed Scottish salmon steaks and fillets in Safeway, Tesco and Wm Low, and as a gill tag on whole fish in Selfridges and selected fishmongers.
Scottish salmon is extremely versatile and easy to cook so it's perfect for busy lifestyles, and, most important of all, it tastes delicious.
Make the most of Scottish salmon with these quick, tasty recipes: SCOTTISH SALMON WITH SPINACH AND PESTO
Serves 4
600ml (1 pint) milk 1 small onion, halved and peeled 6 peppercorns 2 bay leaves 40g (1½ oz) butter 25g (1oz) flour 125g (4oz) frozen chopped spinach, thawed 2 tbs pesto sauce (bottled) salt and pepper squeeze lemon juice freshly grated nutmeg 4 Scottish salmon steaks, about 175g (6oz) each olive oil
Make sauce: Put milk in a pan with onion, peppercorns and bay leaves.
Bring to boil slowly then remove from heat.
Melt butter in a pan and stir in flour.
Cook, stirring, for 1 minute.
Strain milk into pan, whisking all the time.
Simmer for 5 minutes.
Stir in spinach and pesto.
Season, add lemon juice and nutmeg to taste.
Heat grill.
Brush salmon steaks with a little olive oil, season, and grill for 4–6 minutes on each side, until opaque and cooked through.
Serve with the spinach and pesto sauce and noodles or tagliatelle .
SCOTTISH SALMON AND TOMATO PARCELS Serves 4 4 ripe tomatoes, sliced 2 medium courgettes, grated 2 tb chopped fresh chives 4 Scottish salmon fillets, about 175g (6oz) each fish/vegetable stock or white wine olive oil salt and pepper
Cut out 8 22.5cm (10in) squares greaseproof paper.
Dampen each slightly with wet kitchen paper.
Place some sliced tomato in the centre of 4 squares.
Top with a quarter of the courgettes and chives.
Lay a salmon fillet on top, moisten with a little stock or wine and oil, season.
Brush the remaining 4 squares with oil and place oiled side down on top of salmon.
Twist the edges tightly together and twist the corners to form 4-square packages.
Place on baking sheet and put in oven preheated to 180°s; C (350°s; F, Gas Mark 4) for 20 minutes.
Serve packets unopened with potatoes and green vegetables .
GREEN NOTES
have we got green fatigue?
‘In a market economy there must be demand.
No demand, no sales.’
There was a rumour doing the rounds a few weeks ago that one of the big supermarket chains was on the point of phasing out its organic food lines.
A combination of ‘inconsistent supply and inadequate demand’ meant they simply weren't shifting produce quickly enough to generate a big enough profit.
It hasn't happened yet, but it still might.
It's up to the organic farmers to sort out the inconsistent supply complaint.
But what about the inadequate demand?
Why aren't more people buying organic now that the supermarkets have made it so easy?
Is it price?
The premium on organic food really is quite steep, and in a recession people are being much more careful.
Or quality?
It's true that quality can still be a little uneven, and for consumers attuned to standardised, blemish-free produce, organic food is something of a cultural challenge.
Or is it just plain indifference?
That's the one that really worries me.
The whole phenomenon of Green consumerism depends on there being enough concerned, caring and sufficiently well-informed consumers out there to buy Green products.
In a market economy, there must be demand.
No demand, no sales, so no producers.
Some commentators are now claiming that the whole Green consumer wave was just a fashionable spasm, and that the vast majority of people have now reverted to their usual habits, regardless of their environmental impact.
I don't think there's enough evidence to bear that out as yet, but it's clear that some companies are now ahead of their consumers in terms of what they're trying to do and the products they're developing.
If that gap isn't narrowed, we could well see a backlash as business doing their bit for the environment lose heart at the apparent lack of consumer interest.
Earlier this year, John Elkington and Julia Hailes, authors of the highly successful Green Consumer Guides, brought out a new guide for holidaymakers.
Holidays That Don't Cost the Earth (Gollancz, £5.99) is a lively, informative read: as good a way as any of getting to grips with environment-friendly holidays.
Sales, however, have been disappointing, and there's been nothing like the same kind of interest the earlier books had.
What this means is that far fewer people are putting pressure on their travel agents or package-tour operators than Elkington and Hailes were hoping for.
Travel and tourism is now the world's biggest industry, and many countries are almost entirely dependent on tourism.
And not just in the Third World.
The environmental impact of tourism can be grim; from Torremolinos to Thailand, the ravages of mindless tourist development are all too painfully obvious.
Theoretically, however, it should be easier to reconcile the principles of sustainable development with tourism than with many other forms of economic activity.
But that will only happen if and when holidaymakers use their consumer power to insist that hotels, tour operators and international airlines take an active role in minimising their impact on the environment.
The breakthrough will come when all these players in the tourism game begin to market themselves not just as providing value for money, but value for the environment.
Or when all those glossy hotel guides begin to award green rosettes for environmental performance as well as gold stars for comfort or knives and forks for cuisine.
As it happens, a start has already been made on this.
An initiative instigated by Inter-Continental Hotels has brought together ten major hotel groups to provide individual hotels with a detailed environment manual.
More than one million hotel rooms will be covered right from the start, and the idea then is to draw in as many of the smaller chains as possible.
All good stuff.
But the beneficial impact of such initiatives will only be felt when the punters start discriminating positively in favour of those taking a lead.
And that applies to every area of our lives: on holiday, in the supermarket, with our banks, and so on.
Environmental degradation is always somebody else's problem: the multi-nationals, the supermarkets, the local authorities, the Government.
But unless we push, hassle, bully, encourage and cajole at every turn, best practice will not be properly rewarded and the bad guys will go on cleaning up.
A recent consumer survey indicated that 89% of people wanted the Government to implement legislation to promote more recycling of paper.
I wonder if that means that 89% of people (or even 89% of SHE readers?) are promoting the use of recycled paper products themselves by actually buying them: loo roll, kitchen roll, tissues, writing paper, exercise pads, envelopes etc?
Like hell they are.
Because if they were, we wouldn't need legislation.
It has to be said that the world would be a much better place if we just got on and did things instead of waiting for other people to do them on our behalf.
FOOD
cooking for comfort
When you need to be nurtured, it's simple tastes that cheer both body and soul.
By Clare Ferguson
Comfort foods are those which soothe us and make us glad to be alive even on the most miserable of days.
Comfort means different things to different people, but when food and comfort are mentioned in the same breath, chances are that the tastes and textures of childhood will come back to visit us whether we consciously realise it or not.
Childhood foods are often soft, their flavours simple and straightforward.
Comfort foods are often easy to handle.
Perhaps a liking for ‘babyish’ foods has something to do with recollections of early loving encouragement from others.
Even more likely is that our first-remembered food was mother's milk.
Most people I questioned about their favourite comfort foods named liquid foods frequently, hot dishes more often than cold and savoury tastes, surprisingly, seemed more favoured than sweet.
The home kitchen is no longer a comforting place of continuous humming activity and bubbling stockpots; it is far more likely to be the scene of short-term frantic effort.
Nevertheless, whenever we feel out of sorts, tired, sick of ourselves and others and in need of‘restoration’(origin of the word restaurant), it's more than likely we will head for the kitchen hoping for some well-known and trusted food from our past.
The following dishes depend upon fresh, flavourful, and well-chosen raw materials.
Not only do they all taste good and comfort the spirit but they are healthier, within a balanced diet, than junk food.
These recipes are a taste of some of the things that are simply too good to forget.
Above: Bangers and mash — savoury and satisfying.
Opposite: Fresh-tasting barley and vegetable soup.
BANGERS AND MASH
Baked sausages
This childhood dish is back in style and can taste outstanding.
Select ‘real’ sausages with real gut casings and high-grade rough-chopped contents with relatively little rusk or filler to bulk them out.
Bake with mushrooms and serve with creamy mashed potato for an easy, delicious comfort meal which can make dinner-party fare, too, for discerning guests.
Preparation time: 5 minutes.
Cooking time: 35 minutes.
Serves 4. 8 or 450–675g (1–1&frac12; lb) good quality lean sausages 225g (8oz) flat mushrooms, roughly chopped 2 tbs flour 300ml (½ pint) pork, veal or beef stock and red wine mixed 1 tsp soy sauce 1–2 tsp Worcestershire sauce Bake sausages, unpunctured, with mushroom pieces ranged down both sides, on a shallow, lightly oiled baking tray in an oven preheated to 210°s; C (425°s; F, Gas Mark 7) for 25–30 minutes (time will depend on sausage size and meat type) until crisply browned and firm right through.
Lift sausages out, using a fish slice, and keep warm.
Meanwhile make gravy by stirring flour into 2 tbs or so of pan juices over heat, with mushrooms still in pan.
Add the stock/wine liquid and soy sauce and bring to the boil, stirring constantly with wooden spoon to dislodge pan brownings, until the gravy thickens and flour taste has gone.
Add Worcestershire sauce as seasoning.
Serve hot over the sausages.
Mashed potatoes
Soothing and delectable, velvety mashed potato is suitable for children of all ages.
Preparation time: 8 minutes.
Cooking time: 22 minutes.
Serves 4–6. 1kg (2.2lb) maincrop potatoes 1 tsp sea salt flakes boiling water 50g (2oz) butter 4 tbs low-fat fromage frais Peel and halve potatoes crosswise, cover with boiling salted water.
Bring back to boil and simmer, covered, for 20 minutes.
Drain (refrigerate liquid for soup-making) and leave in pan, uncovered, to dry off.
Add butter and fromage frais and mash until completely smooth and creamy.
Do not use a food processor — the potato becomes like glue!
Serve with sausages or mushroom gravy.
BARLEY AND VEGETABLE SOUP The bonus of this homely soup is the brevity of its cooking time: 40 minutes or so is all that's needed for a cheering bowl of soup from all-fresh ingredients.
Follow the given preparation and cooking order correctly for the best flavour and beautiful vivid colours.
Preparation time: 10 minutes.
Cooking time: 40 minutes.
Serves 4–6. 3 tbs extra virgin olive oil 225g (8oz) onions, skinned and finely chopped 25g (1oz) garlic, chopped 225g (8oz) celery, finely chopped 225g (8oz) small potatoes in 5mm (¼ in) slices 25g (1oz) pearl barley 1.75 litres (3 pints) boiling chicken stock or water 225g (8oz) leeks in 5mm (¼ in) slices 225g (8oz) cabbage, shredded finely 225g (8oz) dwarf beans, trimmed 225g (8oz) cauliflower, broccoli or mixture, cut into tiny florets bunch of fresh herbs: bay, thyme and parsley salt, freshly ground black pepper handful of parsley, scissor-chopped Heat oil in a large deep pan.
Sauté onion and garlic for 5 minutes until aromatic and tender.
Add celery, potatoes and pearl barley and stir for 5 minutes more.
Add boiling liquid, bring back to the boil and add leeks.
Cover and simmer for 20 minutes.
Add cabbage, beans in 5cm (2in) strips halved lengthwise, and cauliflower or broccoli.
Cook, covered, for another 8–10 minutes until green vegetables are brilliantly colourful and barley tender.
Taste, add salt and pepper and stir in the parsley.
CHEESE ON TOAST When it's cold and you feel tired and hungry, some hot, bubbling cheese on toast is very restorative.
For a special treat try a hand-made farmhouse cheese from a small producer such as Spenwood, a dense, nutty ewe's milk cheese (see picture) made by Jane and Andy Wigmore in Berkshire, or Mature Caerphilly produced by Chris Duckett in Wedmore, Somerset.
Both of these are available at Neal's Yard in London's Covent Garden, but see what is available at your local specialist cheese shop.
Preparation time: 2 minutes.
Cooking time: 4 minutes.
Serves 4. 450g (1lb) good quality mature farmhouse cheese 1 medium onion 4 generous slices bread Preheat grill and toast bread lightly on both sides.
Cut cheese into 5mm (¼ in) thick slabs, removing rind.
Peel and slice onion into semi-circles, then scatter it under and over the cheese on its toast.
Grill close to heat until cheese is melted, barely bubbling and aromatic.
Serve with beer, cider, a robust red wine or a bowl of hot soup.
LAMBS' LIVER, BACON AND ONIONS Not only is lambs' liver high in iron and a general nutrition booster, but it tastes superb when thinly cut and cooked briefly so it is brown outside and pink inside.
(Pregnant women should cook the liver thoroughly.)
Bacon is a natural partner — salty to balance the sweet.
Fried onions make the final delectable touch.
Preparation time: 5 minutes.
Cooking time: 15 minutes.
Serves 4. 1½ tbs virgin olive oil 8 thin rashers good quality smoked bacon 8 thin slices of lambs' liver — about 400–450g (14oz–1lb) salt, freshly ground black pepper 2 onions, peeled and thinly sliced Heat ½ tbs of oil in a large, heavy frypan.
Scissor-snip the bacon fat at intervals to help it release its fat.
Fry bacon, turning until brown and crisp, about 2–3 minutes either side.
Remove from pan and keep hot.
Season liver on both sides, add 4 pieces to the hot pan.
Cook until aromatic (about 45–60 seconds) then turn and cook other side for about 1 minute.
Keep hot while second lot of liver cooks.
Add extra oil to pan, then onion and stir over high heat until caramelised and aromatic, 5–6 minutes.
Serve decoratively with alternate slices of bacon and liver with the onions down the centre.
Have ketchup and hot English mustard to hand.
STEAMED SPONGE PUDDING Unlike the heavy steamed puds of the past, this is soft and cakelike.
In a microwave it cooks in just 6 minutes.
Serve it with the delicious fruit sauce, right.
Preparation time: 5 minutes.
Cooking time: 6 minutes or 1½ hours.
Serves 4–6. 125g (4oz) butter, softened 125g (4oz) sugar 2 eggs, beaten 1 tsp vanilla essence 175g (6 oz) self-raising flour 1 tsp baking powder 4–5 tbs milk butter for greasing bowl Cream butter and sugar together until pale and fluffy.
Gradually whisk in beaten egg and vanilla essence.
Fold in flour and baking powder then add enough milk for mixture to have a soft dropping consistency.
Smooth quickly into a well-greased heat-proof 1 litre (2 pint) pudding basin.
For the traditional steamed method: cover with a 30cm (12in) circle of greased silver foil, pleated in the centre and then secure tightly with string.
Place in a saucepan half-filled with boiling water (or preferably in a steamer) and cook, tightly covered, for 1½ hours.
Check every 20 minutes or so that the water has not boiled away and, if so, replenish with boiling water.
For a quick microwave version: Cover filled pudding basin with a loosely secured microwave-safe plastic film or pleated Bakewell paper tied with string.
Cook on full power for 6 minutes or until puffed and well-risen.
Leave to stand for 2 minutes.
For both methods, loosen the pudding with a knife, turn out and serve with fruit sauce.
INSTANT APRICOT SAUCE The sharp, fruity taste of this sauce balances steamed pudding perfectly, though it's just as good with soft cheese, yogurt or fromage frais.
Preparation time: 2 minutes.
Cooking time: 3 minutes.
Makes 350ml (12 fl oz).
411g (14oz) can unsweetened apricot halves in fruit juice 2 tbs sugar juice of ½ lemon
Remove fruit and 2 tbs of juice from the can, then discard the rest.
Put all ingredients into a saucepan and slowly bring to the boil.
When hot, pour into a food processor and process to a smooth sauce.
For extra texture reserve 1–2 pieces of fruit, mash, then add this to the finished sauce.
PERFECT PORRIDGE This easy recipe is rather like a hot version of muesli but uses the best kind of oats, has wheatgerm as a bonus and indulgent toppings.
The microwave version needs stirring only once.
Preparation time: 3 minutes.
Cooking time: 7 minutes.
Serves 4.
50g (2oz) almond, pecan or walnuts, sliced 50g (2oz) traditional medium Scottish oatmeal 15g (½ oz) wheatgerm ½ tsp salt 600ml (1 pint) boiling water
To serve: 4 tbs molasses sugar, golden syrup or honey 4–8 tbs single cream, top of the milk or natural yogurt 2 flavourful apples, coarsely grated
Put first 4 ingredients into a saucepan, add boiling water, stir and cook over moderate heat, stirring often, for 6–7 minutes.
Divide between 4 bowls.
Add some sugar (or alternative), cream and yogurt and top with some freshly grated apple (use a food processor or coarse grater).
Enjoy the hot, warm and cold temperatures all at once.
Microwave version: Combine dry ingredients in a heatproof bowl.
Add boiling water, stir, microwave on high for 7 minutes.
Stir after 6 minutes.
Serve as above.
ROSEMARY GEORGE'S WINE CHOICE
These soothing comfort foods require equally soothing, warming wines.
Sausage and mash is the perfect foil for hearty, spicy wines, born in southern sunshine, such as Asda's St Chinian, which is redolent of the scents of the sunsoaked hillsides of the south of France.
It has some plummy fruit, with sufficient tannin for only £2.74.
Alternatively, try a 1990 Crozes-Hermitage, Cuvée Louis Belle, from Oddbins at £6.99.
Although only two years old, this wine is already mature enough to drink.
1990 in the northern Rhône was a star vintage, making some lovely ripe wines with masses of fruit and balancing tannin, and this example is warm and gutsy.
It complements a banger perfectly and will make you forget the November chill.
Comparable in style and flavour is a 1990 Côtes du Rhone, Cépage Syrah from one of the leading producers of the northern Rhône, which Rhône and Loire specialist Yapp Brothers in Mere is selling for £6.50.
This sounds expensive but this is no ordinary representative of the appellation.
Australia is another good source of winter warmers, especially with full-bodied wines made from Shiraz, which is what they call Syrah down under.
Lay & Wheeler in Colchester is selling a 1989 Shiraz/Cabernet Sauvignon blend from Penley in Coonawarra for £9.30.
The substantial proportion of Cabernet makes for a slightly more elegant wine, with a delicious combination of spice and blackcurrant fruit.
Bulgaria is one of my latest enthusiasms.
Yes, I know everyone has been drinking Bulgarian Cabernet Sauvignon for ages, but Bulgaria has much more to offer, with original grape varieties such as Melnik, Gamza and Mavrud which are not grown elsewhere.
1985 Assenovgrad Mavrud, which Waitrose is selling for £3.79, represents excellent value for a splendidly solid, chunky wine, with fruit and tanin.
Rosemary George is the co-editor of Which?
Wine Guide (Hodder & Stoughton, £12.99).
BON FROMAGE the cheeses of France
Make the most of the delicious and versatile cheeses from Bel
SHE PROMOTION
Until recently, most people in this country limited their choice of cheese to cheddar.
Now more and more of us are sampling what other countries have to offer: countries such as France which makes hundreds of cheeses, in a mouth-watering variety of shapes, textures and tastes.
One of France's many fromageries (or cheese factories), blending traditional know-how with the latest in high-tech production methods, is Bel, and one of Bel's best-known cheeses is Port Salut.
You can recognise it by its bright and distinctive orange rind, and you won't forget its delightfully mellow flavour.
Port Salut first appeared in 1873, when it was created by an order of Trappist monks.
By 1937, the cheese had become so popular that the monks registered its name.
Port Salut is fairly soft and supple, with a clean mellow flavour enjoyed by both adults and children.
It has also been launched in a mature (affiné) variety.
Port Salut is a cheese which can be eaten as it is or used in cooking, where it adds a rich, buttery taste.
For best results, keep Port Salut at the bottom of the refrigerator, wrapped separately, and remove an hour before serving as part of a cheeseboard.
Also from Bel comes Le Roitelet Brie, made from pasteurised milk.
(Roitelet means wren in French and the bird is featured on the wrapping).
It has an even white and bloomy coat and a white, chalky inside, which should be allowed to ripen to a soft, flowing consistency before eating.
There are two types of Le Roitelet Brie: 52% fat which develops a full, pronounced flavour when ripened; and 60% fat which is a fully matured Brie with a lighter, buttery taste.
Bel also produces Crediou, a high-quality smooth cheese spread made from a blend of Cheddar, Emmental and other fine cheeses, decorated with natural walnut pieces.
Because it only has a 50% fat content, it's ideal for light lunches, and its firm texture makes it easy to spread on crackers or chunks of crusty bread.
Crediou is also available in a resealable pack.
FOOD NOTES
Young cooks
As a judge for the South-east England final of Sainsbury's Future Cooks I was impressed by the high standard of the entrants, two of whom were only ten years old.
The winner, Katie Bishop, 15, cooked a special meal with an unusual carrot pudding that had the judges asking for more.
Here is Katie's recipe: 125g (4oz) plain flour; 25g (1oz) butter; 25g (1oz) lard; pinch salt; 1 medium carrot, grated; 200g (7fl oz) single cream; ¼ small white loaf, made into breadcrumbs; 25g (1 oz) sugar; 2 eggs, size 4; 50g (2oz) butter, melted; pinch ground nutmeg; 15ml (1 tbs) brandy; 1.25ml (¼ tsp) grated lemon rind; 1 large peach.
Preheat oven to 210°s; C (425°s; F, Gas Mark 7).
Sift flour and salt into bowl, rub in butter and lard.
Add water to make into smooth dough.
(Or buy ready-made shortcrust pastry).
Roll out and line 18cm (7 in) flan dish.
Bake for 15 mins.
Cream together carrot, cream, breadcrumbs, sugar, eggs, butter, nutmeg, brandy and lemon.
Spoon into flan case.
Bake for 20 minutes.
Peel and stone peach and liquidise.
Serve slices of pudding with a spoonful of peach purée.
Join the club
Eating out for two at half price and discounts for parties of four sounds too good to be true.
But it is possible through Club Bon Viveur, organised by restaurant critics Les Routiers.
More than 500 restaurants throughout Britain are included in the scheme, from the well-known to the smallest, all providing good food, good service and good value for money.
Membership is £60 a year and includes discounts on Air France holidays.
To win one of ten free memberships, send your name and address on a postcard to Club Bon Viveur.
New blues
Blue cheese lovers will welcome a new French blue cheese from the Pays de Bresse in eastern France.
Blues is a delicious full fat soft blue cheese with a creamy texture and good bite.
On sale in good food stores and delicatessens, from around £4 per lb.
A new blue-veined English cheese from Millway Foods called Cambridge Blue (around £3.25 per lb from Tesco, Waitrose and good delicatessens and food stores) is designed for people who prefer blue cheese to be more ‘delicate’ in flavour, though some might find it bland.
Cook's bible
Larousse Gastronomique is considered the bible for chefs but now Larousse has produced a new, practical cookbook that offers lots of inspiration and advice for the enthusiastic amateur cook.
Larousse Pratique (Hamlyn, £25) is an encyclopedic book which contains more than 750 clearly explained recipes together with helpful descriptions of various cooking techniques.
Add some sparkle
When you're trying to cut down on caffeine or alcohol, drinking plain mineral water as a substitute can be very boring.
Wake up your tastebuds with something which tastes fruitier, such as Amé, a new lightly sparkling drink.
Natural fruit juices are blended with herbs, including jasmine, ginseng and limeflower, and vitamins.
Available from health food shops and good food stores for around £1.95 for 75 cl.
Under pressure
Beans, pulses and grains feature increasingly in a healthy diet, but they take a long time to cook, even using a microwave.
The quickest method is pressure cooking — to cook beans, soak them for 1 hour in hot water, then cook for 3 to 5 minutes (or for 15 minutes if unsoaked).
Good stainless steel pressure cookers cost around £40.
Organic hitch
Recently my local baker told me the stoneground organic loaf I was buying would be the last.
New EC regulations requiring all premises producing, growing or processing organic food to be registered and inspected by an organisation such as The Soil Association or the UK Register of Organic Foods add up to too much red tape for many small businesses.
However, after protests, the EC has postponed the measure until January 1, giving my baker a reprieve — if temporary.
To support organic food production and subsidies, join The Soil Association.
SHE PROMOTION
simply LAMB
Lean and tender British lamb is the easy way to make a meal special
Lean, versatile British lamb is so easy to use it brings out the cook in all of us.
Not only does it sizzle to perfection in a very short time but its natural succulence and subtle, sweet taste win compliments whenever it is served.
Your local butcher or supermarket boast new, versatile cuts of English, Scottish and Welsh lamb which avoid waste and maximise eating pleasure.
The following recipes use both traditional vegetables and fruits and less usual glazes which make the most of British lamb.
GRENADINE VALENTINES Boneless, heart-shaped chops are pure bliss served with a fruity sauce.
(If grenadine is unobtainable, use cassis or other red fruit syrup.)
Preparation time: 30 minutes.
Cooking time: 12 minutes.
Serves 4. 4 valentine (boneless) lamb chops 2 tbs grenadine (pomegranate syrup) 2 tbs Worcestershire sauce 1 tbs grapeseed oil ½ –1 tsp sea salt flakes 8 tbs lamb stock 2 tbs guava or crabapple jelly 225g (8oz) chasselas grapes Marinate lamb in grenadine and Worcestershire sauce for 20 minutes.
Drain, reserve liquid.
Preheat heavy-based frypan, brush with a little oil.
When pan is very hot, press lamb down with a fish slice for five minutes on each side or until golden outside and pink inside.
(If preferred, extend cooking to 12 minutes total.)
Meanwhile, in a separate pan, boil the marinade, uncovered, with the stock, salt and jelly for ten minutes to a syrupy glaze.
Serve valentines with a pool of sauce.
WEST COUNTRY NOISETTES Make a delicious meal from grilled lamb noisettes with apple, onion and sage.
Preparation time: 2 minutes.
Cooking time: 15 minutes.
Serves 4. 8 lamb noisettes 4 garlic cloves, skinned ½ tsp sea salt flakes 4 dessert apples, peeled, cored and each cut into 8 2 red onions, skinned and sliced 1 tbs liquid honey small bunch fresh sage Crush garlic and salt together and rub over lamb.
Push noisettes in pairs onto short wooden skewers.
Preheat grill to very hot and grill close to heat for 4½ –5 minutes each side or until golden and firm to the touch.
Remove lamb and keep hot.
Add apple and onion, tossed in honey, to the grill with two leaves of shredded sage.
Grill for 4–5 minutes in total, turning now and then, until apple is semi-tender and the onion is cooked.
Serve with lamb noisettes.
LAMB STEAKS VERDE Lamb steaks are served on a brilliant green sauce of leek, potato and spinach.
Preparation time: 2 minutes.
Cooking time: 25 minutes.
Serves 4. 4 lamb steaks, about 675g (1½ lb) 4 garlic cloves, skinned and crushed 3 tbs extra virgin olive oil 450ml (¾ pint) dry cider 225g (8oz) trimmed leek 100g (4oz) potato 25g (1oz) spinach and parsley, mixed 4 tbs single cream or low-fat fromage frais Crush garlic and rub well over the lamb.
Heat 1 tbs of oil in a heavy-based frypan and sauté steaks for two minutes on each side.
Add 300ml (½ pint) cider to the pan, cover and cook for three minutes.
Remove steaks to oven to keep hot.
Add white part of leek, finely shredded, and potato, peeled and cut into 5mm (¼ in) cubes.
Cover, cook over a moderate heat for ten minutes.
Meanwhile, shred green leek tops but reserve a 20cm (8in) length.
Add leek shreds, parsley, spinach and remaining cider to pan, cover and cook for a further four minutes.
Blend pan contents, adding cream to make a speckled green sauce.
Cut remaining leek greens into fine shreds.
Sauté in remaining oil until tender.
Slice lamb into thin diagonal slices.
Pour some sauce onto each plate, add fanned out lamb and top with sautéed leek.
HONEY AND SPICE LAMB KEBABS Alternate cubes of lean lamb with courgette batons and chunks of red and yellow pepper along four long skewers.
Brush with a little oil mixed with honey, a few drops of soy sauce and some cumin seeds.
Grill both sides until sizzling.
Scatter chopped mint over all.
Serve with broccoli and rice.
get a crush on garlic
Why a clove a day keeps the doctor away.
By Patsy Westcott
One of the great culinary joys for me is a bowl of aïoli — the golden garlic mayonnaise so thick you can cut it with a knife — with a plate of crunchy baby vegetables scrubbed and served just as they are.
But there's far more to garlic than its wonderful taste.
The plant itself is a member of the lily family — our word for it comes from the Anglo Saxon gar , meaning spear, and leac , leek; the French ail and Spanish ajo derive from the Latin allium .
Originally a native of Asia, the cultivated version we buy today is a close relation of the crop first brought here by the Romans.
The British were slow to catch on.
Thirty years ago, rubbing a cut clove of garlic round the salad bowl was considered daring, but now we import 4,572 tonnes of the stuff, mainly from Italy, Spain and France, and as well as its wide ranging culinary uses there is increasing interest in its medicinal powers.
Garlic has been known for its healing properties for more than 5,000 years.
The ancient Chinese claimed it promoted longevity and an Egyptian papyrus from 1500 BC recommends garlic for 22 different complaints such as headaches, sore throats and physical weakness.
In more modern times, garlic ointments, compresses and inhalants were used to fight TB.
There's even a scientific rationale behind Dracula's aversion to garlic — a regular intake of garlic releases sulphur compounds in sweat which deter insects such as mosquitoes and gnats.
Today, garlic is the subject of intensive medical research — in particular with regard to heart disease.
German research showed that a dose of 800mg of dried garlic powder a day lowered cholesterol levels significantly, and the British Medical Journal has reported garlic's beneficial effect on blood coagulation, blood fats and the dilatation of blood vessels.
What has still to be discovered is just how much garlic is necessary to confer protection against heart disease, and in what form is best taken.
Garlic is also showing promise in the field of cancer research.
It has long been known that people who eat a high-vegetable diet have lower rates of stomach cancer, and this is particularly striking in regions of Italy and China which have a very high garlic intake.
Research in Texas on two sulphur compounds found in garlic discovered that they blocked the conversion of certain chemicals in the gut to carcinogens, inhibiting the first stages of tumour development.
Researchers in China, where garlic is widely used in folk medicine, discovered that garlic compounds were effective against some viruses including the cold sore virus and a type of meningitis.
Garlic extract has also been shown to be a valuable first line of defence against oral thrush.
A regular intake of garlic is said to cut the development of plaque-forming bacteria on the teeth, too.
Garlic's reputation for curing colds and lung infections has also gained orthodox medical recognition.
No-one knows which ingredients are responsible for these almost magical properties.
It could be the chemical allicin, or possibly the trace mineral germanium, which is found in greater quantities in garlic than in any other herb apart from ginseng.
Germanium boosts the immune system by helping the cells mop up free radicals, which are now thought to lie at the root of many degenerative diseases and the process of ageing.
Should you eat it raw or cooked?
Raw garlic is said to be preferable to kill bacteria and boost immune functioning.
However, researchers are now working on the theory that heat and digestive enzymes are necessary for the production of the substances which are active in promoting health.
Cooked garlic is thought to lower blood cholesterol, help prevent blood clotting and act as a decongestant, cough medicine, mucus regulator and bronchitis preventor.
Whichever way, it seems sensible to use plenty of this delicious bulb to add a kick to your cooking and boost your health.
Choose healthy, fresh garlic with no blemishes.
Use it as fresh as possible.
To relieve catarrh, chew raw garlic.
To get rid of garlic breath try strong coffee, cloves, honey, yogurt, or parsley.
The French recommend red wine.
Garlic doesn't freeze well, so don't keep any cooked dish containing garlic too long.
Grow garlic by planting single unwrapped cloves in a sunny position from November to March.
Harvest in July and August when the stems collapse.
horoscopes
CALL JUSTIN TOPER ON THE SHE HOROSCOPE HOTLINES
SCORPIO Oct 24–November 22
It's been said before, but it's perfectly true that Scorpio is the most enigmatic and least understood of all the zodiac signs.
With more secrets than Pandora's Box, they give absolutely noting away.
They are quite happy to question you, though, and are not averse to having a look through your personal items when your back is turned.
Delve into their affairs, however, and you are likely to be met with that fixed stare — all Scorpios have piercing eyes — which says mind your own business.
The Scorpio shell is a hard one to crack and outwardly they are cool, calm and collected; inside, however, they are a mass of emotions and are as insecure as anyone.
As for the famous stinging tail, it's only used as a last resort.
Another myth is that Scorpios are sex-mad, but they do exude a kind of magnetism and sexuality which others find hard to resist.
But, as broad-minded and liberal as they are, they are choosy and unlikely to hop from one bed to the next.
All Scorpios will be a little tetchy when the Sun in your birth sign is at odds with Saturn on November 4 and close to Pluto your ruler on the 14th.
The Full Moon in Taurus on the 10th is also likely to coincide with some kind of friction or discord when discussing intensely personal issues.
Yet if ever there was a time to put the record straight, this is it.
And it will probably be around the 19th — a magical day if ever there was one — that a fateful meeting or journey takes place.
Any messages or responses that you receive around November 27th should be spiritually uplifting.
Sagittarius Nov 23–Dec 21
November is seldom an easy month for you and, until the Sun enters Sagittarius around the 22nd, life tends to be somewhat dreary and downbeat.
Although there will be occasions around November 4 and 14 when you feel let down, there's no need to be completely negative.
There are some bright spots on your horizon and what occurs around the 7th ought to add a fillip to career or cash matters.
But, above all, the New Moon in your own sign on the 24th indicates some happy twists of fate.
Capricorn Dec 22–Jan 20
Provided you don't mix friendships with finance — especially on the 4th when the Sun makes a decisive aspect to your ruler Saturn — then this looks like being a month when you are fussed, feted and fawned over.
Admittedly, a Full Moon in Taurus on the 10th does signify a time of torn or divided loyalties, but perhaps you have more than one string to your bow.
An alteration in your working pattern or routine is indicated — and may be triggered off by developments around the 24th.
Aquarius Jan 21–Feb 19
As early as the 4th, when the Sun is at odds with Saturn in Aquarius, you'll realise that employers or loved ones won't comply with your wishes as quickly as you'd like.
In spite of that — and any skirmishes between the 10th and 14th — a long-awaited breakthrough is guaranteed.
On a personal level, the New Moon on the 24th and the eclipsed Full Moon on December 9 enable you to sort out the wheat from the chaff and decide exactly where your true loyalties lie.
Pisces Feb–Mar 20
All forms of communication and travel arrangements are stressed now and, although there is bound to be a change of plan early on in the month, what is planned or agreed around the 10th ought to send you merrily on your way.
Added to which, an emotional reunion is indicated on the 19th.
After the 22nd, however, the accent turns to your career and matters closer to home, and there's no doubt that changes are afoot.
Aries Mar 21–Apr 20
There's no point arguing over finances this month, or jeopardising a special relationship just when some kind of settlement is about to be agreed.
The 4th looks ominous, although it probably won't be until the Sun is close to Pluto on the 14th and superbly aspected by your ruler Mars on the 19th that anything happens.
After that, new sights and possibilities beckon.
But, apart from a winter break, whatever is planned around the 23rd relates to one specific plan or association which has been on and off for several months and is now back on again.
Taurus April 21–May 21
Although tokens of affection or messages from afar will lift your spirits around the 8th, this is likely to be a month of strained relationships.
The Full Moon in your own sign on the 10th urges you to give others a piece of your mind.
But, before you do, wait to see what is proposed around the 19th and then again on the 24th, because the chances are that someone will feel embarrassed and may even offer you the earth when all you wanted was an apology.
Gemini May 22–June 21
A tricky aspect between the Sun and Saturn in Aquarius on the 4th could disrupt your plans or routine, and the fact that you are also physically or mentally under par this month doesn't help.
There will be some perks around the 7th and 8th, but it won't be until well after the 14th that you will feel back in the swing of things again, particularly at work.
The New Moon in your opposite sign of Sagittarius highlights a special relationship and a piece of news.
You will be intrigued — and elated.
Cancer June 22–July 23
Don't allow your personal feelings to cloud your judgement in finances or joint arrangements — a tall order because you seem to be emotionally involved, too.
Both the Full Moon in Taurus on the 10th and an explosive aspect to Pluto on the 14th denote that two's company, three's a crowd.
That, and your reluctance to make a final decision, may cause a few sleepless nights.
But a fantastic aspect to Mars in Cancer shows that you are the instigator this time, and you have the ability to melt someone's heart — or break the ice, at the very least.
Leo July 24–Aug 23
A series of complex and powerful planetary influences suggest that everyone's gunning for you this month.
On the 4th, 10th and 14th, the atmosphere at home or at work could be rather tense, so hold tight and simply wait until the Sun, your ruler, is at perfect angles with Mars on the 19th, when you can anticipate a happy ending to one melodrama.
This may entail a major upheaval, but it will be more than compensated for later this month.
Virgo Aug 24–Sept 23
Delays or frustrations are indicated as November gets underway, so keep your options open until the Full Moon on the 10th — or preferably until after the Sun conjuncts Pluto on the 14th — when plans, contracts or important arrangements will be confirmed.
Once that's settled, you can afford to indulge in a little merrymaking.
At the beginning of December, you can expect some extra developments regarding a domestic or professional matter, and this time you can't resist the winds of change.
Libra Sept 24–Oct 23
You've always been a bit of a soft touch, but now it's time to wise up and tell those around you that enough is enough.
There are bound to be some tears around the 4th and 10th but, with Jupiter in Libra for the first time in a decade, you cannot allow yourself to be constrained any more.
Events on the 19th will boost your confidence and bank balance.
After the 22nd, the spotlight falls on travel and projects which have been in the offing since around June.
Now it's time to take off and enjoy yourself.
Justin Toper is a Libran.
After graduating from the Faculty of Astrological Studies in London, his talents were spotted by veteran astrologer Patric Walker and he has cast The Sun's  horoscopes for over ten years .
souper suppers
Make delicious dishes in minutes with Campbell's condensed soups
When life is hectic and you've only got half an hour in the evening to snatch a meal, a heartwarming bowl of Campbell's condensed soup with some crusty bread makes an ideal supper.
But if you want to make a more substantial winter supper for family and friends, you can put this versatile condensed soup to good use and create a delicious meal just as quickly and easily.
Campbell's range of 21 soups, from traditional Cream of Mushroom to more exotic recipes such as Mushroom and Peppers with Cream, can transform basic ingredients into a variety of tasty dishes: chicken korma, chicken and mushroom pie, lasagne and lots more.
And because they're condensed, they bring a thick, creamy texture to sauces — perfect for rice and pasta dishes.
Here are some easy recipes combining Campbell's soup and simple ingredients — with delicious results.
Scoop out the centre from baked potatoes and mix with a can of Campbell's Condensed Ham and Cheese Soup with Wine.
Pile this back into the skins, sprinkle with grated cheese and grill for a few minutes.
Use Campbell's Condensed Cream of Tomato soup to give richness to chilli or curry sauce, or as a base for a quick pizza topping, for instance with some herbs, mushrooms, peppers and salami.
Add chopped mushrooms to a can of Ham and Cheese Soup with Wine for a tasty carbonara sauce to serve with pasta.
Finish with a sprinkling of parmesan.
QUICK TIPS
BEEF STROGANOFF Preparation time: 5 mins.
Cooking time: 12 mins.
Serves 4 30ml (2 tbs) vegetable oil 450g (1lb) rump or sirloin steak, cut into ½ cm (¼ in) strips 1 medium onion, finely sliced 100g (4oz) button mushrooms, wiped and sliced 200ml (7fl oz) milk 295g (10.4oz) can Campbell's Condensed Mushroom & Peppers soup salt and pepper chopped parsley to garnish Heat oil in large frying pan and fry steak for around 5 mins over high heat or until lightly browned.
Remove with slotted spoon, set aside.
Cook onion and mushrooms gently in pan for 5 mins, stirring regularly.
Stir in milk and soup and heat until bubbling, stirring occasionally.
Return meat to pan and cook for 1 min more, stirring continuously.
Season to taste, serve with rice or noodles.
Garnish with parsley.
CHICKEN A LA KING Preparation time: 5 mins.
Cooking time: 20–25 mins.
Serves 4 15ml (1 tbs) vegetable oil 575g (1¼ lb) boneless chicken breast, skinned and cut into 2.5cm (1in) cubes 295g (10.4oz) can Campbell's Condensed Mushroom & Peppers soup 300ml (½ pt) milk 45–60ml (3–4tbs) dry sherry (optional) salt and pepper Heat oil in a large frying pan and fry chicken for 5 mins or until lightly browned.
Stir in soup, milk and sherry.
Simmer gently for 15–20 mins or until tender, stirring occasionally.
Season to taste, serve over freshly boiled rice.
For a free leaflet containing 30 delicious recipes using Campbell's soups, send an sae to .
you can't ignore THE DRUGS EXPLOSION
The world is full of dubious substances — most are available to your kids.
By Laurie Graham
Parents are ever fearful for their children.
Throughout our child's infancy, we shadow-box with a whole tribe of bogeymen — speeding drivers, viruses and teddy manufacturers who don't fix the eyes in properly.
We know our child is vulnerable and the world is wicked so we keep a close watch.
Then she grows up and keeps ducking round corners, out of sight.
If there is a single subject guaranteed to strike fear in the hearts of parents, it is drugs.
We know the stuff is about, in abundance.
We know a lot of people have pledged to fight a war against it, and other people keep telling them they can't succeed.
We know enough to resist hysteria, but too much for total calm.
The world is full of mind-bending substances.
The way we decide which to condemn and which to pursue turns out to be complicated and illogical: a synthesis of the times we live in, the place and what the newspapers tell us.
I'll tell you what I mean by drugs.
I mean LSD, cocaine, narcotics, speed, Ecstasy and all the amphetamine family.
I mean solvents, marijuana, tobacco, alcohol and anything else that humans sniff, snort and sell the shirt off their back for.
I gather them all, unapologetically, into the same disreputable fold because they are all substances we use to change the way we feel.
It's just that some are socially acceptable and available within the law, others are most definitely not.
The criterion of legality is enough for many parents, and understandably so: a criminal conviction is a handicap and a label that may stick for life.
The problem with the law is that it isn't always easy to defend.
It is a patchwork of well-tested rules, long-forgotten power struggles, and reactionary humbug.
And while a teenager has the foresight of a flea, her powers of humbug-detection are finely honed.
This is why, before you embark on any kind of anti-drug crusade with your children, you have to be clear where you stand — and not just on the subject of heroin.
Your Valium and Benson & Hedges will be fair game, as will your weekly consumption of vodka.
Our greatest fear is that one of our children will end up in a body bag.
Our next greatest fear is that, before that, she will become one of those shadowy sub-humans — a junkie.
In our nightmares we see a black and white world of junkies and non-junkies, with nothing very apparent separating them.
Mother love, iron discipline, cooked breakfasts — nothing promises the protection we want for our six-foot babies.
We pour another glass and vent our spleen on drug barons and dope fiends.
But if we are to be able to talk to our children about this at all, then we must have some understanding of the choices and risks they face.
And if we can't be sure of preventing our children from trying things, then we'd better be sure how we can live with their experimentation, and how we can help them limit the damage.
When our teenagers go out for the evening, most of them use something, if only occasionally, as a social prop.
The four substances they are most likely to use are alcohol, tobacco, marijuana and amphetamines.
The choice they make has all kinds of consequences — whether they'll be up or down, whether they'll be fit to drive or fit to live, and whether they are risking a criminal record.
Instead of getting hysterical over the remote possibility of gutter-level heroin addiction, we have to contemplate something almost as hard and much more likely — that our children will sample what's available and live to tell the tale.
The facts are easy to assemble.
We all know the long-term effects of alcohol and tobacco.
Pot, hash, cannabis, whatever you call it, is well-documented, too, by its devoted users who praise its benign powers, and by its detractors who believe it is a short-cut to the opium den.
Amphetamines are the dance drugs, the designer drugs that come and go on waves of fashion.
Their effects are unpredictable.
And in the longer term?
No-one has been using them long enough to know.
A recite these facts against a background hum of media panic.
When fear keeps them awake at night, parents would do well to remember that thousands of teenagers try things and then move on, that people of all ages make regular use of drugs as part of their happy, productive lives and, above all, that we are not the hapless victims of some depraved international conspiracy.
We each choose our own poison, even our children.
They try things first out of curiosity.
Peer pressure is a factor, but not necessarily in a coercive way; a teenager who isn't sure how to smoke a joint will be more worried about losing face from doing it wrong than not doing it at all.
After that it becomes a question of taste, and of having the money.
We imagine our children being accosted in dark alleys and force-fed narcotics until their souls are no longer their own.
Actually, the transaction is more banal than that.
They go shopping for what they want and mainly they buy from people they know.
But it helps to expiate our imagined sins if we have a bogeyman to hand, a Drug Baron.
In the very long run, the actions of a Colombian warlord may reverberate in your family, but railing against him is a waste of time.
Anyway, there are bogeymen much closer to home: true Brits who drink too much lager and then get behind the wheel of a car.
With cocaine we all have a choice denied us by a drunken driver.
We can say no.
Early campaigns against the use of illegal drugs failed to achieve their aim, to scare users and potential users rigid and make parents frightened to turn their backs for a moment.
Teenagers, even imaginative ones, aren't good at making connections and the occasional smoker of hash felt as remote from those images of heroin addiction as did her sherry-sipping uncle.
And reasonably so: most of us go through life without knowing anyone who is destroyed by heroin.
We may also know heroin users without realising it — a carefully managed habit is not incompatible with a healthy, active life.
By presenting us with the most degenerate images they could find, those campaigns made us feel comfortingly distant from it all.
Shock tactics often fall wide of their mark.
This lesson was learned, and urgently, with HIV focusing our minds on a more realistic target — damage limitation.
As parents, sensibly, we can only follow suit.
We may long to scream, ‘If you ever,ever so much as look at a prohibited substance, I'll lock you in your bedroom until you're 30,’ but we have to master our panic.
And then we have work to do in two important areas.
First, we have to keep track.
That means being willing to listen to things we'd rather not hear.
I would like my children to stay healthy, on the right side of the law, and lead fulfilling lives without taking any risks.
As it is, I will settle for healthy.
There are some people who will never try any mind-bending substances.
One or two of them might be related to me, but I work on the assumption that my children will have access to most things and personal experience of some.
When one of my teenagers spent a month huddled in the park with a crowd of deadpan Gothic posers, I radiated white-hot hostility.
All those nose studs.
All that sitting around in a circle.
Clearly it wasn't Opal Fruits they were sharing.
I didn't want them in my house or my life, but I did want to know what they were up to, and no-one would tell me.
It took me a long time, years rather than months, to relax enough for anyone to feel they could tell me anything.
I had to give up my All or Nothing scenario, in which my child either remains completely untouched by drugs or ends her short life with a needle in her arm.
Once I eased off, the information was freely offered.
Who had tried what, where they got it from, what it cost, and how they balance the accounts of risk and pleasure.
Pleasure is a very big part of the drugs picture.
The main reason our children try drugs is that they're searching for pleasure, and the main reason they carry on is that they've found it.
This is the other bit of hard work — admitting that our children aren't sick or deranged, but that they were exercising consumer choice.
Peer pressure fills the rest of the picture.
Drug-taking is woven as tightly into teenage social life as drinking is into the social lives of their parents.
If they are around people who seem to have good experiences of drugs, they'll join in.
If they witness something frightening, if they see someone messing up at school or losing friends, they'll show concern, distance themselves from anything really threatening, enjoy a little frisson of fear and then slip back towards their old habits.
But they do make choices.
That's the point.
If you suspect that your teenager is using drugs, the most important thing to remember as the waves of panic close over your head is this — experimentation doesn't always lead to addiction, but if your child does become addicted, recovery is possible.
The tell-tale signs of drug use are mainly to do with behaviour; sudden mood swings, poor concentration, disturbed sleep patterns, apathy, loss of memory and, if the addiction is an expensive one, stealing and lying.
Weight loss is common, as are the obvious physical signs of needle track marks (and wearing long sleeves to hide them), and the perpetually sore, running nose of someone who has a sniffing habit.
If it turns out that your teenager is using drugs and has problems, you have something very painful to face.
On top of your fear, anger and guilt, you have to accept that you have no control over what happens next.
Addicts don't stop what they're doing because someone gives them a talking to.
They say they're going to stop, they make all kinds of worthless promises, and always revert to their habit.
An addict only stops when he personally comes to the conclusion that his addiction is bringing him more trouble and suffering than pleasure.
This is why parents who keep rushing in, trying to alleviate their teenager's suffering, can actually set him back in his attempts to recover.
He has to experience the awful consequences of his addiction, including the withdrawal of parental rescue operations, before he will have the motivation to stop.
In the world of rehabilitating addicts, this is known as showing your child tough love.
Withdrawal effects vary, depending on the substance.
The most difficult withdrawals relate to substances that teenagers rarely become addicted to — barbiturates and alcohol.
Withdrawal from heroin, usually described in lurid nightmare language, is actually like a severe attack of gastric flu.
The only supervision required is the kind that will keep the addict from going out and buying something to satisfy his craving.
Allowing your children's choice-making skills to develop is one of parenthood's toughest tests.
You have to relinquish things you actually long to cling to, and you have to know when to remove the safety net.
It calls for consummate timing and nerves of steel.
Most of us do very well.
Then, just when we think we've really let go, we realise that we don't want our children making just any old choice.
We want them to make the choices we would have made.
You can admit this to your teenagers.
In fact, you can reveal all — your idiotic fears, your justifiable fears, your worst-case fantasies — as long as you say it right.
If you say, ‘I keep thinking you might take some LSD and have a bad trip and get scrambled-egg brains and never be the same again and I really love you the way you are,’ that's fine because you've confined yourself to what you know and what you feel.
Saying, ‘You're going to end up like your Uncle Jim,’ reveals nothing.
In the end, most teenagers who play with pills and powders give them up.
They accumulate responsibilities and commitments and confine themselves to drink and cigarettes.
Every year there are 500 times as many alcohol- and tobacco-related deaths as there are deaths related to the use of illegal drugs.
When the drugs debate gets overheated, when there's talk of plagues and tidal waves and the destruction of a whole generation, we'd do well to remember that.
The drug scene
Cannabis (pot, marijuana, hash, dope, blow, ganja, grass) Usually smoked by mixing with tobacco and rolling into a cigarette called a spliff.
Can be eaten.
Effects are similar to alcohol; euphoria, impaired judgement, drowsiness.
Psychologically but not physically addictive, but heavy use is believed to cause chronic psychological changes.
Most users smoke it only occasionally.
Amphetamines (uppers, speed, French Blues, Dexies, Wizz).
Mainly pills.
Users feel euphoric, restless and invincible.
Not physically addictive, but suppresses need for food and sleep, so depression, hunger and tiredness often follow.
Regular use can lead to hallucinations and paranoia.
Ecstasy Amphetamine compound that acts as an hallucinogen.
Pills.
Causes restlessness, tripping, dehydration.
LSD (acid, trips, blotters, blue, smileys).
A powerful hallucinogen.
Few try it more than once.
Blood pressure, heart rate and breathing affected, as well as altered perceptions — pleasant or horrific.
(Also, magic mushrooms, which can be eaten or made into an infusion and drunk.)
Solvents (also glues, paints, aerosols and lighter fuel).
Inhaled direct from the container or from plastic bags.
Causes stupor, hallucinations, vomiting.
Greatest risk is death by asphyxiation.
Look out for smell of solvent on breath, nose-bleeds, sores around nose and mouth, weight loss.
Cocaine (coke, snow, freebase, crack).
Psychologically addictive.
The powder is usually sniffed.
Freebase is a compound that can be inhaled or smoked.
Crack is a cheaper, smokable form which is powerfully addictive.
Produces a quick rush of euphoria followed by a rapid depression of mood.
Other dangers are dramatic increases and decreases in blood pressure, paranoia and psychosis.
Heroin (smack, horse, H, Chinese — when combined with cocaine it is called a snowball).
May be sniffed, or burned and then inhaled (chasing the dragon) or injected.
Produces a relaxed euphoria and is highly addictive.
The need to feed the addiction takes priority over all other activities, leading to personal neglect, anti-social behaviour and crime.
Also, there's a risk of overdosing, and of HIV or hepatitis infection through sharing needles.
LEARNING CURVE
building a library of reference books at home…learning with the colourful collages of Eric Carle…techniques for making art copy life
FACT FINDERS
Information books at home not only supply a resource for school topic work, they also help your child develop good study skills.
But which should you buy?
‘Start with a one-volume encyclopedia to answer quick questions,’ suggests children's librarian Keith Harrap, ‘then add other books on subjects which interest your child.’
Choose well-made books with good quality print, plenty of interesting pictures, clear and concise writing with straightforward sentences and short paragraphs.
Ask yourself: is the information accurate and up-to-date?
Does the background knowledge assumed seem appropriate for your child?
If the book suggests experiments or projects, are they safe and clearly explained?
If your child finds reading difficult, don't provide books aimed at younger children because he may be bored by them even though he can understand them.
Look instead for books for his age with plenty of visual clues, and read them together.
Many children happily tackle much harder books than usual if they are interested in the subject.
Good books need not cost a fortune.
Usborne books are excellent value at £1.95–£8.95.
Dorling Kindersley's beautifully illustrated Eye Witness Guides (£7.99) are a fine choice.
Good value, single-volume encyclopedias include: the Kingfisher Children's Encyclopedia (£25), Dorling Kindersley's Children's Illustrated Encyclopedia (£25), or the Heinemann Children's Encyclopedia (£19.95).
Diana Kimpton 
TISSUE TALES
Despite his prolific output, author/illustrator Eric Carle has never lost touch with what it feels to be force-fed unsuitable books.
As an illustrator, he felt limited by the unimaginative educational material offered to him.
‘It was done by experts and in my heart I knew it was wrong.’
A father of two children, now grown-up, he had the good fortune to work early on with author Bill Martin on Brown Bear, Brown Bear, What Do You See?— now a pre-school classic.
While collaboration with Martin continues, his own titles, such as The Very Hungry Caterpillar , sell in their millions.
‘Education is one element of my books,’ he says.
‘My success I think is also due to their emotional impact.
The Caterpillar , for instance, is a book of hope.
It says that you too — an ugly, little thing — will open your wings and fly.
Kids who are insecure and little identify with that.’
Born in New York of German parents, he attended art school in Germany before returning to America in the 1950s.
His technique is collage.
‘I create my own coloured tissue paper by finger painting and trickling or spraying paint on it,’ he explains.
The range of textures, shapes and colours he achieves is attributed to his early career as an art director for an advertising agency.
‘We were always trying to be creative and to shock!’
Eric Carle's latest book,Polar Bear, Polar Bear, What Do You Hear ?’, with text by Bill Martin, is published on November 5 by Hamish Hamilton, priced £8.50.
THE TOP DRAW
Children's artistic sense is innate and should not be cramped by an adult's vision or formal teaching.
That is the conventional view, but it is disputed by Maureen Cox, former teacher, now psychology lecturer.
In Children's Drawings (Penguin, £6.99), she suggests that children become dissatisfied with their work, often between the ages of eight and ten, when they can't achieve visual realism.
At this stage more structured teaching of drawing should be given.
She suggests that children:
Copy a drawing which is upside down; or draw the ‘negative’ spaces round an object.
This helps them to see a 3-D object as a simpler, two-dimensional configuration of lines and shapes.
Place a clear piece of plastic on a window, close one eye and trace the outlines of what you see.
This helps with drawing perspective.
To critics who say this isn't drawing but copying, Maureen Cox answers, ‘In some sense, copying what you see is exactly what learning to draw from life actually means.
Technical skill is a fundamental basis for most, if not all, great art.’
Crayola's 24-page Starting Points booklet has bright new ideas for experimenting with art materials, and we have 200 free for SHE readers.
Send your name and address on a postcard to Crayola .
HEALTHY KIDS
organic baby food…help for cerebral palsy…hyperactive handbook…do you need more humidity?…don't OD on fluoride…how buses could be better
Babies eat larger amounts of fruit and vegetables than adults, weight for weight, so if they contain pesticide residues, infants will consume proportionately more.
Baby Organix has a new range of baby meals, grown without pesticides, fungicides, synthetic fertilisers or growth hormones.
From Waitrose and Safeway, around 70p.
Hungary's Peto Institute pioneered conductive education for people with cerebral palsy and opened its new UK centre this year.
However, less well-known are the Bobath Centres in London and Wales which have their own unique form of physiotherapy for children with cerebral palsy.
They rely largely on donations.
For information on treatment or how to give financial support.
Do you have a hyperactive child?
Lesley-Anne Cull, who is writing a parents' handbook on the subject, would like to hear from you.
Optimum room humidity for health and comfort is 45–55% — but indoors in winter, with central heating, it can be only 10–20%.
Having a parched nose and throat may lower resistance to colds, croup, sinusitis and respiratory problems.
A humidifier keeps air moist and the Air Improvement Centre is offering SHE readers the electric Turmix 200 humidifier for the special price of £79 inc p&p until Nov 30.
FLUORIDE IN MODERATION
‘I am surprised that dentists don't advocate the use of fluoride tablets,’ wrote a SHE reader recently.
‘It is a proven fact that it strengthens growing teeth.’
Certainly studies have shown a remarkable correlation between ingestion of fluoride and a drop in tooth decay among children — up to 60%.
Even the use of fluoridated toothpaste has been shown to reduce decay by 25%.
And in the few areas of the UK where fluoride is added to the water, dental carries have been reduced by around 50%.
Topical fluoride (applied as toothpaste or as a mouthwash) blends with saliva to create a bacteria-fighting rinse.
When ingested (as tablets or as fluoridated water), it builds stronger enamel and heals small spots of decay before they develop into holes.
Yet most UK regions have resisted mass fluoridation of the water supply.
Why?
Jack Levenson of the British Dental Society for Clinical Nutrition says, ‘Too much fluoride can make teeth become mottled and brittle.
And an excess of fluoride must have a systemic effect elsewhere in the body.
I think it is immoral to put it in the water when you don't know how much water people drink.’
India's government is so concerned about naturally high fluoride levels in water that it believes children under seven should not use fluoridated toothpaste.
And the World Health Organisation suggests that all children should not use fluoride mouth rinses and should only have toothpaste portions the size of a small pea.
US-government-funded research has also linked fluoridation of water to an increase in osteosarcoma, a bone cancer.
Now 40 American dentists are suing the American Dental Association for allegedly misinforming its members about the dangers.
They also claim that fluoride potentially causes birth defects.
For concerned parents, the best advice is: weigh the evidence, talk to your dentist and, if you opt for fluoride, make sure you don't overdose.
BUS FUSS
Children who travel to school by bus or coach are 20 times less likely to be injured in an accident than when they travel by car.
However, an international conference on school transport in Strasbourg decided that, despite the good safety record of buses and coaches, supervision was a particular problem because it was generally left to the driver, whose priorities obviously lay elsewhere.
The conference's suggestions included:
A perfect system, used in Ireland, where senior pupils are paid to supervise behaviour.
However, peer pressure made this unpopular.
Free bus passes offered to parents in return for acting as supervisors.
More women bus drivers.
In France, efforts are being made to train more women for the job.
Delegates felt that women had more talent than men for spotting potential sources of trouble and taking action at an earlier stage.
Michael Evans 
GROWING PAINS
why television causes confusion…do toy guns encourage aggression?…rites of passage…baby talk and body language…spoiling a special child
THE GOGGLE BOX
‘Television could be a fair greater waste of time from a developmental or social learning point of view than has been recognised.’
That was the damning view of child psychologist Anne Sheppard when she researched the question of children, television and morality for the Broadcasting Standards Council two years ago.
Her latest research for the BSC takes her point further.
After asking primary-school children questions about the Turtle cartoons, designed for children, and The Bill , designed for adults but often watched by youngsters, Dr Sheppard discovered that:
The children remembered less than half the plot of each.
The majority failed to understand the motivation of some of the characters.
The children failed to differentiate good characters from evil ones in The Bill .
The younger children did not understand the moral lessons of either programme
.
‘Television is fast-moving and relies on much non-verbal communication, such as a quick glance between the characters, which means nothing to a young child,’ says Dr Sheppard.
And what children fail to understand, they often make sense of in their own way, interpreting the plot and characters wrongly.
‘I stopped my eight- and ten-year-olds from watching Grange Hill ,’ she says, ‘because it covered abortion and, however well it was done, I did not want their first experience of it to be through television.’
If all a child is getting out of a programme is a blank mind and confusion then, she says, ‘Any other activity, even squabbling, might be more valuable from a social learning point of view!’
TARGET PRACTICE?
Children, especially boys, will construct a fake gun using anything from sticks to a piece of toast.
But if you buy your child a toy gun will it turn him into an aggressive adult?
The short answer is, no-one knows.
Research indicates that it won't — unless the child's family circumstances encourage aggression, too.
Professor Jeffrey Goldstein believes that children play with aggressive toys for many reasons:
To master their environment and help them to understand violence and death.
To develop imagination and learn social skills.
To imitate adult play and express some emotions.
To help maintain an optimum level of excitement.
However, several studies have shown that aggressive toys do lead to a rise in anti-social behaviour, but that this is short-lived.
As soon as the toys are withdrawn, the aggression falls to pre-weapon levels.
The long-term effects of playing with toy guns are unknown.
‘Whatever the contribution of aggressive toys to children's anti-social behaviour may be,’ concludes Professor Goldstein, ‘it is fairly minor compared to such factors as the parents' use of aggression and their tolerance of their child's aggression.’
NAMING NAMES
The number of christenings has fallen dramatically in recent years; parents would rather let the child decide about religion for himself, and many vicars are unwilling to conduct christenings for people who are not regular churchgoers.
But the absence of a ceremony does leave a gap, and is disappointing for many grandparents.
Rituals mark the milestones of life, and work to bring members of the family together.
The British Humanist Association, a registered charity, is trying to meet the need for a non-religious ‘christening’.
It has published a booklet, called New Arrivals — A Guide to Non-religious Naming Ceremonies , which gives five alternatives, ranging from the personal to something similar to the vows in the Christian ceremony but without reference to a deity.
One advantage of a naming ceremony is that the child can be given ‘godparents’ to turn to for support.
Parents have found many ways to mark a new arrival — planting a tree, designing a certificate or making a book to give to the child when older.
New Arrivals costs £3.50.
Janice Parrock 
For some parents, spoiling their child is one of the ways they can express relief at having someone to care for.
But it can lead to trouble: many of the problem children I see as a child psychologist are ‘precious’.
A dreadful pregnancy or birth that produces a healthy baby can make it difficult for a mother to allow her baby to cry even for a few minutes.
This may continue right through to the toddler stage, when she finds herself still attending to every cry, day and night.
Mothers of premature babies often have similar difficulties.
Weeks in a special baby unit, difficult feeding or breathing constantly remind parents how precious the baby is.
For example, some parents feel unable to reprimand asthmatic children in case this provokes an attack.
It is extremely easy to spoil a new baby born after the death of a first; or to smother a long-awaited or adopted baby with love.
Equally, an unwanted or unhappy pregnancy may result unexpectedly in the birth of an instantly beloved child.
But the mother then feels guilty at not having wanted the baby, and compensates by spoiling.
So remember:
Saying ‘No’ occasionally doesn't mean you don't love your child.
If you are worried about being tough on a child who has a medical problem, ask your doctor for advice.
BODY TALK
Babies communicate with body movements and facial expressions.
As well as smiles and cries, look out for:
‘I'm pleased to see you,’ indicated by the arms and legs thrashing about.
‘I want that,’ which babies as young as five months ‘say’with a hard stare and small cries and arm movements.
Even very young babies turn their heads away from something they don't want.
By seven or eight months, a baby's posture can tell you how comfortable she really feels.
Sit her on a stranger's knee and she may seem content, but compare her rigid posture with how relaxed she is on a parent's knee.
Body language is mostly unconscious and therefore more reliable than words.
When telling fibs, your child may stand awkwardly, holding her arms stiffly and covering her mouth or eyes fleetingly with a hand.
Also note that:
We produce less saliva when tense, so if your child is licking her lips excessively, this could be a sign of worry.
If she fiddles with her buttons while she's talking, then she may feel threatened.
If she starts blinking excessively, she probably wants you to shut up
!
MINDING THE KIDS
a real need for after-school care in rural areas…worry for working mothers
OUT OF BOUNDS
Country children don't lead the idyllic and untrammelled lives many townies imagine.
‘Rural children have no right to play in areas which have become increasingly dangerous,’ says Alison Marshall, new rural development officer for the Kids' Clubs Network.
‘Barbed wire, chemicals, heavy machinery and busy roads all mean the rapid disappearance of natural play areas.’
Yet there is almost a total lack of out-of-school childcare in rural areas.
To remedy this, Alison is setting up pilot projects to develop after-school and holiday provision in Bedfordshire, Cornwall, North Yorkshire, Shropshire and Suffolk.
For details of schemes in the target areas and general advice on rural out-of-school schemes, ring her.
For details of after-school care in Scottish towns and villages ring Rita Hopper.
Good out-of-school schemes can revolutionise women's lives.
A survey by BAND, the Bristol Association for Neighbourhood Daycare, which supports such schemes, found that they enabled 59% of parents to take full-time work, 36% to take training, and 22% to receive promotion.
For clubs in the Avon area, phone Maureen Durand.
NANNY NIGHTMARE
Working mothers today suffer from a problem which beset middle-class matrons at the turn of the century — you just can't get the staff.
In a survey by Childcare Vouchers of more than 400 working mothers, 72% of nanny-users said that childcare problems were among the most stressful they had to cope with.
In comparison, 60% of nursery-users and only 48% of childminder-users felt the same way.
Finding a new childcarer is so traumatic that 80% of the mothers surveyed admitted they didn't have the courage to give an inadequate nanny the sack immediately; 60% of those who were unhappy carried on with their carer for a month, and 35% for up to six months.
These figures are hardly surprising — it took most respondents up to six weeks to find a replacement .
tons of treats
GOOD TIMING
10 nursery clocks
Help your child to tell the time with this nursery clock which has a solid pine surround and clown design.
From Seymour Direct, it has easy-to-read numbers and is personalised with the child's name and birth date.
It sells for £32.95 but we have ten to give away.
Please mark your card ‘Clock’ giving child's name and date of birth.
GET PACKING!
50 rucksacks
Books and packed lunch, swimming gear or overnight kit — children can stash it all away in this snazzy backpack from Rowntree's Jelly.
It's tough, colourful and contains a free pot of fruity Ready-to-Eat Jelly.
We have 50 to give away.
Please mark your postcard ‘Rowntree rucksack’.
WORLDLY KNOWLEDGE
10 GeoSafari quiz games
An exciting way to learn about maps, continents, flags, currencies and more, the award-winning GeoSafari Senior Electronic Quiz game is ideal for children aged eight up.
It can be played alone or with friends, and is battery-driven.
It costs around £60, but makers Educational Insights are giving ten away.
Mark your postcard ‘GeoSafari’.
BAUBLES AND BEADS
20 jewellery sets
Young designers can accessorise any outfit with splendid earrings, brooches and bracelets created with the Get Set!
Designer Jewellery kit.
From Waddingtons, priced around £13, it contains all the raw materials they'll need.
We have 20 to give away.
Mark your postcard ‘Jewellery kit’.
ARMED TO THE TEETH
200 toothbrushes
Thunderbirds are back, saving the world — and protecting your teeth from decay.
Search's Thunderbirds character toothbrushes are designed to make toothbrushing time fun.
They normally cost around £1.40 but we have 200 to give away to readers.
Please mark your postcard ‘Thunderbird toothbrushes’.
TRUNK CALL
23 cuddly Babars
Loved by two generations, Babar is still every child's favourite elephant.
Quality toymakers Gund are offering 23 of their 45cm-high Babars free to SHE readers.
Made from washable soft plush fabric they are usually priced at £26.
Please mark your postcard ‘Babar’.
ANIMAL ANTICS
60 creature kits
Kids have a monster giggle at ‘Create-a-Critter,’ the new rubbing templates from Crayola.
Using the 15 double-sided plates and crayons, they can mix and match different body parts to make a thousand fantastic characters.
Normally priced £8.99, we have 60 monster kits to give away to SHE readers.
Please mark your postcard ‘Create-a-Critter’.
START TO SPELL
60 Boggle Junior games
Early learners can start to learn their reading and spelling skills with Boggle Junior from Parker Games.
It contains three- and four-letter word picture cards, and children have to make up the words using eight cubes with letters on each side.
It is suitable for ages three to six, and costs £11.99, but we have 60 to give away.
Please mark your postcard ‘Boggle Junior’.
SHE PROMOTION
no tears medicine
We help you take the strain out of childhood illness
Childhood illness can be upsetting for children and parents alike.
Whether they're suffering from a mild sore throat and a runny nose, or something more serious, an ill child is usually an unhappy one.
Parents often feel helpless, knowing that all the cuddles in the world won't stop the tears.
In cases of mild illness, such as coughs and colds, often all you can do is let children rest and give them over-the-counter medication to relieve pain or fever and help them to sleep.
But, for common bacterial illnesses such as ear, throat and chest infections, a visit to the doctor and a course of antibiotics will be called for.
Many children don't look forward to a visit to the doctor's — not surprising, as they may associate it with illness or injections.
Persuading a child to take a long course of medicine is usually a struggle, as children often dislike the taste.
Given that they're feeling unwell to start with, this can lead to tears.
Here are some helpful tips from mothers who've been there before.
‘If visits to the doctor's surgery are a nightmare of tears and temper, there are ways to ease the trip.
Try telephoning the practice nurse in advance so that she will know your son or daughter's name and make them feel welcome and special when you arrive.
Take along some favourite toys or a book so that your child has something to play with in the waiting room.
A promised treat for when you get home — a cake for tea, or watching a favourite video — gives your child something to look forward to at the end of it.’
‘It can be difficult to make your child take lengthy courses of treatments such as antibiotics when the average treatment can last for seven days — an eternity to a child However, newer, shorter-course antibiotic treatments are now available from your doctor, which are taken once a day for between three to five days.
These short-course treatments are as effective for some illnesses as longer courses and may be suitable for your child.’
‘If your child dislikes taking medicines, trying making it ‘fun’— for instance, make it part of a teddy bears' tea party.
Set your child's teddies in a circle and pretend to give them all a spoonful, finishing with one for your son or daughter.
Alternatively, pretend to take some yourself, so that it becomes a shared ritual.’
While some children prefer liquid medicine, finding it easier to swallow, others dislike it.
Let your child wash the medicine down with a mouthful of his or her favourite drink, so that an association can be made between the taste of medicine and something more pleasant.’
It may sound obvious, but take time to explain to your child that we all become ill from time to time, and we are given medicine to make us well again.
It's easy to take it for granted that we take medication to get better but a child doesn't necessarily understand that.’
make learning FUN!
SHE PROMOTION
Is your child keen to learn to read?
Boggle Junior by Parker Games makes reading and spelling child's play
Children learn in many ways; by watching and copying, by asking questions and by following a parent's example.
But to achieve success — whether it's kicking a ball or learning to spell — they need loads of praise and lots of fun.
Boggle Junior from Parker Games is a fun educational game for children aged three to six, which painlessly teaches essential pre-reading skills.
All parents hope their child will enjoy reading for the pleasure of it.
But this skill, along with accurate spelling, is essential in succeeding in most areas of life.
Children who are familiar with the shape and sound of letters by the age of four are likely to be good readers at seven.
And three isn't too early to begin to teach the alphabet.
The most important pre-reading skills for children to learn are:
The ability to discriminate between the shapes of letters and their sounds.
Research shows that games which encourage the recognition and naming of letters are a useful learning tool.
The knowledge that words are read from left to right, and from the top of the page to the bottom.
Boggle Junior is a matching and spelling game introduced last year to complement the successful adult Boggle.
It helps young children learn to read and spell using 30 picture cards with three-letter words on one side and four-letter words on the other.
Eight plastic cubes with letters on each side, a timer and a tray complete the game.
Three games are possible, each of which makes learning to read fun.
The games are:
Match and Spell — a game for the younger age group.
Mum or Dad shows the top picture card in the tray and then sounds out each of the letters beneath.
The child finds the same letters on the eight cubes and places them correctly in the tray underneath the card.
Cover-up — a card is placed in the tray, the child studies the word beneath it then covers it and tries to spell it from memory, using the cubes.
Time's Up — a game for older children.
The challenge is to play either game against the timer, which can be switched off at any time if the child wants to check a word or letter
Whether your child's school uses the ‘look and say’ reading method, where pictures are used to help children read a word, or the ‘phonic’method, which emphasises the sounds of letters, or a mixture of both.
Boggle Junior will complement the national curriculum.
All its letters are in lower case and the picture cards incorporate both approaches.
Just as important, Boggle Junior gives parents the chance to provide a relaxing and positive environment in which to learn.
And most of all.
Boggle Junior makes reading and spelling fun from day one.
SHE mail
THE LONG AND SHORT OF IT
Oh, how I envy Sharon Maxwell Magnus (Walk small!
September SHE).
As someone who stands nearly five feet eleven in my bare size 7½ feet, I have suffered a cruel life.
At seven I had to carry ID in case bus drivers attempted to charge me adult fare.
At 11 I was three inches taller than our school netball posts (very handy for goals).
Just three years later I was taller than any other human being at our school, teachers included.
When I finally stopped growing at the age of 17 I felt relief.
But how the world conspires against you!
While every clothes store carries a petite range, there isn't one range for the taller than average woman.
‘Bodies’ and swimsuits do terrible things to my groin and tights have their gussets around my lower thighs.
Backache is a constant complaint as I stoop over low baths, sinks, baby buggies and shopping trolleys.
Planes, restaurants with fixed seating, cinemas and hairdressers all leave me cramped.
So please don't complain, Sharon — the cruel hand of fate affects us all!
PRACTISE WHAT YOU PREACH
As a comfortable pear-shape, I was delighted to read Why it's not in to be thin (August SHE).
At last, I thought, someone is willing to explode the myth that thin equals sexy!
Sadly, my euphoria evaporated as I looked through the rest of the magazine.
Were the ads full of shapely hips and billowing bosoms?
Did the fashion pages show curvaceous waists and womanly stomachs?
Not a bit of it!
They showed the same gorgeous thin creatures as usual.
Come on, SHE, show that times really are a-changing and let us see models with curves!
FRIEND OR FOE?
I loved We were such good friends (September SHE)— in fact, I could have written most of it myself.
I recently tried resurrecting some former friendships and didn't get any response, except for one who turned up on my doorstep, glad that I'd written.
We have now resumed our friendship.
I wonder whether the others would have replied had I suddenly become famous!
The older I get, the more efficient I become at sifting out the rubbish.
The friends that I've had for over 20 years are ones I can rely on and who don't ‘take’ all the time.
I don't see them very often but when we meet it's as though we'd seen each other yesterday.
Those are real friends.
AID TO RECOVERY
‘Here we go again!’
I thought, lying in hospital recovering from a major operation, surveying the glossy cover of SHE.
‘Two interesting articles and 80% adverts.’
But what a surprise!
I kept going back to the interesting and varied articles, and I liked the fact that it is neither too career-oriented nor too mumsy.
I'll definitely be buying SHE next month!
LIFE AFTER DIVORCE
Thank you for your wonderful Divorced woman's guide to dating (August SHE).
It made me take a good look at what I really wanted out of men and dating.
The article was obviously written by a woman who has been there and survived, as I have.
My friends tell me that I've coped really well after my divorce — I have my own home, own car, own job and manage to keep my wonderful four-year-old son as happy as can be.
What they do not see, of course, are the tears at the sheer frustration of it all when it hits home at two in the morning.
Thank you once again for giving me a really good laugh at just one of the many aspects of being a happy single parent.
MEN HURT TOO
If Trudy Culross (Why women are so easily replaced , September SHE) really believes that the ‘only difference between the sexes is that when love lies wasted, men don't know how to hold a grudge’, she should try joining an introduction agency.
The number of bitter, angry, women-hating recently divorced men I have met in this way has been a real eye-opener to me.
Most of them are indeed trying to pull the ‘off with the old, on with the new’ wife replacement technique but they are in such an emotional mess that they subconsciously drive away any woman who tries to get close to them.
And these are men who have paid a small fortune to meet someone!
In my experience, men's lives are every bit as ‘ruled’ by love as women's.
GET ON COURSE
Having read An evening with a touch of class (September SHE), I hope that more women will be encouraged to join an evening class.
Before my first evening class in English I was no nervous that I couldn't eat!
However, my GCSE courses eventually led me to attend university as a mature student and now I hope to become a solicitor.
A course can increase confidence, career prospects or simply be enjoyable — all of which will never be regretted.
RECLAIMING CHILDHOOD
I couldn't agree more with Are we breeding the Lolita generation?
(August SHE).
Working with children, I often find myself thinking that their young minds have been deprived of innocence, and usually a good deal of fun and happiness along with it.
Forcing children to acknowledge sexuality at an early age and face up to adult problems is not going to raise a generation of responsible adults — it is far more likely to breed a generation of confused and unhappy children.
Let's give our children a chance to enjoy their childhood.
We spend half our time trying to escape the worries of adulthood, so it doesn't make sense to rush children into it.
maureen lipman has the last word!
I should never have done it.
How could I?
The very idea of working from home should have been anathema to me.
Haven't I seen over the years what it has done to my husband, a man who lifted me off the shelf just before my sell-by date expired?
A man who sported a sports car and sideboards, a season ticket and a sculpture teacher, a man who produced his own series and had a bachelor pad, a Peter Sarstedt LP and a past?
Twenty years of working at home later, wasn't that same celebrated swinger someone whose body language suggested he was surrounded by concern for his surroundings?
‘We're out of milk.
Adam can't have his cornies…
I'll just slip to the…
The BT man's here, where do we want the new socket?…
Have you seen the huge crack that's appeared in the front door?…
I'm just going with Amy to the chiropodist, she's not sure where it…
Oh, Christ, the cat's done it outside the tray again…
We're down to our last tumbler…
Has anybody seen a piece of A4 I left by the phone with all my ideas on it…
It's all right,I'll answer it!’
One day, while I was away and mother was holding the fort, he cracked.
Zelma, bless her, who has always regarded her son-in-law as a sort of concierge who somehow manages to throw up the odd masterpiece in between sitting at a desk, gazing uselessly out of the window and making endless messes in her kitchen with his coffee dregs and fag ash, had been popping into the study at fairly regular intervals, with unspecific enquiries.
‘Ja-ack?
If I do the braising steak, will Adam eat a baked potato or should I do roast?’
‘Ja-ack?
You know what you could do with?
One of those hand blenders, have you seen them?
My friends swear by them.
You can do soups and everything, it's not just for cakes.
Do you think Maureen would like one?
I can slip out up the road…’
Even Job had his moment.
Patiently, Jack swivelled round in his chair.
‘Zelma, love.
With respect.
I know you mean well and I do appreciate all you're doing, but I really am in the middle of a thought and it's very difficult for me when you keep…look, if it's really,really important, then please do interrupt me — but only if it's urgent, OK?
Otherwise I just can't work.’
‘Oh, sorry.
OK.
She disappeared.
For a couple of hours.
He worked on — rediscovered his thread and was deep in concentration when, behind him, he felt a presence.
A familiar presence.
It hovered but didn't speak.
It was there but not there.
The thread in his head was slipping away…slipping away.
He turned.
‘All right, Zel.
It is important, isn't it?’
She looked puzzled.
Then said truthfully, ‘I don't know.’
The thread unwound a little more —‘Well?
Go on, then.
What is it?’
‘I'm just going out,’ she said nervously.
‘To Brent Cross…’
‘Oh yes?’
The query hung in the air.
‘…and I just wondered…’
‘Yes?’
The thread disappeared.
‘Do you think that this jumper really goes with this skirt?’
It's all right.
He's better now.
But that's what happens when you work at home for 20 years.
You become a fixture and a fitting.
Now, it's been just the four months for me.
I've been writing a book.
You know, another of those books with unmemorable titles and a goofy front cover.
So, when I haven't been gazing out of the window, phoning every friend I ever had, dashing up the street in an urgent quest for…er…something or other I'm desperate for or singing along to Melody Radio at the top of my thorax — I've been noticing things.
Like why is my entire kitchen chipped?
The dream kitchen.
Who wanted white taps?
And a white porcelain sink?
I bloody well did, that's who.
And for several myopic, workaholic years I've believed they were still white, haven't I?
But no.
Au bloody contraire.
The enamel has peeled off the taps like so much banana skin, revealing dull, patchy brass.
Black, spider-like chips have turned the white porcelain sink into mock Dalmation.
Grubby brown chipboard has emerged from under the designer fitted units and the cobalt blue Mexican tiles appear to have rusted .
On a first, dizzy entrance, it still looks, with its gingham curtains and pine furniture, like the set of an early Doris Day film.
On close inspection it looks more like the second touring production of Absurd Person Singular after a long spell in Pitlochry.
Also the cutlery has warped and the cereal bowls have cracked and the lining paper has started its inexorable roll down the walls and the Hoovermatic has gone symptomatic and the Teflon's gone AWOL from the frying pan and the tumble dryer's lost its rubber.
Let's face it, I'm fresh out of wedding presents.
Twentythree stainless steel dishes, Denby casseroles and Pyrex serving sets have gone to that great built-in-obsolescence pile in the sky.
Rest in pieces.
In short, it's either time to remove, redecorate or remarry.
Fortunately I play Re:Joyce on Sunday, start a documentary on Wednesday and begin a six-month run of a play in a fortnight.
And you know and I know that when I come home after a nice relentless day at the rehearsal rooms, it will look like Versailles, Southfork and Designers Guild rolled into one.
There's none so blind…