

Origins
The Sign of the Serpent
The Serpent throughout time has existed as a symbol of the energizing creative force of the one supreme universal Spirit.
In the human entity it manifests as consciousness reaching in its highest expression towards wisdom and enlightenment.
In its lower aspect it is related to fertility and regeneration.
The Serpent is the most profound image ever conceived to crystallize this dual principle in the human condition.
The fire flames when the
Fuel is stirred.
The Serpent when assailed
makes a hood.
Commonly, people show their
Greatness when stirred.
(Ancient Indian aphorism )
When Alexander the Great (356–323BC) was invading the cities of India he found therein may sacred snakes which were kept in caves and worshipped by the Indians with great devotion.
The Indians accordingly, with every kind of entreaty, implored Alexander to let no-one molest the animal.
To this he agreed.
From the vast reaches of time, the Serpent has been a potent symbol, reflecting as many aspects and occult meanings as the Garden of Eden itself, with which it was emblematically associated.
Whether it is viewed as a physical or metaphysical symbol, the image has never been so degraded as it is today.
In India, however, it still remains a living force, playing a prominent role in the lives of millions of people.
Any observant traveller who moves from the snow-tipped Himalayas in the North to the sun-soaked sands of Cape Comorin at India's southern tip, will encounter — particularly in the rural areas and at sacred centres of pilgrimage wherever Siva, God of both Divine Wisdom and regeneration, is the presiding Deity — the serpent motif sculptured within shrines, impressed on myriads of stone implants in the ground and depicted in art.
To most westerners it may appear as a mere decorative embellishment reflecting the ubiquitous presence of the Cobra all over India, or possessing some remote significance in terms of local superstition or religious belief.
In reality, however, the truth is far more profound.
The symbol is representative of the essential fabric upon which the higher Indian mentality is woven.
It has been so throughout India's recorded history.
Images such as the Serpent crystallize, in simple form, universal principles relating to the creative process and the dynamic forces or energies operative throughout nature.
The clearest insight, esoteric perhaps, has always belonged to the Rishis or Initiates although accessible to all those who sincerely desire, and are able to absorb and assimilate, such ‘secret truths’ by means of the heart rather than the intellect.
Nothing is entirely ‘secret’ nor was it ever intended to be so.
‘Closely guarded’ would be the more appropriate term.
Certain information is not compatible with the psychology of the masses ‘lest it be trampled asunder’, abused, ridiculed by  sceptics or used towards destructive ends.
In no other country on earth have ancient traditions and their ritualized expression been held intact in their undiluted form from time immemorial.
This ‘great continuum’ is the real wonder of India, and it is here, where the sign of the serpent was nurtured and is preserved to this day, that its exact significance is most clearly defined.
The Nagas
In India, it is the Hooded Cobra — and no other snake — that is the object of veneration throughout the country.
The Sanskrit name for the animal is Nag (the modern term) or Naga (the traditional title).
The word ‘cobra’ is derived from the Portuguese ‘Cobra de Capello’meaning ‘hooded serpent’.
‘Naga’ means ‘wise serpent’, the title given long ago to those who had acquired great wisdom.
The female counterpart is Nagini.
The Nagas (non-related to the present inhabitants of Nagaland, one of India's north-eastern states) according to ancient sources were an actual race identified as belonging to the Vedic/Aryan civilization.
They were of Caucasian appearance, and they possessed a rare knowledge, it is told, of magic, or insight into natural forces.
In nature they were benevolent and therefore regarded as ‘white’ magicians.
They worshipped the sun as the giver of life and heat, creator of night and day and the responsible agent for vegetation and fertility.
They became  the instructors of the Brahmins and were the progenitors of Sun worship itself.
The hooded serpent was their totem.
The Nagas should be regarded as the initiates and the guardians of the ancient esoteric knowledge.
The city of Nagpur in the State of Maharashtra, located at the geographical centre of India, was considered to be the capital of their empire formerly known as Naga Dwipa, one of the surviving relics of old India known as Bharata Varsha.
James Fergusson, author of Tree and Serpent Worship (1868), identifies the Nagas as a race of Turanian stock.
Turania, an area of East Turkistan, now one of the Central Provinces of the USSR situated between Afghanistan and the Caspian Sea, spawned, it appears, gifted stone-masons, and at the request of the Emperor Asoka who ruled India during the third century BC, the Naga named Mahakala produced colossal images of Guatama Buddha and his two predecessors.
Turania becomes significant in relation to Easter Island and its monolithic structures due to the existing theory that Melanesians of the South Pacific (Fijians, for example) migrated to the Pacific from Turania via Egypt.
This connection, if correct, would prove Fergusson right.
Naga symbols appear on third-century Buddhist monuments at Sanchi in the south of India, and Buddhist Sanctuaries such as Sarnath, near Varanasi, were originally dedicated to serpent worship.
As far away as Java, at the great Borobudhur stupa, Naga images are well presented and show that the Nagas were prominent in Buddhist culture.
The famous University of Nalanda —‘the place that confers the lotus’(or spiritual knowledge)— which flourished near Patna in the State of Bihar between the fifth and twelfth centuries, was named after a Naga King.
The University had 2000 teachers and more than 10,000 students, each of whom was required to produce a book every year on the nature of consciousness and the human mind.
This amounts to a total of six million books, apart from its own vast library of nine million volumes.
Ransacked by Afghan invaders, it is reported that the University burned for six months after the event.
Its students, from as far away as Java, Sumatra, Korea, China and Japan included Hsuang Tsang, the Chinese traveller who studied there in the seventh century.
Guatama, the Buddha himself, taught there.
Investigations of the pre-Moslem monoliths in the Maldive Islands situated off the coast of south-west India, have indicated Naga presence in that area, Thor Heyerdahl's work The Maldive Mystery being significant.
On the Coromandel coast of Tamil Nadu in south-east India, the Pallava Dynasty which held sway during the fourth to eighth centuries traces its lineage to Naga ancestors, as do many Royal families in Kashmir in the north of India.
The one-time centre of learning, Taxila, now in Pakistan, existed as the chief city of the Nagas in the north.
Originally called Takshasila, the city was named after the great Naga Chief, Takshaka, referred to as a ‘carpenter’ and a great healer in Vedic literature, possessing the power to cure diseases as well as snakebite.
In his book Jesus Died in Kashmir , A. Faber-Kaiser reveals that Taxila was known to the Christian Saviour who visited there en route to Kashmir.
The knowledge of poisons and antidotes is one of the eight chief subjects of Indian medical science and it is strongly evident that the Naga Takshaka was looked upon as a patron of the medical profession.
The Caduceus, which forms the emblem of the profession, was in all probability first identified with Takshaka.
The coiled serpent, or serpents, around the central rod is a Naga emblem.
It was in Kashmir that Apollonius of Tyana, a Pythagorean philosopher, became instructed by the Nagas and completed his initiation into the mysteries.
The Mahabharata ,Puranas and Upanishads , India's ancient texts, often cite the Nagas, and in the Atharva Veda which consists largely of magic spells, they are prominent.
Their role as ‘wise ones’, instructors and initiates is well documented, and their totem, the Hooded Cobra, often depicted in anthropomorphic form, has played a leading role not only in Hindu, but in Buddhist art throughout India, Sri Lanka, Java, China and Japan.
In China and Tibet, the Dragon is but a transposition of the Serpent.
The Chinese writers usually refer to the Nagas under that name and the character of the Dragon as it appears in the folklore and literature of China and Tibet is in great part derived from the Indian conception of the Naga.
As the Dragon, signifying ‘the being who excels in intelligence’, breathes ‘fire’, the destructive action of snake venom resembles that of the all-devouring fire, and the snake belongs to those beings which are believed to possess to a high degree that magical energy which is indicated by the Sanskrit word ‘Tajas’, meaning heat or fire.
Nagarjuna, the Indian Adept who became a Buddhist in the second century BC, was the one who converted China to Buddhism.
In Greek mythology the Serpent, ‘he who sees and waits’, was associated with Asclepius, the physician and healer and son of Apollo.
Shrines and temples of healing known as Asclepieia were built throughout Greece along the shores of the Aegean.
Here, the sick would come to worship and seek for cures.
The most renowned was the sanctuary of Asclepius at Epidaurus which flourished from 600BC down to AD400.
At its peak the cult of Asclepius was the most successful in history in that part of the world, to fuse religion, magic, nature care, diet, rest, massage and hydrotherapy into the service of healing.
Ancient Central and South American Indian civilizations named their medicine men, magicians or initiates, Nagals, as did the Chaldeans.
In Uruguay, the word Nagal means ‘chief’, a teacher and a ‘serpent’.
The Nagals were known, it seems, to the ancient Aryans, and the Sanskrit word for the South American Nagals is ‘Uragas’.
There are legends about the Nagas being the ancestors of the Uragas whose homeland was Uruguay.
In Mexico the word becomes Nagaul.
Quetzacoatl, the Mexican ‘Plumed Serpent God’, instructor of the populace, came accompanied by builders, painters, astronomers, etc.
He built roads, civilized the people and departed across the sea on a magic ‘raft of serpents’.
Mexican tribes associated with the myth of the Plumed Serpent came from a city called Tulan.
It is significant that they were known as Tarianas, a title closely  resembling that given to the tribes of Turania in Turkistan who were associated with the Serpent, the Taryans.
The Mayas, Aztecs and Toltecs attributed the source of all ‘light’(spiritual and mental) to the Great Serpent in keeping with the Christian Bible where knowledge, due to the Serpent, was obtained.
Humboldt, the German naturalist and explorer, states:
‘The Hieroglyphs, cosmological monuments and institutions of the Peoples of Central and South America prove indisputably the existence of communication between America and India.’
The numerous myths relative to the founders of the American Indian civilizations make reference to great teachers who arrive from the East, and the word ‘Serpent’ invariably appears in connection with their presence.
The Esoteric Tradition places the Nagas as descendants of a prehistoric race whose homeland was destroyed by a great cataclysm 10,000 years ago.
An ancient Papyrus in the Leningrad Hermitage mentions the ‘Island of the Serpents’ and contains the following passage:
‘After you leave my island you will not find it again and this place will vanish under the sea waves.’
The actual existence of that civilization, the Vedic/Aryan, is now accepted in the light of the new archaeological revelations.
The Harappan civilization of the Indus Valley has also provided evidence of highly advanced technology, city planning, social structure, commerce and maritime activity dating back to 4000BC.
Called Meluha by the ancient Sumerians, it appears that the civilization arrived intact from across the sea.
It is also known that the Indus Valley civilization was far more extensive than formerly realised, embracing areas as far away as the Oxus River, now called Amu Darya, in Central Asia and forming part of the Soviet Afghanistan border on its course.
Turania was a region just north of the Oxus.
In The Tigris Expedition Thor Heyerdahl writes:
‘In reasoning or inventiveness, little has been gained or lost in the build-up of the human species during the last five millennia.
A visitor to Mohenjo Daro, one of the Indus Valley sites, will be left with the impression that this city with all it contained had either in record time surpassed all other human generations in inventiveness, or that like the Aryans they were immigrants bringing with them centuries of cultural inheritance.
The mystery of the Indus Valley Civilization is not so much why it disappeared as to how it began.’
It is that race of ‘wise serpents’ whose totem was the Hooded Cobra found inscribed on the soapstone seals of the Indus Valley who are the Nagas of Indian philosophy, and that is why the Cobra, known as Nag or Naga, has been raised throughout the country to the rank of a Divine Being.
The Serpent as a Metaphor
The Sign of the Serpent is derived from the spiralling motion of all energy beginning with the primal formative process which spawned our galaxy and solar system, as seen in the configuration of a Spiral Nebula and reflected in the formation of sea-shells and flowers, in the nature of the flow of energy in an electrical current, in the human body and in the double helix of the DNA molecule, the transmitter of genetic information throughout the physical entity.
In Hinduism, the Cosmic Serpent — Ananta Sesha — symbolic of timeless eternity, carries the world on his 1000-fold hood as he rests between creative periods.
(The Hindus believe that the universe is periodically created and dissolved.)
As the creative impulse stirs within the great Serpent in the Sky — when passive idea becomes active thought — the forces of attraction and repulsion come into play as ‘spirit’ begins its involution into ‘matter’.
Universal Energy is a consequence of this interplay of forces.
What science labels ‘electro-magnetism’ and ‘gravity’, but is still unable to explain in materialistic terms, are merely ‘effects’of the movement of this dynamic yet subtle Universal Energy which pervades all of space — all of the created universe.
The Hooded Cobra depicted in a coiled or undulating position is symbolic of the spiralling, vortex-like pattern of movement of Universal Energy as it permeates matter and proceeds to nourish and vivify it.
It is also symbolic of the essential nature of that life-force energy which is identified as ‘pure consciousness’.
Hindu Seers named the energy ‘Sakti’, the all-pervading, formative ‘energy of the Gods’.
Each God, or governor of the forces of nature, has his own Sakti, or consort, which is understood as the ‘expression of the God’.
Sakti is thus female, or feminine; a life-giving, nurturing, non-aggressive, loving force, and if western science is ever able to grasp the fact that human consciousness is an attribute of that same energy and not the result of physical, biochemical reactions, it could dispel the ever-increasing aggression, personal greed and psychosis that is pervading our present society like a cancer.
In the human biophysical system, Universal Energy is known as Kundalini Sakti, and because of its presence we are able to exist as conscious, self-aware, human beings.
How we use that life-force energy via our mental faculties, for constructive or destructive purposes, determines our degree of intelligence or stupidity.
Kundalini Sakti can be amplified by controlled breathing techniques (Prana-Yama) along with meditative disciplines.
In an amplified state it is generally referred to as ‘expanded consciousness’— a condition that allows us to process through our nervous system, information from the environment which during a normal state of consciousness is totally inaccessible.
The Hooded Cobra when erect is symbolic of amplified Kundalini Sakti, the Serpent Force.
The God Siva, who represents in his higher aspect universal intelligence and in his lower aspect metamorphosis, renewal and re-generation, governs these principles relating to the creative and dissolutionary processes in nature, and that is why the God's image is always depicted with the Cobra adorning his person.
To the Yogis he is venerated as the King of Serpents — the possessor of the ultimate wisdom — the Great Guru.
At the social level he is the father of fertility, procreation and regeneration.
The idea of Gods as metaphors for the principles underlying the forces of nature was central to the abstract nature of the Indian mind and imbued their philosophy and mythology with a lyricism and beauty foreign to our twentieth-century sensibilities.
The inference to the Serpent representing Universal Energy is clearly presented in the following extract from the Atharva Veda :
‘Homage to the Snakes which ever move around the Earth
And are in the Sky and in Heaven.
Homage to the Snakes which are in the Arrows of Magicians
And of Tree Spirits and which lie in holes.
Homage to those Snakes which are in the Brightness of Heaven.
Which are in the Rays of the Sun, which have made their abode in the Waters.’
The Serpent as a Fertility Symbol
A common sight throughout the rural areas of South India, occurring sometimes at the entrance to a village or town, near Siva temples and shrines, in the corner of a temple courtyard, near a water tank or stream (water being the mother of life) or most often under Peepul or Neem trees, is a cluster of erect stone slabs planted in the ground rising to about 3 feet in height on the face of which appear effigies of the Cobra or Nag, In relation to the afore-mentioned trees, generally ‘married’ to each other, they are symbolic of ‘life’, with the Serpent representing their spirit or life energy.
The stone slabs are known as Nagacoils and are mostly placed there by childless wives who vow to install a ‘snake-stone’ if they are blessed with offspring; probably the greatest desire of the average female Indian mentality.
Various rituals complement the desire.
It is one belief, for example, that a  woman will obtain children if she walks around a sacred tree 108 times dally for 48 consecutive days.
The action is an invocation to the Queen of Serpents, the Royal Nagini, whose name may vary from State to State through the land.
(In Bengal, for instance, she is most popularly known as Manasa.)
The compound number 9 is apparent in the circumambulatory ritual, and in esoteric numerology the number 9 signifies completion or unity with the forces of nature.
At many Siva temples and Cobra shrines, women are often seen in prayer or receiving the blessings of the attending priest.
Small gifts of fruit or flowers are offered to the Deity.
The nearby Nagacoils act not only as testaments to the fact that the devotee's prayers have been answered but as tributes to the Serpent Goddess.
The King Cobra, or Hamadryad, is the largest of all poisonous snakes.
This sometimes 15-foot long, lethal creature is entirely a snake eater.
It enjoys Pythons, other Cobras and even its own species.
The King is aggressive, unpredictable, and can strike without provocation.
It is most intelligent.
When erect it can stand up to 5 feet in height.
In certain fertility rites in Burma, a woman desirous of offspring is required not only to approach the King Cobra but to plant a kiss on its mouth.
If she is successful in doing so she will bear many children; if she falls, obviously none.
Throughout the southern and western parts of India the live snake itself is also the object of veneration, and at a multitude of Cobra shrines and in temples it is fed on milk, sweetmeats, sugar, etc., nurtured and worshipped as being the bodily vehicle of that higher cosmic power or spirit which is to be approached with reverence and honoured.
In the State of Kerala on the Malabar coast, it is popularly considered good fortune to have a Cobra living in the garden.
A patch of undergrowth, preferably under a tree, is cultivated and preserved for the snake.
It will be fed and attended accordingly.
To harm or kill a Cobra is considered sacrilegious by many people and such an act can only' bring misfortune.
The Cobra, normally a non-aggressive animal, is widely known  as ‘the good snake’.
In the northern States it is essentially the image of the Serpent that is worshipped.
The Metaphysical Serpent
Cobra effigies and icons are in most part multicephalous, that is possessing three, five, seven or sometimes nine heads, always an odd number.
Certain images are anthropomorphic, showing a human head on the body of a snake, and others present a Naga, often seated in the Lotus or meditative position with a multi-headed cobra forming a canopy over the figure's head.
Cobras are constantly depicted entwined in a double helix.
The female head, often seen on a Serpent's body, depicts a Nagini, or female Naga.
The attendants of Naga Royalty also possess only one head.
These variations appear cryptic to most westerners, and require some explanation.
The multiple heads relate once again to certain fundamental principles and functions concerning natural processes upon which the universe is created and maintained, and which underlie all our experience.
When seen over the head of a Naga they designate his rank or position within the Naga hierarchy depending upon his degree of spiritual attainment.
Three Heads represent the Law of Three, relative to most esoteric teachings and ancient philosophies throughout the world.
These three laws or principles relate to Creation, Preservation or Sustenance, and Dissolution or Destruction, which repeat themselves in a cycle and apply to all existing phenomena.
The Gods who govern these principles are named Brahma (the Creator), Vishnu (the Preserver or Sustainer), and Siva (the Destroyer), and form the Trinity or, in Hinduism, Trimurti.
In the physical sense, Birth, Survival and Death are irrefutable realities of existence.
The ancient Egyptian Trinity was named Osiris-Isis-Horus, and in the Christian faith Father-Mother (Holy Ghost) -Son; Jesus of Nazareth being the destroyer (of ignorance).
In the psychological sense, creation of any sort can occur only in the face of commensurate opposition, and a balance or reconciliation must be established between the two forces in order that the idea may become an actuality and be sustained.
For example, male and female is not a relationship; there must exist love or desire to actualize and sustain the relationship.
A composer and a sheet of musical manuscript will not produce a musical score; there must be ‘inspiration’.
A business deal cannot be closed without a ‘mutual agreement,.
In Physics, the three principles become transposed in the concept of Proton-Neutron-Electron, forces constituting the nature of every atom.
Five Heads represent ‘potentiality’ and the desire towards idealism.
The symbol for a star is drawn with five points.
The ideal of the initiate is to become a ‘star’ or one with the Gods; to achieve union with the natural forces which created him or her.
Psychologically, the male-female union as a result of the Jaw of Three is, by nature, extended to include additional considerations which become more complex as the functioning of the relationship changes.
The original love or desire, emotion, etc., is sublimated towards a more balanced ideology which embraces family, security, ambition, and the future realization of each partner's potentialities.
Seven Heads represent the seven stages of evolutionary growth towards the ideal of self-perfection.
Growth is not a continuous process.
Throughout nature, completion arrives via seven plateaux of progress.
The significance of the seven-hooded Cobra is most clear when related to the discipline of Kundalini Yoga and the seven levels of consciousness leading to Samadhi or ‘liberation’.
The enlightenment of Guatama the Buddha is represented with a seven-hooded Naga in a protective attitude forming a shield over the head of the Saviour.
Psychologically, seven relates to the realization of our potentialities; success in our chosen endeavours.
Nine Heads represent finality, fulfilment and unity with the forces of nature; the number applied to the fully initiated; the Seer.
Psychologically it would apply to a life completely expressed without regrets and with all guilts erased; a difficult number to resonate with in our present type of society.
The Entwined Serpents which gave birth to the symbol of the medical profession, the Caduceus, later became in Greek mythology the Staff of Hermes, the Messenger of the Gods.
The two serpents in a double helix around a central rod are known in Yogic terms as Ida — related to the Moon, the female or negative polarity, magnetic in nature; and Pingala, related to the Sun, the male or positive polarity, electrical in nature.
They represent two of the major Nadis or conduits through which polarized Bioenergy (Life-force, Kundalini or Serpent Force) is normally conducted throughout the biophysical system.
The seven Chakras, or energy vortex centres, are interconnected — each Chakra being responsible for the distribution of life-energy, received from the environment via the energy body or ‘causal body’— to a respective organ of the endocrine system.
Manifesting seven different frequencies, life-energy is directly related to the seven bands of light that constitute the composition of pure white light, seen by our senses in the form of the rainbow.
The term ‘rainbow body’ is often heard to describe the principle.
The central rod is known as the Sushumna and corresponds to the spinal column.
Each serpent or conduit conducts its respective energy to form the human electro-magnetic energy flow.
It is the maintenance of balance between these two energy flows that underlies the principles of Indian Ayurvedic medicine, Acupuncture and holistic health in general, and in particular Kundalini Yoga which is explained below.
Two wings appear at the top of the Caduceus.
These are representative of the intellectual and intuitive cognitive faculties.
When bilaterally balanced, mental and physical wellbeing is the result.
The orb at the top of the rod symbolizes this ideal condition.
Kundalini Yoga
The aim of Kundalini Yoga is to intercept the normal oscillation of polarized life-energy by the practice of controlled breathing, and to close down these two channels forcing the life-energy into the Brahma Nadi, the hair-thin central duct situated within the Sushumna Kundalini.
Thus aroused, the life-energy ascends along the Brahma Nadi to the head.
Each Chakra subjected to the flow is vivified, its activity as a distributor intensified.
A dynamic transformation of consciousness is the result.
The objective reality of such an energy distribution system is thoroughly documented by Dr Hiroshi Motoyama of Tokyo, who has spent thirty years researching the subject of Bio-energy and from results of tests conducted over a fifteen-year period qualifies his work in these words
‘The Chakra-Nadi system bears striking resemblances to the layout of the autonomic nervous system.
This is remarkable in that the yogic model was developed before the anatomical constituents of the nervous system were understood.
The Sushumna seems to be in the effect place occupied by the spinal chord and the Ida and Pingala are similarly located along the main sympathetic nerves.
Each Chakra appears to have a corresponding nerve plexus (bundles of nerve tissue which control respective areas of the body and the internal organs they contain).’
Western medical psychology has endeavoured to link acupuncture with the human nervous system.
Dr Motoyama states, however, that the acupuncture meridians and physical nervous system do not coincide positionally; they are independent of each other.
He summarizes:
‘We have proved conclusively that the human is more than a body and a limited intellect.
He possesses non-physical properties and energies that are still largely unknown and uncharted by traditional science.
Man has three bodies, the physical, the astral and the causal which overlie and interpenetrate each other.
Each level of the human entity's three beings is sustained by the energy in that dimension.
More refined matter is to be found in the higher dimensions.
Physical tools can only measure physical objects.
Modern science is therefore unable to detect or evaluate non-physical energies.
The forces that we are dealing with are so far removed from what we regard as the material world that they will completely revolutionize physics and philosophy and bring about a profound change in humanity's perception of reality.
‘My greatest hope is that we shall gain a deeper knowledge of who we are and how we are related to the Universe, and that this knowledge will further the evolutionary progression of our collective consciousness.’
Dr Motoyama holds Ph.D.
degrees in Philosophy and Clinical Psychology.
He is both a scientist trained in empirical methodology and a serious Yogi.
UNESCO selected him in 1974 as one of the world's ten foremost researchers in Parapsychology.
The ancient metaphysics of Indian Serpent lore co-relate to the latest understandings in advanced research in Physics, Biochemistry, Biology and Parapsychology.
Photographic evidence confirming the existence of acupuncture meridians corresponding to the ancient, traditional model has recently been obtained by a research team at the Necker Hospital, Paris, France.
Garuda and the Serpent
Legend has it that the ‘eyes’ or ‘spectacles’on the rear of the Cobra's hood were given to it by Guatama the Buddha as protection against the attacks of Garuda the Eagle, arch enemy of the Cobras.
Garuda is the steed or vehicle of the God Vishnu, the Preserver in the Hindu Trinity.
High-flying birds represent      spirituality.
(The markings on the hood are also often referred to as ‘half a Swastika’, the word Swastika meaning literally ‘wellbeing’ in Sanskrit.
It is also the tide of one Naga Chief.)
An ancient Hindu amulet and talisman — sign of the Initiate.
The circle represents the infinite Universe.
The border of triangles symbolizes the three Universal principles governing the cyclic processes of nature and known as the ‘Trinity’ or ‘Law of Three’; that is, Creation, Preservation and Dissolution.
The seven-knotted bamboo represents the ‘Law of Seven’.
There exist seven levels of consciousness to be attained by an Initiate; seven energy centres or Chakras distribute vital energy throughout the human biophysical system; seven stages of growth occur during the life cycle,; light consists of seven primary colours or light frequencies.
The number is highly significant in all esoteric teachings.
The Serpent is in this aspect symbolic of the Universal reactive energy or ‘life force’ manifesting in man as ‘consciousness’.
Hooded, Spectacled Cobra.
Rear view showing ‘eyes’.
Photo: Mark Balfour.
The Caduceus of Hermes, symbol of the medical profession.
Cobra effigies of ‘Nagacoils’.
The entwined serpents forming a double helix gave birth to the Caduceus.
The God Shiva is seen second from left.
Photo: Mark Balfour.
Effigies of the Cobra, or ‘Nagacoils; in a Hindu shrine built over an anthill, seen at the rear.
The triangles represent the Trinity or the ‘Law of Three’.
Photo: Mark Balfour.
Effigy of the Seven-headed Cobra in a Hindu temple.
Photo: Mark Balfour.
Indian girl making offerings at a Cobra anthill shrine, Southern India.
Photo: Mark Balfour.
It is believed in India, as in most ancient civilizations, that the process of spiritual evolution in its pure natural form demands a series of rebirths through reincarnation.
Vishnu is the preserver of this principle which in the popular sense would be ‘let nature take its course’, to preserve a natural balance.
The Tree of Life is a fitting analogy.
Siva the Serpent King, patron of the Yogis, possessor of the ultimate wisdom on the earthly or material plane, insists that spiritual evolution through ‘illumination’ can occur in a single lifetime, thus eliminating a succession of rebirths.
His devotion is to the destruction of ignorance; his credo is ‘hastened evolution’ or, in popular terms, ‘nature must be given a helping hand’.
The Tree of Knowledge is the appropriate analogy.
The aim of all schools of initiation the world over has always been to guide a human mind from an ordinary state of consciousness which is considered as a conscious state of ignorance or illusion, to a higher, more aware, enlightened condition.
The limitations of our normally functioning sensory apparatus enable us to experience a minute fragment of actual ‘reality’.
This higher state of consciousness is, within the concept of the mundane world, ‘un-natural’.
Garuda's counterpart in Egypt was the Vulture.
The headpiece of the Egyptian Pharaohs, the Diadem, was adorned with the Cobra or Uraeus on the left side and the Vulture on the right.
Politically, the Diadem was symbolic of the union of Upper and Lower Egypt.
Metaphysically, however, the images correspond to the association of the Serpent with wisdom and the intellect, and the Vulture with intuition and assimilation, the respective functions of the brain.
The union of both right and left hemispheres in bilateral symmetry results, ideally, in the perfect man; the enlightened one, as all Pharaohs were held to be.
The Diadem was modelled on the anatomical structure of the human brain.
Enlightenment, though, is fraught with the constant  struggle between discrimination, rationalization and logic on one hand, and the clearer, more direct insight of the intuitive vision on the other.
Meditative techniques were designed to eliminate this struggle, to overcome the duality and to promote a more balanced mental condition.
The legends of St George and the Dragon, Apollo and Python, the Forces of Light overcoming the Forces of Darkness, Heaven and Hell and the innumerable analogies existing throughout the myths and philosophies of every civilization, all speak as metaphors that clearly illustrate this struggle towards spiritual awareness or ‘evolution’ in its correct context.
Physical evolution is concomitant with the evolution of an entity's consciousness.
Any change in consciousness is accompanied by a corresponding change in the biophysical system.
This is fundamental to Yogic understanding.
The Winged Cobra is representative of the transcendental nature of higher consciousness or total spiritual enlightenment, and as such the image adorned the entrance to all sacred temples and schools of initiation in Egypt.
The Jewel in the Cobra's Head
An ancient Indian legend tells of a precious Jewel in the Cobra's head.
Symbolically, this jewel represents ‘light’, the precious source of wisdom.
In reality it is a membrane, the pineal gland, regarded in the East as the seat of extra-sensory perception.
In birds and animals whose cerebrum (the top part of the brain) is small or non-existent, it lies immediately under the skull and is sensitive to light.
Once, it seems, the pineal gland was an eye.
In 1958 two zoologists from the University of California discovered that the removal of the gland made the escape reactions of lizards much slower; so undoubtedly it still has survival value.
Indian friends have testified that they have witnessed a Cobra at night with its ‘jewel’ glowing, moving through the undergrowth In search of water.
Since glow-worms, fireflies, electric eels and many fish exhibit a similar phenomenon, the  statement is not unrealistic.
I have never witnessed it myself.
The Cobra's skin is considered to be highly magnetic, and friction with the earth could perhaps create an electro-magnetic effect.
The jewel is connected in the legend with the anthill, a favourite haunt of the Cobra.
Anthills are often seen decorated with flowers, and small offerings of food are displayed near the base when it is known that a Cobra is in residence.
In many cases, a shrine is erected over the anthill and women can be seen lighting candles and praying to the Deity within.
At times, even in the cities, an anthill occupied by a Cobra can be the cause of great traffic problems.
To remove such a sacred mound would cause much distress to a great number of people.
Anthills, as well as indicating the presence of underground water, exist as mythical entrances to an exotic, sensuous, subterranean world called Patala, or the Netherworld, home of the Nagas.
Patala is symbolic of gold and the earth's minerals which energize the terrain and fertilize it.
It is from a fissure in the anthill that the rays of light from the jewels in the Cobras' heads shine forth, and coming in contact with the rainclouds, which represent the ‘pure water of wisdom’, they form the rainbow.
In Vedic times a rainbow was known as ‘Indra's Bow’, Indra being the first-born of the Gods or the ultimate state of consciousness; the mind developed to its highest degree.
The rainbow thus forms a bridge between materialism and spirituality, between ignorance and intelligence, and the fable of ‘the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow, grew from this ancient Indian source; the pot of gold was originally symbolic of psychological liberation or ‘enlightenment’.
Patala also represents the ‘shadow world’.
Shadows enable light to manifest itself and give it objective reality, just as wisdom can only manifest itself in the face of ignorance.
There must exist a point of reference.
Without a knowledge of good and evil, for example, there would only be ignorance and destruction.
As anthills also represent ‘the confusion of humanity’, much like the Tower of Babel in Christian belief, it  is therefore necessary that the Cobras be identified with the shadow world to be the instructors of humanity.
The jewel in the Cobra's head has its counterpart in Australian Aboriginal folklore in the form of the quartz crystal which enshrines the colours and essence of the rainbow, and the Rainbow Serpent of Australian mythology is closely related to the Indian Spectacled Cobra in terms of its role as both a fertility symbol and a symbol of higher consciousness.
The Festival of the Serpents
The Festival of the Serpents — known as Nagapanchami — occurs in India generally in August after the monsoon rains.
It is then that the full impact of Cobra power is manifest.
Throughout the country Cobras are either brought into the villages and fed, or effigies of the animal are anointed and worshipped.
Rarely has it ever been recorded that a fatality has occurred from snakebite during the festival; the Cobras appear to know that they are being revered.
On one occasion, however, a devotee who had a few too many drinks took a mud-covered Cobra to his home with the intention of washing the snake.
Unfortunately he turned on the wrong tap, which gave hot water instead of cold.
The Cobra nipped him and he died shortly after.
But such instances are rare.
Although there may be variations in the date and in the local traditions and modes of observance, Nagapanchami is still celebrated in large portions of the country according to ancient rites.
The festival continues to testify to the feelings of awe and veneration which the Cobra evokes in the minds of the population since the earliest times remembered.
The Cobra is a graceful animal and appears always to carry an air of dignity and nobility.
The physical charisma with which the snake is endowed is no doubt one of the major reasons why it, among all snakes, was chosen by the Nagas to be their totem.
The fond feelings of the Indian people for the Cobra are perhaps nowhere better expressed than in the words of Sarojini Naidu, an Indian poetess.
The Festival of Serpents
Shining ones awake, we seek your chosen temples
In caves and sheltering sandhills and sacred banyan roots;
O lift your dreaming heads from their trance of ageless wisdom,
And weave your mystic measure to the melody of flutes.
We bring you milk and maize, wild figs and golden honey,
And kindle fragrant incense to hallow all the air.
With fasting lips we pray, with fervent hearts we praise you,
O bless our lowly offerings and harken to our prayer.
Guard our helpless lives and guide our patient labours,
And cherish our dear vision like the jewels in your crests;
O spread your hooded watch for the safety of our slumbers,
And soothe the troubled longings that clamour in our breasts.
Swift ye are as streams and soundless as the dew fall,
Subtle as the lightning and splendid as the sun;
Seers are ye and symbols of the ancient silence
Where life and death and sorrow and ecstasy are one.
Snake Charming
The eyes of the Cobra are hauntingly black and hypnotic; the snake is beautiful to watch when it is being worked by a skilled charmer.
The hood is spread then and the markings apparent.
The colours of the hood merge from black to brown to beige, and when framed against the sunlight it appears almost translucent.
It is a mystic thing and no visit to India is complete without experiencing it.
Snake charming is always fascinating and at times mystifying.
But the true essence of the art is not observed by the tourist.
There are initiates of the Shiva cult who handle Cobras without any danger of being bitten.
The ‘commercial’ snakes, generally the Spectacled Cobra, have either had their fangs extracted or the poison sacs removed.
In general their lifespan is shortened due to mouth rot.
The performance, nevertheless, is quite spectacular and colourful.
Cobras do not hear in the ordinary sense as they have no extended ears.
It is believed that the tongue plays an important part in acting as an antennae for vibrations, or that the snake is hypersensitive to earth vibrations.
The flute, therefore, is not heard by the snake.
Some feel that it is the movement of the flute which fascinates it.
Snakes do respond to quick movements.
There is also the possibility that the vibrations of the flute being played tend to alert and annoy the snake.
Physical Characteristics of the Indian Cobra
Cobras belong to the Elapidae family of snakes which includes Mambas, Kraits, Tiger Snakes and Coral Snakes.
They are oviparous, or egg laying, and have rigid fangs.
They mate at the beginning of the year and lay one or two dozen eggs in May.
The young measure just under one foot in length at birth, they are more aggressive than their parents and can rear up, spread the hood and strike while emerging from the egg if aroused or annoyed.
The celebrated Spectacled Cobra is found in West Pakistan, India and Sri Lanka.
It is not a vicious animal compared to most snakes and will avoid contact with humans rather than form a confrontation; although it is very lively and alert.
It is known in India as the ‘Good Snake’.
Those which have the single ring on the hood are found in Assam and Eastern India, and spit venom like the Ringhals Cobra of South Africa which can eject a spray for a distance of 6 to 8 feet and cause severe eye pain, sometimes blindness.
Keepers who attend this particular variety of Cobra always wear goggles.
The Egyptian Cobra, commonly called an Asp (which is incorrect), is slightly longer than the Indian counterpart.
The Asp is a Viper and a member of the Viperidae family.
It has fold-away fangs.
The wholesale slaughter of these magnificent animals by poachers has been averted to a considerable degree since embargoes have been placed on the exportation of their skins and on products manufactured locally for the Indian tourist  industry, such as briefcases, wallets, belts and handbags.
Skins being held by dealers hit by the ban number in the millions.
It is the deepest wish of the author, a member of the Wildlife Association of Southern India, that this embargo will become a permanent situation and that a national consciousness will not permit the continued destruction of the Cobra, which performs not only a biologically and environmentally essential function but exists as a symbol of life itself.
The Sign of the Swastika
Throughout India the image of the Swastika is as ubiquitous as the image of the Serpent.
It appears on Siva temples, the doors of homes, as a decoration on mobile food-stalls, in folk art and on rugs, and exists as a significant design or ‘yantra’ at ceremonial occasions, particularly weddings.
To the western world, however, the Swastika is probably the most disturbing image that has ever been associated with a political regime.
The Nazi Party of Germany used its powerful pattern to full advantage during the Second World War.
Surrounding their use of the image there exists a widespread misconception concerning the representation of the symbol.
It is commonly thought that the motif of the Third Reich was an inverted Swastika, a deviation from the original ancient design.
The point needs clarification.
Regardless of the Swastika's configuration, i.e. right-angled or left-angled, the symbol's significance does not suffer: it merely indicates two opposing principles, evolution and dissolution.
The Swastika has both spiritual and social implications.
Its use by millions of people in India for ceremonial and decorative purposes is primarily a sociological application.
Its esoteric meaning is of the domain of the scholar rather than the layman — of the initiate rather than the priest.
Like the Serpent, the Swastika crystallizes fundamental principles relating to the activity of Universal forces and their relationship to terrestrial life, and was designed to evoke an intuitive realization or response rather than an intellectual understanding.
The inadequacy of language and logic falls to justify their significance in simplistic terms.
Swastika, a Sanskrit word, means literally ‘well-being’, which has many variables depending upon the application.
As the Serpent is, cosmologically, the symbol of the creative energizing force of the Supreme Spirit, the Swastika is representative of the life-force being set in motion to initiate the cyclic processes of nature.
Both images are thus closely interrelated.
The Swastika signifies a ‘union of principles’— the infusion of spirit and matter which forms an essential aspect of Relativity, namely, energy and matter are one and interconvertible.
The ancient Hindu seers depicted the original cosmic creative process with somewhat more sensitivity, poetic visualization and direct insight than does modern physics.
The Hindus saw subtle forces and proceeding energies crystallizing or condensing into gross matter.
We have contrived the ‘Big Bang’ theory — a typically western aggressive concept — whereas the Hindus termed it ‘the churning of the milky ocean’.
This ‘churning’ is represented geometrically in Tantric ritual as a four-armed cross within a circle.
The cross is meant to be imagined as oscillating backwards and forwards.
The circle represents the universe in its potential unmanifested state prior to creation, and is called in Hinduism ‘Bramhanda’.
The Hindus believe also that the universe periodically dissolves and is then recreated.
The period between dissolution and recreation is known as ‘Pralaya’ or time of rest or neutrality between creative periods.
A period of creativity is called a ‘Manvantara’, and both periods (i.e. creation and dissolution) constitute a ‘Kalpa’ or a cycle of creation.
This view actually parallels modern scientific thinking, which presumes that the universe is evolving towards final destruction when the inevitable pull of gravity slows down the rate of expansion.
The system will then reverse its motion and begin to contract, becoming once again a great ball of fire, and another ‘big bang’ will eventually trigger a new creative era.
The dissolutionary process is labelled by science ‘the big crunch’.
The entire creative scenario is again more descriptively labelled  by the Hindus as ‘the breathing out of Brahma’, or in the Christian context ‘God creating the world’.
The dissolutionary process is seen as ‘the breathing in of Brahma’ or ‘God destroying the world’.
This cyclic process of cosmic, periodic involution and dissolution is also symbolized by the Swastika, depending upon its direction of movement.
The four arms of the cross are known as ‘the four arms of Vishnu’, the Supreme Deity in Vedic times who later became the preserver and supporter of life in the Hindu Trinity and can be equated with the ‘Holy Ghost’ or Mother in Christianity.
As a God, Vishnu's role is to support the order and balance throughout the created world (Dharma).
This is the ‘mystic cross’ within the circle which later found its way into all religions as the Egyptian Cross, the Chinese Tau, the Cross of the Rosicrucians and the Christian cross.
Balance or ‘dharma’ throughout the manifested universe presupposes an opposition between two forces, i.e. attraction and repulsion.
When manifested, these forces become in scientific terms ‘magnetism’ and ‘electricity’.
Electricity, as the centrifugal, male force and magnetism as the centripetal, female force act and re-act via a process of flux that is mirrored in the activity of all nature from the breathing of plants, the action of the human lungs, bio-rhythms, circadian rhythms, the flow of energy in a dynamo, to the expansion and contraction of the Earth itself.
Once again, it is the oscillating motion of the cross within the circle which symbolizes that forthcoming conflict between positive, evolutionary forces and negative dissolutionary forces during life on Earth that gives birth to the Swastika in both its configurations, i.e. right-angled or left-angled.
Many believe that the ‘arms’ of the Swastika represent ‘tails’and the spin is away from the direction of the tails.
This is incorrect; the Swastika as a magical symbol suggests an indicated direction (forward or reverse) by the angle at which the ‘arms’ and not the ‘tails’point.
The left-angled Swastika symbolizes the centripetal force  related to the pull of gravity — the force which ties us to mental stagnation — decay and dissolution.
The right-angled Swastika symbolizes the centrifugal force which strives to release all things from the gravitational pull and propels us towards mental activity, growth and evolution.
It is the opposition between these two forces which cart be regarded as contraction and expansion, or attraction and repulsion, that binds the whole of creation.
This duality or conflict of opposites is reflected in every facet of life.
By the balancing of these two polarities we achieve ‘well-being’— a state without conflict.
This condition, as any individual knows, is only a sometimes thing during the course of day-to-day living.
The point of neutrality or perfect balance between the two forces is equilibrium — consequently no conflict between negative and positive.
If it were to become an actual consistent condition, the very purpose of life itself (which is growth towards perfection through the struggle between opposites or growth towards total ‘order’) would be cancelled out and the evolutionary process would cease to be of significance.
The cross at rest symbolizes that state of perfect balance or equilibrium — Pralaya.
In Vedic lore these principles of attraction, neutrality and repulsion are encompassed within the three Gunas or qualities inherent in the forces originally symbolized by the Vedic Gods:
1.
Surya — Sun — Creative agent
2.
Vayu — Air — Preserving agent 
3.
Agni — Fire — Destructive agent
In post-Vedic times they became:
1.
Brahma — Vishnu — Siva respectively.
The three Gunas are:
1.
Raja Guna — Creative desire — Brahma
2.
Satva Guna — Preservation, cohesion, stability, complacency — Vishnu
3.
Tama Guna — Transformation, challenge, destruction — Siva.
In atomic physics they are represented as Proton, Neutron, Electron, the three elements of all structure throughout nature.
The right-angled Swastika represents the electron, or Siva in his aspect as transforming, evolutionary agent.
The left-angled image is relative to his aspect as destroyer.
The mythical opponents, Vishnu representing complacency and preservation and Siva symbolizing change and metamorphosis, gain another perspective in the light of physics.
On Siva temples throughout India the right-angled Swastika is ever present.
Human psychology is reducible to not only the constituents of the atom, but to the primal forces which imbue the atom and ourselves with our very nature.
The abstract quality of symbols such as the Swastika renders it difficult for cerebral intelligence to grasp the full concept and implications of their purpose, which is to awaken the more subliminal centres relating to feelings and intuitive responses.
This serves to further illustrate the mentality of past ages and acts as a means of measuring our own cognitive processes in relationship to those of that time.
The Sociological Aspect
The Swastika as a Vedic image finds expression in the magical ritual worship or ‘sacrifice’ known as Yagna.
The purpose of the sacrifice is to ensure the fertility and well-being  of the individual, his family and domestic animals and ultimately the whole community.
It constitutes an offering to the Gods, or universal forces, to sustain them in their task of maintaining the world, directing its manifold generative activities and at the same time ensuring protection against the sometimes malevolent forces of the Graha, or nine planets.
Dr V. Hasanali of the Soviet Institute of Climatology and Medicine, has stated in a paper published in Moscow that the vital activities of humans are affected not by individual factors but by the sum total of certain external factors.
These factors include solar or gravitational anomalies, sharp fluctuations in atmospheric pressure and magnetic disturbances.
In respect of these geophysical conditions there are increased chances of misfortune occurring on certain unfavourable days when the functioning of human responses is affected.
Long-term medical prognosis may vary also with change in regional conditions (from The Indian Magazine , Sydney, May 1987).
The theory that planetary movements can influence sunspot activity and thus the solar wind, which in turn affects the magnetic field of the Earth to which nature is attuned, may well be seen to endorse the Hindus' views about the Graha.
The form of the ritual may involve, for example, a circumambulation in which a horse is walked in a circle, clockwise, to effect a cure for its disease.
This clockwise movement is called ‘Pradakshina’ and indicates a natural evolutionary function.
It is used in respect of sacred trees, shrines, etc., and is performed as an act of reverence or respect.
It is believed to bestow merit and prosperity and acts as a protective circle preventing harm coming to the circumambulator.
It also delineates a sacred area.
Temples are revered in this way and it is not uncommon to observe a priest in prayer moving clockwise around a sacred enclosure, or a Stupa.
If circumambulation is performed in the opposite direction it is called ‘Apradakshina’ and has a malign influence resulting in misfortune or death.
In funerary rites or in cases of houses subject to the intrusions of snakes, this reverse direction is followed by the priest.
The image of the Swastika  accompanying the Yagna is either drawn or formed on the ground.
In the case of Pradakshina or clockwise movement the right-angled Swastika is used; for Apradakshina or anticlockwise movement the left-angled Swastika would be applied.
This ancient ritual, still continued in India today, particularly in the rural areas and in villages, is based on the principle that nature's life-giving forces integrate and disintegrate in spirals.
Integrating life-energy assumes a clockwise spiral or vortex, and dissipating energies move anticlockwise.
The Swastika and the solstices
The Swastika has been widely associated with the solar orb and its motion across the sky, the right-angled movement of the design relating to the rising sun and the left-angled to the setting sun, and accordingly the summer and winter solstices.
The Swastika and Buddhism
Buddhism, like Hinduism from which it emerged, is also a scientific teaching, and the Swastika borrowed from the Hindus is a symbol of esoteric Buddhism and as such was placed over the heart of the Buddha, stamped on the breasts of departed Initiates and planted wherever Buddhists have left their mark.
It is regarded by the Jains, a branch group of Buddhists, as the emblematic symbol of a perfectly evolved being (a Sidda, or Initiate).
Initiation in Buddhism necessitates the realization of the 49 ‘truths’ or ‘fires’relating to universal forces.
This knowledge once obtained and understood cancels out the need for re-birth or re-incarnation into the school of life.
The image of the Buddha's foot known as the ‘Tri-Pada’ shows on each of the toes the Swastika.
The symbol is seen on the underparts or pads in a left-handed or anticlockwise configuration, which would become a right-angled or clockwise image if an imprint of the foot was imagined.
Five is relative to the law of potentiality which shows that nature tends to build on a system of five-fold construction; e.g. five toes on each foot, five fingers on each hand, five senses.
This principle in Hinduism is called ‘Pancha Bhootas’ and has to do with the five states of creative substances and their relationship to the five sensory faculties.
These substances are as follows:
1.
Light — relative to the sense of Sight 
2.
Air — relative to the sense of Smell 
3.
Sound — relative to the sense of Hearing 
4.
Liquid — relative to the sense of Taste 
5.
Solid — relative to the sense of Touch 
When all of the five senses function in harmony, ‘well-being’ is the result.
To a Hindu or Buddhist Initiate, ‘well-being’ in its highest sense would mean ‘enlightenment attained’.
Thus the significance of the ancient symbol is again apparent.
The Swastika and ‘Om’
The Swastika is also associated with the Elephant-headed God of Expression, Ganesh, whose symbol is the Sanskrit word ‘Om’ with which any student of Yoga is familiar.
In Hinduism ‘Om’ is the primal sound or vibration accompanying the creative process.
In the Christian Gospel of St John it is known as ‘The Word’—‘In the Beginning was the Word’.
Science has confirmed that the universe is filled with a constant noise, believed to be overtones of the ‘Big Bang’ echoing through the vastness of space, according to the materialists.
The Swastika and Ancient Civilizations
The Swastika was evident on the seals of Mohenjo Daro in the Indus Valley, as well as in the Rongo Rongo tablets on  Easter Island.
It was found in Troy, in Mesopotamia, and is still used by the Navajo and Hopi Indians in the USA in their rituals and art work.
In ancient Egypt, the Crux Ansanta or Ankh is a transposition of the Indian symbol with similar implications, the infusion of energy and matter; the two components of ‘life’.
The Swastika and Nazi Germany
Its use in Germany during the Second World War provided the most dramatic illustration of the power of the symbol.
The architect of Nazi Germany was not Adolf Hitler but a man called Professor Hans Haushofer, the Geo-political genius involved in the occult.
He recognized in Hitler certain ‘gifts’ that could be further developed and used to project Germany with powerful force towards the ideal of the ‘Superman’laid down in the philosophy of Nietzsche, and to re-vitalize the ancient Aryan heritage.
The grand plan was not only to achieve this stage of evolution in the shortest possible time, but also to eliminate Marxism, the opposing principle or force relative to this philosophy.
Hitler was initiated into the occult by Dietrich Eckhart, one of the seven founding members of the Nazi Party, a supreme adept of the arts and rituals of magic and the central figure in a powerful circle of occultists known as the Thule Group.
As he lay dying in Munich in December 1923 from the effects of mustard gas, he spoke these words:
‘Follow Hitler!
He will dance, but it is I who have called the tune.
I have initiated him into the ‘Secret Doctrine’, opened his centres of vision and given him the means to communicate with the Powers.
Do not mourn for me; I shall have influenced history more than any other German.’
Hitler's gifts were amplified to become instruments by which 60 million people were mesmerized.
To Germany he was more a messiah than a political leader: his speeches became ‘mantras’ or magical sounds; his words, phrasing and delivery clutched hard at the emotional centres of millions.
Alan Bullock writes:
‘Hitler's power to bewitch an audience has been likened to the occult arts of the African medicine-man or the Asiatic Shaman.
Others have compared it to the sensitivity of the medium and the magnetism of the hypnotist.’
Backing this up was the constant confrontation with the Swastika; its image, made more powerful by the angle at which it was presented, affected the deepest centres of human intuition and acted in what is called in Hinduism a ‘yantra’, a design to stimulate consciousness.
The Nazi regime was first of all an occult ‘order’, with its underlying motive being the achievement of human perfection through the destruction of the old decadent order to create a new dimension in human potentiality.
The Germanic mind is highly amenable to the belief in correspondences between the Universe and Man — between microcosm and macrocosm.
The Nordic legends parallel in great degree those of the Vedic civilization.
The myth of Asgard, home of the Norwegian Gods, speaks of the Rainbow Bridge connecting Earth to Heaven which represents the seven levels of consciousness between ignorance and enlightenment, as described by the Naga myth in the previous chapter.
The Thule legend also speaks of an island to the North as the centre of a vanished civilization who possessed great esoteric knowledge.
Other stories relate to a lost Atland or Atlan in these latitudes and concur with the latest finding in relation to the origin of the Aryan race.
The recovery of this rare wisdom was of primary consideration to the elite of the Third Reich.
It was seen as the key element in the proposed transformation of the nation.
This idea was at the heart of the movement, and in accordance with this scheme the right-angled Swastika was employed; the symbol of Siva and metamorphosis; the purpose — evolution.
It was the idealism behind its use that became misdirected.
The image was used to inflame rather than instruct or reveal truth.
That was the default.
The Swastika — a Summary
All over India the right-angled Swastika is commonly regarded as a sign of good luck.
Good luck is related to the literal translation of ‘Swastika’ which is ‘well-being’, and is understood in its mundane aspect by most people.
The idea of well-being originates from the principle of balance; a harmonious relationship and union between mind and body.
This allows healthy growth whereas imbalance creates illness and chaos.
The Swastika is widely used as a talisman to counteract possible negative or demonic influences.
It is particularly evident during weddings (the union of male and female principles).
New business enterprises may feature also Ganesh, the Elephant-headed God, who in this aspect governs prosperity, wealth, good fortune, or well-being.
The origin of the Swastika has become a source of speculation for western researchers throughout time.
Mentioned in the Vedas , the Upanishads and the Mahabharata , the symbol has its origin with the Vedic Aryans, its meaning being clearly defined by the Naga or Aryan initiates.
The Serpent and the Swastika are siblings; the Serpent as the energizing creative force of the Universe, the Swastika as that force in motion.
Both are fundamental aspects of Vedic cosmology, and the Cosmic Serpent, Ananta Sesha, symbolic of the timeless, eternal creative principle, displays the Swastika on its multi-hooded image.
The symbol reflects the wisdom of its original architects; those who understood that the Union of Principles is the underlying law to an creation from the Cosmos to the essential Atom.
The Rainbow Serpent and the Secret of the Wandjina
The Kimberley mountain ranges stretch across the northern tip of Western Australia.
Here, in some remote age, mysterious, enigmatic images of mouthless beings, some clad in robes and surrounded by what appears as a halo, were inscribed on the rock faces of numerous caves.
Sacred to the Aboriginals of the Kimberleys, the images are revered as awesome beings who in primeval times wandered around the landscape, instructing the indigenous people in the use of weapons and tools and initiating tribal laws, rites and customs, and after completing their task they disappeared into the heavens or into the ground.
They called themselves Wandjina.
Similar stories exist, particularly throughout the Americas and Asia, relating to teachers who arrived from across the sea.
But the Wandjina have been the subject of special interest and speculation to anthropologists, ethnologists and certain writers who have linked them with visitors from space due to their resemblance to astronauts.
There exists no exact information surrounding their identity or the idea which inspired their design, and untold theories have been voiced.
It is my intention to add one more possibility to the existing collection in the hope that it may bring this intriguing issue into perhaps a less mystifying perspective.
The Australian Aborigines make a clear distinction between the works of art they consider their own and those they claim go back to the time of their creation, popularly referred to as the Dreamtime in all literature about Aborigines.
Mythical beings are reputed in most cases to be responsible for the art that cannot be attributed to their own people.
But the Northern  Kimberley tribes maintain that the ancestors of the clans arrived in boats led by individuals called Wandjina, each with his own name.
The visitors painted their symbolic image on galleries and rocky caves.
The symbol of the sun is also represented on the walls of these caves where the Wandjina appear.
Ancient totemic drawings were often anthropomorphic, showing, for example, art animal's head on a human body.
Relating to the Wandjina, this point becomes significant further on in the story.
Wandjina images are closely associated with rain and fertilization, the increase of natural species and the increase of the human race.
They are identified also with the image of a serpent appearing in the rock art of the area.
Among the Kimberley tribes the snakes are called Unguds, the word ‘Ungud’ being applied primarily to a life principle or a ‘vital force’, and the natives believe that the Wandjina and Ungud paintings must be restored at the beginning of the wet season to ensure that rain will fall and fertilization proceed.
The wellbeing of all living things in the area is thus dependent upon the yearly restoration.
It is believed that the Ungud serpent was the totem of the Wandjina.
Both images are essentially symbols of a life-giving power.
The mythical snakes live in waterholes (water being the mother of life) and bear various names according to the location and tribal language.
But their role in relation to fertility, on one hand, and wisdom on the other, according to the application, appears to be consistent throughout the country.
To distinguish the snakes, the term Rainbow Serpent is applied, due to the widespread belief among Aborigines that they are capable of assuming the form of the rainbow when they desire to do so.
A rainbow is formed from the interaction of pure white sunlight with molecules of moisture in the atmosphere acting as prisms that break up the light into the respective colours perceived through our senses.
Manifested light or solar energy  is the vital component for the sustenance of life.
The serpent, symbolic of the creative energy, and the rainbow, symbolic of the sustaining principle, are therefore siblings.
In its lower aspect the Rainbow Serpent forms the central figure in many of the great Aboriginal fertility cults, such as Hunapipi.
Hunapipi represents the Earth Mother and the cult is probably the most important and widely spread of any in northern Australia.
Medicine men, tribal initiates or ‘clever men, are also closely connected to the snake.
Thus, in its higher aspect, it relates to wisdom and enlightenment.
This dual role attributed to serpents or their image as symbols of the life-force and therefore ‘consciousness, is universal, and indicates how life-force energy can be used for regenerative ends or sublimated towards purely mental or ascetic pursuits.
Links with India
Many anthropologists believe that Australian Aboriginal tribes may have had contact with India via the once existing land mass that stretched from southern India almost to Australia.
Proto-Australoid skulls have been found in the Indus Valley.
Boomerangs were known in the south of India, and many of the mythological themes of the Australian natives relate to those found in the oldest known sources of Central Asia.
Australoid skulls have been unearthed in Indonesia, and the Malaccans from the Celebes were constant visitors to Arnhem Land and the Kimberley area in recent centuries.
The implication is that the early Australians may have imported their basic mythology at some distant time or had experienced cultural intercourse with visitors from India in the not so remote past.
In The Maldive Mystery Thor Heyerdahl has written in relation to the Indus Valley kingdoms of north-west India:
‘This maritime centre was known to be the cradle of all the  cultures and kingdoms that gradually grew down to the southern tip of India and eastwards to Java and other distant lands.’
Support for Indian influence has been given also by certain Aboriginal elders and initiates with whom I have conversed, and my explorations in India into serpent worship have strongly indicated that the concept of the Rainbow Serpent could be a direct transposition from Indian serpent lore.
In India, the hooded Spectacled Cobra assumes, in effect, the exact same role as that played by the Rainbow Serpent.
Still prominent in art, folklore and literature, the live snake or its ubiquitous image influences millions of people in that country.
The ‘eyes’ or ‘spectacles’on the rear of the Cobra's hood, as discussed in the chapter entitled ‘Sign of the Serpent’, are related to well-being and balance in terms of spiritual attainment.
The Aborigines claim that the Wandjina ‘cannot have mouths’.
If they had, they say, the landscape would be flooded.
The concept of balance and wisdom in relation to the design is again apparent.
‘He who speaks does not know.
He who knows does not speak’ is the ancient Indian aphorism that is applicable to any image lacking a mouth.
If one closely observes both designs, i.e. the ‘eyes’ of the Cobra and the Wandjina image (see photographs p.63,64), the similarity appears so strikingly evident that in consideration of the metaphysical aspects of the Rainbow Serpent, the Spectacled Cobra, the Wandjina and the Cobra's hood markings, the point is further amplified.
It is highly possible that the Wandjina image inscribed by these visitors from across the sea is a direct transposition from the Indian Spectacled Cobra's hood markings, which constituted the symbol of well-being or balance used by Hindu or Buddhist spiritual teachers whose totem was that same animal — a legacy of the ancient Nagas.
Finally, in respect of the Wandjina, it appears to be more than chance that the word ‘Wandjina’— sometimes spelled  ‘Wondjina’— can be formed from two Sanskrit words, ‘Vand’ and ‘Jina’.
The Australian Aborigines did not develop a system of writing their own language and the written attempts to spell the words phonetically are the work of Europeans, missionaries or Aboriginals trained by Europeans.
Thus ‘W’ could easily be ‘V’, the correct application.
Vand — a root word meaning ‘saluting’ or ‘greeting’: an acknowledgement of rank or attainment applied in a spiritual context to an Initiate.
Jina — meaning ‘conqueror’ in the sense of one who has conquered his own duality to obtain balance, liberation and wisdom.
Wandjina or Vandjina would translate then as ‘an initiated wise one’, a ‘serpent’ or spiritual instructor, and comply with the Aboriginal tradition concerning the Wandjina.
The female expressive or active aspect of the Wandjina, according to information gleaned by Professor A.P.
Elkin, was noted as ‘Wand Jininya’ or ‘Wand Jnina’.
The Sanskrit word ‘Jnana’ would appear to be the correct spelling for the female aspect and would comply with the understanding of the function of the Wandjina.
Jnana — relates to mystical or magical knowledge required by a spiritual teacher to enable him to deal with the mysterious powers of nature as well as the intuitive awareness of a single, all-including entity other than which nothing persists (in simple terms, the Creator).
The concept of the power inherent in knowledge ensures the sharing of this power and the magical skills to guarantee victory to the warrior, abundance to the herdsman and agriculturist, and fecundity to women, etc., the role of a spiritual teacher.
Thus, in summary, Vandjina and Vandjnana being the male and female aspects of the image, are the original Sanskrit terms for what has become Wandjina and Wandjnina in the  Aboriginal vocabulary.
The close affinity between serpent lore in Indian and Aboriginal Australia is revealing.
Although the symbolism of the serpent is universal, in no two countries does the relationship appear to possess such complimentary sociological, philosophical and metaphysical components.
Increase Centres and Fertilization
It is an Aboriginal understanding that the fauna and flora of the landscape has an ‘increase centre’— an area of high electro-magnetic energy, where the performance of correct rituals will release the life essence or Kurunba stored there and bring about the desired increase.
If a species, the increase of which is desired, is depicted on a Wandjina gallery, for example, the increase is assured.
It is claimed, however, that only the female of the species is fertilized.
In India, Kurunba, or ‘universal energy’, named Sakti, is female in nature.
Sakti is representative of the ‘expression’ of the God, or force of nature that is responsible for a particular principle.
The natives know that it is not the actual paintings in the caves that activate the Kurunba but the rocks on which they are drawn; the rocks being imbued with the ‘spirit’ of the entities depicted.
Sacred works of art such as the Wandjina act as powerful images, capable of stimulating and intensifying mind power during rituals, similar in nature to Yantras or designs used in Tantric meditative techniques.
Any work of art is a complex vibratory system to which our senses and nervous system respond, and any object such as the sacred wooden boards or Tapundas, or the stone Tjinas of the Aborigines, many of which are inscribed with the serpent motif, or any object that has been submitted to human veneration through actions or desires, remains charged with psychic power that can be transmitted or given off in energetic emanations providing there has been no transformation of the original material used in its creation.
Robert Pavlita, the Czech inventor of Psychotronic Generators, has given scientific proof  of how psychic energy can be stored in material objects and used for various purposes.
During rituals, the release of human bioenergy, intensified mental energy and sound frequencies from the special chants (mantras), effectively stimulates the energy field of the rocks (the spirit of the rock) at the sacred site.
The Kimberley area is rich in crystalline deposits; thus the rocks have high energy content.
Amplification of this energy promotes fertilization of the surrounding area via underground water-courses.
Sacred Rights
The Aboriginal legends maintain that most of the underground water-courses were created by the mythical snakes as they travelled across the country.
These water-courses or ‘serpent currents’ have counterparts in the Chinese ‘Dragon Currents’and the ‘ley lines’of Britain which display, at certain points, intense degrees of electro-magnetic anomaly.
Most Christian churches in Britain were built over the original sacred sites at these points.
In China, the science of Fung Shui, a method of divination to determine strong positive sites prior to the construction of houses, etc., is still practised, particularly in Hong Kong.
In India, ashrams and temples are likewise situated where electromagnetic variations evoke heightened mental responses.
Human sensitivity to such fields is a subject of intensive research today.
Aboriginal sacred sites appear to conform to this principle; each tribe being responsible for its own section of line, visiting the sites at the appropriate season and performing traditional rituals and chants.
During rituals, the bodies of the performers are decorated with the design or symbolic representation of the animal to be fertilized, e.g. snake, dingo.
The actors impersonate the totem animal, thus identifying and promoting a resonant connection with it.
Plant down, with natural blood as an adhesive, is often used to form the design; or ochre (blood of the earth) which has always been intimately associated with  ceremonies of fertility, the invocation of rain, etc., by tribal people in most countries, who, like the Aborigines, regard the earth as a living, breathing entity, its underground watercourses being seen in a similar light to the human arterial system.
The fact that thoughts, desires and sound waves influence our environment is no longer an abstract theory, and controlled experiments have scientifically verified that the healthy growth of plants can, for example, be promoted by certain music along with harmonious and positive thoughts and behavioural patterns.
Tests conducted in southern India by Dr Singh, head of the Department of Botany at Annamalai University, resulted in the speeding up of the movement of protoplasm in plant cells by the application of harmonious music from various instruments two metres from the plants for half an hour.
Longer daily exposure for several weeks resulted in positive changes in chromosomes; the musical treatment actually increasing the chromosome count.
Thousands of years ago, sacred dances were practised to generate energy which influenced crops.
An interconnectiveness between mind and matter is no longer regarded as mystic mumbo jumbo, but forms a vital ingredient in present scientific research into magnetic fields which have been found to influence the pattern and organization of any living thing, the alms of nature being wholeness, organization and continuity.
Today's physics are merely rediscovering fundamental principles known to the ancient seers for millennia.
In its true context, the creation of the landscape by the Wandjina refers to the activity surrounding the nourishing of the energy centres along the existing ‘serpent current’.
This natural science of geomancy, still practised in the East, is almost forgotten or ignored by western materialistic science.
Little wonder that we do not understand the basic ingredients of Aboriginal culture in Australia; our education teaches us nothing about these workings of nature or how we inter-relate with them.
Sir George Grey is reputed to be the first white person ever to have seen the Wandjina images in 1838.
His drawings and documentation proved extremely valuable for researchers who followed him.
Sollas, author of Ancient Hunters , has commented:
‘The shape of the head-dress and body of the Wandjina images suggests an origin and workmanship other than native.
It is quite possible that the Wandjina figures owe their origin to external influence.
Visitors may have drawn the first prototypes, for some purpose from to themselves.’
J. Bradshaw, writing for the Royal Geographic Society of Australia in 1892, states:
‘Some of the human figures were life size, the bodies and limbs very attenuated and represented as having numerous tassel-shaped adornments appended to the hair, neck, waist, arms and legs: but the most remarkable fact in connection with these drawings is that wherever a profile face is shown, the features are of a most pronounced aquiline type, quite different from those of any natives we encountered.
Indeed, looking at some of the groups, one might almost think oneself viewing the painted vaults of an ancient Egyptian temple.
The sketches seemed to be of a great age, but over the surface of some of them were drawn in fresher colours smaller and more recent scenes, and rude forms of animals, such as the kangaroo, wallaby, porcupine, crocodile, etc.’
Basedow, another researcher, echoed George Grey's impression of a 9-foot long Wandjina, lying on its side:
‘It reminded one forcibly of a Buddha in a Ceylonese temple.
It was clothed in a long striped garment resembling a priestly gown from which only the head, hands and feet were excluded.
A loosely fitting belt is also shown.
The mouth is omitted and the head is surrounded by a number of peculiar, concentric bands, through which and from which many lines radiate, giving the structure the effect of a halo.’
In relation to the adornments quoted by Bradshaw, Professor Elkin, one of the foremost researchers into Aboriginal culture, was told that the name for these was ‘taramala’.
Again the Sanskrit language is evoked:
Tara — Mother or Goddess of Wisdom and Mystic Knowledge
Mala — a protective necklace, wreath or garland
Taramala — a protective adornment worn by spiritual teachers
Elkin, in his compelling book Aboriginal Men of High Degree , cites the ritual procedures which a potential medicine man or Karadji undergoes in awakening his latent paranormal powers:
‘It is possible that there is some historical connection between the Yoga and occult practices of India and Tibet and the practice of psychic powers of Aboriginal men of high degree.
The transcendental practices of the Australia Aborigines seem to be of the same order as those of the Tibetan practices, even if not so highly developed.
The Australian Aboriginal religion with its emphasis on mysteries and degrees of initiation, its doctrines of pre-existence ad reincarnation and its belief in psychic powers, belongs to the Orient, not the West, and can only be understood in the light of the Orient.’
The origin of much of the Australian Aboriginal culture still remains a mystery.
Until recently, the Aborigines have always been regarded as little more than the exceptional survivors of prehistoric man, a view based primarily on the materialistic aspects of their culture, its ‘hardware’.
Yet every anthropologist and ethnologist who has dug below the surface of ancient Australian culture and folklore has found subtle connections with Eastern metaphysics.
The Wandjina images and the cult of the Rainbow Serpent are so closely aligned to Indian serpent worship that the probability of cultural interchange in some remote age is no longer a vague theory.
The noted ethnologist, Alberto Cesare Ambesi, has speculated that:
‘In relation to the early Australians, the language of the       Photo: Mark Balfour.
The Swastika as a decorative design on a wall tapestry (India).
Photo: Mark Balfour.
Incense or oil burner in the form of a Swastika adorning an ant-hill in which a Cobra or Nag is in residence.
The mound becomes a temporary shrine.
Serpent and Swastika are indelibly inter-related.
Photo: Mark Balfour.
The Swastika in both its configurations adorning the fence at the one-time residence in Athens of Schliemann, the  founder of Troy.
Photo: Mark Balfour.
‘The Rainbow Serpent’ painting by Mike Lyons (with permission of the artist), graphically illustrates the Rainbow Serpent as the Creative, energizing force of the Supreme Universal Spirit or ‘Father’, named Biame or Byamee in the mythology of the Australian Aborigines.
The water symbolizes the fertilizing vital source of all terrestrial life, the ‘Mother’.
The two figures, the first man and woman, emerge from the union and are representative of the two polarized or opposite principles existing throughout nature, or the ‘Son’.
The figure of a Tuckonie, or nature spirit, is seen in the sky along with a planet, representative of the solar system.
Photo: Mark Balfour
The Wandjina images of the Kimberley (from a design contained in the Australian Information Service Calendar 1982).
The significance of both the Wandjina and the markings on the rear of the Cobra's hood are related to balance and ‘well-being’ in Nature.
The halo effect which surrounds the Wandjina's head has always been symbolic of ‘enlightenment’ and ‘initiation’.
The central spot on the chest is indicative of the Heart Centre, the source of ‘mind’ and therefore wisdom, in yogic teachings.
Photo: Mark Balfour.
A pair of Spectacled Cobras showing the marking on the hood.
The spectacles or ‘eyes’ on the rear of the Spectacles Cobra's expanded hood.
Photo: Mark Balfour.
The Rasakumbha positioned at the back of the image.
Chakras connected by copper wire leading to the head of the idol.
Rasakumbha, the ancient form of battery used in imbuing idols in Indian Temples with ‘life’.
Photo: Mark Balfour.
Acharya Hanumanthacharya renowned sculptor of temple idols
Aboriginal communities possesses a richness of grammar, syntax and vocabulary that makes possible the expression of subtle nuances of thought, and the complex social structure of the Aboriginals is a further proof that he is not ‘prehistoric’.
The aesthetic inventions of the South Seas and Australia have their own value as a communication with the invisible and represent a last witness of the more ancient cultures that somehow linked Asia with the shores of the American continent.
The Australian Aboriginals could well be a fugitive branch and now the inheritors of a mother race which has left undeniable proof of its presence in a remote past…’
Offering being made to temple idol by attending priest.
Bangalore, India.
Photo: Mark Balfour.
Priest bathing idol with Ghee (clarified butter).
Bangalore, India.
Photo: Mark Balfour
The Aboriginal Initiates communicate intuitively with the Dreamtime — the time of their creation — by tapping into a universal reservoir of information containing their racial memory.
The Hindus call this reservoir the Akashic Record, which many researchers in physics have identified with the long sought-after Unified or Universal Field.
There is little reason to doubt that these pristine people are able to impart their special vision to those whom they choose to be the recipients of their ancient knowledge.
The Hidden Power of Idols
Few individuals — even in India — are remotely aware of the complexities involved in the construction of temples and in particular the installation of the idol or icon.
A knowledge of how the idol is imbued with ‘life’ or the ‘serpent power’is even more obscure.
But the records of this branch of scientific endeavour date back 7000 years.
To the Western mind the reverence shown to an idol appears profane, since little understanding exists in relation to its social and religious significance to an Easterner.
An icon is to a temple what the spirit or life energy is to the human body.
It can be likened to the vital currents that link our physical vehicle to our energy body.
The temple is a structure specifically designed to house an icon as well as the mental images that are sought to be evoked in its presence.
The geometry of a temple's construction relates to the human body and incorporates the principles of man's relationship to the universe, thus forming a bridge, a living connection between the cosmic forces and the terrestrial.
It becomes a place of union between the two.
This factor enables a human-being to resonate with those forces responsible for his existence and explains the feelings one may experience when visiting such sanctuaries.
But it is the actual icon that amplifies this condition when we are in close proximity to its form.
This will be explained later in the story.
From ancient times in India, icons have been modelled in stone or wood, cast in metal or made of clay.
Occasionally, precious stones and crystals are used for carving small idols.
Special manuals provide explicit and elaborate instructions as to the creating of different icons and the use of different kinds  of material.
The most ancient images found in country areas are known to have been wooden, with the location and nature of the tree from which the wood is taken being of great significance.
Trees in burial grounds, near tanks, at points where roads cross and in close proximity to anthills and ponds are carefully avoided, as are trees that have been eaten by worms or struck by lightning or are barren, old and worn out.
Trees in which birds have nested and which provide shade for cattle are also avoided, and trees that are unattractive or have fallen down by themselves are likewise unsuitable for icon making.
The piece of stone or the log of wood selected is treated in an elaborate manner in order to divest it of its inert nature and to infuse into it the power to contain the divine image.
When the selected material is brought to the sacrificial enclosure in a ceremonial procession, a consecrated ‘pot’ or ‘puma-kumbha’is installed and the stone or wood is subjected to set rituals before it is given to the sculptor.
The carving is done generally in that portion of the temple designed to be the sanctum, and the doors are closed during three, five, seven or nine days.
If this area is not available an alternative pavilion is specially set apart to the south or north of the temple, the stone or wood being placed in the centre of this structure and worshipped with flowers and various other offerings.
The sculptor begins his work with an initial ritual resembling the traditional ‘seed-sowing’ ceremony.
Clay icons are classified as ‘temporary’ or ‘occasional’and are not designed for permanent installation in temples.
Such images are installed just prior to any ritual and are ‘discharged’ in water immediately after worship is over.
The main icon installed inside the sanctum of the temple is usually carved of stone but there will be one or more metallic images to serve various ritualistic ends.
These metal icons are not fixed and can be taken anywhere for the performance of rituals.
Three major metals are prescribed for the making of such icons: gold, silver and copper, although bronze and brass are often used as well as a mixture of five metals, copper, gold, silver, brass and white lead.
In magical rites, iron, lead and tin icons are utilized.
Stone icons are preferably carved from stones found in rocky, mountainous areas, or when not available those existing at ground level are selected.
Stones are classified as follows:
Male Bright coloured, free from spiral grains and knots, and which when struck sound like a brass gong and during excavation throw out splinters like sparks of a fire.
Female Light-coloured, having streaks of grain, and when struck emit a hollow but pleasant sound.
Neuter Dull coloured, hard, and unable to produce any musical sound when struck.
In general, male stones are employed for making major icons of Gods while the pedestal is carved out of female stones.
Goddesses are made from female stones and the pedestal from male stones.
Neuter stones are used for structures hidden underground.
The black, finely grained granite stone is generally recommended but stealite and marble are agreeable, especially in the northern regions of the country.
The elaborate rituals surrounding the preparation of the icon are not without purpose or effect.
Any object subject to veneration receives ‘vibrations’ or psychic energetic impulses, and once charged, retains them.
(This has been discussed in relation to Aboriginal sacred sites in Australia.)
Once the icon has been sufficiently ‘charged’ by rituals executed by the priest or initiate, the actual installation and preparation for the activation of an additional electro-magnetic impulse is undertaken.
The procedure was explained by one of the most celebrated sculptors of icons in India, Acharya Sri Hanumanthacharya, whose idol-adorned gardens and studio are situated near Bangalore at the township of Devanahalli.
A softly-spoken, intense man, he receives hundreds of visitors who come to his home from all over India to view his work.
With his young assistant and a much-loved black cat we sat on the floor of his   studio, sipped mint tea and listened to his words relating to the ancient science.
Every idol, he explained, must be constructed according to strict specifications as outlined in the Shipa Shastra, and based on the Tala system which is the measurement of the palm of the hand from the tip of the middle finger to the wrist.
At the rear of the idol, seven round indents are formed beginning at the base of the spine and extending to the head.
These cavities correspond to the seven chakras or energy centres in the human entity.
In each indent there is placed a metal disc upon which a geometric design or ‘yantra’ is engraved.
On many important icons, precious gems relating to the colour and function of each chakra are used instead of metal.
At the base of the idol, a gold-lined vessel known as a Rasakumbha is installed, and in it is placed potassium nitrate, sulphur, copper-sulphate, nine herbs, nine cereals and nine gems.
These substances are called Navapasham and relate to substances existing in the human body, in the earth and throughout nature.
A small vessel containing mercury is added from which extend two hollow copper wires.
These are connected vertically to the idol along the spinal column, over the chakras and end at the head.
The wires correspond to the energy conduits or ‘nadis’ in the human counterpart.
The icon thus reflects the principles of bioenergy flow in the human-being.
The ringing of the temple bell continuously, the blowing of a conch shell, the chanting of mantras within the sanctum of the temple all create sound energy vibrations which force the mercury to rise from the Rasakumbha through the copper wires to the head.
The combination of the Rasakumbha, which can be likened to a battery, the metal disc on which the yantras are inscribed, or the gems along the spine acting as chakras or energy absorption and distribution points, the sound vibrations of the mantras or bells, results in an emission of electrical energy from the head of the idol.
The amount generated is about 3 watts.
A devotee praying before the idol and gazing at the God's face is  thus influenced by an electro-magnetic field which interacts with the devotee's own bioenergy field.
The effect is on the autonomic or unconscious nervous system and sets in motion a process which influences the brain to respond in a high degree to the desires of the heart.
The devotee's faith in the representative image of his chosen Deity confirms his imagination and stabilizes the ‘will’.
If a person clearly imagines and believes implicitly in the forthcoming realization of a desired result, nature inevitably allows that desire to materialize.
The electrical energy emission serves to amplify that process.
Scientifically, it has been shown that electromagnetic field variations influence enzyme activity, the autonomic nervous system and thus behavioural patterns.
The paranormal effect of the temple idol is apparent and the devotee's ‘prayers are answered’ by this method.
An accompanying physical effect may also occur.
When meditating deeply before such an idol it appears as if the image takes on the aura of a live human-being.
In the Alpha or Theta frequency, the brain is able to be directly influenced by the electrical emission.
The reports of statues actually ‘breathing, and ‘speaking’ may be explained by this understanding.
Andrew Tomas, researcher and author, during his stay in India was told of an ancient document preserved in an Indian Prince's library at Ujjain and listed as Agastya Samhita, which gives directions for making electrical batteries.
He writes:
‘The electrical energy produced was known as the Gods, Mitra and Varuna which are now called by science Cathode and Anode.
The instructions state that water will be split by the current into Pranavayu and Udanavayu — which to us is Oxygen and Hydrogen.
Discoveries of ever-burning lamps in India are further proof of this ancient knowledge of electricity.
To illustrate further the significance of the Rasakumbha, it is necessary to look at the traditional teachings surrounding the Sanskrit words ‘Rasa’ and ‘Kumbha’.
Rasa (a) has to do with ‘vital essence’ or ‘elixir’.
Mercury was  believed to possess magical properties and some regarded it as the quintessence of the human body and of all substances.
Rasa played an important part in Indian alchemy which is primarily the concern of those devotees of Siva, God of metamorphosis, and was used in concocting the ‘elixir of life’ known as ‘Rasayana’.
As mercury is now used in the construction of batteries and vapour lamps this ‘elixir, in traditional terminology was undoubtedly what is now known as ‘electromagnetism’, the vital essence of all living things.
Rasa (b) is the name of a mythical river personified as a Goddess and said to flow around the world.
(Van Allen belts of radiation?)
Rasa (c) A third concept of Rasa as being a cosmic mystery dance of Lord Krishna and his Gopis or herdswomen, a circular dance in which each Gopi imagines that she alone dances with him, is again significant when transposed to its more scientific meaning.
Astronomically, this dance is representative of the movement of the planets (Gopis) around the sun which Krishna symbolizes.
Atomically, the dance becomes the movement of electrons around the nucleus of the atom.
Kumbha is a container or pot in which to place generative substances such as water, the source of life, etc.
The Rasakumbha is thus a container of the life force — bioenergy or the ‘serpent power’.
Just as each human-being should bathe regularly, so the temple idol, if it is constructed of metal or stone, is bathed daily, several times a day or once a week.
Various ingredients are used in succession, such as clarified butter, milk, and oils that nourish and stabilize the material and prevent alien vibrations or electro-magnetic influences from upsetting its existing frequency.
Offerings of food are placed before the figure and so it  assumes a role almost equal to that of a human, and it is in this light that it becomes understandable why the sanctum of Indian temples is usually taboo to all but the priests who attend the icon and perform the ceremonial prayers.
Professor S.K. Ramachandra Rao, author and highly respected authority on Indian icon and temple lore, summarizes the significance and importance of both in Indian society:
‘An icon as a object of veneration, satisfies not only the religious impulses of its user but also the artistic expectations.
It develops a ‘vital quality’ and a protective role.
It must be regarded as being imbued with living quality and possessing special powers.
It must have a profound appeal to the devotee who stands before it and be meaningful.
Only then it becomes a object of veneration.
It also has a tradition and a function that is paramount within the community.
Its nature, in scientific terms can be likened to a ‘paradigm’.
‘Common people worship a variety of icons which for purposes of practicality represent various attributes and aspects of a supreme Godhead.
The Hindus have discovered that the Absolute can only be realized or thought of, or stated through the relative.
The images, the icons, are simply so many symbols; so may pegs to hang the spiritual ideas upon.
It is a attempt to grasp the higher spiritual truth.
The masses can never be expected to have a clear conception of a supreme God without investing those attributes with a projection of their own personality.
By the law of association, the material image calls up the mental idea and vice versa.
The icon assists in focusing the mind on the Being to whom one prays.
The devotee knows, however, that the image is not the omnipresent God force, whatever that may mean to almost the entire world.
We can no more think about anything without a mental image than we can live without breathing.
Idols are the supports towards realization of a higher power.
‘In India, Hindu Gods are endowed with different personalities relative to the natural forces they represent.
The more esoteric or higher understanding of the reality of one universal, wholistic creative principle (monism) is embraced only by those who are able to transcend the confines of theistic involvement as it is in any country or civilization.’
Summary of Section 1
The most significant thing about each phenomenon presented in the previous pages is not the nature of the phenomenon itself, but the underpinning — the workings of the consciousness of those who gave birth to such realities and their regard for consciousness as the primary concern in the adventure of life itself, as everything proceeds from it.
That great insight — lost or rejected throughout 2000 years of western history, save for its occasional stirring in the minds of rare individuals uncrippled by centuries of projected dogma — became the touchstone of eastern philosophy.
‘Cause’ was of higher consideration than ‘effect’.
When the cause is known the effects are clearly understood: metaphysics was the name of the game.
In the West, ‘effect’ is primary — the ‘cause’obscure and unknown, and ‘physics’is the name of the game.
The realisation that all things in the creative universe are manifestations of one all-pervasive, eternal conscious principle, and that there are no holes or gaps anywhere where consciousness is absent, made this exalted state of mind possible.
Consciousness, as understood in Vedic law, is the primal, fundamental essence of creation from the cosmos, to living cells, to the atom.
Consciousness and life are synonymous and constitute the essential fabric within which mind and emotions in all their aspects are interwoven.
The great arcanum of Eastern esotericism taught that there is no difference between matter, mind, and spirit: they are only different phases of experiencing the One.
All is consciousness .
The Western mentality — conditioned to regard physical objects as clear-cut and isolated — remains largely unaware that the physical level is only one significant level of reality, obscuring much more than it reveals.
The commitment of our twentieth-century science to the exploitation and manipulation of the earthly environment is a direct result of a linear, unbalanced utilisation of the cognitive process.
Materialism, in its naïve infancy, denies the Eastern concept of consciousness, proclaiming mind to be the effect of purely physical causes.
For 300 years or more our science has omitted any human attributes that may impinge upon or impede its mechanistic working model.
Science's egocentric constricted views in relation to consciousness and mind have reduced the human mental condition almost to that of a robot's, with ‘mystic mumbo jumbo’ being the label placed on the canons of the sublime Eastern ‘Science of Life’.
To quote one Hindu sage:
‘Some fools consider that nothing apart from the body exists, because movement arises from the body.
This conception, peculiar to individuals of low stature such as idiots, is, by the Materialists, elevated to the status of a ‘system’.’
The fact that consciousness is able to operate independently of the physical vehicle has been proved throughout vast research, and that an ‘interconnectiveness’ exists between mind and matter was brought clearly into focus in a study prepared for the House of Representatives Science and Technology Commission in the United States, back in 1981.
In a section encouraging serious assessment of further research on the ‘physics of consciousness’, the report revealed that:
‘Recent experiments suggest that there exists an ‘interconnectiveness’ of the human mind with other minds and with matter — that the human mind may be able to obtain information independent of geography and time…’and concluded that ‘…a general recognition of the degree of interconnectiveness of minds (and matter) could have far-reaching society and political implications for the nation and the world.’
(From a paper prepared in 1981 by Robert G. Jahn, Dean of the School of Engineering and Applied Science, Princeton University, New Jersey, USA)
What is unfortunate today is that scientists are still trying to build science on foundations that are known to be inadequate.
Arthur M. Young of the Foundation for the Study of Consciousness, has stated:
‘Our philosophy has become emasculated by the anxiety to propitiate deterministic sciences.
We strive like obsequious morticians to provide consolation by enshrining a corpse.
But the true science no longer upholds the sanction of the inert, though there are undertakers everywhere that still administer to it.’
Section 2 will further discuss the issue of consciousness as Life-Force from a new emerging scientific perspective which parallels precisely the ancient Vedic tradition.
Hard scientific evidence to support the existence of a universal Life-Force energy field was found in 1986.
The implications of this discovery are profound and far-reaching.
The possibility of a long overdue extension of present physics principles and an answer to the persistent problem of cancer, appears imminent by virtue of the intrinsic nature of the energy field discovered.
Science and the Serpent
‘People have become weary of scientific specialization and rationalistic intellectualism.
They want to hear truths which do not make them narrower but broader, which do not obscure but enlighten, which do not run off them like water, but pierce them to the marrow .’
Carl Jung
The Life Force
‘Space will have to be regarded as a primary thing with matter derived from it.’
Albert Einstein (Physical Review 1935)
‘In one cubic centimetre of empty space the amount of energy is much greater than the total amount of energy of all matter in the known universe.’
David Bohm, Theoretical Physicist
We exist within a vast ocean of invisible, universal energy.
All of nature — our Earth, planets, sun and moon — bathe in an infinite sea of subtle substance or ‘ether’, the essence of which is the ‘life force’, often termed ‘consciousness’.
Hindu seers thousands of years ago named this energy Sakti — the creative, formative energy of the Gods.
They stated: ‘When manifesting in the physical world it brings with it the forces of attraction and repulsion and moves in a curved path or spiral.’
Throughout India it has always been symbolised in the form of the hooded serpent or Cobra.
The existence of an ether in space had been a highly controversial issue with scientists until 1951, when Nobel Laureate, Paul Dirac, affirmed that the ether he thought existed was essentially an all-pervading sea of electrons in random motion.
In 1959, another French physicist, Victor de Broglie, suggested that this ether is a gaseous substrate made up of subatomic particles of small mass.
In the past thirty years, astrophysicists have discovered dust clouds, radio signals, X-rays, electric and magnetic fields in supposedly empty space, and it is now realised that there is as much energy/matter between the stars as there is contained in them and in all the planets as well.
In short, empty space is in  fact crowded with interlocking magnetic and electric fields, and sub-atomic particles which have been labelled Neutrinos.
This Neutrino sea arises from the nuclear fusion reactions taking place in the countless stars scattered throughout the universe, and these minute particles pass through our bodies at a rate estimated at one million to one billion per square inch per second.
This sub-atomic medium has been defined as an energy-rich substrate, the common denominator in all particle reactions in nuclear physics.
In 1965, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson, of the Bell Laboratories in the USA, discovered that the earth is bathed in a faint glow of radiation coming from every direction in the heavens.
The measurements showed that the Earth itself could not be the origin of this radiation, nor could any other object in the sky.
The entire universe seemed to be the source.
Hard experimental evidence for the existence of this energy has been lacking due to the imperfections of both chemical and molecular physics, as well as self-imposed restrictions on the imagination.
But this is seen to be the reason why forces or energies are transferred or transmitted across what has continually been regarded by so many scientists as ‘empty space’.
The ether is not so much the carrier of cosmic electro-magnetic forces, as it is the materialised forces themselves.
This recent knowledge is but an echo of Vedic understanding.
The ancient initiates defined space as a ‘formative matrix’, a field of energy which gives birth to matter.
As the very essence of nature it is eternal and underlies all forms — all qualities — all activity and all things return into it.
Around 400BC the Greek philosopher Plato termed the ether ‘archetypal essence’, which contained the predetermining images of the visible world.
Paracelsus, the Swiss alchemist and physician (1493- 1541), referred to it as the ‘Archeus’— the light or energy that underlies the world of shadow or the material world.
Descartes (1596–1650), French philosopher and mathematician, taught that space must be filled with something  because empty space would fulfil no function, which is contrary to the perfection of Nature's design which shows throughout the Universe that anything without purpose should not exist.
He applied the term ‘Luminiferous Ether’ to the formative substrate.
Sir Isaac Newton (1642- 1727) in his second paper on light and colours spoke of an electro-magnetic-like, subtle, vibrating electric and elastic medium as the inorganic basis of life.
Newton (erroneously regarded as a materialist by those who should know better) was the one responsible for the Western scientific endorsement of ‘ether’ prior to 1 930, having based his own work on much earlier sources, including the Greeks.
In 1704, in his classic work Optiks , he poses the question:
‘Is not the heat of a warm room conveyed through the vacuum by the vibrations of a much more subtle medium than air which after the air was drawn out remained in the vacuum?
And is not this medium the same with that medium by which light is refracted and reflected — and by whose vibrations light communicates heat to bodies?
And is not this medium exceedingly more rare and subtle than the air and exceedingly more elastic and active?
And does it not readily pervade all bodies?
And is it not (by its elastic force) expanded through all the heavens?’
Franz Anton Mesmer (1734–1815) called it ‘animal magnetism’.
It filled space and was believed capable of acting on the nervous system of living forms directly, depending upon the individual fluctuating resonances in the body.
Maharishi Yogi identified it as ‘the creative field of intelligence from which all knowledge and all possibilities for physical existence is manifested.’
Charles Muses, a Columbia University Doctor of Philosophy, is convinced that there are forms of living substance far more subtle than our relatively crude polarised (i.e. electron/proton) matter form already hinted at in the mysterious physical effectiveness of the so-called ‘vacuum state’ as revealed by Quantum Physics.
The nineteenth-century concept of ‘ether’ identified it as  an inert — stationary — undynamic substance in space.
It was this default in thinking that rendered the famed experiments of Michelson and Morley during the 1880s null attempts to prove its existence.
Einstein's attempt to explain their failure resulted in incorrect assumptions about the nature of space (although Einstein personally accepted its reality).
Thus by 1940, any concept of ‘ether’ as a medium necessary for the transmission of light or X-rays was abandoned.
The ancient wisdom proclaiming the existence of ‘ether’ or ‘sakti’— the energy of the gods — was submerged as a mere fable and lost.
The materialists in their innocence misunderstood the real message of the Greek atomists, who taught that ‘the ultimates of all things are atoms and a void (vacuum?.’
A vacuum is not absolute emptiness.
What the Greek atomistic philosophers really meant was an absence of matter that could be identified by the senses — gross matter; the very basis of their thinking emphasised the existence of an ethereal field which constitutes Space itself and interpenetrates matter like water in a sponge.
The Hitachi Corporation of Japan have estimated the power contained in this underlying sea of energy as one billion volts per cubic centimetre.
It should be clarified that there is no distinction between ‘ether’ and ‘matter’.
They are not separate substances but different degrees or ‘octaves’ of matter, as ice and its formative gaseous substance are one and the same thing and are interconvertible.
Early quantum mechanics required that interactions between sub-nuclear particles and atoms occur in spaces which are free of energy and mass.
The space must not contribute anything to the reaction or else modern physics is wrong in so many issues (which it was at the time).
A recent paper prepared by Dr Harold Puthoff of the Institute of Advanced Studies in Austin, Texas, USA, provides data illustrating why present Quantum Physics admits the existence of an ether which is termed in physics ‘zero-point energy’.
He summarizes:
‘One of the more bizarre predictions of modern quantum theory is that each cubic centimetre of space, including that of the most pristine vacuum of outer space, contains an enormous amount of untapped electro-magnetic energy known as zero-point energy.
(It is the zero point from which all other energies are measured.)
The amount of energy associated with this (usually unobserved) background is conservatively estimated to be on the order of nuclear energy densities or greater.
‘The enormity of the figures describing zero-point energy has led theorists to question from time to time whether these numbers should be taken seriously, or whether they are due to some defect or misinterpretation of the theory.
However, over the years, even though this energy density has not been measured directly, certain physical consequences due to its presence have been measured.
One example is a unique zero-point quantum force between closely spaced metal plates known as the Casimir force, which results from unbalanced pressures in the zero-point energy due to the presence of the plates.
As a result of this and other similar prediction and measurement, the reality of the zero-point energy is now accepted as part of the lexicon of modern quantum theory.
‘Now yet another indication of the reality of this ubiquitous energy has turned up, while at the same time resolving a long-standing mystery from the early development of quantum theory.
When it was first recognised that the atom could be likened to a small solar system in which the electron planets orbited a nuclear sun, theorists were Puzzled as to why the electrons in their tightly curved orbits did not radiate their energy away and spiral into the nucleus as predicted by classical, that is pre-quantum, theory.
At the time the best answer was basically, ‘Well, that's quantum theory for you.’
‘Now, however, this issue has been addressed again, this time taking into account what has been learned over the years about the effects of zero-point energy.
In my paper, it is shown that the electron in lowest energy or ground state of the hydrogen atom indeed does continually radiate its energy away as predicted by classical theory, but it also  absorbs energy from the ever-present sea of zero-point energy in which the atom is immersed, and an assumed equilibrium between these two processes leads to the correct values for the parameters known to define the ground-state orbit.
‘The ‘bottom line’ is that the ground-state orbit is set by a dynamic equilibrium in which collapse of the state is prevented by the presence of zero-point energy.
The significance of this observation is the understanding that the very stability of matter itself depends upon, and verifies the presence of, an understanding sea of electro-magnetic energy of almost inconceivable magnitude, a vast reservoir of random energy that is universally present throughout space.’
A simplification of the latter part of Dr Puthoff's summary may be in order for those unfamiliar with quantum terms.
The electron is a negatively charged particle of the atom, and the nucleus of the atom containing the proton which is positively charged is likewise positive.
Since opposite charges attract, the reason why the electron does not gravitate towards the nucleus but stays in orbit around it (even though it is radiating and losing its energy in doing so) is because it retains a certain energy called ‘ground-state energy’.
To fall, in, towards the nucleus it would have to lose all its energy, and this it cannot do as it is continually absorbing energy from the ether which balances with the amount it naturally radiates.
An analogy can be drawn to a human-being continually expending energy yet simultaneously absorbing life-force energy from the environment, which offsets the amount expended.
The behaviour of atoms in this sensibility is governed by the same principles that apply to human systems, or any energetic system throughout nature or the universe that interacts with the medium in which it exists (its environment) and exchanges energy.
The Hermetic axiom ‘as above — so below’ is again apparent in the discussion of innumerable phenomena which differ only in aspect, size and proportion, their nature remaining consistent with the workings of the universal scheme of creation.
Characteristics of Universal Energy
1.
As can be observed in the operation of heat, light, electricity, magnetism and chemical reactions.
Yet it is different from all of them.
2.
It fills all space, penetrating and permeating everything.
Dense materials conduct it better and faster.
Metal refracts it while organic material absorbs it.
3.
It is basically synergetic — a synthesis of all the forces in nature.
It has a basic negentropic (formative and organising) effect even as heat increases, and therefore is the opposite of entropy which is the disintegration and disorganisation of matter set forth by the Second Law of Thermodynamics, which it thereby violates.
4.
Changes in the energy precede observable physical changes, and it creates matter, energy and life.
5.
It has its opposite number which is opposed to its life-giving properties.
This occurs during disintegration of matter when life-giving energy is leaving instead of integrating into a system.
6.
In any highly organised structure (e.g. crystals, plants, humans) there are certain points at which the energy is highly concentrated, for example the human Chakras in the Yogic tradition and the acupuncture points in the traditional Chinese medical system.
7.
The energy will flow from one object to another if a sympathy or attractability exists between them.
The density of the energy varies in inverse proportions to the distance, which sets it apart from electro-magnetic or gravitational laws, but for which a theory of potentials is applicable,
8.
The energy is observable in several ways — as isolated pulsating points, as an aura surrounding a body, as a flame, as a tenuous web, or as a spiral.
(This information, forming essential elements in both ancient  traditions and modern research, was assembled by Laurence Beynam, an American Engineer and Researcher in Bio-electronics.)
In nature, Universal Energy is known to the Yogis as ‘Prana’, the breath of life; Polynesians know it as ‘Mana’, or vital force; the Australian Aborigines term it ‘Kurunba’; to the Chinese it is ‘Ch'i’; to Germans it is ‘Wodan’; Wilhelm Reich referred to it as ‘Orgone’ and Christians call it ‘Holy Spirit’.
The Russians label it ‘Plasma’; to Colin Wilson it is the ‘X factor’; ‘Noetic Energy’ and ‘Magnoelectricity’are both recent terms formulated by Americans Charles Muses Ph.D., well known investigator, and William A. Tiller Ph.D., Professor of Materials Science.
It has as many names as there are civilisations on earth.
The ancients taught of a universe built on invisible causes, the material world being the outer garment, veil or effect of a higher, more subtle order of reality.
The physical world, seemingly solid to our senses, when reduced to its ultimate is mostly ‘emptiness’ or etheric spaces with almost innumerable particles of negative or positive electricity mutually acting or interacting, producing all the existing material phenomena and holding them in a more or less organised state.
All matter is ‘force’, or energy, or light, in crystallised form.
With the substantial reality of an ether existing in space as accepted by Quantum Physics, in line with the ancient Vedic teachings, we can now look at the movement of this energy and how it integrates and forms this material world we know according to modern twentieth-century understanding as well as past views.
Vortex Theory
Hannes Alfven, Swedish Nobel Laureate, a plasma physicist and experimenter in electrical phenomena, has applied his theories to Astronomy and is convinced that the Universe is criss-crossed and sculpted by titanic electric currents and vast magnetic fields.
Consequently, a universe  shaped by electro-magnetism does not require a ‘big bang’ to begin, as generally theorised by twentieth-century science.
Galaxies, he believes, are formed in awesome electro-magnetic cosmic vortices.
Tony Perratt, also a plasma physicist of Los Alamos National Laboratory and a former student of Alfven's, has conducted experiments that bear out Alfven's ideas at laboratory level, and computer simulations have confirmed his data on a galactic scale.
In 1984, radio astronomers from Columbia University identified electro-magnetic vortices in our Milky Way and arrived at a similar conclusion to the theories of Alfven and Perratt.
Ancient tablets found in Mexico read:
‘The first command was ‘Let the gases which are scattered throughout space be collected together and with them let worlds be formed’, then the gases were brought together into whirling circulating masses [Nebulae].’
Vedic seers termed the process ‘The Churning of the Milky Ocean’(refer to Chapter 3, ‘Sign of the Swastika’) and proclaimed, ‘The ocean curdles and spreads in milk-white curds [Nebulae]throughout the Depths [Space].’
It is not difficult to see where the term ‘Milky Way’ had its origin.
Moreover, the ‘curved path’, ‘whirling mass’, ‘cosmic wheel’ or spiralling vortex described by the ancients as the integrating pattern of cosmic universal energy, can only be seen to have the endorsement of modern research and understanding.
Sir James Jeans (1877–1946), eminent British astronomer and mathematician, has stated that throughout the universe (and nature) there exist ‘singular points’ or centres from which, and through which, energy from a higher sphere streams into our physical universe and in turn streams out.
He has stated:
‘Matter is poured into our universe from some other and entirely extraneous spatial dimension so that to a denizen of our universe they appear as points at which matter is continually created.
In the vastness of Space such points are the Spiral Nebulae.’
Eastern tradition names these singular points ‘laya centres’, or centres of neutrality which act as points of exchange of energy.
In physics at the molecular level, they are referred to as ‘Vacuums,.
The law of vortical movement in primordial matter is one of the oldest conceptions of Greek-philosophers, whose great minds were all nourished by the arcane Vedic wisdom and taken up 2000 years later by Copernicus, Galileo, Descartes and Swedenborg.
Yogic masters have described the movement of pre-physical matter as ‘circulatory’, and Democritas, Greek philosopher of the late fifth century BC and a pupil of the esoteric school, taught that this gyratory movement of the atoms and spheres existed from eternity.
Pythagoras and his pupils in the sixth century BC taught of the rotation of the Earth, and Archimedes calculated its rotation in the second century BC as scientifically as modern astronomers do now.
The spiral is a principle basic to nature's processes.
Tendrils wind around a support; leaves are coiled in spiral form before they open; flowers form in a spiral nature; the spiralling formation of shells is one of the most obvious examples.
In the body, the spiral is found in the umbilical cord, the sweat glands, the humerus, the pelvis and the thumb prints.
In cell division the spiral appears, as well as in the DNA molecule in the cell nucleus.
The spiral possesses a subtle quality of its own.
Wilhelm Reich observed that life began on earth from its action — thus echoing the Hindu insight — and in the Heavens vast streams of ‘orgone’, or ether, flow, pulsating in spiral form and creating, through super-imposition.
The ‘Doctrine of Vibration’ relative to the philosophy of Kashmir Saivism, relates that the cosmic vortices (known as the ‘wheels of energies’or ‘sakti chakras’) follow one another in recurrent cycles.
As each wheel rotates, one power after another becomes active, taking over from the one that went before it and blending into the one that follows.
The energetic flow circulates in harmony with the rhythm of its pulsation.
When, for example, a piece of copper wire is wound into a  spiral, it acquires properties it did not possess previously.
In electronics, a spiral is used to convert radio waves into electrical impulses.
The suggestion is that the spiral possesses the capacity to move energy from one level to another or from one vibration to another — to act as a channel or interface.
The following account of one of the more unusual uses of coils further illustrates this function.
Ross Henderson, from Wilmot in Tasmania, is one of Australia's most respected exponents of radiesthesia, commonly referred to as ‘dowsing’ or ‘divining’.
He is involved in radiesthesic soil-testing in an attempt to determine the requirements of the soil for the purpose of restoring balance to elements which act as responsible agents for the propagation of crops.
One aspect of his work is the application of radiesthesic coils (a spiral of wire or copper attached to a stake and driven into the ground).
The coils, according to Henderson, conduct and amplify natural energies radiating and vitalising the mineral content of the soil, when designed and located exactly as indicated by the divining technique.
One coil can energise an entire farm and its life will vary from six months to seven years — perhaps longer.
His coils, sixty in number, are in operation from the southern tip of Tasmania to Queensland in the north of the Continent where farmers, aiming to improve their land, request his services.
They have been working successfully for years and apparently preclude the necessity of fertilisers.
The spiralling motion of electro-magnetic energy generated from the ether of space and the proceeding symmetry occurring throughout Nature has become the long-time concern of Christopher Illert, Bachelor of Science and one of the world's foremost theoretical mathematicians (IQ well over 200!).
His firm conviction in the existence of a higher or hidden principle underlying the life process is not idle speculation but a well defined reality, with his published work appearing in prestigious journals of physics, such as Lamp , the Swiss International Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics, and Italy's Il Nuovo Cimento .
Inspired originally by an intense love for, and later a deep  scientific interest in the beauty of sea shells, their organic form and their life spirals, his work was highlighted in Scientific Australian journal in 1980, in which he explained the essence of his vast research and findings.
Illert states:
‘The obvious symmetrical properties of sea shells indicate the operation of a far deeper principle in nature than previously thought, one that could have far reaching implications for Science in general.’
His papers illustrate that many living creatures and their parts grow in magnitude only, suffering no actual change in form or overall configuration as they become larger.
He states:
‘We are talking of potentially titanic forces which are present at the beginning of the Cosmos.’
Illert reveals that the same equations governing the geometrics of sea shells and flowers also apply to the Cosmos.
The symmetrical geometries relating to the elephant's tusk, the elk's antler, the beaver's tooth, the claw of a canary, are additional examples of such systems.
Sea shells enlarge not by growth or magnification in all directions simultaneously, but by the accumulation or accretion of material on the unbounded end of the spiral structure.
This occurs in such a way that similar increments of growth are similar in shape, similarly oriented, and similarly magnified relative to their predecessors.
Parts of such spiral structures, once formed, remain incapable of change.
A young sea shell would thus generally appear, in most respects, identical to an adult of the same species if it were appropriately magnified.
It can be generally said that their form remains essentially unaltered throughout their entire lifetime.
This symmetry is required basically for optimum structural strength and to suitably accommodate the mollusc it protects.
A mollusc past the initial stages of growth increases in size without significantly changing the orientation and relative proportions of its organs.
In order to accommodate its growing occupant, the shell must enlarge in such a way as to preserve its original form.
Surfaces possessing this property are called gnomic surfaces.
Generally speaking, intermolecular forces and  the micro structures of the shell material itself have very little influence on overall shell shape.
Illert, through his research, is now in a position to rigorously describe the shapes of past, present and future shell forms, and as sea shells are amongst the best preserved of all fossils, we have a progression throughout the entire fossil record from the Pre-Cambrian era right up to the present day.
It is now possible to study not only the direction but also the rate of shell evolution at an interspecies level over the entire history of the Earth!
It has long been known that creatures such as molluscs, and indeed the embryos of most living things, come into existence in our physical world in such a fashion that their early development is characterised by either radial or spiral cell cleavage.
Illert poses the question:
‘Could it be that any living creature has its inception with the creation of a discontinuity in space (a vortex) through which life energy flows, sweeping biological molecules, matter, and perhaps even entire embryos along with it in predictable, spiral trajectories?
Could it be physically meaningful to entertain the concept of a morphic field of life energy which radiates from a pole for the span of the organism's lifetime?’
His mathematics strongly indicate that living systems are manifestations of a previously unknown interaction between fields of life energy (sakti) and organic matter in the physical world.
The ‘L-Fields’ of Harold Saxon Burr
Professor Harold Saxon Burr, the distinguished Neuro Anatomist, formerly of Yale University School of Medicine, formulated the concept of the ‘L-field’ or ‘Life-Field’.
He explains:
‘Measurement by modern electric instruments developed in recent years has revealed that man and all life forms are ordered and controlled by electro-dynamic fields which can  be measured and mapped with precision.
Any organism possesses an L-Field as a whole which embraces subsidiary or ‘local’ fields representing the organism's component parts.’
The behaviour of living systems is a consequence of the pattern and organisation provided by the L-Field, Burr maintains, and that abnormalities in the L-Field can give advance warning of future symptoms before they are evident.
L-Fields reflect also mental and emotional states which evoke energy in the nervous system.
Burr maintains that L-Fields, by their very nature, must be influenced by the all-powerful field of the Cosmos and must therefore be an integral part of its overall design.
Since the field of any living thing is an ordered pattern it must be a part of the overall general pattern which represents the Universe.
L-Fields are links in a ‘chain of authority’ which starts with the simplest living forms, runs upward through all life on this planet to the most complex form we know — man — and then extends outward into space and upward to an ‘infinite authority’, about which we can only speculate.
One field cannot exist within another field without an interaction between them, therefore it can be argued that the Universe is an energy field and that everything that exists in it is a subsidiary or component part of the total field.
It would appear that we are fully justified in regarding the fields of life as the instruments of physical evolution, of which, on this Planet at least, the human nervous system is the masterpiece.
The L-Field regulates and controls the creature whatever it may be, and its alms are wholeness, organisation and continuity.
Burr states:
‘Law and order prevail from the highest to the smallest, and to suggest that there is any chaos is merely to display our lack of information.
In short, the Universe has meaning and so have we.
Though we do not understand it, the meaning is there.’
These ideas, expressed a year before his death in 1973, epitomized Burr's life work.
His research and experiments with  living plants and animals in the 1940s gave early evidence for the existence of an energy body surrounding the physical.
He found that energy fields surrounding salamanders possessed an energy field roughly shaped like the adult animal, and discovered that the field's electrical axis was aligned with the brain and spinal cord.
Needing to find precisely when their electrical axis first originated in the development of the animal, he began mapping the fields in progressively earlier stages of salamander embryogenesis and discovered that the electrical axis originated in the unfertilized egg, thus contradicting conventional biological and genetic theory.
In relation to his work with tiny seedlings, he found that the electrical field around a sprout was not the shape of the original seed but resembled the adult plant, indicating that any developing organism is destined to follow a prescribed pattern of growth generated by the individual EM field of the organism.
Burr, with his Yale associate Northrop, succeeded in establishing conclusive evidence (with the use of a highly sensitive instrument capable of measuring electrical discharges in the body as small as five-millionth of a volt) that the electrical potential found in the human body is directly related to an electrical pattern which dictates the nature — the form, growth and evolutionary direction, of the organism.
‘Human behaviour is the consequence of the activity of the nervous system — not the result of the imposition of the legal and moral laws upon the biological laws of the organism.
In the case of humans — to the physical factors or the environment, the ideological environment must be added, because a idea is just as valid as a kick in the teeth; ideas are actually more important stimuli to the nervous system than are other types of stimuli; ideas are, or induce, emotions that evoke energy in the nervous system.’
Burr feels that psychiatrists of the future will be able to measure the intensity of grief, anger, or love, electrically, and that electro-magnetic study of this phenomenon seems relevant to the study of human behaviour.
Russian researchers have complemented this idea.
In Soviet Discoveries Behind the Iron Curtain , Dr Genady Sergeyev names techniques now in the development stage relating to a scientific method of determining electro-magnetic emotional patterns.
Every human being makes an imprint on their surroundings because we are at all times radiating energy which is soaked up and stored by items around us.
Energy can never be destroyed and our energy imprints are preserved technically for all eternity, along with the imprints of other people who have been in close proximity.
Sergeyev has developed a machine that uses liquid crystals to recover such energy from the surface of these objects.
It can record and turn into electrical impulses ‘memories’ of the past which he has found are stored in every object.
He states:
‘We have a long way to go before we are able to record and translate accurately such imprints of ourselves left behind in the void of time.
But my machine is a beginning in the right direction.’
By using very exact analytical methods he has determined that humans can change the electrical conductivity of the air around them.
An important part in this is played by water vapour in the air.
In laboratory experiments he has shown that the electrical field of the human entity can affect the contents of the vapour.
The electrical information is recovered, and by the process of decoding it he can determine the amount of emotional stress in actual figures based on the levels of the electrical impulses picked up from the subjects.
Any object that an individual has had for a long time, a favourite book for example, has already been affected by that individual's electrical impulses.
It will contain the thoughts and emotional imprints of the person.
All objects have this information of other people — of other times.
He explains:
‘I must stress that we can detect these signals with my machine and we have already managed to give certain characteristics to certain signals — joy — frustration — sorrow, etc.
It is only a matter of time before we can decode them fully.
With this we will be able to find the memory of the World, its people and its history.
We are now scientifically examining what man has cloaked in mystery.’
Thoughts and emotions are energetic, and the human entity can transmit electrical impulses to a vapour, changing the structure of the molecules in the vapour, which then becomes a bank or repository of these human attributes.
Tests have proven that a room where there is a reasonable amount of humidity will retain human impulses for up to four days in such vapour banks.
A person who has been thinking intensely, for example, even for a very short time will leave these thoughts in the vapour.
After four days the vapour settles.
The water, as it lands on the objects, leaves the imprint of the thought again in the form of energy.
The imprint is invisible to the eye, but it is shown clearly using the Kirlian technique.
Every object around us has magnetic qualities.
When it absorbs energy it changes the magnetic characteristics of the molecules.
It is then that it becomes a natural magnetic recorder.
The Morphogenetic Fields of Rupert Sheldrake
Rupert Sheldrake, a Cambridge biochemist and author of A New Science of Life and The Presence of the Past , formulated his theory of morphogenetic fields which can be likened to a blueprint for determining biological processes and creating forms.
These fields act in liaison with the energetic and chemical processes of the body, Sheldrake believes.
They are present before a living organism takes up its physical form and suggest a potential state of the developing system.
Each field is seen as an overprint of a previously existing field and contains the characteristics of all our ancestors.
We in turn modify the field for our future generations.
The theory is directly related to the Hindu concept of Karma, pre-suggesting a principle of reincarnation.
New forms of behaviour are the result of what can be  regarded as a ‘mind climate’ or group mental energy creating a morphogenetic field.
Organisms receive this information through what Sheldrake terms ‘morphic resonance’.
If enough members of a species ‘tune in’ to the hew behaviour and adopt the new form, a new morphogenetic field is created allowing an easier path for others to follow.
Similar forms resonate and reinforce each other.
The principle may also be instrumental in the transmission of disease to vulnerable receivers along with aggression, negativity, etc.
Mind climates influence other mind climates of similar nature: conversely, positive thoughts amplify positive attitudes via the same field.
Sheldrake sees these fields as being endowed with the property of traversing empty space or actually constituting it.
Sheldrake does not totally discount the role of the DNA in genetic programming, but feels it works in conjunction with the fields to guide cell growth and direction.
As to the ultimate source of the fields, he is open to three propositions, each of them metaphysically grounded.
1.
Chance.
2.
A creativity inherent in matter.
3.
A transcendent creative agency.
The Kim Bong Han Findings
During the 1960s in Korea, a research team headed by Professor Kim Bong Han conducted experimental work in relation to acupuncture meridians in assorted animals.
The meridians, as conduits for electro-magnetic bioenergy distribution throughout the physical vehicle, appear from his findings to have been formed earlier in the creative process than the arteries, veins and lymphatic vessels.
Furthermore, the meridians are directly interconnected with the cell nucleus containing the DNA genetic control centre.
Kim began to study the time these meridians were formed in different species and in a way, echoing Burr's reports, found  that within the embryonic chick, for example, they manifested within fifteen hours of conception!
The rudimentary organs have not even yet been formed at this stage and the implications support the existence of a guiding field of electromagnetic energy as a responsible agent for the organisation of the cells of the newly forming embryo via the DNA.
This information parallels Sheldrake's view of the DNA as being an antenna to receive information for the field, as well as a physical component in the genetic process.
Briefly summarising, the work of Burr and Kim indicates that an electro-magnetic principle of formative energy guides and controls the structural differences, growth and behavioural, of an organism.
Sheldrake, however, does not see the formative field or morphogenetic field as being electro-magnetic, but capable of acting in liaison with electro-magnetic fields that influence morphogenesis.
He emphasises his point in the following statement:
‘The identification of morphogenetic fields with electromagnetic fields is responsible for much of the confusion inherent in H.S. Burr's theory of electrodynamic ‘life fields’.
Burr cites indisputable evidence that living organisms are associated with electro-magnetic fields, which change as the organisms change, but then goes on to argue that these fields control morphogenesis by acting as ‘blueprints’ for development, which is a very different matter.’
What is significant in this disparity between the views of Sheldrake and Burr is the understanding that electro-magnetic fields are generated and are ‘effects’ of more subtle formative ‘causes’.
This understanding is relative to the views of David Bohm, which transcend both Burr's and Sheldrake's views by focusing on the process at cosmic level, although the work of Burr and Sheldrake can be comfortably accommodated within Bohm's grand structure and become essential elements in his design.
The insights of Bohm are of primary importance to the comprehension of life energy force, both from the Vedic insights and much of the information that proceeds from this point.
David Bohm's ‘Implicate and Explicate Order'
American David Bohm is regarded as one of the world's foremost theoretical physicists.
‘The Universe doesn't exist only in our familiar three dimension or Einstein's four,’ he states.
‘It is a Universe of countless dimensions which embody its wholeness.’
Bohm refers to what he terms ‘higher order’ or ‘implicate order’.
The ‘higher order’ unfolds into the lower or ‘explicate’, meaning the known world of substance.
In turn, the ‘explicate’ enfolds or returns into the ‘implicate’.
A continuous process causing modification at both levels.
His view corroborates the Hindi concept.
The Hindus, however, term the process of unfolding and enfolding ‘the breathing out of Brahma’ and ‘the breathing in of Brahma’, the Creator.
(Refer to Chapter 3, ‘Sign of the Swastika’.)
In relation to what we regard as ‘consciousness’, Bohm believes that there is a grave fallacy lurking behind the idea of ‘individual consciousness’, that is the individual's recognition of ‘self’ as being a separate and distinct entity.
The total consciousness of humanity, in Bohm's eyes, has a more primary reality.
This can be likened to Jung's ‘collective unconscious’.
Even more deeply than this, all of consciousness is enfolded in matter and matter is the unfolding of consciousness.
(This will be discussed further on.)
He sees the physical world as a mere ripple or excitation on the giant ocean of universal energy, a fitting metaphor employed by many visionaries of past and present.
The Hindus taught of infinite degrees of one, subtle, ubiquitous energy, interpenetrating and interblending and constituting the fabric of creation, with each strand or web of the network of forces and energies reflecting all aspects of the  other — a holographic process which Bohm terms ‘holo-movement’.
In this model, an observer and that which is observed are not separate and distinct.
Fundamentally, all is consciousness interacting and observing itself.
The term ‘Looking-Glass Universe’ has often been applied to illustrate the idea.
The Renaissance painter and inventor Leonardo da Vinci wrote in his journal:
‘Every body placed in the luminous air spreads out in circles and fills the surrounding space with infinite likenesses of itself and appears all in all and all in every part.’
Consciousness and the Life Force
The concept of consciousness as the fluid, or fuel of life, forms the solid foundation upon which Eastern esoteric wisdom is constructed.
It can be described as the psychology of absolute consciousness, seeing consciousness not only as an awareness an individual has of him or her ‘self, but an eternal all-pervasive principle — the highest reality, with all things being manifestations of it.
It should be emphasised that in India metaphysics, or that which is beyond the measurement, and therefore clarification of physics as a scientific discipline, is never merely abstract speculation but serves as a theoretical framework supporting a body of spiritual discipline.
It is not a knowledge of things, but a direct insight into their essential nature.
Metaphysics is therefore the pinnacle of knowledge.
Long ago, those who attained this absolute knowledge explained: ‘No longer can anyone bring before us anything that we have not already found, understood or known.’
It is essentially a state or experience of recognition.
Called the ‘great light’ in the Doctrine of Vibration, it is figuratively described as the ‘sun of individual consciousness, bathing the entire Universe in its radiance.
It is both absolute and divine, the supreme object of veneration and the absolute identity of all phenomenon which are one with its nature.
Consciousness generates both the primary forces and the proceeding energetic interactions of the physical universe, and reabsorbs all things unto itself.
It is not a passive witness to creation, but is the dynamic conscious activity which constitutes creation.
Everything, therefore, resides in and is sustained within one absolute consciousness.
Humans think, feel and express intuition and creativity because the Universe itself is a manifestation of consciousness, of conscious forces and self-conscious powers.
We can recognise animals or birds as exhibiting a different degree of consciousness from our own.
Some humans can recognise consciousness in plants and effectively communicate with them.
But for most it is difficult to imagine that minerals may also have consciousness.
A living system such as opal, granite, or quartz, is capable of responding to human consciousness given enough time and subjected to sufficient stimuli.
Australian Aborigines, Pacific Islanders, American Indians, etc., and all so-called ‘primitive’ peoples live by this principle.
Anomalous aspects of nature often venerated by ritual over long periods of time become charged with the directed mental/ psychic energy of their race.
One consciousness can therefore interact with another.
All events are consciously experienced, and if a physical object were totally devoid of consciousness, or external to it, and purely material, the object could never be experienced as it would be entirely unsubstantial, since consciousness is the basis of all things.
The nature of an object cannot be established through a means of knowledge totally unrelated to it.
Consciousness and matter interact according to this principle.
The ultimate experience in the Yogic views is the realisation that everything is contained in consciousness, and this awareness is obvious when an essential identity is established between individual consciousness and the object.
Yogic meditative techniques allow this state to occur with the accompanying realisation that all things in reality are one , sharing a subtle flavour, although we normally experience them as being independent of each other.
Once, ‘thought’ was considered to be housed entirely in the brain and related to purely physical responses to stimuli.
Now it is realised that thought, intimately related to feelings, is driven and accommodated by our entire cellular structure which records experience that ultimately becomes ‘memory, in terms of time.
Each cell in our body retains impulses or patterns of experience.
The brain, now realised to be a ‘processor’ of information rather than a ‘computer’, is also recognised as being a gland allied with the endocrine system.
Thought itself is seen as an energetic process, closely related to life-force energy fields which transmit information patterns to our biophysical cellular receptors, which in turn relay the information to the brain for processing.
The science of Radionics, now gaining respectability in some scientific circles due to the understanding that fields of subtle energy guide our consciousness, is a process which allows a total image of an individual's life pattern to be recorded from a single cell or hair sample or any minute segment of the body.
To Radionics practitioners, their results, in respect to healing over any distance by the conscious transmission of healing energies, have established indisputable proof of the cell's ability to register and retain information from the environment.
The late Roy Hand, an internationally respected Radionics expert who worked from his base in Sydney, Australia, treated in his time around 5000 patients whom he had never seen.
He claimed, from their replies, that only two cases had been unsuccessful — a remarkable record.
‘Mind’, as a functioning of consciousness, is viewed by the Hindus as a series of ideas or impressions that pass through the brain via the process of thought.
The word ‘man’ is derived from the Sanskrit ‘Manas’, meaning ‘mind’— the mental faculty — and ‘man’is understood esoterically as a ‘vehicle for mind’.
Mind and Body therefore should be regarded as an integrated network, a self-realising energy system.
The Kashmiri ‘Doctrine of Vibration’ explains:
‘Mind is the instrument through which consciousness fashions specific, clearly defined mental representations of the world of sensations which are channelled through our senses and reflected in the intellect.’
The ‘intellect’ is seen as a function for the direct apprehension of images — to illumine the products of sensory and mental activity, to distinguish, and this is aligned to the thought processes which offer seemingly fragmented views of reality, being centred on objectivity.
‘Intuition’, free of thought constructs, enables direct insights to occur.
This function is considered as the supreme power of consciousness in operation in the individual, both aspects forming the dual functioning of the mind.
Like a Samurai sword, ‘mind’ cuts through superfluous information, excluding all the sensations not immediately useful for the perceiver and focuses his/her attention on those that are.
If this did not occur, and without ‘mind’ playing its special role, our field of awareness would be flooded with a sea of indiscernible sensations, preventing us from following a sequence of events or performing any activity without having a multitude of distractions to contend with.
The distant ‘woof of a dog or screech of a car engine would sound as intense as a Rachmaninoff concerto in a concert hall.
Manas, or Mind, selects and isolates specific sensations from the multitude reflected in the intellect, comparing them with similar sensations from past experiences lurking in the memory.
Two sensations — one past, one present — are thus bound together by the continuity of awareness between these two moments, and we recognise that the two components are inter-related and belong to the same class.
The Mind assesses their relative importance, and thus not only is it capable of analysis and disassociation of individual sensations but it can also synthesize a series of sensations into a single whole.
Mind therefore brings order to all random or unstructured phenomena.
The importance of Mind and its power in ordering the physical activity is of paramount significance in all aspects relating to the Life Force, or consciousness.
The axiom ‘All random events are counter-reversible and become ordered patterns’ is contingent on Mind as the prime activator in the process, and is equally applicable to certain so-called ‘paranormal, or ‘trans-personal’mental functioning.
All activity is generated by the Mind in its normal waking or sleeping state which moves from one sensation to the next, and unlike the external senses which provide knowledge, Mind is not confined to a specific field of operation.
Sound, taste, smell, touch, etc., can all be inter-related to form a mental picture of the physical world — a patterning process or a ‘Holistic’ means of cognition.
Mind is said to be ‘full of will’ or ‘desire’to progress and process different sensations, driven by the Ego in its ceaseless quest to assimilate experience: the mental image is presented to the intellect where it becomes ‘known’by individual consciousness.
From a more scientific viewpoint, an electron, within the atom, is essentially a unit of energy having a certain frequency or rate of vibration, the frequency determining the energy.
That which vibrates within the electron can be regarded as a unit of pure consciousness.
All physical phenomena consisting of particles or energy are formed ultimately by the vibrating, ever changing activity of universal energy or consciousness.
The unchanging, unknowable, eternal wellspring of that energy has been called by many names in many civilisations: Brahman, Allah, God, The Absolute, to name a few.
Edison's belief was that atoms are possessed with a certain intelligence, and Max Planck, the great German scientist, has remarked: ‘I regard matter as derivative from consciousness.
Everything we talk about, everything we regard as existing, postulates consciousness.’
Sir James Jeans in his famous statement remarks:
‘I incline to the theory that consciousness is fundamental and  that the material world is derived from consciousness — not consciousness from the material world.
In general, the Universe seems to be nearer a great thought than a great machine.
Each individual consciousness ought to be compared to a brain cell in a universal mind.’
David Bohm proposed that consciousness is basically in the ‘implicate order’ as all matter is, and therefore it is not that consciousness is separate from matter but rather that consciousness manifests in the ‘explicate order’as does all matter.
He sees consciousness as a more subtle form of matter and movement and the source of what we perceive both of the external world and of ourselves, our so-called inner processes lying in the non-manifest, pre-physical realm.
Consciousness or ‘life force’ is being increasingly seen by Western thinkers as an expression of a higher, more subtle, unseen and therefore unmeasured, spiritual field of force.
Universal and human consciousness are one and the same in nature, the only difference being that individual consciousness is experienced as limited or restricted in its operation within its physical vehicle.
The activity of the mind is that of consciousness itself, as are feelings, thoughts, emotions, intuition, creativity and imagination.
Consciousness exhibits many faces which are in reality only categorizations conceived by our intellect.
The Hindus recognise three levels of consciousness:
1.
The awareness of separation between objects (intellect or ‘apara’)— the lowest level.
2.
The awareness of unity existing in the diversity of objects (intuition or ‘para para’)— the middle level.
3.
The awareness of the undivided unity or oneness of all phenomena (transcendent consciousness or ‘para’)— the supreme level.
The term ‘para-normal’ thus refers to the highest level of consciousness which may be attained, e.g. by Yogic techniques.
To the advocates of reductionism and materialism, or the  sceptical at heart, the Hindus have a clearly defined answer for that condition:
‘Due to ignorance the deluded individual is in doubt, and caught between conflicting alternatives [the devil and the deep blue sea!].
The mind shifts from one alternative to the other, becoming more entangled in the net of its own thoughts as it does so.
‘Doubt succeeds in only contracting consciousness, sullying it with a turbulence of confusion.
Like a thief it steals away the wealth of true knowledge and reduces man to a state of mental poverty.
Ignorance and its sister, doubt, are the essence of all impurities and the source of every mental and spiritual element.
An individual in doubt about his/her true nature is constantly in a state of distress.’
It should be evident to arty thinking individual that the problems facing our Planet at this point in time are the results of a commitment to a science and a philosophy based on erroneous assumptions about the true nature of reality, and that these assumptions are the products of a mentality conditioned to seeing only the separation, the apara, between all things, rather than the unity.
Poor Sir Isaac Newton, the father of modern science; if he only knew, he would surely return to Earth and rewrite his books in Sanskrit to ensure a full understanding of their content.
The Akashic Record
Intimately associated with the etheric realm is the concept of an ‘Akashic Record’.
Akasha means unmanifested light, space or vacuity, whereas Kasha is manifested light or electro-magnetism.
The esoteric tradition relates that all physical, moral and psychic energy patterns emitted throughout time are imprinted in this sub-strate or background of primordial ‘pre-matter’, which acts as a reservoir of information and is referred to as ‘the first stadium in the evolution of matter’.
It can be easily imagined as a cosmic video recording tape.
Akasha can be regarded as the universal ‘soul’, with the universal field — or Sakti — acting as its dynamic means of expression.
Akasha is evoked in India in the form of a Goddess when a house is being built to ensure its completion.
The individual pattern or blueprint for form and growth has its origin at this source, and via universal Manas or Mind, is radiated by the universal field when the frequency pattern of an embryo or seed at the physical level attracts that sympathetic vibration, and when the conditions for its manifestations are conducive; in terms of physics, when a state of coherence exists.
The physical thus conforms to the etheric pattern, which in turn is influenced and modified by our own energetic emissions.
Sheldrake's theory of Morphogenetic Fields and Bohm's concept of ‘Implicate and Explicate Orders’ are closely allied to this principle.
The nature of both universal and human expression is identical, the universal being mirrored in the human entity.
Just as we express what is in our soul through the use of our Mind and our bioenergy, so the Universe expresses itself.
We are one of its evolving products.
In turn, we structure our lives and influence our growth, development and behavioural patterns by continual interaction or feedback with the etheric field or Akasha, just as any evolving product of our own creative ability (e.g. a musical composition or the contents of a book) interacts with our consciousness and undergoes modification during the process.
At all times it is consciousness that drives the chariot, or car — through the Mind.
We replicate our own kind as does all of nature by this method of interaction and feedback.
What we imagine or desire is what we get — within the limits of our potentiality, at a given time, and a given place; that is, as aforementioned, when the conditions are conducive.
We are the product of our thoughts and Mind; our individual expression of consciousness.
The materialistic, scientific view of life processes has achieved no success whatsoever in endeavouring to answer how  living systems are able to maintain their forms through continually changing conditions, or how growth is planned or organised.
Reason alone insists that there has to exist a non-physical formative cause to provide an appropriate hypothesis, and in view of this realisation by visionaries in the domain of physics, bio-chemistry, biology, neuro science, etc., a bridge between ancient wisdom and modern insight is now being built.
In no area is this more significant than in the field of medical research, and it will become evident that the principles outlined above apply equally to interactions between living cells and our mental functioning.
Discovery of the Life-force Field
During August of 1986, media outlets in Australia proclaimed the history-making discovery of a low-level electromagnetic energy field by a scientific team at Sydney University.
Seen to be an ‘effect’ of the Universal or Unified Field, it is able to transmit energy patterns from one natural source to another and give rise to a physical formation of those patterns — in other words, the field is believed to be the agent for creation, growth and development throughout nature.
The discovery was a direct outcome of the interest of Dr Bevan Reid (Reader in Obstetrics and Gynaecology at Sydney University's Queen Elizabeth II Research Centre for Mothers and Infants) in the cause of cancer, and his aim to resolve the many questions surrounding the problem.
He explains:
‘Despite millions of dollars being spent in cancer research, nobody knows the answer to the fundamental question — what causes growth?
What is cancer but ‘new growth’—‘creation’, if you like.
The reductionist approach was not providing results in cancer research and I thought that something other than the presently known properties of carcinogens had to be involved as a activator.’
A number of steps involving work on crystals, yeast cells, thymus cells and mouse cells, in relation to transmissions of patterns over a distance, led to amazing discoveries.
Some  typical examples are given here.
1.
An experiment using silicic acid, and being carried out in a laboratory 5 metres away through a brick wall, affected the normal pattern of salt crystals being observed in Dr Reid's laboratory.
The salt crystals spontaneously began to change to fern shapes whenever the experiment began.
When the experiment stopped, the crystals reverted to their normal configuration as a cube.
Various experiments of a similar nature over several years demonstrated the same phenomenon over much greater distances.
2.
A glass slide coated in a solution of polystyrene and benzol gave the slide a polymer coating.
(Polymers are macro molecules, important in living systems.)
A carbon particle or ‘charge’ placed on the slide, upon examination revealed a spiral appearing on the polymer and surrounding the charge.
Acting as a sensitive film emulsion, the polymer recorded a phenomenon which must involve factors outside the normal concept of space/time dimensions.
3.
An experiment with a psychic healer passing his hands over the polymer-coated slide, resulted in a tearing of the film membrane in several places.
As healers act as channels for the Life Force energy, the experiment provided additional hard evidence to support the field theory.
Dr Sergei Barsamian, an original member of the Sydney University team and now involved in independent research, has outlined not only his concept of the creative process but, in simple terms, further explains the model he used to provide scientific evidence which:
(a)
Supports the theories of Sheldrake and Bohm.
(b)
Qualifies vortex theory.
(c)
Endorses the ancient Vedic teachings in such matters.
(d)
Solves the problems of cancer.
Dr Barsamian is a bio-physicist with over thirty years' experience in the study of polymers and bio-polymers and their dielectric nature, As he explains:
‘The field is of low energy; it is dynamic or active.
It is a receiver and transmitter of all energy patterns existing in our physical universe.
It recycles this information according to the attractability of a specific energy pattern existing at the physical level when the conditions the conducive.
It contains the potential for the emergence of matter and is the responsible agent for growth and development in living biomatter.
It is an expression of dynamic nature herself.’
A photograph taken of the vortex field shows a speck of carbon, a charged particle in the centre of the vortex.
The energy frequency of the particle attracts a sympathetic or cohering frequency existing in the field.
This situation creates an unfolding of the field's potential energy towards the particle, in a spiral or vortex pattern which is electro-magnetic in nature.
The result is a stimulation of the energy of the particle, or host.
The field nourishes the particle.
With a living cell, however, the vortexes become multiple due to the numerous individual charges existing in the cell's structure.
This produces a busy pattern on the slide due to the overlapping of the man), vortexes arriving from the field, as well as those being created by the dynamic nature of the energetic interactions within the cell itself.
The energy enters the particle via a similar point (laya centre) which can be regarded as a vacuum point in the charge where the vortex field will not be deformed in any manner.
This is the principle upon which Dr Barsamian's mathematics for vortex field equations is constructed, and in accordance with the above findings relating to Life Force energy fields, an understanding of the problem of cancer is also made easier.
The human organism is highly responsive to a wide spectrum of electro-magnetic (EM) influences; in fact we are essentially an electro-vibratory entity immersed in an EM environment, our body's molecular or chemical reactions being indelibly interrelated to these EM influences.
This understanding — central to Eastern medical practice for millennia (Ayurvedic, Acupuncture, etc.) has been  instrumental in the development of bioelectromagnetic (BEM) procedures for both diagnosis and treatment of disease.
West Germany in particular has utilised the method and promoted its continuing development for over 35 years.
English-speaking countries, however, have been relatively unaware of this activity because of language barriers, or if aware of any aspect of it have turned a blind eye due to a lack of understanding of the background of the method or a disinterest in the findings of Quantum Physics.
The most significant revelation of Quantum Physics is that matter is, in reality, congealed energy.
Thus it is the physicists and medical specialists with a strong background in physics, along with electronics engineers, who form the vanguard of this thrust, which has been shown particularly effective in predicting illness prior to its becoming a pathologically apparent condition.
Interactions between living organisms and EM fields can be broadly classified as follows:
(a)
EM information patterns received from the environment act on DNA molecules in living cells, which in a way produce sensitive antennae to receive and in turn relay the information throughout our biophysical system.
(b)
EM effects generated within our body interact with nearby physiological processes.
(c)
EM effects internally generated act in turn upon external environmental fields.
Typical bioelectromagnetic procedures utilise instruments capable of displaying on a video screen the changing patterns of the EM fields.
Any disturbance in the field indicates an area where cancer, for example, is likely to appear in the future.
Healing is accomplished by the restoration of an even, harmonious flow of bioenergy in the patient's body.
Chemically based methods of attending to disease and their toxic effects will soon be replaced by electro-magnetic therapy on a global scale.
The early 1990s — not the twenty-first century  — will witness this breakthrough.
The movement in Germany is surging, Dr Barsamian has related, as well as in Armenia.
His own diagnostic machine called the Dielectric Diagnostic Analyser, employs computerised biofeedback techniques to determine energy disturbances at cellular level.
The methods outlined by Dr Barsamian during his address at an International Cancer Meeting (held at the Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, Freie University, Berlin) in June 1989, and in his two articles on the subject published by the American Journal of Biological Physics in 1988, are hereby presented in a simple yet concise way.
Cancer — its Cause and its Control
In physics the application of principles which relate to biopolymers in living cells can provide an exciting and promising new direction towards discovering the ‘missing link’ in the seemingly fruitless quest for the explanation to the problem of cancer.
Polymers are compounds of large molecules which are derived from the combinations of smaller ones, and biopolymers are likewise similar structures which are used in science to represent organic cellular structure.
They are ‘dielectric’ in nature, meaning they are not conductors of electric currents but act as vehicles for the registration of electric fields.
Thus it is understood that cells are influenced by fields and not currents of electricity, as the effect is minimal.
It is the interaction between the field of a cell and another EM field that becomes the responsible agent for growth.
How Does This Occur?
1.
Living cells should be regarded as ‘entities’ that are highly sensitive to electro-magnetic (EM) fields.
All atoms, molecules or living cells are continually under the influence of EM fields either man-made or resulting from neighbouring EM activity in the biophysical system.
2.
If an EM field is applied to the cell, the cell's EM activity becomes aligned to the nature of the applied field and at the same time it re-arranges its intracellular components accordingly.
During this process, cells influence each other and they form fibres.
The electrical potential on the surface of the tissue formed by these fibres becomes extremely high.
Moreover, when the cells form tissue they bring their energy level into line with the potential surface energy of the tissue.
Again, the concept of a conductive current is not applicable since it is negligible.
This fibre-forming process further increases the energy level of the cell, and consequently the field strength between cells that have coupled.
Such activity eventually causes an electrical breakdown of their membranes and this is called ‘cell fusion’.
It is therefore clear that it is the nature of the EM field that organizes the growth of tissue.
3.
Every living cell has a naturally occurring vibration which relates not only to its level of energy, its mass and its form but to the nature of the medium in which it vibrates — its environment.
This natural state can be influenced by the presence of a cancer-causing agent located outside the cell.
For the influence to be effective, however, the frequency of the cell or any of its parts must be in phase or, more correctly, in a state of ‘coherence’ with the existing frequency of the virus.
In this way the energy pattern of a cancer-causing agent can transfer itself via the field to impinge upon the cell if the cell exhibits a vulnerability or an attractiveness to the agent.
Any cell exposed to this situation experiences a powerful rise in its energy level.
The increased order is so strong that no neuro-electric message can fight it — a special EM field has to be applied.
The influence takes place without direct contact with the virus —‘action at a distance’ is the applicable term.
Thus a field can influence another field and nothing is transferred into or out through the cell membrane.
The process is one of ‘induction’.
4.
Cell vulnerability arises from a number of known factors that influence cellular metabolism; e.g. sustained adverse mental or  emotional conditions, environmental discord, nutritional shortcomings, ultra-violet irradiation or genetic factors.
The state of a living cell is a direct reflection of the state of its host's metabolism and its nature no different from that of the organism of which it is an integral part.
Many researchers are still falling to realize that cancer is not some alien invader that attacks from outside but the result of a breakdown within.
‘We attract according to our being’, is an appropriate axiom relative to the process.
Diagnosis
Within the internal structure of the cell, in the cytoplasm, the energetic interactions are weak and electrostatic effects predominate.
An extremely low EM field can cause a significant movement in this area.
By applying such a low EM field to a cell in order to excite it and then observing how long it takes to discharge, it is possible to determine when a cell has become transformed from a normal state to a cancerous condition.
This method is highly effective in detecting transformations while still in their latent stage; that is, before they become clinically observable.
Control
Living cells can also exhibit an electrodynamic character, e.g. a piezo-electric effect.
This is the production of EM energy in certain solid crystals when they become compressed and stretched in particular directions (an effect used in a crystal pick-up of a record player).
The application of such an effect can change the intracellular structure of a cell that has been transformed by a cancer-causing agent, even in its latent stage.
By monitoring the cell's behaviour during treatment by such a piezo-electric technique, it is possible to measure and control the progress being made in reversing the transformation process.
By comparing the measurements taken on fresh dissected tissue with those taken on an intact body, it is possible to demonstrate the important influence that the body's neuro-electric  actions have on the recovery mechanism.
Neuroelectric devices were used during the last century without the blessing of the medical sciences.
But in recent years the knowledge of the role of electricity in the treatment of disease has developed considerably, and there are no technical reasons why the findings and the techniques outlined cannot be implemented and developed immediately by any competent specialist.
Modern instruments are reliable and the process is based on presently valid scientific methods.
It must be accepted that although the above findings relate mainly to electrical forces they form part of an interactive system involving also chemical, pressure-volume, gravitational and other environmental factors, and as such they appear to be under the influence of one basic energy field — whatever it might be termed.
These forces in turn can react to various pathological processes such as infections, chronic irritants, including smoking, toxic agents, chronic irradiation, nutrients, etc., which serve as activators in the process of carcinogenicity in accordance with the circumstances previously discussed relating to cell vulnerability.
Cell vulnerability and immune system functioning are indelibly interwoven.
In a healthy organism the latter, as a member of the cellular society, endeavours in a way to maintain a natural equilibrium between the cell's vibrational frequencies and external environmental EM influences.
It recognizes abnormal cells, destroys them or walls them off.
If the immune system is not strong enough, however, the faulty cells will multiply.
The variety of stresses that affect biological systems and influence the immune system's potentiality are as follows:
1.
Psychological stress
2.
Negative thought energies
3.
Nutritional deficiency
4.
Allergenic overload
5.
Physical over-exhaustion
6.
Drug side-effects
7.
Extreme temperature variation 
8.
Microbiologic contamination
9.
Geopathic stress
10.
Environmental chemical pollutants
11.
Electro-magnetic pollution
12.
Low-level radiation
The writer terms them ‘The Dirty Dozen’.
In relation to EM pollution, recent research has indicated that EM patterns of energy emanating from high-voltage transmission from power lines and other man-made devices, can influence immune system stability if the activity is sustained and one is in constant proximity.
Geopathic stress as a result of EM emanations from subterranean water tables with clay soils and underground streams, particularly where they cross, also play their role.
The physical vehicle is directly vulnerable to all the stresses listed.
But mental and emotional factors are of prime significance, and ultimately it is the breakdown in cohesion and the naturally occurring communication between these areas of being that becomes the main underlying cause of cancer.
The mind — if unable to express creativity or creative impulses — exhibits frustration and evokes self-disdain for negative self-images and loss of self-worth; the emotions — if subject to suppression or repression of essential human responses relating to love, understanding and compassion — are suffocated; the harbouring and nurturing of accumulated aggressions, rejections or guilts, destroys the human ability to be receptive to positive influences, and depression, grief, hopelessness and helplessness all evoke a desire for self-annihilation if sustained; the spirit — if unable to establish any connection between its personal nature and those higher elements which nourish it — eventually starves.
These inter-related issues — if not somehow bound together — are highly instrumental in the production of a chaotic state within the network of human reality.
Often, the end result is a total collapse of cohesion which can be reflected not only at individual cellular level but in human social structure itself.
A close analogy can be drawn between cancer of the cell and a society hooked on drugs.
It is not drugs as such that act as responsible agents for the collapse of well-being in the society and the proceeding crime, but the human desire for drugs.
Desire, as a mental element which in a way relates to a physical force, is a powerful and potentially — energetic state which produces action when a state of coherence occurs.
The point illustrates the true mechanisms underlying the onset of cancer.
An ancient aphorism, ‘Energy Follows Thought’, is most applicable to the understanding of the problem as well as the nature of those who have had the misfortune to suffer its terrible consequences.
Our mind, emotions and spirit — integral to our physical well-being, or conversely our state of disease — are not divorced from our cellular components, and the known ability of the mind to influence DNA coding (or vice versa) and therefore enzyme activity, opens doors to a view of the human entity that has far-reaching implications yet to be realized.
The relationship between genetic anomalies and cancer is now also better understood.
1989 Nobel Prize winners J. Michael Bishop and Harold Varmus of the University of California, San Francisco, along with Dominique Stehelin of France, discovered in 1 976 that normal cells contain genes that can activate cancer if they malfunction.
More recent research has revealed that genetic malfunction can be caused by chemical carcinogens that convert normal genes into cancerous ones.
What has not been known, until now, is the nature of the mechanism by which this occurs.
In the light of Dr Barsamian's visionary work, a clear understanding of the process has emerged.
The malfunction of normal genes can be occasioned by the effective field influence of a chemical carcinogen located outside the cell.
Once again, it is the existence of a state of coherence between field frequencies that constitutes the cause of cancer: nothing can be effectively subjected to any influence whatsoever if the subject is not of the same nature as the influence, and the ancient statement ‘all is energy’ is the most  meaningful contribution that emphasizes the primary, fundamental nature of all phenomena in the created world and the basis of interaction between all things.
To those who may view his findings as ‘some new revolutionary theory’ Dr Barsamian's reply is straightforward: ‘such people,’he states, ‘deny evidence without evaluating it.’
Powerfully supported in West Germany by leading academic figures such as Professor Ingolf Lamprecht, Head of Freie University's Institute of Biophysics in Berlin, and in Canada by Professor James Webb of Victoria University's Department of Biophysics, to name only two, his work has been described as being of prophetic insight, incredibly productive and important and the most significant breakthrough in the field of cancer research today, one which should be given the highest priority in terms of social worth, funding and exposure by the media, as such discoveries can literally usher in a new science for the benefit of all humanity.
Dr Barsamian stresses, however, the importance of a correct understanding of such concepts and methods of analysis so as to avoid unrealistic expectations about their capabilities by non-experts.
Bioelectromagnetics (BEM)— A Brief History
The concept of channels or meridians through which EM energy flows in the biophysical system is as ancient as the Indian and Chinese civilisations who taught about it.
Indian Ayurvedic treatment, Chinese Acupuncture as well as today's electro-acupuncture and herbal medicine, are all methods based on the maintaining of balance and rebalancing of the energy system of the human entity, allowing the body to cure itself, which is its natural function; wholeness — organisation and continuity — being the purpose, as researchers like H.S. Burr have stated.
Scientific validity of the Nadi and meridian systems is now well established (Motoyama) and the key to cure, rather than relief of systems, is found in the electrical potential of an  organism, as all living phenomena are essentially electro-vibratory, a fact that orthodox Western medical minds have not yet quite realised.
In the 1950s in Germany, Dr Reinhold Voll and his research team began the electrical examination of acupuncture points of the human system as a continuation of the work of Rodger De La Faye during the 1940s.
Over 80 points were charted and the electronic accuracy of the laws and rules of classical Acupuncture were firmly established.
The energy flows in the Hindu and Chinese descriptions were correct, and from hundreds and thousands of experiments they confirmed that changes in the physical vehicle correlated to actual changes in the electrical potential of the related Acupuncture points.
The most important discovery of the Voll group was that before any physical changes occurred, there was a change in the energy potential of the assorted acupuncture point or points.
If the points were electrically stimulated to induce correct electrical balance, the impending physical changes were averted, In many cases they found that a pathological condition could be reversed by stimulating and rebalancing the points.
The Voll group developed an electro-acupuncture machine called the Dermatron.
A similar machine now being produced, named the Theratest, employs an electronic probe which monitors the condition of the energy in the meridians, The information is transferred to a computer from which a reading and assessment is made.
A strip chart recorder duplicates the reading of the computer and forms a permanent record.
Treatment with the Theratest method is effected by either traditional needle acupuncture or the electronic probe, which is similar to a ballpoint pen, that directs a weak electrical discharge into the points determined by the computer readout.
(The author testifies to the effectiveness of the Theratest electronic probe discharge in the total elimination of a vexing migraine problem unable to be cured by chemically based methods.
The treatment took a mere ten minutes to analyse, complete the readout and effect the cure.)
Dr Franz Morrell, a former member of the Voll group, has demonstrated that EM oscillations and resonance with the human system are of a higher order than chemical responses.
Morrell forged a new era in BEM methods of therapy by formulating a method whereby EM signals from the body are converted and sent back into the body to stimulate the organism's self-repair mechanisms.
After treatment, measurements are undertaken to ensure that the self-healing processes have been initiated.
The method has been in use since 1977 and requires only two and a half minutes of therapy time, according to reports.
In the United States at the University of Colorado Health Sciences Centre in Denver, Dr John T. Zimmerman, a noted energy field researcher, has developed a Biomagnetic Imager (BMI) which will detect and display in colour, on a screen, the changing patterns of the magnetic field energy surrounding a living organism.
Used in a shielded room the BMI will allow investigation into alternative forms of healing, such as touch therapy, acupuncture, shiatsu, etc., as well as detecting pre-cancerous conditions.
This is how it works.
A physician scanning the video image of the patient's biomagnetic field, quickly locates an energy field disturbance — a typical precursor of cancer.
Entering the shielded room, the physician will place both hands a few inches above the disturbed area in the patient's energy field, and begin to ‘tune in’ and resonate biomagnetic energy field patterns in unison with the patient.
Healing information carried through resonating biomagnetic waves instantly begins to restore an even, harmonious flow of energy throughout the patient's body.
The computer monitor verifies and records the healing process to its completion.
Regardless of the wide use of acupuncture and BEM, hard-nosed sceptics still insist that such methods are entirely placebo oriented, in as much as the patient's belief that they work effects the cure.
Unfortunately for such critics it has been found that acupuncture works equally well, if not more effectively, on animals.
Dr Barsamian states:
‘Scepticism and doubt is legitimate when it is correctly and intelligently applied; that is, when it is questioning.
But a blind refusal to consider alternatives is negatively based on fear, ignorance, deeply embedded convictions or insularity.
Then it is not scepticism but a withdrawal from reality.
I cannot understand how individuals with this problem can gain authorisation to give a opinion.
Such action succeeds only in dividing truth into oblivion.
It is better to revise existing dogmatic theories relating to matter/energy/interactions.
Nature knows better than we.
Let's open our minds; the dark ages need not continue.’
It must be emphasised that the preceding information does not constitute some new revolutionary theory, but echoes a once universal understanding of the true workings of nature embraced by the knowledgeable in every high civilisation of the past, and perhaps intuitively felt by most sensitive individuals who have not been bludgeoned by the dull instruments of Western reductionism.
To exist and survive, a living system must have access to other levels of function and other mechanisms beyond those embraced by present physics, electro-magnetics and biochemistry, otherwise the natural steady progress towards entropy or disintegration would soon reduce all living systems to a state in which they could no longer reproduce the clear patterns of their own kind.
Living systems are ‘open systems’, exchanging energy with their environment, as opposed to‘closed mechanical systems’ upon which the so-called ‘immutable’Second Law of Thermodynamics is based.
The Second Law states that the amount of energy obtained from a system is always less than the amount absorbed, so it eventually ‘runs out of steam’.
The long-standing belief that this was applicable to all systems in Nature first had holes shot into it in recent years by Ilya Prigogine, the Belgian bio-chemist who received a Nobel Prize in 1977 for his expert marksmanship.
Living matter as well as so-called ‘inert’ matter is seen to be an expression of a formative universal field which in turn is regulated by even more subtle primary forces, Hoyle, Jeans  and Raynor Johnson, as well as a host of visionaries have stated their belief that creation and the maintenance of the Universe rests upon a Universal Consciousness — a Creative Intelligence.
They have accepted the idea that matter is formed as the Universe expands, and will possibly be destroyed if it ever happens to contract.
It has been calculated that matter is at present being continually created at the rate of about 50,000 sun masses per second.
It is becoming increasingly evident that the traditional scientific approach to determining reality has run its course.
The fragmentary analysis of nature succeeds only in obscuring the real and deepening the mystery.
The emerging ‘systems’ view is fast creating a new model of the universe in which all areas of the human experience merge and integrate into a unified whole.
The concept of a Universal Field presupposes the existence of a pre-physical body made of fine degrees of matter not yet recognised by orthodox science, which regulates and controls the creature, whatever it may be.
This overall field embraces subsidiary or ‘local’ fields within the organism and its component parts, and if there is a tendency to contract a disease such as cancer, this tendency will appear first as a ‘stress’in the pre-physical body, later becoming a pathological disease at the cellular level.
The discovery at Sydney University gives scientific support to this long-held view.
Dr Barsamian's work in relation to vortical dynamics is being successfully applied by researchers in Germany and great interest is being shown by research teams in Belgium.
A cure for cancer now seems imminent.
When the underlying principles are widely understood and incorporated into medical technology on a world-wide scale, the action will constitute a ‘quantum leap’ in the present-day understanding of disease, as well as the essential nature of man himself.
Bohm believes that scientists who profess to have no philosophy of science beyond that of open enquiry, deceive themselves; for their whole approach is based on unquestioned assumptions as to how scientific research should proceed and  long-standing prejudices as to how the World works.
The insistence by scientists that the World is merely a series of chance collisions of indifferent forces of nature is to him a dangerous road, since they believe they can discover and harness those indifferent forces through determining Nature's ‘laws’.
Bohm points out that science's very participation in formulating these so-called ‘laws’ may change them, and more deeply, there can be no fixed laws of nature because Nature is essentially creative.
The Eastern ‘Science of Life’ re-emerging today as ‘Creative Physics’employed a multi-faceted approach to truth encompassing philosophy, psychology, relation, mathematics, geometry, cosmology, and medicine, to the arts.
Objective investigation of phenomena formed only one aspect of a far wider approach, the greatest emphasis being  centred consciousness and mind as the underlying reality.
Just as we create our individual world with our mind, so we participate in shaping the Universe in which we exist.
Richard Bergland, at the forefront in the field of Neurosurgery, writes in The Fabric of Mind :
‘Wise men from India predicted that mystical forces regulated the activities of the brain and body.
Their view of Karma as a life-giving force that flows from life to life is in every way like the modern physicist's view of electrons (electricity) which they say is not ‘matter’ but a ‘force’.
The Hindu commitment to reincarnation is a wager that Karma moves from one moving life to another moving life by the same ‘magic’ that moves atomic electrons between orbits.
‘With the discovery of the non-substantial nature of atomic particles and the prediction of a unifying force, Western science has validated much of the ancient holistic wisdom written 5000 years ago in Vedic Scriptures.
The Karma of the Eastern mind is so similar to the interdependent forces that scientists such as Schrodinger claim are both the stuff of matter and the stuff of thought, that Yogis might rightfully claim that karma does exist because Western science has proved it .
‘The reductionists of the West, however, cannot accept the holistic wisdom of Eastern mysticism even though, at the most fundamental level, their own tools have verified it, and their best physicists are committed to the conceptual need for a unifying force that defies reduction.’
Dr Sergei Barsamian (left) and the author discussing the spiralling vortex configuration found in the form of sea shells.
In the foreground is an icon of ‘The Cosmic Dance of Siva;, ancient Hindu symbol of the dynamic creative rhythm of universal life-force energy.
The Hindus asserted that the same rhythm must of necessity be mirrored at all stages of creation and in all domains.
This photo comes from a Sydney University laboratory.
It was taken was late 1986 and is regarded as an historic event.
It shows the low-energy spiral field that surrounds a carbon particle.
The particle was placed on a polymer-coated slide.
Polymers are used by scientists as a substitute for human cells.
The can act as sensitive film emulsions and thus record an impression of a physical event — in this case, that a previously undetected field pattern surrounds this carbon particle.
Energy is believed to flow in spirals.
This photo is considered to be evidence in support of the Unified Field Theory, which Einstein, amongst others, believed to be the basis of the physical universe.
Ancient Hindu tradition says that this life force, known as Sakti or the ‘energy of the gods;, materialises in the form of a spiral and brings with it the forces of attraction and repulsion.
Artist Robert Pope with his painting ‘The Life Force Field;, completed at the Sydney University during his appointment as Artist in Residence at the faculty to interpret the historic discovery of the field on canvas.
Photo: Courtesy the Science Art Research Centre.
‘Spirals of the Serpent’ by Robert Todonai.
Oil on canvas.
The author