

SOME PSYCHIC AND POLITICAL DIMENSIONS OF WORK EXPERIENCES
‘It may be that many employed people preserve themselves from anxiety and insight into their real selves by contemplating themselves at work’
(Pederson-Krag, 1951).
For those who have had social opportunities early in life — enjoyed what sociologists would call ‘life chances’— coupled with the ability to recognise and use them when presented, it is possible ultimately to choose a profession such as‘management’.
Others have less choice, they work as the skilled, the semi-skilled and unskilled.
Some, primarily because of their educational background, though there will be other causes, are in a position in a business enterprise to be able to define their own roles and will have a determining voice in deciding pay and other rewards and, in general, be able to define the procedures and roles by which others' work will be done.
Others, ostensibly, are there to follow these rules.
Some, usually those who are designated managers of the enterprise, can determine the social organization of the firm because they have the requisite scientific knowledge to define the work technology.
The expectation is that the others — presumably definable as ‘non-managers’— will follow.
In actuality this relationship between managers and workers is not so simple as it may first appear to be.
It is not so neat because people, irrespective of their function and status in the enterprise, have minds, can feel, think, and have subjective experiences of the world of work on which they base their behaviour.
Until human beings take up roles in an enterprise, it is merely a collection of buildings and plant.
It is people fulfilling their role obligations to other people at work in the enterprise with its technology who make a social organization.
But as Alan Fox in his book MAN MISMANAGEMENT writes:
‘How well this social organization serves the purposes of those who seek to impose it depends in the last resort upon the conceptions in the minds of the men and women they recruit for these purposes.
It depends upon their conceptions of how they ought, or would be best advised in their own interests, to behave with respect to these top-management definitions of their duties end obligations, their rights and privileges, and their relationships to the material technology, to higher authority, and to each other’
(Fox, 1974).
Here, Fox focuses on the rational, conscious motivations of individuals, relating in a calculative way to their human environment.
In this paper the focus is to be on the not so conscious aspects of the relatedness between those who are designated managers and those who are called workers.
In particular I want to consider what conceptions skilled and unskilled workers hold ‘in their minds’ about their working environment and authority within it as represented by management and, conversely, what conceptions managers hold in their minds about the status and process of management.
My hypothesis is that these varying conceptions in the mind have real psychic and political consequences which ought to be taken into account when considering change strategies in organizations and, more fundamentally, when considering what we mean by the term ‘quality of working life’.
The connection between psychic and political processes may seem, at first sight, tenuous.
The ‘psyche’ is the ‘mind’and the two terms can be used synonymously.
In psychoanalytic thought and practice the mind is regarded as a process and not a thing:
‘The general theory of psycho-analysis, in its most abstract definition, is a psychology of mental processes and their organization.
For such a psychology, mind has ceased to be a static structure or a substantial thing and has become a dynamic entity, a nexus of activities and a sequence of adaptive responses’
(Brierley, 1951).
In the remainder of the discussion in this paper I am using the term ‘psychic’ in these senses, although it may seem, at times, in the descriptions of psychic phenomena that these processes are static and fixed.
I see the mental constructs of workers and managers, which I report, as being temporarily frozen, so to speak, rather than static and therefore with no possibility of changing.
So the enquiry that is reported in this paper is into what is ‘in the mind’ in terms of mental processes and constructs and how what is ‘in the mind’makes particular political milieux.
The term ‘politics’ is one with a range of definitions.
My colleague, Eric Miller, has summarised some of these as follows:
‘One paper, by Paige (1967), for example, quotes Lenin's ‘who does what to whom’, and Mao's ‘war without bloodshed’, reminds us of the more familiar formulations of Lasswell (1936)—‘who gets what, when, how’—, Easton (1953)—‘the authoritative allocation of values’—, Levy (1952)—‘the allocation of power and responsibility’, and Snyder (1958)—‘the making of authoritative social decisions’, and throws in for good measure a definition by a Japanese political scientist, Masao Maruyama —‘the organization of control by man over man’.
Paige himself emphasises the element of ‘purposive organizational behaviour, the object of which is to formulate and achieve social goals by means of consensus and coercion’.
J.D.B. Miller states that politics ‘is about disagreement or conflict; and political activity is that which is intended to bring about or resist change, in face of possible resistance…
Conflict lies at the heart of politics’(J.D.B. Miller, 1962, p.14).
Barber defines international politics as being ‘concerned with interaction involving conflict or potential conflict between the actors in international relations.
From the interaction emerge structures, processes and patterns which involve power and coercion on the one hand but bargaining and cooperation on the other’(Barber, 1975, p 22)’
(Miller, 1980).
Miller goes on to conclude that these principles could apply both to interpersonal and intergroup relations.
Since in this paper I am concerned to explore the intergroup relations ‘in the mind’ between workers and managers, I propose to follow Miller's usage of the term which is: ‘…relations between two systems are political when one system is consciously or unconsciously attempting, or is perceived as attempting, to impose its goals and values on another’(Miller, 1980).
In this context, the term ‘system’ is being used by Miller to refer to persons, groups and enterprises.
A ‘system’ is such a bounded entity that it is possible to differentiate between what is inside and what it outside.
A system relates to its environment of other systems by importing materials, feelings, ideas etc. and transforming these into outputs that can be exported into the environment.
(See Rice, 1963, 1964, 1970; Miller and Rice, 1967; Miller, 1976.)
The imposition of goals and values is the critical element in a political relation and, as Fox (1974) reminds us, goals and values are in the mind.
In this paper it is on these dimensions as they can exist between sets of managers and workers (as systems) that I focus.
The material that is to be used for this paper comes from a number of studies conducted from the Tavistock Institute, but also includes material from other sources.
What is given here, however, is not a review of the literature nor an attempt to make generalisations about all workers and all managers.
The paper is much more tentative because some of it is based on evidence which has not always been gathered from studies designed specifically to elicit people's conceptions in the mind.
It is also more tentative because much of the material has been developed by using a psychoanalytic perspective and so is about people's subjective experiences.
The evidence is disjointed and sometimes even contradictory, but the essay is an attempt to make sense of aspects of human behaviour in industrial enterprises and to formulate some working hypotheses.
The essential problem of enquiring into what may be in other people's minds has been captured by John Berger, who has made one of the most imaginative reconstructions of the European guest-workers' social world.
He wrote of the problem:
‘To try to understand the experience of another it is necessary to dismantle the world as seen from one's place within it, and to re-assemble it as seen from his.
For example, to try to understand a given choice another makes, one must face in imagination the lack of choices which may confront and deny him.
The well-fed are incapable of understanding the choices of the under-fed.
The world has to be dismantled and re-assembled in order to be able to grasp, however clumsily, the experiences of another.
To talk of entering the subjective experience of another is misleading.
The subjectivity of another does not simply constitute a different interior attitude to the same exterior facts.
The constellation of facts, of which he is the centre, is different’
(Berger and Mohr, 1975).
While all the studies used for this paper do not attain this ideal, the effort to articulate material that is not readily available through more conventional studies of workers' images of society, for instance, may serve to make some point in the social landscape between the ‘centres’ of workers' and managers' worlds and that of social scientists.
Any enquiry  into what is in the minds of others is not only an exploration of what is consciously expressed by people but is also about interpreting what is unconsciously believed.
This means that the enquirer is generating data and making interpretations of material which is usually repressed and made unconscious because it is emotionally painful to articulate it.
What are also being explored in this paper, although tangentially, are ways of establishing and understanding data about workers' feelings regarding work.
These are less amenable to being uncovered by using conventional interviews or survey methods.
There is a real sense in which the worker has limited choices of occupation and, consequently, he or she makes the best of what work is available.
Inevitably, a rationalization has to be developed by the worker to explain his relatedness to his work environment with its technological and social structures and cultures.
The problem for the enquirer is to get behind these rationalizations to find out what experiences and interpretations of these are being repressed in order to make hypotheses about the ‘felt’ nature of the political relatedness between workers and management within a particular enterprise.
And in all this the enquirer's subjectivity is an integral element of the enquiry.
Therefore, the enquirer who is using himself as a research instrument needs to be as aware as possible and committed to becoming more aware of his own biases, values and his reasons for holding the conceptual framework he does.
Bluntly stated: an enquirer into ‘the mind’ has to know what is in his own mind and why it is filled in the way it is.
‘IN THE MIND’
This phrase may appear rather vague so I need to spell out what I mean by it.
Human beings possess the ability to experience subjectively the objects in their environment and themselves as an object in it.
This ability we can call self-reflexivity.
People relate to the objects in their social world through activities and these activities have meaning for them.
So ‘mind’ refers to the ‘meaning of behaviour’.
When we talk of a ‘mindless occupation’, for instance, I take it to describe a situation in which activity is possible without having to think and feel about the meaning of the relatedness between the person and whatever the objects are that he manipulates.
It is this capacity to give meaning which needs to be held on to in considering human behaviour.
It is man's capacity to invent meaning for the objects around him in his environment which is the root of culture and also structures his experience of his world.
The importance of meaning in the lives of men and women has been dramatically stated by Victor Frankl in his book FROM DEATH CAMP TO EXISTENTIALISM.
In the concentration camp he knew:
‘Acute states of existential frustration — evanescence of any meaning to one's existence…
In concentration camps the age-old adage primum vivere deinde philosophare was no longer applicable.
In these extreme situations the ultimate question was to find a meaning in life and to account for the meaning of death…
What really mattered was primum philosophare deinde mori…
The question which beset me was, ‘Has all this suffering, this dying around us, a meaning?’
For if not then ultimately there is no meaning to survival; for a life whose meaning stands and falls on whether one escapes or not…ultimately would not be worth living at all’
(Frankl, 1959 — quoted in Holbrook, 1971).
This will-to-meaning, Frankl argues, is more important than will-to-power but, of course, an individual can be obsessed by power and gives meaning to life in this way.
The meaning of objects in the human world is shared among people, otherwise it would be impossible to have social relations.
There are times, however, when communication is impossible because there are no shared meanings.
These shared systems of meaning constitute a particular culture.
But individuals have minds of their own and can interpret the shared meaning given to a particular object such as work and can change the commonly accepted meaning.
So, what is ‘in the mind’ is, for the most part, culturally determined but there are more intimate and idiosyncratic dimensions.
Culture, because it provides a set of meanings, can restrain social behaviour but it also refers to ‘the domain of social experience in which people work out their understanding of the world’(Hales, 1974).
The role from which this paper is written is that of a social scientist who is concerned with the practical issues of living and working in contemporary societies.
As has been indicated, this role perspective uses psychoanalytic thinking.
To discover what is ‘in the mind’ of human beings requires a different methodology from the natural sciences whose practitioners are interested in matter and would recognise that matter does not have a mind and is incapable of subjective experience.
To be sure, human behaviour can be, and is, studied from the outside, but such a science — behavioural science — tells us nothing about the psyche and the person's understanding of his experience of his existence.
An alternative science — what could be called a psychodynamic science — has been described as the study of live objects which are seen, experienced and recognised subjectively in contrast to traditional sciences which study ‘objects only’:
‘It is this exclusively objective approach of classical science that fails to do justice to ‘persons’ as ‘subjects of experience’.
Psychodynamic studies pose a genuinely new problem for science, which cannot be studied by the classic scientific methods of investigation and conceptualization’
(Guntrip, 1968).
The individual can be understood as living in a ‘double environment’; the personal inner world and the outer world of other people.
For the purposes of exposition, though it is of necessity an oversimplification, we can say that objects of feeling, particularly other people, encountered in the outer world are mapped subjectively in some way on to the inner world.
People in relating to their human environment have object relationships.
The reality or meaning of the object outside of the person is structured by previous experiences with similar objects which have been internalised by the person.
Between, so to speak, the inner and outer world there is the ego which is a filtering process that screens aspects of the outer object.
This is done on the basis of the objects of feeling which are mapped in our inner worlds.
External reality and psychic reality are thus inextricably intertwined.
The inner world is that of memory and ‘internal objects’.
Here these terms are being used in their psychoanalytic senses.
‘Internal objects’ are images, or imagos , of our past experiences which are retained in our inner worlds.
All the people with whom we have had a significant relationship are retained as imagos ; a private society inside of us.
We carry inside of us all our experiences in life ‘in our minds’ because:
‘If we did not, we would lose all continuity with our past, would only be able to live from moment to moment like butterflies alighting and flitting away, and no relationship or experience could have any permanent value for us.
Thus in some sense everything is mentally internalised, retained and inwardly possessed; that is our only defence against complete discontinuity in living, a distressing example of which we see in the man who loses his memory, and is consciously uprooted’
(Guntrip, 1968).
Experiences which we have throughout our lives are retained inside of us individually, then, in two ways: in memory and in the world of internal objects .
The original ego that we possessed in infancy has the potential for growth and development, but as it encounters the realities of objects in its environment, such as the mother, good experiences will be stored in the memory and bad experiences will be mentally internalised in an unconscious fashion as internal objects.
If you will, some experiences with objects outside of us can be digested (Bion, 1961) because they are enjoyed and are satisfying.
Others are bad experiences which cannot be absorbed in memory but are ‘retained as foreign objects which the psyche seeks to project’(Guntrip, 1968).
In fact, these ‘bad objects of feeling’ are retained in our inner, unconscious world.
They are dynamic in the sense that they are a source of energy for later behaviour.
In this brief precis of object relations theory I have started from the proposition that good objects are remembered and bad ones only hidden in the unconscious.
Clearly, I am focusing on the idea that it is the residues of bad experiences that lurk as bad objects in our psyche that cause us so much trouble because they have to be avoided at all costs and so rarely get modified by experience.
They therefore retain their archaic characteristics.
But we also know that good experiences with objects in the environment also get forgotten and repressed in the same way.
Why they do get repressed is unknown, but they do.
All these repressed good objects are ‘idealised’imagos .
When they do surface from the unconscious they also retain some of their archaic characteristics.
Falling in love is with an idealised imagos which projects an image on to the live, loved object.
Later experiences modify the object of love.
At this point I need to say that in this paper I am concentrating on the bad object relations that can exist between workers and managers.
Alongside this, however, has to be an exploration of the political relations between a boss and subordinate, to use such terms, which is not one of fear and resentment.
There are examples of workers following managers and feeling a sense of trust, even worship, even love.
However, the evidence that I have available points me towards exploring bad object relations because to understand these, in my view, is to engage with the troubled unconscious of individuals in industrial and other enterprises.
‘In the mind’ is therefore a more complex term than it may at first seem.
Here I am using it to cover both the conscious world of memory and the unconscious world of internal objects.
The importance of the unconscious for political realities of industrial enterprises may seem a tenuous link but objects of feeling that are retained in the unconscious, and constitute our psychic reality, are:
‘The perpetuations within the psyche of the situation of the child vis-à-vis parents and other powerful and authoritarian figures with whom the child of necessity had dealings at that time.
Nevertheless, the busy life which goes on in the unconscious profoundly affects our feelings and reactions in our conscious, outer life.
Thus it comes about that the patterns of object-relationships which exist in the unconscious inner world determine the kinds of immature object-relations which people sustain in their outer world.
They react repeatedly from the emotional life of inner reality which is immature, and not in ways appropriate to the conscious and adult appreciation of outer reality’
(Guntrip,
1961).
This means that potentially mature human relationships with objects in the environment, such as people seen as having authority, are distorted by immature reactions from the inner world of psychic compulsions.
In the biography of every individual he or she begins in a state of infantile dependence which ‘is characterised by a persistence of both primary identification (the emotional state of the infant in the womb) and the oral incorporative or ‘taking in’ attitudes (contributed by breast feeding) as the infant's chief means of object-relationships after birth’(Guntrip, 1961).
Ultimately the individual attempts to attain maturity or mature dependence on other objects in the environment.
This state is characterised by a full differentiation of the individual as a person (through the ego process) from objects which can then be valued for their own sake and can be related with in both a giving and receiving fashion.
Nevertheless, as I understand it, the individual may be striving towards mature object relations but finds himself in situations where those in authority to whom he may want to relate may cause him to regress towards infantile dependence.
Without appropriate or just ‘good enough’ object relationships the mature ego cannot develop.
Maturity, however, is not to be simplistically equated with absolute independence although it includes that capacity.
Between these two states of relationships which the individual can experience in his lifetime there are transitional forms of relationships that are the content of everyday living.
So far I have written of the individual in relation to his, or her, environment of other people and have pointed to object relationships as the key connections between the inner world of the individual and his outer world.
The significance for human living is that meaning is given to our lives through object relations.
When people come together in groups there will be a resonance between their inner worlds, or individual psychic realities, and the reality they collectively make.
To explain to themselves how they relate together they will develop particular rationalisations or myths.
One purpose of the myth is to explain how the individual with his narcissistic needs relates to the more socialistic demands of the group, such as the business enterprise.
Conventionally we regard myth as being a story, or even a fable, but certainly a coherent account of events that are believed to have happened in the past.
Even industrial man needs myths to account to himself how life really is, for example, in the business enterprise.
One myth that prevails in advanced industrial societies, for example, is that technology is politically neutral.
As one writer describes it:
‘The myth of the political neutrality of technology is frequently invoked both by politicians, seeking to explain the effects that a particular technological development has on society, and by the technologist, seeking to disclaim responsibility for such effects.
Problems such as industrial pollution, traffic congestion, or indiscriminate nature of military technologies, will be blamed either on inadequate policies or insufficiently sophisticated technologies.
In each case the technology itself remains blameless’
(Dickson, 1974).
His point is a simple enough one: the application of technology is held to be value-free and independent of any human motives:
‘It claims that we first select a particular task that we wish to carry out, and then select the appropriate machine which will enable us to perform this task.
Although the choice of task may, according to this notion, be consciously or unconsciously determined by political factors, the subsequent choice of machine or technique to achieve the task is claimed to remain a politically neutral technical task’
(Dickson, 1974).
Such a myth is integral to the salient cultural paradigm of our times and which we have possessed for the last three centuries.
This is the paradigm of the natural sciences to which I have referred.
One consequence of this cultural paradigm, and also an illustration of the ‘technology-is-politically-neutral’ myth, can be found in industrial and other enterprises.
There is a substantial belief in ‘scientific management’ in enterprises and although there may be modifications of this basic notion it remains remarkably robust.
This belief provides a rationalisation of how man ought to relate to technology and the enterprises which employ them.
Crudely stated, it is the idea that the machine (technology) has to be accommodated to by man.
Politically, this means that the technological system is pre-eminent over the social system in an enterprise.
F.W. Taylor is conventionally regarded as the one who introduced ‘scientific management’ early in the twentieth century.
In 1911 he wrote: ‘In the past man has been first, in the future the system must be first.’
His ideal was to bring men to their maximum efficiency in relation to technology.
The contemporary flowering of these ideas can be found in man-machine control systems.
One engineering psychologist has stated this ideal for man at work: ‘The more complex the human task the less precise and the more variable becomes the man….
Human control behaviour, it is asserted, reaches the optimum when the man becomes the analog of a simple amplifier’(Fraser, 1968).
The notion of man as an ‘amplifier’ which I take to mean that he enlarges programmes of skill, which have been developed by another, in order to manipulate machines is one that has far-reaching consequences as I shall try to show in this paper.
The voice is never his own.
All the studies used in this paper share a common base line in the sense that the culture of all the enterprises would tend to reflect the ideas just outlined.
There is a considerable wish to have efficiency in enterprises, and to bring this about the jobs of men and women have been simplified.
Consequently, enterprises are seen to be like the machines they contain and people have to relate to them accordingly.
This philosophy has been described  as the ‘machine theory of organization’.
The characteristics of this philosophy have been summarised by Louis E. Davis, and are quoted by Trist, as follows:
1.
The man and his job are the essential building blocks of an organization; if the analyst gets these ‘right’(in some particular but unspecified way), then the organization will be correctly defined.
2.
Man is an extension of the machine, useful only for doing things that the machine cannot do.
3.
The men and their jobs — the individual building blocks — are to be glued together by supervisors who will absorb the uncertainties and variabilities that arise in the work situation.
Furthermore, these supervisors need supervisors, and so on ad infinitum until the enterprise is organized in a many-layered hierarchy.
In bureaucratic organizations the latter notion ultimately leads to situations in which a man can be called a ‘manager’ solely on the grounds that he supervises a certain number of people, and without regard to the degree of judgement or decision-making responsibility such supervision requires.
4.
The organization is free to use any available social mechanisms to enforce compliance and ensure its own stability.
5.
Job fractionation is a way of reducing costs of carrying on the work by reducing the skill contribution of the individual who performs it.
Man is simply an extension of the machine, and, obviously the more you simplify the machine (whether its living or non-living part), the more you lower costs’
(Trist, 1973).
Without exception, the experiences of workers, and managers, recounted in this paper were grounded in industrial enterprises which were organized along the scientific lines just described.
The question now is how do people relate ‘in their minds’ to the objects in their industrial environment?
I am hypothesising that they do so not only from their conscious memories but also from their world of internal objects which are unconscious.
Furthermore, I am hypothesising that, on occasions, they collectively develop shared myths to account to themselves how they relate politically to each other in their different roles within the complex organization of a business enterprise and so give meaning to life at work.
SOME MANAGERS' MYTHS OF MANAGEMENT
In a study of management development some colleagues and I had an opportunity to identify some conceptions in the minds of managers about management (Lawrence, et al., 1975).
These conceptions in the mind define how individual managers relate themselves to those seen as having authority and those who are subordinate.
Because we encountered similar accounts repeatedly I am justified in pointing to shared models or myths.
We discovered that there was a public conception of management and private, but nevertheless shared, metaphors to translate this conception into personal action.
Both public and private versions were held in the mind at one and the same  time.
It is tempting to suggest that the public conception came from memory and the private metaphors from their inner worlds of inner objects, but to draw such a fine distinction would be to go beyond the evidence I have.
Essentially, I am suggesting that what I am calling private metaphors were developed by managers as a means of coping with the dissonance between what is commonly accepted as being management theory and what they thought for themselves it ought to be in actuality.
The Public Conception: Rational-Scientific Management
This public model was, in a sense, a normative ideal for many managers.
It was what they felt they ought to do as managers.
We found that a number of enterprises had defined this model and published it in internal documents for managers.
I quote from one such document without giving my source because I do not want the firm to be identified:
‘Responsibility means accepting on assignment, being personally committed to seeing it through to success and, if necessary, being prepared to accept the consequences of failure.
Responsibility cannot be delegated, so that a manager is accepted by his staff and has also the responsibility for providing an environment in which each individual is able to fulfil his obligations.
‘Authority is the freedom to act, and relates to the ability to control the resources available to a person to carry out his responsibilities.
Authority is delegated to an individual by his manager.
Anyone having responsibility for an assignment must have sufficient authority delegated to him to ensure the success of the assignment.
‘Accountability is an examination or assessment of how well responsibilities have been carried out in terms of results that have actually been obtained and the efficiency with which they were achieved.’
With such a framework of authority, which is clearly a top-down one, objectives and targets can be set for managers, and indeed all in the enterprise.
The essential point is that responsibility is assigned and, therefore, authority is delegated for which the individual is accountable in his role.
Authority is filtered through managers to other managers and other job holders.
At the same time it is a contract: responsibility, authority and accountability are defined by the superior and the individual in his job contracts to perform to the standards set.
The idea of contract is made explicit by the more senior manager providing resources for a job to be done.
Performance is measured against objectives so ensuring that the contract is fulfilled.
We found in the interviews that once we had got beyond some version of this public model of management, managers attempted to humanize this by drawing on metaphors from their own experience and inner resources.
Three are worth repeating here because of their popularity: the Military Model, the Family Model, and the Crisis and Truce Model.
The Military Model
This model was posited on the assumption that there are three levels of jobs in industrial enterprises.
Senior and middle managers tend to be in the Officer class; junior managers and foremen in the Warrant Officer grade; and the rest are in the ranks.
It is a very neat metaphor so, for example, foremen or supervisors are likened to Warrant Officers who are ‘worthy gentlemen of extreme power’, as one manager described them.
What is interesting, en passant, is that it is an army model and analogies are not drawn from the other services.
Management as a process appears to be understood as being about taking decisions which will be more likely to be unpopular than those taken by lower ranks, i.e., middle managers, whose task it is to mediate higher decisions by making them palatable in some way.
Managers, like service officers, it is believed, can see the whole ‘terrain’ and have to take the decisions, unpopular as they may be, so that the enterprise can survive.
It is sometimes admitted that there are dangers in this in that they can take the wrong decisions, about new technology, or marketing a product, or about industrial relations, and it is implied that if these decisions lead to the wrong strategy then all will be lost for everyone.
The manager is, therefore, an individual who is willing to shoulder responsibility and, by implication, has a sense of duty.
The ideal of service was clear.
For the non-commissioned people, who need only be concerned with their work during their prescribed working hours, their task is clear: to carry out the decisions of management.
The idea of service is extended to include the work that the manager does when he leaves his office, and it is this devotion to duty which marks him off from all the others.
As one manager expressed it: ‘Managers appear to turn up at 9.00 and leave at 4.30, but they take their problems home with them.’
Man-management is a central concept of the Military Model.
As in the services, it is assumed that the ‘man’ will trust his senior managers because, in the final analysis, they have to be trusted as they are the only ones to hold the total picture of the situation of the company.
But the officer/manager should not trust the ‘man’ unless it has been demonstrated, such as through promotion, that he is willing to take on responsibility.
It is not expected that the ‘man’ will question his orders except to have points explicated.
Man-management is about the maintenance of structure and morale so that all can give of their best.
Organizations are seen to be not unlike armies engaged in battle with the armies of other enterprises.
At times this includes the customers.
I have reported the Military Model first because it is one which will most likely fall soonest into desuetude as there are fewer people around in industry who have had actual experience of the services.
As one young manager put it: ‘The only things I know about the army are what I have seen on television!’
Yet it is a model which has some force because it provides a neat conceptualisation of relationships between those designated managers and those not.
It also provides, for some managers, a continuous thread to their life experiences through both the army and into industry.
It is a metaphor of order both in the sense of ordering experience and of an ordered social structure.
It is understandable that the Military Model should be so salient.
As John Morris and Jack Burgoyne have pointed out in DEVELOPING A RESOURCEFUL MANAGER:
‘In much of managers’ thinking about management war has dominated the scene…management development becomes rather like military training.
Most of the language of business policy has been borrowed from the armed services.
We talk of mobilising a task force, getting the organization into action, corporate strategy.
Managers consider morale and wonder whether they have dynamic leadership…none of this is surprising.
Industrial and commercial activity in a capitalist society is highly competitive and risky; harshness, self sacrifice, comradeship, brutality all feature.
Because of the enormous risks inherent in war the armed services have traditionally put a good deal of emphasis on training.
Such training is by no means limited to relevant knowledge and technical skills; it is concerned with forming  ‘appropriate attitudes and values: tenacity, self-discipline, courage, determination, loyalty, fortitude.
Many of these qualities are esteemed by managers’
(Morris and Burgoyne, 1973).
The Family Model
The difficulty of this model is that in actuality some businesses are still run by families, and a good deal more have started as family enterprises but, in time, have gone public.
Very often in such cases older managers and workers can recall the times when the business was run by the family.
There is, therefore, a coincidence between lived reality and the construct held in the mind; unlike the Military Model which constructs reality in terms of the metaphor.
To put it simply, the family metaphor is: there are fathers and sons and one day the sons will inherit.
In the meanwhile they must wait, and engage in competition for the father's place; what is known as ‘sibling rivalry’.
But this rendering of the myth emphasises what lies in the shadow of the model.
In explicating this model, managers tend to emphasise the goodness of relationships such as one would find in a happy family.
More accurately, it should be said: relationships as could be phantasised as happening in a happy family.
As in the Military Model, the family metaphor provides a sense of order.
Age is equated with experience and experience with dependability.
Younger managers will grow in experience and be able to take on their responsibilities in time.
If the order is to be disrupted it is because one of the younger sons shows remarkable promise but being a ‘family’ anxious to demonstrate tolerance, envy and jealousy are masked and can certainly be dissipated if it is suggested that the elder brothers had a hand in the development.
It is also a metaphor which puts a high valuation on trust between colleagues as in a family.
The Family Model is the one which can best be understood in terms of feeling.
The working conceptions the individual holds of authority and, by extension, organization, no matter how much overlaid by experiences and learning about management, are based on his early experiences of his family and authority figures, such as parents and teachers.
The metaphor explains the present in terms of the past.
The uncomfortable aspects of the metaphor can be screened out of memory because the wish is to create a ‘new’ family within the enterprise and so rectifying past, actual experiences in families, or simply perpetuate memories of good families.
The outcome is that the complexity of organization is ordered and made familiar in experience; the reality of differences in authority, power, and status can be explained away ‘in the mind’ in terms of family roles — father, son, uncle, cousin.
What the myth does, of course, is to cause people to relate to their inner society of internal objects, i.e., at less than a mature level.
They end up by behaving not ‘as if ’ they were fathers but as fathers, for instance .
Authority, therefore, comes to be related to people having power.
Authority, then, does not derive from competence to carry out tasks.
The Crisis and Truce Model
I have used the terms ‘metaphor’, ‘model’ and ‘myth’synonymously because a more precise formulation is beyond me at present.
What seems clear is that the Family Model and the Military Model define the qualities of a manager from which flow his functions.
My hunch is that these two popular myths of management — which are both drawn from previous experience and make the contemporary experience of the manager — are designed to mediate the rational model both to the manager himself and others so that it is more human.
Nevertheless, all these models are inadequate to cope with the realities of business enterprises as experienced by workers.
They see the enterprise differently and, at times, enter into conflict with their managers.
Both the military and the family metaphors of management celebrate cooperation between people and the possibilities of conflict are denied, or made not legitimate.
With a military model of management in his mind, the individual manager is working on the assumption that conflict within the ‘ranks’, so to speak, is impossible because all the jobs and statuses have been defined and all who take roles within that framework will be committed to maintaining the order of the enterprise which is engaged in ‘battle’ with a hostile environment, which is persecuting in its demands.
Internal conflict, therefore, smacks of mutiny.
It is a metaphor which attempts to create a reality of organization whereby cooperation is mobilised for fight with the outside world.
‘Conflict’ and ‘fight’are strong words to describe what is a generalised feeling of aggression towards competitors in the business world outside the enterprise.
The reality may well be that the enterprise is not competitive enough but the military metaphor is a way of bringing about this attitude.
Similarly, the family metaphor celebrates the idea of having cooperation among the members of the enterprise and ensuring that any conflict will be directed towards the outside world.
Any conflict within the enterprise can be explained away in terms of‘personality conflicts’ which not only lodges the conflict in a few people but ensures that others can cooperate as a good family might do in phantasy.
These military and familial idealised images of cooperation and conflict, then, break down in the face of current realities so there has to be another metaphor which can both explain and inform behaviour when conflicts or interests arise between management and work force.
In such a situation behaviour is understood to be analogous to war.
Hence, peace is wanted by either one or the other parties involved.
In an effort to regain equilibrium in the enterprise there are attempts to negotiate a settlement.
This can be understood to be a truce.
What is known is that the truce will only hold till the losing interest group can find the opportunity to create another conflict which it might win.
Although there are specialist personnel and industrial relations roles, we found that in smaller firms the negotiations with trade unions were carried by a very few managers.
The tendency is for them to hold, as a result of their negotiating role, a truce metaphor of management ‘in the mind’ which informs their conduct.
A particular manager will hold more than one metaphor, but in negotiation the truce metaphor is brought to the fore with the others held in abeyance.
Management by crisis is a favoured metaphor of managing because it implies disentangling realities and priorities in a hurry, making a decision, and executing it by getting others to carry out the appropriate actions.
It is on such occasions that the discretion can be exercised legitimately, that a sense of autonomy and real authority can be experienced.
Authority for managing comes unequivocally from the crisis.
The crisis model places a good deal of emphasis on ‘flair’ and ‘personality’.
Even the term ‘charismatic’ was used, which implies that those who hold such a model provide others with outstanding leadership.
Sometimes, to exercise this quality consistently an unconscious hand may have to be taken in creating a crisis!
If the problem is within the social system, the aim is to negotiate and achieve a truce on favourable terms for management.
The Crisis and Truce Model rests on the assumption that the difficulty of management today is in finding an opportunity to use authority.
There is a sense of being on the boundary of management vis-a-vis workers.
At the same time an ‘open-style’ management is also valued because that will further negotiating skills.
The three metaphors of management are ways of translating the rational-scientific public model/ideal.
The first two can be seen as being derived from history, both shared and private, while the third is an attempt to come to terms with and respond to current realities as they are being experienced.
The first two define the person and then his behaviour but the third defines action, first, and then the qualities needed to carry out the function of truce-making.
More than one myth can be held ‘in the mind’ at one and the same time.
These are not static mental images and there will be a dynamic tension among them both in the mind and through action.
Underneath these myths of management, both as giving a sense of status and defining process, we noted that there was a good deal of depression and despair.
Many of the managers we then spoke with were disenchanted with their roles and felt that it was an increasingly difficult set of tasks they had to carry out.
They were often beset with inner problems, a difficult economic environment, unsteady market conditions and, somehow, the promised excitement of their jobs had failed to materialise.
This depression, however, could not be engaged with because the belief was that to be in such a state was to be not mentally healthy.
Hence, in some measure, if not crises then problems were wished for because their solution could give a sense of purpose.
To summarise, all the three models of management can be seen as metaphors to avoid the realities of-real relationships with other employees but, perhaps most important of all, as social fictions to mask what we then called ‘social depression’.
We termed it thus because the depression arose from role performance and not from their psychopathology.
To have acknowledged social depression and despair would have been to have identified anger.
As it is, the anger felt among managers is projected in other directions as I shall try to show.
In the course of this kind of research work I am describing, a social scientist is continually being pressed to examine his own imagos , his own inner world with its stored subjective experiences.
Consequently, he is continually having to hold on to a sense of humility while he listens to other people, otherwise he can too easily defend himself by taking up a judgemental posture.
I am merely trying to describe aspects of life as they are experienced subjectively by others.
SOME SKILLED WORKERS' MYTHS OF MANAGEMENT: A SAMPLE OF SHOP FLOOR CULTURE
One study which goes a long way towards identifying dimensions of the culture of the shop floor, and the political relatedness of workers to their enterprise has been completed by Paul E. Willis.
He has elicited the meaning workers place on their work and their relatedness to it.
What comes across vividly from his account is the existential triumph of the shop floor:
‘…despite bad conditions, despite external direction, despite subjective ravages, people do look for meaning, they do impose frameworks, they do seek enjoyment in activity, they do exercise their abilities.
They do, paradoxically, thread through the dead experience of work a living culture, which isn't simply a reflex of defeat.
It is a positive transformation of experience and a celebration of shared values in symbols, artefacts and objects’
(Willis, 1976).
But Willis ends his account with a note of despair when he writes that the life of the shop floor worker should not be romanticised and that others should not be blind to its nature:
‘The prospect for most, still, in our society is this: That the products of their hands, the living culture developed with others, the art of their daily lives, is stifled, broken and scattered; its remnants returned in unrecognizable dead forms’
(Willis, 1976).
Willis described the elements of the culture of the shop  floor as being hinged around the execution of hard work.
There is a pride taken in surviving in the hard, even hostile, conditions of work through the exercise of physical bravery in coping with materials which are difficult to handle such as in a foundry.
To be strong and to have a reputation for being so is a source of self-esteem.
This emphasis on masculinity is found in all heavy industries, and even spills over into lighter industries where work is less awkward–and demanding.
The ‘mythology of masculine reputation’ suffuses the work place even though increasing numbers of women may be employed.
The distinctive feature of the shop floor culture, however, is:
‘…a development of this half-mythical primitive confrontation with the task.
It is active fascination with the industrial process, and a positive interest in technology.
This is not merely a meeting of demands, but a celebration of mastery’
(Willis, 1976).
There is, on the part of the worker, an involvement with task because he makes it and finds it fascinating and there is a feeling of involvement in the technological task and its activities.
Willis quotes a toolmaker describing his first day at work:
‘On every piece of ground lay metal shapes; some more bars and sheets straight from the steelworks: other gigantic constructions covered in a deep brown rust…
Then I entered the great main workshop.
Each chamber, an aisle as they were called, was about a hundred and fifty feet across and anything between five hundred and seven hundred yards long.
Several of these great vulcan halls lay parallel to each other…
Overhead rolled the girdered cranes capable of carrying weights of more than two hundred tons…one passed over my head…
My startled attitude to the crane's passage amazed the men at work…a series of catcalls followed my passage down the aisle.
Mostly the shouts were good natured advice to get out of the plant while I had the youth to do so.
Such advice never even penetrated my outer consciousness, for how could anyone abhor this great masculine domain with its endless overtones of power and violence’
(Willis, 1976).
There is a strong sense of competence on the shop floor.
This competence may not always be grounded in actual, contemporary ability but is based on the previous experiences of competence to cope within various industrial situations prior to the actual situation the worker finds himself in.
Willis presents evidence to show that his competence is cumulative and so ‘makes it sensible to speak of the working class not as an abstract group of those who share similar interests but as an organic whole with real and used inner connections’(Willis, 1976).
This acquisition of competence can be seen as one way the worker defends himself against the control exercised over him by management.
This control, according to Willis, is manifested in the fact that the men organize production in a greater measure than ever before.
This practice has its roots in the basic organizational form of the work enterprise: the informal group, which is:
‘…the fundamental and most basic unit of resistance, and creative extension of control, on the shop floor.
It is the massive presence of this informal organization which marks off shop floor culture most decisively from middle class cultures of work.
This informality is not simply neutral — the open ended product of a free association — but is directed against the formal.
Simply, this is a blanket opposition to the bosses, but is also a refusal to accept even the idea of acknowledged leadership.
It is ‘the men’ who act as a body, and the actual organizer is recognized only as the symbolic embodiment of ‘the men’, and is in no way superior or qualitatively different from ‘the men’‘
(Willis, 1976).
The sense of ‘the men’ constituting a social group in a particular enterprise can be found in the joking relationships that are established which Willis describes in some detail.
Despite the evidence of solidarity there is little to suggest that this culture, even though it is against the formal organizational structure, is one that produces active protest against the conditions of the work enterprise.
Willis argues this is because:
‘…it is a subordinate culture and occurs in prior conditions of oppression and dominance, and the whole nature of the system is such that the worker's hands are directed by others than himself, and the product of his hands are taken away: this is the elemental meaning of alienation in work’
(Willis, 1976).
What Willis emphasises is that the culture of the shop floor is bounded and has a special sense of completeness about it.
At worst there is a parochialism about this culture even though its completeness embraces a wide range of human activity and potential.
Although this culture can be seen as having profound political significance there is, according to Willis, no wish for a corporate voice on the part of the working class.
As Willis goes on to say:
‘…this culture is deeply unpolitical.
Its riveting concerns for the work place — and specific work places at that — prevents the connecting up of work experiences, issues and social structure; it prevents a true political practice.
The inherent and deeply charged contradictions of a culturally threadbare working-class politics having such a richly threaded, but essentially unpolitical base, is right at the heart of the problems facing strategists of class liberation’
(Willis, 1976).
The connectedness of the individual worker to his work environment is such that it can easily be controlled by others.
What Willis describes is what the worker does to protect himself and his dignity from persecution by those who attempt to exercise control over him.
As one reads his account one has evidence of the capability of human beings to triumph, albeit in limited terms, over adversity and to get on with ‘the business of living’.
Life at work, it seems, has some of the quality of the emotionally charged life in the family.
The craftsmen whom Willis describes are involved with  their work even though they are alienated from the given structure of the enterprise.
Indeed it is this alienation that is the welling source of their pride and self-esteem but in order that it can thrive a psychic and political boundary has to be drawn around it.
And in so doing a range of choices about what life could be at work — vision, if you will — have to be denied.
Alienation binds people together because of the outer, alien enemy of employment.
SOME UNSKILLED WORKERS' IMAGES OF MANAGEMENT: THREE MYTHS OF RELATEDNESS
This sense of coping with the ‘business of living’ was one of the themes that came out from a study conducted by the writer and a colleague from the Tavistock Institute for a client in 1974 (see Appendix One).
Briefly, the study was conducted through a series of group discussions with unskilled workers in three areas in England.
This study provided us with an opportunity to identify some of the myths that predominantly unskilled workers hold about life in their work environment.
When I say ‘myths’ it should now be clear that I am not using the term ‘myth’in any pejorative sense but am referring to the cultural assumptions existing in the world of work.
Three myths can be identified: the myth of unalterable dependence, the myth of independence, and the myth of hope.
The Myth of Unalterable Dependence
Workers in all the groups in all the areas were of the opinion that work and the organization through which it was carried out was inevitable and little could be done to alter it.
As one man expressed it: ‘When all's said and done we have to get a product out and the management are interested in how cheap it can be done and although it means sacrificing the worker it means one has a cheap product.’
They had, nevertheless, ideals of what constituted job satisfaction.
Consistently the view was presented that one had to feel that the job which one was doing at a particular time could be related to some end product.
If one was to look forward to work, it needed to be stimulating and enjoyable, but precisely what was meant by this could not quite be imagined.
Consequently, work for unskilled workers was not seen as being an entirely happy experience but something one did to earn money in the forms of pay, pensions and bonuses.
A certain fatalism was present in all the discussions.
More particularly there was a strong sense that life had been predetermined.
There is, therefore, an acceptance that work as it is experienced is ‘what school prepared us for’.
The causal connections between early life chances and present opportunities were implicit rather than explicit almost as if people did not want to articulate these except in the ways that I report.
Work itself with its complicated fluctuation of task was seen as too complicated for a worker to understand and the belief was that only management could do so.
Some even pointed out that job rotation, which was suggested as being a way of understanding the whole picture of a factory, was inefficient.
When a young worker offered one group the fact that in Germany workers had been given training to help people see themselves as not being ‘simply cogs in a wheel’, it was suggested that this could not be done in Britain.
The fatalism of life at work was accepted just as it was believed that they could not help themselves or, indeed, be helped.
Essentially, the industrial world was divided into ‘them and us’; a dichotomous view of the world in which there are those who manage and those who are managed.
Management however, was divided or ‘split’ into good and bad parts: higher management were ‘good’; middle management ‘bad’.
The one organization which one would expect workers would see as being part of their own world (one of the ‘us’) would be trade unions.
For the record, trade unions were not seen as being very important, except as giving some sort of ‘insurance’ against low wages and loss of employment.
While people recognized that ‘unions are as strong as the members make them’ little was done to ensure that shop stewards had authority from the work force.
Hope, we were told, does not lie with the trade unions except in a narrow economic sense and as a security.
In terms of the organization of enterprises, there was little belief that union representatives could be in a truly mediatory role between workers and management and could make work more interesting, for example.
This has all to be seen in the context of the profound fatalism about life itself.
While they acknowledged they did not feel themselves to be happy at work — their lot was ‘to work’— they felt that nothing could be changed because they did not have the knowledge.
As one young member of one of the groups put it: ‘We just accept things as they are, and while we are quite prepared to talk to you tonight we will not do anything tomorrow.’
People did not however see themselves as ‘apathetic’.
They described themselves to each other as being virtuous even, and certainly industrious.
Laziness belonged to workers elsewhere in other parts of the country.
They saw themselves as being responsible people who did not go on strike for trivial benefits such as a tea-break but, at the same time, also saw themselves as a little bit downtrodden, almost persecuted.
The evidence for the feelings of persecution came from the discussions of the fixing of wage rates by personnel managers.
American-owned firms were seen as particularly bad.
The belief expressed was that wage rates were held at a depressed level in the provinces of England compared to London.
And new firms entering an area were ‘asked’ not to raise wages by existing companies in the area.
It was also believed by some that if they went on strike for higher wages they would be victimized by all the companies in the area.
In the end all hope of change was projected into higher management.
People saw themselves as being totally dependent on top management.
Repeatedly the feeling was expressed that nobody could change the quality of their working lives except possibly higher management.
To cope with these feelings of helplessness and infantile-like dependency on external events and factors there has to be a myth which allows for the possibility of being heroic, apart from being a martyr.
The myth is that there could be a marvellous pairing between workers and higher management; between ‘them’ and ‘us’.
The point is that it is middle management who spoil and destroy this potential relationship.
Everywhere negative feelings were expressed about supervisors and junior management as a role.
The myth was expressed this way: if only higher management would come out of their offices and join the workers on the shop floor it would be possible to create better working conditions.
Workers had an interest in producing goods and higher management knew about production — how else could they have become higher management?— and so if the two got together all the crises would be resolved.
Repeatedly the theme of making  the work place like a family was touched upon, and while higher management were not referred to as ‘parents’ it was clear that in feeling they were so regarded.
Therefore, all the ‘bad’ had to be displaced into middle management.
Higher management were ‘good’ objects.
An alternative phantasy to create refuge from the insoluble problem of work was that work life in a small factory would be ideal.
As we reported at the time:
‘In a smaller firm there was [would be]a great deal of personal cooperation with people giving and receiving favours as they collaborated about their tasks, and ‘there was a lack of competition and everything was worked out in a fair-deal way’.
In essence such a firm was small, friendly and family-like in its organization’
(Lawrence and Jones, 1974).
There was a marked sadness in articulating this phantasy because it was a shared phantasy about people being together at work.
Throughout the discussions people had often said how they felt always ‘on their own’ at work.
The absence of relationships was experienced acutely.
Something of the despair and helplessness that men felt about work was projected into women.
The Role of Women
In the group discussions we were struck by the role that was allocated to women.
They were seen as mindless individuals who could take on repetitive tasks.
Men displaced their own feeling about being mindless into the women.
The assumption was that their wages only supplemented the family income and, anyway, they did not need to find work interesting because they had families to look after, which was their real job.
We were told that in one area there was a high degree of labour turnover among women.
It was suggested that women move from one factory to other factories at the rate of 50 to 60 a week.
(There was no way we could check this figure; the point is that it was accepted as a social fact.)
This is partly to get higher wages, but it is really so because jobs are run-of-the-mill and they are looking simply for a change of venue, a new setting, and new faces.
As one woman in a discussion group saw it: it really is a good thing that there is labour turnover and it is possible to move on to other factories because women do get bored.
Women are expected to work on shifts though none like the ‘unsociable’ ones.
Men, on the other hand, it was suggested, preferred to work a normal day and were not very fond of shift work.
In one group discussion we explored the role of women further.
We had a great sense of family responsibilities being carried into the work place.
Women had all the constraints of family life to cope with; children at school, shopping and housekeeping, but no sympathy was expressed by male members of the group as to the comparative hardness of the women's lives in terms of demands on them, such as few hours of sleep.
The rub was that the women said that when the wife went out to work and earned more income for the family, it meant ‘you live up to your wages’.
Overall, the sense was that women were subordinate to the masculine culture of work but were central to the world of the family.
The Myth of Independence
This myth was only articulated by one group which was convened in a northern seaside resort.
All the participants were unskilled and the majority, as we the group-takers understood it, had migrated to this town from the larger industrial cities that the seaside resort served as a holiday venue.
The belief they held was that the resort was a ‘dream city’ in that everyone who came on holiday there had the wish to live there permanently.
While they could point to the fact that the town might have a poor bus system, could have better public amenities and that in winter it was dull, they could also point to the good health they enjoyed compared to when they lived in a large industrial city.
Those who had moved from what they described as ‘inland’ had made and experienced some choice about the kind of life they cared to lead.
Such a move means wresting oneself and one's immediate family away from the extended family, uprooting from relations and depriving oneself of being sustained by kin contacts.
While the stated reason for moving to the resort was the desire to bring up one's children in a healthy place, the less readily acknowledged reason was to ‘better oneself’.
The recognized way of doing this was to own a boarding house and take in summer guests.
The dream that the resort offered was of economic independence by being in business on one's own.
The reality was that few had attained that ambition though some had tried.
To own a boarding house required capital in the first instance and to maintain the boarding house as a business venture in the early years the husband had to work as a taxi driver or have a part-time job during the winter.
Even though the chances of owning a boarding house were less then the people we listened to first believed, they had a distinctive orientation to work which no other group expressed.
Essentially, it was a calculative attitude and it was clear that they managed themselves in the sense that they saw work as being a means to their personal ends, which might be owning a boarding house, for example.
During the summer months it was possible to get a much more highly paid job as a housecleaner, a ‘barker’ or a bingo-caller or a taxi driver, and so the winter job of working in a factory was a ‘stop gap’.
This resulted in them not feeling involved in any way with the work enterprise.
To stay and gain promotion within a work enterprise would have acted as a brake on their aspirations to be independent of employment.
In a strange way these people identified with ‘them’(owners and managers), whom they admired, but their own dreams of independence interposed and there was no wish to have a sustained relationship with a particular firm.
The Myth of Hope
Apart from the firm belief that if workers and senior management were to pair and so produce a perfect working environment– all hope was placed in the children of the workers we spoke with.
This was very clear in one area where there had been redundancies in coal mining.
Consequently, the majority of participants in the group discussion had been in coal mining but now had jobs as unskilled workers in factories.
They felt acutely the loss of their skilled experience.
They could remember a world which they had known and recognized compared to the fragmentation of their work and lives that they were now experiencing.
Because they saw no way out of the situation for themselves, they held to the belief that if their children had better opportunities, particularly education, it would enable their children to have far better working lives.
The human world that they had known was a tight, total life pattern in which work and home were inextricably bound up.
The term ‘community’ in this context meant something because it had been experienced as such.
Everyone in the family lived out their lives in relation to coal-getting.
In the factory it was different because work was separated from home in a way they had never experienced before.
The participants in the discussion accepted this for themselves because they were too old to change, they said.
Essentially, they wanted to spend the rest of their lives in the area in which they were born, and anyway, where were there opportunities for ex-miners?
What the participants in this group discussion saw themselves as doing was working to make sure that their children could hope for a better life.
As we wrote at the time:
‘In conclusion, whilst this group was not a ‘happy’ group, there was evident a considerable yearning and reaching out towards happiness.
Expressed was a need to ‘belong’; a small firm, a boss who knows you as one of his employees, who walks around the factory — a benevolent authority — with the right and the ability to make decisions on the spot.
This is what people want to return to.
Expressed is an alienation, too great distancing between the work and where decisions can be made.
The work force want to return to a contract and yet do not want to return to a situation which takes away from their individual freedom and negotiating rights.
Hope is thus invested in the future, on the young, and this includes great stress on education and training’
(Lawrence and Jones, 1974).
Resentment versus Investment
So far I have reported myths (and dreams) that were held both consciously and unconsciously and indicated how these shape people's lives.
A more specific example of how the culture of work profoundly influences the industrial worker is around the issue of assessment.
I again quote from the report which we wrote:
‘In the same way in which a person's job can say something about the way he values himself and sees himself as being valued, there was considerable talk [in the group]about assessment and much time was devoted to the problems of time and motion and job evaluation.
These were perceived as tools of management,[who]were only interested in productivity and in milking as much as possible out of their work force and were thus responded to by a work force who were determined to ensure that their rewards were as high as possible, and thus there was a perceived necessity to fool the time and motion man.
This discussion held a number of themes at different levels.
What was evident at one level was resentment about being available to be ‘measured’ in terms as simple and unindividual as time, where personality and personal input and skill were not considered relevant.
On the other hand there was some investment in being able to assess performance such that it was possible to reward people for ‘good’ performance, and the group were not entirely able to sort this one out in that it was representing to them a dependent desire to be judged and be judged as good, and yet a refusal to accept the terms upon which judgement was being made in that they felt depersonalized by it’
(Lawrence and Jones, 1974).
The worker, we concluded, is caught in that he wants to make some investment in work, even though the ends sought may be quite diverse by different workers, and, at the same time, is always caught in a situation where he has to experience feelings of resentment.
This small study which yielded the myths that I have described is, perhaps, not sufficient to base any conclusions on except that there may be marked differences as between skilled and unskilled workers' experiences of work.
According to Willis there is the hypothesis that skilled workers create a culture which is complete in itself and it is centred round an involvement, even excitement, in the technological process, its tasks and activities.
When listening to unskilled workers we found that what was pre-eminent in their minds was the sense of being cut off from involvement in a product.
Both kinds of workers, even though in different ways, split from the social structure of their enterprise and both kinds see little political connection between themselves as workers and managers except that the latter are dominant.
The notion of ‘acting-back’ on this environment appears to be far from people's minds.
This study could be seen as a pilot study that gives an intimation that if one has the right methodology the data which is yielded can be richer than that created from other methods.
Essentially, we were exploring subjective experiences of work and pointing to the fact that these experiences become objective reality.
Mythical, yes, but nevertheless a shared reality that is potent enough to control people's lives.
And there is a real sense in which this ability to make fictions that maintain life at work is a triumph of the human imagination, given the conditions of work.
The problem always is to identify myths that support a mature life from those which distort the quality of living and mobilise only the less than adult, managerial capacities and capabilities of individuals in their work roles.
To be able to take and make a role in an industrial or other commercial enterprise–requires that the individuals have a sense for themselves of their personal identities.
If this is eroded through job experiences, the chances of making, no matter how keenly sought, mature object relations are minimised.
How this can happen requires a finer psychoanalytic lens.
A PSYCHODYNAMIC INTERPRETATION OF WORK EXPERIENCES
Work has emerged as a differentiated experience within the life space of the individual in industrial societies.
Work is ‘split off’ very often from the rest of life and it has been so since the beginnings of industrialisation.
Subsequently, there have been attempts to bring together man in relation to his work.
Freud suggested that work was man's link to reality because it was through work that the individual became linked to the human community.
But what happens if work is demonstrably and objectively a bad experience?
Usually, in the psychoanalytic literature, work is conceptualised as being a worthy activity engaging the individual with the reality principle.
This is plausible enough but falls down, I submit, when the work by its very nature is of such a character that failure to adapt might be construed as being more reality orientated.
The mass production enterprise is a case in point.
To the best of my knowledge there has been only one sustained examination of mass production undertaken by someone using a psychoanalytic perspective.
Geraldine Pederson-Krag, in a paper written in 1951, took a different stance from her psychoanalytic contemporaries when she analysed the system of mass production.
There are  two factors, she hypothesised, that have to be taken into account when commenting on work: the mechanisation of labour and mass production.
Her analysis is a rich one and I shall rely heavily on it even though I only take two aspects of her findings.
In particular, I am to follow her arguments that:
1
Mass production together with the mechanisation of labour impose on the worker a return to infantile living conditions, and
2
creates conditions that induce a return to the emotional relationships of childhood.
In the mass production enterprise the individual worker is dwarfed by the machinery which is experienced as producing a sense of threat and inadequacy, even though, in actuality, the machinery is only a realisation of man's logical thinking in response to the requirements of high technical efficiency.
At the same time, the worker has at his command tools and machinery that would make him feel enormous strength but he feels impotent because he is involved in only one part of the pattern of mass production; never experiencing involvement with a total process from the raw material stage through to a finished product.
All such experiences induce a sense of unreality in the employee.
This is further exacerbated by the noise in many factories which makes conversation difficult and so relationships with others are diminished.
When a worker is on piece work, it is even more difficult because concentration is required for the job in order to earn the best return.
The same sense is induced in white collar workers such as book-keepers, who are manipulating symbols that have little connection with tangible realities.
Just as workers in the mass production system they too have at their command machines endowed with amazing powers (such as computers), but they too cannot alter their environment significantly.
Pederson-Krag argues that for both these kinds of workers their experiences are:
‘…directly reminiscent of the existence of the individual in infancy before he could talk readily, when everyone was bigger and stronger, when chairs and tables were mountainous and had sharp injurious edges, when he could flood the dark universe with light if someone lifted him to press the switch, but when usually his greatest efforts were ineffectual to change anything.
It is associated too with the later world of fantasy, peopled with giants and genii, where the ordinary laws of cause and effect were suspended’
(Pederson-Krag, 1951).
Workers react in two ways to this occupational situation which infantilises them: some become bored which results in them becoming accident prone, or they develop hostility against those whom they feel have condemned them to this and withdraw into themselves.
This is made even more possible because the noisy environment impairs communication between people.
Neither response is an adult, mature mode of relating and the chances of checking out realities as they are experienced and perceived are reduced because of the noise in the environment.
These childhood emotional relationships are further engendered by the integration into the authority pattern that is essential to mass production.
The arrangement of authority and functions whereby one manager supervises a foreman who in turn supervises workers is reminiscent of family authority systems.
Just as can happen in families sometimes, the relationships between individuals in an enterprise are organized around fear of aggression  from strangers, i.e., comparing companies, which then makes each person submit to the authority of his supervisor.
It is suggested by Pederson-Krag that the workers' rivalry is stimulated in order to overcome their aversion to effort and resentment of the authority that makes their work life what it is.
The organization very often mobilises the fear of aggression from competing companies rather than a mature dependent relationship with the enterprise and its management and so encourages people to submit to the power of supervisors:
‘However, a business corporation is organized not so much for industrial warfare as for the production of goods or services for consumers and sustenance for its own members.
The corporation is like a vast pregenital mother who gives her brood security and nourishment, but who loves the eldest and the strongest (the top executives) best, since she gives them the most.
The weaker and inexperienced newcomers get promotion and wage increases, favours from the mother, only if they are deserving and their superiors approve.
This is reminiscent of the hypothetical primal horde where the tribal father kept the women to himself and allowed the sons to remain in the family on sufferance’
(Pederson-Krag, 1951).
Such conditions reinforce the individual's previous conditioning in his own family of origin but, of course, for some individuals it will run counter to their previous experiences.
Essentially, people in their work roles are caused to respond from their unconscious world of internal objects.
Compliance and complacency are the manifest behaviours associated with an infantile dependency culture.
Pederson-Krag argues that such conditions can foster ‘the development of the passive individual, the tool of the demagogue, both directly among its workers and indirectly among all those whom it benefits’.
In a prophetic passage she ends her paper as follows:
‘The product which once was the outcome of one man's hard-learned craft is now made by a dozen single operations, each too simple to give pride or meaning to the operator.
The less initiative the worker has, the better he can tolerate such a job.
To the general public the result of all this integrated activity has been an enormous improvement in the standard of living.
There never was a time when so many could get about so quickly, comfortably, and with so little effort as we can now (except when they were infants in arms).
For more and more people food is plentiful, available, easily prepared.
We are regaining that earthly paradise from which we were banished as we grew up, but at the cost of disturbances in our relations to reality, and in increasing pressures of hostility and anxiety’
(Pederson-Krag, 1951).
SOME PSYCHIC AND POLITICAL CONSEQUENCES
Hostility, Aggression and Anger
A beginning to an exploration of the psychic consequences of work experiences can be made from the problem of hostility and aggression in the enterprise.
The fact that these emotions exist in industrial and other enterprises and that the ego finds ways of defending against bad experiences is not at issue; what is more difficult to establish is the complex way in which these feelings are dealt with.
Menninger regarded work itself as an expression of aggression.
He argued that the life instincts (the erotic impulses) could be conceived of as being the chief influence for redirecting the destructive instincts of the individual.
His idea was that these have to be fused in some way in industrial societies otherwise such societies could not survive.
One method whereby the aggressive and destructive energies of mankind are sublimated is through work.
In a telling passage he provides part of his rationale:
‘It is easy to see that all work represents a fight against something, an attack upon the environment.
The farmer plows the earth, he harrows it, tears it, pulverises it; he pulls out weeds, or cuts them, or burns them; he poisons insects and fights against drought and floods.
To be sure all this is done to create something, for which reason we can call it work and not rage.
The destructiveness is, so to speak, specialized or selectively directed, and a net ‘product’ is obtained’
(Menninger, 1942).
For Menninger, the essential point is that ‘in work, as contrasted with purposeless destruction, the aggressive impulses are moulded and guided in a constructive direction by the influence of the creative (erotic) instinct’(Menninger, 1942).
Although instinct theory is now a questionable explanation of human behaviour, there is some truth in Menninger's observation that work is an admixture of aggression and creativity.
In particular, the creative element justifies the aggression (the struggle with materials, for instance ) when an artefact is produced that is satisfactory.
But what happens if the worker is divorced from any product and the chances of creativity are minimal?
If we look at the nature of work as developed through the application of scientific management principles we find that workers are only engaged in ‘part’ tasks rather than‘whole’ones.
If we compare much of contemporary task execution with primitive work, such as hunting, the whole tasks are obvious in the sense that discretion has to be used to ensure the death of the quarry and the result is manifest.
If the task is completed successfully there is joy and satisfaction; and there is disappointment, sadness and anger if it is not.
If we look at industrial work it can be seen that it tends to be too much dominated by part tasks in that the worker is not involved with the delivery of the whole product but with a small component of it and even, at times, with a particular operation on that small component.
So this means that the experiences of joy and disappointment are denied.
A good deal of effort, I suspect, is applied by people to control and manage their resentment and the resultant aggression, hostility and anger in the work place.
In part they are ‘helped’ in this by the social organization of enterprises which is posited on a ‘them’(management) and ‘us’(workers) axis.
The tension between the two absorbs a good deal of the aggression that is felt about a whole range of social experiences.
Menninger makes the point:
‘The organization of labor against its employers furnishes workers with a closely knit brotherhood end a formidable enemy upon whom they can project all their aggressions.
The men in power see this as a menace and attempt to make their position more secure by fighting; but in doing so they are forced to yield ground because of the losses they incur in decreased production.
The stiffer the opposition, the stronger waxes the battle, until much of the energy which would otherwise go into production of goods is deflected into personal warfare.
That some of this waste is unavoidable is probably true, for the aggressive instinct seems never to be satisfied with entirely impersonal objectives.
But that it may be redirected towards other ends is shown by the way in which labor difficulties become unpopular during war when employers and employees unite against a common foe’
(Menninger, 1942).
This ritualised drama of the conflict between managers and workers probably enables the participants to make a sort of sense of their relatedness.
That there is aggression in work enterprises has been a phenomenon pointed to and discussed by a number of psychoanalysts.
The thrust of what has been explored in this paper suggests that the culture of work enterprises induces a sense of inadequacy and inferiority in individuals.
To be sure, as Willis demonstrates above, people develop their own cultures which will have the function of providing a sense of worth for themselves collectively.
But if the experiences of work are a continual bombardment of the individual's sense of self-esteem, he can only respond aggressively in his own defence.
This aggression may be projected on to others, e.g., middle management, or turned back upon himself.
This will bring about both inner and social conflicts.
What has emerged from the studies examined in this paper is that workers are forced to take up an unsophisticated dependent position in the social organization of their enterprise.
This means that their relatedness to their organization can be construed as being infantile-like in that it evokes relationships reminiscent of childhood.
The search can be for the ‘lost object’, i.e., ‘good’ management; ‘good’relations (cf.
Lawrence and Jones, above, when describing the yearning for relationships among unskilled workers).
This sense of loss, of longing, dominates the psychic structure and exacerbates feelings of dependency.
The ‘lost object’(be it the good mother, or good management) can be converted into an object of hate.
This outward aggression, however, if it cannot be expressed to the object has to be turned inwards in depression, which is anger turned back upon the person.
Whether the worker directs his anger outwards or inwards he is in a fix; what can be called a ‘double bind’.
Kets de Vries summarises the position as follows:
‘Survival and adaptation to organizational life seem to be determined by the balance between inner-directed and outer-directed aggression.
If aggression is too much inhibited and inner-directed, the result may be immobilization and the incapacity to engage in any form of self-assertion.
The organizational consequences of uncontrollable, outward-directed aggression are obvious’
(Kets de Vries, 1978).
Alternatively, the ‘lost object’ is yearned and hungered for even more.
The point is now that the individual comes to fear wanting even to relate because the relationship itself might be destroyed.
The pain of the individual's sense of loss is so great that he withdraws from relating to any object he perceives as having authority as a way of masking the pain.
Sometimes this can be described as apathy: ‘to have difficulties in taking initiative, and to experience problems in personal control and human relations’(Kets de Vries, 1978).
But a sense of apathy arises from the feeling that life is pointless and futile.
More accurately, the apathy and futility can be described as schizoid aloofness.
If we use the term ‘schizoid’ in its clinical sense we find it refers to people who have:
1.
An enduring and maladjustive pattern of behaviour manifesting avoidance of close relations with others;
2.
Inability to express hostility and aggressive feelings directly;
3.
Autistic thinking (i.e., thinking unduly directed towards oneself and the inner personal view of the situation, at the expense of the information actually available from the external world);
4.
A shut-in, seclusive, withdrawn, introverted personality’
(The American Psychiatric Association, 1950).
In using this term I am not making the simplistic assumption that people who hold this position are sick.
I am less concerned to focus on the psychopathology of individuals than to point to a collective, cultural condition ‘and the tendencies of people who make it up’(May, 1969).
My hypothesis is that the conditions of work are such that one mode of relating is that of schizoid withdrawal which means that individuals have to take on some of the characteristics just described.
As Rollo May (1969) puts it: ‘The schizoid man is the natural product of the technological man.’
Clearly, there are other factors involved in bringing about this syndrome.
Experiences in a depersonalized family in childhood that subsequently bring about this readiness for schizoid withdrawal are re-awakened in a social situation that is depersonalizing.
The overall result, as I see it, is that the schizoid position is held to avoid feelings of anger and depression.
In this essay I have tried to identify the principal responses of workers to the industrial situation as they experience it.
At this juncture I merely want to hold on to the notion that workers are pressed, for a variety of reasons, into a dependent position of an infantile-like nature, which is felt to be unalterable, in many industrial enterprises.
This is their experience as well as interpretations made of their condition.
What is  carried ‘in the mind’— in their world of ‘internal objects’— has little chance to be reorganized in a mature fashion because they are continually being pressed into ‘childhood emotional relationships which result from integration in a pattern demanded by mass production’(Pederson-Krag, 1951).
The emotional relationships can be of aggression, depression and, most of all, schizoid withdrawal.
Something of the same emotional patterns are evinced by managers through the metaphors and myths of management which they carry in their minds.
The reciprocity between these sets of conceptions ‘in the mind’ can only perpetuate within the psyche of the individual worker and manager the images of authority they have inherited from their relationships with people who had authority over them in the past.
The possibility of moving to a state of mature interdependence between workers and management is thus diminished.
But not all workers are dependent and prone to inner-directed aggression or to schizoid withdrawal.
An equally immature posture is that of rebelliousness.
It can happen that the aggression is directed outwards.
The chances are that a management, such as described by Menninger or by myself, who take up a ‘fight’ /conflict posture vis-à-vis their workers, thus bring out the latent hostility and anger and push the worker, and themselves, into the rebellious position.
A management may be such that it is difficult for the worker to identify in any way with them.
The management can be a rejecting object and may well be confusing and inconsistent, so much so that workers cannot make sense of them and their demands.
One compensatory reaction that has to be developed is that of rebelliousness.
While this may be regarded as a sign of real independence it is probably more accurate to describe it as ‘pseudoindependence’(Kets de Vries, 1978).
Whatever the description the result for such individuals who take up this role is that their lives are beset by disappointment and frustration because the remainder mobilise in their own defence of their egos the kinds of myths I have indicated, or withdraw in a schizoid way.
Essentially, however, I am suggesting that the majority of workers avoid this extreme rebellious position.
Nevertheless, feelings of hostility and anger have to be deposited somewhere in the environment, otherwise the feelings of aggression would have to be acknowledged and acted upon.
One hypothesis is that these angry feelings are projected into shop stewards.
To be sure, the chances are that particular shop stewards are available to have these feelings deposited in them.
They have a predisposition for using such feelings.
Shop stewards are both chosen and self-selected.
The task of the shop stewards is, then, to carry ‘fight’ on behalf of other employees.
The ‘fight’ has to be shown to be taking place.
The obvious way is through wage negotiations and issues about security of employment.
To be able to sustain such a posture it is necessary that feelings of persecution be held by shop stewards vis-à-vis ‘them’, the management of the enterprise.
Through these kinds of dramas (the wage negotiation annual one) the remainder of workers can feel that their uncomfortable feelings of anger and paranoia are being dealt with so they can continue to hold the position of withdrawal, thus avoiding the pain of their real feelings.
This includes managers as well as workers.
Political Consequences
At the level of the local enterprise it is being hypothesised that the chances are that the political relations between management and workers are a re-enactment of patterns more reminiscent of family relations.
The chances of a mature, interdependent political relation is thus reduced.
We have already tried to capture something of this dilemma when we wrote of unskilled workers as follows:
‘The construct of authority ‘held in the mind’ is that it could be good but is in actuality bad, and the hope held by workers is that it [authority]may be all that is positive for their children.
Alongside this, one has to set a high degree of tolerance, dependency, held by unskilled workers [whom we interviewed].
What comes across, to us, is that workers, on the whole, do not feel they can change the principal features of their world of work…
What is so humbling is the fact that workers see it as their lot in life to put up with bad management for the social structure is such that they do not see themselves as having [the]qualities of managers.
‘It is easy to make the judgement that there is a good deal of fatalism held by unskilled workers…[they]believe they ‘don't have the knowledge’ to think about the organization of their work.
They know that trade unions could be mediators between them and management, but they do not give them authority.
They know that life at work could be more satisfying, but they have no desire to identify what their interests and ideas might be’
(Lawrence and Jones, 1974).
With hindsight, it is clear that at the time we did not fully grasp the real significance of the workers' position.
To be able to ‘identify what their interests and ideas might be’ is to take up a political stance to life at work.
The ‘double bind’ referred to already does much to quieten the voice of workers.
If the majority of workers could be angry (as opposed to just the minority being ‘rebellious’) about the conditions that are inducing a sense of nothingness, and loss of self-esteem, they would have either to face their depression (i.e., anger turned inwards) or face why the social structure is as it is.
For some, the schizoid position with its pain would have to be considered in order to rediscover how to feel.
This would necessitate questioning the myths that abound in the enterprise.
As it is, they create a culture that compensates for life at work; a myth system that draws its sustenance from being separate from the culture of management.
To question across the boundaries of the myth systems would, of course, involve aggression and getting in touch with the latent anger.
But by the same token managers would have to consider how their aspirations are being satisfied by the culture they create in the enterprise.
What I have offered up to this point, however, is only a partial description and explanation of the mutual, unconscious relatedness between workers and managers.
Both are related to each other within the frame of the organization of the enterprise in which they both work.
So far I have written about what may be carried ‘in the mind’ of workers and managers and attempted to see the political implications of the relations that ensue.
I have used the psychoanalytic constructs of the inner world and the outer world of the individual; the inner world of phantasy and the outer world of other people.
The individual can be seen to be struggling to reconcile these two states.
This, however, is not an adequate explanation because it cannot account for the kind of statement made by the apprentice of his appreciation of the grandeur of work that was quoted by Willis (1976) and repeated earlier in this paper.
Nor can it account for the way that unskilled workers in a northern seaside town could imagine, think and plan how to move into the boarding house business.
We need a third concept to relate the concepts of the inner and outer world.
Winnicott provides us with such a concept.
He asks in one of his papers, ‘The Place Where We Live’: ‘What are we doing when we listen to a Beethoven symphony or when a child is playing?’
He goes on to say that the question is also: ‘Where are we (if anywhere at all)?’
The answer is that this third human state has a special feature that distinguishes it from the other two (the inner and the outer states) in that it is a zone for cultural experience or creative playing.
This third way of living emerges from the experiences of the individual person in his environment.
Winnicott traces out how from infancy onwards individuals learn to make a space between themselves and others, and yet avoid total separation by ‘the filling in of the potential space with creative living, with the use of symbols, and with all that adds up to cultural life’(Winnicott, 1971).
This mode of relating, which starts between the mother and the infant, is taken over into subsequent situations such as enterprises, I suggest.
The industrial enterprise can be seen as the ‘Third Area’ or the area of cultural experience which arises out of attempts to reconcile the inner and the outer world.
The evidence, particularly of Willis, would support this working hypothesis.
Ways in which this Third Area are used by people in enterprises have been identified by a retired Tavistock Institute colleague, Isabel Menzies.
Here I use her hypotheses as set out in her paper ‘Some Mutual Interactions Between Organizations and Their Members’ as well as others she has written on the same theme.
As she says, her theoretical approach ‘centres around on attempt to link social science and psychoanalytic theories in order to further understanding of the functioning of social organizations’(Menzies, 1965).
Her central hypothesis is that a social organization with its culture, mode of functioning and political structure, is the product of a number of interacting factors.
Among these will be the definitions held by the people involved as to what the primary task of the enterprise is, how its relationships to its environment are conceived by the people in their roles, what uses they make of technologies ‘and the needs of the members for social and psychological satisfaction, and, above all, for support in the task of dealing with anxiety’(Menzies, 1970).
In the course of our psychic experiences with the objects of our feelings in our environment we build up an inner world which is peopled by ourselves and the residual images of these objects.
This process begins in infancy as I have indicated earlier in the paper.
I now want to add another dimension which relates to what I have said about aggression.
Again, I use Menzies:
‘In the inner world, they [objects]exist in a form and condition largely determined by his [the infant's]phantasies.
Because of the operation of aggressive forces, the inner world contains many damaged, injured, or dead objects.
The atmosphere is charged with death and destruction.
‘This gives rise to great anxiety.
The infant fears for the effect of aggressive forces on the people he loves and on himself.
He grieves and mourns over their suffering and experiences depression and despair over his inadequate ability to put right their wrongs.
He fears the demands that will be made on him for reparation and  ‘the punishment and revenge that may fall on him.
He fears that his libidinal impulses and those of other people cannot control the aggressive impulses sufficiently to prevent utter chaos and destruction.
The poignancy of the situation is increased because love and longing themselves are felt to be so close to aggression.
Greed, frustration, and envy so easily replace a loving relationship.
This phantasy world is characterized by a violence and intensity of feeling quite foreign to the emotional life of the normal adult’
(Menzies, 1970).
Much of this I have touched on already.
In any particular organization individuals bring in these anxieties from their inner, phantasy worlds.
The chances are that in some organizations there will be real difficulties and dangers such as in nursing, coal mining, and heavy industries or indeed any work situation which has machinery.
The individual is always trying to reconcile his inner and outer world and lessen the anxiety of the internal situation.
One way this is done is to project the internal situation into current real situations when they symbolise the internal situation.
Menzies states her hypothesis as follows:
‘As a member of an organization, the individual makes use of on-going organizational situations as depositories for the projection of his internal anxiety situations.
Different individuals project different internal situations into the shared real situation and experience these somewhat differently.
The individuals then develop and use in concert organizational means for dealing with both the real difficulties and dangers and with the highly personal anxiety situations that are projected into them.
Greater assurance about mastery of anxiety is gained by effective collaboration with other members of the organization in taking organizational action about the organizational problems which incorporate the personal problems.
In particular, the individuals collaborate over the erection of a system of socially-structured defences against anxieties arising from both common and personal sources’
(Menzies, 1965).
The point, as I understand it, is that there can be a resonance between the inner situation and its anxieties and the outer world with its real dangers.
These inner phantasies are projected into the external reality which is then re-incorporated as objective reality.
There is a mutual, collusive process at work.
In relation to the themes of this paper, I believe that very primitive aspects of the mind are brought into the work situation.
Since organizations are about authority — or political relations — it is this aspect which is mobilised, at least if we accept the evidence of Pederson-Krag (1951) and Lawrence and Jones (1974).
The external reality does little to allay the  phantasied anxieties.
Managers representing the organization are also caught in the web of their own anxieties about production, status and power.
Hence these come to be re-incorporated by workers who then collectively have to defend themselves from being overwhelmed, i.e., having their internal fears confirmed.
How this can be done I have tried to elucidate when I wrote of hostility and anger, the depressive and schizoid positions.
In short, although it is an oversimplification, I am suggesting that workers develop solidarity, or a bounded culture and protect their own boundaries as a group in order that their primitive fears can be allayed.
Similarly, so do managers.
Between the two, so to speak, in the organizational and cultural space between them, or the Third Area, come the psychic and political relations to which I have been pointing.
Overall, I am coming to the view that the main cultural element is the collective wish to have a non-relation, or at least one that is strictly delimited, between workers and managers and, in turn, between the worker and his enterprise except in terms of the workers' culture which is one of withdrawal.
This ‘withdrawal’— which can be explained as a collective, dignified attempt not to have any truck with the enterprise except on one's own terms — which an outsider can describe as apathy or schizoid withdrawal — has far-reaching political consequences.
The culture of the worker can only be subordinate and a closed system; a security from the salient values of the industrial culture.
The culture is about accepting the status quo, about accommodating to the demands of the industrial system.
It cannot be a radical political culture because of the limits of its concerns.
What has been described is a culture of social passivity.
Assuming that no mature way can be found to speak from the workers' culture or meaning system, as opposed to breaking it down and imposing on it other meaning systems such as that espoused by management, then passive individuals will be fostered.
They are passive in the sense that the social structure is seen and experienced as being outside of them and not amenable to questioning, only acceptance.
Furthermore, this structure is split off from the actual social structure they carry ‘in their minds’ and which they internalise from their own culture.
All this means that individuals find it more difficult to give meaning to their lives and become isolated units, without a mutual interdependence with objects in their human environment.
Individuals thus become preoccupied with themselves and unempathic.
There is no possibility of creating anything either by oneself or in conjunction with others — or, indeed, in relating with others.
In such an existential situation there can only be one desperate outcome:
‘If man cannot create anything or move anybody, if he cannot break out of the prison of his total narcissism and isolation, he can escape the unbearable sense of vital impotence and nothingness only by affirming himself in the act of destruction of the life that he is unable to create.
Great effort, patience and care are not required; for destruction, all that is necessary is strong arms, or a knife or a gun’
(Fromm, 1977 edn.).
Whether versions of destruction are to take place within or without the industrial enterprise, the political implications are obvious.
What we should remember, however, is that workers have not always had the same kinds of experiences I have just described and have, consequently, been able to hold on to a sense of political relatedness between themselves as individuals and groups vis-à-vis society and the industrial enterprises within it.
The separation or split between individual and society started in the last century.
E.P.
Thompson, the historian of the working class, has argued that the working class community was the product of a ‘High degree of working class endeavour’(Thompson, 1968 edn.).
The evidence he has collected shows that working people of the last century were able to hold an image of society from their own experience and so articulate a political consciousness.
According to Thompson the early nineteenth century was the time of:
‘…the most popular culture England has known.
It contained the massive diversity of skills, of the workers in metal, wood, textiles and ceramics without whose inherited ‘mysteries’ and superb ingenuity with primitive tools the inventions of the Industrial Revolution could scarcely have got further than the drawing board.
From this culture of the craftsmen and the self-taught there came scores of inventors, organizers, journalists and political theorists of impressive quality’
(Thompson, 1968 edn.).
Thompson shows that again and again in the last century these men resented efforts to make them into ‘tools’ or ‘implements’.
Even ‘when they knew their cause was lost…they reached out again, in the Thirties and Forties, and sought to achieve new and only imagined forms of social control’(Thompson, 1968 edn.).
I have tried to express in another paper one conclusion:
‘But despite their heroic culture, with its dreams, visions and utopian ideals, such men became what they feared the most: the proletariat; a dissociated aggregate of society; men and women converted from citizens to mass consumers.
Now a century later, we are in the midst of mass society, that half-welfare and half-garrison society in which the population grows passive, indifferent and atomized’
(Lawrence, 1979).
Continuing this political enquiry we should note the belief that was once expressed with some confidence that as workers became more affluent they would take on the values of the middle classes in their society.
The thesis of embourgeoisement of the British working class has proved to be an attractive one.
Goldthorpe and his colleagues conducted an empirical enquiry into working class affluence and working class politics to conclude that embourgeoisement is not a tenable thesis.
As they say:
‘Our affluent workers remain, in spite of their affluence, men who live by selling their labour power to their employers in return for wages; and, in all probability they will still be so at the end of their working days.
Again, although they and their families enjoy a standard of living comparable to that of many white-collar families, their social worlds are still to a large extent separate from those of the latter, except where linkages of kinship, or to a lesser degree of neighbourhood, can span the social distance between them.
Nor is there much indication that affluence has encouraged the desire to seek acceptance in new social milieux at higher status levels.
Thus, we would suggest, there is, as yet at least, little basis for expecting any particular change in the political attitude and behaviour of these workers apart, perhaps, from the spread of the more calculative — more rational — outlook’
(Goldthorpe et al., 1967).
While the possibility of affluence influencing political stability may be present in the future, there is always the possibility that the worker, from his subjective experience of work and of his society, may articulate a political outlook of dissent and radicalism.
A recent analysis of social class in Britain by Ralf Dahrendorf does much to explain why little hope can be placed in any movement towards embourgeoisement in Britain.
Compared with any other major European country, Britain does not differ significantly on any index of social stratification.
Furthermore, Dahrendorf argues, there should be less conflict in the Marxian sense because so many of the means of production are publicly owned.
Nevertheless he points out that in Britain we appear to have industrial malaise, adversary politics and a society that is different in quality compared to other developed European countries.
The reasons for this are complex and to explain the situation all away in terms of social class is an oversimplification.
The factors which differentiate Britain from the remainder:
‘…are social values rather than social structures.
For whatever reason, British society places much emphasis on solidarity with others rather than competition between individuals, and it is this phenomenon which is often mistaken for class’
(Dahrendorf, 1979).
While such solidarity may cause the nation to bind together from time to time as in 1940, at present it-is of a divisive nature rather than unifying.
Whereas other countries, such as Japan, Germany and the USA, have had substantial increases in gross national product and per capita income, it is not the case in Britain.
This is because solidarity, rather than competitiveness, is a prevailing value.
This solidarity Dahrendorf describes as follows:
‘It is within the little boxes which the division of labour has bequeathed us, a solidarity in other words which involves permanent concern with the boundary of one's own box, and thus with comparability.
Such solidarity can be quite ruthless: it is a much stronger force for people than any appeal to overriding common interests of on enterprise, a community, a nation.
But it is also a binding force, one that holds people together and sustains them’
(Dahrendorf, 1979).
And again:
‘Solidarity…
[
A means that one wants to please one's peers, not one's bosses.
This is not only easier, but also more fun.
Tea breaks and chats in the yard and dart games in the pub make life pleasant; the fact that nobody will do anybody else's job gives everybody security; people's aspirations do not take them out of their group, but concern the group as such’
(Dahrendorf, 1979).
Some more features:
‘A solidarity society is pleasant to live in, but it is neither economically efficient nor politically sensible.
It has been observed that on increasing number of industrial disputes actually begin at the grass roots; trade union leaders merely invoke democracy and then proceed to lead from behind.
Only a society in which people feel secure in their peer groups can bring about such mass action from below.
At the same time it is easy to see that group solidarity overrides all other loyalties and motives.
It makes for static relations’
(Dahrendorf, 1979).
The psychic reasons for this solidarity I have tried to give in this essay, just as I have attempted to spell out some of the political consequences, but it is to Dahrendorf that we owe the making of the connections between solidarity and economic consequences.
The working hypothesis I end with, however, is that the subjective experiences of work, engendered by the application of particular rational-scientific principles of work organization, can have the psychic consequence that the worker is asked to manage himself at less than a mature level.
He can, then, only withdraw into his own culture which provides him with a sense of lived connections for his experiences but these are bounded by his enterprise and separate from the larger society.
His only possibility is to tap the latent anger, which he has to keep suppressed for the most part, and the social depression that would enable him and his peers to speak out from their own consciousness in order that a mature and civilized level of relationship can be attained between them and others.
Similarly, managers are also caught in their myth systems which deny their capability for maturity.
For example, the myth that management development is a politically neutral, objective activity that brings the best talent out for service to the enterprise (Lawrence, 1977).
Other connections between the psychic worlds of individuals and groups and their political relations have been traced out systematically by Guntrip.
He argues that there are only two ways out of disturbed immature relationships.
There is the false solution of an escape into ‘schizoid withdrawal’.
This, as I have said but repeat, is to escape into oneself and to abolish emotional  relationship altogether because they are too pressurising.
One then becomes a ‘cold detached person who acts mechanically with people’(Guntrip, 1961).
One of my arguments is that the mechanical relations of work can bring about this withdrawal.
The real solution, predictably, is to attempt growth to maturity, i.e., ‘relationships of mature dependence in equal partnership’(Guntrip, 1961).
But this is easier said than done.
It is the struggle to maturity that brings that state, and which, perhaps, can never be attained as such.
In all this both managers and workers are equally implicated.
In social situations we can ‘act out’ our political struggles to make transitions from immature to mature relationships.
But if the politics are not even experienced and lived, the struggle cannot take place.
This may be too despairing a note to end on.
Situations are more dynamic than I have been able to describe.
My experience has been that there are a great many people in industrial and other commercial enterprises who want to have insight, and indeed already possess it, into their roles in industry and to contrast these with their roles as citizens.
They want to engage in as mature a fashion as possible in realities as they are being experienced in order to take and make their own authority for their existence without being caught in the many traps for immaturity which are open to them.
The obvious trap is that of being infantilised.
Alternatively, to avoid this people come to feel omnipotent which is but a short step from wreaking the kind of destruction that offers little hope of remaking life at work anew.
People, however, can only mobilise their adult mature capacities if their peers are prepared to be curious about their social world and its implicit and explicit political structures as these exist in reality and in their minds.