

Help with choosing your first camcorder
IT'S strange but true: the earliest ancestors of the video camcorder are to be found in holes deep below ground which were inhabited by cave dwellers long before the dawn of recorded history.
Here, faint traces can still be found of man-made images which show that, in one respect at least, our club-wielding predecessors were just like us: they had the urge to record the important happenings in their lives in the form of two-dimensional pictures.
Men have always had the compulsion to ‘freeze’ the memory of important events in pictures.
This cave drawing is typical of the work of our artistic ancestors.
Nowadays, we store our memories in more high-tech ways — but the images still fulfil the same basic human need.
The creation of these early drawings required considerable ability on the part of the artist.
More recently, the coming of photography has made it possible for even the least talented among us to produce our own pictorial records.
Now we have video, a complex technology which is so automated and fool-proofed that it enables anyone, whether technically minded or not, to record moving pictures to a standard which can be very high indeed.
Although camcorders have become a popular means of picture-taking, many more people are familiar with video in the form of table-top recorders (VCRs) for the time-shifting of television programmes and the viewing of rented films.
If you have used one of these, you will already know quite a bit about video recording from handling video cassettes, and knowing what all the tape control buttons are for.
Also, you will no doubt be aware that video tapes and their cassettes come in various formats, and that the initials VHS, for instance, stand for one of the most popular of these.
However, for the benefit of those who have yet to become acquainted with these mysteries, let's take a look at the whole business of video formats and their particular significance to anyone who is intending to purchase a camcorder.
Currently, there are six formats which can be used with camcorders.
These are standard VHS, VHS-C, Super-VHS, Super VHS-C, Video 8 and Hi 8.
Various other formats have come and gone over the years, but these are the ones which have become established and likely to remain for the foreseeable future.
How do you set about choosing the best format?
Let's consider each in turn.
STANDARD VHS
If you already have a table-top VCR machine, it is very likely to be this format and you will no doubt have a stock of VHS cassettes which use standard 12.7 mm (½ in) video tape.
If you are going to buy a camcorder, it might seem to he sensible to keep to this format: all your cassettes would be interchangeable, and you would be able to play back your own recordings on your colour television via your existing VCR just as you would any other tape.
Although this may seem advantageous, however, it is not a conclusive reason to choose standard VHS, since you can play back recordings of any format by plugging the requisite camcorder into the television set in place of the VCR.
Are there any other advantages in favour of standard VHS?
Certainly, one plus point is that you can record three to four hours of material onto the one tape.
Also, the cassettes are cheaper than any of the other formats, blank tape being widely available in a variety of qualities which extend up to the ‘PRO’ grade for really important recordings.
Picture quality is good; if the format has a weakness, it is in the quality of the sound if recorded to the old ‘mono’ system which has a tendency to be slightly hissy.
The reason for this is that the sound is recorded as a separate linear edge-track which runs at the slow forward speed of the tape, and the speed affects the audio quality to some extent.
On the other hand, these sound tracks can be erased and re-recorded (dubbed) independently of the pictures; this is an important advantage when video tapes are being edited (see page 80).
Some VHS camcorders now overcome the sound quality problem by adding (non-dubbable) hi-fi stereo sound alongside the mono track.
Another factor to bear in mind is that VHS cassettes are quite bulky, and full VHS camcorders are correspondingly hefty pieces of equipment to carry round.
So, if portability is an important factor, consider one of the compact formats instead.
VHS-C
Technically speaking, the only difference between VHS and VHS-C is in the length of the tape in the cassette, which for VHS-C is currently limited to forty-five minutes runtime at standard play speed (‘PAL’ machines), though this could increase as tapes are further improved.
Most VHS-C camcorders are twin-speed, the LP setting halving the speed and thus doubling the runtime albeit at the cost of a slight reduction in recording quality.
Because of the shorter tapes, the cassettes are much reduced in size and therefore VHS-C camcorders are smaller and lighter to handle than full VHS machines.
To play compact VHS cassettes in most, but not all, full-size table-top machines, however, they must be slotted into special adapters which adjust the tape-path to suit.
The cost of VHS-C tapes per hour of running time is much higher than for standard VHS.
SUPER-VHS AND SUPER VHS-C
These are the first of the super-formats, and although basically compatible with standard VHS, the picture quality is greatly improved.
This is achieved by the use of specially-formulated tape and by technical upgrading of the machines themselves — so both the tapes and the equipment to run them cost more.
Hi-fi stereo sound is also available.
To reap the full benefit of the extra quality, the playback VCR or camcorder should be connected to the colour TV set or monitor via a special ‘S’ connector which splits the playback signal in such a way as to cause the brightness and colour components to be processed separately.
Because of the higher picture quality, Super VHS (and, to a lesser extent, Super VHS-C), has become a semi-pro premium format for the origination of recordings intended for post-production editing onto a copy tape.
Bear in mind that although VHS pre-recorded tapes will play back on S-VHS equipment, the converse is not possible: S-VHS recordings will play back only on S-VHS machines.
VIDEO 8 (8mm) /HI 8
Finally we come to the smallest, but by no means the least, of the formats: Video 8 and its ‘super’ version Hi8.
The cassettes are of audio-cassette size, and the tapes are specially produced ‘metallic’ types only 8mm (⅓ inch) wide.
The recording quality for standard 8mm is at least equal to VHS, and the comparison also holds for the two competing super-formats of Hi8 and S-VHS.
Compared to VHS-C, though, Video 8 tapes have a longer maximum runtime of up to two hours (standard play), or four hours at LP speed (‘PAL’ machines).
This is sufficient to hold most video camcorder shoots without the inconvenience of changing cassettes in the middle, a drawback encountered on VHS-C.
In spite of its four-hour capability, Video 8 is basically a camcorder-only format.
There are few 8mm table-top VCRs around simply because there are as yet virtually no pre-recorded tapes in this format to buy or rent.
In practice, this means that you have to show your own original recordings either by playing them directly off the camcorder onto the colour television, or by first copying them onto one of your table-top machine cassettes for showing along with your other tapes.
This involves a slight drop in picture quality, but the copying can be done as a part of the editing routine (see page 82) and the loss in quality is then offset by improvements in presentation that editing inevitably brings.
One of the big pluses for Video 8 is the high sound quality from the hi-fi FM recording system it uses.
This encodes the audio and video signals together and puts them onto the tape via the high-speed rotation of the head-drum; it is this ‘high writing speed’ recording method which greatly improves the audio quality compared with VHS mono.
However, this combination of the two signals does have one drawback; it prevents pictures and sound from being erased and re-recorded separately during editing.
For this reason, you will not find an audio dub button on an 8mm machine which has hi-fi FM   sound.
Stereo sound, which can be dubbed separately, is available on the few machines which feature the alternative PCM system of audio recording.
Each format has its own cassette design (anticlockwise from top): VHS is the largest in size and has the longest runtime of up to four hours (PAL); VHS-C cassettes are more compact but the runtime is reduced to a maximum of 1 ½ hours (Long Play); Video 8 has the smallest cassettes but runs for up to four hours (LP).
VHS hi-fi stereo sound, unlike VHS mono, is encoded at high speed along with the picture signals in the same way as Video 8 hi-fi, and hence has the same high standard of audio quality.
Having considered the tape formats, now let's take a look at the camcorders that use the tapes.
There is a very wide range of models to choose from, and they come in all shapes, sizes and prices.
In fact, the choice is so wide that your problem may be one of bewilderment — how are you to pick the ideal model from the dozens competing for your custom?
We have already narrowed the field significantly by looking at cassette formats.
Now we'll narrow it some more by considering which camcorder features are essential and which are simply desirable.
In essence, a camcorder consists of a video camera and a recorder built together into a one-piece unit which can be powered either by battery or mains adapter.
This distinguishes camcorders from ‘separates’, which do the same job but in the form of individual cable-connected cameras and recorders.
For some years now, the amateur market has been dominated by one-piece machines and separates have virtually disappeared from the scene.
Your camcorder consists of a video camera and recorder built as a one-piece unit.
Behind the lens is the electronic image-sensor; the rear of the body-shell accommodates the cassette, tape transport mechanisms and record-section.
The camera section of a camcorder has a photographic lens which forms an image of the subject on a sensing device.
This converts the image into electronic signals which are passed to the recorder section containing the cassette housing and tape transport mechanisms.
The video sensing is done by a robust and high-definition solid-state imaging device called a CCD.
The recorder section also receives sound signals from a built-in microphone and puts these onto the tape along with the video pictures.
Camcorders can play back their recordings immediately after they have put them onto the tape.
The playback can he displayed either over the viewfinder so you can check your recordings as you go or by being connected to an external television screen or monitor.
The three basic camcorder shapes are shown in these typical examples (two here, one shown overleaf).
The one on the left is a ‘compact’ model which is light enough to be hand-held and easily carried round.
The camcorder on the right is bigger and heavier and is designed to be supported on the shoulder: compare the position of its side-mounted viewfinder with the ones on the compact machines.
Otherwise.
although the body-shapes are very different, these camcorders are operated in much the same way.
The other main distinction between camcorder types is in the style of the body-shell.
Most camcorders arc designed to be hand-held, so the minimisation of size and weight has been an important consideration.
However, the lighter the camera the harder it is to hold steady, though at least one ultra-compact machine now has Electronic Image Stabilisation to minimise picture shake!() n the other hand, professional-style camcorders, which are much heavier, are not as prone to the problem of camera-shake.
Another advantage of professional-style camcorders is that they are built longer in the body so that they can he supported on the shoulder — the operator's hands are then left to steady the front end and operate the controls.
The shoulder-mount design is typical of standard and super VHS machines which have thereby come to he associated with semi-pro use.
Camcorder viewfinders are, in effect, miniature television screens, and they show both the scene as received by the camcorder lens and also the recorded picture when the machine is switched to playback.
Some viewfinders are built solidly into the camcorder body while others are adjustable to make it easier to take shots at awkward angles.
Viewfinders also commonly contain displays of useful information such as the state of the battery and the mode of operation in use.
So far, we have looked briefly at the basics which are common to all camcorders, that is formats, body-shapes, and viewfinder arrangements.
Now let's take a quick look at some of the other operating features which you need to know about before you can decide on the model of machine which will he best suited to your own particular needs.
To begin with, all camcorders have automatic exposure control as standard.
Auto-exposure systems work by measuring the average brightness of the incoming picture, and they control it to a standard level by varying the lens iris opening and the ‘gain’ of the camcorder's video amplifier.
In most situations this works perfectly well, but there are times when it is useful to be able to make your own adjustments.
Most camcorders provide manual control options to allow you to do this.
The simplest of these manual controls is the ‘backlight ’(BLC) button, by which the exposure can be increased by a fixed amount when shots are being taken under ‘backlit’ lighting conditions (see page 25).
As an alternative, fuller and more flexible manual exposure control is provided on some machines in the form of a thumbwheel or pair of ± toggle switches which enable you to control the amount of increase or decrease in the exposure and so obtain the best possible picture.
A further refinement found on some models is ‘exposure lock ’ by means of which the exposure can he preset at a   particular level and held through a shot — we shall consider the reasons for wishing to do this later (see Chapter 5).
CHECK LIST
Here are a few really useful features — check your model has them before you buy.
A socket for an extension microphone — a useful means of improving the quality of your sound recordings.
An earpiece socket — essential for monitoring the sound as it goes onto the tape.
A still-frame button — vital for the precise location of edit-points when you are recording.
A record-review button — a great time and battery saver when you want to make a quick check-replay of a shot on location.
A manual focus ring and zoom lever for fast operation and minimum drain on battery.
The shape shown here is one of the newer ultra-compact palmcorders.
Many video cameras now include a feature known as ‘High-Speed Shutter ’.
This is primarily intended for the recording of fast-moving subjects such as sports action.
The normal (electronic) shutter speed of a camcorder is  of a second; this is too slow to record rapid movement as anything other than a blur.
Higher shutter speeds, variable up to  of a second or beyond, are now available on camcorders to give better definition of fast action when played back on a VCR with matching replay facilities.
However, high shutter speeds reduce the exposure time and so are best used only in good light.
Also, the movement on screen can appear rather jerky due to an effect known as ‘image strobing’.
On the other hand, the details within the shot can certainly be seen with enhanced clarity if played back frame-by-frame or in slow-motion.
The use of high-speed shutter technology has been extended by the introduction of ‘program auto-exposure (AE)’ systems on some camcorders.
These programs give the user various exposure options suited to the needs of differing subjects, typically sports and portraiture.
For ‘Sport’ AE, a high shutter speed is set automatically and the auto-exposure then opens up the lens iris to suit.
Conversely, ‘Portrait’ AE sets a larger than normal lens aperture.
This gives the picture a reduced depth of field and so separates the subject from the background; the shutter speed is then automatically adjusted to offset the increased exposure.
There are differences of opinion as to the real worth of program AE for video recording, but most people agree that some form of manual override of auto-exposure control is a very useful thing to have on any camcorder.
Camcorders vary in their ability to produce a good picture in low light, but any model capable of working at a light level of 10 lux or less will enable you to record in most interiors without the need for additional lighting.
To help you cope with really poor lighting, some camcorders are fitted with a small onboard video light for either manual or automatic control.
The ability to fade both vision and sound while shooting is certainly a worthwhile feature, and auto-faders are to be found on almost all camcorders.
If you can, you should try this out before you buy: some tend to give incomplete or premature fading of the sound, while others (a minority) fade to white instead of the more customary black.
For many years, video camera lenses have come with manual focus rings and zoom operating levers fitted as standard.
However, the pattern is changing, and one recent development is the introduction of camcorders which have power-zoom toggles but no manual zoom lever; another change is the substitution of toggle-switches in place of a focus ring.
These arrangements work quite well, but some prefer the simpler and faster manual alternatives, partly because power-driven controls use up precious battery capacity.
Modern camcorders have zoom lenses which can enlarge the scene by telephoto factors of ×6 or more.
Some now have ‘zoom extenders ’ which further increase this zoom range either by optical or electronic means.
As we shall see in Chapter 4, hand-held shots taken at extreme telephoto ranges can be pretty wobbly affairs, so the practical value of extended zoom ranges is somewhat open to question, though electronic zooms can be used for the creation of special effects.
‘Macro ’, a lens setting that enables the shooting of small subjects (including colour transparencies) at very close range, is also to be found on most camcorders.
Although manual focus is a useful feature, almost all camcorder operation is done with the lens set to auto focus (AF).
This is a great boon to the amateur camera operator who, unlike the professional film-maker, has to get by without an assistant to act as focus-puller.
Most current AF systems are both accurate and fast in finding and holding focus on moving subjects, and although there are a number of different types of system, there is not too much to choose between them in practice.
Another ‘camera’ feature is the ‘white balance ’(WB) setting system which compensates for changes in the colour of the light while shooting.
One of the most popular types of WB is the ‘tracking auto ’ system which automatically monitors the scene and continuously corrects for any light changes; this is commonly supplemented by a pair of fixed presets, one for daylight, and one for artificial (tungsten) light.
A further type of WB is set manually, the camcorder being aimed at a standard reference such as a white card or lens cap.
‘WB lock ’ is a useful refinement by means of which a setting can be obtained and held irrespective of lighting changes — handy when you are shooting sunsets!
Moving on now to some of the other facilities and controls to be found on camcorders, there are one or two which deserve a mention here because of the way in which they speed up and simplify their operation.
A ‘full auto ’ button, for instance, is very useful because it gives auto-exposure/auto focus/auto white balance at a single press.
Another helpful facility is called ‘picture search ’.
Its function is similar to the one found on table-top video machines, that is it enables the recorded picture to be replayed over the viewfinder both forwards and in reverse at a fast speed so that particular points on the tape can be located quickly.
A refinement of this is ‘record revue ’, which automatically replays the last few seconds of the previous shot as a check before returning the camcorder to record-mode.
‘Rehearsal ’ mode or its equivalent is also very useful, as it saves the  head-drum and tape from unnecessary wear by displaying the scene to be shot in the viewfinder without the camcorder needing to be held in record-pause while takes are being lined up.
If you are ‘editing in camera’, that is shooting your scenes to the correct length and in the correct order, the ‘still frame ’ button will help you to begin each new shot at the right place on the tape.
Some upmarket machines have ‘digital still ’, giving freeze-frames without the customary noise-bars, others have ‘still frame advance ’, to make the finding of edit-in points even more precise.
‘Time-lapse ’, as its name suggests, makes possible recording in bursts of a few frames at variable time intervals so that subjects such as the movement of clouds or the budding of flowers can be studied in speeded-up replay.
We should not overlook the sound recording facilities when choosing camcorder.
All camcorders are fitted with an onboard microphone , and many but not all have a socket for monitoring the incoming or recorded sound on an earpiece or headphones ; many also provide a socket for plugging-in an extension microphone .
A problem with camcorders in general is the proximity of the microphone to emitters of mechanical noise such as the camera's power zoom motor or the auto-focus servo.
Some machines have less trouble with this than others, but the option of being able to use an extension microphone held well away from the camcorder is a good way of avoiding spoiling your recordings.
There is more on this topic later — see Chapter 10.
Another sound recording problem is wind-noise off the micro-phone, and some camcorders are fitted with a wind-noise filter switch which can help to reduce this annoying fault.
While on the subject of camcorders and their microphones, many models, as we have already noted, now record sound in hi-fi stereo , and the audio quality is excellent.
You do, of course, need to have replay facilities which also have stereo sound to do justice to this type of audio recording.
You may regard ‘audio dub ’— a means of over-recording the original sound with new material without affecting the picture — as an essential camcorder feature.
Many VHS-format machines have this, and some also have ‘picture insert ’, which usually involves the over-recording of the original picture without affecting the sound.
8mm-format machines, however, insert both pictures and sound together.
For all insert editing operations, the feature known as ‘flying erase ’ is important, as it enables the edits to be made cleanly without picture disturbance at the insert out-point.
Digital title superimposers and/or character-generators are provided on most camcorders.
These enable you to put titles onto your recordings while they are being shot, with the option of adding a record of the date and time if desired.
Among the remaining socketry, the most important ones are: an ‘RF-out ’socket for connecting your camcorder to the television set for replay of tapes; ‘AV out ’sockets for connection to your TV's ‘AV in ’sockets (if it has these) for higher-quality playback;camcorder ‘AV in ’ sockets for dubbing pre-recorded video onto the camcorder tape (very few camcorders now have these useful video input facilities);S-terminal or RGB connections for ultra high-quality replay of super-format tapes (your TV set will also need to have these socket inputs); ‘synchro-edit ’for starting machines simultaneously when editing tapes; and remote control sockets (‘LANC’or their equivalent) for automatic control of camcorders and VCRs by edit controllers.
To end this features roundup, we need to mention timecode generation facilities (VITC or RCTC) for frame-accurate editing — see Chapter 8 for more on this new development; ‘edit switches ’ for optimising the quality of your camcorder's video signal output when copying tapes onto another machine;remote control handsets for camcorders; and SP/LP sliders to switch you from Standard recording speed to Long Play.
As you can see, there are a lot of features to keep in mind when you are choosing a camcorder.
Fortunately, it's simpler than it looks.
First decide on the video format, and then jot down a short-list of the features you consider to be really essential, bearing in mind the cost of the models which include these.
Having narrowed the field, do a tour of the shops and try as many different models as you can, keeping a watchful eye on such things as good picture definition and colour, no picture ‘jitter’(unsteadiness), and good sound recording with low hiss and mechanical noise pick-up.
Whatever you decide, it pays to look before you leap.
At the end of the day, a camcorder with sound, basic design is going to give you years of creative pleasure, even if it doesn't have all the latest sales gimmicks!
Camcorder Day One
THE arrival of a brand new camcorder is a red letter day in the life of any household.
The impulse to take it out of the box and start taking pictures right away can be very strong, and the user-friendliness of these machines is such that it is quite possible to do just that.
It is better, though, for you to restrain your natural impatience to make a start, and take time instead to read the book of instructions before you begin pressing any of the buttons.
This is important if you are to gain a proper understanding of how to obtain the best results from your new machine, and it also contains some cautionary notes to help you avoid accidentally damaging it through misuse.
The instruction details will differ from model to model, but the basics are much the same for all.
Camcorders have two main functions: recording and playing back.
The instruction book will probably devote its two principal sections to these, preceding them with guidance on how to prepare your machine for action.
In addition, you will find step-by-step directions on how to connect the camcorder to a colour television for playback, and how to operate special functions such as fades and inserts.
You may also find advice on how to couple your camcorder to a second video machine to enable you to copy your tapes and carry out editing operations.
It may all look a little complicated at first, but camcorders are quite simple things to use if you tackle the job in an orderly fashion.
The first task, you will discover, is to find and fit the rechargeable battery.
It will be stowed either in the carrying case or within a plastic container.
The thing to remember about these batteries is that they should be stored in a way which prevents the accidental short-circuiting of their contact terminals: if they are shorted, the battery quickly overheats and will become unfit for further use.
The next job is to check on the battery.
This will probably have been supplied discharged.
To confirm this, clip it into place on the camcorder as directed, and switch on.
If the camcorder fails to respond, or the ‘low battery’ signal is showing in the viewfinder, the battery needs to be put on charge.
Another, and perhaps better, way to make the check is to clip the battery into the mains charger; switch this on, and watch to see if the charge lamp goes out.
If it      does, the battery is ready for immediate use; if not, leave it on charge for as long as necessary.
After charging, the new battery is fitted into place on the camcorder.
Some batteries fit on the end of the camcorder body as shown, others clip onto the side, and still others slot into a compartment within the machine.
Take care to follow exactly the battery fitting instructions for your particular model.
When the camcorder battery warning light comes on, recharge the battery to ensure that it is ready for the next time it is needed.
This charger is dealing with two batteries at once.
With a fully-charged battery in place, the blank cassette can be loaded for recording.
Before you do so, make sure that the cassette's safety-tab has not been removed.
With the fully charged battery in place, you are now ready to load a tape cassette, following the instructions.
If by any chance the cassette has already been used for recording on another machine (for example, on a VHS mains VCR), remember to check that the cassette's safety-tab is still in place, otherwise, you may be baffled by your camcorder's refusal to do any recording!
What happens next depends on the particular model: you may find that the machine goes automatically into record mode on switch-on, or you may have to press an additional button to ready it for recording.
Either way, you will now have a picture of some kind in the viewfinder.
This picture may be in monochrome, or it may be in colour if your machine is fitted with one of the new miniature LCD screens.
These colour finders do give you an approximate rendering of the colours you are recording, but they tend to be of lower definition than the black-and-white types of finder.
Because of this, manual focusing of the picture from off the viewfinder image may be more difficult.
If the EVF picture is blurred and indistinct, check that the camera lens is correctly focused.
Do this by switching to auto-focus, and then aim the camcorder at some suitable object.
If the viewfinder image is still not sharp, you should now check that the eyepiece diopter adjustment is correct for your eyesight: you will find the adjustment ring or knob for this near to the eyepiece.
On-off control of the camcorder is simplicity itself.
You will find the camera button located close to the hand-grip on the right hand side of the body.
Usually, it is positioned so that it can be operated by the thumb, and normally one press is needed to start recording and a second press to stop.
Just above the camera button, you will almost certainly find two more.
These are buttons which operate the power-zoom on the lens, and they should be comfortably accessible to the first and second fingers of the right hand, although different models vary on this.
So, now is a good time to try out the zoom controls while watching the effect in the viewfinder.
This done, you are almost ready to take your first shots on video, but before you do, check first that you have the correct white balance setting for the lighting conditions so that the recording will be made with the true colour values.
This is necessary because the light in, say, an artificially lit room is warmer in tone than daylight outside, even on a brilliantly sunny day.
Your eye makes a natural adjustment for this when looking at the scene direct so that the colour appears the same irrespective of the lighting.
Camcorders on the other hand have to be given a little help to cope with different     kinds of lighting by adjustment of their internal white balance settings to enable them to ‘see’ white as the same neutral colour regardless of the conditions.
A typical camera-control button arrangement as found on the side-panel of most camcorders.
The on-off and zoom buttons are positioned separately, adjacent to the handgrip.
The tape-running (VTR) controls are usually grouped together.
On this model, they are built into the end of the body-shell; the camera-to-tape switch is in the form of a sliding cover.
Setting the white balance used to be a fiddly and time-consuming procedure, hut nowadays it is done automatically, or by setting presets, or manually by aiming the camcorder at a standard white reference.
Unless you arc on auto white balance, check the settings each time you move outdoors or come back indoors.
Now you can begin to take some test shots.
First, get used to the correct way of holding the machine.
Slip your right hand through the hand grip strap and adjust it for comfort if necessary.
Then position your right thumb over the camera button, and rest your index and second fingers just clear of the zoom switches.
Raise the camcorder and rest it against your face so that the viewfinder eyecup is just in contact and the finder picture can be clearly seen.
Finally, bring up your left hand to provide additional steadying underneath the camcorder body at the lens end.
Above: The left hand provides steadying and operates the manual focus and zoom controls as well as the other camera buttons on both compact and shoulder-mount models.
Left: Most of the weight of compact camcorders is supported by the right hand on the hand-grip, leaving the fingers and thumb clear to operate the on-off and power-zoom buttons.
If your camcorder is one of the larger shoulder-mounted models, you will have the benefit of the additional steadiness that this professional style of camera-holding brings.
You will also find that the viewfinder eyepiece is positioned along the side of the camcorder body.
Incidentally, although some models have view-finders which are adjustable to suit either right-eye or left-eye viewing, camcorder design on the whole favours right-handed people in the way that the controls are laid out on the body.
Now take a few practise shots to get used to the camera control, having first set everything to auto.
Press the button gently but firmly and without jerking the camcorder each time you start and stop.
Next, switch from auto-focus to manual and practise setting the focus by hand while you watch the effect in the viewfinder.
Even though you will probably normally use auto-focus, there will be times when you'll need to use manual.
Using the fingertips of the left hand, gently turn the focus ring (being careful to keep clear of the lens itself or actuate the focus toggles as appropriate.
Above: Although the use of wide-angle improves shot steadiness and gives increased focus depth of field, close-ups in wide-angle can produce unflattering distortions.
Left: Scenes shot on telephoto appear to have compressed perspectives which can be used to good effect.
Camera-shake and shallow depth of field can cause problems.
Try the effect of zooming the lens, first to wide angle and then to telephoto, adjusting the focus in and out on each of these two extreme settings.
You will discover that it is much easier to find the exact point of focus when the zoom is set to telephoto, partly due to the enlargement of the image and partly to the fact that the focus depth of field is much shallower at this end of the zoom.
This is a useful aid to accurate manual focusing: zoom in to telephoto, set the focus, and then zoom back out to frame the shot the way you want it.
For this, you can use either the power zoom buttons (right hand), or the manual zoom lever on the lens barrel (left hand), if fitted.
While you are experimenting with the zoom, note how much easier it is to hold the picture in the viewfinder steady when it is set to wide-angle.
Close-ups taken on telephoto are often so shaky as to be unwatchable, so take the hint and keep to the wide angle end of the zoom for most of your shooting.
If your lens has a macro setting for shooting big close-ups of small subjects, you could also experiment with this while you have the lens switched to manual focus.
The setting of macro is usually done via the zoom lever which has a short amount of extra travel at the wide-angle end.
You will probably need to push or pull it to overcome a detent to move it into the macro position.
Macro focusing is generally done, not by the normal focus ring but by the zoom lever, and the adjustment needs to be done carefully to obtain maximum sharpness.
Many camcorders are provided with a means of manually overriding the automatic exposure control setting.
Auto-exposure controls work by taking an average reading of the brightness of the subject and setting the exposure to suit this average.
This is fine in most cases, but there are times when averaging is less than ideal.
A common example of problems with auto-exposure is where you have a dark foreground subject, say a building, which has bright sky in the background.
In photographic terms, this is called backlighting, and the camcorder's attempt to find a compromise setting generally results in the under-exposure of the foreground, though some machines have metering systems which are sufficiently sophisticated to avoid the worst effects of this.
To help you offset backlight under-exposure, your camcorder will probably provide some form of manual override, the commonest being the provision of a simple backlight button.
When you press this, the exposure is increased by a fixed amount which lightens both the foreground subject and the background.
However, some machines go one better than this by providing full manual control of the exposure to allow you to make a more precise correction while observing the effect on the image in the viewfinder.
This override may even enable you to make full picture fades; alternatively, you may have the facility of a separate fade button which will fade both picture and sound simultaneously.
Finally on the subject of exposure, if your camcorder has a gain-up switch, you can use this if you are working in poor light to further increase the exposure electronically.
Gain-up does tend to make the picture look rather grainy, though, so it is best to look on it as a last resort and reserve it for those times when a grainy picture is better than no picture at all.
If your camcorder is a two-speed machine, it will have an SP/LP selector switch which you should get into the habit of checking before you do any important recording.
Also, you may have the high speed shutter feature, or even some form of program auto-exposure.
Hopefully, you will have one very useful button: record review.
This is a real time saver, because it automatically plays back the last few seconds of the previous shot as a check before returning you to record mode ready to take the next shot.
Try it, and you'll quickly see what a boon record-review can be.
The bright sky area in this shot makes the automatic exposure system reduce the lens aperture and under-expose the figures in the foreground.
The backlight button or manual iris control has been used to open up the lens aperture in order to give the foreground subject the correct exposure.
For normal playback over the viewfinder (or on a television screen), you will need to use the tape-running buttons, and these are generally grouped separately from the camera controls.
There are buttons for ‘play’, ‘stop’, ‘rewind’, and so on, just like the ones on a table-top video recorder.
Buttons for ‘audio dub’ and ‘insert’, if these are facilities on your model, are also in this group, together with a camera/VTR selector which switches you from camera controls to tape controls as required.
By now, you should be starting to see some interesting results on your first tape even if they are just pot-shots taken at random .
You may also have noticed that the viewfinder is displaying signal indications as well as the picture itself.
The extent of these signal displays depends on the model, but with the help of the instruction book you will gradually learn to recognise what the signals mean and how they can help you to operate the camcorder to its best advantage.
Left: A comprehensive display of signals and indicators which enable the operator to monitor the ‘camera’ functions through the viewfinder while recording is in progress.
Included are warnings for low battery, no tape and condensation (‘dew’), together with date/time indicators which can be switched off if desired.
The ‘shutter’ signal indicates when the High Speed Shutter is on, and the cursor-type indicator above it shows the brightness of the scene being recorded and hence the lens aperture as set by the automatic exposure system.
The two signals above the viewfinder show when the camcorder is in record-mode and when the White Balance system is switched to Outdoor or Indoor preset.
Below: An alternative signals configuration in which the display is split between the view-finder and a separate LCD panel mounted elsewhere on the camcorder body.
In this typical example, the ‘attention!’ signal draws the operator's notice to the LCD panel where the specific condition is indicated.
The panel also shows the camcorder speed setting (SP or LP), and the tape running modes, ie play, stop.
record, fast forward etc.
‘Low battery’, for instance, is a warning that you have only a minute or so of battery-time left before you will have to stop the  shoot to allow the battery to be changed or recharged.
‘Low light’ is a warning to check that the exposure (as shown by the picture in the viewfinder) is adequate.
A tape-counter readout in the finder is a very convenient way of finding your way around the recordings which are already on the tape, and there may be other indicators such as‘SP/LP’ to remind you of the operating mode.
Probably the most useful indicator on a shoot is the one which shows whether or not you are actually recording pictures — it's easy to forget whether you have just pressed the camera control on or off!
To continue with this practise shoot, move outdoors — if you are not there already — where there will be more light and plenty of room to work in.
If you can take a member of the family with you to stand in as a practise subject, so much the better.
Switch the camcorder back to record mode, check the white balance and set the focus to auto so that you can concentrate all your attention on the picture.
Perhaps you could begin by taking a wide-angle shot or two of the house and the garden, so set the zoom to wide angle and select your first shooting position.
Frame the shot in the viewfinder, and gently press the camera button to start the shot while holding the picture steady.
After a run of say five or six seconds, press the button again to stop the machine on record-pause while you move to a new position for the next shot — this might include both the house and part of the garden.
Line up the shot in the viewfinder as before, press the camera button again and away you go on shot two, still keeping the camcorder as steady as you can.
Having learned to hold the camcorder still for these static scenes, and having resisted all temptations to pan the camcorder to and fro to ‘get it all in’ you can now move in for some closer shots.
These could show some activity going on in the garden — someone weeding a flowerbed, say, or children playing in the sand-pit.
Hold the camcorder to one subject at a time, starting a new shot every time you change to a new subject; each of these shots could be of say five to ten seconds duration.
This time, because your subjects are not static objects but people, you can move the camera as necessary to keep them in the centre of the frame — but stay with the subject, don't pan part-way through to show something else.
Don't zoom the lens in and out, either, but save this effect for the last shot in which you zoom out to a wide view of the garden again.
Having exhausted the pictorial possibilities and/or the patience of your subjects, switch from record-pause to stop and then to the tape-running controls.
Rewind the tape back to the beginning and do a replay of the shots you have just taken.
The odds are that you will be delighted with the results of this simple little shoot, particularly if you have  managed to avoid the besetting sin of  most first-time camcorder users, that is of panning the camera in an aimless fashion over everything in sight.
When you later screen a second replay on your colour television, it's likely that you will be even more pleased with your efforts: the colours, the movement, the thrill of seeing and hearing the sights and sounds of the place where you live and of the people who live there; it's all magic, and a moment to be savoured.
If your camcorder has twin speeds, it might be a good idea to repeat the exercise at the LP speed, assuming the first recording was done at the standard speed.
Comparison of the two recordings will then give you an indication of the difference in quality between the two.
At first glance, you may not notice any obvious differences, but if you look more closely you may spot a slight increase in the graininess of the picture at the LP speed, especially in the darker areas or if you were shooting in poor light.
Also, the vertical edges of objects such as fenceposts may be slightly fuzzy, an effect which is more pronounced if the edges contrast strongly with the background.
You will also see a difference between the two recording speeds when you play back in slow-motion or still-frame.
Paradoxically, LP often fares better than SP under these conditions because the noise-bar interference on the picture tends to be less for LP.
However, camcorders vary considerably in this respect, and many of the newer ones give virtually disturbance-free pictures at any playback speed from fast to slow.
Here ends your first video shoot.
Although you could re-use the tape for another recording, you may decide to keep it: it's surprising how even the most unambitious personal video recordings often contain scenes, or just brief moments, which are worth preserving.
If so, now is a good time to remove the safety-tab from the cassette to avoid the risk of accidental erasure.
Finally, to end your Camcorder Day One in good style, check the battery and put it on charge if required, so it will be ready for action for Day Two.
FIRST OUTDOOR SHOOT — RECAP
1
Check battery is fully charged, fit and switch on.
2
Load tape cassette.
3
Switch to record; check picture in viewfinder.
4
Check focus (manual or automatic).
5
Check eye-piece adjustment.
6
Check correct white balance.
7
Raise camcorder and hold in comfortable position.
8
Select first shooting position.
9
Frame shot in viewfinder, preferably with zoom on wide-angle.
10
Press camera button ON and hold picture steady.
11
After 5–6 seconds, press camera button OFF and stop machine on record pause.
12
Move to new position and repeat from 10 as many times as you like, starting a new shot for every new subject.
Day Two — your first location shoot
HAVING taken your first steps on the road to becoming a video movie maker, you can now begin to run a little.
Already, the basics of camcorder operation are becoming routine, and any initial uncertainties on how to cope with so many different control buttons are evaporating.
In fact, camcorders are not only very simple to use — they're fun.
Why not turn your next video shoot into a day out with family or friends?
A zoo, park, or some other attractive open-air venue will provide you with lots of photographic opportunities while keeping other members of the party happily occupied.
At this early stage in your video career, don't worry too much about making a complete record of the day.
More ambitious projects will be possible when you have become fully proficient with your new equipment.
For now, use the occasion as a means of learning more of the essential techniques which you will need later to produce first-rate movies.
Take the question of stance, for instance.
Although you have already learned how to hold the camcorder, the way that you stand while you are holding it is important too.
Ideally, of course, the best support for any kind of camera is to mount it on a tripod, but tripods are awkward things to carry and they also have a dampening effect on spontaneity.
The trick, therefore, is to make your body imitate a tripod — as far as that is possible with two legs instead of three.
So, with the camcorder firmly held in both hands and braced lightly against the forehead, stand with your feet slightly apart and your elbows tucked firmly into your sides…and relax.
If there's a handy tree, wall or fence to provide the third leg, rest against it: this will increase your camera steadiness quite dramatically.
On the street, the roof of your car may be at just the right height for you to rest your elbows as you take the shot, and there are all sorts of other items of street furniture such as lamp-posts which can serve as props.
Panning the camcorder, that is swinging it round through a horizontal arc, is a camera movement often used to excess by amateurs.
Nevertheless, it has its place in camcorder operating   techniques and there is a right way of doing it which is worth learning and practising.
(a) The correct way to stand while holding a camcorder if no additional support is available;(b) shows how to ‘pre-swing’ before starting to take a pan-shot;(c) lean against walls, trees or whatever is available;(d) rest your elbows on car-roofs or low walls for extra steadiness.
To pan a camcorder smoothly, hold it normally while rotating your body from the hips to mimic the action of a pan-and-tilt head on a tripod.
The snag to this is that although a pan-head can rotate through a full circle, your hips are limited to about a quarter of this movement.
For this reason, it is best to practise a pan before you shoot, starting with the body pre-swung through half of the movement in the opposite direction — rather like winding up a spring.
This way, you will begin the pan smoothly and avoid running out of body-swing before you reach the end.
For more information on when to pan and when not to, see Chapter 6.
For now, continue to hold the camcorder steadily except to follow the subject as you did on Day One.
Above all, resist the temptation to pan the camcorder back and forth, this terrible technique is known as hosepiping and will ruin any shot.
Tilting is the vertical equivalent of panning, and similar rules apply.
In addition, tilt-shots have to be taken with extra caution be-cause of the problem of backlight (see page 25).
Suppose you are taking a shot of something tall such as a giraffe.
If you want to get in close enough to see the detail of his beautiful body markings, you won't be able to include much of his neck which will be mostly sticking out through the top of the frame.
Naturally, therefore, you will want to tilt the camcorder right up to the head, but if the shot now includes a large area of bright sky in the background, the auto-iris will reduce the exposure and George's head will become a featureless silhouette.
To save the shot, you can then do one of two things: reframe the shot to exclude the sky, perhaps by moving to an angle where the sky is obscured by a building; or, correct for the backlight either by pressing the backlight button or by making a manual adjustment to the iris (depending on which facility is provided on your machine).
The improvement will immediately show up in the viewfinder as the detail in the foreground lightens and becomes visible again; however, the sky in the background will also lighten, and perhaps even become overexposed if there are some particularly bright clouds in the shot.
Correcting backlight while carrying out a tilt is rather tricky.
A better solution is to split the take into two shots, the first (pre-tilt) one being exposed normally, and the second (tilted) one being given the correction.
However, some of the newer camcorders apply automatic correction for backlight without the need for any button-pushing, so tilts or pans into backlight can be successfully undertaken without spoiling the shot.
If you are shooting video in a zoo where animals are kept behind bars, you are likely to come up against situations which prove that auto-focus systems are not quite as clever as you are.
As with any automatic system, it is the unusual situation which can cause a problem, and here the problem is that most AF systems tend to focus on the cage bars in the foreground rather than on the animal lurking behind them — or the focus may hunt nervously from one to the other.
The solution, of course, is to switch to manual and do the job yourself, using the ‘zoom in to telephoto’ routine (see page 24).
As you wander round with your camcorder, you may well encounter significant changes in the character of the light during the course of a day's shoot.
Not only may the strength of the light vary, perhaps from full sunshine to overcast, but the colour of the light can also change.
Even on a cloudless, sunny day, the late afternoon sunlight is much warmer in tone than it is at noon.
Since your viewfinder picture is not in colour (unless you are one of the lucky ones who have a camcorder with a colour viewfinder to bring along on a shoot), you have a rely on your camcorder's white balance  system to get the colour-balancing right for you — and it probably will.
HELPLINE
Question
Bright background causes the auto-iris to reduce exposure and foreground objects become featureless silhouettes.
How can this be overcome?
Answers
1
Reframe the shot to exclude bright background.
2
Correct for backlight by pressing backlight button or by making manual adjustments to iris (depending on model).
However, it makes sense to keep the variations of lighting within reasonable bounds from shot to shot by shooting your scenes in groups which are consistently lit.
If you happen to stray into an area of mixed day and artificial lighting, say at a window-table in a café, beware!
The combination of warm and cold light can produce strange colour effects and the white balance setting becomes a compromise which may produce less than satisfactory results.
Since you are still in the process of learning about your camcorder's capabilities, it might be a good idea to deliberately try some of these mixed light shots and to shoot some comparisons between fully auto white balance and outdoor/indoor presets, if your machine gives you this choice of operation.
On Day One, the simple exercise of shooting a few scenes in the garden was partly to familiarise you with the idea of editing in camera.
As you recorded each shot, each shot-change was an edit, and the order in which the scenes are viewed on playback was decided by the order in which they were taken.
This is quite unlike the situation when you shoot still photographs because these can be viewed in any order.
Although this may seem to be a statement of the obvious, it is in fact a very important point which goes to the very roots of movie making.
As shot follows shot on the screen, your viewers will instinctively relate each to what has gone before in order to construct a thread of story — even if this story is as rudimentary as ‘first we saw A, and then we saw B’.
So it is kinder to your audience if your shots follow a logical progression.
Keep interruptions to the smooth flow of images to a minimum by eliminating false starts and shots which don't belong within a particular group.
Tidy beginnings and endings to shots are important.
Decide what each shot is going to include and get it properly focused and framed before you press the button.
There is nothing worse than sitting through shots which wobble around and zoom in and out while the camcorder operator is getting things sorted out.
If you do find that you have recorded an unsatisfactory shot, cut your losses there and then by reversing back to the beginning so that you can over-record with something better before continuing with the rest of the shoot.
If you leave the dud shot in place you are stuck with it, and you will dislike it more and more each time you replay the tape.
These giraffes were first seen positioned against the sky.
To avoid backlight exposure problems, they have been re-angled to appear against a darker background.
The shot (above) has been taken with the wrong white balance setting.
Given the correct setting (left), the colours are restored to their proper values.
With a monochrome viewfinder. use ‘auto’ or remember to check that you are set to the correct preset.
Auto white balance will almost always give the correct colours.
Bear in mind, when you are starting a shot, that you should allow for the backspace time.
If you have an ordinary video recorder which does not have ‘backspace’ or ‘fine edit’, you will probably have noticed, when changing from one recording to the next, that for a while the picture is spoilt by various forms of disturbance that take     several seconds to clear.
This is because the electronic pulses which control the scanning of the video picture are interrupted at the point of the change, and the system takes quite a time to re-adjust itself.
This is all taken care of on camcorders.
At the beginning of each new shot, the tape first back-tracks over the last few seconds of the previous recording, after which it reverses and returns back to the edit-point during which the camcorder's electronics find and lock onto the previously recorded control-pulses.
As it reaches the end of these, it automatically switches into record mode and the new shot begins to go onto the tape.
In practice, when you press the camera button there is a delay of about one second before the camcorder actually begins to record anything.
In many cases, this delayed start will not be noticeable, especially if there is no important action right at the beginning; the only real effect is that the shot is about one second shorter than you intended, and you will soon learn to allow for this by adding a second or so to the time before you press the button to end the shot.
Take extra care when a shot begins with a pan.
It is a good technique to allow a few seconds at the beginning of a shot before the pan movement actually starts to allow the audience time to take in the scene.
If you forget to allow for the backspace time, you may find that this time margin has been reduced noticeably — the pan may even start before the backspacing is complete — and this will not look good on the screen.
Remember to allow for the backspace time before starting each new shot or you may miss part of the action.
The camcorder takes about one second to begin recording after you press the button.
If your camcorder has a record-review button, you will find this to be a most useful facility to have at your disposal when you are out  on a shoot because it enables you to make a quick check on the previous shot before starting to record the next.
The manual alternative, in which you have to switch from record mode to play, and then check to find the end of the previous recording by trial and error before returning to record mode, is messy, time-consuming and wasteful of precious battery-time.
So if you have record-review, use it — and use the standby switch too if you have one: another battery saver.
You may sometimes wish to shorten the end of the previous shot by over-recording it with the beginning of the next one.
In this case, you have to go through the full manual routine as outlined above, stopping on play-pause and switching back to record-pause when you reach the desired edit-out point on the previous recording.
This is, in fact, real editing in camera, and when you have become accustomed to the routine you will find that it makes all the difference between a good movie and one which is tedious and irritating to watch.
To take a typical example: you are at the zoo, and have just recorded a very nice shot of a chimpanzee peeling and eating a banana.
In the expectation of more amusing antics from the little chap, you keep the camcorder running on…and on…and on.
Nothing much happens, and you eventually decide to cut.
If you simply start the next shot from here, you are left with an awkward pause and this spoils the effect of what has gone before.
Obviously, the thing to do is to backwind to the point where the eating of the banana comes to an end and begin the next shot from there.
Quite apart from achieving neat endings to actions bear in mind that a shot has a natural length beyond which it should not run.
As you gain experience, you will learn to sense the point at which to cut to a fresh shot from a new angle.
Shot lengths are discussed more fully in Chapter 7.
For now, resolve to hold your shots only for as long as is needed to allow the audience to take in the details of the scene or to cover interesting action.
So far, we have been taking the sound recording very much for granted.
Indeed, the odds are that if the pictures are looking good, the sound will also be recording satisfactorily and will at least be representative of the atmosphere at the particular location.
It is always a good policy, though, to check the sound as well as the pictures whenever possible.
Many, but sadly not all, camcorders enable you to monitor the sound in the field via an earpiece which is plugged into a socket provided specially for this purpose.
This enables you to maintain a continuous check on both the direct input off the microphone as well as playbacks of the recorded sound, though the earpiece and its connecting cord can be something of a nuisance to wear all the time.
As you near the end of your first video safari, the low-battery warning in your viewfinder may begin to flash, indicating that you have not long to go before switch-off for the day.
If you have yet to record a scene which will end the tape in a suitable way — maybe a farewell wide shot of the whole park, or of people beginning to pack up and go home — now is the time to do it before the battery goes completely and the camcorder switches itself off.
If you miss out on shooting a closing shot because of this, the recording will seem to end rather abruptly.
Some people take a fully charged spare battery along with them just in case!
CHECKLIST
These stylistic refinements will add a professional touch to your video:
Hold the camcorder firmly; stand with the feet slightly apart and the elbows tucked into the body.
Rehearse important pan shots.
Remember to pre-swing before starting to shoot — no hose-piping.
Beware of backlight problems on an upward tilt.
Switch to manual focus where necessary.
Maintain consistent lighting for sequences of shots.
Maintain a logical sequence of events — a storyline.
Edit in camera— give your shots tidy beginnings and endings.
Frame and focus your shots before you shoot.
Allow for backspace at the start of each shot.
Know when to close a shot.
Use record/review to conserve battery power.
Use an earpiece or headphones to monitor the sound.
Allow battery time for a concluding shot.
Learning by looking at your first results
BACK at home after your first location-shoot — at the zoo or wherever — and having viewed your efforts in glorious colour, you will perhaps be asking yourself, ‘What next?’
Well, with a camcorder, the world is very much your oyster, and the possibilities are limitless.
However, before you sally forth on your next video shoot, take a long, cool look at your first tape to identify any mistakes you may have made so that you can avoid them next time.
When the initial excitement has subsided, settle down on your own for a closer and more critical showing.
Try to view your work as dispassionately as you would any other programme you might watch on the television — but don't be too hard on yourself, you are now comparing your efforts with the work of skilled professionals!
Wobbly shots are the hall-mark of the raw amateur.
All the professional photography we see on television is shot from camera tripods except for some newsreel material — and even hand-held news shots are almost as steady when the camcorder is being operated by an experienced cameraman.
So, if you find that too many of your shots come into the wobbly category, resolve to do better next time by concentrating on getting this basic technique right.
You don't even need to shoot any video to practise this: simply switch to ‘rehearsal’ mode, and work at keeping the image in the viewfinder as steady as you can.
Maybe you were tempted to take handheld shots on telephoto — perhaps with a very good reason, lions in a zoo are not very approachable and often the only way to shoot them in close-up is with a long-focus lens.
On the other hand, shaky close-ups, even of magnificent beasts, are not very good to watch and you really need to provide yourself with some kind of additional support to help you hold the camcorder steady.
If you decide that a tripod is the answer, you will find a selection of these to choose from at your local photographic dealers.
Ask to see the ones which are specially made for video cameras.
These have sturdy telescopic aluminium legs which are well braced to provide good support, and are fitted with pan-and-tilt heads to enable you to make smooth camera moves.
Heads designed with a fluid-type action are the smoothest of all.
Unfortunately, it has to be admitted that tripods are heavy and bulky things to carry round, and you might consider the use of a mini-tripod (which can be supported on walls), a chest-pod or a  monopod.
These do not have the sophisticated pan-and-tilt heads of the full tripod, so they are not the complete answer.
If you can afford such luxuries, the device known as the Steadicam JR will give you perfectly smooth shooting even while you are walking your camcorder through a tracking shot!
If you have been shooting with the help of autofocus, you should have few problems with regard to image sharpness.
If one or two of your shots are less sharp than they might be, it may be because the conditions did not suit your particular autofocus (AF) system.
This subject certainly won't ‘beat’ your camcorder's autofocus because of its speed of movement, but its low reflectivity and dark colour might still confuse the system.
Check that your AF is focusing on the tiger and not on the bars of his cage; if in doubt.
focus manually.
Bright reflections off the surface of water or glass may also cause your autofocus to select the wrong setting — it's another time when manual focus may be best.
Rapidly moving vertical subjects such as the people in this crowd can sometimes result in focus hunting when auto is being used.
AF systems are of two main types: optical, and infra-red.
Optical systems use the actual picture image as the signal source which is continuously evaluated electronically as a means of determining and holding the point of focus.
These optical systems work well, though the accuracy falls off in poor light and when the subject is dark in tone or lacking in contrast.
The alternative infra-red system uses a beam which is emitted from the camcorder and reflected back off the subject, the time taken for the reflection to return being measured and converted to a distance setting.
Infra-red systems work in any light and on most types of subject, but accuracy reduces with distance and with subjects which reflect poorly.
Both types of system can be confused by reflections off glass and other shiny surfaces, and they can be beaten by rapidly moving subjects although the speed at which the newer systems work is incredibly fast.
The technology, in fact, is getting better all the time: some AFs are now capable of holding the focus all the way from the front surface of the lens to infinity and will lock onto the subject even if it moves from centre-screen right to the edge of the frame.
Maybe some of your pictures are rather dark and muddy-looking.
One cause of this is the problem of backlighting.
If this seems to be the cause, resolve in future to spot the effect in your camcorder viewfinder before you press the button so that you can take the necessary action to avoid the fault.
However, backlight may not in fact be the culprit.
The scene itself may have been unsatisfactory as a subject, with flat lighting and dull colours combining to produce the sad-looking picture you see on the screen.
Again, the viewfinder image will alert you to the problem by showing you how the camcorder is seeing the scene.
So get into the habit of really looking at the viewfinder picture as you line up the shot.
If this scrutiny raises doubts in your mind, move on and find a better subject.
The way that a scene is lit is important: in general, the best lighting for outdoor video is slightly hazy sunshine coming at an angle from behind the camera.
In such a situation, the colours show up to the best advantage, and the angling of the light helps to ‘model’ the detail and separate the planes to increase the illusion of depth.
For close-ups of people's faces, hazy, rather than full, sun gives sufficient modelling but without casting unflattering heavy shadows; it also reduces problems with glare reflected off light-coloured clothing and other surfaces.
If the day is overcast, where possible shoot with whatever light there is behind you as this will maximise the exposure and help prevent the colours from becoming washed-out and muddy.
If you are getting a ‘low light’ warning in the viewfinder, take a careful look  at the picture before giving up on the shot; if the light is only marginally below par it may still be worth taking despite the warning.
In really dark conditions, and where a poor shot is preferable to none at all, use the gain-up switch (if you have one) and accept the picture may be grainy.
Photographically speaking, contrast is one of the elements in the making of a good picture.
Unfortunately, video imaging systems are not very tolerant of contrast, and the range of brightness between the lightest and darkest areas of a picture which can be reproduced is very much less for video than it is for ordinary colour photography.
HELPLINE
Here are some answers to solve the technical hitches you may have had with your first movie:
Question
Why are some of the shots shaky?
Answer
Probably because the camcorder was not held absolutely steady.
Practise holding and using the camcorder keeping the picture in the viewfinder steady.
Or, buy a tripod.
Question
Why are some of the shots out of focus?
Answer
The autofocus should have been over-ridden on these shots.
Use manual for problem shots.
Question
Why are some shots dark and muddy?
Answers
1
There may have been a backlight problem (see page 25).
2
Perhaps the lighting at the scene itself was too drab.
Practise really studying the picture in the viewfinder.
Question
How can burn-out on bright, highlighted subjects be avoided?
Answers
1
Angle the shot so the light comes cross-wise at the subject.
2
Reduce the proportion of dark background area relative to the subject.
Question
How can graininess on plain surfaces with bright primary colours be avoided?
Answer
Steer clear of these subjects.
The effect results from technical limitations in the video equipment.
Question
A combination of wind, traffic and camcorder noise have drowned out the required soundtrack.
How can this be avoided?
Answer
Use an extension microphone aimed away from the unwanted noise.
So, if you are taking shots of people in brilliant sunshine, be wary of shots which include areas of white set against dark backgrounds.
If the day is hot and foreheads are glistening, these shiny surfaces will ‘burn out’ in a most unbecoming way when you play back the shot in colour unless you take steps to prevent this from happening.
One way is to change the angle of the shot so that the light comes cross-wise and hence will not be reflected straight back to the camera.
Another is to reduce the proportion of dark background area relative to the subject, either by shifting to a more suitable setting or by moving in to a bigger close-up so that the dark background is reduced in size.
The symptoms of over-contrast are not always easy to spot on the monochrome viewfinder picture, so it pays to be specially vigilant if the light is very bright.
Another video weakness to guard against is the coarse and grainy look of plain surfaces in bright primary colours, especially reds.
Shiny plastic rainwear and children's toys are common examples.
Yet another irritating picture defect is the flickering moire effect which is often seen on finely-patterned surfaces such as the stripes in men's suits.
These picture faults are due to the technical compromises which are built into video and television systems.
Unless you are fortunate enough to possess one of the new super-format camcorders in which these defects have been ironed out, the solution is to steer clear of such subjects.
Remember that these are colour effects, and they will therefore not show up on a black and white viewfinder.
Flesh tones can often burn out in bright sunlight.
Shoot against light backgrounds to lower the exposure and reduce the risk of over-exposure on highlights.
As you play back your shots, you may notice colour disturbance at some of the picture edits — unless, that is, your machine has the feature known as flying erase.
Flying erase is a system in which the erase heads are located, not in a fixed position, but mounted instead on the rotating head-drum alongside the video heads.
The gap between the two sets of heads is thus virtually nil, and so the tape is cleared of all previously recorded signals before it reaches the record-heads.
Hence, colour disturbances due to the over-recording of  unerased signals, which occurs on machines with the older fixed erase heads, is eliminated.
More and more camcorders are coming off the production lines with this useful feature; however, it is not a point which need concern you unduly if you happen to have one of the older machines, as the effect is noticeable only on edits where there is a big change in the character of the colours at the shot-change.
Let's turn now to some problems you may have encountered on your sound recordings.
Camcorder microphones are contrary devices: sometimes they fail to pick up the sounds that they should, and sometimes they hear things that they shouldn't.
Unlike light, which can reach the lens from sources far beyond our galaxy, sound is a very localised phenomenon.
Its ability to travel over distance is limited, and it is therefore a commodity which the recordist has to reach for.
The best place to position a microphone is always as close as possible to the source of the sound.
Unfortunately, the right position for taking the pictures is seldom ideal for picking up the sound, especially when speech is being recorded, so on-board camcorder microphones do have their drawbacks.
However, the problem has an easy solution if your camcorder is fitted with an extension microphone socket-sadly, not all of them are.
With a microphone on a long lead plugged in, the on-board mike is automatically disconnected and the sound can then be picked up at much closer range.
For more advice on how to go about selecting and using an extension microphone, see Chapter 10.
For now, we will concentrate on how to make the best of the built-in microphone.
Your camcorder's microphone will no doubt do a first-rate job of picking up the general sound atmosphere, or ambience.
However, it is vulnerable to wind noises, especially if the shot is being taken right into the weather.
It doesn't need to be strong wind to ruin the sound on a shot, the lightest of breezes can sound like a Force 8 gale in spite of the foam wind-shield with which the microphone is no doubt adorned.
It can be very upsetting to have good shots spoiled in this way; once the noise is on the tape there's not much you can do about it except dub it out with a substitute background sound (see page 80).
Prevention is better than cure, and the sensible thing to do is to physically shield the mike, either by angling the shot out of the wind, or by getting an assistant to shelter it bodily.
Traffic noise is another enemy of the sound recordist.
It is less of a problem if the camcorder microphone is an unidirectional type, that is one which will tend to accept sound which is coming from the camera direction only.
Loud noise from passing vehicles is doubly  unwelcome because, not only does it drown out the wanted sound, but it also causes the camcorder's automatic gain control to lower the recording level; this generally takes some seconds to return to normal after the disturbance, during which time the wanted sound is not recorded properly.
‘Audio nasties’ can get onto the tape from sources which are much nearer to home than wind or passing traffic.
The various whirrings and whinings which may be emitted by the camcorder itself, not to mention any noises which you make while operating the controls, are liable to be faithfully picked up by the on-board microphone.
Some camcorders — and some operators — are much quieter than others, and the problem only becomes acute when you are recording indoors under quiet conditions; outdoors, these unwanted sounds tend to be lost in the general background.
The answer to the three problems of wind traffic and camcorder noise is to be found in the use of an extension microphone: it can be more easily sheltered from the wind, it can be a super-directional type if need be and so help to exclude the sound of passing traffic, and it can be placed far enough away to reduce camera handling noises to zero.
It is also virtually essential when it comes to recording speech (see Chapter 10).
If this seems like a catalogue of disaster, don't be discouraged: you are unlikely to have hit all of these problems on your first outing, and forewarned is forearmed.
Now that you are aware of the possible technical snags, you can make sure you avoid them in the future.
Perhaps some of your problems are not technical so much as aesthetic.
Have you the feeling, perhaps, that the order of your shots is aimless and unsatisfying?
Is it that some of your shots do not look as pictorially attractive as they might?
If so, read on.
Camcorder microphones are vulnerable to wind noise.
One solution is to use an assistant to provide shelter if this becomes a problem.
Indoor recording skills — Christmas festivities
IT'S party time, and you and your camcorder are invited!
Parties and camcorders do seem to go well together, and it's not difficult to think of reasons why.
Any really good party is a chaotic jumble of noise and movement, so you have vision and sound built in.
It's a way of bringing together and mixing people, with lots of opportunities for candid camera shots of folk with their everyday guards down.
It's also often an ideal time to update the family picture archive against the background of a happening which is in itself worth recording.
Parties can he set indoors or outdoors — or be split between the two.
Each location has its video advantages and disadvantages.
Outdoors, there is space, but there may be problems with light if the occasion is held during hours of darkness as well as uncertainties about the weather.
Indoors, everything is under more control and camcorder operations can be pre-planned to a greater extent, particularly if the location is in your own home or some other familiar setting.
The question of lighting can be sorted out in advance.
Ideally, in the interests of  spontaneity , the normal lighting, whether artificial or daylight, will be adequate or can be supplemented without too much fuss.
Indoors, power supplies are generally on hand, and the camcorder can be run either directly off the mains via its adapter or on the battery which can easily be recharged between times.
In fact, there are only two real disadvantages to indoor video filming.
The first is that there is less room in which to work, and the second that the boomy quality of many interiors can make the recording of clear sound difficult.
While a simple one-off party can be a rewarding subject for video, Christmas parties, and in particular children's Christmas parties, offer even greater scope for creative video because they take place within the context of a whole season of festivity which has a built in story of its own.
The idea of telling a story is important to discuss at this point, because it contains the secret of all good video.
This is true whether  the story is an epic with a cast of thousands or nothing more elaborate than a simple family situation.
The story of a children's Christmas, climaxing in a party, comes towards the lower end of these two extremes, and we are going to take it as the plot on which can be built an interesting home movie.
What, in video terms, is the story of a family Christmas?
It is not simply one of scenes showing children excitedly unwrapping and playing with their new presents — or of shots taken at the party later in the day.
Certainly, these are important highlights and should be given their proper place and emphasis in the narrative.
However, you should not forget that there are low-key happenings which can also make excellent video and help in building up to the climaxes.
So, while there is no need to spoil the fun by trying to make an over-blown production out of your Christmas video, why not give a little time and thought to ways of showing the excitement leading up to the day itself.
One of the advantages of shooting a video like this one is that the events group themselves quite naturally into sequences which advance the story in a way which your audience will have no difficulty in following.
All you have to do is to go with the flow of events, letting each scene add to what has gone before.
In fact, the trick that you need to learn to help you with this and all other movie making is to think in sequences.
What this means is simply that each time you line up a shot in the viewfinder and before you press the button, you should look on it not as an individual shot as you would a still photograph hut as one of a group of shots.
Ask yourself two questions:
Does the shot fit in with the last one?
Does the shot form part of a logical progression within the group?
If this sounds too complicated, don't be put off.
Thinking in sequences is a mental trick that comes with practise, and some of the more advanced sequence building rules will be discussed later.
For now, let's begin by jotting down a few ideas for sequences to make a Christmas movie.
Much of the thrill of Christmas lies in its anticipation.
There is the bustle of the shopping centres with their decorated window displays and coloured lights; the traditional ritual of writing to Santa Claus; the visit to the ‘Santa’ in a big city department store; the decoration of the Christmas Tree; and all kinds of other activities, including those in the kitchen to prepare the party food.
on the day itself, there is not only the opening of the presents, and the party, but also the aftermath when it's all over to provide a fitting finale to the day's activities.
Be ready for those once-in-a-lifetime shots at Christmas-time!
Make sure that the camcorder is ready whenever needed, and work out the best camera positions in advance.
CITY LIGHTS
If you have decided on this as your opening sequence, you may like the idea of beginning it with a fade in on a close-up of some brightly lit seasonal decoration in a shopping precinct — the face of a life-size Santa would be an ideal way to set the mood.
If your camcorder has a titling facility, you could even superimpose a title over this shot.
This could be followed by a wider shot to take in the overall scene, showing the dazzling displays and hurrying shoppers.
This will establish the character of the location in the minds of the viewers.
Then, you could continue with a whole succession of closer shots concentrating on the colour and glitter of the shop windows in which the reflections of shoppers add their own element of movement and interest.
In an atmospheric kind of sequence like this, you should keep your shots fairly short, pulling back to a wider shot once in a while to provide extra visual variety and to re-establish the scene.
Don't overdo the length of the sequence: two or three minutes should be ample as an opener for your movie.
You can have a lot of fun shooting city lights, but there are one or two points to watch out for if you are going to come away with some really effective shots.
Remember that even if the precinct appears brightly lit to the eye, your camcorder will probably be working flat out to expose for the wide shots.
The brightest objects are of course the lights themselves, but wide shots also include the darker areas which reduce the average brightness of the scene.
The lens aperture will probably be working fully open, and this may over-expose the lights which will then tend to flare.
When you are shooting night-scenes such as these, avoid shots which are simply of decorative street lights against a dark sky.
These can be disappointing because the camcorder's auto-exposure system, in opening up the lens aperture to maximise the average brightness of the shot, will probably record the coloured lights as colourless points of light.
Focus is more critical at lower lighting levels, and your autofocus system may be confused by reflections off the shop windows.
If you have to resort to manual focusing, remember to use the telephoto focusing routine (see page 24) to help you get your shots nice and sharp.
At the end of the sequence, you may choose to close it with a fade out, but a straight cut to the first shot of the next sequence might be more brisk and businesslike.
If the next sequence is to be ‘Letters to Santa’, in fact, you could cut from a repeat of the original close-up of the Santa's head to a close-up of a letter already headed ‘Dear Santa’…
This is what thinking in sequences is all about!
LETTERS TO SANTA
In contrast to the first sequence, the keynote here is one of simplicity and naturalness.
Even so, if the sequence is to come off it will have to be stage-managed to some extent: children who are young enough to believe in Santa Claus are not old enough to carry the action on their own without the help of an adult to keep things moving.
If the children are very young, the adult — mother, grandpa, or whoever — will have to do the writing, too.
To keep things as natural as possible, the scene should be shot in normal light, and one set-up worth considering is to place your subjects near to a window so that you can shoot in daylight.
This has the added advantage of making a nice contrast to the night scenes in the previous sequence.
To make the most of the light coming through the window — which preferably should not be direct sunlight — seat the letter writers to face diagonally onto the window so that they are attractively cross-lit.
The camcorder can then be operated from a position looking diagonally away from the window to face the subjects.
Make sure none of the window area is included within the shot otherwise you could be giving yourself a problem with backlighting.
A relatively static subject like this is best shot from off a tripod which would enable you to keep well back and work the zoom towards the telephoto end of the range for close-ups without risking spoiling your shots through camera-shake.
This will perhaps help your younger performers to be less self-conscious, though you may find that the appearance of a tripod induces a fit of the giggles in the cast.
With a tripod you lose the freedom of camera mobility which you have with a hand-held camera, and if you decide to dispense with a tripod, a position at 3 m (10 ft) or so from the subjects will allow you to work the zoom from wide angle down to midrange for close-ups.
Even with adult help, the attention span of small children is very short, so you will need to work quickly and grab any chances of good video as they happen.
To follow the close-up of the pre-headed letter, the first shot should show all the performers together to establish them in the setting.
To begin the action, the adult says something like: ‘Now what shall we ask Santa to bring you for Christmas?’
The rest of the scene is strictly ad lib !
As you shoot the scene, you have to tread a tight-rope, avoiding the fault of holding a shot too long if the action seems to have dried up, while simultaneously avoiding the opposite fault of cutting shots too short just before something begins to happen.
However things turn out, try to reflect the mood of the scene by the pace of the  cutting of your shots: if the children are quiet and thoughtful, the shots can be held a little longer than if they are lively and excited (provided that the adult does a good job of filling in the gaps in the action).
Each time you cut, use the interruption to give some stage directions without them being recorded onto the tape, but try to minimise the effect of jumps in the action by changing either the shot angle or size before you restart the recording.
If you can, end the sequence with a pre-arranged payoff line.
For example, the adult could say ‘Well, Santa is certainly going to be busy!’
Alternatively, you could let the recording run on, picking the best point at which to end it (and start recording the next sequence) later.
DECORATING THE TREE
We are back to night scenes again.
While the mood of the letters sequence was naturalistic, this time we can indulge in a little magic and mystery as we show the decking of the tree with all kinds of colourful lights and baubles.
Once again, the principal performers could be children who are helping an adult.
It is an interesting activity, so the chances are that they will quickly forget about the camcorder and behave naturally.
Hence, the element of mystery has to be introduced in the way that the scene is shot and particularly in the way that it is lit.
However, nothing very elaborate is called for, it's just a matter of putting the available lighting resources to the best possible use.
If your camcorder is one of the new low-light models which can take pictures down to levels of 2 lux, you could simply switch on the normal top lighting in your lounge and start recording some perfectly adequate pictures.
For our present purpose, though, they would look rather flat and not very magical: try it and you'll probably agree.
The trick is to augment this top light with more accented and directional lighting, so switch on a nearby standard or table lamp.
Immediately, the feel of the scene changes: the pool of light from the extra lamp creates its own little centre of colour and interest, and the flatness of the top lighting is relieved.
With this as a starting point, you could go on to experiment with even more additional lights.
If your lounge is equipped with batteries of spot-lamps and other sophisticated facilities, you could spend an hour or so trying out all kinds of variations before arriving at the best effect.
Great quantities of lighting wattage are not needed.
The aim is to provide sufficient directional light to make the decorations sparkle, but they should be set against areas of soft shadow which        will throw them into relief.
If your camcorder has manual override of the exposure control, try the effect of this at various settings (with the camcorder picture shown on a colour television) so that you can work out the one which gives the best balance between the highlight and shadow areas.
This is a scene which calls for imaginative lighting The tree and its decorations should sparkle against darker backgrounds.
Close the curtains to exclude daylight, and pick a camera position which gives a good wide-angle view and also allows close-ups of the tree and its decorators.
This party is recorded under normal room lighting from a lamp-pendant over the table; dark corners can be lifted by use of table-lamps or spots.
Choose a fixed camera position with as clear a field of view as possible if you are shooting from a tripod and using an extension microphone.
Otherwise, you could use a mobile camera, but curtain the window if there is risk of backlight or mixed light problems.
To end your pre-shoot planning session, pick one or two camera positions which will keep you clear of all the coming and going.
If you can, plan to use a tripod; with the camcorder firmly secured, you will then be able to zoom right in to fill the screen with individual baubles and still be placed to get good normal close-ups as well as wider shots of your performers absorbed in their task.
As a sequence, this simple little set-up holds great creative possibilities.
You could, for instance, cut freely from close-up to closeup without the problems of jumps in the action which can spoil wider shots.
This rather cinematic approach adds to the atmosphere of mystery and excitement.
Remember, though, that the sound will also cut at each shot-change, so it's wise to make your in-camera picture cuts at times when no one is actually speaking.
As a climax, you could arrange for some of the room lights to be switched off one by one before the tree-lights are switched on for the first time (test them first!).
However, you really need the camcorder feature known as exposure lock to make this effect work properly.
Without it, the camcorder will try to compensate for the reduced light by increasing the exposure, and the picture will look muddy rather than magical.
With exposure lock, you can set the exposure for the full lighting, and this setting is then unaffected both when the lamps are switched off and also when the tree-lights are switched on, thus giving the lit tree its full dramatic impact.
To complete the sequence, try for a few close-ups of the coloured light reflecting in the children's faces, after which a fade to black would bring the sequence to an appropriate close.
OPENING THE PRESENTS
This sequence is probably going to be shot very early in the morning, and it will take great strength of mind to get it all together.
The results, however, can be well worth the effort, and it will all come that much easier if you have prepared things in advance.
At this hour, artificial light will be all the light there is, and your main job the night before will be to ensure that there is sufficient for your purposes.
Fortunately, there is no need for anything very magical this time, ordinary top lighting should be perfectly adequate plus maybe one or two spot-lamps borrowed from the lounge.
Children's bedrooms are usually small areas with light-coloured  walls, so there should be enough reflected light to lighten up the main scene of action, but if you do bring in any additional low-level lighting, take care to position it where it will not get in the way of the camera or shine into the lens.
Present-opening sessions are generally unpredictable affairs, the pictures being shot with mobile camera on a catch-as-catch-can basis with the sound mostly consisting of the rustling of wrapping paper being undone and the excited squeaks of the recipients.
Once again, the presence of an adult to help keep things going will make it easier for the cameraman, whose job it is to cover the most interesting bits of action wherever it may take place within the four walls of the room.
Although you may decide to begin with a fade in, the circumstances may leave you with insufficient time for these niceties, and a crash-in cut to the first shot probably sets the mood for the sequence better in any case.
With action as unpredictable as this is likely to be, and since you won't want to risk missing anything vital, you will probably opt for longish takes and let the mobility of the camera and the occasional zoom in or out provide the visual variety to help the sequence along.
If you can, end each take at an angle which excludes at least one of the parcel unwrappers from the frame.
Then, you can begin the next shot with a close-up of that individual and so avoid the awkwardness of a jump in the action.
For a final shot, pull back to a wider view of the scene and hold this for long enough to mark the winding-up of the sequence.
KITCHEN PREPARATIONS
Another change of scene, and with it another change of mood.
The activities of the cook are the centre of attention, and the presence of children, spouse, dogs, cats or other subordinates are peripheral to the main action.
Kitchens are generally bright, well lit areas so there should be no exposure problems on that score except if there is mixed lighting, that is a mixture of daylight and artificial light, illuminating the scene.
Daylight and ordinary tungsten light do not mix together very well photographically; on the other hand, fluorescent light is often used in kitchens and this mixes with daylight better than tungsten if ‘daylight’ tubes are in use, in which case set the camcorder white balance to the ‘daylight’preset if you have the choice.
Otherwise, auto white balance will probably cope adequately with mixed day/ fluorescent.
Having ended the last sequence with a wide shot, it might be nice to begin this the same way to show Cook at work.
Kitchens can  be cramped, steamy places to swing a camcorder in, and if yours is particularly small you may want to use a wide-angle adapter-lens of the kind which screws onto the front of the lens to increase the angle of view.
If you do use wide-angle, be careful not to come too close to your subject, as this can produce odd distortion effects.
With regard to content, the sequence can concentrate on various cooking activities, mostly in close-up and without the need for rigorous attention to continuity.
Knives chopping carrots, spoons mixing in spices, rolling-pins rolling out the dough, bubbling pans…there is lots of interesting and colourful action in a well run kitchen, enlivened now and again by the peering of children's eyes over the table-top at all that is going on.
If you like, the whole sequence could be shot from their point of view.
THE PARTY
By this stage, you could be feeling that you are quite an old hand at Christmas video making; if so, recording the party should be child's play in every sense.
Shoot the party games sequence with a mobile camera and in available light if you can.
The circumstances will dictate how much you can make of it from the standpoint of good video.
The main job will probably boil down to making sure you have taken plenty of candid camera shots of those present, both adults and children.
If there is to be a sit-down meal, you will then have a much better opportunity to get some good shots, hopefully without missing out on too much of the turkey yourself.
A main decision is whether to settle for one fixed camera position or whether to stay mobile.
A fixed position allows the use of a tripod and, for the first time in this Christmas video shoot, the use of an extension microphone to enable you to make a good job of recording all those fascinating speeches that tend to be made after the second or third glass of wine.
Try to arrange for attractive lighting; a few candles, for instance, can add a touch of distinction to the scene, and lounge spots can help to lighten the darker corners of the table.
AFTERMATH
This is intended as a sort of coda to the movie: fade in to scenes of rooms strewn with festive remains, stacked dishes awaiting washing up, some of the more senior party-goers taking a nap.
Fade out.
These have been just a few ideas to get you started.
There are lots of other ways of interpreting the theme, and the actual details will of course depend on your own Christmas story.
Camcorder holiday
CAMCORDERS and holidays were made for each other.
Think about all the video opportunities that await you: golden beaches, sparkling waves; the sound of the sea; snow-capped mountains, the swing of the ski-lift and the chatter of the wintersports crowds; sleepy Mediterranean villages; the tinkle of distant cowbells; the bustle of busy airports; the surge of city traffic.
A whole world of colour and sound is waiting to be brought back on video tape, and camcorders are now so simple to operate, and so portable, that you can take pictures just about anywhere.
What you pack apart from the camcorder itself depends on the kind of holiday you are planning and the amount of luggage you can reasonably handle.
If you are travelling by car, carrying extra bits and pieces is less of a problem than if you are going by air.
The additional equipment you will need with you on your holiday shoots will also depend on the importance that you — and your companions — attach to video movie making in relation to the other holiday activities.
If the video is intended to be little more than shots of the folks taken as and when opportunity offers, you will obviously wish to be burdened with the barest minimum of tackle.
If on the other hand the video is to be a record of a once in a lifetime trip, you are more likely to accept the need to go fully equipped and ready for all eventualities.
Here are three items to take with you when you go on holiday with your camcorder.
A blank cassette — and maybe a spare — is an obvious essential (a), and you will certainly need to be able to recharge your camcorder battery as you go along, so don't forget to take your battery charger (b) with you.
If you intend to record views of impressive scenery, it might be a good idea to take a tripod (c) along as well.
Overleaf are some more items of ‘holiday video’ equipment.
If your camcorder has an audio monitor socket, take an earpiece (a) or — preferably — a pair of headphones (b).
An extension microphone (c) can also be worth considering when you are packing for the trip.
As far as minimum requirements go, you will need to take at least one blank video cassette with you.
This is particularly necessary if you are using either the VHS-C or Video 8 formats; unlike the ubiquitous standard VHS cassettes which can be bought just about anywhere, the availability of the mini-format cassettes tends to be patchy and you risk running out of tape at an awkward time.
Another essential item to take with you is a battery charger; if you are really keen not to be caught with a flat battery, take a spare rechargeable battery, too.
Camcorders are rather power-hungry beasts and the average of forty minutes of recording time per charge seems to last no time at all when you are actually on a shoot — a spare battery can be a god-send.
If you are likely to be using the camcorder near the car, it might be worth taking one of the special leads which enable you to feed power from the car battery directly to the camcorder; however, this is obviously not a practical option for general holiday use.
On the other hand, there are battery chargers which can be run off a car's lighter-socket, and this does open up possibilities for running camcorders at locations such as remote camp sites which do not have a public mains power supply.
Otherwise, the way to keep your battery topped up is to use a mains charger.
If you are holidaying in hotels, or in places such as caravan parks which provide electric power hook-ups, you should have no problem in this country or on the Continent, provided that the plug on your charger fits the power supply socket or can be made to do so via an adapter.
However, many people these days take their holidays in places which are much further afield.
Holidays in the United States of America are increasingly popular, and here the public power supply comes at a different voltage and frequency (110 volts 60 Hz) as compared with the European standard of 230/240 volts 50 Hz.
Even so, this does not pose a problem if your charger is switchable to the US standard, and it is a point you should check out first if you intend to use a European-standard camcorder in the United States.
Another point to bear in mind when you are taking a camcorder away with you on holiday is that you may wish to do check replays of your recordings on a colour set as you go along.
You might take a colour portable with you, either an ordinary set or one of the new mini-screen LCD colour televisions.
If on the other hand you have access to a colour television set at the place where you are staying, you may be able to use this instead, provided that it can be tuned to your camcorder's signal output and assuming that it is designed for use on the same television standard as the camcorder, eg UK PAL for machines sold in Great Britain (see page 153).
The remaining items of your video holiday baggage are all optional.
If your camcorder has an earpiece socket, you should     certainly slip one of these tiny accessories in your case.
If you prefer to do a more thorough job of sound-monitoring, a better alternative to the earpiece is a pair of full-size headphones.
Choose phones which have generously sized earmuffs as they will keep out the direct sound and allow you to concentrate on the audio signal itself.
It is important to check that the earphones are correctly matched to the monitor-signal output; if you are uncertain on how to set about this, consult your dealer.
Another audio item which need take up little room is an extension microphone — useful if only as a means of eliminating the pick-up of camcorder operating noise in quiet conditions if this happens to be a weakness of your machine.
Finally, you may decide to take a tripod or one of the handier mini-tripods — plus a bag to carry your video gear around on shoots.
The rigid cases which are supplied with some camcorders are bulky to have with you all the time, and a lighter padded bag with pockets to take small items will probably be more convenient.
You are also likelier to be able to carry it through with you at airport check-ins.
Having reached your holiday destination, what are you going to record onto the tape?
Is the emphasis going to be on people, places, or a bit of both?
It's a good idea to be clear on this at the outset; it's also a good idea to resist the temptation to start shooting whatever catches your eye the moment you arrive.
So, unless there is some once only event going on — such as little green men arriving from outer space — restrain your enthusiasm and take a look round first, especially if the location is completely new to you.
Another factor which can have quite a major bearing on your approach is whether your video is to be edited in camera, that is recorded in the final shot order, or post-production edited into a different shot order on a copy tape.
Post-production editing is a boon if you are uncertain as to what you will want to include in the final version of the video.
You can shoot the material in any order, the edited movie can be built up from the best parts of the recording, and the overall shape of the movie can be finally determined when the material to be retained is known.
If this is to be your approach see pages 87–92 for the actual process of post-production editing.
Whichever way you decide to produce your holiday movie you still need some kind of broad action-plan in your mind; without this, you will inevitably find that you have filled the tape with a lot of unrelated odds and ends.
Remember: think in sequences (see Chapter 5).
Although this comes more naturally if the shots are primarily of human activity, it is equally true if the emphasis is on places rather than people.
CHECK LIST
Remember to include these pieces of equipment in your holiday baggage:
blank video cassette
battery charger
spare rechargeable battery
and if you have space:
earpiece socket or full-size headphones
extension microphone
tripod/mini-tripod
bag in which to carry video gear
Lead with which to feed power from car battery to camcorder.
To take an imaginary example: suppose you are wandering round the old town of a Mediterranean resort.
Your first shot might  well be a general view to show the character of the area, the town square and its traffic for instance.
Now move in a little closer, and your next shot might show just one corner of the square which we can now see includes an attractive little feature: an ancient water-trough into which a cascade of water is pouring from the mouth of a gargoyle-like creature in stone.
A still closer view shows us the detail of the cascade, and the passing traffic can be seen as a shivery reflection in the water of the trough.
The next shot is of the traffic itself, and we pan with a quaint three-wheel vehicle as it passes by on its way to market with a cargo of onions.
Onions are the link to take us to the nearby open market where we see these and other vegetables on display.
There is lively movement and chatter here, and the next few shots are quick cuts to show the activity at the various stalls.
Now comes a cut to a deliberate contrast: the west front of the church, an impressive building which stands a little apart on the far side of the square.
It is quieter here, and we hold the shot for a time to allow it to make its impact…
This sequence is typical of what can be done in such surroundings once you have got your eye in and have begun to link your shots together visually or by association of ideas.
It is certainly more fun to shoot video this way than to take unrelated pot-shots, and it is infinitely more interesting to watch.
Now let's imagine a sequence which is mostly about people, say a family who are spending a day on a sandy beach.
Once again, the best way to open the sequence is to establish the location with a wide shot which shows the character of the setting: maybe it's one of those idyllic places which the crowds have not yet discovered, or perhaps it is crammed with people and overlooked by tourist hotels.
Either way, the audience likes to know.
Follow this with one or two closer shots which show the family against this background: the adults might be sunning themselves while the younger members of the family amuse themselves in more active ways — paddling, or playing beach football.
Gradually, each successive shot brings us closer to the action and eventually to the actions of individuals, allowing us to see their expressions and hear whatever it is they are saying to each other.
Finally, we are so close that we can see only the details of the actions: feet kicking balls, spades scooping up sand and so on.
This introduction to a scene and the gradual unfolding of the action within it may seem to be a rather academic restriction on the freedom of the cameraman, but it is a most important movie-making technique because it gives the viewer the feeling of involvement as a participant in the exploration of the location.
Having achieved this, the camera can then pull back to a wider view and re-establish the  general scene before closing in again to continue a probe of the setting and its activities.
This move in, pull back shooting pattern can become repetitious of course, and an effective variant is to begin with a sudden close-up of some piece of action, say the kicking of a ball, and then to move back to reveal the background to the action.
To accomplish this, you can go from close-up to a wider view in any one of three ways:
1.
Cut, move to a new position further away and at a different angle.
2.
Cut, stay where you are but reframe the shot by zooming out to a wider angle before continuing the recording.
3.
Keep running while zooming out.
Method 1 is the professional way and gives the most satisfying result on the screen.
However, it takes time and effort and the action shown in the close-up may have changed or stopped by the time the wide shot begins, so there may be action matching problems.
Method 2 is practical if the closeup was shot at a zoom setting which leaves sufficient range for the pull back although cutting without a change of angle can give the appearance of a jump cut.
Method 3 is, strictly speaking, only legitimate if the aim is to feature the gradual revealing of the background to the action; otherwise, it is a slow and obtrusive alternative to a straight cut, and becomes tedious to watch if done to excess.
Nonetheless, it does get over the problem of matching actions over the cut which can occur with methods 1 and 2.
Just as zooming should be done only for a good reason, panning is also a camera move which should be used sparingly if it is not to become visually irritating.
One legitimate reason for panning is to follow the action; shots of beach football, for example, will need to pan to keep up with the play.
The other legitimate reason for panning is to relate one part of the scene to another, a situation which can arise as a natural part of the action in this day on the beach sequence.
The safety of young children is a constant preoccupation of parents at the seaside.
No sooner has a toddler begun to make for the water's edge than heads turn and adults prepare to go to the rescue.
A situation like this can be covered very succinctly by panning from a shot of the mother to a view of the child who is receding into the distance.
Quick thinking on the part of the father will soon have him sprinting after the runaway, and similarly quick thinking on the part of the camera operator will result in a cut from the distant child to one of the rescuer as he sets off.
What not to do is to pan from the toddler back to the father, instead of cutting from one to the other.
Hosepiping the camera back and forth is a bad technique: it makes the audience feel giddy and will soon have it heading for the way out.
Another reasonable but less dramatic use for a pan might be brought in earlier among the establishing shots if the aim is to show the relationship of a feature — an icecream stall, say — to the position of the family group.
Begin this pan with a few seconds of static shot (remembering to allow for the backspace time) and continue the shot for a few more seconds when you reach the end of the pan.
To return now to the mother-and-child-on-beach situation, this relationship, and that between other individuals in the group, can be a fruitful source of additional story-continuity ideas.
Viewers, when presented with a shot in which the subject is seen looking at something off the screen, will assume that the next shot will show whatever it was that the person was looking at.
It does not matter whether this was really the case or not, the apparent connection between the two shots will be accepted unless there are compelling reasons which suggest the contrary — an abrupt and illogical change of location for instance.
Therefore, if a shot of the mother looking anxiously out of frame is immediately followed by one of her offspring, the two will connect in the minds of the viewers and another link in the story chain will have been formed.
It becomes possible to envisage a sequence of shots in which real pieces of connected action are linked together by shots which are included to fill in the continuity gaps.
Hence, a sequence of shots might be: mother and toddler together on sands, toddler crawls out of picture leaving mother watching to see where it goes cut ; an older child digging a sand castle cut ; closer shot of mother looking out of picture in opposite direction, turns to look back in direction of off-frame toddler,cut from her to toddler who is now well on way to the sea cut ; father getting to his feet to go after child, pan with him as he sets off and catches up with the wanderer, they start to walk back to mother cut ; the older child carries on with its castle-digging (see pages 62–63).
Note that although the actions of the mother, father and child might well have been part of one connected incident, the cuts to the first shot of the older child and to the shot of the father getting to his feet open up the possibility that the actions could in fact have been parts of separate but similar incidents which took place over a very much longer span of time; the shot of the father could well have been contrived specially, with the help of a little direction from the cameraman in between shots.
The shots of the older child are termed cutaways, and they serve the very useful purpose of bridging time-gaps and of hiding jumps in the action, for instance the jump between the mother looking in one direction at the end of one shot and looking in another at the beginning of the next.
Cutaways are a great help when you are trying to build a sequence of events over which you have little or no  control.
So whenever you are shooting action sequences like this one, make use of them as a means of smoothing the flow of the pictures as well as providing additional visual interest.
Having seen how it is possible to tell a story within a particular sequence, let's take a step back to consider how this might be made to relate to the story of a whole day on the sands.
It begins with the arrival at the beach, the spreading of towels and the erection of wind-shields and so on after which the beach activities begin including the incident covered by the ‘runaway toddler’ sequence.
Later, there is a picnic followed by more beach games, perhaps while the adults snooze in the sun.
Finally, there is the departure from the sands at the end of the day.
While it is not necessary to cover all of these activities in detail it is important, if the interest of the audience is to be held, to show some indications of the passage of time.
So shots of the family's arrival help to start things off while the picnic marks the middle of the day, and serves to break up what might otherwise be a too lengthy sequence of beach games.
Structure helps the viewers relate to what is going on; without it, they are lost in what amounts to a succession of unrelated snap-shots.
Even the most tenuous thread of story is infinitely better than none at all.
Moving back another step to a still wider canvas, the holiday as a whole should have an overall structure: preparations for the journey and the journey itself; arrival at the holiday destination; introductory shots of the immediate vicinity; a day on the beach; a visit to a place of interest; night-life, and so on…
Thus, our holiday video turns out to be a series of boxes within boxes, of shots related to each other within sequences, and sequences related to each other within an overall structure which has to be made clear to the audience.
If the emphasis is on people whose holiday activities are more or less self-explanatory, a main title (which can be pre-recorded onto the beginning of the tape or superimposed live over the opening shot by your camcorder's titling facility) may be all that is required to set the scene.
For instance: ‘Our Holiday in Wales’ could say it all.
On the other hand, a holiday video which is basically a travelogue will probably need the help of sub-titles, or a commentary which can either be ad-libbed at each showing or added to the sound track later.
Commentary dubbing is a subject in itself (see page 110).
An alternative to post-production commentary addition is to record explanatory comments in the form of speeches straight to camera as you go along.
Talking right into the eye of the camcorder lens is either fun or something of an ordeal depending on the kind of person you are.
It is easier to bring off if you have an assistant to hold the camcorder, otherwise, you have to set it up on a tripod or some other                suitable support and switch it on with a remote control or time-delay.
It is also better if you use an extension microphone rather than rely on the inbuilt one to pick up your words of wisdom.
This establishing shot sets the scene for the viewers and shows the family arriving for their day on the beach.
A story-line begins to develop: the boy is still…
The camera has come in closer for this next shot.
We can see their expressions, and how they relate to each other as a group.
Another close-up of the boy; this can be used as a cutaway to hide any awkward jump-cuts.
…but, meanwhile, Mother discovers that baby is missing.
Meals are a good way of suggesting the passage of time in a movie.
Closer still, and now the attention is concentrated on the boy who is making sand-pies…
…while his Mother and baby sister find other things to occupy them.
There she goes…
If you are good at speaking to camera, this is one way of keeping the viewers informed.
…but Father is already on his way to the rescue.
Loading or unloading?
This shot could be used either to begin the movie or to end it.
If you intend to insert subtitles at a later editing stage (rather than superimposing them live at the time of shooting), you will need to reserve space for these on the tape by shooting overlength material which can subsequently be erased and over-recorded by the insert.
If you don't, you may find yourself unable to add the subtitles because to do so would entail the loss of too many good shots.
The recording of fades to mark the beginning and end of a sequence is another of those chores which is easier to carry out during post-production editing than during live shooting.
However, if you are editing in camera, and if your camcorder has a fade-button, it is quite practical to put the fades in as you go if you are organised enough to be able to pick the points at which they should come.
Shooting video in unfamiliar surroundings raises potential hazards.
On the coast, blowing sand and seaspray presents obvious dangers to your camcorder's lens and interior mechanisms.
It is sensible to keep the camcorder well protected in its carrying case when it is not being used and keep it there when conditions are hostile.
Remove the lens cap only when shooting, and fit a plain glass or polaroid filter over the lens to provide a first line of defence for its delicate surface.
To further reduce the risk of internal damage from blown dust and grit, load the cassette into the camcorder in dust-free conditions indoors or in the car.
If you are holidaying in a hot climate, do not expose the camcorder to the sun for long periods, and take a neutral density filter along with you if the light is likely to be particularly brilliant (sunlight on snow, for example) to avoid the risk of spoiling shots through over exposure.
CAUTION
Holiday environments can be tough on your camcorder, take the following precautions:
Keep the camcorder in its case when not in use.
Remove the lens cap only when shooting.
Fit a plain glass or polaroid filter over the lens
Load the cassette into the camcorder in dust-free conditions.
Do not expose the camcorder to the sun for long periods.
Making better movies — the language of film
So much for the nuts and bolts of shooting video but what makes a movie work on screen?
Movies are a medium of communication, and over the years they have developed their own language of expression.
It is a language which has to be learned, and this applies just as much to audiences as it does to movie makers.
As a medium it is supreme among the arts in its ability to portray the real world, hut it is in itself quite artificial, and it speaks to us by way of a pictorial language which first took shape during the early days of the silent cinema.
The ‘filmic’ way to shoot a scene is to record it as a series of separate shots taken at different distances and angles.
Here, two camera positions are being used alternately to record a group of friends enjoying a drink in the sun.
One camera position is for wide-angle views of the whole scene, while the nearer position in the foreground covers the details of the action.
The major breakthrough came with the realisation that a story can be told in a series of separate shots taken at different distances and from different angles.
(Until this point, films had been shot in continuous takes by cameras which were fixed in position and set well back f r()m the action.)
This newer cinematic approach  summarises the essential difference between the cinema and the theatre, and in order to make good video one must re-learn this important truth.
Hopefully, the technique of cutting from shot to shot in a controlled and purposeful way is already becoming second nature to you, as is the use of shots of different sizes as a means of directing the attention of the viewer to where you wish it to go.
Until now, though, we have glossed over descriptions of shot sizes, and the time has come to make these clearer.
In all professional work for the cinema and television, shots are given standardised descriptions so that the camera operator knows exactly what is required.
We may as well use these same descriptions even if there is no intention of shooting movies from detailed scripts, because they act as a useful discipline when we are shooting any kind of material.
These are the standard descriptions:
LONG SHOT (LS)
A long shot is one which takes in the whole of a scene.
It is sometimes referred to as a wide shot, and one of its most important uses is to establish the nature of a location in the minds of the viewers.
The actual distance between the camera and subject varies considerably depending on the circumstances.
If, for example, the shot is of an expanse of countryside, the camera may be many hundreds of yards away from the main feature, say a group of trees.
When the term is used in relation to the human figure, the camera distance then comes down from hundreds of yards to tens of feet.
According to the standard description, a long shot of a human figure is one in which the figure takes up half to two thirds of the height of the picture.
At longer ranges, for example where the subject is reduced to a silhouette on the horizon, the shot then becomes an Extreme Long Shot (ELS).
MEDIUM SHOT (MS)
In relation to the human figure, the picture height includes a standing subject from (typically) just below the waist to the top of the head.
The figure is close enough to be easily identified and the expressions can clearly be seen, while enough of the background remains visible to place the subject in the setting.
This is a frequently used shot as it covers the action without giving particular emphasis to any one part of it.
Scenes containing dialogue are  frequently shot at this camera range and where two characters are seen together the shot is described as a two-shot.
Shots taken at intermediate ranges between long shots and medium shots are called Medium Long Shots (MLS).
CLOSE-UP (CU)
Close-ups range from those which include the whole of the head and shoulders of a human subject to those in which only a part of the head is shown in ‘big close-up’(BCU).
Close-ups are frequently used to show the reactions of people to each other, and for ‘talking heads’.
Another use is to give dramatic emphasis to significant objects, for instance the muzzle of a gun.
Shots which come midway between close-ups and medium shots are called Medium Close-ups (MCU).
It helps if you know and use the correct names for each of the different shot sizes.
The illustration shows all the main ones as related to the human figure: Extreme Long Shot (ELS), Long Shot, LS), Medium Long Shot (MLS), Medium Shot, MS), Medium Close-up (MCU), Closeup (CU), and Big Close-up (BCU).
If the camera lens is zoomed during the action, a shot which begins as a Medium Long Shot can end as a Close-up — or vice-versa.
In Chapter 6, we saw how to introduce a sequence set on a beach, beginning with establishing shots after which we grew gradually closer to the characters and their reactions to each other.
In shot-size terms, the progression was ‘LS to MLS, to MS, to CU’.
Having first explored the scene in this way, the actions and reactions of the various individuals were shown in an interplay of shots ranging from medium close-ups to long shots, with a couple of close-ups included as cutaways.
If you were to script this sequence, these are the size descriptions that you would write down against each of the shots.
For scripting movies, there is a standard format in which each line represents a single shot.
Unless there are instructions to the contrary, the transition from shot to shot is by way of a straight cut.
If you had been making the movie on film, the term cut would have been taken literally because each piece of cine film is physically cut and spliced onto the next.
For video, the term is used metaphorically, but the effect on the screen is just the same.
In film language, the alternatives to a cut are fades in and out from one shot to another, or dissolves (mixes).
Both of these techniques are much slower transitions than cuts, and they are used to suggest the passage of time or the change from one location to another.
Fades are well within the video repertoire of the average home movie maker, and they can be done either on the camcorder while the shots are being taken or later at the editing stage when they are being copied during assembly.
For adding fades, you need to connect a video processor or enhancer into the editing set-up.
Dissolves can also be edited in but require the use of rather more sophisticated equipment than for simple fades.
On this typical page of shooting script are given the essential directions needed to set up for each shot in a sequence.
It begins with a fade-in to an exterior scene — the Camp — which is to be shot in daylight.
The first shot ‘establishes’ the scene in the minds of the audience, and it is followed by shots which are taken progressively closer to the action as the scene unfolds on the screen.
The sound recording consists of the background noises natural to the location.
Cuts on action are those which carry an action over from one shot to the next, and they constitute an important element in film making.
However, they require the cuts to be made to high  standards of accuracy so that the transition is made smoothly.
This presents problems when video is being edited unless frame-accurate editing equipment is being used — see Chapter 8.
The fact that the video sound is cut with the pictures and not independently as a separate recording also creates problems, especially when inter-cutting shots containing dialogue.
For these reasons, and because it is so easy to change the screen size of a shot by zooming in or out without stopping for a cut, the zoom (and the pan) are often used by amateurs instead of a straight cut.
For instance, the cinematic way to shoot a conversation between two people is to cut from one speaker to the other as the talk passes to and fro .
The easier alternative for video is to record the scene as a two-shot (page 73), the static nature of which can be relieved by discreetly zooming in and panning between the two speakers from time to time and then zooming back to the two-shot.
While it may be frowned on by purists, it is a practical way round the problem of cutting on dialogue, and if it is done with sensitivity it is not too obtrusive.
The cameraman is recording a ‘cut on action’ which is centred on the little girl's hand as it reaches down to pat the goat.
Ideally, the cut from medium shot to close-up would come during the downward movement of the hand, but this degree of editing precision is often difficult for video.
An easier edit is to let the hand reach the goat's back and to cut to close-up for the patting, a shot which should be taken from a different angle to the medium shot.
Cutaways are a means of bridging jump-cuts, that is interruptions or discontinuities in the action, by briefly cutting to some related subject before returning to the main subject.
They are, in fact, examples of the way that film can cover simultaneous but separate activities through the intercutting of parallel action.
In early movies, the unsophisticated audiences of those days had to be helped over sudden changes from one scene to another with subtitles, for example: ‘meanwhile, back at the ranch’.
Nowadays, we are well used to this switching back and forth, and cutaways are used not only to hide jump-cuts but also to telescope time by making it possible to remove uninteresting parts of lengthy actions.
Cut-ins, in which a close-up detail of something within the main shot is used, are similar to cutaways and serve much the same purpose.
Parallel action cutting is a good way to increase the pace and interest of your movies.
Here, a family group has just arrived at the giraffe's enclosure on a day out at the zoo (1).
Meanwhile, two stragglers and a dog are running to catch up with the main party (2).
As the giraffes begin to greet their visitors (3), the latecomers arrive to join in the fun (4).
This intercutting of separate actions tells the story more vividly, and it allows the editor to ‘telescope time’ by shortening the length of the shots at the cuts.
Part of the art of film making is to know how long to allow for the length of each shot.
Obviously, the content of a shot has a bearing on its length; ideally, it should end just at the moment when the viewer has absorbed all the information in the scene, and is beginning to wonder what happens next?
If you succeed in this, your cuts will be effectively invisible, and the images will flow smoothly.
In general, long shots run for longer than close-ups because they contain more information for the eye to take in, and an average length might be ten to fifteen seconds.
The detail in a close-up can often be assimilated in a flash, and most need only be held for two or three seconds unless the subject happens to be a ‘talking head’, in which case the sound governs the editing rather than the picture.
Medium shots come between these two extremes, and the length of their stay is generally decided by the action; the shot is held for as long as something interesting is going on or being said.
The pace at which a sequence is cut also depends on the mood which it is intended to communicate.
Slow cutting has an effect which is calming and relaxing, whereas faster cutting gives a feeling of drama and excitement.
Controlling the mood in this way is not an easy thing to do while you are shooting live and editing in camera, there are too many other calls on your attention.
It is, however, something to keep in the back of your mind on a shoot, and if you intend to carry out a post-production edit, pace can be a major factor in determining how you organise the assembly of your shots.
The actions of human characters involve a whole grammar of visual signals which the audience will pick up if it is given the right clues.
For instance, there is the question of continuity of movement.
If we see a character walking along a path to cross the screen say from right to left, and if this shot is immediately followed by one in which the same person is walking along the path from left to right, the viewer's natural assumption is that the walker has reversed direction and is now returning to his or her starting point.
In reality this may not be the case: the explanation could simply be that the camera position for the second shot has been shifted over to the other side of the path.
Confusions of this kind can be avoided by keeping the camera anywhere within a 180-degree arc of the original position, hence the name ‘180 degree rule’.
In other words, in the example given above, stay on the same side of the path for both shots!
If for any reason you have to change sides, you can neutralize the effect of the apparent reversal of direction of movement by interposing a shot of the subject approaching (or receding) straight towards (or away from) the camera.
The same rule works for eyelines.
Suppose you have a scene in which two characters are holding a conversation, and you are covering it in separate close-ups which cut from one to the other: these shots should both be taken from camera positions which are on the same side of an imaginary line connecting the two characters together.
If you switch sides, the characters, judging by their eyelines, will no longer appear to be looking at each other.
The pictorial composition of your shots is one of those areas where rules have grown up which, though seemingly arbitrary, actually work well in practice.
For instance, the placing of the human figure within the frame has its conventions.
Do not allow the joints in the figure to be cut by the edges of the frame, that is at the subject's ankles, knees, waist or neck.
Choose instead a framing which cuts the figure, say, just above the knees or just below the shoulders.
To maintain the continuity of movement on the screen from shot to shot, the girl's walk along the path should be recorded from camera positions which are all within the ‘180 degree zone’ on the same side of the path, eg at A and B. If shot 2 is taken from C, the audience becomes confused as the girl appears to have reversed her direction compared with shot 1.
However, shot 2 can be taken from the ‘wrong’ side of the path if it is aimed from D directly on the line of the girl's approach; this frontal angle neutralises her previous left-to-right movement across the screen in the minds of the audience.
The shot from D can be panned to follow her as she walks past (now from screen right to left), or it can be cut before the pan and continued as a separate shot from C.
The 180 degree rule also applies to ‘eyelines’ when camera angles are being chosen from which to shoot scenes where people are shown in conversation.
The individual close-ups should be shot from the same side of a line connecting the two characters so that the eyelines match from shot to shot in the way they do in the master two-shot.
The placing of the head in a close-up is important.
If the subject is looking directly at the camera, the head should generally be placed centrally in the frame.
Otherwise, it should be set slightly off-centre so that there is a little more space to the edge of the frame in the direction in which the subject is looking; this is called looking room.
You also need to allow headroom by leaving a little space between the top edge of the frame and the subject's head, except for big c.lose-ups when the rule is to set the head so that the eyes come at about two-thirds of the height of the picture.
Walking room, as you might expect, is the allowance of extra space ahead of a moving subject which is being followed in a pan shot, whether a human figure, a vehicle or some other object.
There are right and wrong ways of framing the human figure.
(1) This is incorrect: the lower edge of the frame cuts the body inelegantly at the elbow joint.
(2) Both of these two framings are acceptable: the body is cut either just below or just above the elbow joint.
(3) Wrong: the body is cut at the knees — which often looks awkward.
(4) Right: Framing to cut the body just below or just above the knee-joint is much better.
(1) This big close-up has been carefully composed.
The top of the head is cut by the top edge of the frame while the chin is just clear of the lower edge.
The girl is looking off-screen to the right, so she has been placed to the left of the frame to give her ‘looking room’.
(2) The character in this closeup is speaking direct to camera, so she has been placed centrally in frame.
The head is less than full frame height and a space has been left at the top of the picture to give her ‘head room’.
(3) A lively subject for a medium long shot.
As the camera pans left with this tennis player it is aimed slightly ahead of him to balance the shot by allowing ‘walking room’.
Some pictorial compositions have a natural balance which is based on the ‘rule of thirds’.
In this shot the TV screen, the glass, the woman's head and shoulder — the main points of interest in the scene — all coincide with the intersections of imaginary lines which divide the frame into equal thirds.
While it is not always possible in practice to achieve this degree of balance, it is an ideal to keep in mind when shots containing a number of different visual elements are being set up.
There are also a few rules about pictorial balance.
One is the thirds rule.
In this, the scene is divided into three sections both horizontally and vertically, and the idea is to line up the shot so that the main features are made to come at the intersections of the imaginary dividing lines.
In practise, this is often difficult to achieve of course.
However, a rule that is easier to remember and to follow is: never allow the horizon in a scene to come exactly on the centre line of the frame.
The reason for this is a question of aesthetics, but it is true, nonetheless.
Another fault to avoid is to shoot horizons which are not horizontal; it pays to line up your scenes squarely in the viewfinder.
Because the pictures are two-dimensional, it is all too easy to confuse the eye with an unsuitable choice of background.
Beware of classic howlers such as trees growing out of tops of heads (the fact that the tree is many yards to the rear of the head in question will not be apparent if there are no visual clues as to the depth of the scene).
Depth is easier to convey pictorially if you avoid shooting your scenes square-on and go instead for diagonal compositions which lead the eye into the picture and direct it towards the centre of attention.
The viewer's eye is also kept happier if the centre of attention is in the same position within the frame before and after each cut.
Irrespective of the composition, any movement within the frame will become the centre of attention.
Where movement is a major element in a scene, such as in a shot of a passing vehicle, a diagonal composition is generally the most effective and pleasing to   watch because of the increased illusion of depth.
Also, as compared with a shot in which the subject traverses the picture directly from one side to the other, the diagonal movement gives the eye longer in which to take in what is going on and it reduces the need to pan the camera to follow the subject.
The vertical angle at which a shot is taken is another important visual signal.
Scenes which are viewed at normal eye level convey the message that this is a normal situation: dramatically, it is neutral.
On the other hand, a shot taken from a high angle to look down on the subject diminishes it and suggests a feeling of superiority.
Conversely, shots taken from a low angle impart a feeling of inferiority or weakness.
High and low angles are often used as point-of-view shots in which we are seeing the scenes through the eyes of one of the characters.
Since film is a language which is expressed primarily in visual terms, it makes sense to plan your movies in a visual way, and the technique of storyboarding is often used for this reason.
A story-board is a script presented as a series of drawings, so that the composition of each shot, and the flow of images from shot to shot, can be designed into a movie from the earliest stages.
The pictures can also be a great help to the camera team when the movie is being recorded.
Go for unusual subjects...
.. from unusual angles.
The technique of storyboarding can be a great help in the planning of a movie.
No real artistic skill is required — just the ability to produce simple sketches which show the essentials of each shot in a sequence in terms of its content, screen size and camera angle.
This is an efficient and easy way to work out your story ideas in advance by translating them into film language before shooting begins.
Although the visuals are the most important part of film-making, sound also has an important part to play, and music can be used as a powerful creator of mood and atmosphere.
The selection of music to be added to a movie soundtrack is governed partly by      common sense and partly by fashion — saccharin-sweet string accompaniments to romantic scenes are no longer popular in the commercial cinema, for example.
In the amateur sphere, the choice of music for holiday travelogues often follows traditional lines, such as the selection of ländler music for video shot in the Austrian Tyrol.
Music as a background for drama is a much trickier area, but you should err on the side of understatement.
If you overdo the atmosphere, the effect is likely to be comic rather than dramatic.
Problems of taste can also arise on the selection of music backgrounds for scenes of domestic life because the mood to be reinforced is more personal and it is all too easy to lapse into embarrassing banality.
The lightest of touches is required here: avoid heavily orchestrated music and opt instead for small ensembles or solo instruments — or leave out the music altogether and let the natural sound carry the scene.
When you are planning musical additions to your soundtracks, remember that the law of copyright protects all commercial music recordings except those which have been specially produced for use as background music.
This applies to all soundtracks whether made for professional or non-profit amateur use even if these are limited to showing in the home.
Copyright-cleared background music recordings can be obtained by mail order, and the addresses to contact are to be found in the relevant hobby magazines.
From this source come a good choice of discs and tapes offering mood music with titles describing the content in filmic terms such as‘busy street’, ‘quiet countryside’, and so on .
Moral: avoid placing your performers against unsuitable backgrounds!
Shots taken from a low angle make subjects look forbidding, while a high angle has the opposite effect.
Cut from one to the other and you create opportunities for humour or drama.
Video and sound editing
HAVING by now produced one or two very presentable videos by the direct method of editing in camera, you may be ready to move on to carrying out some post-production editing as a way of overcoming the limitations of in-camera editing and further improving the standard of your work.
In its fullest form, post-production editing involves the complete re-arrangement of the material shot into a different and better order by assembling it onto a copy tape.
The need for this editing by copying, which requires the use of a second video machine, of course, is brought about because it is not possible to edit video tapes by physically cutting and rejoining them as you would a cine film or sound tape.
Video pictures are recorded in the form of overlapping magnetic signals which cannot be cut and respliced without severely disrupting the pictures when the tape is played back.
We shall be looking in detail at the full routine for carrying out an assemble edit later in this chapter.
A limited amount of post-production editing can, however, be carried out on the original recording, either on the camcorder or on a second VCR depending on the facilities available.
This direct editing involves the recording in of video inserts and/or audio dubs.
Video inserts are very useful as an editing tool, though the scope for carrying them out on your camcorder is reduced if, as is probable, it does not have a video-in socket for the insertion of pre-recorded material.
Although the order of the shots on the original tape cannot be changed wholesale, inserts such as titles (either generated electronically within the camcorder, or shot from a title card directly by the lens in the ordinary way) can be made.
Shooting title cards, which have to be specially prepared, set up and lit, is a skilled activity in itself, and the techniques are explained fully on page 149.
To record any kind of insert, you first have to decide where it is to come within the existing recording, that is the material which is to be over-recorded and therefore lost.
Hopefully, you will have anticipated this by having shot some spare length which can be sacrificed to make room for the insert, the edit in and edit out points for which are determined with the help of the cue/review buttons.
The insert procedure itself varies somewhat from model to model, but the essence of it is to arrange for the over-recording to end at a pre-determined out point.
This bit of juggling is introduced   into the process because you will necessarily be working blind — during the recording of the insert, the camcorder viewfinder will be displaying, not a playback of the original shot, but the material which is displacing it.
To help you end the insert at the correct place, therefore, you first zero the tape counter at the out-point and then run the tape back to the in-point, after which you switch to insert mode and press the camera start button.
On most machines, the insert ends automatically as the counter reaches zero again.
Inserts, in the generally accepted sense of the word, change only the pictures, the original sound continuing over it unaffected.
Video 8, with its inability to dub audio separately, inserts both new pictures and sound, the latter being whatever was being picked up by the camcorder's microphone while the title was being recorded — unless you have arranged for some other sound to be fed onto the tape!
Inserts are a useful means of cutting away from the main subject to some subsidiary action while keeping the original sound going under the insert.
Apart from their ability to give extra liveliness to a sequence, they can also be used to hide any awkward jump cuts in the action!
Audio dub replaces the original sound with new material.
On VHS machines with both hi-fi and mono sound, the dubbed and original sounds can either be heard together, or, on some advanced machines, mixed together onto the mono track.
There are several reasons why you may wish to do this.
One is to add commentary or music; another is to substitute a background effect where a shot is spoiled by unsatisfactory location sound, perhaps due to wind noise.
In such cases, the shots can often be saved by dubbing in suitable backgrounds of a kind which do not need to be closely synchronised to the pictures.
Another reason for dubbing new audio is that you may wish to edit out jump-cuts in the sound at some of the picture-edits.
For example, if music was being played in the background at the time the shots were being taken, the breaks at each shot change will be very noticeable and the remedy may then be to replace the original sound with a continuous background.
Nowadays, a wide choice of effects recordings is available for amateur use.
Alternatively, you can record your own effects on cassette (see Chapter 10).
To make an audio dub, the sound is transferred from the source recording by means of a cable connection.
You will need a screened cable about one metre (one yard) in length and with the correct plug terminations; these can be bought ready made-up at hi-fi stores.
The connections are made between the source machine's line-out (or audio-out) socket and the audio-in socket on the VCR or camcorder.
Audio dubbing is a simple set-up (right) by which original video sound can be dubbed out and replaced by new sound such as background effects or music.
For this, the ‘line’ output of a sound-source such as a cassette recorder is connected to the audio input of a video recorder (or camcorder) having the audio dub facility.
The dub is monitored on a TV set as shown, and the sound level can be adjusted manually by means of a volume control connected into the lead between the two machines; alternatively, one channel of an audio mixer can be used as a volume controller.
If the VCR's input socket is for ‘mic’ level inputs, the ‘line’signals should be reduced to match via an attenuator lead which is connected into the set-up at ‘X’.
STEP-BY-STEP TO VIDEO INSERTS (TITLES)
1
Prepare set up and light a suitable title card
2
Decide where insert is to fall within existing recording
3
Zero the tape counter at the out-point.
4
Run the tape back to the in-point
5
Switch to insert mode and press camera start button.
(The title insertion ends as the counter reaches zero)
If the latter socket is marked ‘mic’ instead, you will need to make the connection via an attenuation lead which reduces the level of the signal to match the microphone-level input.
Some camcorders have a ‘mixing microphone’ which makes connection simpler.
Although this set-up can work well as it stands, a useful refinement is to add a means by which the level of the dub can be controlled manually.
For the electronically minded, the easiest method is to obtain a 25 Kohm volume control from a radio spares shop, mount this in a metal box to screen it from hum pick-up, and connect it into the audio dub line.
An alternative is to use one channel of an audio mixer as a volume controller, an added advantage being that, depending on the type, it may be used as a means of matching line and microphone-level signal inputs.
To make the dub, begin by checking that the chosen effect is of sufficient length.
Then, having found the point on the video tape where the dub is to commence, hold the machine on play-pause and switch to dub mode.
Pre-test the effect level, release the machines together and run the dub to the end, being careful not to overrun into the next section of the video tape.
Although putting inserts and dubs onto original video tapes is quite straightforward, it does carry the risk that, if you make a mistake, you may ruin an irreplaceable recording.
For this reason, many people prefer to keep their camera originals as shot and carry out all their editing operations on a copy.
There are other grounds for wishing to make copies of original video recordings:
1.
You may want to change the format, say from Video 8 to VHS, so that it can be played back on your table-top VCR, or to convert the sound track from hi-fi to a linear edge track which can then be edited by audio dub.
2.
You may wish to add commentary and or music to the original synchronised sound, an operation which is not possible by means of simple audio dub, which erases the original sound.
3.
You may wish to carry out a full post-production assemble edit.
STEP-BY-STEP TO AUDIO DUBBING
1
Connect a 1m (1yd) length of screened cable from the sound-source machine's line-out (or audio-out) socket to the audio-in socket on the camcorder or VCR.
(If ‘mic’ socket, use attenuator lead.)
2
To control the level of dub manually, use a simple volume control connected into the line (or use one channel of an audio mixer as a volume controller).
3
Check that chosen sound effect is long enough.
4
Find the point at which the dub should start on the video tape.
Hold machine on play-pause and switch to dub.
5
Pre-test the sound effect level, release the machines together and run the dub to the end.
Let us look at each of these options in turn.
Video recordings can be copied quite easily provided that you have the use of two machines, one of which can be your camcorder while the other would be a video recorder.
In the basic set-up, the machine-to-machine video connection is made by screened cable.
This is run between the respective video-out and video-in sockets, the plug terminations being either phono, BNC, or a combination of the two.
The audio connections are made in a similar way to that used for an audio dub, except that the source-machine is now a camcorder (or a VCR).
As before, a simple volume control or one channel of a mixer is used to control the sound level as it is being transferred.
An ordinary TV set is all that is required to monitor both pictures and sound.
It is connected to the record machine but it can be used to display the pictures from both machines in turn: when the record-machine is in either record or stop mode, playback from the source-machine is displayed; when the record-machine is in playback mode, however, it has priority for the screen and its pictures are displayed.
To make a transfer, you simply start both machines together from off play-pause and record-pause respectively and run to the end  of the recording — synchro-edit facilities make this easier to manage.
The resulting copy, being at one remove from the original, is referred to as a second generation tape, and it will be slightly lower in quality than the original.
The quality loss, however, is minimised if you use premium-grade tapes such as Extra High Grade or PRO.
If you are recording on a Super-format such as S-VHS, though, the copying loss will be barely discernible, and you could go on to make a copy-of-a-copy (ie third generation) without noticeable fall-off.
Third generation copies of standard-format originals are generally of so poor a quality as to be unacceptable.
This is why video makers who wish to run third generation copies off second generation edited masters use super-format tapes for all their work.
When multi-track sound mixing is being carried out it is necessary to cue the various tracks in and out to a precisely laid-down programme, a task which is made much easier by reference to a ‘dope-sheet’.
This example page, which is also set out at one second of runtime per line, shows that the original sync sound transfers continue without a break, but additional background sound (voices) is to be faded in at the beginning of shot 18.
It also shows that the next section of commentary is cued to commence half way through shot 17 and that there is no musical background at this point in the movie.
If your source-machine has an edit switch, use of this will help to optimise the video signal for transfer and reduce the copying losses.
A more radical improvement can be obtained by the use of a video enhancer.
These are electronic devices which are connected into the video transfer line, and they not only optimise the signal for copying but enable you to control the picture brightness and colour; fades can be added as well.
Some of the more expensive enhancers, or processors, can produce trick effects (see Chapter 14), and practically all of them incorporate audio mixing facilities.
Suppose now that you wish to dub music to a video recording with only a simple linear mono sound track.
This is done while the  transfer of both pictures and original sound is being made onto a copy tape.
To do this, you connect a music source, that is either a disc or cassette player, to the second channel of the audio mixer, the combined output from which is fed to the record machine as before.
The transfer is made non-stop, during which the levels of synchronised sound and music are adjusted to mix them in and out as required.
This is a two-machine set-up by which original video recordings can be transferred onto copy tapes.
In this case, the transfer is being made off a camcorder which is acting as the source-machine; the record-machine is a VCR which need not be of the same format.
Additional sound, ie commentary, music or effects, can be mixed to the original sound recording during the transfer, which is done non-stop.
As well as simple copying, assemble editing can be carried out on a stop-start basis under manual control of the machines provided that the VCR has the backspace edit facility.
A single TV screen can be used to monitor playback off each machine in turn, or a ‘picture-in-picture’ set-up can be used instead.
STEP-BY-STEP TO COPYING
1
Obtain two video machines, one of which can be the camcorder.
2
Use screened cable running between video-out and video-in sockets to make machine-to-machine video connection
3
Make audio connections as for an audio dub (see page 81)
4
Connect television set to record-machine.
5
To make a copy, start both machines together from off play-pause and record-pause respectively and run to end of recording.
Non-stop mix-transfers are a three-handed job, and you will need the help of an assistant to cue-in the music material and to take care of the changing of source-discs and or cassettes on the replay machine if required.
A better and more organised way of handling the music feed, though, is to pre-record it onto a cued sound tape which can then be fed to the mixer non-stop.
This video processor combines enhancement — adjustment of colour, brightness, contrast and noise reduction — with video and audio fades.
A sound mixing facility is also included.
Up to four microphone inputs can be mixed on this unit.
Since it is battery-powered, it can be used on location shoots as well as in the studio.
There are a number of ways of cueing a sound tape, but the simplest way is to record a guide onto a spare track to show where each section of the music should start and end.
To record this guide-track, you set the tape to a start-mark and the tape recorder to record-pause; the video tape is set on play-pause on the first frame of picture.
You then release both machines together, calling out the music cues into a microphone connected to the tape recorder while you watch the pictures on the screen.
Having recorded the guide-track, you can use it directly to cue the sections of music into place as you pre-record them onto the sound tape, or you can convert them first to tape-counter references; another alternative is to mark their positions on the back of the tape with a wax pencil or felt-tip pen.
Preferably, the sound recorder will be a reel-to-reel machine with ¼ in tape as this is much easier to work with, but a cassette machine is quite a practical alternative.
When you are pre-recording the music, remember to record it at a constant high level so that you can make all the downward level adjustments when the final transfer is made onto the video tape; this minimises tape hiss.
Where there are to be music fades in and out at the transfer, leave plenty of overlap at the beginnings and endings of the pre-recorded sections to give yourself ample working margins at the mixing stage.
STEP-BY-STEP TO ADDING MUSIC WHILE COPYING VIDEO
1
Connect a music source (disc or cassette) to the second channel of the audio mixer and dub direct, or
2
Pre-record a music tape to timed lengths for dubbing:
a
Cue a sound tape by recording a guide-track to indicate where each section of the music should start and end: set the tape to a start-mark; set tape recorder to record-pause; set the video tape to play-pause on the first frame of picture; release both machines together calling out music cues into a microphone connected to the tape recorder while you watch the pictures on screen.
b
Connect music source (disc or cassette) to the sound tape recorder.
Use the guide-track to cue sections of music into place on the sound tape.
3
Dub the music onto the video tape:
a
Set up as for video copying, with the audio line carrying the original sound connected via one channel of an audio mixer.
b
Connect the music tape source to another channel of the mixer; set on start-cue to play-pause.
c
Reset the video machines to start-cues on play-pause/record-pause respectively; release all machines and run the copy transfer while mixing the original sound and pre-recorded music.
If the video is to end with music though, you should arrange for the last note to come at the end of the last shot.
To do this, use a stopwatch to time the length of music required, and the actual length of the music on the source recording.
The amount by which the latter is over-length is the length of time that you should allow the source recording to run before you begin the transfer onto the cued tape; the music will then end exactly on cue.
A word of warning here: although video recorders have tape drives which are speed-controlled to high standards of accuracy, sound recorders tend to drift in speed.
The running time for a twenty-minute sound tape, for instance, might vary by several seconds either way at each playing depending on the quality of the machine.
Hence, the extent to which you will be able to match the timings of the video and sound tapes during transfers will depend on the performance of your particular sound recorder.
While the exact timings of music transfers may not be too critical, the addition of voice-over commentary usually calls for greater precision.
One method, which by-passes the problems of tape-to-tape synchronisation, is to speak it direct to a microphone which records it straight onto the video tape via the mixer during a non-stop transfer.
However, speaking commentary while watching the screen for cues is not easy, and if you make a mistake you have to go right back to the beginning and start all over again.
A method which you may prefer is to pre-record your commentary section-by-section onto a sound tape; this tape is not cued, and the sections follow each other with gaps of only a second or so between them.
The video transfer is done non-stop as before, and each section of voice-over is added during the transfer by stopping and starting the commentary tape in step with the pictures.
This method neatly side-steps the problem of sound tape speed drift, but it does require the help of an assistant to handle the machines and manage the mixer level controls.
This method of commentary addition works quite satisfactorily provided that there is no music to be mixed in as well.
If there is, and if both music and commentary are to be pre-recorded onto parallel tracks of a cued tape, the stop-start transfer routine cannot be used: the sound tape has to be run non-stop, and we are then back with problems of tape-to-tape synchronisation.
One way round the problem is to script your commentary so that it does not depend on being recorded to accurate timings.
The professional way, though, is to do the transfer on a special sound recorder which is synchronised electronically to the actual video pictures.
These machines are rather expensive, but they make it possible to lift off the original sync sound from the video tape, combine it with additional sound (held either on separate tracks or  pre-mixed on the recorder via ‘sound on sound’ mixing), and then to lay it back onto the video tape still in perfect synchronisation.
We come now to a full post-production assemble edit in which the camera-original material is completely re-arranged as it is copied onto a second tape.
Although this involves the use of rather advanced techniques compared with the running of simple transfers and dubs, many enthusiasts believe that this type of editing is essential to the making of ‘real’ movies, and look on it as the key creative element in their video activities.
It is certainly true that assemble editing has a major effect on the scope of the subjects that can be covered, and also on how they are recorded.
Because the material can be shot in any order, there are none of the limitations of edit-in-camera recording.
The intercutting of parallel actions — which can be shot at different times and in different places — can all be done at the editing stage, and you are free to try your hand at risky shots safe in the knowledge that any failures can be edited out later.
The beginnings and endings of shots can be trimmed down to exact lengths and, given sufficient editing skill and technical resource, even cuts on action can be included in your movies.
At the other end of the scale, the most rambling and unplanned holiday and family videos can be edited into quite  watchable movies provided that they contain material which can be re-ordered into some semblance of continuity.
The editing bench becomes more crowded as the basic set-up is expanded to include an edit controller, which is used to operate both video machines automatically, and an enhancer to improve the picture quality of the transfer.
The arrangement also includes for the dubbing of pre-mixed sound from a reel-to-reel recorder, the signals from which are fed to the audio mixer section of the enhancer via a graphic equaliser in order to optimise the audio quality.
Having been processed on the enhancer, both video and audio signals are then passed to the recording VCR.
Fades can be added to pictures and sound as the edit proceeds, and some units are able to change the character of the pictures in various ways as described in Chapter 14.
The ultimate in sophistication is achieved by the incorporation of video mixing which requires the use of an additional source VCR which must be gen-locked to the other source VCR, and video-sync control of the sound recorder, which permits the lift-off and lay-back of the original sound to allow it to be mixed with additional sound without loss of synchronisation.
The set-up for assemble editing is similar to the one used for making copy transfers but with the important qualification that assembly is a stop-start process.
Although automatic edit controllers can be included in the set-up to simplify and speed up the process, the basic essentials are the same whether the job is done automatically or manually.
The routine will therefore be described in manual terms before we consider the advantages of investing in a controller.
Assembly consists of the location and transfer, a shot at a time, of the camera-original material onto a copy tape in the required revised order.
An edit is therefore made at the start of each shot, and this means that the record machine should be capable of making clean edits, in other words, that it should have the backspace facility (see page 35).
If your table-top VCR has this, it can be used as an editing recorder.
Alternatively, your camcorder will have backspace as a standard feature and can be used as the editing recorder provided that it has a video-in socket ; your VCR is then used as the source or replay machine.
Both machines should have cue/review to speed up the location and setting of edit-points, this being the most time-consuming part of the process.
If you have single-frame advance, you will also find this very useful to help you find particular frames on which to make a cut.
Assemble edits are made much easier if the camera-originals are all shot on one cassette.
The material should first be logged in the form of a shot-list giving brief descriptions of the shots, their tape counter references and preferably their running times.
A good method of compiling the list is to record a running commentary onto a cassette tape while you watch a replay of the material; this is then  converted into a written list.
The cumulative timings for the start of each shot are then taken by stopwatch and entered on the list, from which the individual shot lengths can be worked out.
This edit Controller can be used with a variety of camcorders and VCRs in the VHS format for fully automatic 2-machine editing.
Its pre-roll function gives accurate edits, the jog/shuttle dial speeds the location of edit points, and up to eight edit programmes can be stored in its memory.
If the originals are being shot to a numbered shooting script, it makes the material easier to identify for editing if you record the shot number onto the beginning of each take.
The professionals use clapper-boards for this, but sheets of paper with the numbers written in felt-tip pen can be held up to the camera, and they serve just as well.
Having made your preparations, the routine for assembling each shot is as follows:
STEP-BY-STEP TO FULL POST-PRODUCTION ASSEMBLE EDIT MANUAL CONTROL
1
Two video machines, one of which (the record machine) must have backspace (or fine edit), are set up as for video copying.
2
With the record-machine on stop, locate the shot to be assembled on the source machine; hold it on play-pause at the point where its assembly onto the copy tape is to begin, ie the edit-in point.
3
Locate the point on the copy tape where the assembly of this shot is to begin, and hold the machine on record-pause.
4
Release both machines off pause simultaneously and run to beyond the end of the shot.
Go to stop on both machines.
(Note: if your equipment has synchro-edit, you will be able to release the machines from off the one button.)
5
Check the edit on the copy and then repeat the above routine to the end of the assembly.
6
For greater editing accuracy, set the tape on the source machine early by the amount of the backspace time, ie about one second.
This routine can be carried out manually without any special equipment, but it is easier and quicker with an edit controller which takes over the operation of both machines from the one keyboard.
Some, but not all, automatically roll back the source tape at the beginning of each edit to offset the backspace and so produce edits which are accurate to within one or two frames.
A new development called time-coding is in the process of revolutionising video editing at the advanced amateur level.
Under this type of system, each frame of video picture is ‘labelled’ with its own reference number relating to the number of hours, minutes, seconds and frames which have elapsed since the beginning of the recording.
There are two rival systems, namely VITC (Vertical Interval Time Code), and RCTC (Rewritable Consumer Time Code).
They operate in basically the same way, but VITC coding has to be recorded onto the tape (of course without being visible in the picture), at the time of shooting or while being copied onto a second tape; RCTC coding on the other hand can be carried out at any stage of the editing process, and so is the more flexible of the two systems.
Each type of coding must be used with compatible edit control equipment, which can be expensive, but the whole process of finding, previewing, recording and check-playing edits is vastly simplified and speeded up.
In addition, these systems have built-in memories, so that once the details of a series of edits has been finalised, the actual assembly of shots onto the copy tape can be done with single-frame accuracy entirely automatically.
If more than one edited copy tape is required, the extra copies can easily be produced from off the original recordings and not as third-generation copies off a second-generation edited master — with obvious advantages in terms of picture quality.
Before we get carried away by this dazzling technology though, it is as well to recognise that all this automation will not produce good videos if the operator of the equipment is lacking in the knowledge of editing principles and in creative ability!
To return to more mundane editing procedures, if you are working without the help of an automatic edit controller, you can improve the accuracy of your manual edits by making allowance for the backspace time on the record VCR.
This is done by a small modification to the routine described earlier in this chapter.
If you neglect to make this allowance, the first second or so of each shot will be lost as it is assembled onto the copy.
It is possible to make approximate allowance for backspace by releasing the source-machine off play-pause about one second late.
A better and more accurate method is to set the edit-in point on the source-tape early by the amount of the backspace, so that the true edit-in point reaches the playback head just as the record-machine completes the backspace and starts to record.
In this case, the setting of the edit-point on the source-tape is best done by stopwatch.
First, you time the length of the material to be trimmed at the beginning of the shot, and subtract from it the amount of the backspace; this shorter length is then the point at which you set the tape early for the edit-in.
With this in mind, when you are shooting camera-originals which are to be assemble edited later, shoot them with at least five seconds of spare length at the beginning of each shot; this not only facilitates the offsetting of the backspace but also helps to ensure that the edits will be stable on the copy.
The backspace time varies slightly from machine to machine, but you can measure it exactly by test-copying a shot and comparing its length with that of the original — the difference between the two  is the backspace.
The measurements can be done by counting frames if you have frame-advance.
Or, you can use a stopwatch in which case you can increase the accuracy by doing the timings on slo-mo and correcting them to the normal-speed equivalents.
As a final refinement, you will probably find that the last few frames of each shot on the copy assembly are over-recorded at the edits.
This over-recording can also be measured and offset by running the edit-point on the record-machine forward by the corresponding number of frames.
These routines may all seem to be rather complicated and fiddly, but they are simpler to follow than their descriptions might suggest.
If you are using one or more ‘editing decks’, that is VCRs which have features which are specially provided for facilitating the editing of video, you will be able to assemble your tapes quickly and reasonably accurately with one of the more basic edit controllers — or even none at all.
These machines, which are comparatively new to the domestic market, have jog/shuttle dials with the aid of which you can rapidly pinpoint edits by playing the tapes back and forth at any speed you like from single-frame and slo-mo to five or more times faster than normal.
They are also capable of making high quality picture transfers because of their advanced circuitry and mechanical design.
If you are considering the purchase of an automatic controller as a part of your editing set-up, check first that it is compatible with both your video machines, by test if possible, before you commit to buying.
The process of shot assembly is strictly a sequential one: each shot has to be copied and edited to length one by one in the correct order.
If you reach the end of an assembly and then wish to change your mind about one of the edits, you will have to repeat, not only that edit, but all the others from that point onwards.
It therefore pays to check as you go!
The only exceptions to the sequential rule are inserts, which can be added in without affecting any of the other material provided that they are of the same length as the material which they are replacing.
The set-up for inserts is the same as for assemble editing.
Before you start on an assembly, you will find it helpful to write down an editing plan.
This could be in the form of simple notes, but a better way is to compile a revised shot list in which the details are given together with other editing information (eg ‘delete first six seconds’) to help you set up the edit-points quickly.
How you decide on the assembly order is very much a matter of personal judgement, but the principles of shot to shot continuity, the function of cutaways, and the ordering of your material into a logical progression of images which tell a story, all follow the same rules as   for in-camera editing.
Now though, you have the flexibility of being able to try different shot orders, and to repeat the edits until you are satisfied that the best use has been made of the material available.
In fact, you can experiment with cuts and juxtapositions ad infinitum , because the originals are unaffected and can be recopied as many times as you like.
This is a page from a plan compiled to help the editor to assemble shots in the correct order.
The shot numbers are given along the left-hand side of the sheet together with a brief description of each shot.
In the centre are the tape counter references to assist in the location of the material on the source tape, to the right of which are reminders as to how each edit is to be made.
Note from the counter readings that shot 17 was obviously recorded as an extra after the material for the arrival of the train had been taken.
The counter numbers could be replaced by VITC or RCTC code references if one or other of these two systems is being used.
One important editing chore is to ‘top and tail’ shots to give tidy beginnings and endings, especially if subjects are entering or leaving the shot.
Entrances should be preceded by only a few frames of ‘dead’ action, and exits should be equally neat.
This juggling with material is quite a fascinating task.
Suppose, for instance, you have shot some video on a harbour-front.
Down below, some fishermen are working on their boat to prepare for sea.
The editing problem is that this particular group of shots ends with the boat's abrupt departure — we go suddenly from shots of the men at work to one in which the boat is already in motion: in effect, we have a jump-cut, and your task as editor is to find some way of bridging the gap in the action.
Suppose also that, on another day, you had taken some shots of the unloading of a catch at the same location.
Among these are several medium close-shots of the crowd of onlookers, and the angle is such that the boat itself is not visible on shot.
The answer to the problem of the jump-cut, then, is to ‘lift’ one or more of the onlooker close-ups out of context for cutting into the preparation sequence just before the shot of the moving boat.
The jump between static boat and moving boat is then hidden.
When you are on a location shoot, in fact, it is always a good idea to take a few extra shots for possible use as cutaways to get you out of difficulties.
In this example, it is probable that the background sound to the cutaway will match the rest of the sequence.
If it doesn't for any  reason, you have to dub in new matching background sound.
This could either be taken from an effects record, or you could transfer some real location sound from off the original video recording.
If it is your intention to add a fully scripted commentary, you will need to work out the timings.
The easiest format for the script is one in which the shot details are written down on one side of the page, while the corresponding words of commentary are written opposite them on the other side.
Use lined paper for this, and reckon each line as one second of running time.
You can then write the commentary at the rate of three words per line, this being the average speed at which voice-overs are spoken.
The style of your commentary should reflect the style of your movie.
A simple family record should be equally simple in its choice of words and spoken in a natural and relaxed tone of voice.
A holiday travelogue set in some exotic location might on the other hand merit a slightly more expansive style to suit the circumstances.
Leave plenty of breathing space between each section of speech so that your audience is not bombarded with too much information at a time, and don't allow the commentary to describe things which can already be seen on the screen; instead, use it to complement the pictures and provide additional (but relevant) information.
For instance, the words ‘inshore fishing isn't an easy life’ might add something which cannot be gathered from the pictures alone.
A convenient layout for scripting commentary: the page is divided into two columns, the shot details being on the left and the commentary wording on the right.
Each line of script represents one second of running time and the words are written down at the normal speaking rate of three per second.
The cumulative runtimes from the beginning of the movie are given at the right hand edge of the page.
This format makes it easy to fit the words to the (edited) pictures and to cue them to the start of each section so that they all come at the right place when they are being recorded onto the video sound track.
Better lighting
TODAY'S camcorders are amazingly good at producing pictures in quite dim lighting.
Most can operate at illumination levels down to 10 lux or less — the equivalent of candle-light — and it is a fact that video can be shot in almost any conditions short of the proverbial coal cellar at midnight.
However, there is no denying that the picture quality does suffer at these low levels: the colours become increasingly weak and washed-out looking, and the sharpness of the definition falls off because the lens is having to work at its maximum aperture.
The camcorder's electronics are also working flat-out, and this gives the picture a somewhat coarse and grainy appearance.
Sometimes you will not mind this too much: the freedom to shoot in whatever light happens to be available can outweigh these shortcomings.
There will be occasions, though, when you will need to produce the best-looking pictures that you possibly can — perhaps of an important family event.
It then makes sense to make the effort to improve the lighting.
This does not necessarily mean you have to go to the extent of bringing in high-power floodlights together with their attendant supply-cables.
This would certainly increase the level of the lighting but it would also tend to change the character of the setting, and the presence of floodlights works against any wish to keep the atmosphere of an occasion informal.
The first move, therefore, is to see whether the level of the available lighting can be improved without making any radical changes.
For instance, if the video is to be shot in a domestic setting such as a lounge where the top lighting is provided by a three- or four-lamp pendant fitting, you may be able to substitute lamps of higher wattage for the ones which are normally fitted.
However, you should take care not to risk overloading the electrical wiring in the process, and you should certainly not attempt to use photoflood bulbs in ordinary domestic fittings as they not only draw a lot of current but they also run very hot and could possibly cause a fire.
Although this adaptation may have succeeded in improving the general light level, you can do more by adding to the illumination of individual areas, so take a look at what other light sources are available.
Can the table and standard lamps be used to better advantage by moving them to different positions?
Can the power of the bulbs be increased?
Often they can, by sensible amounts, depending on the size and style of the shades and fittings.
Are there any domestic spotlamps around?
If so, they can be used to boost the lighting by aiming it where it is most needed.
Nine times out of ten, careful attention to the redeployment of  existing sources of illumination will improve matters sufficiently to enable you to shoot good pictures.
If this strategy fails, however, you then have to resort to sterner measures in the shape of video floodlights.
Although few performers really enjoy working under the glare of high-power lights, their use is sometimes essential, and the most acceptable way to use them for the illumination of small areas is to employ the technique known as bounce-lighting.
As the name suggests, this consists of bouncing the light off reflective surfaces instead of aiming it directly at the subject.
If the walls and ceiling of the room are white or near-white in colour, the lamps can be turned upwards over the heads of the performers who are then illuminated indirectly by the reflected light.
Alternatively, the light can be bounced off special reflectors, and sheets of white expanded polystyrene are ideal for this purpose.
Bounce light is diffused and soft in character, and hence similar to normal room lighting.
The modelling of the subjects is very natural, and the lighting-spread is such that performers can move about in reasonable freedom without running into areas which are over or underlit.
The one drawback is that bounce is not very efficient in its use of lighting power compared with direct lighting, and you may find that the illumination level is on the low side unless you are using floodlamps of high wattage.
To meet this need, high-power video lights have been developed from earlier photographic types which are capable of being run for long periods at full power.
Although photoflood bulbs in aluminium reflectors are still used, they have largely been supplanted by the newer and much more efficient halogen quartz lamps, and these are available in a variety of power ratings.
Bounce light is aimed upwards at the walls and ceiling for reflection back onto the subject below.
These surfaces should be white in colour; if they are not suitable, some other reflective surface can be used instead.
Portable video lights are of comparatively low power and range.
Some are fitted to the accessory shoe on the top of camcorders and operate off their own battery supplies.
Others are fitted as permanent onboard lighting units fed off the camcorder battery, and are arranged for either manual control or, in some cases, auto on/off as and when the ambient light level drops to a predetermined value.
As they constitute a significant drain on the camcorder's battery, they do reduce the shooting time per charge.
There are also higher power (300 watt) mains-fed portable lamps which represent the upper limit in terms of heat output and weight for camera-mounted lamps.
These units are very useful because of their portability, but single-lamp frontal lighting is not very flattering.
For more normal requirements, and where a greater spread of illumination and better photographic quality is called for, it becomes necessary to use bigger lighting units which have to be supported on tripod stands.
There are quite a number of different types to choose from, and the lamp wattages range from 500 to 1000 watts, with a further doubling to 2000 watts for twin-lamp units.
In spite of the high efficiency of halogen lamps, the heat which they generate is considerable, and the 1000 and 2000 watt units are generally blower-cooled.
This inevitably produces a certain amount of fan noise which may give problems with sound recording.
Most, however, are reasonably quiet in operation and can be used in studio conditions provided that they are kept away from the microphones.
For ultra-quiet lighting duties, uncooled 500/600 watt lamps can be used instead, and even the humble photoflood (275 or 500 watts) can be called into service.
Above: This camcorder comes with a detachable 6-watt video light to help brighten up shots taken in dark conditions.
Left: This battery-powered video light is fitted with a 12 volt 100 watt lamp.
It can be detached from its rechargeable battery-pack and attached to the camcorder's accessory shoe for complete portability.
Floodlights are available either as wide-beam units for general lighting, or in the form of spot-lamps the light from which is focused into a concentrated beam; some have variable-focus lamps and can be used for either duty.
All have safety-glasses fitted which double as diffusers, and most incorporate sets of hinged flaps, called barn doors, which are used to direct the beam.
The more expensive models have provision for mounting filters and extra diffusers to soften the beam further and correct the colour temperature of the light as required.
Halogen lamps give excellent service, hut the bulbs are fairly expensive to replace.
Their working lives (up to about fifteen hours) can be maximised if you handle them with care, so avoid subjecting them to mechanical shocks when in use; switch off and allow them to cool before moving them around on the set.
Bulb-life is also related to the number of times that they are switched on and off.
The heavy surge of current at switch-on is minimised if pairs of lamps are switched to operate in ‘series’ at reduced power while setting up is being done, after which they are switched back to full power on ‘parallel’for the take.
Some units have series/parallel switching built in; otherwise this has to be provided by plugging pairs of units into an external series/parallel switch arrangement.
For video shoots in which individuals or groups of people are to be lit by direct floodlighting, the exact placing of the lamps becomes more important.
The basic lighting arrangement is known as the three-lamp set-up.
The first of the three lamps is referred to as the   backlight, and its function is to provide a rim of light from behind the subject in order to separate it from the background.
A spotlight is often used for this, as it concentrates the beam and allows it to be aimed very precisely at areas such as shoulders and the tops of heads.
The basic lighting set-up incorporates three lamps.
The first to be set is the backlight.
This provides a rim of light to separate the subject from the background.
Having set the backlight, bring in the key light, so called because     it provides the photographic modelling and sets the general level of exposure.
Set it, not frontally, but at an angle onto the subject from a position alongside the camera, and aim it downwards at about forty-five degrees to the horizontal.
The key light is then added, angled on to the subject from alongside the camera.
It provides the main source of illumination and modelling.
The diffused fill light is now placed on the other side of the camera.
Its function is to reduce the harshness of the modelling and to lighten the shadow areas.
A diagram of the complete set-up is shown overleaf.
The complete three-lamp set-up as seen from above.
An optional fourth light is often added, as shown, to illuminate the background.
The light is quite strongly directional, and to avoid excessive variations in contrast within the depth of the scene you should set the light as far back from the subject as possible within the limits of what is acceptable to give a good exposure, each doubling of the distance reducing the brightness of the scene by a factor of four.
The third lamp is now brought in.
This is called the fill light, and it is set on the other side of the camera to reduce the depth of the shadows and to soften the modelling of the subject.
It is generally fitted with an additional diffuser such as a glass cloth scrim, and positioned so as to give a lighting intensity of about one half of that of the key light.
To this standard arrangement, a fourth lamp is frequently brought into play to light the background separately and to  neutralise any double shadows cast by the key and fill lights.
The illumination of the background should be set to a somewhat lower level than that for the foreground to give depth to the scene and add prominence to the subject.
You can, of course, extend this lighting set-up to cover larger areas at the cost of providing and running more lamps.
If you are limited to a three-lamp set-up, your subjects have to remain within a fairly small area, otherwise the lighting becomes unbalanced and the performers may even stray into unlit areas.
We have already touched on the question of mixed artificial and daylighting in an earlier chapter.
A typical example is one in which the subject is sitting in a window lit by daylight.
If the dark side of the subject is lit with artificial light, the difference in the colour of the two kinds of lighting is immediately apparent: the day side is cool in colour, perhaps even with a blueish tinge, while the artificial side is warm, probably with an exaggerated reddish cast.
There is no white balance setting which will resolve this colour conflict, and an alternative lighting solution has to be found to give the colours their proper values.
The simplest method is to switch off the lights and to lighten the shadow areas by reflecting some of the daylight back onto the subject.
Provided that the shot is a reasonably close one, and that the subject stays in the one position, this arrangement will give you excellent results with the minimum of cost and effort.
All kinds of things can be used as reflectors: projection screens; aluminium foil which has been crumpled, roughly straightened out and stuck onto a sheet of hardboard; or purpose-made reflectors bought from photographic dealers.
An alternative solution to the mixed light problem is to change the colour of one light source to match the other.
The easiest option is usually to ‘cool down’ the floodlighting by fitting correction filters over the lamps.
You can purchase suitable blue filters at lamp or theatrical specialists, and the type known as half-blue is the best for general purposes.
Some of the lighting power will be absorbed by the filter which will therefore get hot, and it should be made of a filter-gel which is sufficiently heat-resistant.
For lighting large areas, you may instead find it preferable to ‘warm up’ the daylight by taping sheets of orange filter material over the windows.
This material is known as WF Orange, and it can be bought in large rolls.
It is rather expensive, but it can be re-used.
Large interiors such as church halls and workshops are difficult if not impossible to light to the standards which are the norm for small interiors.
Many lighting units would be needed and, since large amounts of electrical power would be needed to run them, the distribution systems of many buildings of this type would be overloaded.
In set-up A, the subject is lit by daylight from the window.
To lighten the shadow side, a floodlamp has been brought in to provide additional illumination.
Note that a blue correction filter is being used on the lamp to match its ‘colour’ to that of the daylight.
Set up B shows an alternative lighting arrangement in which the floodlamp has been replaced by a simple reflector.
Professional television crews, in fact, bring their own power generators with them to enable them to light large areas.
Amateurs, perforce, have to settle for less expensive solutions, and the low  minimum illumination levels at which domestic camcorders can operate makes it possible to get by with just the available lighting supplemented with additional lighting to lift the foreground.
In the theatre, stage lighting varies in brightness, but it is often sufficient for video recording purposes, even if only as an aid to rehearsals.
If the performance can be staged specially for video, this opens up the possibility of bringing in extra lamps and interrupting  the action at agreed points to shift the lighting round to suit the camera.
As already noted, video lights are great consumers of electric power: for every 1000 watts of light a current of just over 4 amps at 240 volts (9 amps at 110 volts) is required, so safe working practices are paramount when you are setting up and using high-power lamps.
Use a separate mains socket for each lamp unit, and spread the electrical load over as many circuits as you can to keep within the current ratings.
Use only power cables of the correct capacity for the duty, and run them as neatly and directly as circumstances permit.
If cables are being stored on drums, wind them completely off the coil before connecting them to the load; otherwise they may overheat in use.
Do not allow the cables or their connections to become wet.
To end on this note of safety, warn everyone on the set to beware of coming into contact with the hot surfaces of lamps, especially metal barn doors.
Ensure also that tripod stands are set up securely and that they are in no danger of being accidentally upset by the comings and goings of performers and camera crew.
Better sound recording
AS we have already seen, built-in camcorder microphones have their limitations.
They are prone to picking up camcorder machine and handling noise and are not very good at recording speech if the source is more than a metre or so away from the camera.
In addition, there is no provision for manual control of the sound level control on most models, and a further difficulty is that there are times when a single microphone is not sufficient to do the job properly in any case.
Fortunately, all of these problems can be solved if your camcorder is fitted with a socket for an extension microphone.
If you are unfamiliar with these, you may be uncertain as to how to select a suitable microphone from the many different kinds which are available, as a glance at the windows of your local electronics store will show you.
There are two reasons for this diversity: microphones have differing pick-up characteristics depending on their intended use; and they differ in the ways in which they convert sound into electrical signals.
There are two basic types of pick-up pattern, namely omnidirectional and unidirectional.
Omnidirectional microphones are designed to pick up sound equally in all directions; the one on your camcorder may be omnidirectional.
‘Omnis’ are very good at capturing the general atmosphere of a location but, since they are not directionally   selective, unwanted sound coming from sources outside the picture area may result in the shots being spoiled.
Camcorder microphones are liable to pick up operating noises as well as the wanted sounds!
Unidirectional microphones have a pick-up pattern which is biased in the forward direction, a characteristic which is sometimes referred to as cardioid because of the heart-shape of the pattern.
Microphones of this type pick up sound which is mainly from sources within the picture area, and the nuisance of unwanted noises-off is much reduced.
It is quite possible that your camcorder's microphone is a ‘uni’ rather than an ‘omni’.
On the whole, these are to be preferred for video work because of their ability to relate what you hear to what you see.
Some extension microphones are superdirectional; these are used in situations where their high selectivity is needed to record sound in difficult conditions.
Turning now to the ways in which microphones generate their signals, the cheapest types use a crystal, but their quality is poor and they are not recommended for video.
Electret microphones use a polarised condenser instead of a crystal.
The level and quality of their signal output is good, they are moderately priced, and they are very suitable for general use; however, they require a battery to operate them.
Dynamic microphones work rather like miniature loudspeakers in reverse.
The quality is excellent, and they do not require a battery.
They are suitable for general use and especially for music recording.
Microphones are designed in various styles and sizes according to the particular application.
STICK MICROPHONES
These can be mounted on a stand or held in the hand, and are available in both electret and dynamic types and with both ‘omni’ and ‘uni’pick-up patterns.
Stick-mikes are the all-rounders of the audio world, but when used for video their size makes them clearly visible on shot.
There are times when this is quite acceptable, such as for street interviews or music recording, but they are not suitable for drama unless they are mounted on a boom.
TIE-CLIP MICROPHONES
These are miniature electret mikes which are specially recommended for speech recording when the microphone should be visually unobtrusive.
They are attached to the speaker's clothing and are virtually invisible on shot.
Positioned within a few inches of the speaker's lips, they produce a strong speech signal which stands out clearly against noisy backgrounds.
However, if there is more than one speaker, each has to be provided with an individual microphone, and the speech signals therefore have to be fed to the camcorder via an audio mixer; hence, tie-clip mikes are not suitable for use with large groups of people.
Ordinary cable-connected tie-clips are quite inexpensive but they limit freedom of movement.
As an alternative, radio versions are now available at economic prices; these allow virtually unrestricted movement to the wearer, the signals being picked up by a special receiver which passes them on to the camcorder via a short cable connection.
Miniature tie-clip microphones are ideal for location speech recording, as they can be positioned close to the lips of the speaker and so reduce the pick-up of background noise.
This gun-microphone has a super-directional pick-up pattern which makes it suitable for use outdoors at sports events and in similar situations.
It can also be converted for use as an omnidirectional microphone.
GUN MICROPHONE
These are super-directional microphones which are aimed at individual speakers or sound sources; they therefore require skilled operation by a sound assistant who monitors the signal on headphones.
Gun-mikes are generally restricted to outdoor use; indoors, sound reflections off walls defeat the directional characteristics to a large extent.
BOOM MICROPHONES
These are uni-directional microphones mounted on booms which can be swung overhead and aimed at individual speakers; they are mainly used for recording drama, and require skilled operation by an assistant.
Although purpose-made units are expensive to buy, ordinary hand-microphones attached to simple booms make an acceptable alternative for amateur use.
As we have already noted, audio mixers are used to combine the signals from a number of microphones, and they can also be used as volume controllers.
Simple mixers can in fact be made up cheaply by enthusiasts from published circuits, but these have largely been supplanted by modestly priced commercial units which incorporate battery or mains-fed circuitry capable of delivering better balanced outputs of higher quality.
These are obtainable from hi-fi and electronics stores and also by mail order.
Recording good sound is a job in itself, so take an assistant along on those important shoots.
If you purchase an audio mixer, look for one which has built-in level meters.
These are very useful, as they enable you to balance up the individual microphone inputs with a degree of precision which is not easy to achieve simply by listening on headphones.
At the beginning of a recording session, start by asking each speaker in turn to say a few words.
The differences in voice levels will show up clearly on the meter, and you can then adjust the mixer settings accordingly.
When you are making these settings, go for levels which give good, solid recordings but are not so high as to overload the tape on signal peaks.
If you do set too high, you may find that the first syllable spoken after a pause is distorted, especially on p's and b's, after which the overall level of the recording drops to a lower value as the speaker continues; during the next pause in speech, the background slowly returns to its original value until the speech resumes, whereupon it falls again.
This cyclical fluctuation in volume is due to-the operation of the camcorder's automatic gain control which is all the time trying to maintain a constant sound level irrespective of the natural level of the incoming signal, an effect which makes it impossible to reproduce true audio perspectives.
The problem can be solved neatly by setting the mixer output so that the signal peaks at levels which are just below the threshold at which the automatic gain control comes into operation.
You can find this setting by trial and error by getting someone to speak steadily into the microphone while you gradually bring up the mixer level from zero to the point at which the volume, as monitored on headphones, ceases to rise.
Note the corresponding reading on the level meter: this represents the threshold maximum within which you can work — from this point downwards you can control all your sound levels manually on the mixer, and background levels will not drift upwards during pauses.
Indoors, you may have trouble with the acoustics of the room in which you are recording.
If the speech sounds ‘boxy’ or ‘boomy’, this will be due to sound reflections off walls and other surfaces.
These can spoil an otherwise good recording, though the effect can be lessened by using close-position tie-clip microphones in place of hand- or stand-mounted mikes.
Any hard, flat surface will reflect sound to some degree, and this includes not only walls and ceilings but also uncurtained windows, table-tops and parquet floors.
The solution is to muffle as many of these surfaces as you can: tables should be covered, floors should be carpeted, and windows should be curtained unless it is essential to admit daylight to the scene.
If, in spite of these precautions, your recordings still have an   unpleasantly boomy quality, you will then need to apply some tone correction, either while you are making the original recording or at a later editing-transfer stage.
For this you will need a tone correction unit of a kind which can be plugged into the appropriate points on the cable connections.
In this recording set-up, two tie-clip microphones are connected to a microphone mixer, the mic-level output from which is fed to the camcorder's external microphone socket via a tone control unit.
The incoming signal is monitored at the camcorder on headphones.
Provided that the mixer is a battery-operated type, the set-up is fully mobile and can be used for outdoor as well as indoor locations.
For stereo hi-fi recording, the microphones are connected all the way to the camcorder via separate right and left hand mixer channels, the mixer being set to mono for ‘centre-stage’ speech recording, otherwise to stereo.
The most sophisticated and flexible type of tone control is the graphic equaliser, a facility which can be obtained either in the form of a free-standing unit or built into amplifiers.
These apply very selective filtration of unwanted audio frequencies.
With one of these you can, for instance, remove just those parts of the signal which are responsible for boominess or tape hiss, leaving the remainder of the signal unchanged.
It is also possible to tailor the sound in other ways such as extra bass for increased depth or treble for improved clarity.
EQ units generally have two channels so that they can be used for stereo, but the channels can be operated separately so that two mono signals can be corrected individually.
If you use an equaliser during your video editing sessions, carefully check the effect of each adjustment as you go, by monitoring the sound over a loudspeaker (headphones may not give a true impression of how the tone corrections will sound when played back in the normal way).
Most EQ units have line inputs which are not suitable for direct microphone inputs, but these low level signals can be matched by  feeding them via an amplification stage, a facility which is provided on some mixers.
For all your sound recording, take care to ensure that your microphone leads and audio connections are electrically sound and properly screened from hum pick-up, so that the signal arrives at the camcorder in the best possible condition.
Keep the length of extension leads as short as you can to reduce the risk of them picking up stray radiations from nearby electrical appliances and short wave broadcasts such as taxi radio messages.
Do not operate microphones, mixers or other such equipment in close proximity to television sets and loudspeakers as these emit magnetic fields which can adversely affect the working of your audio systems.
There are right and wrong ways of handling microphones for speech recording.
Hand-held stick microphones — except the very expensive professional ones are prone to pick up handling noise.
It is important to get your performers to hold the mike in a firm grip and to keep it and its connecting cable as still as possible while recording is in progress.
Another point for them to remember is not to speak directly at the microphone but to aim instead just over the top of it; this is to reduce the pick-up of breath noises and the distortion of plosive consonants.
Perhaps the most difficult skill for amateur performers to acquire, though, is the art of speaking to microphone at a constant voice level: most tend to start off strongly as they launch into their speeches, but gradually tail off as they reach the end.
If you then lift the mixer level to compensate, the   background noise comes up too, and this can be very noticeable.
An extension microphone can be taken right up to the source of the wanted sound and kept well away from camcorder operating noise.
Probably the most demanding kind of speech recording is that of voice-over commentary — it is so easy to make it sound embarrassingly amateurish.
Commentary should be delivered at an even pace, without over-emphasis, and completely free of ‘fluffs’ such as mispronounced words, hesitations and other departures from perfection.
If you make any kind of a mistake, you should re-record the offending passage there and then.
Any feelings of strain will inevitably show up in your voice, so you should try to make the recording set-up as comfortable and convenient as you can.
If you use a stick-microphone, support it on a stand and position it as close as possible while allowing enough room for you to handle the script without rustling noises getting onto the recording.
Some people prefer to hold the script; others like to read off a lectern, which can be simply a tray propped up on a couple of books.
Position the microphone to suit your speaking height when reading from the script, and check that the operating noise of the video or sound recorder will not be picked up; this will probably require the equipment to be controlled by an assistant, who can also take care of the timings and cueing of the sections.
Although you will have to speak a little more slowly and clearly than you do normally, you should nevertheless make it sound as natural as you can.
If you have a regional accent, don't be tempted to try to disguise it, in all probability it will simply sound affected.
However, do avoid the use of slang or dialect expressions unless the context calls directly for such deviations from normal speech.
If you can, memorise the script section by section, so that you only need refer to it occasionally for confirmation.
Make a few test recordings before you start the session in earnest in order to get used to the set-up and to check that the wording sounds as good when spoken as it looks on the page.
Play these tests back and listen to them critically.
Is the pace and pitch of your voice suited to the material?
Is the recording quality as good as it can be?
When everything is ready, begin the recording, and never be satisfied with second best!
Taping your own sound effects is another interesting part of video movie making: it can become almost a hobby in itself.
It needs little in the way of special equipment other than a portable cassette recorder and microphone, and many a pleasant hour can be spent in collecting background sounds of various kinds.
It is, in fact, sensible to take your sound recorder along with you whenever you set off on a major shoot.
It can then be used in spare moments to provide you with recordings of matching background sound, which can be dubbed in at editing if need be to replace any unsatisfactory sections of the original synchronised sound.
CHECK LIST
When speaking into the microphone:
Hold the microphone in a firm grip and keep it still.
Aim over the top of the microphone rather than at it.
Speak at a constant level.
Re-record any ‘fluffs’.
Avoid any strain.
Speak from a comfortable position.
Speak a little more slowly and clearly than normal but keep it natural.
Record these background effects tapes at as high a level as possible to minimise tape hiss, and go for longish recording runs to give yourself plenty of margin at editing.
Remember also to record effects of a kind which do not need to be closely synchronised to the pictures.
For instance, if you are taping a traffic effect, keep back from the roadside so that the passing of vehicles merges into the general roar.
Also, avoid backgrounds in which individual voices can be clearly heard; aim instead for a general babble.
Keep the content of each effect simple — do not allow it to contain too many different elements at once.
If, say, you are recording a beach effect, it could include the sea, the cry of gulls, and even distant voices.
But if there is a band playing within earshot, move on and find a better location!
Bear in mind that your video tapes may contain audio material which can be copied onto sound tapes to add to your effects library.
Any material which runs for half a minute or so is worth considering, and you can stretch these times to any length by repeat-recording them nose-to-tail for as many times as needed to make up the required length.
However, check that there are no sounds which are likely to be noticed each time they come round on the repeats.
As your stock of effects grows, you will need to catalogue them by tape-number and counter-reference so that you can find them easily when you need them.
These lists could also be extended to include your collection of commercially produced effects, discs and tapes, and video recordings from which background sound could be dubbed direct.
It is interesting to note that stereo sound is already featured on some video recorders and camcorders, and it seems that it is only a matter of time before it becomes standard as for sound recorders.
This is already bringing in its train a whole new generation of stereo-related audio products including microphones — together with a whole new set of audio problems for you to solve!
One consideration is the question of ‘stereo spread’.
If your camcorder is fitted with a stereo microphone, you will find that it will be capable of producing a stereo signal which has plenty of ‘depth’ for the recording of the ambient background sound at locations.
Problems do arise, however, when speech is being recorded.
As we have already seen, if speech is to be recorded clearly it is best picked up by an extension microphone positioned close to the speaker.
If there is more than one speaker, a separate microphone should be provided for each.
If dialogue is being taped in stereo, the signals from the individual speakers should not be given a pronounced left and right stereo bias as this would conflict with the performers' relative positioning as seen in shot.
Instead, the speech should be recorded as from‘centre  stage’.
To achieve this, the signals from the two microphones are fed to the camcorder via an audio mixer switched to ‘mono’(that is not ‘stereo’) output.
A creative use for a pair of extension microphones used for recording location sound in stereo is to position one of them to concentrate on the foreground sound, leaving the pick-up of more general background sound to the other microphone.
This will add a real feeling of ‘audio depth’ to the recording.
If these two signals differ significantly in level, you will need to balance them up at the mixer before passing them on to the camcorder.
This is best done by monitoring the signals on headphones, worn perhaps by an assistant.