

Beyond Cadbury
One of the most frequent criticisms of the Cadbury committee's draft recommendations is that they lack an adequate enforcement mechanism.
This assumes that we know what we want to enforce.
Yet the debate on Cadbury shows that there are serious disagreements about the ideal structure for company boards.
In these circumstances, there is a strong case, not for imposing a rigid enforcement mechanism, but for allowing companies greater freedom to experiment.
The key recommendations in Cadbury concern the role of non-executive directors.
There is nothing new about non-executives.
The boards of banks and insurance companies, for example, have traditionally been full of long lists of the great and good.
A titled but non-executive chairman has always been seen by some as a desirable ornament on the company's board, and even more so on its stationery.
And some companies are of such eminence in the world that, for an appropriate emolument, retired politicians, diplomats and higher civil servants are more than happy to bestow on them the benefits of the business acumen and personal probity for which they are rightly renowned.
But there is a lot in Cadbury that is relatively new.
Most listed companies do not at present use their non-executives in the precise ways Cadbury recommends.
The concept of the ‘independent’ director, though arguably reflecting what non-executives should always have been, is a new one.
Most listed companies do not yet have enough independent directors to fulfil the roles Cadbury allots them, and it is even doubtful whether enough individuals of the right calibre are available for these positions, particularly in view of the heavy legal responsibilities that any company director incurs.
We still have a lot to learn about corporate governance, and we should not try to impose a single and relatively untried model on the UK's major companies.
Implementing Cadbury will therefore be an experimental step in the right direction.
It will not be an immediate transition from an imperfect state to a perfect one.
It would be helpful to companies, as they try to improve their corporate governance, if they could make a real distinction between executive and non-executive directors.
This means a distinction in law.
At the moment, the law does not distinguish between different classes of director.
If they wish to do so, companies should be able to have non-executive directors who do not have the same legal responsibility for its activities as do other directors.
This might make it easier to attract capable non-executive directors to fulfil the oversight role that Cadbury envisages for them.
It might even be possible to develop two-tier boards.
These are anathema to the British corporate establishment.
But they seem to work perfectly well in continental Europe, and it is difficult to see why British companies should be prevented from using them.
The most important question about any board of directors is not its structure, but the character and ability of the men and women who are on it.
While moves to codify best practice on structure are desirable, therefore, they should allow companies to go beyond Cadbury, not be confined by it.
technical summary
Accounting for subsidiary undertakings
The Accounting Standards Board has issued Financial Reporting Standard 2,Accounting for Subsidiary Undertakings (pp 124–135).
The FRS sets out the conditions under which an undertaking that is the parent of other undertakings should prepare consolidated financial statements.
The FRS also sets out the manner in which consolidated financial statements are to be prepared.
The FRS's requirements should be complied with as soon as possible and be regarded as standard, other than for Republic of Ireland companies, in respect of consolidated financial statements relating to periods ending on or after 23 December 1992.
The FRS supersedes SSAP 14,Group Accounts , altogether and the ASB's interim statement,Consolidated Accounts , except for certain provisions concerning joint ventures and associated companies.
Long-term debtors in current assets
The ASB's Urgent Issues Task Force has issued a consensus (No 4) on the presentation of long-term debtors in current assets (p 136).
It requires that the amount of debtors due after more than one year should be disclosed on the face of the balance sheet when it is so material in the context of total net current assets that disclosure in the notes alone may lead readers to misinterpret the accounts.
The requirement comes into effect for accounting periods ending on or after 23 August 1992.
Transfers from current assets to fixed assets
The UITF has issued a consensus (No 5) on transfers from current assets to fixed assets (p 136).
It requires that such transfers should be made at the lower of cost and net realisable value at the date of transfer.
Any loss arising should be charged in the profit and loss account.
Where the transfer is at net realisable value, the Companies Act disclosure requirements for a fixed asset carried at a valuation will apply.
These requirements come into effect for accounting periods ending on or after 23 December 1992.
Corresponding amounts for preceding years should be restated where applicable.
Lloyd's audits
The Auditing Practices Board has issued Practice Note 2,The Lloyd's Market (p 106).
The note deals with the special factors to be taken into account in the annual audit of syndicates, managing agents and Lloyd's brokers.
Copies of the note are available, price £6.50, from  
Single-member companies
Regulations now in force allow a private limited company to be formed or to operate with only one member (p 110).
Pensions: information and deficiencies
Regulations have now been issued to improve disclosures by trustees of pension funds and to provide that a deficiency in a pension scheme that is wound up becomes the debt of the employer (p 111).
Auditors' liability: Berg
It has been held that auditors did not owe a duty of care to creditors of a failed company on which they reported.
Following Al Saudi Banque and Caparo , foreseeability that a lender might rely on audited accounts is not enough in itself to establish such a duty.
Also, since the sole proprietor and directing mind and will of the company was not misled by the audit report, the company could not claim to have been misled by it; the company and its proprietor were in effect one and the same (p 111; see also p 6).
Offset in liquidation
A bank account standing in credit, and charged with debts owed to the bank by other account holders, can be offset against the debts in the bank's liquidation (p 111).
Shareholders' agreement enforceable
While a company cannot deprive itself of its power to alter its articles, an agreement by which shareholders (without binding future shareholders) agree personally between themselves about the manner in which they will exercise their voting powers is enforceable (p 112).
Competing while still employed
A company acted reasonably in dismissing its managing director after discovering that, along with another manager, he was planning to set up in competition with the company and take on the business of its best customer (p 114).
Racist remarks at work
It has been held that racist remarks made by an employer to an employee can amount to unlawful discrimination at work (p 114).
Health and safety
Regulations now in force put health and safety duties on the original supplier of equipment that is leased for use at work, rather than on the lessor (p 114).
Group relief claims
The form in which group relief claims should be made has been determined by the Inland Revenue under s 42(5), TMA 1970 (p 116).
Company cars
Proposals for a system of price-based scales to tax the private-use benefit of company cars have been put forward in an Inland Revenue consultative document,Company Cars: Reform of the Income Tax Treatment .
Comments are requested by 13 November (p 117).
Stamp duty reduction guidance
The Stamp Office has issued a guidance note on which documents can benefit from the temporary higher threshold for stamp duty, where the documents are signed on or before 19 August, but relate to a sale that may not be completed until 20 August or later (p 117).
Capital allowances
It has been held that while mezzanine platforms erected in a warehouse could be regarded as plant for capital allowance purposes, ancillary lighting could not (p 119).
VAT and staff discounts
With effect from 15 May 1992, VAT is only liable on the price actually paid for goods supplied at a discount to employees (p 119).
VAT: flat rate scheme for farmers
A flat rate scheme for farmers is to be introduced with effect from 1 January 1993 (p 120).
letters
Auditors' liability
Sir,— As the last senior partner of Dearden Farrow, I was interested to read the news item (see ACCOUNTANCY , August, p 20 and this issue, p 111) relating our success in the action brought by Berg Sons & Co Ltd and Union Discount Ltd.
Having lived through the case in considerable detail since the writ was delivered in 1989, nearly seven years after the audit report in question was signed off, I think I can say that there are some better grounds for believing that the result is good for the profession than are implied in your brief summary.
First, however, I should amplify your statement that the claim was £13m.
The true exposure was probably in excess of £25m with interest over 10 years and with costs added in.
The interest was a consequence of the delay in bringing the action.
It may be instructive that the prime mover in the action was an American bank (Allied International) which has subsequently ceased operations in London and which withdrew from the action on those grounds, although their vice president in charge of operations at the material time was, and still is, resident here.
The second plaintiff to remove itself from the action was Thai Farmers Bank, of which the judge in the case commented: ‘The other development is more disturbing in that from January 1983 the local manager of Thai Farmers Bank began to provide to other banks references for Berg which either misrepresented the true position of Berg's accounts with Thai Farmers Bank or at the least concealed the true position without making it clear that there was highly relevant information about Berg which they were declining to give.
These references, which were given over the period continually to 1984, undoubtedly had an effect on the ability of Berg to engage in large scale bill discounting transactions with other banks.’
With this knowledge it was difficult, at times, to take the plaintiff's case seriously.
Our advice, from solicitors and counsel, remained steadfast: that, in their view, the banks had clearly lost money through their own negligence and had not relied on the company accounts at all.
The judge found most damningly against Union Discount.
Its evidence: ‘depended upon the evidence of Mr Whitney-Long [not a current employee of UD I understand]; his evidence was essential to the proof that they had relied upon the 1982 audited accounts in discounting the four bills that formed the basis of their claim.
I do not accept that they did.
Mr Whitney-Long's evidence on this aspect was unsatisfactory: indeed the weight of his evidence in cross-examination was that they did not so rely in any material way but relied on other matters.
‘Under these circumstances, since no causal relationship has been established, it is unreal to consider the question of contributory negligence.
But if it had been necessary for me to do so, I would have concluded that the whole loss should be borne by Union Discount.
To rely upon the 1982 accounts as providing a reason for deciding to discount these bills would have been reckless; it would have been just and equitable to require Union Discount to bear the whole of the loss.’
This seems to strike at the very heart of many of the cases which are made against firms of accountants.
It could be a significant victory for those who wish to defeat the ‘deep pocket’ syndrome.
We are all acutely aware that this baleful influence of the American ambulance-chasing lawyer has infected commercial relations in the UK.
The impact is felt all over the profession and not just by the larger firms.
It also may have a significant effect on the problems of Lloyd's.
A British judge has nailed the spectre in unequivocal terms.
Wherever the law settles in the post- Caparo era, plaintiffs will have to show that they actually relied on the work done by the accountants.
The assumption that because the accounts can be shown to be wrong, with the benefit of hindsight, every creditor can blame the auditors, is decisively rejected.
Also relating to the issue of reliance on the accounts, I should correct the statement in your report that ‘the 1982 accounts were the last audit completed and signed’.
In fact, the 1983 accounts were issued very late and heavily qualified because, by that time, the problems of Esal commodities (whose bills Berg had been discounting) were well known.
It was very much part of the evidence that the banks (although Union Discount's expert witness claimed that they were not a bank) continued to discount bills presented by Berg, despite the fact that Berg's 1983 accounts were late and that the only accounts of record [1982]showed net assets of only about £250,000 against potential exposures measuring many millions.
Finally, it has to be admitted that we were strengthened in our resolve not only by the robust advice of our own legal team but by the knowledge that the merger of Dearden Farrow and the loss of the practising name meant that we were not susceptible to concerns in regard to our reputation.
There were several indications that the plaintiffs assumed that all accountants and their insurers would settle.
It must also be admitted that the fact that some of the companies insuring our policy had ceased to pay out in the wake of the LUI failure, also helped our resistance.
But the principal credit goes to our legal team for identifying at the outset the essential weakness in the plaintiffs' case.
For most of the time the plaintiffs seemed to miss out on the need to prove their reliance on the accounts and had they addressed this early enough, the case might never have come to court.
The lawyers did well.
District society debate
Sir,— I feel I must write and put the record straight on several of the matters raised by Stella Fearnley in her article in the August issue of ACCOUNTANCY (see p 66).
It is with some reluctance that I have to strongly disagree with one of my fellow presidents, but some of the impressions that her article creates are very misleading and, in some cases, offensive.
It is true that during the 1991/92 presidential year a certain amount of friction occurred between Moorgate Place and the district societies, but it should be made clear that this was almost entirely due to the funding problems and not because of any breakdown in the relationship between the national president and the district society presidents.
That relationship was superb and made for an excellent team effort throughout the year, as was evidenced by the fulsome tributes paid to Ian McNeil at the end of his period in office.
The funding problem is linked to the Institute's own financial problems, but this year's District Societies Steering Committee is being very positive on this issue and is doing all it can to ensure a reasonable level of funding.
The article implies that district societies are no more than a local practitioners' club.
I am sure that I speak for all district society presidents when I say that this is just not true.
We have all worked very hard to make sure that our district societies are representative of all members and I am sure that a breakdown of the composition of committees would prove this.
The activities of the societies also ensure that there is something for every branch of the membership.
Sometimes it is difficult to get people involved, but the facilities are there for those who wish to partake.
The strength of the Institute itself is through its district society network and all district society officers are dedicated to ensure that that continues.
A recent meeting at the Institute between the national president and presidents and deputy presidents of all district societies re-affirmed the importance of, and the role of, district societies, and if you look at the make-up of the district society presidents and their deputies you will see that this is also representative of all members of the Institute.
Stella Fearnley, once again, questions the point of the dinner circuit.
I am certain that 21 of the 22 district society presidents in 1991/92 found it to be very valuable.
There is no compulsion to go to every dinner and one is not expected to do so.
However, it is an ideal opportunity to meet one's colleagues on a regular basis and to discuss matters of concern.
It is also an ideal opportunity to meet with members of other district societies to learn how they approach matters.
A useful exchange of views always takes place and engenders an excellent team spirit, which proved its worth with the campaign for increased subscriptions when we all felt we were working towards the same goal and had a common purpose.
It is essential that presidents meet together on a regular basis and the dinner circuit provides the ideal forum for this.
There is also the point that district society presidents are all volunteers and work very hard for the good of the district society and the Institute and it is a pity if they cannot be allowed some enjoyment from their endeavours and also make new friendships which will last a lifetime.
Stella has also raised the question of spouses joining in on the dinner circuit.
It should be made clear that this is on a completely self-financing basis and that at an increasing number of dinners spouses now attend the dinner rather than do their own thing.
It is also worth saying that spouses provide invaluable support during their partners' periods of office and, in some cases, are very much involved in district society affairs.
I am sorry if Stella has found it uncomfortable to be a female president.
I have talked to lady presidents of prior years who have said that they did not experience any difficulties.
It is with regret that I have had to take issue with a fellow Council member, but I was very incensed when I read her article.
Stella Fearnley replies: In response to Richard Harwood's comments, I feel I should point out that my article did not imply that the only perception of district societies is that of a practitioners' club, and that this perception emerged from market research carried out among our members last year, not from my own opinions.
But, yes, I did have problems with the dinner circuit.
I found it personally difficult to justify the cost to my society of attending these occasions in times of recession, and I would have dearly loved to have had the support of my spouse on the occasions when I did go.
But I found it too embarrassing to keep suggesting to a fellow professional that he should take time off from his own work to accompany me to functions where he was not able to join me at the dinner table when he got there.
As I represent 25% of the total population of women presidents to date, if my predecessors did not share my feelings a 25% opinion still deserves to be heard, and I believe that some of my successors may well be of the same mind as I am.
I am sure we all have one objective in mind, which is how we can best serve our members, and I'm sure that both Richard and I are of the same view on this.
And of course I can assure him that a difference of opinion such as this will in no way undermine my personal relationships with any of my fellow professionals.
Cash flow, or no?
Sir,— I note with interest that in its last annual accounts, the Institute has published a cash flow statement, which some members might expect to look to as a model.
However, I wonder if the Institute is using a different version of FRS 1 from mine.
First, current asset investments cash flows have been merged with cash and cash equivalents, whereas the FRS requires those acquired with more than three months' maturity to be reported in the Investing section of the cash flow statement.
Second, the Institute marks-to-market those same current asset investments, and has put into the Investing section ‘Net profits on sales of current investments’ and ‘Increase in market value of current investments’.
I am very puzzled as to how either of these two items can be cash flows by any stretch of the imagination.
If I am correct, should not the Institute, although not a company, also have regard to s 245 of the Companies Act?
Michael Phizacklea, the Institute's director of finance, replies: The overriding consideration in the preparation of the Institute's accounts has always been the provision of information to members.
The accounting policies of the Institute have regard to accounting standards and presentational aspects of the Companies Act where these are relevant to the Institute's activities and do not result in misleading information.
While we endeavour to adopt ‘best modern practice’ it would be inappropriate for the accounts to lead the Accounting Standards Board, particularly as the Board is independent of the Institute.
The Institute's liquid resources are actively managed on a daily basis to maximise income with any surplus to immediate requirements being invested in short-term certificates of deposit issued by blue chip financial institutions.
These investments have therefore been treated as cash equivalents in preparing the cash flow statement reflecting the liquid nature of the investments.
The change in market value of certificates held at 31 December is simply the product of applying accrued interest at that date.
The certificates are, of course, quoted daily with accrued interest.
I can assure Mr Faris that the issues he raises were looked at and that the disclosures adopted were considered to be the most appropriate in the circumstances.
The Institute has simply attempted to distinguish between returns from investing activities and those derived from operating cash flows.
According to the financial press, we are not alone in this dilemma and, indeed, in response to the concerns of some major quoted companies David Tweedie, ASB chairman, has gone on record to state that ‘FRS 1 is embryonic’ and that ‘as a matter of routine, the Board collects all comments on published standards and, from time to time, depending on the issues raised, will consider whether any changes should be made.’
president's page Fairer and faster ways of dealing with misconduct
Most members are only too pleased to go through their professional lives without the need to obtain an intimate understanding of the way our professional conduct committees work.
Long may that continue to be the case!
Like the other office-holders, I am debarred by my office from membership of the professional conduct committees.
But it is my responsibility to ensure that our disciplinary procedures are ‘fair, firm and fast’, to reiterate my words to Council in June when I took office as president.
In common with most other professional bodies the Institute has seen a substantial increase in the rate of growth of complaints against members in recent years; in 1991, we received 20% more complaints than in 1990.
This increase seems to be part of a broader social trend in which clients increasingly expect a high quality of service from professional people.
One consequence is that it has caused substantial administrative problems for us.
In the first instance, the Institute dealt with this strain on its resources by appointing consultants to examine the problem.
They reported that, while our professional conduct department represented good value for money, it was grossly overloaded.
Since then the resources of that department have been strengthened, and much has been done to streamline procedures.
Nevertheless, the inflow of complaints continues to grow and I am disturbed that we have not yet been able to make much of an inroad into the backlog of work.
This is a problem that we will have to deal with urgently, not least because slow service in responding to complaints affects the reputation of our profession.
It must be recognised, however, that even with totally adequate resources, some of the most complex cases would still take years to unravel.
A few of these difficult public-interest cases go, not to the disciplinary committee, but to the Joint Disciplinary Scheme: not more than about one or two a year, but each of them demanding a great investment of time and money.
The approval by members at the June special meeting of a reformed scheme should, with luck, cut down the time that references to the JDS take to complete, as well as the cost of these expensive investigations.
Resolving grievances
Most complainants, however, are more interested in getting their grievance resolved than in disciplinary proceedings.
For them, there is a provision in the byelaws that in all appropriate cases the Institute should attempt to resolve complaints by conciliation, arbitration or otherwise.
It is not generally known that nearly 90% of the 3,500 or so complaints received yearly are cleared up by the secretariat without the need for disciplinary action.
A recent innovation has been to allow the investigation committee to give members who are the subject of a complaint an opportunity to accept a judgment (and appropriate penalty) against them as an alternative to prosecution before the disciplinary committee.
The take-up of this new procedure has been good.
A serious flaw in our arrangements was remedied this year by the appointment of the Reviewer of Complaints (or Ombudsman).
If the investigation committee rejects a complaint, the complainant now has the right to apply for a rehearing.
The reviewer has only been in office for eight months but so far has not had cause to uphold a single application for a review.
Apart from the need to reduce delays in the investigation of complaints there is no more important issue than the need to ensure that serious misconduct is met with suitable sanctions, and that the costs of disciplinary proceedings should, so far as is practicable and just, be borne by those who cause us to incur those costs.
I have recently addressed the disciplinary committee on these issues and I am confident it is aware of their importance, although what decisions are taken in an individual case must always remain a matter exclusively for those who hear the case.
The Joint Disciplinary Scheme was the first of our committees to recognise the need to take jurisdiction over firms as well as individual members.
Since then the Financial Services Act 1986 and the Companies Act 1989 have required us to do likewise in relation to investment business and to audit work.
A consultative paper published in August argues the case for the extension of this principle (with safeguards) to all areas of practice work.
I look forward with interest to your reactions to this proposal.
But it is not enough to do a good job: our professional conduct committees must be seen to be doing a good job.
Often, the Institute is criticised unjustly for supposed inactivity when in fact investigations are well in hand.
The absence of a power to make announcements in cases of public concern, however, was corrected at the June special meeting.
We are committed to reviewing the ways in which the work of all committees of the Institute may be more open and that does not exclude the professional conduct committees.
As part of this review I hope that very soon the reports of our disciplinary and appeal committees will be more informative in terms of details of particular cases.
news
FUTURE STRATEGY FOR THE INSTITUTE
District societies want a director general
The Institute needs to take its image upmarket along the lines of the Confederation of British Industry and appoint a director general who — like the CBI's recently retired Sir John Banham — can become its media face and voice.
So says the Nottingham Society of Chartered Accountants in its response to the Institute's consultative document Manifesto to Members (see ACCOUNTANCY , April, p 13).
‘We believe,’ it says, ‘that the Institute has lost its leadership in this area and a more forthright spokesman who could appear in the media on a regular basis would be welcome.’
The CBI, it continues, has become a powerful voice in lobbying the Government and leading British industry.
‘They have achieved this, we believe, through the appointment of a high profile director general and we would welcome consideration of a similar appointment at the Institute.’
The district society is not alone in its call.
The Institute has received more than 250 responses to the document, which are currently being analysed.
Many of them reiterate the plea for a high profile personality to present a powerful voice on behalf of the Institute and its members.
The London Society, in its hard-hitting commentary, also calls for a director general.
The appointee would not usurp the roles of the Institute president and secretary, it says, ‘but should provide the opportunity for a higher public profile, the opportunity to become recognised as as the spokesman for the Institute, and the driving force in achieving the Institute's longer term goals.’
Another issue, which commentators are keen to see debated widely, is the question of whether the Institute can effectively carry out the dual roles of protecting the interests of both the public and its members.
Although there is unanimous agreement that the profession should do everything possible to keep self-regulation and that both roles should somehow be kept within the Institute's ambit, there is a desire to discuss what the Beds, Bucks and Herts Society describes as an ‘underlying feeling of unease about the dual role’.
And the Liverpool Society warns of the threat of external interference if the profession is not seen to be demonstrating effective self-regulation.
Some district societies also want an assurance that the Institute will not take on additional regulatory responsibilities without consulting the membership: some go as far as urging it to oppose any future legislation to extend statutory regulation of members' activities.
All the societies stress the need for good communication and PR and argue the importance of their role as a conduit between the Institute and the membership.
But they take the Institute to task for criticising the level of services they are able to offer their members.
They point to falling revenue from the Institute, the recession and competition over courses.
‘We do not see that such undeserved humiliation has a place in the Institute's Manifesto ,’ says Liverpool.
However, all the commentators who spoke to ACCOUNTANCY said that they had welcomed the principle behind the document warmly.
The fact that the Institute was setting down its objectives for the first time was seen as ‘a move in the right direction’.
What they want to see now is action.
As the LSCA put it: ‘If the momentum of consultation and communication is not maintained, members will not have confidence in the leaders of the Institute nor in the future proposals for financing its activities.’
‘It was never our intention to stand still on this document,’ said Institute deputy president Michael Chamberlain.
‘The responses to the Manifesto will form the background against which our strategy is going to be planned for subsequent years.
‘Clearly, we are not going to rewrite the Manifesto , but our strategy for 1993 and beyond will be thrashed out by Council in the light of the responses and the priorities that they identify.’
Michael Chamberlain: ‘It was never our intention to stand still'
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Cadbury code to be delayed
Implementation of the Cadbury Committee's proposed code of best practice for improving boardroom procedures in UK listed companies looks certain to be put back until next year.
According to Committee secretary Nigel Peace, the finalised version of the report, which had been expected to be issued in October, will not now appear until the end of November at the earliest: this makes the original proposed deadline of 31 December 1992 for compliance with the code too tight for companies to meet.
Commentators are also pressing for a staggered implementation, with companies being allowed to report progress on compliance for a given period of time.
Mr Peace says that of the responses to the Cadbury report, 64% — including the Institute's are generally supportive.
‘We thought that Cadbury was realistic within the terms of reference he was given,’ said Chris Swinson, chairman of the Institute's Financial Reporting and Auditing Group.
‘He was trying to make what was already there work and we believe he has done a reasonable job in the circumstances.’
It is on the detail of the recommendations that Cadbury has come in for strong criticism — in particular, over some of the recommendations in the code (see also this issue, p 24).
The Institute of Directors, the CBI and some chartered accountants in business are critical of the suggestion in Cadbury that non-executive directors should have much enhanced responsibilities to check and balance the power of the executive board.
They are also concerned that giving distinct roles to two separate groups of directors is divisive and that two tier boards might arise because of the split in responsibilities.
On the other hand, some shareholders' interests and media commentators believe that the code should be mandatory and supported by stringent enforcement powers.
These critics have been disappointed by The Stock Exchange's announcement that it will not insist on compliance as a listing requirement.
The sections of the report dealing with interim reporting and measures to enhance the perceived effectiveness of auditing have received more favourable comment.
AUDITING
Small company audit should go
The small company audit is costly, time-consuming and of no practical use to management, bankers, suppliers and customers, and should be abolished, according to a consultative paper recently issued by the Institute's Financial Reporting and Auditing Group.
The statutory requirement should no longer apply to the 250,000 or so companies that are below the VAT registration threshold of £36,600, and those companies which meet the VAT cash accounting limit requirements (£300,000) should be allowed to opt out of the audit provided there is unanimous agreement among the shareholders.
The change would not apply, however, to public interest companies, such as those registered under the Financial Services Act.
Instead of the audit, FRAG proposes that the accounts should contain a compilation report on their preparation, which would be furnished by an accountant who is suitably qualified but not necessarily independent of the company.
It also recommends that the directors should be required to make a statement about their responsibilities in relation to the accounts.
Scrapping the audit could reduce the cost to companies by between 20% and 55%.
The saving, FRAG maintains, could be better spent on purchasing more useful advisory services from accountancy firms.
‘This would be more beneficial to the company and to the national economy than the audit.’
The consultative document, which seeks views on the size criteria for companies qualifying for relief, the nature of the compilation report, who should provide it and whether it should be voluntary, has been sent to interest groups outside the profession, as well as to members.
The deadline for comments is 30 November.
Relaxation of the small company audit requirement has been Institute policy since the debate resumed in 1985.
Since then, there have been several attempts to persuade Government to relax the statutory requirements but these have failed, largely because of opposition from the Inland Revenue and the Treasury.
At the time, both departments were understood to be concerned about potential tax losses and a steep increase in collection costs.
However, the Institute is more optimistic about its efforts this time.
Earlier this year, the then Corporate Affairs Minister John Redwood indicated that the DTI was prepared to consider relaxing the audit requirements for very small companies.
As FRAG chairman Chris Swinson points out, ‘I can't see why the Government would have mentioned it if it was not intending to act.
It has plenty to do without stirring this one up.’
He also said that the Revenue's position is likely to have changed since 1988 when the question was last debated.
ACCA out on a limb
The ACCA is the only accountancy organisation to maintain its support for the small company audit.
CIMA would like to see the audit requirement scrapped for all companies which fall within the statutory definition of a small company.
If the Government is serious about reducing the burdens on business, it says, then the £2m turnover criterion contained in the Companies Act makes much more sense than the proposed £36,600 VAT threshold which is far too low.
‘The question of whether there is a continuing need for small companies to have their annual accounts audited should essentially be viewed in the context of the value to the small company itself.
‘Surveys have shown that the added value gained by small companies from the audit is generally perceived as poor.’
In place of the audit, it says, the individual who prepares the accounts — who should be a professionally qualified accountant — should sign a certificate stating that the accounts had been prepared in accordance with relevant UK accounting principles.
The directors should also state that the company is a going concern and able to pay its debts as and when they fall due.
The Scottish Institute is currently finalising papers on the small company audit and disincorporation to be released shortly.
But it also has long supported the idea that the small company audit should go.
The ACCA argues that limited liability status confers privileges and responsibilities on the company and that the audit is the price to be paid.
It also claims that the audit is an aid to the company, its bankers, potential suppliers and tax inspectors.
All were aspects considered and dismissed by the Institute in its consultative paper.
It agrees that companies should be publicly accountable in return for the privilege of limited liability, it says, but that accountability lies in filing the accounts, rather than their audit.
Unlimited companies, it points out, must also have their accounts audited, even though they are not filed with the Registrar.
‘This suggests that the audit is not so much the price of limited liability as a protection for shareholders.’
Bankers are generally in a position to make specific conditions for providing finance and so have little need for the audit, abbreviated accounts filed 10 months after the year end are of little value to trade suppliers and customers, and the Revenue's reliance on audited accounts is ‘largely illusory’, the Institute says.
RECESSION
More firms are floundering
The Institute is receiving a steady stream of reports of accountancy firms entering into individual voluntary arrangements under insolvency laws.
One of the latest firms to have entered into an IVA, which allows the firm protection from creditors while it attempts to reorganise its finances, is Hook Harris, an eight-partner firm with three offices in the south of England.
Reports of bankruptcy or IVA in firms used to be a rare phenomenon, said Jack Maurice of the Ethics Committee, but since the recession began, the reports have become ‘quite regular’.
Any partners entering into an IVA are automatically referred to the Institute's Investigation Committee, whereas bankruptcy, a less frequent event, results in instant expulsion.
But Mr Maurice added that the Investigation Committee is sympathetic to members where there is no evidence of fraud or recklessness.
‘Where members entering into IVAs have simply fallen victim to the recession, there are no instances of the Committee pulling the rug from under them,’ he said.
‘It tends to adjourn the case for six months to allow them to get themselves together again.’
Helping hand.
Sally Gunnell's well deserved victory in this year's Olympics (see left with her gold and bronze medals) was not just a boost for employer Pannell Kerr Forster — its fax paper now reads ‘Sally Gunnell — Olympic Champion Another PKF First’— but also for the British team.
‘She looked over at the UK block as she ran past and the place just erupted,’ Stoy Hayward's Olympic hockey player Don Williams told ACCOUNTANCY .
‘It was a great feeling…the icing on the cake.’
Don, unfortunately, did not fare so well.
Having lost in the last group match against Australia 6–0 and punctured an eardrum to boot, he admits he felt depressed.
‘When you sit down afterwards and look at all the training you've done and all the sacrifices you've made and you don't get a medal it's pretty shattering.’
But both he and Adrian Stead, Grant Thornton's Flying Dutchman Class yachtsman, said the Olympic experience was fantastic.
Adrian, who came 15th despite hopes for a medal, vowed: ‘I certainly hope to go and win in four years’ time.’
CREATIVE ACCOUNTING
The book they tried to ban
Accounting for Growth , the controversial book which led to the suspension of a top City analyst, was finally published last month amid a flurry of writs and proved to be an immediate best seller.
City book stores had queues of buyers on the first day eager to find out what had so upset stockbrokers UBS Phillips & Drew.
The firm had suspended its head of research Terry Smith, issued injunctions against him and his publishers, and gained, for what is essentially an analysis of the ways in which companies improve their reported profits, the sort of press coverage more usually associated with revelations about Princess Di.
Accounting for Growth is a guide for investors on how to spot creative accounting techniques used in annual accounts — quite legally — to flatter profits; it also contains a list which shows how many of the UK's top companies use these techniques and to what extent.
It is an expanded and updated version of a report written by Mr Smith in 1991.
That report voted best piece of research in the 1991 Extel survey of institutional investors — was inspired, Mr Smith says, by the belief that ‘much of the apparent growth in profits which had occurred in the 1980s was the result of accounting sleight of hand rather than genuine economic growth’.
Of the 208 FT actuaries index companies analysed in the book, GrandMet, Ladbroke and Trafalgar House come out top of the list of those taking fullest advantage of accounting techniques.
GrandMet — whose enquiry to UBS about the book's contents sparked off the row uses nine out of 12 possible accounting devices.
Ladbroke and Trafalgar both use eight.
Five other companies — Albert Fisher, British Aerospace, Granada Group, Rank Organisation and Ratners — use seven techniques, another 15 use six and a further 21 use five.
Only 16 out of all 208 use none of the accounting devices.
A similar checklist in the original report, showing companies which used five or more techniques, threw up names like Maxwell Communication Corporation which subsequently went into administration, Asda whose boardroom shake-up followed a £365m pre-tax loss, LEP which is now in the hands of a company doctor, British Aerospace which is about to undergo further restructuring, and Ultramar which was taken over after reporting losses.
As Mr Smith points out, ‘the share price of these companies has ranged from indifferent to disastrous, with MCC representing a near certain total loss to shareholders’.
The study, he says, ‘has proved to be an amazingly accurate guide’.
Publication has angered accounting firms, particularly those with listed clients.
In the view of Ernst & Young, ‘The book's conclusions are largely misleading’.
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES
Net poised over firms
Measures to make firms more accountable to their clients in non-reserved functions have been proposed in a recent Institute report.
Under the proposals, the Institute's disciplinary powers in these areas would be extended to include firms as well as individuals, in recognition of the fact that in reality it is the firms, rather than their engagement partners, which are responsible for client satisfaction.
Under the existing byelaws, complaints relating to non-reserved work which account for 80% of all the complaints that the Institute receives — can only be investigated against individuals.
‘When clients have gone to a firm and believe that they have been treated badly, they tend to complain against the firm, not the engagement partner, and are surprised when the Institute tells them that they cannot do so,’ said Elwyn Eilledge, head of the working party.
‘In this they are probably more in tune with reality than are the present byelaws.’
The firms will be liable for poor work and other breaches of professional standards and requirements, unless they can prove that they had not contributed to the misconduct which was wholly attributable to some other individual (including partners, employees or non-members).
DISCIPLINARY PROCESS
Open hearings under review
The Institute will have to look more closely into the implications of opening up its disciplinary hearings to the public before the idea can be taken further.
A preliminary exploration of the issues involved revealed a number of complex legal and practical difficulties which could threaten the effectiveness of future disciplinary procedures if they were held in public, according to Institute secretary and chief executive Andrew Colquhoun.
‘There is a definite tension between openness and effectiveness,’ he said.
‘For instance, would openness deter complainants from making complaints in the first place?
These issues will have to be considered most carefully.’
A review will be carried out by the Professional Conduct Directorate and a report made back to Council ‘at some stage’.
The Institute first considered the possibility of extending openness to disciplinary hearings at the request of Council member Douglas Llambias, after he had been refused admittance as an observer to the Disciplinary Committee hearing into the conduct of Polly Peck administrators Michael Jordan and Richard Stone (see ACCOUNTANCY , August, p 14).
Although Mr Llambias is a member of the Disciplinary Committee, he had not been selected as a member of the disciplinary panel and so was prevented by the committee's byelaws from attending.
The Professional Conduct Directorate will also separately consider expanding the information that is published after a Disciplinary Committee finding.
At present this is confined to a brief outline of the defendant's breaches and the penalty imposed, but a working party will consider the possibility of issuing a full judgment outlining the facts alleged by the Investigation Committee, the member's defence, the Disciplinary Committee's findings and any mitigating circumstances (see also p 25).
The Jordan and Stone hearing, which began on 27 July, was adjourned after four days for unspecified reasons.
The hearing will resume, the Committee says, ‘at the earliest possible date’.
This is likely to be some time in October.
Messrs Jordan and Stone are accused of breaching the Institute's ethical guidelines in acting as administrators for Polly Peck in spite of an alleged ‘continuing professional relationship’ between Coopers & Lybrand and the company.
Mr Jordan heads Cork Gully, C&L's insolvency arm, while Mr Stone is head of C&L's corporate finance department.
REVIEW PANEL
Companies capitulate
Associated Nursing Services has agreed to alter its accounting policies and Williamson Tea Holdings has agreed to publish fuller information about its policies after discussions with the Financial Reporting Review Panel.
Associated Nursing Services' 1991 accounts, described by one analyst as ‘weird’, were brought to the Panel's attention for two reasons.
The company tended to capitalise all costs and revenues associated with opening new homes until they reached projected break-even occupancy levels.
Its 1992 results, recently published, restrict capitalisation to three months from the date of registration, which the directors call ‘a more prudent’ policy.
The company also agreed to provide a more adequate explanation of changes in accounting policy in future, and the Panel welcomed the directors' intention ‘to ensure that future notes will include reiteration of the former policy as well as a description of the new policy’.
The Panel queried Williamson Tea Holdings' 1991 accounts on a number of issues relating to its policies on depreciation.
The 1991 accounts stated that additional depreciation arising as a result of assets revaluations was charged directly to the revaluation reserve, contrary to SSAP 12.
The directors added that they had done so because ‘this is the basis adopted in the accounts of the overseas subsidiaries’, and that the group accounts should be drawn up on the same basis in order to show a true and fair view.
The 1992 accounts are due to be published shortly, and the company has agreed to ‘provide fuller information about a number of accounting policies’, including the background and reasons for a transfer to reserves and the non-depreciation of properties described as leasehold and lease rentals.
The Panel added that it would take no further action in either case.
The Urgent Issues Task Force has published two new abstracts, its fourth and fifth, covering the presentation of long-term debtors in current assets and transfers from current assets to fixed assets (see p 136).
READER SURVEY
Over 800 people participated earlier this year in our annual survey of readers' views on ACCOUNTANCY .
As in previous years, we shall be making some changes to reflect readers' comments.
We have already dropped our International Tax section and this is the last issue to include European Briefing: both sections had relatively little support from readers.
We are most grateful to those readers who participated in the survey.
Their comments have been extremely helpful.
Watching brief.
The Labour Party has appointed barrister and short story writer Stuart Bell as its front bench spokesman on corporate affairs and the accountancy profession.
He replaces Marjorie Mowlam, now shadow Minister for the Citizen's Charter.
Mr Bell, who is MP for Middlesbrough, is no newcomer to difficult briefs: he was front bench spokesman on Northern Ireland for three years.
Responsibility for financial services has gone to another lawyer, solicitor Alistair Darling, MP for Edinburgh Central.
ACCOUNTING STANDARDS BOARD
Qualified welcome for OFR
The Accounting Standards Board's plans for large companies to produce an Operating and Financial Review have received a qualified welcome, with most commentators agreeing with the principle but squabbling over details.
The majority supported the basic idea of the OFR: that company directors should provide with the reports and accounts a commentary on the operating results, a review of financial needs and resources and a commentary on shareholders' return and value.
‘To the extent that the proposals encourage the inclusion of better information in a form that is more accessible and intelligible to users, it is a useful step forward,’ said Touche Ross.
But CIMA warned that the additional reporting burden which it represents in terms of cost and management time ‘could lead to its acceptance being reduced’.
The main point of disagreement with the ASB, however, was with its suggestion that the OFR should be voluntary and its assumption that companies would follow by example.
Coopers & Lybrand was most vocal on this point, saying that there was ‘no point in pursuing the OFR as a set of recommendations that are extensive but non-mandatory’.
‘It is difficult to see how the integrity of the statement can be assured or enforced,’ it added.
‘This is crucial in determining how useful it will eventually be.’
The Institute, along with several other respondents, suggested that the OFR should be a Stock Exchange requirement the Scottish Institute made the same suggestion, but advised a five-year trial first.
CIMA suggested that the proposals should be included in Cadbury's code of best practice, while Coopers & Lybrand thought that a Stock Exchange requirement would not work and added that ‘it could not see why the OFR could not in principle be a Financial Reporting Standard’.
C&L was not alone in thinking that the OFR should be audited, and a number of firms, as well as the Scottish Institute, felt that, at the very least, the Auditing Practices Board should be consulted on the proposals' development.
The ASB, however, has previously expressed its unwillingness for the OFR to be audited.
‘The firms represent one particular viewpoint and until we've considered the argument on both sides, it will be difficult to see where the balance lies,’ Simon Peerless of the ASB told ACCOUNTANCY .
CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTS
Standard points the way
The Accounting Standards Board's second financial reporting standard will result in more subsidiaries being brought into group accounts, and is being seen as an indication of how the ASB will deal with group accounts in its later projects.
FRS 2,Accounting for Subsidiary Undertakings (see also this issue, p 124), is an unusual standard in that its main function is to bring SSAP 14 into line with the 1989 Companies Act.
However, says ASB project director Janie Crichton, the standard ‘does have a philosophy of its own — it is just a philosophy that tends to coincide with the Act’.
The more fundamental discussions on group accounting, she added, will appear in the relevant chapters of the ASB's Statement of Principles.
The main thrust of the standard is that if a parent controls an undertaking (the standard includes the new definitions of parent and subsidiary undertaking introduced by the Act), it should be consolidated, and only in exceptional circumstances should an undertaking controlled by a parent be excluded.
‘Together, the Act and the standard will have the effect that more undertakings will tend to be consolidated,’ said Ms Crichton.
‘Previously, for instance, where companies owned subsidiaries with different activities, they were actively encouraged not to consolidate them.’
The ASB's interim statement on consolidated accounts, published in December 1990 as an exceptional measure to clarify the issues put forward in the Companies Act (see ACCOUNTANCY , January 1991, p 37), included several references to associates and joint ventures.
But those areas were taken out of the project when it became clear that they merited their own separate treatment.
Discussion drafts dealing with associates and joint ventures will probably be released next year.
AUSTRALIA
DRT ruling good news for accountants
A recent finding in the New South Wales Supreme Court has given a fillip to accountancy practices across Australia.
During the interim decision on the AWA negligence case against Deloitte Ross Tohmatsu — in which AWA had alleged that DRT contributed to the $50m in foreign exchange losses the company suffered — trial judge Mr Justice Rogers asked the court why it should be that ‘the whole burden of possibly insolvent wrongdoers falls entirely on a well-insured, or deep-pocket, defendant’?
Although they might be responsible for a ‘minor’ fault, and therefore initially liable for the plantiff's losses, he suggested that they might ‘indeed seek a contribution’from those responsible for the major damage.
DRT was delighted by the decision.
In a statement afterwards, the firm expressed the hope that it might not ‘lead to any compensable loss recoverable from Deloittes by AWA’.
It said it was also satisfied that it had challenged the assumption that AWA was doing anything other than‘evidenced’ policy when its losses were incurred.
Technology company AWA had sued DRT (then Deloitte Haskins & Sells), claiming that its negligence during two 1986 audits had contributed to foreign exchange losses.
According to Mr Justice Rogers, however, both parties were at fault.
Deloittes had been negligent when certifying AWA's 1986 profits and it had also failed to adequately disclose to directors various matters including books and record deficiences, the existence of ‘hedges upon hedges’, the ability of its foreign exchange dealer Andrew Koval to siphon funds, and the fact that he was dealing in sums of up to $400m.
However, AWA had also been negligent by allowing Mr Koval to operate without ‘effective control and supervision’.
It had retained no suitable system of books and records, failed to implement an appropriate system of internal controls and it had lacked appropriate segregation of functions.
That made it difficult to work out the company's exposure to open contracts at any given time and this, in turn, allowed Mr Koval to indulge in ‘extensive trading outside any limit contemplated by the plaintiff's board’.
The judge did not apportion negligence and gave the parties two weeks to attempt mediation.
Hearings have now resumed and a decision on the amount of damages is expected shortly.
Apportionment will be decided later.
Cross claims by DRT against three AWA non-executive directors were dismissed.
SAVINGS & LOANS
AA faces $400m suit
The Resolution Trust Corporation, responsible for liquidating failed US savings & loan institutions, has filed a $400m damages claim against Arthur Andersen.
US firms have been incensed at the number and size of claims filed against thrifts' professional advisers by RTC, and have accused the government of targeting them as ‘deep pockets’ in an attempt to recover some of the billions of dollars US taxpayers lost when the S&L industry collapsed.
The suit against AA is one of the biggest filed and relates to AA's audits of the Benjamin Franklin Savings Association, based in Texas, between 1984 and 1987.
The writ accuses AA of negligence, breach of contract and accounting malpractice and claims that the thrift, which grew enormously between 1984 and 1987, built up its capital artificially with the help of suspect accounting practices that AA approved.
The firm's ‘failure to properly account for and report Benjamin Franklin's financial condition allowed the association's high-risk lending to continue unchecked, which directly caused the damages claimed’, it adds.
AA signed unqualified audits for the thrift in 1984 and 1985, but in 1986 and 1987 noted that the state's precarious economy made the thrift's property investments risky.
It refused to sign the 1988 accounts when the thrift failed to meet minimum capital standards.
The thrift collapsed early in 1989.
RTC says the suit was filed against AA when it failed to negotiate an out-of-court settlement.
An AA spokesman said that the firm was ‘dismayed’ at the writ.
‘We believe that this institution's problems were directly related to the collapse of oil prices in 1986 and other related economic forces affecting the south west at the time.’
‘We plan to vigorously defend this lawsuit and are confident that our work was performed in accordance with professional standards.’
AA is continuing to fulfil its existing RTC contracts, he added.
US TOP 10
Big firms still struggling
Only a handful of US accountancy firms managed to increase their revenue by an amount significantly more than inflation over the past year.
With US inflation running at over 3% and the recession still biting, few firms across the Atlantic can genuinely claim to have performed well.
Arthur Andersen tops the US league table, buoyed by consultancy earnings which contribute 44% of the firm's overall revenue.
Only 35% of AA's revenue came from auditing and accounting last year, which allowed the firm to increase its earnings by a reasonable 8%.
But Ernst & Young, Deloitte & Touche and KPMG Peat Marwick, all of which rely on their auditing and accounting for over 50% of total earnings, saw revenue fall in real terms.
Kenneth Leventhal, which reported the highest growth rate in the top 10, at 9.7%, specialises in real estate.
A survey of the US top 100 firms by Public Accounting Report showed that almost 25% had seen revenue fall over the past 12 months, with a further 20% reporting growth of less than inflation.
On average, the second tier outperformed the larger firms, with an average growth rate of 6%.
THE YOUNG AFFAIR
Nick Young decision delayed
The Institute Investigation Committee has delayed its decision on whether to proceed with disciplinary action over Clark Whitehill's alleged involvement in the Nicholas Young fraud.
According to committee secretary Gordon Porter, it is pursing two new lines of enquiry, although a statement may still be made shortly.
‘These areas are being actively looked at,’ he told ACCOUNTANCY .
Mr Porter also confirmed that a further complaint, made by chairman of the Nick Young Victims Group Richard Hornsby, had been drawn to the committee's attention.
This relates to the forwarding of investors' names to the Inland Revenue by a firm of solicitors.
Mr Young, a former executive of the world network Clark Kenneth Leventhal, who was based at member firm Clark Whitehill's London offices, lost investors £7.5m in his Ponzi investment scheme.
He was jailed in 1991 for four years.
According to Mr Hornsby, ‘One of the investors was a client of Clark Whitehill and at an early stage while he was still a client, the firm wrote to him saying if he didn't declare what his interests were, they would have to inform the Revenue.’
The investor later moved to another firm of accountants.
‘A year later Hugh Butterworth, chief executive of Clark Whitehill, wrote to him saying that a copy of Mr Young's will, which included names of most of the investors, had been sent to the Revenue without Clark Whitehill's permission.’
The will, signed in January 1990, listed all investors' holdings: these were shown as loans made by the individuals on the basis that these were repayable at given notice or on Mr Young's death.
Although Mr Hornsby was quick to stress that the investors have held a dialogue with the Revenue and have nothing to hide, he admitted that they got ‘very upset’ when letters from the Revenue began arriving.
Mr Hornsby consequently issued his complaint.
Mr Butterworth, however, reiterated that Clark Whitehill was not involved.
‘We did not send the letter on,’ he stressed.
‘Indeed, when we discovered the letter had been sent on, because of client confidentiality, we felt it was important that we should tell any client for whom we acted — either before or presently — that it had been done and not at our behest.’
CW was, he added, ‘trying to make sure that all concerned were put in the best possible position’.
BLUE ARROW
‘Costly disaster’ grinds to a halt
The four accountants convicted in the £40m Blue Arrow trial (see ACCOUNTANCY , March, p 14) have had their convictions overturned, and, in the face of criticism from the Appeal Court, the Serious Fraud Office has also abandoned a second trial.
Jonathan Cohen, David Reed and Nicholas Wells, all former senior executives of County NatWest, and Martin Gibbs, ex-director of UBS Phillips & Drew, were found guilty of ‘conspiring to mislead the markets’ during the £837m Blue Arrow rights issue in 1987.
The SFO had alleged that they secretly arranged for their own companies to buy shares, thereby raising the take-up level announced to other investors.
It was said that the matter came to light when the stockmarket crash of October 1987 left the advisers facing large losses.
Mr Cohen, Mr Reed and Mr Wells were consequently given 18-month suspended sentences.
Mr Gibbs received a year, also suspended.
According to the argument the appeal judges accepted, the trial was unfair because of the weight and complexity of the case presented to the jury.
In addition, Mr Justice McKinnon's decision to narrow the indictment to the ‘late take-up’ issue effectively disregarded 75% of the evidence presented during the trial.
The Appeal Court labelled the first trial a ‘costly disaster’ never to be repeated; as a result, the SFO has abandoned the second one.
The four defendants were County's former chairman Charles Villiers FCA , its former compliance officer Elizabeth Brimelow, and Paul Smallwood and Tim Brown, both former equity directors with UBS Phillips & Drew.
LITIGATION
BDO to fight ADT writ
BDO Binder Hamlyn is ‘vigorously’ resisting the negligence writ issued against it by ADT Ltd, the car auction and security company.
ADT alleges that Binders made negligent misrepresentations during its 1990 takeover of Britannia Security Group.
Binders, it says, approved Britannia's 1989 accounts although assets had allegedly been over-stated.
It also claims that, at a meeting shortly before the takeover, Binders said that Britannia's 1989 accounts were both true and fair — a statement which, ADT alleges, contained ‘material inaccuracies’.
The £110m takeover — which made ADT the second largest burglar alarm company in Great Britain — resulted in a £146m goodwill write off in ADT's 1991 accounts.
BDO's senior partner John Norton told ACCOUNTANCY : ‘As far as I am concerned the claim has no grounds.’
He refused to comment on the writ's contents.
To cap it all.
Coopers & Lybrand's Emma Goodrick, who already has five Institute prizes and one Worshipful Company award to her name (see ACCOUNTANCY , June 1990, p 18, June 1991, p 16 and June 1992, p 15), has joined four other accountants to scoop the top six awards in this year's Institute of Taxation exams.
Emma, who presently works in corporate finance, was awarded the IoT medal and Butterworth prize for the highest overall marks.
Although confessing to being ‘a bit surprised’, she told ACCOUNTANCY : ‘I worked quite hard for the month before but in the end, it's a question of learning the stuff, and making sure you remember it when you get in there.’
SOUND DIFFUSION
E&Y offers compensation
Ernst & Young has offered to pay compensation to Sound Diffusion investors who took up shares in a rights issue seven months before the electrical equipment company collapsed.
The move follows the £1.4m out-of-court settlement agreed in July with the Tunstall Group, which had been suing the firm for damages for the losses it had incurred in purchasing Sound Diffusion shares (see ACCOUNTANCY , August, p 15).
Ernst & Young still denies liability.
‘Having done the Tunstall settlement — which was really driven by concern over the costs, it seemed to us that we had a moral obligation to extend that deal to other shareholders,’ Ernst & Young's national marketing partner David Wilson told ACCOUNTANCY .
‘Otherwise we would have given way to the big guy with the muscle to push and not to Joe Public.
And it didn't seem fair to us that might should be right.’
Any shareholders claiming the compensation will receive 25% of the value of rights exercised in the issue.
Applications should be made to E&Y's solicitors, McKenna & Co.
At this stage, as Ernst & Young does not have access to the shareholders' list, it is unaware of the numbers involved, but it estimates that compensation payments may total £1.4m.
ACCOUNTANCY TV Accountancy TV starts broadcasting on 17 September.
Details on p 72. news
BORN SPORTSMAN
Some people are born sports enthusiasts and John Wharam, the 1991 world karate champion, is definitely one of them.
A former youth runner for Britain and a world class rock climber in his teens, he is also the youngest person to hold the top ‘grandmaster’ karate grade of Judan Hanshi and the highest graded Westerner in the martial arts of kung-fu and aikido.
Unlike Oriental contemporaries who begin to practise at school, John — a PE1 tax trainee with Arthur Andersen — began training while pursuing an honours degree in molecular biology and biochemistry at Durham University.
‘I wanted a sport where I could give my all,’ he told ACCOUNTANCY .
Realising that rowing wasn't viable long-term, he soon became interested in karate and after a short time at the university club looked further afield for tutoring.
He consequently met two leading teachers — a top Japanese instructor for karate and a Chinese tutor who introduced him to kung-fu.
He will not reveal their names without permission, largely because of the whole ethos lying behind karate and the other arts.
‘It's not a sport at all, it's a way of life,’ he explains, unable to avoid the cliche.
‘It's supposed to be something that you do to try and better yourself.
You're not supposed to be egotistical.’
Aggressiveness and excess competitiveness are also frowned upon.
‘You are supposed never to use karate and if you do it's only in circumstances where you've exhausted every other option.
Even then you only use the minimum amount of force,’ he says.
‘Competition for competition's sake is completely against all the principles.’
He particularly avoids the UK ‘sport’ variety because competitors often wear padding, while blows to certain body areas are prohibited for safety reasons.
This, he says, ‘defeats the object’ because ‘you're not allowed to make certain moves which are the most effective’.
John, on the other hand, has moulded various moves from the three arts into a system suitable to his own physique.
‘Martial arts all have emphases on different things,’ he says, and inspiration is essential.
‘You can learn all the moves and practise until you're silly,’ he warns, ‘but in the end you need to put those moves together in a manner that is more efficient and effective than anybody else has done before.’
This he clearly achieved at the world championships in Okinawa, Japan, last year.
In a traditional ‘non-contact’ competition without padding or restrictions, save that the opponents must never actually touch, each bout lasts roughly three minutes and is overseen by three judges whose job it is to study the accuracy and intended force of each blow.
‘If, in the opinion of the judges, you theoretically land a blow which would have killed somebody outright, you win by something called ippon , or one point,’ John explains.
‘If however, you land a blow which would have caused them serious injury and limited them in the fight, then you get a half point.’
Having succeeded in his aim — to learn from the best and win — John has no intention of returning to Okinawa to defend his title.
‘I actually won quite easily when I expected that I'd still have a lot to learn,’ he explains.
‘It's not very much of a challenge.’
ANIMAL PASSION
For most people, a love of animals tends to extend to several pets, the odd donation and perhaps a rally.
For Michael Kay, the present chairman of the RSPCA, it has meant 27 years in the field of animal welfare.
The introduction he now regards as ‘inevitable’ came in 1965 when a friend — who happened to be chairman of the RSPCA's Leeds branch — asked him if he liked animals.
Innocently replying ‘yes’, he found himself propelled on to the committee and later into the vice-chairmanship.
Following his friend's death, he took over as chairman, and, in 1970, was elected as the Yorkshire representative to the RSPCA's National Council.
Since then, Michael has been deputy treasurer on several occasions and chairman once before in 1975.
For this year, he is, he told ACCOUNTANCY , the ‘senior voluntary worker’.
The RSPCA's business attitude should not, however, be obscured by voluntary activities.
A ‘commercial operation but not run for commercial values’, it made a conscious decision some years ago to recruit the ‘best people available’.
This has led to a range of top level employees including high powered vets, scientists and senior inspectors.
Combine this with more than 200 branches (all separate charities), ‘a massive number’ of animal homes and an inspectorate which is ‘probably the largest private prosecutor in the country’, and it is clear that a close rein has to be kept on finances.
‘Every single campaign and appeal is reported monthly,’ Michael says.
But, he admits, ‘our great strength and biggest weakness is that we are involved in every form of animal welfare’.
This results in accusations that it does not do enough on single issues.
Michael's love of animals has even played a significant part in moulding his career.
Currently a ‘non-executive director for hire’, he gave up his partnership at Arthur Young in 1987 so that he could devote adequate time to his role as chairman of the Eurogroup for Animal Welfare.
‘I considered it more important at the time,’ he confesses.
Informally suggested by the EC to present the overall view of welfare groups across the Continent, the Eurogroup was ‘cobbled together’ by 1980, and concentrated predominantly on scientific and agricultural issues.
In fact, its success was such that it was given the ‘unique honour’ of being made the secretariat to the Intergroup on Animal Welfare — an all-party committee which discusses welfare issues.
It was the first non-governmental body to be honoured in this way.
Having relinquished the Eurogroup chairmanship in 1990, Michael's latest cause is the Sea Watch Foundation, an educational charity which monitors cetaceans (whales, dolphins, etc).
Previously run on an informal basis by the universities, the Foundation hopes to ‘obtain more grants so that it can stand alone’.
Not surprisingly, he is chairman.
Getting on top of the business world.
Ernst & Young and Touche Ross are among the hundreds of organisations and businesses that will be competing in the World Corporate Games in London this autumn.
Their teams will be pitting their skills against competitors from around the world — including a 200-strong team of Russian businessmen and women — in 22 sports ranging from softball to dragonboat racing.
The games, which have become an annual event, are intended to appeal to weekend sportsmen and women.
They are open to athletes of all standards, with entrants divided into age categories from the under 30s to the over 60s and an open event for better athletes.
Venues include Wentworth for golf, Wimbledon for tennis and Crystal Palace for a variety of activities.
If you are interested in entering a team, call  for further details.
IN BRIEF Business matters
The Institute's Board for Chartered Accountants in Business is to hold its first national conference this autumn.
Speakers will explore the pressures affecting UK businesses, and consider the economic and regulatory regimes likely to exist in the future.
The main speakers include Hugh Collum of SmithKline Beecham; Claus-Dieter Ehler-mann, director general of the EC's DGIV, and Christopher Holyoak, controller of the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development.
The conference will be held from 8–10 October at the Swallow Royal Hotel, Bristol.
Further details from Anna Glover at the Institute.
Crash course
Coopers & Lybrand played host recently to a delegation of Russian officials presented with the unenviable task of setting up a market economy from scratch.
The delegation, which included Edvard Vedernikov, deputy chairman of the Parliamentary Commission which oversees financial matters, and Igor Moskovsky, a senior financial adviser to the Russian prime minister, spent a week in London, visiting such places as Lloyd's, the ASB, The Stock Exchange, the Treasury and the Institute.
‘We have to take advantage of other countries’ experiences to the greatest possible extent,’said Mr Vedernikov, ‘but we have to make sure we don't end up inventing the bicycle.’
The artist's revenge.
Do you recognise yourself?
If so, you could be the accountant who so incensed wildlife artist Adrian Rigby that he felt compelled to put his feelings about the profession into paint.
What happened between the two must remain conjecture but the result — this beautifully executed painting of a vulture above — was recently presented to another chartered accountant, John Jacklin, a friend of the artist.
Mr Jacklin, a partner in Jepson & Hindle of Darwen, Lancashire, is amused and delighted by the gift.
However, he tells us, he did feel compelled to defend the good name of accountants.
‘I indicated that the picture represented more representatives of the Inland Revenue, or Customs & Excise, or even visitors from the JMU.
But he wouldn't change his mind!’
Normally, Mr Rigby says, he has a great admiration for predators but only of the kind that need to be conserved.
‘The world I paint is under threat from many directions and this is a constant theme behind my work.
As I work on a painting, whether it's a bird of prey, a rare mammal or even rare habitat, I wonder how many more are left in the wild.
Through my work I hope to show people some of the fascinating creatures we share the world with.’
Mr Rigby, whose work has been exhibited around the country including at Mr Jacklin's home — is holding an exhibition at the Warrington Municipal Art Gallery from 21 November.
For preview tickets on 20 November, call .
Concert time
The Institute is to host an early evening concert in aid of the Chartered Accountants' Benevolent Association.
Viola player Roger Bigley, formerly with the Lindsay Quartet, will play Mozart's string quintets in B flat major and G minor with the Sorrel String Quartet.
The concert will take place at Chartered Accountants' Hall at 6pm on Monday, 26 October.
Tickets cost £10 each, including refreshments.
Sandra Maggs of Fimbra, who is organising the concert, is looking for firms or companies which would be willing either to provide sponsorship or to buy up a number of tickets for staff and guests.
Please call her on  for further details and tickets.
Get up and run!
All of you couch potatoes who were inspired by the Olympics to take more exercise in future, what about having a bash at the New York Marathon and raising funds for charity as well?
Whizz-Kidz, the movement for non-mobile children, is looking for 300 sponsored runners to pledge either a minimum of £1,250 which guarantees free entry and flight, or £2,250 which includes accommodation as well.
There's a prize of a Concorde ticket for two for the individual raising the most money overall.
The funds raised will help provide disabled children with lightweight manual or powered wheel chairs.
Further information from Whizz-Kidz on 071–938 4600.
Family affair
Given the number of mergers that have happened over recent years, it's becoming a rare event when a firm can celebrate its centenary with the same name it started out with.
It's even rarer to find a firm with the same family connection 100 years on.
But, since William Henry Payne set up his own practice in London in 1892, there have been Paynes all the way down the line — including two sons, a grandson (the current senior partner) and a great grandson — another William — who joined this year.
There are also several brothers-in-law and sons-in-law.
By all accounts, William senior was not easy to get on with the turnover of partners in the early years of the practice was rapid, until he met his match in one Major Faulks in 1905 who not only outlived him, but stayed with the firm as a consultant until 1965 when he finally retired — at the age of 90.
Survival basics
London-based chartered accountant students need a basic salary of £10,862 (without pension contributions) to survive, according to CASSL and the LSCA.
They report that costs have increased by 3.5% over the past year to £8,327.
A student's weekly expenditure — which is calculated on the basis of the price of a basket of goods in May — amounts to £160.13.
This includes: £61.74 for accommodation, £28.23 for food; £26.51 for clothing and toiletries; £21.38 for travel and holidays; and £22.27 for sundries.
Winning streak
Perhaps the England cricket team could learn a thing or two from the Institute's own XI whose performance this season goes from strength to strength.
Not content with its splendid win over the Law Society in the Robson Rhodes' Cup (see ACCOUNTANCY , August, p 22), it trounced the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors last month by 43 runs.
Star performers included Bill Holland of KPMG Peat Marwick who scored 95 of the Institute's 250 for five wickets declared, and captain Feroze Dada of Freeman & Partners who took four wickets for 70.
The RICS team lost their last six wickets for 17 runs.
Dressing down
As unemployment increases and another batch of students floods the market, employers are beginning to notice increasingly desperate interview techniques among candidates.
Robert Half recruitment consultants has collected an entertaining batch of true stories which saw one candidate zoom into the room on a skateboard and another, keen for the interviewer to see how sorely he needed the job, reveal the holes in his shoes.
The sober grey suit has been replaced in some instances by pink corduroys and sandals, while some interviewers were faced with female candidates in low cut dresses or transparent blouses.
As an extra hint, Robert Half suggests that candidates avoid interviewers' known pet hates — loud ties, sunglasses and tattoos.
UK business news
15 JULY — 18 AUGUST 1992
Recession.
Britain's trade deficit increased from £830m in May to £922m in June as a result of a 3.5% fall in the value of exports.
A survey by Jordans has found that the number of companies created in the first half of this year was 3.1% lower than the same period last year.
Banks.
First half profit before tax at Midland Bank was £89m, compared with a loss of £71m in the same period last year.
First half profit before tax rose by 11% to £369m at Lloyds Bank, by 109% to £211m at National Westminster Bank, and fell by 23% to £64m at Standard Chartered.
This was due to provisions made for expected losses resulting from the Indian securities trading scandal.
First half profit fell from £378m to £51m at Barclays Bank and by 12% to £270m at Abbey National.
Despite the fall Abbey National increased its dividend by 9%.
Mortgages.
National Home Loans reported a first half loss before tax of £85.9m (v £10m profit); there will be no dividend.
Insurance.
Walbrook Insurance has passed into provisional liquidation.
General Accident reduced its first half losses before tax from £105.2m to £21.2m.
After the improvement GA announced that it would like to seek further capital to finance possible expansion.
In spite of a £15m loss incurred after the IRA bombing in April, first half losses before tax fell from £26.3m to £18.1m at Commercial Union.
Royal Insurance reported a first half loss before tax of £79m (v £97m); its dividend was reduced from 11.25p to 2p.
Lloyd's.
David Coleridge announced that he will resign as chairman of Lloyd's at the end of the year.
He nominated David Rowland as his successor.
Advertising.
Saatchi & Saatchi announced a first half profit before tax of £11.1m, compared with a loss of £32m in the same period last year.
Media.
Reuters reported a half year profit before tax of £187.4m, a rise of 10.2% on the previous period.
Conglomerates.
Hanson has expressed an interest in buying British Coal but will not make any decision until all financial information on the privatisation becomes available.
The company also reported a profit before tax of £762m (v £967m) in the nine months to 30 June.
Harrisons and Crosfield reported that half year profit before tax rose by 12% to £40.6m.
The London Stock Exchange has asked Lonrho to explain its relationship with the Libyan government.
The request is a result of rumours that Lonrho and the Libyan Arab Foreign Investment Company have formed a joint-venture company to pursue their interests in Africa.
Construction.
Tarmac is to sell Briggs Oil for £70m to Swedish AB Nynas Petroleum.
The sale is part of Tarmac's plan to reduce borrowings; it hopes to raise up to £250m by selling non-core businesses.
Chemicals.
ICI is proposing to split itself into two companies; its drugs and agrochemicals operations would become ICI Bio and would be a separate publicly listed company.
Sir Denys Henderson would remain chairman of the two groups.
Industrial gases.
BOC reported that profit before tax rose by 10% to £251m in the nine months to 30 June.
Although the figure was lower than expected, BOC's share price rose by 17p to 601p.
Power.
British Coal announced a record profit before tax of £170m (v £78m) for the year to 31 March.
Lasmo reported a half year profit before tax of £72m (v £132m).
BP reported a first half net loss of £717m compared with a net profit of £834m in the same period last year.
The company also announced that 11,500 redundancies will be made worldwide, 1,500 of which will be in the UK.
Scottish Nuclear announced a net profit of £13.7m in the year to 31 March, compared with a loss of £32.5m last year.
Helicopters.
Westland has won part of a £1.94bn deal to make marine helicopters for Canada; the order means the future of Westland and its workforce will remain secure for at least another decade.
Airlines.
Lord King has handed over executive authority at British Airways to his deputy, Sir Colin Marshall.
Lord King will remain non-executive chairman for a year and will then become life president.
Sir Colin is expected to succeed him as chairman.
BA is to buy a stake in the US' sixth biggest airline, USAir.
The deal, which is worth £393m, has come under fierce criticism from the other American airlines.
BA also announced a first quarter profit before tax of £91m (v £9m).
Motors.
Half year profit before tax rose by 26% to £33m at BBA and rose by 37% to £65.1m at GKN.
Beer.
Greene King failed in its attempt to take over Morland; it now owns a 29.32% stake in the Thames Valley brewer.
Tobacco.
Half year profit before tax at BAT Industries rose by 55% to £645m.
Pharmaceuticals.
SmithKline Beecham announced that second quarter profit before tax rose by 10% to £254m.
Retail.
Sales volumes fell 0.2% in June compared with the previous month.
Shell is to open up to 1,000 food shops on its garage forecourts in order to compete with the food retailers that have started selling petrol on their superstore sites.
Food.
Tony Millar resigned as executive chairman of Albert Fisher.
Travel.
Land Travel has gone into liquidation.
As the company was neither a member of the Association of British Travel Agents (ABTA) nor of the Bus and Coach Council, customers have no prospect of recovering their money.
Valere Tjolle, chairman of the company, has filed for personal bankruptcy.
Telecommunications.
BT suffered its first quarter on quarter decline in turnover since its privatisation and reported profit before tax down 27.8% to £596m.
The company also announced that it will make over 33,000 redundancies this year.
analysis
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE The long road beyond Cadbury
Cadbury's end of year deadline for listed companies to comply with a recommended code of best corporate governance practice always looked optimistic.
Comments on the draft report were due in to the Cadbury Committee by 31 July, and committee secretary Nigel Peace confirms that the postbag is a large one.
It is unlikely that the final report will be published in October, as was originally planned; the end of November, perhaps the beginning of next year, look to be more likely publication dates, leading to an inevitable delay in implementation.
It is not so much the size of the postbag as the issues raised in the responses which should give the Cadbury Committee pause for thought.
When the draft report was issued in May, it was universally welcomed as heralding a major step forward in the way that UK listed companies should be run.
There was also palpable relief from the auditing section of the accountancy profession because the report had not favoured an extension of auditors' liabilities, or recommended a ban on their providing their audit clients with other services.
Against the current background of UK company failures and extreme examples of boardroom malpractice, the Cadbury proposals were bound to win support, in principle.
The responses echo the need to raise the general standards of UK corporate governance, and recognise the important role that the Cadbury initiative has to play in this process.
But they also show that there is wide disagreement about what is considered to be an acceptable way forward.
Nobody should be surprised about this.
The Cadbury report is a masterpiece of brevity, but its full scope and implications are just beginning to be realised.
In essence, it proposes the introduction of a system of checks and balances into the boardrooms of UK listed companies, to be administered by non-executive directors according to a prescribed code of best practice and to be given force by public disclosure of compliance.
But both the CBI and the Institute of Directors are worried about the monitoring role proposed for non-executive directors.
They argue strongly for the retention of the unitary board, where all directors take collective responsibility for all board decisions.
The allocation of discrete tasks to non-executives advocated by Cadbury, coupled with their monitoring role, is seen as divisive, robbing the board of its power to manage and creating the potential for boardroom splits.
‘It sends out the wrong signal that there should be two groups on the board of directors — the doers and the checkers,’ said Peter Morgan, the IoD's director general.
Underlying the CBI and IoD concern is the worry that Cadbury's proposals could lead to the two-tier board structure that both bodies have vehemently opposed for many years.
The opposite view is expressed by Arthur Andersen, which would like to see the supervisory function of NEDs spelled out and encouragement given to experimentation with alternative forms of corporate governance, including two-tier boards.
A number of respondents make the point that when the Cadbury proposals refer to NEDs bringing independent judgment to bear on board decisions, the reference should be to independent directors.
NEDs may not be independent at all, as their appointment may be for some personal reason or because of existing business connections.
This has prompted some commentators to ask whether there are going to be enough properly qualified independent directors.
The ACCA thinks that too much weight is placed on NEDs and that more emphasis should be given to other mechanisms, such as internal audit and control.
The Institute, in an otherwise supportive response, removes another plank from under Cadbury's proposals.
Cadbury proposes that auditors should review a company's compliance with the code, before the compliance statement is lodged with The Stock Exchange.
The Institute's response concedes that in some matters compliance will be easily attested, but on others it may be difficult, if not impossible, for the auditor to form an opinion.
The example cited is the impossibility of auditors' giving an opinion on the code recommendation that non-executive directors are to bring independent judgment to bear on issues of strategy, performance, and so on.
The Auditing Practices Board concurs with the Institute's view, and suggests either that audit endorsement be restricted to those parts of the code capable of objective evaluation, or that a company's audit committee should endorse the statement of compliance at a meeting attended by the auditors.
Some means of checking companies' compliance with the code is seen as essential if real improvements are to be made across all listed companies rather than in those which are already well run.
Yet The Stock Exchange, while strongly supporting the Cadbury initiative, has made it plain that it does not intend to require compliance with the code as a listing requirement.
It believes that it is the shareholders' responsibility to take action if a company qualifies its statement of compliance.
The CBI does not even go this far: Sir Michael Angus, its president, says that compliance with the code should not be a listing requirement because of excessive bureaucracy.
The Stock Exchange and others hope that sharp-eyed analysts and journalists will spot companies that admit in their accounts to non-compliance with the code, and trust that the resulting bad publicity will force them to comply in future.
A parallel is drawn with criticism of a company's accounts by the Financial Reporting Review Panel.
Criticism of a company's accounts has, on occasion, been accompanied by a fall in its share price.
Companies in this situation have been quick to remedy the situation.
But is this really a fair comparison?
The Review Panel publicises its criticisms, which are based on departures from accepted accounting standards, and which usually require changes in accounting policies affecting reported results.
Thus press-released information is given to analysts enabling calculations to be made of how the required change would affect a company's results.
Added to which, the Panel has legal power to apply to the court to require a company to change its accounts if they do not comply with recognised standards.
Not surprisingly, companies respond to its criticisms.
The situation with Cadbury's proposed code of best practice could not be more different.
It is questionable whether the statement of compliance with the code will be audited; the media will have to look for non-compliance themselves.
It is apparent that the proposed code faces detailed criticism, and the effect of non-compliance on company results is unquantifiable.
The Cadbury report itself suggests a different approach to monitoring compliance.
The sponsors of the Committee would reconvene about two years after the code has been implemented, and a group would be formed to examine how far compliance with the code had progressed.
It has been suggested that the Institute's Research Board should be involved in this review.
But the Research Board is hardly likely to get involved in a policing activity.
Its approach will be to guarantee participating companies' anonymity so as to obtain as much information as possible, to analyse companies' experience in implementing the code, and to investigate other methods employed in furthering corporate governance.
In the circumstances, this approach would seem appropriate, but it is not likely to satisfy those critics of the Cadbury report who want to see compliance firmly enforced.
Some commentators even suggest that the code should be put within a legal framework.
But how feasible is it to legislate in an area where no consensus exists other than a broad wish to see corporate governance improved?
As is pointed out in a robust response from Ernst & Young, the code is full of the desired qualitative attributes of boards and directors, but it is short on objective operational criteria.
Not surprisingly, the DTI has declined to contemplate legislation at present, presumably because there is not enough detailed information available.
The CBI is worried about the cost of implementing Cadbury.
This concern is behind its view that compliance with the code would lead to excessive bureaucracy and costs.
While other respondents do not go this far, some are concerned about Cadbury's application to small listed companies.
The responses to Cadbury demonstrate that while there is a will to improve corporate governance, there is no real consensus on the detailed application.
There is real, entrenched opposition to the imposition of any structure that resembles two-tier boards or which suggests that significant sections of board powers should be devolved to part-time directors.
Too much is being expected from the Cadbury Committee.
Reference has been made, in the context of the Cadbury proposals, to the ineffectiveness of accounting standards before real enforcement powers were put in place to back them up.
But it must be remembered that the process of evolving acceptable accounting standards has taken many years.
If fierce enforcement powers had been available when basic accounting standards were being evolved, compliance with standards might have been more uniform, but the standard of financial reporting would not necessarily have been improved.
The draft report of the Cadbury Committee has been described as the opening of a debate.
Much more research is needed into what comprises effective corporate governance before a definitive code of best practice can be imposed, together with enforcement powers, on UK listed companies.
1.
The boards of all listed companies should comply with the code of best practice and as many other companies as possible should aim to comply.
2.
Listed companies reporting for year ends on or after 31 December 1992 should make a statement about their compliance with the code in their accounts and give reasons for any non-compliance.
3.
Companies should publish their statements of compliance only after it has been reviewed by the auditors.
4.
All investing parties should use their influence to ensure that companies in which they have invested comply with the code.
5.
A review of compliance should be carried out in two years' time.
It is not so much the size of the postbag as the issues raised in the responses which should give the Cadbury Committee pause for thought
Morgan: Cadbury sends out wrong signal
SUMMARY OF THE PROPOSALS
Code of best practice
Audit committees
Within two years, all listed companies should set up effective audit committees.
Directors' service contracts
The Companies Act should be amended so that directors' service contracts do not exceed three years without shareholders' approval.
Interim reporting
Interim reports should include balance sheet information and be reviewed by auditors.
1.
Fees paid to audit firms for non-audit work should be disclosed.
2.
The profession should draw up guidelines on rotating audit partners.
1.
Directors should report on the effectiveness of their system of internal financial control and auditors should report on this statement.
2.
Directors should report that their business is a going concern and auditors should report on this statement.
3.
Legislation should be considered to extend statutory protection to auditors so that they can report reasonable suspicion of fraud to investigatory authorities.
Enhancing audit objectivity
Enhancing audit effectiveness
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES
Too much sunshine can be bad
When the Institute's working party on openness reported to Council at the beginning of the year (see ACCOUNTANCY , February, p 13), it endorsed the idea of letting the sunshine in on some of the Institute's important but less controversial public interest functions.
But, as it warned in its report: ‘No matter how far the Institute in fact agrees to open up its procedures, there will always be cries for more.’
One month before the Institute's pilot scheme to open Council meetings to the press and the public has even begun, that prediction has already come true.
The Institute is now under increasing pressure to open up its disciplinary hearings to the public.
At first sight, this seems to be an attractive move: holding hearings behind closed doors has led to accusations that the Institute is protecting its own at the expense of the public interest.
With openness, one could argue that the Institute would be seen to be discharging its obligations under statutory regulation and its charter.
But, as the Institute's Council found last month, when it considered a preliminary paper on the subject, openness could actually end up destroying the effectiveness of the disciplinary process altogether.
Being brought before a disciplinary panel is not like appearing in a public criminal court.
The rules of evidence are in fact much tougher — defendants have no right to silence — and this raises complex legal questions.
For example, members might claim to be disadvantaged in an open hearing in putting forward a defence that could give rise to legal action for defamation or breach of confidence.
The Institute has been given legal advice to the effect that there is a possibility that the defence of qualified or absolute privilege might be available, but it would be up to the courts to decide and the only way of finding out would be a test case.
There is also concern that complainants might be put off bringing complaints for the same reason.
A third question, which would have to be solved, is whether regulatory bodies, such as the Securities and Investments Board, the Bank of England and the Department of Trade and Industry, would be deterred from providing confidential documents and reports without receiving in return a guarantee that they would not be publicly disclosed.
In addition to the legal issues, opening up disciplinary hearings would create practical problems as well.
For instance, a large part of the evidence comes in the form of written representations and documents which would have to be read out.
This has enormous implications for the cost and length of time it takes to expedite cases, both areas over which the Institute has been severely criticised and which it is keen to see reduced.
Most other professional and self-regulatory bodies — including the Scottish Institute, the RICS, the RIBA, the Institution of Electrical Engineers and Lautro — use a similar system to the Institute's current disciplinary process.
The Law Society holds hearings in private but allows the defendant the right to opt for a public hearing if he or she so wishes (the prosecution also has the right, but only in public interest cases).
The adjudicating committee can also override this right where confidential information is involved.
Lloyd's of London and Imro also have similar rules.
Two bodies, the dental and medical councils, automatically hold hearings in public unless confidential information is involved.
One could argue that since the Institute has to be seen to be acting in the public interest, complete openness along these lines is the only alternative.
But if it goes down that route, it will face some criticism from its members.
As one observer put it: ‘The law of this land says that you are innocent until proven guilty.
But think of all the medical disciplinary cases that hit the headlines.
I bet you most people remember the evidence and not the verdict.’
brought to account
GRAHAM NEARN, MANAGING DIRECTOR, CATERHAM CARS LTD Life in the Lotus position General Motors' decision to kill off the Lotus Elan shocked many British car enthusiasts.
But the independent British sports car industry is alive and well, as Liz Fisher discovered
Most people tend to remember two things about the cult 1960s television series The Prisoner .
One is the cry ‘I am not a number, I am a free man!’
The other is the Lotus Seven sports car that Patrick McGoohan propelled around Portmeirion.
That car was very nearly a Lotus Elan, destined to be driven by Emma Peel in The Avengers .
‘Patrick McGoohan, who wrote the series, was looking for a car to use and Lotus tried to persuade him to use the Elan,’ says Graham Nearn, managing director of Caterham Cars, which still makes the Seven today.
‘He saw the Seven in the corner of the yard and said that was the one.’
Mr Nearn, who was at the time sole concessionaire for the Seven, supplied the car used in the series.
‘It achieved a certain amount of nationwide fame,’ he says.
The Lotus Seven first appeared in 1957, designed by the company's founder, Colin Chapman.
The first version carried only 48bhp and went from 0 to 60mph in over 16 seconds, but compared to other post-war sports cars it was light, fast and above all, cheap.
As a way of avoiding crippling purchase tax, which only applied to completed goods, Mr Chapman came up with the idea of selling the car in kit form.
‘The whole thing was really quite revolutionary,’ says Mr Nearn.
‘To me the Lotus Seven was everything a sports car should be.’
Today more than ever, his enthusiasm for the car is tangible.
His office at the Caterham factory is covered with pictures of Seven racing cars — and one of Patrick McGoohan, whom he persuaded to endorse a special 35th anniversary Prisoner edition of the Seven this year; his most animated conversation is reserved for descriptions of the car and its abilities, and one could almost believe that finances and company administration took a firm back seat to the development and fine tuning of the car's design.
It was Mr Nearn's interest in the car that led him, in 1959, to set up Caterham Car Sales and Coachworks with three friends.
They bought a garage at Caterham from Anthony Crook, who still runs the Bristol Car Company, and began by carrying out ‘all the usual garage things’, and soon became the first Lotus agent when the manufacturer began to expand.
But almost as soon as the company had got established, the economy slumped.
‘Recessions are nothing new to us,’ says Mr Nearn.
As a result of the 1962 recession Lotus retrenched and sold direct from their factory, virtually disbanding their network.
The members of the Caterham partnership went their different ways, but Mr Nearn stayed on.
‘I carried on dealing in Sevens, servicing them, repairing them and did some racing until the economy picked up again in 1965.’
At about the same time, Lotus moved to bigger premises in Norfolk and made the decision to aim higher with models like the Elan and the Europa.
The bigger premises increased Lotus' overheads, which made low volume production cars unprofitable to manufacture.
The Seven, which had been the mainstay of the company for several years, was under threat.
‘Chapman was essentially a designer, an artist, who was always looking for the next design, something different,’ says Mr Nearn.
‘He obviously wasn't going to carry on with the Seven; he'd had his fun with it.’
Mr Nearn persuaded Mr Chapman to carry on producing the Seven, acting as sole concessionaire.
‘Lotus built it and we marketed it.’
The Prisoner added to the car's popularity throughout the late 1960s.
‘We had some good years.’
In 1972 a new, deeper recession hit and there was a bigger blow for kit cars with the abolition of purchase tax and the introduction of VAT in 1973.
‘There was no escaping VAT, which hiked the price of the cars up, and inflation was running at a horrific rate, 1.5% or 2% a month,’ says Mr Nearn.
Lotus was also in trouble and Mr Chapman decided that the end of the road had come for the Seven.
Mr Nearn had other ideas, making Mr Chapman the proverbial offer he could not refuse.
‘I persuaded him to sell me the rights to manufacture the Seven and I took over everything except the Lotus name.’
Technically, says Mr Nearn, it was not a big step for Caterham to move into manufacturing the car it had been selling and marketing for years.
‘Psychologically, it was a huge step.
In 1974 we had the three-day week, followed by the oil crisis.
It was a nightmarish time to go into manufacturing because, although there was a steady demand for the car, no-one wanted to supply us with anything.
We literally started building the cars in the corner of the workshop.’
The company made about 50 cars in its first year of production, which rose to 150 by the end of the 1970s and reached a peak of 800 three years ago.
This year the company plans to make about 650 Super Sevens.
The Caterham office is now used as a sales centre, while the cars are built at a small factory in Dartford.
The lack of apparent activity in the factory was startling at first, but not when you remember that Caterham makes as much money in a year as General Motors does in half an hour.
Specialist, outside manufacturers still make some component parts for Caterham, such as the chassis and the suspension, but the cars' aluminium bodies are produced at Dartford.
Caterham Super Sevens can be bought in three basic states of build.
The starter kit, the cheapest way of buying the car, requires about 100 hours of work by the buyer, once all the parts are to hand.
The chassis is delivered ready panelled, and all the components that require precise location and installation, as well as the safety-related components, are factory-fitted before delivery.
The Complete Knocked Down (CKD) option contains all the required parts presorted, and takes about 70 hours to complete, while the Component Form requires only 20 hours of the simplest work to finish the car.
Buyers are given assembly instructions and a video to help them in the building of their car, and Mr Nearn maintains that the kits are not difficult to put together.
‘If you are used to handling a spanner, it's not difficult at all.’
All buyers are offered a free post-completion safety check.
Caterham has experimented with several different large manufacturers' engines, which saves the company a huge amount in research and development costs.
The main criterion for an engine, says Mr Nearn, has to be that it fits the car.
‘We buy British wherever possible.
90% of the car is British.’
The company has a long association with Ford, and recently introduced the 1400 cc Rover powered K-Series of cars.
Its latest coupling is with Vauxhall's powerful 16-valve, 2-litre, 175bhp engine, which powers from 0 to 60mph in under five seconds and sends testosterone junkies into paroxysms.
The Vauxhall HPC Seven is so powerful that Caterham took the unusual step of offering a high performance driving course in the price of the car (between £18,200 and £23,000), compulsory for the under 25s.
For the past few years, Caterham has produced a new model every year, whether it be with a different engine, or new suspension or an entire new series such as the Rover K-Series.
The annual models provide good publicity at the Motor Show, but surely there is a limit to what can be done to a car that has to be instantly recognisable by its shape?
‘There is a limit to everything.
No doubt we will run out of ideas one day.’
Caterham does not have copyright on the Seven's basic, long-bodied shape, which ran out several years ago, but it has sued companies that indulge in ‘passing off’.
‘If someone comes out with a car that looks like ours, that has the same windscreen, a roll bar in the same position and so on, that did not happen by accident.
The intention is to deceive and we are pretty hard on that.’
Caterham is still technically prevented from producing fully-built cars by national legislation although that could change by the end of the year.
At the moment, fully-built cars need National Type Approval, which is basically destructive testing.
‘The most common destructive test is to drive the car into a concrete block at 30 mph.
It is possible for us to do it — we carried out one test in France — but it is very expensive.’
Mr Nearn was instrumental in lobbying the Government in the early 1980s to give exemption from Type approval to small manufacturers.
Norman Fowler, Secretary of State for Transport at the time, eventually agreed to grant an exemption for amateur-built vehicles.
‘We can't manufacture the cars, but we can sell the parts to a private individual, who can.’
Now, after further lobbying by the Specialist Car Manufacturers Group, the self-regulatory body which Caterham founded (Mr Nearn is its chairman), a secondary legislation amendment has been drawn up, and is expected to pass this year, which will allow Caterham to manufacture up to 500 fully-built cars a year, under a low volume manufacturer classification.
The low volume amendment is connected to European legislation affecting the car manufacturing industry that comes into operation on 1 January 1993.
As part of the open market, blanket legislation comes into effect across the EC, although the changes mainly apply to the large manufacturers, which come under the first tier of the three-tier approval system.
Companies such as Caterham come under the second tier and have to comply with national approval rules based on EC legislation.
The Department of Transport announced last month that low volume production cars will be exempt from the EC Type Approval provisions, and once the appropriate legislation is in place in this country, the way will be clear for Caterham to produce fully built cars.
Caterham is as ready as it can be for the single European market, which is of critical importance since 60% of its production is exported.
But exports outside the EC are already firmly established.
Japan, surprisingly, is a major market, more, it must be said, by luck than by design.
In 1973, a Japanese motoring enthusiast bought a Super Seven and before long he was back, determined to import the cars into Japan and more than willing to take on the red tape.
‘He takes care of all the legislation and has established the Seven as a quality British product.
All our agents beat a path to our door,’ says Mr Nearn.
‘It's just not possible for me to pack a briefcase and go and stay in a Hilton somewhere looking for business and agents.
It doesn't work that way.’
The company feels confident enough to begin exporting to the US before the end of the year.
‘We have to be stable enough to have product liability insurance before we can enter the US market.
‘It's crazy over there.
If someone has an accident in a Caterham, they might not sue me for $10m because I don't have that much.
But they might see the engine is made by Ford and go after them.
But the US is such a big market, you can't ignore it.’
Caterham has already had a significant success in the US when it was invited to compete in the Sports Cars of America's 24-hour race in Ohio, and won.
‘We did that race for our own satisfaction, but there is publicity to be gained.
In this country in particular, racing is very much part of the publicity.
(Caterham, in common with other British sports car manufacturers, does not see marketing as a high priority.
Most leave promotion to the agents.)
We have this unique tradition, this tremendous background in motorsport in this country.’
And it is the British tradition for motor racing, Mr Nearn believes, that practically guarantees a future for the specialist UK car manufacturer.
‘Something British car manufacturers are good at is being different and individual.’
And he believes there is room for the 11 or so independent manufacturers in this country.
He does not see the likes of Morgan, Ginetta, TVR and Bristol as competitors.
‘We each have our own following.’
Caterham tends to compete, he says, with the ‘hot hatches’ such as the Golf GTI, a huge surprise considering that a Golf has four comfortable seats and can carry a respectable amount of luggage while the Seven arrives at a buyer's door in several cardboard boxes, has two seats, no doors or luggage space to speak of and, in the words of one reviewer, ‘is likely to blow your teeth out at much over 80 mph’.
The Super Seven is not by any stretch of the imagination a cruising car, in fact for many people it is downright impractical.
But, as Mr Nearn points out, it is a driver's car, and motoring journalists have heaped it with praise for many years, one even going so far as to say that your smile ‘will need surgically removing’ after driving one.
The ‘typical’ Caterham driver is difficult to categorise beyond the fact that he will be a sports car enthusiast ‘who takes pride in his driving’(there is an unspoken assumption that he is male).
The most popular models vary.
One year it was the cheapest model, the next the £18,000-plus HPC.
But almost everyone has had to cut back on luxuries during the recession and this has affected Caterham's sales badly, with orders cancelled through fears of redundancy or increasingly expensive mortgages.
There is still a three-month waiting list for the cars, but even so, Caterham saw its turnover drop from a £9.4m peak in 1991 to £8.3m this year, and is forecasting a further drop next year, even though it has managed to increase its export sales a little .
But Caterham's independence does enable it to be more adventurous than perhaps a large parent would allow.
Its next development will be the 250bhp JPE, the Jonathan Palmer Evolution, which will be tested by the former Formula One racing driver.
At £25,000, it is Caterham's most expensive car yet.
Mr Nearn is also planning a lightweight coupe, but recognises that the company ‘will have to sustain its present sales and profitability’.
‘We're set for the end of the century,’ he says, ‘but you can't look much further than that, can you?’
RECESSION BRINGS A CHANGE OF GEAR
Caterham's turnover has suffered during the recession and the company is budgeting for a further drop to £7.96m in 1993.
It also predicts a 20% return on capital employed in 1993.
The number of cars produced fell from a peak of 800 in 1990 to 650 this year, although production will increase considerably if legislation to allow the company to produce fully-built cars is passed later this year.
The company has steadily increased its pre-tax profit despite the recession.
It rose from £106,250 in 1988 to £582,210 in 1989 and to £702,208 in 1990.
In 1991, pre-tax profits increased by a further 31% to £921,919.
Midland Bank DECLINE OF A HEAVYWEIGHT The Midland's disastrous immediate past has put a blot on its glorious history.
But the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank has still inherited a rich prize
Neil Bennett
In June one of the pillars of the British economy tumbled into foreign hands the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank declared that its £3.7bn bid for Midland Bank was unconditional, and had been accepted by more than 90% of its shareholders.
The takeover of the Midland, after a brief, savage struggle for ownership between Lloyds and the Hongkong Bank, was a tragic fate for a once powerful institution.
Less than half a century ago the Midland stood at the pinnacle of the financial system, the largest bank in the world.
Over the past 15 years, however, a long string of management blunders, lost opportunities and sheer misfortune brought the Midland to its knees.
Its acquisition of Crocker National Bank in California in 1980, the most expensive mistake in recent financial history, stands out among a catalogue of disasters.
Midland's story started in Birmingham in 1836 with Charles Geach, a former inspector at the local branch of the Bank of England.
Mr Geach chose his location well.
The Midlands was the workshop of the world and his new institution became its banker.
The founding shareholders provided a ready supply of business, particularly bill discounting, while firm management helped the Midland to survive troublesome early years dogged by capital shortages.
The 1830s saw the foundation of hundreds of small banks like the Midland, many of which failed in the successive financial crises of the following decade.
One of the reasons for the Midland's survival was its close links with the Bank of England.
The Midland kept its own account at the Bank and used the Bank's notes instead of its own; this protected it against the effects of Sir Robert Peel's clampdown on note issuing in 1844.
Mr Geach died in 1854 aged only 46, but before then he had laid the foundations for the Midland's meteoric expansion in the second half of the century.
The Midland rose in the same way as it later fell — by acquisition.
While the bank prospered in Birmingham, it was an insignificant feature of Britain's financial world until the 1880s, when it began to buy up other institutions rapidly.
Between 1851 and 1918 it bought 30 other banks.
One man stands out as the architect of the Midland's golden era: Sir Edward Holden.
He joined the bank as an accountant in 1881, and rose to become managing director in 1898 and also chairman from 1908 to 1919.
He transformed the Midland from a successful regional bank into one of the country's largest institutions.
In 1891 Mr Holden (he was knighted in 1909) made his first significant move when he negotiated the acquisition of the Central Bank of London for £469,000.
The move brought the Midland to the capital for the first time, and the bank changed its name to the London and Midland Bank.
Following the success of the Central Bank acquisition, Sir Edward's ambition was boundless.
The bank's deposits grew at an explosive rate from £8m in 1891 to £67m by 1908.
The acquisition policy was complemented by an aggressive branch opening programme, which produced many of the Edwardian banking halls that still dominate British high streets today.
Sir Edward reached the pinnacle of his career in 1898 when he bought the City Bank in London for £2.56m, an acquisition that catapulted the Midland into the top four banks in the country.
After the First World War the Midland continued to expand by opening branches, and by 1939 it had 2,100.
The outbreak of the Second World War marked the turning point in Midland's fortunes and the start of a long decline.
Like the other clearers, the bank suffered grievously.
Its branches reported 1,350 incidents of bomb damage, and more than a third of the staff left to serve in the armed forces.
Profits suffered as loan demand fell, and the government soaked up a high proportion of personal savings to fund the war effort.
After the war, the bank struggled under the pressure of the government's changing credit restrictions and exchange controls.
The moribund management, dominated by WG Edington, chief general manager from 1951 to 1956, failed to keep pace with the expansion of rival lenders.
The damage became obvious in 1957 when the Midland lost its coveted position as Britain's largest bank Barclays' deposits of £1,346m edged ahead of the Midland's £1,342m.
A year later Barclays had 2,228 branches to the Midland's 2,221.
The Midland hit back by stepping up its branch opening programme and introducing a string of innovative new products, including personal cheque accounts and personal loans in 1958.
In the same year the bank acquired the finance house Forward Trust.
It was the first time a traditional bank had diversified into the instalment finance business.
But the Midland continued to lose ground against its rivals.
It suffered its next severe blow in 1968, when it was left on the shelf after a round of mergers from which the British banking industry emerged in the state it remained in until this year.
Barclays bought Martins, and was only prevented from merging with Lloyds by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
At the same time, National Provincial merged with the Westminster to create National Westminster, the UK's second largest lender.
Sir Archibald Forbes, the Midland's chairman, explained the bank's apparent unwillingness to merge in the 1968 report.
‘Further increases in size would give no assurance of superior service, improved efficiency or greater profitability,’ he wrote.
Secretly, however, he had already proposed an alliance with Lloyds but had been rejected.
The first proof that the rot had set in at the Midland was the full disclosure of its profits and reserves in 1969.
Until then the banks had been allowed to report profits after transfers to secret, inner reserves.
The City was shocked when it learned that the Midland was the least profitable of the big four banks and had the weakest capital.
The Midland's branches were making an average profit of less than £7,000 each, compared with almost £10,000 at Barclays, National Westminster and Lloyds.
While the Midland had expected that its reserves would be lower than either Barclays or NatWest, both newly merged, it was horrified to learn that the true capital of Lloyds, a bank it had always looked down on, was £266m, £73m higher than its own.
The Midland's business expanded rapidly through the seventies, like the other clearers', and its balances were boosted by high inflation and interest rates.
But one area of the bank's policy remained stuck in the thirties.
While the other banks were opening and buying banks around the world to service the growing flows of international capital, Midland still relied on a network of correspondents.
This strategy was suddenly reversed in 1976.
The board decided to embark on aggressive overseas expansion and committed the bank to the biggest gamble it had ever taken, one that would eventually sink it.
After an abortive attempt to merge with Standard Chartered, whose international network and weak UK base would have provided a good fit, the Midland started to
look at the US, which at the time seemed
to offer the most exciting prospects.
The
search was led by Malcolm Wilcox, the
general manager of international banking.
The Midland's first target was Walter
Heller, a finance house in Chicago.
Ironically the bank was scared off when
it discovered bad debts of $50m in the
firm's books.
This was a fraction of the damage it eventually suffered from the acquisition it made instead, Crocker National.
Malcolm Wilcox was drawn to Crocker through his personal friendship with its chairman, Thomas Wilcox.
Crocker was one of the largest banks in California, and was respected by investors and rival bankers alike.
The Midland sent Geoffrey Taylor, its future chief executive, to negotiate a deal, He returned with the news that Crocker would welcome an investment by the Midland but completely refused to grant them any management control.
By 1980, the Midland was so desperate to satisfy its international ambitions, it would have agreed to almost anything.
The board agreed to Crocker's demands because it believed that the bank was well managed, and because it knew that the Midland did not have the management strength to tackle retail banking in an entirely alien environment.
By July 1980 the Midland had agreed to buy a 51% stake for $595m and to buy a further 6% at $225m over the next three years.
The deal was described as an alliance, and Crocker was allowed complete autonomy.
The deal was welcomed enthusiastically by the City and the financial press.
The Midland spent more than £1bn on acquisitions round the world between 1979 and 1981, money it could barely afford because of its capital weakness.
Nevertheless, the deals were applauded by commentators who believed the Midland was entering a new era as an international bank.
Thomas Wilcox could hardly believe his good fortune and immediately put Midland's money to use by expanding Crocker's lending at a phenomenal rate.
Crocker's branch managers were given demanding lending targets and were forced to grab any prospect that appeared to meet them.
The bank even advanced $2.8bn to Latin America, loans that the Midland is still paying for today.
‘Wilcox was shameless then and shameless now.
He still insists the deal would have worked.
He is an eternal optimist,’ says one former Midland executive.
Overall Thomas Wilcox increased Crocker's loan book by more than half, from $19bn to $29bn.
Meanwhile the Midland's board was only allowed sketchy details about the breakneck expansion.
When California's economy started to slow down, the loans began to unravel.
By the end of 1982, Crocker's quarterly figures showed that it was in trouble.
Non-performing loans had risen by 75% to $770m.
Scores of the bank's borrowers were going bankrupt as land prices slumped.
A year later a routine annual inspection by American regulators uncovered a further $300m of non-performing loans in Crocker's books.
The provisions pushed the bank to a $10m loss and caused a profound shock to ripple through the Midland's executive offices in Poultry.
The Midland sent in a team of its storm troopers to try to sort Crocker out.
But the damage had already been done.
The full horror of Crocker's position was only revealed at the end of 1984.
That year Californian land prices had gone into free fall.
This, coupled with the Latin American debt crisis, prompted the US regulators to demand provisions of another $326m, which threw Crocker into a $324m loss.
Today's recession, and many banks' multibillion pound provisions, make Crocker's losses seem like small change.
At the time, however, Crocker's plight threatened not only its own existence but the Midland's as well.
The Midland built up a cash reserve of £2bn to meet any run on the bank once the loss was revealed, but the reserve was not needed.
At the same time the bank announced a rescue package for Crocker.
It injected $250m into the bank and bought out the 43% minority for $224m.
As a final precaution, the Midland removed a $3.6bn bad debt portfolio from Crocker to manage it separately.
Crocker's pretentions to autonomy were finally squashed.
The Midland might have persevered with Crocker, but by then the bank had been so bruised by its American adventure that it could think of nothing but leaving.
In February 1985 the Midland announced the sale of Crocker to Wells Fargo, a rival Californian bank, for $1.1bn.
At the time it seemed as though the Midland had miraculously got its money back from the ill-fated venture.
But when bad debt provisions, the lost opportunities and the thousands of management hours were taken into account, it became apparent that the Crocker episode had cost the bank more than £1.5bn and destroyed its pretentions as an international force.
There were other effects, too.
‘The psychological damage was even greater.
There was a loss of self-esteem in the bank and a belief that Crocker was the only problem.
It was only when it was sold that the bank began to face up to its other problems,’ said one former executive.
Crocker had damaged the Midland so badly that in 1986 the Bank of England sent in Sir Kit McMahon, its deputy governor, as chairman and chief executive to sort things out.
By then the bank was in headlong retreat.
Sir Kit was one of the most brilliant central bankers of his generation, but his twin role at the Midland proved too much for him.
The bank was wracked by internal divisions between the bank's traditional managers and the outsiders headed by Sir Kit.
He struggled to repair the bank's balance sheet to allow it to take the inevitable write-offs against its $6.7bn third world debt portfolio.
In 1987 the bank raised £700m in a rights issue, only to use it to make provisions of £1.02bn against sovereign debt, a move that pushed the Midland into its first ever loss.
This was followed by provisions of £846m in 1989.
This time, however, the bank could only afford 55% cover against its loans while the other banks were setting aside 70% or even 80%.
The capital shortage was exacerbated in the same year by a massive interest rate mis-match in the treasury book that eventually cost more than £300m.
There followed other capital issues and a disposal programme.
The Clydesdale and the Northern Bank were sold to National Australia Bank in 1987.
Later that year Sir Kit laid the foundations for the eventual takeover, when he sold a 14.9% stake in the Midland to the Hongkong Bank in return for a much-needed £383m injection.
In the latter part of Sir Kit's reign, which ended in early 1991, half the bank's assets were up for sale, including its European businesses, Thomas Cook, the travel chain, Forward Trust, and even the Midland's headquarters in Poultry.
Sir Kit's work might even have succeeded if the Midland had not been caught by the recession.
Domestic bad debts began to explode in 1990 and punched an even greater hole in the Midland's balance sheet.
By the end of December the situation had deteriorated enough for the Hongkong Bank to abandon its long-planned merger.
‘That was the blackest hour for Midland.
The bank was left rudderless.
When I came to the bank there was a lot of fear about,’ said chief executive Brian Pearse.
The Midland's financial weakness became a source of worry to the other high street banks.
They started to question the high exposures they ran every day with the Midland in the clearing system.
The Midland could often owe Barclays and National Westminster up to £10bn in the normal course of business, balances that would only be settled at the end of each day.
News of the worries soon reached the Bank of England.
The Bank immediately took action to restore confidence.
It asked Barclays to release Brian Pearse, its finance director, to become chief executive and asked Sir Peter Walters, the former head of BP, to join him as chairman.
With defeat written across his face Sir Kit announced his departure in February 1991, when profits had collapsed to £11m and forced a cut in the dividend.
Mr Pearse first arrived at Poultry on a Friday afternoon and struggled to find his way around the quiet corridors and closed doors.
When he returned after the weekend he brought with him a tool that sums up his management style — a wedge, to keep his door open.
Since then the bank has slowly begun to rejuvenate.
Mr Pearse, a lifelong clearing banker, has inspired new confidence in the staff, and streamlined the bank's retail network and range of products.
Costs have been reduced by automation and heavy job cuts, and profits last year more than tripled to £36m.
Hongkong Bank is inheriting a bank in better shape than it has been in for more than a decade.
Despite the Midland's many failings, it is still a rich prize for Hongkong Bank.
Its retail business caters for 6m loyal customers, while First Direct, its innovative telephone banking service, has started to make deep inroads into the traditional market.
Midland Montagu is one of the most powerful foreign exchange houses in the City and Samuel Montagu is a premier merchant bank.
In Europe, Midland has a successful investment banking network, including Trinkhaus & Burckhardt in Germany, which, like Crocker, was the product of its international expansion in the early eighties.
Hongkong Bank is moving fast to consolidate its acquisition and is appointing senior executives to many of the key positions.
By the middle of next year the bank will move its head office into Poultry, and take on the heavy mantle of tradition.
Charles Geach: Banker to the workshop of the world
New style branch: Now a change of management style
The board decided to embark on aggressive overseas expansion and committed the bank to the biggest gamble it had ever taken, one that would eventually sink it
Lost imperial grandeur: Interior of headquarters
The Crocker episode had cost the bank more than £1.5bn and destroyed its pretentions as an international force
Brian Pearse: Inspiring new confidence among the staff
The Midland's financial weakness became a source of worry to the other high street banks.
They started to question the high exposures they ran every day with the Midland in the clearing system
Hongkong and Shanghai Bank: Victor in £4bn takeover battle
Airtours THE WORLD IN ITS LAP Rumours of a price war are unlikely to take the wind out of the sails of a tour operator that has not just weathered the recession and the downturn in travel caused by the Gulf war, but increased market share as well
Nigel Cope
As the board of Airtours, the tour operator, prepared to announce its interim results on a warm summer's day in the City, caution hung in the air.
This might sound surprising.
After all, here was a company that had just performed unparalleled feats.
It had not just weathered the recession and the downturn in travel caused by the Gulf war, but actually increased market share.
It had scooped up armfuls of holiday bookings following the the collapse of Harry Goodman's ILG group, which had taken with it one of Airtours' biggest rivals, Intasun.
Sales had increased from £183m to £289m.
Profits had shot up from £6m to £27m and the share price had risen — on a trajectory a jumbo jet pilot can only dream of — from 170p at the beginning of 1991 to 899p by the year-end.
Airtours became the best-performing share on the stock market.
For shareholders, it must have been like winning the pools.
The caution was due to a dark cloud on Airtours' horizon: the rumour of a possible price war.
When Airtours had announced its full-year results in December, chairman David Crossland had dismissed the idea as nonsense.
But only days after his statement, and on a regular basis ever since, the newspapers had been full of holiday bargains and talk of overcapacity in an industry in which profit margins are already wafer thin.
In the spring, Thomson, the largest tour operator, issued a bargain brochure, took full-page advertisements in the tabloid press and provoked banner headlines along the lines of ‘Have a holiday in Spain for £59’.
As the speculation continued, the Airtours share price started to lose altitude.
The question the City, shareholders and the press have been asking is, can Airtours continue on its smooth upward climb, or is it about to hit turbulence?
A look at some facts and figures might help.
The first thing is that Airtours' interims, announced at the end of June, were better than expected.
Turnover for the six months to the end of March almost doubled to £101m and the interim loss fell from last year's £6.2m to £5.6m (tour operators traditionally make a loss during the winter months when few people book holidays).
Market share was up to 12.6%, ranking Airtours as the third-largest tour operator in Britain behind Thomson (32%) and Owners Abroad (12.9%).
Summer bookings were up a highly impressive 31% on the previous year and Airtours' cash balance rose to £90m.
As Nigel Hicks, leisure analyst at stockbrokers Panmure Gordon, puts it: ‘I don't see how your bubble can burst when you have nearly £100m in the bank.’
According to Mr Hicks and to the Airtours management, the story of overcapacity in the travel market has been one based more on media hype than reality.
‘Some of the comment that has appeared has been ill-advised,’ says finance director Harry Coe, diplomatically.
One point Airtours is anxious to make is that it is normal for discounting to take place during May, June and October; children are still at school and tour operators try to tempt others to book their holidays.
These months are known as the shoulder months in the industry.
The eight to 10 weeks after schools have broken up for the summer are the peak period for tour operators, and it is only around mid-September that they can judge how successful they have been.
Mr Coe feels that though the recession is still strong and unemployment high, those in employment have a much higher disposable income to spend on a holiday.
‘I think the money is there.
Though they might be putting off buying new carpets or curtains, they have continued to buy holidays.’
Market dynamics are working in Airtours' favour.
Holiday bookings are up 20% on last year and the stresses and strains of the recession and high interest rates are forcing smaller travel operators out of business.
Nigel Hicks at Panmure Gordon feels that the market will consolidate around the three main players, with their share rising from the current 57% to around 70%.
This cautious optimism was reflected in the share price of 215p at 12 August, comparing well with the year end 899p (before the intervening 3:1 scrip issue).
Mr Hicks points out: ‘These guys have done all this in the worst years of a recession.
Come the upturn, they are going to make a lot of money.’
That Airtours arrived at this position is due to one of the best years any company could wish for.
At the beginning of 1991 Airtours had a 6% share of the package holiday market and a brand name known to few south of Birmingham (it is based in Lancashire and two-thirds of bookings come from the Midlands and North).
Then came the Gulf war and, as Harry Coe recalls, ‘the bottom fell out of the market’.
As bookings sank by 40%, Airtours had to pull out of resorts such as Cyprus and Tunisia.
But then things started going Airtours' way.
The Gulf war, which could have spelt disaster for Airtours and many other travel companies, ended quickly.
Then ILG collapsed, removing Intasun from the market.
Basically, the world fell into Airtours' lap.
But while the company's management would not deny an element of luck, they would also point to a good deal of contingency planning that enabled them to react faster than anyone else to ILG's collapse.
It is now travel business legend that Airtours had seen ILG's demise coming and despatched staff to the most popular resorts in February to talk to hotel owners about the possibility of booking spare space if any other tour operator found itself unable to fulfil its obligations.
Hence, when the news of ILG's collapse came through on 8 March last year, Airtours simply had to send its negotiators back to buy up Intasun's beds.
Airtours meanwhile was in the middle of launching its own airline.
Though doing so shortly after the Gulf war and in a recession might have seemed risky, Airtours had its reasons.
It was the only major package holiday tour operator without its own airline.
Thomson had Britannia, ILG had (at the time) Air Europe and Owners Abroad had Air 2000.
With airlines such as Hispania, British Island Airways and Paramount going belly-up, and others such as Dan-Air and Monarch reducing capacity, Airtours was concerned that it might have difficulty securing flights for its holidaymakers.
It spent nearly £7m launching Airtours Aviation International, leasing five McDonnell Douglas jets (from Irish aircraft leasing company GPA) to service its short-haul requirements from Manchester, Birmingham and Stansted.
It has since leased a further three aircraft from GPA.
Airtours will not say how much it has paid for the leases, though it claims to have secured good terms because of the uncertain travel market.
‘We certainly didn't pay what they first asked,’ says Harry Coe.
He adds: ‘The airline has fulfilled, if not exceeded, all our expectations.’
He is proud of the speed at which the whole launch was achieved, from an announcement in September 1990 to having all five aircraft operating by Easter 1991.
‘A lot of people said it couldn't be done, but we did it.’
The company has now started flying from Gatwick, and, to help to stimulate demand for the Gatwick operation, Airtours has become a regular advertiser in the South East, particularly on the Underground, where it promotes its holidays to the price-conscious sun seeker.
Airtours — perhaps best known for cheap Mediterranean holidays — has begun to fly to more upmarket destinations such as Florida, Kenya and the Caribbean.
‘We are very pleased with the way our new destinations are performing,’ says Mr Coe.
The growth of Eurosites, the company's camping holiday subsidiary, has also been impressive, with bookings up 42% on last year.
Expansion has continued into the Netherlands, and the German operation, begun last year, has fared well.
Airtours' management often does its own reconnaissance of potential new destinations — a reflection of the board's workaholic nature.
In April last year managing director Hugh Collinson revealed that, during his holidays in the Virgin Isles, he had been miffed to find that the runways at the local airport were not long enough to take Airtours' jets.
He was delighted to find that there were plans to extend them.
No doubt the Virgin Isles will crop up in an Airtours' brochure before long.
Chairman David Crossland — who often looks rather pasty compared to his occasionally tanned colleagues — has to be positively dragged away on holiday.
Last year, after a fortnight's holiday in California, his first for two years, he complained, ‘My wife wouldn't let me take any work with me’.
Where next for Airtours?
While the media, still mesmerised by a possible price war, might look askance at the group, the City seems to approve.
In a note issued in June, Panmure Gordon predicted profits of £39m at the September year-end and £43m in 1993 on sales it foresees nearing £500m.
Nigel Hicks is particularly impressed by the way Airtours has nursed its cash pile.
‘Normally when you have that kind of money it would be burning a hole in your pocket.
But the management is quite cautious.’
Airtours is keen to expand, but as Mr Coe points out, it has expanded so far mainly by organic growth and would like to continue it that way.
More expansion into Europe is likely, but the company will not be hurried.
‘We are not frightened to walk away from the table if the deal is not right,’ Mr Coe says.
Moving further into the German market would be difficult given the strength of the major players there, and if it does happen, it is likely to be via a joint venture.
‘Germany is a difficult one to crack,’ Mr Coe says.
‘But we continue to study it and are looking for the right vehicle.’
Airtours might not repeat last year's extraordinary feats, but its cash pile and cautious management should ensure that it does not lend further credence to the current theory — that this year's fastest grower is next year's insolvency.
Mr Crossland, though he rarely shows it, must be proud.
He is certainly rich.
As the largest single shareholder in the company with 38% of the stock (32m shares), he has seen the value of his stake increase to over £65m.
He might struggle to spend it, of course, such is the nature of his packed schedule.
David Crossland: Rumours of a price war have been greatly exaggerated
Airtours ads: Going underground
Nigel Hicks is particularly impressed by the way Airtours has nursed its cash pile.
‘Normally when you have that kind of money it would be burning a hole in your pocket.
But the management is quite cautious.'
middle managers TOO MUCH ROUND THE MIDDLE Traditionally, a substantial layer of middle management has been necessary to push large quantities of information around an organisation.
Now, the computer can do that…
David Oates
For years management gurus have been predicting the demise of autocratic management and the pyramidal organisation structure.
The pyramid has taken a long time to crumble.
The ancient Chinese invented it 2,000 years ago as a way to pass instructions down the line and information up to the top.
It has been adopted by the military, the Church and more recently by public services and commercial organisations.
In recent years, particularly in the US, there have been numerous experiments with new organisational shapes to replace the omnipresent pyramid.
The new structures have rejoiced in wonderfully evocative names like the beehive, the bell, the doughnut and the bicycle wheel.
They have all had much the same aim of moving away from the sharp-pointed pyramid with its traditional hierarchical approach.
The trend in the UK has been for the pyramid to become flattened as many organisations have striven to reduce their layers of middle management to take account of new technology and cut costs.
In the past few years major corporations such as BP, BT, the Post Office and IBM have cut out huge swathes of middle management to produce leaner, more competitive organisations.
It is obvious that too many levels of management are expensive, slow down decision making and reduce responsiveness.
And since it is generally recognised that managers cost their companies at least three times their annual salary, the scope for cost-saving is enormous.
As part of a cost-cutting exercise, Sir John Egan, chief executive of BAA, the airports, property and retailing group, has slashed the workforce over the last two years by 20%, kissing goodbye to many of its white collar workers.
The voluntary redundancy programme at BAA is still open.
It seems inevitable that the flattening process will continue and that middle managers will continue to be squeezed.
Indeed, there is every reason to suspect that middle managers are an endangered species.
There is no doubt in the mind of Tony Knight, director of the strategic management programme at Henley Management College, that the days of the middle manager are numbered: ‘When you look at the figures, who are the people being made redundant in this country at the moment?
It's the middle managers.
I think that generally organisations are squeezing out a lot of fat at that level simply because they're finding more efficient ways to organise themselves to do the work.
The impact of technology is such that you can now do by electronic means a lot of things which were previously done by middle managers — collecting information, processing it, manipulating it in various ways: shunting it around the organisation.’
But it is not just the former penpushers who are being sacrificed.
In June, BAe Space Systems, a British Aerospace subsidiary that makes communication satellites, announced it was cutting 640 jobs as part of a rationalisation scheme.
The company said it needed to scale down the business to keep costs under control.
In the event 500 jobs were lost out of 1,700.
The lost jobs included highly-trained white collar staff involved in some of the most hi-tech work in British industry.
Hardly a week goes by without some similar large-scale slimming down affecting large numbers of middle managers.
The process has been going on for some time.
Only a week after becoming chairman of BP in 1990, Robert Horton announced sweeping organisation changes that led to over 1,000 job losses.
The number of head office managers was reduced by 160 — a 30% cut.
The job losses were part of a masterplan aimed at transforming the structure of the oil group.
In place of the former culture of bureaucracy, Mr Horton set out to install a structure with the minimum of controls and the maximum of delegation of responsibility, bypassing the traditional middle management layers of the organisation.
Mr Horton was determined to replace the group's many departments, committees and layers of middle management with much leaner and more informal networks.
This year, another 400 jobs went at its research centre at Sunbury.
BP Exploration plans to axe 350 technical staff and office workers over the next 12 months.
In the aftermath of Mr Horton's own departure ruthless slashing of the payroll continues: 10% of the remaining workforce are to go.
Pressures will remain on BP to cut costs until oil prices rise substantially.
BT has been even more ruthless in scything out swathes of middle managers.
In March 1990 Iain Vallance, its chairman, announced a reorganisation programme called Project Sovereign, aimed at achieving ‘a leaner and more supple organisation, structured to meet the differing needs of all our customers.
We are currently organised by product and geography.
This might be convenient for us, but it does not suit our customers’.
As part of the customer realignment all BT's existing managers were reassessed for their suitability to the new structure and were obliged to reapply for posts in the new organisation.
The snag was that there were thousands fewer jobs available under the restructuring.
Nearly 19,000 jobs disappeared last year, 6,000 of them from management.
Again, it was the middle management ranks that suffered the severest cuts.
The exercise took 12 months to complete and the atmosphere of uncertainty did little to boost morale among the ranks of BT's middle managers, even though thousands opted to go under a generous voluntary redundancy programme.
Many had to work for a year under the threat of the axe and even those who survived continue to live in a climate of insecurity, not knowing when the next rationalisation programme is likely to be introduced.
Indeed, there continue to be job losses at BT.
This year everyone working for BT was sent a letter telling them the redundancy terms they were entitled to if they decided to leave the company voluntarily.
Under this programme, code-named Release 92, BT aimed to shed a further 24,000 employees.
More than 40,000 BT staff applied for redundancy, with 29,000 eventually being accepted.
A company spokesman sums up BT's intentions graphically: ‘There are too many people at BT.
We are striving to become the world's leading telecommunications group, but we are facing a lot of competition from home and abroad.
We've got to become a lean, mean fighting machine.’
Tony Knight, who worked at BT as an electronics engineer for 23 years before opting for the academic life at Henley Management College, says that BT middle managers have attended his courses uncertain of whether they would have a job to go back to.
Middle management has been vulnerable for some time.
US management guru Peter Drucker points out that while blue collar productivity has increased some forty-fold over the past 100 years, white collar productivity has remained static.
To start with the computer made not a blind bit of difference.
It merely replaced clerks' pens, paper and typewriters with VDUs and keyboards.
But now modern information technology is making many of the former tasks of middle managers redundant.
Drawing on Norse mythology, Adrian Savage, who runs Assessment Design Services, a training company based at Leamington Spa, describes middle managers as ‘the squirrels of the world tree’.
‘They run up and down the organisation carrying messages and information and in the past we've had lots of them because it was the only way of passing information.
Where most instructions had to be given verbally, you needed a lot of people to do it.
Today the managing director can get lots of information from a computer,’ he says.
‘There's always pressure on the organisation to increase productivity and cut costs.
Where are the cost reductions going to come from?
Most organisations have done the obvious.
They've cut back on the number of trainees; they've cut back on the number of occasionally used specialists; they're really down to the bedrock now.
They're down to the squirrels.’
The de-layering trend is not bad news for all middle managers, however.
It can provide a chance to break loose and explore new avenues.
Robert Wise, a former implementation manager with Reuters, the general news and financial information agency, was tempted by an attractive voluntary redundancy package at the end of last year.
He had been with Reuters for 21 years in 10 different posts and was looking for ‘something different to do’.
Under a restructuring programme, Reuters was seeking to shed several hundred jobs.
Mr Wise, who is 42, felt that he had reached his peak at Reuters in 1987 when he was made technical projects manager.
But at the end of 1990 the group was reorganised and Mr Wise was less happy with the outcome: ‘I found the general direction in which the group was going didn't really satisfy me in terms of long-term interests or challenge, so I decided to bite the bullet.’
The depths of a recession is hardly the best time to make such a move, but a substantial redundancy package has helped to cushion the risk and Mr Wise could not be certain the opportunity would come his way again.
However, his search for alternative employment has so far met with no success.
And unfortunately for middle managers, the encroachment of technology has coincided with a less autocratic approach to management.
The trend is towards empowerment and allowing junior employees to take personal initiatives that normally would have been beyond the scope of their jobs.
Autonomous work groups are being set up in companies.
The groups police their own work and require the minimum of supervision.
Tom Peters — the top US management guru — cites the example of the US Harley Davidson motorcycle plant, which came close to being put out of business by Japanese competition some eight years ago.
The company has since made a remarkable recovery by clearing out its middle management ranks and replacing them with semi-autonomous work teams.
The improvements in efficiency have been staggering.
Eight years ago the plant had 27 production controllers and nothing ever went out on time.
It now has one production controller and everything does go out on time, according to Mr Peters' research.
Some companies have dispensed with the middle management function altogether.
Sherwood Computer Services, a London-based software company, has turned its entire organisation into self-managed client teams that report directly to the board.
The original intention was that the client teams would be leaderless, but in some cases this has proved to be impractical.
Initially there was considerable resistance to such fundamental restructuring, particularly from the firm's middle managers, who saw their jobs threatened.
At the very least, they could expect a loss of status.
Indeed, the company's staff has dropped from 750 to around 400, but revenue per head has increased from around £35,000 in 1988 to £75,000 last year.
However, not everyone believes that eliminating middle management from organisations is the panacea for all corporate ills.
Bernard Taylor, professor of business policy at Henley Management College, believes companies may come to rue the day they swept their middle managers aside so wantonly: ‘In many cases they've cut out managers who made important contributions like planners, marketing people, personnel people and training people.
They were often very sage and experienced.’
One of the detrimental effects that Professor Taylor has observed is that managers can no longer find the time to go on external training courses.
Those middle managers who are left are finding themselves with three times as much work to do as before, handicapped by depleted back-up resources.
‘The speed of change is very rapid; these people are totally unprepared for it,’ says Professor Taylor.
Adrian Savage predicts other dangers: ‘There are enormous problems because middle management has been the traditional way of deciding who is going to be a top manager.
You bring lots of people in at junior management and through a series of apprenticeships you cream off the people who get to the top.
What happens when you don't have that long series of apprenticeships?
There are some companies now Hewlett Packard is sometimes referred to where there are only two steps between junior management and the main board.
Now where do you learn?
I think that's a major question that hasn't been addressed.’
Tony Knight predicts that the cull of middle managers is far from over.
He has one overriding piece of advice for managers attending his courses at Henley Management College: ‘Either get to the top or to the bottom of the organisation as quickly as possible!’
It seems inevitable that the flattening process will continue and that middle managers will continue to be squeezed.
Indeed, there is every reason to suspect that middle managers are an endangered species
Horton: Immediate, sweeping changes
There are some companies now where there are only two steps between junior management and the main board.
Now where do you learn?
Peters: Empowering junior employees
Iveco ONE COMPANY MANY LAWS Iveco makes trucks for a single European market, but the lack of harmonisation in company and tax law is creating unnecessary obstacles for this pan-European company
Brian Singleton-Green
Once a quarter, the directors of commercial vehicle company Iveco have to sit across the table from the executive committee of the company's parent, Fiat, and face a grilling on their latest results.
The experience is made doubly uncomfortable because the man facing them is Dr Giovanni Agnelli, the founder's grandson, director for 49 years, chairman for 26, and the man who has built up an enterprise with a turnover of £26bn and 300,000 employees.
‘I am, unfortunately, the one who speaks for two hours in face of Mr Agnelli,’ says Massimo Aimetti, Iveco's vice president, finance, with a dry sense of humour.
‘It's traumatic, especially when the results are bad!’
Each quarterly presentation is allocated half a day; Iveco's directors explain the results for the previous quarter and give their projections for the rest of the year.
Mid-year, they present the strategic thinking for the next edition of their rolling five-year plan, and in November they present the five-year plan itself and their budget for the next year.
Apart from these quarterly meetings, and monthly financial reports, Iveco's directors are given considerable freedom in their day to day management.
Mr Aimetti — who studied economics at Turin, spent some years teaching maths, six years working in banking, a similar period at SKF (the ballbearing manufacturer) and joined Iveco in 1978 sums up their position as ‘complete autonomy — but we are always under control’.
But within Iveco, the manufacturing subsidiaries have no autonomy.
Iveco makes trucks and engines.
The manufacturing is distributed among various plants across Europe, in Italy, Germany, France, Spain and the UK, but is centrally controlled and integrated on a just-in-time basis.
One factory, for example, produces the mechanical parts, another the frames for the cabs, another the engines, and so on .
In such a structure, there is no room for autonomy.
‘The manager of the plant in Langley [Iveco's main UK factory]cannot produce 50 more trucks than was planned.
First of all, he will not receive the materials!
Second, he has to follow the rules.’
Central decision-making also implies common systems throughout the group's various units and centralised information.
Mr Aimetti estimates that 80% of Iveco's information is already handled centrally in Turin, from the receipt of the customer's order, to the control of the production process, to invoicing and final payment.
They are now working on a centralised system for spare parts, so that a customer in Spain or Switzerland can be found the part he needs whether it's in Germany, Italy or France.
Iveco has not always been this integrated.
It has been built up since 1975 by combining Fiat's original truck division in Italy with foreign acquisitions: Unic in France, Magirus in Germany, Pegaso in Spain and Iveco Ford in the UK (in which Fiat has a 48% stake, but controls operations).
Iveco has also started to branch out into eastern Europe.
It has a joint venture with Tatra of Czechoslovakia and an agreement with Uralaz of Russia to make Iveco vehicles.
At first, Iveco dealt with the different companies as separate legal entities.
Then it installed a common reporting system.
Next came real integration, with centralised control of production and information.
Having to keep separate legal entities in every state, each with its own board and each obeying widely varying requirements of company law, is therefore an irritation to Iveco's integrated European operation.
Inside the front cover of its annual report, the company prints an unusual request: ‘Within the European Community a single market in commercial vehicles has been a reality for some time.
As yet, however, there has not been a corresponding overhaul and harmonisation of the member countries’ legal systems.
For this reason, although Iveco runs a fully integrated European operation, the group cannot trade as a single company with a single board of directors.
Iveco requests that the process of European integration should advance to the point where suitable pan-European structures will be established for companies as well as for markets.’
Lack of tax harmonisation can impose much higher costs than company law.
‘This year,’ explains Mr Aimetti, ‘the German company has had the opportunity to take advantage of the boom there and made a big profit, so we pay tax in Germany.
In the meantime, we had very big losses everywhere else in Europe due to the recession.
This is a really big problem.
Even the flow of dividends from one company to another depends upon the double taxation treaties between different states.
It's a waste of time!’
Accounting differences between states in the Community provide a further unnecessary expense.
Like any group, Fiat has its own accounting formats and policies, which have to be followed worldwide.
At the same time, accounts have to follow local requirements.
‘You have to think with two different parts of your brain: one following the local rules, the other Fiat's.’
But in accounting, at least, Mr Aimetti thinks that there has been considerable progress over the past 10 years: ‘With some adjustments, we are all following the Americans.’
But he emphasises the development of a distinctively European approach to accounting, ‘less sophisticated, less artificial than the Americans’.
There are also cultural problems in creating a European company.
It isn't always straightforward to get, say, Frenchmen and Germans working together successfully or even people from southern Italy working well with those from the north.
But Mr Aimetti believes that it is easy enough to get them to work together successfully if they share a common technical language, in accounting, for example.
For this reason, working with people from the former communist regimes of eastern Europe can be difficult because the common language and culture of business life are missing: ‘The concept of profit is not there.
The concept of risk is not there.’
Nor does Iveco believe in moving staff from one country to another on a large scale.
‘First of all because Italians don't like to go abroad!
Second, because it costs a lot to move people.
Third, because Turin is not the best town in the world to live!’
Iveco's official language is English, but Mr Aimetti concedes that, in spite of a lot of effort to get people to learn a second language, there has not been much success.
Regardless of the obstacles, though, Mr Aimetti is an enthusiast for what Iveco is achieving.
‘We are really building up a European company, through common systems, by giving people a common language, and giving them a common experience.’
In terms of products, technology and markets, Mr Aimetti is right, but human differences of culture and language remain, and the requirements of different countries' laws still lag far behind what the pan-European company needs.
At the moment in which an engineer draws a line on his computer he is deciding the cost of the product for the next 10 years.
So the accountant has to be involved right from the birth of the product
Reducing manpower: Robots at work on EuroCargo cabs
CHANGES IN INDUSTRY
Massimo Aimetti has seen fundamental changes at Iveco over the past decade.
They are typical of much of manufacturing industry.
Managers
In the past, companies put ‘great responsibility in the hands of very few managers who became ‘all-rounders’ covering large areas both in terms of product and geography'.
Now, ‘a greater number of people hold specific responsibilities.
The manager is a specialist whose function is to improve processes or a corporate function’.
Machinery and manpower
In the past, ‘machinery was not highly automated and manpower was important’.
Now, ‘investment is closely linked to product.
The intensive use of capital for highly automated products leads to a reduction in the importance of manpower.
What has not yet changed is the time invested in looking after manpower utilisation in relation to the time invested in looking after machinery utilisation.
Companies are devoting very low attention — at least in terms of money — to controlling investment’.
Costs and technology
In the past, ‘products were characterised by decreasing costs due to continuing improvements in production technology and, on the engineering side, changing materials and design aimed at containing production costs’.
Now, ‘products are characterised by costs already determined from the moment of their conception.
Technology is dedicated and therefore vast reductions in cost in the lifetime of a product are not to be expected.
At the moment in which an engineer draws a line on his computer he is deciding the cost of the product for the next 10 years.
You can no longer say, ‘OK, but there will be a smart worker who will learn how to do that in half the time it takes now’.
The worker will not be there.
We have just invested L200bn in a plastics factory; it has 25 workers!
So the accountant has to be involved right from the birth of the product.
This is something that is not yet accepted'.
Markets
In the past, ‘the markets for industrial products continued to grow and the limit on a company's expansion depended on its production capacity’.
Now, ‘markets are subject to strong peaks and troughs due to economic cycles and the faster obsolescence of products due to greater competition.
At Fiat, we always look to the future.
The market is changing not year by year, but month by month.
The problem is no longer to provide the company with updated factual data.
The problem is to provide it with updated forecast data’.
trends in information technology
THE INCREDIBLE SHRINKING PC As the cost of the PC and its size are shrinking, its power is increasing.
But the machine's enormous potential has yet to be fully exploited
Lesley Meall
The first portable launched almost a decade ago was the size and weight of a sewing machine, and was termed ‘luggable’.
Even so, many an intrepid user carted one from pillar to post while keeping an eye out for a mains socket.
Some still do.
Soon after, advances in microprocessors brought the laptop.
It fitted into a briefcase, and being battery powered was more deserving of the term portable.
Peter Drake of Intelligent Networks was an early user.
‘I first used one in 1985,’ he says.
‘It was a DG1, a laptop from Data General.
Back then, they didn't catch on in a big way.’
But the idea most certainly did.
Over the past few years the market has boomed: Dataquest expects portables to account for around half of PC sales by 1995.
The smaller the PC, the greater its appeal — or so it would seem.
The laptop is now being overtaken in popularity by the ‘note-book’— weighing under 10lb, the size of an A4 notepad, and shrinking fast.
For the moment, the smallest PC in the world is the Olivetti Quaderno; around the size and weight of a hefty paperback.
Yet despite their growing popularity portables are still largely under-utilised.
‘At the moment, they are only integrated into corporate networks in a haphazard fashion’, Mr Drake says.
‘Most networks still aren't constructed in anticipation of people needing or wanting a plug-in connection for a portable at their desk.’
There are exceptions.
TSB, for example, has a PC and Macintosh-based network at its head office, and all of its executives have laptops with connections to the network.
‘But I only see the odd one, here and there,’ Mr Drake comments.
‘If you don't connect your portable to a network then you've a lot of data going to waste,’ he observes.
‘So I think the next phase of networking will be to have a point on your desk where you can plug your portable in.’
Communications
That is, if other communications developments don't preclude this.Last year NEC Corp launched the first wireless PC.
The unit's radio antennae and built-in modem provide access to what is termed a ‘tele-terminal’ communications network, and will enable mobile users to access an office mainframe from remote locations such as a client's house or office.
Although there are still some technical problems, developers are working on business software for wireless computer networks, and NEC hopes to open up the market by introducing a lightweight antenna-modem unit for use with one of its popular and established series of PCs.
Until recently NEC was alone in the field of wireless communication.
But Fujitsu has launched a notebook-type PC capable of wireless communication via a mobile phone, and Toshiba has developed a radio data communications unit for PCs.
According to Toshiba's Mahiro Tada, this unit will link up with Inmarsat satellites to provide ‘PC communication and access to databases, from anywhere in the world’.
Once, the computer network was viewed as a means of sharing expensive equipment.
Today, the power of networks stems from their information-sharing capabilities.
Local area networks are now expected to enable users to share both data and applications.
Wide area networks, which may have been installed initially to link the geographically remote branches of a company, are increasingly expanding to enable the company to transact business with its customers and suppliers electronically — worldwide.
In a recent ACCOUNTANCY survey of the financial directors of The Times Top 100 Companies, over 70% of the respondents were found to be trading electronically.
Rightsizing
As the desktop computer is being forsaken for lighter, more portable PCs, so the older proprietary mainframes are being superseded by less expensive but more powerful, more ‘open’ and more flexible systems.
The process is known as rightsizing or downsizing: both terms are potentially misleading.
Although they relate to the growing tendency to move computer applications from larger machines to smaller ones (See ACCOUNTANCY , February, p 101), reduction in the size of the boxes is not the most significant factor.
The reduction in price is, as companies as diverse as Eagle Star, Vernons Pools, Fullers Brewery, J Sainsbury and Co and even ACCOUNTANCY Magazine have been quick to see.
After six years of service,ACCOUNTANCY recently downsized its subscription system, replacing a Data General MV4000 with a much more powerful Unix-based AV4100, also from DG.
‘We went for an open systems solution because we wanted to build in flexibility for the future,’ says ACCOUNTANCY 's Malcolm Cole.
But cost was also a significant factor.
‘The Avion maintenance costs are 10% of the MV4000's,’ he adds.
And, although the system offers additional capacity for adding extra applications, the magazine will recoup the purchase cost within four years.
But as with any significant change, rightsizing is not all good news.
Against the obvious cost savings, companies must set the expense of re-implementing their system in a new environment.
‘When Data General showed us the changeover to the AV4100, it took an hour,’ says Geoffrey Holmes, a former publisher of ACCOUNTANCY who has been helping to re-implement the system.
However ‘doing it to our satisfaction has meant re-compiling all of the programs on the system’— a much more time-consuming process.
Even for the experienced programmer, coming to terms with Unix can be like learning a foreign language.
For example, unless you are careful, permissions for access can become quite complicated.
As Mr Holmes says, ‘You can easily end up with people being locked out of the system.’
However, Unix-based systems do usually offer good value for money.
‘The speed with which the AV4100 handles tasks is one of its strengths,’ Mr Holmes says.
‘It used to take minutes for our morning report to take trial balances from every ledger on the system.
Now it takes a matter of seconds.’
But while rightsizing may be good news for end-users, it is bad news for many of the established giants of the IT industry.
‘Downsizing, coupled with the current recession is not encouraging market investment,’ says Carlo de Benedetti, who heads Olivetti, the Italian computer giant.
Information
Advances in telecommunications, the trend towards miniaturisation and falling hardware prices have ensured that access to information is not a problem.
But getting at the right information, and making sense of it, is increasingly difficult.
Private and public databases proliferate, and experts are predicting further growth over the next three years.
The availability of user-friendly interfaces, giving easier access to information held in databases, will have a large part to play in this predicted uptake.
Over the past five years the executive information system has established itself as niche software in this area, but until recently the price of even PC-based EIS has prohibited their use by all but the major groups British Gas, Caledonian Airways, and the Kwik Save group, to name a few.
At a corporate level the EIS offers a means of providing managers with the up-to-date information required for timely and informed decision-making.
‘You can see things going wrong in the company that you wouldn't have seen in any other way,’ says EIS guru Bob Widener.
He believes that companies such as Philips, Polly Peck and Brent Walker suffered ‘because they do not have the right information systems’.
By combining information from both external and internal company information sources, the EIS can be a powerful stategic tool.
But as EIS consultant Rod Newing says, ‘It is a means of delivering corporate strategy, not information.
We are now seeing the non-niche players entering the market with EIS-type products like Lotus Notes.’
Lotus Notes is one of a number of ‘groupware’ products, designed to provide teams of PC users, termed workgroups, with an easy-to-use, interactive way of sharing information.
Like the EIS, it offers a means of communicating information, but where the EIS aids decision-making, Groupware helps its users to complete tasks.
Many of the world's largest companies are now utilising Notes.
Arthur Andersen is downsizing and over the next two years will be replacing its Wang minicomputers with a PC-based system running Notes.
Arthur Andersen and Andersen Consulting have reportedly jointly purchased 20,000 copies of the package, with an option to buy 40,000 more.
Unlike the EIS, the appeal of groupware such as Lotus Notes is not restricted to the large companies.
Notes retails at around £400 a user (with discounts on multiple purchases), and is getting so popular that it may well emerge as the de facto standard for disseminating information.
Later this year a version will be launched for a Hewlett Packard ‘palmtop’(which is already offered with 1-2-3).
Used with a pager, this will allow about 10 A4 pages of Notes mail text to be received.
According to John Landy of Lotus Communications, next year this will be extended to provide two-way wireless transmission of text.
When wireless communications become available for a wider range of portables, the prevalence of Notes and applications like it will go a long way towards tying into networks PCs that are being under-utilised as little more than personal information managers.
No longer a mobile substitute for a desktop, the portable is the travelling desktop
Once, the computer network was viewed as a means of sharing expensive equipment.
Today, the power of networks stems from their information-sharing capabilities
DIRECT TO YOUR DESKTOP Even IBM is considering mail order, and reliable suppliers are offering rapid delivery of PCs at rock bottom prices
Nic Morris
Five years ago companies that bought their personal computers sight unseen through the mail were few and far between.
During the 1980s the business PC, like many other IT products, was best bought from a reputable dealer.
But PCs are increasingly sold through ‘direct’ channels rather than distributors, with reliable suppliers offering rapid delivery at rock bottom prices.
Over the last two years the UK has seen dramatic growth in the number of PCs bought through direct sales channels.
In 1990, 12% of business PCs were sold direct.
During the first quarter of this year the unit share taken by direct selling manufacturers hit an all time high of 36%, up from 34% in the fourth quarter of 1991 (source: Romtec).
The days of the middle man may well be numbered.
Even the IT industry's biggest names, like IBM, are considering mail order, and ICL and Olivetti are already respectively fourth and fifth in the UK direct sales ratings.
But Elonex is the company currently leading the mail order attack in the UK with 12.6% of this market and 4.6% of the total PC market.
Elonex has always been a mail order supplier.
Founded in 1986, it began by importing PCs made by the Taiwanese concern Copam.
But it now has its own research and development facility in the US, and has recently opened its own automated assembly line in London.
It has attracted a growing number of UK corporates, including British Steel, British Aerospace, BT and Mercury.
‘Corporates are buying more and more from direct channels’ says Michael Spiro, financial director.
‘They now have in-house expertise, so they don't need the dealers to hold their hand.’
With obvious cost savings.
‘We were the first in the country to supply pre-installed networks,’ says Mr Spiro, ‘and all Elonex PCs come as a complete plug-in system with Windows 3.1 as standard.’
‘There is a definite trend toward offering the users a complete solution,’ says Opus' Kevin Duncan.
‘We install the operating system as a matter of course and add other software as required.’
With 11.5% of the direct sales market and 4.2% of the total market, Opus is hot on the heels of Elonex.
Quality and service
Although Elonex came top of the rankings for both competitively priced products and services, it was the Dell Computer Corporation that recently came top for overall quality in the Computer Weekly /Kew Associates annual survey of IT suppliers, thanks to ‘its consistent supply of reliable computers and services.’
Dell is only the third largest direct sales vendor in the UK, with 9.6% of the market and 3.8% of the total PC market.
But it's the establishment front runner in the US, where Dell pioneered the direct marketing of PCs, which now accounts for almost a third of the total market.
As the survey indicated, reliable services are as significant as reliable computers.
Good support is vital.
Opus customers have telephone access to technical support (on-site maintenance is an option), while prospective customers can call its pre-support team to talk through their requirements and get advice on system configuration etc.
Opus customers include GEC Marconi and British Rail.
The latter has purchased around 1,500 PCs from Opus.
Despite all this talk of PCs, little boxes aren't the only IT merchandise available via direct sales channels.
You can also expect to source peripherals like your printer in this way.
Opus, for example, has a sister company which is used to supply items such as printers and tape streamers.
‘Elonex supplies this sort of thing,’ says Mr Spiro, ‘but not because it's a big revenue earner.
We do it because our customers need it.
If someone wants to buy a printer or 20 diskettes from us it would be pointless to tell them they'll have to go elsewhere.’
Which is the advice you'd get if you asked Elonex to supply you with an accounting package.
Accounting software
‘Opus offers to load the customer's own choice of software,’ says Mr Duncan, but makes little more than tentative recommendations on the accounting side.
‘We will only go as far as suggesting some of the market leaders like Sage and Pegasus, then we let the customers decide’.
Even so, the upward trend in direct sales extends to software, and you are increasingly likely to be able to buy accounting software by mail order.
One such package is supplied by Cordingly Barnes: Pastel Accounting, the successor to TurboCASH, recently achieved the 1992 Best Buy award for budget software from Which Computer?— beating both Pegasus and Sage.
Although Cordingly Barnes supplies Pastel via mail order, the company is essentially a systems integrator.
As such it offers a wide range of services: ‘These include hardware, consultancy, on-site training and a telephone support hotline,’ says Peter Munson.
Not everyone wants to pay for the highest level of service available, so clients can select the level of service they require.
Many of the users of Pastel come from small business backgrounds, but as Mr Munson points out: ‘There is a worldwide installed base of around 1,800 users.
The software already outsells Sage in Australia, and there are some very large organisations using Pastel in the UK.’
Megatech Software recently won the Institute's recommendation for its TAS Books Account Processor.
In the last 18 months alone Megatech has shipped in excess of 4500 copies of TAS, and since the beginning of this year sales have been averaging 400 units a month.
No mean achievement given the established market domination by Sage.
And what of support?
This is handled over the telephone.
Theo Van Dort says: ‘From the first 1,705 registered users, 53% required no support at all, 34% less than five calls and 13% more than five calls.
However, one company has required 54 calls to date.’
Value for money
Factors like the widespread increase in computer literacy and the contraction of the PC market have obviously effected the growth in direct sales.
But the ever deepening recession will ensure that only suppliers of quality products, backed up with high manufacturing standards and reliable support, will be able to continue to successfully exploit the trend.
Reliable services are as important as reliable computers — especially to the purchaser from a small business background
IT OFF THE SHELF The new computer superstores offer small and medium-sized businesses blue-chip buying power
Lesley Bolton
Walking down the light and airy aisles of this superstore, one could be forgiven for mistaking the piles of Novell Netware for so many boxes of Monopoly piled high on the shelves.
But no, they would be purveyed in the store next door — Toys ‘R’ Us.
This is PC World, and here this week's ‘special offer’ is likely to be a Zenith Mastersport 386SX plus monitor — with a four-figure price tag.
Computer superstores are the latest trend to be transplanted from the US, after such retailing innovations as the grocery supermarket, hypermarkets and out-of-town shopping centres.
They are a product of the current computer market: an oversupply of machines and recessionary pressures forcing companies to seek the cheapest deals.
The trend follows hot on the heels of the phenomenal success of buying computers by direct mail, also pioneered in the US.
But whereas the direct mail method is ideal for computer-literates who know what they want, computer superstores allow the undecided or the uninitiated to see under one roof what is on offer and to seek on-the-spot advice.
There are two such chains of computer superstore in the UK — home-grown PC World, which opened its doors in Croydon last November, later adding a store in Thurrock, Essex, and the American-backed Business Superstore which has two branches, one in west London and one in Colindale in northwest London.
Both companies plan new stores in the near future.
They aim to capture the same market — small to medium-sized businesses that in the past did not have the same buying power as blue-chip companies.
‘There's nobody in the UK to date that's really offered small to medium-sized businesses the same buying power and service as large companies,’ said Jane Knowles, marketing manager for Business Superstore.
‘Small companies did not have the same advantages as large organisations,’ confirms Jan Murray, chairman and managing director of PC World.
As he told ACCOUNTANCY : ‘We are making a very wide range of products accessible at low prices.
Up until the advent of the superstore, if a small organisation wanted to buy a PC system where did it go — Dixons?
An option for those sure of the system they wanted would have been one of the many mail order suppliers like Elonex, Opus, or even a sister company of PC World, like Computers by Post (see panel: A Brief History).
While tapping the same market, the chains approach the business customer in different ways.
Business Superstore offers a whole range of products from computer systems and peripherals like cabling to office furniture and paper-clips.
‘We give up to a 70% discount on some related products like paper,’ Ms Knowles said.
PC World regards itself as a computer specialist, claiming to be the largest supplier of computer products in Europe.
(Its stores stock more than 4,000 lines.)
Apart from the tables on which to place computers, PC World does not stock other secondary items.
‘We won't diversify any more’, Mr Murray said.
‘We want to become more and more specialist.’
Forthcoming innovations from PC World include a networking department where customers can see products demonstrated and receive advice, and a department for the first-time user who wants direct advice without having to wander along all the shelves.
Here PC World will advise users on what will meet their requirements, and will price such an overall package.
‘In other words, we will be providing more expertise and more hand-holding,’ Mr Murray said.
PC World's customer profile breaks down into those who know what they want but want to see it demonstrated and to be able to walk away with the product; those who know a bit, but have never bought a computer before; and corporate customers seeking the best value for money.
Its corporate customers include several departments at BT, some large government departments, and colleges.
At Business Superstore specially trained staff help customers to buy the systems that fit their needs.
‘You don't have to be a computer whizzkid or a specialist.
People should not be afraid to come in and say, ‘I want a system to make my life easier’, or, ‘I want a spreadsheet that will do this’.’
Customers also need not worry about installation or after-sales care.
Business Superstore will install the software, offer training and supply a full technical back-up.
At PC World, Mr Murray is conscious of the need to allay misgivings about after-sales care voiced by computer manufacturers when the superstore concept was mooted in the UK.
‘We had to be upfront about our technical back-up.
We have a big service area at the front of the store where customers can see the engineers working.’
This in-store ‘technical centre’ offers on-the-spot servicing at fixed prices, the fitting of peripherals and component upgrades, installing software, and a clinic for hardware checkups.
Customers can use the store's cafe while they wait.
PC World is also about to introduce low-cost training at its Croydon superstore surely a great boon to anyone who has spent days getting to grips with a user manual the size of a telephone directory!
The store plans to cater for about 10 trainees at a time at a cost of only £29.95 for three hours.
For hard-pressed business people, courses will run during the weekend.
For accountants who can make it to any of the superstores (research shows that customers travel some distance but telesales are available to any destination in the UK), whether they are sole practitioners or part of a larger group, the benefits would appear to be great.
First, they can see and feel what they are buying.
Second, prices are available that have previously been the privilege of firms with the buying power of the Big Six.
There has been a revolution in the marketing of computer products and the winner looks like being the consumer.
A BRIEF HISTORY
The computer superstore phenomenon began in North America in 1982.
Although there were only six such outlets by the end of 1987, together they had combined sales of $250m.
By the end of 1991, there were an estimated 78 computer superstores in the US, with combined sales of $2.8bn.
That represents a growth rate of 1,000%!
Europe's first computer superstore, PC World, opened in November 1991.
PC World is part of the Vision Technology Group, Europe's largest reseller of PCs and peripherals by mail order; Computers by Post and Hi-Voltage are part of the group.
Last year group sales amounted to £32m.
American-backed Business Superstore opened in April this year.
The trend looks set to take off in the UK, although different in some ways from the American experience.
The boom in PC retailing was twofold in the US, with both mail order and superstores developing simultaneously.
Computer products are relatively much cheaper in the US than in the UK, and Americans tend to be more computer literate.
The US computer superstore CompUSA looks more like a warehouse, with products piled high and where knowledgeable customers are happy to make their selections.
In the UK both PC World and Business Superstore found they had to ‘tweak’ the concept to convince more reticent Britons that the trend is here to stay.
‘We found you can't just lay out the store like a supermarket,’ Mr Murray said.
‘Customers need more hand-holding than in the US.’
Likewise at Business Superstore much attention has been paid to colour, lighting and decor.
In the UK the boom in direct sales took the computer manufacturers by surprise.
While the reseller market for PCs by value was flat, growth in units boomed, mostly through direct channels.
‘Mail order took the established manufacturers by surprise,’ said John Whitely, of IT consultants Romtec.
He also sees a rosy future for superstores: ‘Superstores won't take the same percentage of the market as in the US, but that's not to say they won't do well — they will.
There will be good returns in the medium term.’
Mr Whiteley warns that while there is a high correlation between certain types of PC system and certain types of reseller, such as the superstore, there is a brand loyalty to established names.
Manufacturers such as Compaq and IBM will fight back.
‘Manufacturers’ research shows that buyers will pay a premium for the higher quality perceived in some brand names.’
PC World: Part of the Vision Technology Group
Although their product ranges vary, both PC World and Business Superstore offer customers advice and training on the hardware or software they purchase
personal finance: investing for income
INVESTMENT OPTION GAINS CONVERTS With the average dividend yield on UK equities now 5% and dividends not rising, investors are examining convertible issues as a way of increasing the return from their portfolios
Robin Dunham
The sluggish performance of the UK economy has caused estimates for dividend growth to be scaled down.
Indeed, City analysts reckon that in the first six months of 1992 listed companies' dividends only increased by 2% as companies tried to improve their balance sheets and build up dividend cover.
Barclays de Zoete Wedd's analysts predict zero dividend growth in 1992 (v 3% in 1991) and 4% in 1993.
In these circumstances investors are continuing to cast an eye over convertibles — the yield can be considerably higher than on the underlying equity and yet the premium on the conversion price need not be too large.
The convertibles market consists of: convertible loan stocks priced, like gilts, in £100 nominal amounts and, where the rate of interest is stated gross, subject to deduction of 25% basic rate tax; convertible preference shares priced in pence like ordinary shares and where the dividend is similarly expressed as a net amount after basic rate tax; and some convertible capital bonds.
The convertible loans and prefs are dealt on the London Stock Exchange in a similar way to equities, with settlement after the end of the account period.
Generally, most stockbrokers and financial advisers charge the same rate of commission on bargains in convertibles as they do in equities.
The prices quoted for convertible loans and convertible prefs include any accrued interest/dividend; this is not shown separately as for gilts and many debentures and loans.
However, in the case of Eurosterling convertibles issued on the Eurobond market the prices are usually quoted clean, ie with the accrued interest added separately.
Dealings here are for seven day rolling settlement except in the case of new issues.
These convertible issues are convertible into the underlying equity at a fixed rate over a period of years and usually on certain dates in each year.
The yield will usually be significantly higher than that on the underlying equity, but this yield differential will narrow if early conversion appears likely.
The higher the premium is on conversion then the more the issue will be treated as a fixed interest investment and valued on a yield basis, with attention given to the financial strength of the issuing company and the number of times the interest/dividend payment is covered by available profits.
Above-average yields can sometimes be spotted on the convertibles of companies that are going through a bad patch, and these more risky recovery situations appeal to speculators.
Turning to some individual stocks, we can see some of the main points that require examination.
The 7.5p convertible preference of hotel group Queens Moat Houses, at 95 1/2 p, provides a gross yield of 10.5%, whereas the ordinary yield is only 5.6%.
They are convertible into ordinary at the rate of 102 ordinary for every 100 convertible pref in May of the years 1992 to 2011.
This gives an equivalent ordinary price on conversion at the moment of 93.6p, a premium of 35.7% over the present ordinary price of 69p.
If the convertibles are not converted they are redeemed at 100p in 2011.
The dividends on the convertible are paid half yearly on 1 April and 1 October.
Rank Organisation (owner of 49% of Rank Xerox and a variety of leisure activities) has issued an 8.25p convertible preference that has a present price of 94p, giving a gross yield of 11.7%.
The ordinary shares at 564p yield 7.5%.
This convertible pref share is convertible into ordinary in March 1993 to 2003 at the rate of 10.6383 ordinary for every 100 pref.
At a price of 94p for the convertible pref, the equivalent ordinary price on conversion is 884p, a premium of 57% over the present ordinary share price of 564p.
Redemption is 100p in 2007; the convertible dividend is paid half yearly on 31 January and 31 July.
The panel shows a selection of UK convertibles; many stockbrokers and advisers issue regular lists of their recommendations.
It is always advisable to check on marketability as it can be tight for some smaller issues.
Prices are taken as at 6 August 1992.
For individuals requiring income, an investment in convertibles can bring a higher return than an investment in equities and still give scope for some capital appreciation.
GILTS: STILL A GOOD BET Yields on UK Government securities have fallen since the general election, but gilts still represent good value if we are entering an era of low inflation
Robin Dunham
At present the gross redemption yield on gilts is in the range 9.2% to 9.8%.
After the announcement of the Conservatives' general election victory, gilts enjoyed a period of steady demand from investors, including those from overseas, and yields fell from just under 10% to a little above 9%.
However, the Danish vote against the Maastricht treaty prompted a period of instability in many European bond markets would European Monetary Union go ahead after all?
Gilts suffered too, with price drops of up to a point.
The FT Government Securities index currently stands at 88.18 against a high for the year to date of 89.75 and a low of 85.11 (see panel).
The reasons for the gilts' good performance since the election are the feelings among investors that the Conservatives are determined to keep inflation low and also that they are more likely to control government spending.
Because of the recession the public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) will be high, and a figure of £28bn for 1992/93 was forecast at the time of the Budget in March.
The likelihood is that any growth in 1992/93 will be modest, so that spending on unemployment will continue to rise and the growth in tax revenues will be weaker.
This has led to the economists' expectation that the outturn will be £32bn or more.
Such a large PSBR means a heavy programme of new gilt issues, especially as redemptions also have to be funded.
The Bank of England has acted quickly to take advantage of the demand and it is believed that about one third of the 1992/93 funding programme has already been completed.
There is some evidence that institutional investors are now more prepared to increase the allocations to gilts in their portfolios.
Holdings of around one third were common in the 1970s, but the proportion fell during the boom in equities in the 1980s and is now down to 9%.
However, Norwich Union has publicly stated that it intends to devote a greater part of its investments to fixed interest securities.
It must be remembered, though, that UK institutions also face pressure on their available cash from further payments due on privatisations, rights issues, and new issues, besides perhaps wanting to build up holdings of overseas bonds and equities.
Fortunately, overseas investors perceive the UK as an area of political stability; it seems that in spite of the Danish referendum EC monetary convergence may continue, so the UK could remain a major beneficiary of inward capital flows.
The yield on a 10 year German government bond of 8.02% is still noticeably lower than that obtainable from a similarly dated gilt of 9.30% or a French bond of 9.00%.
As a result of the slow recovery from recession in the UK, inflationary pressures appear set to remain subdued.
The annual rate of inflation for June was lower at 3.9%, and the underlying trend appears downward.
Chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont has affirmed that he wants to see the rate drop to 2%, the Japanese level.
On 5 May UK bank base rates were cut by half a point to 10%, but further falls in interest rates may have to wait until Germany begins to cut its rates.
Turning to the prices of individual stocks, in many cases the price is above par (£100) because of the fall in interest rates, so investors have to take into account the fact that if they hold the stock to maturity they will incur a capital loss.
For example, Treasury 10.5% 1999 at present commands a price of £104 15/16 to give a gross redemption yield of 10.01%.
This stock will be redeemed at par on 19 May 1999.
Traditionally, private investors find it difficult to accept a loss on redemption.
Treasury 8.75% 1997 at £97 1/8 to yield 9.48% to redemption is one of the few medium dated gilts still below par.
Now that tax rates on income have fallen to a maximum of 40%, there is less incentive for individuals to buy low coupon gilts to take advantage of the tax-free capital appreciation.
However, in the five to 15 year life range the highest net redemption yield for a 40% taxpayer is 6.20% on Funding 3.5% 1999/2004, which stands at £65 3/4.
Generally, many advisers recommend index-linked gilts as providing the best net return to 40% taxpayers.
When dealing in gilts, some particular points are worth noting.
All transactions are for cash and not, as for equities, for settlement after the end of the Stock Exchange account period.
Most brokers and financial advisers charge less for gilt bargains.
Also, under the accrued income scheme the gilt buyer will pay for the accrued gross interest since the last interest payment date.
For example, a purchaser of 9 1/2 % Treasury 1999 at £100 27/32 will in addition have to pay for 26 days accrued interest.
But on the next interest date the buyer will receive the full half-year payment.
A seller will receive the accrued interest on top of the sale proceeds.
The accrued interest element will be shown separately on the contract note.
It is possible to purchase gilts on the National Savings Stock Register up to a maximum of £10,000 in any one stock in any one day, and the interest is then received gross.
(For full details, see the booklet available from Post Offices.)
GUARANTEED BUT NO HURRY TO BUY If you think interest rates and inflation are going to fall, guaranteed income bonds could be a handy source of income; but returns are now lower than before the election
Flavia Hawksley
Guaranteed income bonds (GIBs), bought with a lump sum investment from a life insurance company, provide a fixed regular income over a term of usually one to five years.
They offer a good deal if interest rates, high at the time of purchase, subsequently fall.
Although the rates on GIBs do tend to lag behind general market rates, fast action is often necessary to take advantage of opportunities — when interest rates fall, issues can be withdrawn without any notice, and replaced by a new issue offering a much lower return.
Naturally the best rates are offered when interest rates are high and expected to rise even further.
The very worst time to take out a bond is when rates are low but then rise dramatically and unexpectedly, as they did at the end of the 1980s.
Prior to the general election, when many experts expected a Labour victory followed by a rise in base rates, there were several enticing bonds to go for.
But they were withdrawn immediately after the election, when it seemed likely that interest rates would fall, and succeeded by bonds offering a lower return.
‘The great advantage of GIBs is locking into high rates of interest,’ says Warren Terry, financial planning consultant at Charles Stanley (phone: 071–739 8200).
‘While at present returns are not as high as a year ago, they are still relatively attractive.’
Considering that the money is also effectively locked up in the bond for a chosen period, usually between one and five years, with the interest rate fixed at this new lower level, it could be the wrong choice.
‘My gut feeling is that interest rates come and go,’ says Mr Terry.
‘It appears unlikely that interest rates will fall quickly, so there is no need to rush to invest.’
So for those who like the idea of a guaranteed fixed income, the two main points to consider are, first, how long your capital can be tied up for, and second, whether interest rates are likely to increase, leaving you with an investment yielding less than is obtainable elsewhere.
The rate of interest on the bonds is quoted net of basic rate tax.
As this tax cannot be reclaimed, the bonds are not suitable for non-taxpayers.
Higher rate taxpayers face a liability to an extra 15% tax if the income is withdrawn, but it is possible to roll up the interest and take it in a year when the investor is only a basic rate taxpayer.
The full sum invested is returned at maturity or on the investor's death, if earlier.
Otherwise bonds can usually be surrendered within the period, but the value is not then guaranteed.
Baronworth Investment Services (081–518 1218), which prints a weekly update of best buys, runs a special deal with accountants who cannot act as direct agents for bond issuers, and splits any commission 50/50, but emphasises that it does also recommend bonds that pay no commission.
‘If we offer a good service, people will come back,’ says director Colin Jackson.
The bonds are often launched by smaller insurance companies to obtain instant, and large, funds (once the target is reached the bond is withdrawn) to finance rapid expansion.
However, some of the bigger and better-known life companies also offer guaranteed income bonds, including M&G (071–626 4588).
At the time this article was written, that company had just launched a bond at 8% for a life of five years.
Skandia (071–220 3520) also has a two year bond on offer, at 7.9%.
It is important before investing to check on the financial soundness of the insurance company involved.
Other companies on Baronworth's list of best buys and keen on guaranteed income bonds include Acuma (0784 430003), which was offering a range from 7.4% for an investment of £1,000 to £1,999 (over one year) to 8.00% for £20,000 (no commission payable).
Consolidated Life, also recommended by Chase de Vere (071–404 5766), was offering 8.05% for £2,000 to £4,999 for a life of three, four or seven years.
Other recommendations included Prosperity Financial Services (0800 521546), which was offering 8.5% on an investment of £15,000 to £24,999 for one year and between 8.35% and 8.5% on £5,000 to £14,999 and over £15,000 respectively for three years.
And Financial Assurance (081–367 6000) was paying 8.05% on £5,000 or more for a period of four years.
The income is generally paid annually in arrears — this is the rate quoted in this article — although it can be paid more frequently at a lower rate.
Although best buys may be easy to spot as they are regularly listed by several financial advisers, Chase de Vere warns: ‘Please remember that all GIBs are ‘limited offers’ and the best buys are likely to be fully subscribed.’
So even if you are convinced that interest rates are going to drop further and remain low for the foreseeable future, you need to be alert to find a good bargain.
The best rates are offered when interest rates are high and expected to rise even further.
The very worst time to take out a bond is when rates are low but then rise dramatically and unexpectedly, as they did at the end of the 1980s
property
LET YOUR BUILDING DO THE EARNING If your company isn't making full use of all its office space at the moment, sub-letting part of it is simple and lucrative.
Isn't it?
Peter Hill
People can get emotional about premises, and the implications of a decision to sub-let part of a company's accommodation are far-reaching.
Sub-letting may seem an obvious way to reduce overheads and generate income.
A company often thinks that it can let space for a short term — say two or three years — and then move back in once the business climate has improved.
The realities are somewhat different.
Apart from not knowing how long to sub-let the space for, there are other considerations that dictate a company's strategy.
First, there are the physical aspects of the premises to consider.
For example, if a company occupies a self-contained building then it may simply be looking at sub-letting a surplus floor or floors to achieve its objective.
However, a potential sub-tenant may well be reluctant to consider part of a self-contained building if there is little chance of gaining identity and the building is dominated by signage.
Premises on a single floor, or a number of floors, in a larger complex may again produce an identity problem for the sub-tenant; and if the space itself is not flexible that may spell problems for the company wishing to sub-let.
Not all office floors are regularly shaped, for example, and complying with fire regulations and travel distances could dictate where the surplus space should be located.
Provision of fire corridors and lobbies could involve a reduction in the net space occupied by the company doing the sub-leasing.
And the company will still be paying rent on such space, so there are financial implications as well.
There are also management implications if there is more than one tenant in a building or on a floor.
Among issues that need to be tackled are:
How will the costs of the electricity and air-conditioning be recovered?
What are the access arrangements?
What is the security position?
Who is going to be responsible for physically dividing the space so that the sub-tenant can operate as a separate entity?
Apart from the physical aspects, if premises are held on a lease there are legal implications, too.
The alienation clause in a lease will set out the disposal rights for the whole or part of the accommodation.
Sub-letting a part may be prohibited, and if sub-letting of part is permitted there will typically be a requirement to let the premises outside the security of tenure and compensation regulations in the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954.
In addition, there may well be a requirement that any sub-letting is to be at not less than the rent in the lease, and that any sub-lease is to contain similar rent reviews to those in the lease.
These restrictions on alienation will dictate, apart from the market circumstances prevailing at the time, how accommodation is packaged in the market for sub-letting.
The chances of achieving a sub-letting on a three year lease that is outside the Landlord and Tenant Act, and that contains rent review and market rent clauses, could be severely limited, particularly in today's market conditions.
Given the general oversupply of space, the limited demand and falling rents, the market is very much in the tenants' favour.
Any potential tenant will require not only a discount on the rent quoted but a rent-free period and/or a capital contribution towards fitting out costs.
Tenants for short-term leases are generally reluctant to spend money on fitting out, because they are unable to write off their expenditure over such a short term.
In today's market, landlords who want to let new accommodation must be flexible.
The few tenants who are searching for short-term leases are now able to negotiate break clauses in leases for new buildings.
So, from a landlord's point of view, the market for leasing short-term space is even thinner.
There is no point spending money on marketing unless all these points have been considered.
And what percentage of the office is to be sub-let?
If the percentage is large, it may be more economical and feasible to dispose of the whole of the leased accommodation and move into something smaller.
For example, we are currently advising a large computer company that occupies a building of some 60,000 sq ft .
They have instructed us to sub-let 20,000 sq ft of offices, surplus to their requirements, for three years.
We have advised them that it would be better to move to alternative, smaller premises, because:
we know of a tenant who would take the whole of their building;
any sub-lease would be outside the Landlord and Tenant Act and would include a rent review in one year's time as per their own lease;
the market circumstances are such that there are a number of alternative buildings in the locality that could suit their company;
the company may be required, during the course of the sub-lease, to move as a result of head office pressure.
The prospects for disposal of the whole building are severely limited if a third of it is subject to a subtenancy.
It is also advisable to commission a space planner to review the accommodation to be sub-let and ensure that there is optimum use of the sub-let space with minimum loss to the existing accommodation.
At the same time, schedules of condition should be drawn up to protect both parties on the dilapidations front.
Ideally, the objective must be to have the accommodation returned to the same condition it was in before the lease.
In any event, whether your company is considering sub-letting or moving, it is advisable to secure an independent view of the alternative options.
This should take into account the physical, legal and market implications of what, on the face of it, might seem to be a simple process.
It might be better to move
software and systems
ACROSS THE BORDER AND INTO THE TANGLE Trading in Europe means communicating in more than one language and using several currencies.
How many accounting packages can cope?
Lesley Meall
A buffet menu on the Paris to Cologne express is priced in six currencies, while the British Rail equivalent comes in just one sterling — and in just one language — English.
Communicating in more than one language and trading in several currencies is a way of life in much of Europe, so many of our Community partners are already comparatively experienced in trading across international boundaries.
This puts them at an advantage in terms of trading within the EC, and within a Europe whose centre of gravity is shifting steadily eastwards.
In order to compete, or just survive, many UK companies will need to become equally flexible, rapidly.
Europe is a complex tangle of legal, accounting, taxation and cultural differences, more languages than countries, and a variety of currencies, payment methods, VAT regulations and statutory reporting requirements.
And as we are unlikely to see any real harmonisation of accounting procedures, fiscal requirements or business practices throughout the Community in the near future, pan-European accounting systems will be increasingly important to the large number of UK companies looking for all the help they can get.
Many packages boast multicurrency, multilanguage features, but truly comprehensive pan-European packages are more of a rarity.
Those available are anything but cheap, and there is little, if anything, on offer to the small business seeking a solution at the bottom end of the price range.
(Some would argue this reflects a lack of demand.)
Predictably, much of the terminology used to describe and categorise these accounting systems can be confusing and misleading.
Terms like multicurrency, multilanguage and pan-European mean different things to different people — especially software suppliers.
Packages like Omicron's XIS and Multisoft Premier Plus offer multicurrency facilities in all of their accounting and distribution ledgers, whereas the Sage Sovereign general ledger only works in the user's chosen base currency, although its sales and purchase ledgers are multicurrency.
Even at the top end of the market which is where these multilanguage, multicurrency systems inevitably reside — selecting and implementing accounting software is, as ever, a perilous undertaking.
John Tate, managing director of consultancy Tate Bramald Ltd says: ‘It is safest to assume the worst of a package until you have confirmed for yourself that it does what it claims to.’
As well as taking a careful look at what lies beyond the marketing blurb, prospective purchasers need to be very sure of their requirements — before they even begin to consider whether any of the available systems can meet their needs.
The Chartac IT statement No 2,Good Accounting Software , offers guidelines.
Mr Tate advises prospective purchasers to produce a written list of requirements, and to check them off against the package one by one.
Consultant Gaynor Thomas thinks this procedure may be counterproductive.
She says: ‘A lot of companies are unhappy with the systems they eventually choose.
But how can you expect a system to solve your problems, if you didn't clarify exactly what they were prior to selection?’
Ms Thomas advocates adding an extra step to the selection procedure.
She advises her clients to involve the users in producing a list of the problems they are expecting an accounting system to solve, in addition to drawing up the more traditional features ‘hit-list’.
So a supplier can then be contractually obliged to solve real problems rather than provide abstract features.
Any software claiming to be pan-European obviously needs to comply with major accounting standards such as the 4th and 7th EC directives, for example, and would benefit from links to online databases providing up-to-date information on legislation across the EC.
But the needs of a UK-based company trading with customers and suppliers in the EC, will naturally be vastly different from those of a multinational organisation with operating divisions in a number of countries.
Multilanguage support, for example, may be essential to a company intending to use a common accounting system in all of its subsidiaries, even if like Intergraph (see panel on p 66) the subsidiaries are all expected to use the language of the parent company.
Systems such as Business 400 and Chameleon both enable users to configure the software so that different languages can be used on the same system.
Chameleon, for example, has been available in English, German, Danish, Portuguese and Spanish for some time, and has recently added Czech and Polish language versions.
‘A Hungarian version will soon be available also’, says Tetra's Klaas Bakker.
But not all packages claiming multilanguage facilities actually offer such user-configurable language options.
The variations in end-user requirements and the differences between the ‘multicurrency’ solutions on offer further complicate the selection process.
For example, although some companies will be happy to maintain foreign prices as a multiple of the UK price, this will not satisfy a company that needs to hold multi-currency price lists reflecting the different terms of payment from country to country.
And as it is quite feasible for a single transaction to have a different currency for each stage of the business cycle — order, invoice, payment, and bank transactions posted to a single account, whether a general ledger account, customer account, or supplier account, should ideally be possible in any currency.
This is possible with packages like JBA's Business 400, and to some extent with Omicron's Powersystems (see panel on p 68) but not with a ‘multicurrency’ system with a general ledger that operates only in sterling; Tetra 2000 for example.
Tate Bramald supplies its clients with a variety of the leading packages, but Mr Tate finds that the UK packages are all too often weak on the currency side.
‘This is where a package like Scala excels,’ he says.
Despite being popular in other parts of Europe, this Swedish product was relatively unknown in the UK until recently.
But users in the UK now include well known companies such as Castrol, Fiat and Giorgio Beverly Hills (see ACCOUNTANCY , May, pp 102–104).
Mark Newsome of software supplier JBA International concurs: ‘Many of today's consumables originate overseas, and as barriers to trade fall it follows that the sourcing of software will follow suit.’
Despite government ‘triumphs’ like the newly agreed EC-wide minimum rate for VAT, true VAT harmonisation remains a political pipe-dream.
Anyway, Europe boasts a variety of approaches to this tax even the number of VAT periods varies by country — all of which may potentially need accommodating by any accounting system claiming to be pan-European.
Such a system may need the facility to suspend VAT on posting, and automatically release it on payment (‘Cash basis’ VAT).
Likewise the extra rate VAT that is chargeable to certain customers in Spain, and the partially reclaimable VAT found in Italy and the Benelux countries — the sort of facilities currently being worked into many software releases scheduled for later this year.
‘PowerSystems doesn't currently handle differences like Spain's extra rate VAT’, but according to Omicron's Neville Merritt, ‘the company is currently in the process of adding in all of the regulations recommended by Customs and Excise for 1993.’
Not that VAT represents the only variation in methods of taxation, as Mr Newsome explains: ‘In addition to VAT, there is withholding tax for monies paid to professionals or agents, sales tax, investment tax, and, if looking beyond Europe, both sales tax and VAT in Canada.
‘The rules for calculating VAT, in relation to cash discount, also vary by country.
VAT can be calculated net of discount, as in the UK, or gross, but with a VAT adjustment if discount is taken.
The Dutch ignore discount in VAT calculations.’
Although there is a worldwide trend towards the electronic exchanging of business information — including the ordering, invoicing and payment cycle — variations in payment methods continue to proliferate.
But as the practice of actively collecting debts is becoming increasing common, so payment methods like direct debit, bill of exchange and the Italian Ricevuta Bancaria will need accommodating.
‘The northern Europeans, particularly in Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands, and Scandinavia, are more accustomed to Credit Transfers and Direct Debits,’ confirms Mr Newsome.
‘This enables the automation of cash allocation and bank reconciliation, and the communication with the bank often takes the form of tape or transmission.’
The payment detail includes the transaction references of the invoices being cleared.
‘The bill of exchange is a popular payment instrument in France and Spain,’ says Mr Newsome.
‘The French bills, known as traites , are normally accepted by the customer prior to maturity, and therefore have the status of an advance payment.’
But, as he explains: ‘In contrast, in Spain the dealing is mainly in unaccepted commercial paper (cartera ), so bills have the status of an invoice.’
In some countries promissory notes are also used, as is the practice of making several settlements for a single invoice.
The concept of date de valeur is used to predict cash flow, by anticipating when items will clear the bank account, according to whether cheques are for banks classified as ‘out of town’ or ‘in town’.
The myriad differences between accounting procedures, fiscal requirements and business practices within the Community have evolved over hundreds of years, and despite the promise of European harmonisation, are not about to disappear overnight.
In the short term, we might do worse than adopt some of the practices of our fellow-Europeans, as Mr Newsome observes: ‘All members of the European Community, with the exception of the UK and Ireland, charge interest on overdue debts.
This may explain why the French, on the same number of overdue days as the UK, make a profit, whereas the latter incurs a substantial loss.’
Terms like multicurrency, multilanguage and pan-European mean different things to different people especially software suppliers
AIR EXPRESS INTERNATIONAL
The US corporation Air Express International is one of the longest established and largest freight forwarders, with 27 subsidiary companies and a network of agents around the world and a turnover in excess of $600m a year.
At the heart of AEI's information systems strategy is a worldwide logistics information system.
‘It runs on two IBM mainframes located in the UK and the US,’ says Lester Tanner, ‘and is utilised by agents, customers and thousands of AEI employees to access accounting and all kinds of other management information.’
Until recently, AEI was handling its accounting using a combination of batch processing on the mainframes, mixing proprietary and third party software, plus locally sourced mini and PC-based packages.
But the company is in the process of introducing a standard accounting solution, based on JBA's Business 400 system.
Mr Tanner says: ‘This is run on 14 IBM AS400 systems, all of which link into the mainframes.
We are using the JBA general ledger, accounts receivable and the payables ledger (for non-air transport payables), handling operations like local accounting and warehousing.’
For management accounting functions AEI uses Lotus 1-2-3.
AEI wanted a product which functionally met its needs, and was available and portable throughout the world.
Mr Tanner adds: ‘It needed to include local language support, and recognise local accounting requirements.
‘In some locations AEI needs to operate a double chart of accounts.
We have our own chart of accounts, but in France, for example, we need a second one that complies with French fiscal law.
‘We had to have multicurrency for receivables.
We sometimes bill shipments in currencies other than the local currency — US$ would be an example.
And it is increasingly common for us to need to bank in a third currency.’
Electronic trading
The logistics network may eventually accommodate electronic data interchange (EDI).
Mr Tanner believes that AEI is probably at the forefront of its particular industry in trading electronically with both its customers and the airlines.
But as he says: ‘At the moment, the air freight business is new to electronic trading, and the emphasis is on the movement of goods.
Several major customers now send shipping instructions or commercial invoices electronically.’
AEI is being billed electronically by the airlines, and is similarly billing some of its customers; Intel, for example.
But at the moment, automating the payment cycle is seen very much as a second phase, so AEI isn't taking any electronic payments from customers.
‘We have plans to in the longer term,’ says Mr Tanner, ‘as and when we can persuade our customers that it's a good thing to do.’
Corporate reporting
Although AEI uses Business 400 in many countries, including Hong Kong, Canada, the Netherlands, Belgium and France, it has yet to install it in the UK.
‘The UK still relies on the mainframe batch system, with a Computer Associates general ledger, payables and receivables.’
But as Mr Tanner explains: ‘The strategy is to have a common interface from the logistics information system into the payables, receivables and general ledgers.
As we are installing standard accounting software, configured in the same way, this will eventually enable AEI to have local fiscal reporting, regional reporting — such as Europe, the Pacific or North America — and consolidation at corporate level.’
INTERGRAPH
Intergraph is one of the world's leading manufacturers of graphics workstations and computer aided design and manufacturing (CADCAM) systems, with offices across the globe and annual sales exceeding $1bn.
Effective information processing systems are vital to its operations.
The company has strict reporting procedures for all its subsidiaries, each providing regular detailed information to the US headquarters.
In 1992 European sales are expected to exceed $400m.
Conscious of this impending growth, in 1989 Intergraph set about standardising its European accounting procedures to facilitate the gathering and processing of the necessary information.
As none of the various systems in use at that time were suitable, Intergraph began evaluating appropriate accounting software.
Their requirements were simple; they wanted a packaged solution that could offer good multicurrency facilities, flexible reporting facilities and would run under Unix.
The company wanted to standardise on a system which it could operate throughout Europe and the Middle East, but which, in turn, could consolidate all the European information to provide reports to the US.
After initial evaluations with various software publishers, Intergraph finally selected Tetra's Chameleon package.
The package was flexible enough to meet all of Intergraph's requirements, and the company was also impressed by the size of the supplier.
As European financial controller Ton Canta says: ‘We felt confident that this was a company that would remain committed to its products well into the future’.
Intergraph felt it was important to be associated with one of the ‘major players’, not a company that was likely to disappear overnight.
All sites now run the Chameleon financial ledgers, report writer and system manager modules, while some also run sales and purchase order processing and consolidation.
By autumn 1990 Chameleon had been installed successfully at 12 sites throughout Europe, but Intergraph felt that a third party with a ‘wider skill set’ was needed to exploit the system's full potential.
And, as the company is in the business of manufacturing CAD-CAM workstations, not designing software, it turned to K2 Systems for help.
K2 had the necessary experience of working with Chameleon and could also boast skills in software design that have, according to Stan Taylor, senior manager of European information systems at Intergraph, ‘been of great benefit to the company.’
While K2 planned the integration of Chameleon with Intergraph's existing systems around Europe, Concordia, K2's software division, tailored the package to meet Intergraph's exacting corporate reporting procedures.
Intergraph uses English as its corporate language throughout the world.
K2 director Simon Andrews observes: ‘Anybody who is anybody in Intergraph has to be able to speak English.
But as and where appropriate, local companies tailor screens to suit their own requirements.’
For example, Intergraph has translated the supplier entry screens on the purchase ledger so that the contact names and addresses are shown in the local address order and language.
This has obvious advantages for local users.
It also allows information needed for automatic payment programs to be stored consistently, and reduces the potential for confusion and error with bank transfers.
Perhaps most significant from Intergraph's point of view has been the development of a tailored reporting routine for all of its European sites.
This has given Intergraph Europe-wide multicurrency consolidation, and at the push of a button.
‘This’ says Mr Canta, ‘will speed up the whole reporting process and give Intergraph more time for analysis’.
Intergraph has very complex logistics, manufacturing and field service management systems, running on a combination of Vax VMS and Intergraph hardware.
In the past these systems have generated invoices separately; this has led to customers receiving invoices from various parts of the company at different times.
But developments by K2 will also enable Intergraph to collect the information from both systems, allowing a single invoice to be sent to each customer, itemising all accounts and making the information easier to trace on the sales ledger.
So far, Intergraph is more than satisfied that it made the correct decision when it selected Chameleon.
With the help of K2 Systems, Intergraph now has dual currency systems installed in around 18 European countries including Italy, Portugal, Cyprus and a number of Scandinavian countries.
It has been installed in the Middle East and will soon be in use in what used to be the Eastern block.
The prestigious Whitefriars Development was designed by the YRM Partnership using Intergraph's CAD terminals
NABB SYSTEMS
Nabb Systems is a US company that manufactures and supplies printing plates to newspaper publishers around the world.
The plates are produced in California, and the UK office is responsible for handling plate distribution throughout most of Europe: Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Holland, Hungary, Italy, Portugal, Romania and Spain.
Nabb made its first move away from a manual system about eight years ago when the UK office installed a single-user version of Omicron PowerSystems.
‘Then when Omicron upgraded it to multiuser, so did Nabb,’ says the European financial director Barry Westbrook.
The PowerSystems modules in use include general ledger, sales order purchasing, sales ledger, purchase ledger, stock control, and payroll, with Power-Target used for sales analysis.
PowerSystem's multilanguage and multicurrency features are increasingly important to Nabb, as Mr Westbrook explains: ‘All of the invoices etc are issued from the UK, but all of the customers’ names and addresses are held in the language they would recognise.
And for German customers, for example, we would hold the titles etc to invoices in both German and English.
Nabb makes heavy use of the multilanguage facilities.’
Nabb also invoices in local currencies, so it runs a dual currency system, ie local currency and the base currency.
‘We have our bank accounts in sterling, Deutschmarks and guilders.’
But Mr Westbrook adds: ‘There are occasions when we might invoice a customer in Austrian schillings, bank it in a DM bank account and yet account for it in sterling.’
This was an important consideration when Nabb chose PowerSystems.
‘We needed a dual currency system.
We had to be able to invoice in a local currency and yet be able to account for it in sterling.’
For Mr Westbrook, the system has only one slight drawback: ‘For each of the currencies we use we need a separate sales ledger.
So, for example, we have a sales ledger for all of the Deutschmark transactions and another for Austrian schillings.
‘It's only a procedural complication.’
But it wouldn't even be that on a system with the facility for multicurrency sales ledgers.
WHAT'S NEW IN ACCOUNTING SYSTEMS
21st century software
Most of the financial systems now targeted at the Unix market have grown out of software that was originally designed for use on PCs, or ported across from older mainframe systems and out of date mid-range platforms.
The Dodge Group has been formed by ex-founder members of McCormack & Dodge and Miracle developer Omega Software.
It claims to be the first software supplier to design, develop and market accounting applications software specifically for the growing client-server marketplace.
Dodge aims to provide a set of financial systems, which will enable users of networked computers to run sophisticated accounting applications that would formerly have required the power of a mainframe.
All the software is written in C and intended for use with Unix based servers, MS-DOS, Windows 3.0 and Motif.
The first implementation uses the Ingres relational database, but versions supporting other relational databases will be available in 1993.
For further details telephone .
The Santa Cruz Operation , the world's leading supplier of Unix system software, is in the process of reaching various ‘cooperative’ agreements with leading suppliers of accounting software.
The end result will be a number of ‘one-stop’ solutions comprising the following:
hardware — from a variety of suppliers/manufacturers such as ACER;
the operating system SCO Unix;
various applications packages.
In the case of the first participant, Pegasus, this bundle will comprise Pegasus Unifacts, Word Perfect and Lotus 1-2-3.
But the mix of applications packages will vary from supplier to supplier.
If and when the agreement is finalised with Tetra, for example, it will probably include a database management system.
For further details telephone SCO on 0923 816344 or Mike Friday at Pegasus on 0536 410044.
Managing exports
Export Manager is a multicompany, multi-currency multi-user package for the processing of export consignments and the production of export and customs documentation with screens that can be ‘nationalised’ to meet local language requirements.
It can produce quality printed documents — to UN standards — and EDI messages to EDIFACT and UN/ GTDI formats.
For further details telephone Computer Traffic on .
Complying with the Companies Act
If you have ever undertaken company secretarial functions manually, you will probably appreciate CoAct.
The package has been designed by chartered accountants (the MacDonald Partnership) and written by the software house Software Solutions with the aim of meeting the needs of those responsible for company secretarial work.
CoAct features a quick and easy to use incorporation model, laser printing of approved Companies House forms, memorandum and articles of association, registers and minutes.
All the necessary statutory records are maintained, and the package even boasts a compliance diary.
An on-line tutorial, explaining all of the relevant legislation and procedures, is available.
The software comes in various modular sizes to suit the requirements and budgets of those with responsibility for both large or small company secretarial work.
The single user version retails from £129 plus VAT.
A network version is available, as is a ‘100 plus’ version for larger companies.
CoAct is compatible with Windows and will be compatible with Windows NT.
For further details telephone .
Mail order processing for PC users
The Pastel Accounting package has recently been released as a successor to the once popular (South African) TurboCASH.
The software offers many enhancements over its predecessor, plus a more user-friendly interface supported by context sensitive help and an on-line manual.
Any existing TurboCASH users are offered a special upgrade price; otherwise Pastel retails for £349 ex VAT single user, and will run multi-user on a network at no extra cost.
It is only available via mail order from Cordingley Barnes.
For further details telephone .
The TAS Books Account Processor is sold direct to the end user as well as through dealers.
Significantly, the package features a novel ‘tutorial’: when it is completed, the user should have computerised the financial side of the business, and hopefully, learned to deal with all ‘financial’ events that happen in business from opening balances, through stopped or bounced cheques to journals.
The package recently received the Institute's recommendation.
TAS retails at £99 a copy.
For further details telephone .
Institute
REPORT OF THE DISCIPLINARY COMMITTEE
Investigation committee consent orders — 1 June 1992
1.
John David Berman FCA of PO Box 1495, 141 High Street, Barnet, Herts who had been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that he at Barnet between 31 March 1990 and 1 May 1990 passed clients' monies through his firm's office account was reprimanded, fined £500 and ordered to pay £250 by way of costs.
2.
Robert Norman McNevin ACA and David Carty FCA both of 234 Manchester Road, Warrington having been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that they at Warrington between 10 June 1991 and 1 August 1991 passed clients' monies through their firm's office account were each reprimanded and jointly and severally ordered to pay a fine of £500 and £250 by way of costs.
3.
Charles Henry Lovell FCA and David Ian Whalley FCA both of Royal House, Market Place, Redditch, Worcs having been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that they at Redditch between 27 January 1991 and 19 July 1991 passed clients' monies through their firm's office account were each reprimanded and jointly and severally ordered to pay £250 by way of costs.
4.
John Leslie Bill FCA , Nigel John Collins ACA , David Scott Fisher FCA , Ralph Edgar Rowledge FCA , Michael Ross Hart FCA , Malcolm Philip Hemming FCA and Gerry Paul Harborne ACA all of Griffin House, 18–19 Ludgate Hill, Birmingham having been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that they at Birmingham between 31 January 1991 and 23 August 1991 passed clients' monies through their firm's office account were each reprimanded and jointly and severally ordered to pay a fine of £500 and £250 by way of costs.
FRES/recruitment
ALL QUIET ON THE COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY FRONT High fliers should still apply, but the profession's long-term unemployed are finding that the longer you're out, the harder it is to get back in
Peter Carty
No changes to report in the commerce and industry sector.
Since our last look at this area of the market six months ago there has been no significant shift in the level of starting salaries.
But in contrast to past surveys — where any momentary upturn, however slight, was seized upon as evidence of imminent recovery — optimists are now those who do not think that things will get any worse.
Polarisation of the market continues apace.
At the top end, very high-fliers are still in demand, to the extent that recruiters sometimes have difficulty pulling them down from the stratosphere to fill plum vacancies.
‘We have jobs that we can't fill because we can't find the right quality person for them,’ admits Charles Macleod of Robert Half.
He cites a very senior management accounting role in a large international bank, requiring exceptional management accounting experience.
The bank is looking for someone canny — not to say extremely gifted — who has developed the right skills in a reasonably sized corporate environment within a few years of qualifying.
The job carries a package of £35-£40k plus banking benefits.
Back on earth, how are the thousands of accountants who have been laid off faring?
The lucky ones have found jobs, of course, but many others have now been unemployed for over a year — or even two years in a significant number of cases.
Like their less skilled brethren back in the early 1980s, unemployed accountants are finding that lengthy unemployment becomes a barrier to re-employment.
After a period employers start to wonder why job searches have not been successful.
‘How long is that period?
That's the contentious point,’ says Mr Macleod.
‘I would say it's probably somewhere between six and 12 months.’
The reason for going over that threshold is often straightforward: candidates simply do not have the skills that are in demand.
This is particularly so for those from public practice who find that their skills are not easily transferable to industry.
The next grim prospect is carnage following the PE2 results.
Redundancies are expected in large numbers, particularly from medium-sized firms.
ACCOUNTANCY TV LISTINGS
The first programmes for the new Accountancy TV service (see ACCOUNTANCY , August, p 99) can be received by anyone with a TV set.
Their contents are listed below.
Subsequent programmes will be received only by subscribers, who will be supplied with a decoder.
An Introduction to Business Account (30 minutes)
2.15am Thursday 17 September, repeated 2.15am Thursday 24 September (see Radio Times 16 & 23 September for final details)
An introductory programme to show how the service works and how to get the most from the accompanying training materials.
Programme 1 (60 minutes)
Thursday 1 October, repeated Friday 2 October (see Radio Times 30 September & 1 October for final details)
This programme will include the following training features:
Cashflow statements.
Part one of a four part analysis of the introduction of the cashflow statement.
David Tweedie explains FRS 1.
Company cars.
The Inland Revenue has released a consultative document that proposes a heavier tax charge for certain cars.
Compulsory competitive tendering.
The Government is trying to extend CCT to the white-collar services.
Thursday 15 October (see Radio Times 7 & 14 October for final details)
Insolvency.
An investigation of the effectiveness of insolvency law in the recession, including: administration; administrative receivership; liquidation.
Activity-based costing.
Accountancy TV explains ABC.
Cashflow statements.
Further study of the implications of FRS I.
Implementing the new VAT rules for the single market
Total quality management
Introduction of local authorities' performance indicators under the Citizen's Charter
Attempts to improve auditing standards for the financial services sector
Property companies' accounting policies
Cashflow continued
ABC continued
Programme 2 (60 minutes)
Forthcoming programmes in November and December (available only to subscribers)
factoring
AIDS TO IMPROVING CASH FLOW Factoring companies all offer the same basic service, with distinguishing marks at the margins
One of the strongest selling points of factoring is its simplicity: it provides cash in advance against invoices.
But how can the competing factors in the industry then distinguish the service they provide from that of their competitors?
Inevitably, in such a well-established industry — modern-style factoring has been in existence in the UK since the 1960s product improvement has come at the margins.
The factors/invoice discounters who form the bulk of the industry have nevertheless been quick to exploit any competitive advantage for their products that they can discover.
The methods they have chosen have included the following:
Technology.
An important way to the heart of the client's business has been through technology: computers and data networks.
As the cost of technology has fallen so the factors have been able to offer clients links into their databases.
Griffin Factors' ‘Ledgerline’ is one such example.
Another is International Factor's ‘Factel’, which allows clients to interrogate a computer screen to establish what cheques have been paid in by customers, whether there are disputed invoices and whether clients are approaching their bad debt protection limits.
In the past factors have used a Viewdata system to keep in touch with clients, but Lombard NatWest Commercial Services introduced an electronic data interchange (EDI) system in early 1990.
EDI speeds the flow of information and reduces the cost of communications because data is stored on the client's own computer as well as by the factor.
Fears about the admissibility of electronic invoices as evidence in court proceedings have held back some factors.
How, for example, do you validate an electronic invoice that lacks an individual's signature?
But these doubts are being overcome.
Factors Chain International, a worldwide network of factoring companies, hopes to move to a system of paperless transactions, involving EDI, on all cross-border transactions between members by the end of 1994.
Opening new markets, including very small companies and management buyouts.
Several factors, including Century, International Factors and Lombard NatWest, have introduced special services for very small clients.
Lombard NatWest targets companies with sales of £75,000 to £300,000 while International has its sights on businesses forecasting sales growth to £250,000 within two years.
These services have brought in new customers — Lombard NatWest claims more than 300 — but some rivals say the marketing of these services has been less aggressive during the recession, given the higher risks often associated with new business.
Financing buyouts has, however, retained its popularity given the greater security involved in such a deal.
Factoring finance sometimes provides the top-up needed to make a buyout possible.
UCB Invoice Discounting cites the case of the buyout of a £4m turnover company that needed £310,000 to finalise funding.
A prepayment of 75% against receivables of £670,000 more than met this amount.
Extending regional coverage.
Despite the increased flow of electronic information, both factors and clients see an advantage in improved personal contacts.
Lombard NatWest recently opened a northern service centre in Leeds, while Venture Factors, a United Bank of Kuwait subsidiary, opened an office in Manchester in April.
Developing export services.
International factoring has grown at a faster rate than domestic factoring over the past five years but still remains only a small fraction of domestic business.
It was just 6% of total world factoring volumes in 1991, according to Factors Chain International.
But if international trade continues to grow and, in particular, if the creation of the single European market stimulates cross-border business in Europe, export factoring should increase in importance.
Export factoring has been held back by gaps in the companies' international networks.
They require links with partners in export destinations to guarantee local coverage.
Gradually, these gaps are being filled, with the aim of allowing clients to conduct ‘open account’ trading with export customers as easily as they now do with domestic ones.
Product labelling.
Perhaps the most significant barrier to the growth of the factoring industry has been the failure to ‘package’ the service effectively.
In the past the industry has frequently appeared bogged down by the use of a range of technical terms that mean little to potential customers.
Factoring itself is not a term that means much to many outsiders, although invoice discounting has the virtue of describing what it does.
A survey by one of the factors, Kellock, revealed a high degree of confusion and misunderstanding about factoring and its benefits.
Only 12% of accountants and 9% of managers appreciated that factoring could lead to an improvement in cash flow.
Kellock has since retitled its service Cashflow Finance in an attempt to overcome this barrier.
Other factoring companies now use terms such as Cash Flow Management (RoyScot Factors) and Business Finance (Alex Lawrie) in their promotional materials.
These additions to a basic service may persuade customers to sign up with a particular factor, but the reason why they stay comes back to the quality of the service provided.
Companies that change factors or move back to handling their own invoices frequently cite poor quality of service.
Since factors incur their major costs in the first year of dealing with a new client and make their best returns the longer the relationship lasts this is an area they must continue to address.
In the past the industry has frequently appeared bogged down by the use of a range of technical terms that mean little to potential customers
LENDERS OF LAST RESORT?
Factors are keen to shed the negative image they have had since the 1960s and to make more companies aware of the service they can provide
Charles Batchelor
The factoring industry, which speeds the flow of cash to business, should be well placed to benefit from the ending of the recession — when it comes.
If the banks continue to restrict the availability of finance to their smaller business customers there will be a greater role for the factors to play.
This at any rate is the theory.
Whether it translates into practice depends on a number of imponderables.
Has the industry finally shed its negative image for helping businesses only when they are in trouble?
Can it market itself more effectively to its potential customers, many of whom are unclear about what factoring is or what it can do for their company?
And how will the banks actually respond when economic conditions improve?
Will competitive pressures suck them into lending more generously to small businesses anyway?
Or will they attempt to funnel more business through their factoring subsidiaries on the grounds that they are better placed than the local branch managers to monitor the banks' exposure to risk?
The factoring companies have been heartened by signs of increased demand in the first half of this year after a difficult 1991.
The volume of factored turnover rose 10% to £7.52bn in the first six months after an increase of just 2.5% in the whole of 1991, according to the Association of British Factors and Discounters (ABFD), which represents 11 of the largest factoring companies.
It is not yet clear though whether this marks the beginning of a sustained upturn or an aberrant blip on the graph.
These rates of increase are in stark contrast to the boom years in the second half of the 1980s when annual increases of 20% to 25% were common.
Even if demand is increasing, it will take the industry some time to recover from 1991's downturn.
This was its worst year for a decade both in terms of the growth of business volumes and of the level of bad debts that had to be absorbed on behalf of clients.
Losses absorbed by ABFD members were a record £13m.
A breakdown of the 1991 numbers shows that even the meagre 2.5% rise in overall volumes was due solely to a 6.5% rise in invoice discounting, the cash-only part of the factoring service, while full service factoring fell 2.8%.
The UK was not alone in experiencing a sharp slowdown in its growth rate last year.
Worldwide, factoring volumes increased by just 9% to $260bn in 1991 according to Factors Chain International, a network of companies in 34 countries.
In 1990 worldwide factoring volumes rose by 29%.
Once the UK (and world) economy starts to pick up, company cash flows will come under strong pressure again.
If a business's balance sheet has been weakened by the recession and its bank is unwilling to lend, then, the factors hope, it will consider alternative forms of finance.
For smaller companies, where financial controls are not highly developed, factoring may prove the answer.
The factor can take over the handling of the client's sales ledger, including chasing up slow payers, providing cash against invoices and also, if need be, arranging credit insurance.
For large companies, with established financial control systems, invoice discounting, which simply provides cash against invoices, may be the most appropriate method.
The great advantage of factoring and invoice discounting is their flexibility.
Unlike a bank loan or an overdraft, which may need to be renegotiated if business volumes grow, a factoring facility grows in line with turnover.
A factor will also advance more funds against invoices than a bank manager.
In the current economic climate banks will not normally lend more than 50% of the value of invoices and may sometimes only be prepared to lend 20% to 30%.
A factor, by contrast, will usually be willing to advance up to 80% of the value of invoices immediately, with the remainder, minus its fee and interest, when the client's customer settles his bill.
There are, however, a number of possible drawbacks.
The bank manager may want to reduce the business's overdraft if it assigns security over its debtors to a factor; and the factor's fee may be too costly for businesses that work on very fine margins.
Some companies feel that involving a factor results in their losing contact with their customers while others fear that their customers will take the appointment of a factor as a sign that they are in difficulties.
The charge for the factor's services comes in two parts.
It will charge interest on the cash amounts it advances at a rate similar to that for an overdraft.
It will also charge a fee for its service.
For invoice discounting fees are typically between 0.2% and 0.5% of the value of invoices.
For factoring, which involves more work, the charge can be anything between 0.5% and 3% of invoice value.
Often, invoice discounting is more attractive to the larger companies that can manage their own sales ledgers, but it does expose the factor/invoice discounter to greater risks because it is not so closely involved in the client's affairs.
Clients have been known to send the factor invoices before the goods have been shipped, to create fictional ‘fresh air’ invoices, or to pocket payments that should have been passed on to the factor.
Fraud has been one of the problems that the factors/invoice discounters have had to tackle during the recession.
Clients under pressure have been tempted to take short cuts in the hope that, when demand picks up again, they will be able to cover up their tracks.
One factoring company, Union Discount Commercial Finance (UDCF), reorganised and relaunched its activities last year after running into problems with some of its clients.
‘We had companies we should have been factoring, not invoice discounting,’ says David Pretlove, managing director.
UDCF is not the only factor/invoice discounter to have reviewed its ‘book’ and shifted some clients to factoring, where they are subject to tighter controls.
One result of UDCF's restructuring was its decision to withdraw financing for GT Invoice Factors, a smaller company and a member of the Association of Invoice Factors.
The ending of this ‘back to back’ funding arrangement forced GT to close its doors.
The larger, bank-owned factors have all come through the recession, though many have seen profit levels reduced.
But some of the more recent entrants in the invoice discounting field have pulled out altogether in the face of the more hostile trading climate.
Schroders, the merchant banking group, shut down its Schroder Discount subsidiary last year after two years, while Westpac Banking Corp also closed its invoice discounting operation last year.
Despite the problems that have faced the invoice discounters, discounting has remained the most buoyant part of the factoring market.
It overtook full-service factoring as the most significant activity in 1989 and has remained in the lead ever since.
In 1991 invoice discounting accounted for 59% of the total UK factoring market.
This shift occurred for several reasons.
Because invoice discounting does not involve banks of computers and armies of clerks to handle clients' sales ledgers it has been a low-cost way of getting into this market.
The sums of money involved in invoice discounting are larger and the recipients of the funds are more well-established companies so the business is, in theory, more profitable.
Finally, the widespread use of personal computers has meant smaller businesses are now more able to manage their own ledgers cost effectively, so that fewer require a full factoring service.
The specialist invoice discounters have increasingly sought to distinguish their activities from those of the factors, despite the basic similarity of the service they provide.
They have been keen to put a distance between themselves and the negative image that still attaches to factors as ‘lenders of last resort’.
The increasing role of the invoice discounters was reflected in the decision by the Association of British Factors to add ‘Discounters’ to its title two years ago.
Some invoice discounters believe the two markets will become even more separate, though there are limits to this process because the larger bank-owned organisations combine factoring and invoice discounting under one roof.
As time passes, factoring's poor image, first acquired in the 1960s, is gradually being replaced with a more positive, or at least neutral, one.
Nevertheless, many companies remain reluctant to hand over such a crucial part of their business — involving cash flow and relations with customers — to an outside organisation.
A second important barrier is that factoring is widely perceived to be expensive.
The industry has done much to publicise its fees and the way it calculates charges but cost still remains a hurdle for many companies.
A third problem is how the factors slot into the broader range of financial services provided by the banks.
In theory, the bank networks should provide an important source of leads for their factoring subsidiaries.
In practice, many bank managers are reluctant to refer customers to their factoring arm because of residual suspicions about the respectability of factoring.
They also fear that they will lose business to the factor, who may reduce the customer's need for a bank loan.
Many of the bank-owned factors have attempted to overcome this problem by devising ways of ensuring that the bank does not lose a customer by calling in the factor.
Kellock, part of the Bank of Scotland group, will provide a guarantee to the bank to persuade it to keep open a loan facility while adding a layer of factoring finance on top.
The factors are keen to keep open their own channels to their clients and do not wish to become too dependent on their parent banks for referrals.
But some feel that more use could be made of their banking connections.
As the recession has deepened, so greater attention has focused on the issue of the late payment of debt.
There have been calls for legislation to give suppliers an automatic right to claim interest on overdue payments and for debt collecting procedures in the courts to be simplified.
The Government has taken steps to improve court procedures but it has steadfastly refused to introduce a legal right to interest.
Some factors are sceptical that legislation would achieve much.
But even if it were to be brought in, there would still be a need for the factor's services, says Alan Hughes, chairman of the ABFD and managing director of Griffin Factors, part of Midland Bank.
‘In some industries there will always be a delay between a company paying its suppliers and getting paid itself,’ he says.
‘If legislation reduces the vulnerability of companies to late payments then we are in favour.’
But with or without legislation there is plenty of scope for the factors/invoice discounters to increase their market share.
A survey by the Confederation of British Industry showed that only 2% of companies had used a factor.
The factoring industry currently serves 12,000 customers.
According to industry estimates this is between 5% and 10% of the potential market.
Has the industry finally shed its negative image for helping businesses only when they are in trouble?
The increasing role of the invoice discounters was reflected in the decision by the Association of British Factors to add ‘Discounters’ to its title two years ago
finance & investment
NATIONAL SAVINGS
Bond under pressure from lenders
FIRST/Fixed Interest Rate Savings Tax-paid Option Bond, launched by National Savings on 7 July 1992, proved so successful in attracting savers' funds that the Government cut the rate of interest in the face of a threat by the building societies to raise mortgage rates.
FIRST Option Bonds are designed to appeal to basic rate taxpayers, and the minimum investment is a lump sum of £1,000.
The original rate of interest 10.34% gross (7.75% net) was reduced to 9.67% gross (7.25% net) for purchases from noon on 21 July 1992.
The basic rate tax is deducted from the interest at source.
For bonds which do not fall in value below £20,000 on the first anniversary there is a bonus of 0.4% gross (0.3% net).
The rate of interest is guaranteed for the first 12 months of the life of the bond.
At each anniversary National Savings will write and say what the guaranteed rate is for the next 12 months.
Repayment can be made without penalty on any anniversary date.
No interest is paid on repayments before the first anniversary.
If you cash in between anniversary dates, the full value at the latest anniversary plus net interest at half the fixed rate for the period since will be received.
The bonds are available to personal savers aged 16 or over and trustees for personal beneficiaries.
Full details of FIRST Option Bonds are available, as are application forms, at post offices; otherwise write to FIRST Option Bonds, National Savings, Glasgow G58 1SB.
National Savings announced lower rates on many other products on 5 August; again, this is believed to be a move to prevent a rise in mortgage rates.
BUILDING SOCIETIES
Less pain from inflation
For investors still concerned about the possibility of inflation's remaining a problem, Britannia Building Society's Index Linked Account is well worth considering.
The account pays interest at 4.5% gross over the headline retail price index.
The interest rate is adjusted on the 23rd of each month after publication of the RPI.
Minimum investment is £1,000 and the maximum £500,000.
Interest is paid quarterly in January, April, July and October; basic rate tax is deducted.
Withdrawals can be made penalty free if 90 days' notice is given; instant access means 90 days' loss of interest.
Normally you can withdraw up to £500 in cash at any branch, or larger amounts by cheque.
More information is available from any Britannia Building Society branch; or ring .
BUSINESS EXPANSION SCHEME
HIV test lab attracts funds
HarleyScreen, a private pathology laboratory and clinic based in Wimpole Street, London, is seeking to raise £750,000 under the Business Expansion Scheme (BES).
It has already raised over £360,000 under the BES and a further £350,000 from non-BES investors.
The BES offer has now been extended until 5 October.
HarleyScreen has traded since September 1989 and recorded losses in its first two financial periods because of high start-up costs.
However, in the first five months of the current financial year to 30 September 1992, it showed considerable improvement.
The company provides a range of health screening services to an established customer base of GPs, private clinics, and public companies.
It offers a guaranteed three-hour walk-in HIV testing and counselling service.
HarleyScreen intends to use the new funds to acquire small and medium-sized laboratory businesses.
It is also planning to expand services at the Wimpole Street medical centre to include allergy and sexually-transmitted disease clinics.
The offer is sponsored by Matrix Securities (071–734 8334) and the minimum subscription is £1,000, thereafter in multiples of £500.
NATIONAL INSURANCE
Voucher scheme gains ground
Employers can now pay bonuses, overtime or incentives and save on National Insurance contributions, using the Nightingale Voucher Scheme from the Motivation Marketing Board.
Since the use of unit trusts as a way of paying bonuses to employees came to an end, vouchers have been attracting attention.
By using them, employers can save their 10.4% NIC liability and the employee 9%.
For details of the Nightingale Scheme, and of how to become an authorised intermediary, call the Motivation Marketing Board on  
BONDS
Fidelity cuts fund charges
Fidelity Investments has cut its initial charges on five bond funds from 5.25% to 3.5%.
The annual management fee is still 1%.
The Fidelity bond funds consist of sterling bond (gross yield 8.73%), European bond (8.02%), US dollar bond (6.01%), international bond (US $)(6.68%) and yen bond (2.62%).
The funds were launched internationally in October 1990 as part of the Luxembourg-based umbrella fund, Fidelity Funds.
The aim is to achieve a high level of income with the prospect of long-term capital growth.
Minimum investment in any fund is £1,000 (or the equivalent in any major currency).
In Fidelity's view, the time is right for investment in bonds, as interest rates should start falling across Europe by the end of the year and inflation is low.
Call  for more information.
INVESTOR RELATIONS
Improving corporate communications
The 1992 Investor Relations Conference is to be held at The Brewery, Chiswell Street, London EC1 on Tuesday, 20 October 1992.
Joint sponsors are Investor Relations magazine, the Financial Times and The Investor Relations Society.
The morning session will discuss fund managers' and analysts' attitudes to corporate ownership and information flows, the changing regulatory environment, and corporate reporting and governance.
In the afternoon a series of workshops will examine the production of annual reports, the management of analysts' and fund managers' visits and briefings, and measuring the effectiveness of investor relations activity.
At the dinner in the evening, awards will be presented to companies for the quality of their investor relations.
Speakers include Treasury Economic Secretary Anthony Nelson, Richard Lambert of the Financial Times , and Philip Augar, managing director of County NatWest Securities.
For further information contact Petra Davies on   
PENSIONS
One more SSAS
National Provident Institution's Directors' Select Portfolio is designed to offer a wide choice of investments with low charges in the small self-administered scheme (SSAS) market.
Minimum premium is £5,000 a year and minimum term five years.
90% of the investment is put into NPI funds and 10% into a unit trust (choice from panel if monthly premium, choice by adviser if annual premium).
For fee-based advisers the allocation is 100.5% for the first £2,500 of premium and 105.5% of balance.
There are no initial units, no discontinuance charges and no surrender penalties.
NPI has reduced its pensioner trustee fees for hybrid SSASs so that in the case of premiums over £10,000 there is no annual fee and no setting up fee.
Where the annual premium is £5,000 to £9,999 the annual fee is £250 + VAT (v £300 + VAT) and setting-up fee nil.
For further details phone NPI on .
WHAT'S AROUND
For first-time buyers.
Citibank Mortgage will pay stamp duty up to a maximum of £400 and provide two years' free unemployment cover.
The mortgage interest charged is currently 10.73% (APR 11.7%).
Phone  for more information.
Indemnity insurance.
Endeavour offers protection of up to £50m to the estate of a solicitor, accountant, architect or surveyor who dies while in practice in the UK.
It works in conjunction with existing professional indemnity insurance and enables estates to be wound up without delay.
The insurance is underwritten by R E Brown & Others Syndicate 702 and a group of syndicates at Lloyd's.
For full details call .
Guide to commercial loans.
Commercial Initiative () issues a monthly Search & Report database enabling accountants and other businesses to make direct contact with a wide range of commercial mortgage lenders.
The cost is £31 plus VAT for each report.
Full details of the lenders' criteria for making advances, and of the information they need, are supplied.
Critical illness.
Scottish Amicable's Critical Protection, now available as an option under its low-cost endowment plan, Home Purchaser, has a minimum premium of £20 a month (£200 a year).
Investment is linked to 11 funds and benefit can be level or increasing.
It provides HIV cover for medical and hospital staff.
Also available is an Income Protection Plan with a maximum benefit of £6,000 a month.
Ring  for further details.
Health insurance.
From General Portfolio comes the Financial Health Scheme, which provides cash for surgical operations carried out under general anaesthetic in a UK hospital.
The cost for a male non-smoker aged 30 is £17.95 a month.
The sum depends on the type of operation and whether it is done privately or on the NHS.
Ring  for details.
Share farming.
The Country Landowners Association has published a new edition of Share Farming: The Practice With Model Form of Agreement , which includes substantially revised tax and legal sections.
By sticking to the model agreement the landowner can keep CGT and IT reliefs.
Copies, price £45 to CLA members and £60 to non-members, are available from Publications Department, CLA,().
economic trends
Anatomy of a recession Businesses responded to a ‘mild downturn’ with sharp cutbacks in output and investment.
They fell into the trap of relying too little on equity finance and too much on credit
Economists have been widely criticised, with some justification, for their inability to forecast the depth of the current recession.
The table below shows HM Treasury forecasts for growth in components of aggregate demand, as well as total gross domestic product and manufacturing output, made at the time of the 1990 budget.
The forecasts are for the year to the first half of 1991, during which the bulk of the gdp fall took place.
They are compared with figures for actual growth over that period, with the forecast error in the third column.
The errors are all very large, but they are largest for investment, exports and imports, and manufacturing output.
The biggest error of all was for investment; the Treasury expected a fall in volume terms of under 1%, but in the event it fell by 12%.
The fall in investment was so large that it was, by a considerable margin, the most important cause of the decline in aggregate demand, even though it accounts for a much smaller fraction of demand than consumer spending.
The investment slump gives some clues to the real cause of the recession: a decision by businesses to react to growing uncertainty by sharp cuts in investment, stocks, output and employment, even though demand growth was slowing only gradually.
At the time, the Treasury forecasts were not out of line with the consensus, so most businesses were making production and investment plans based on projections of slow but positive growth in the economy.
Yet, despite that reasonable outlook, real investment fell by 12%, and manufacturing output by 6%, in the following year.
Furthermore, as a result of the fall in output, businesses were able to reduce stocks substantially even though the eventual fall in demand was much larger than expected.
If the recession had been caused solely by unexpectedly weak domestic demand, we would have seen stocks rising initially, before falling as businesses reacted.
Instead, there was no rise in stocks, which fell sharply from late 1989.
We argue that it was a marked drop in aggregate supply, larger than the initial fall in demand and magnifying it through its knock-on effects, which caused the recession to be much deeper than expected.
Why did this happen?
Business cycle theory
If capital markets are imperfect, they can cause shifts in supply, of exactly the sort described above, which magnify what may initially be relatively small shocks to economies.
The most important capital market imperfections occur in equity markets, making them a relatively minor source of new capital for companies, and in credit markets, which in some circumstances can cause credit rationing.
Equity market imperfections make companies risk-averse, since they are unable to use equity markets to fully share risk.
Business decisions on output, investment and employment will be more sensitive to the risk of bankruptcy than if capital markets functioned better.
The risk of bankruptcy for an individual company is related to its net worth and to the riskiness of the external economic environment.
When that risk is perceived to be rising, companies will cut output and investment, the more so the more highly leveraged they are.
A company's net worth depends on profits.
Trading profits, of course, are a residual, and will swing sharply for relatively minor shifts in sales volume or prices.
Interest rates will also affect net worth through influencing the cost of servicing existing debts.
Furthermore, relatively small changes in a company's net worth can cause relatively large changes in optimum production and investment levels, if that company is highly leveraged.
As a result, there is a form of multiplier effect translating initially what are small shifts in demand, or anticipated demand, into large changes in output and investment.
When all companies make such decisions, there is a feedback through economy-wide demand, causing a second round of production cuts, and so on.
What starts as a mild downturn becomes a severe recession through the reaction of risk-averse, highly leveraged businesses.
The knock-on effect
Banks are companies like any others, and they will be reacting in a similar way: an economic downturn will raise lending risk and at the same time reduce banks' net worth, and bad debts rise.
The banks' reaction is to cut back their own ‘output’, which takes the form of loans and other banking services.
The reduced availability of credit has knock-on effects.
Companies themselves are suppliers of credit to their customers with their own credit being limited, and, reacting in the same way as banks, they will also attempt to limit the credit they make available.
At the same time, larger companies may take advantage of smaller suppliers by delaying payment.
Hence the downturn in bank credit is accompanied by, and helps to cause, a downturn in other forms of credit, which places particular pressure on the smaller business sector.
Furthermore, as in the case of decisions on output, a small initial deterioration in the business environment may cause what appears to be a disproportionately large reduction in bank and trade credit.
It is difficult to assess exactly how important such credit effects have been in this recession.
If companies reacted to early signs of slowdown with large cuts in production and investment, their demand for credit will have fallen sharply, perhaps faster than the supply of credit.
The future
The reduction in base rates from 15% to 10% appears to have done relatively little for supply growth, since it has coincided with a gradual downgrading of recovery prospects by most analysts.
It is possible that only a very marked and rapid reduction in interest rates, which might cause a substantial shift in confidence, would be effective.
Such a move would probably be ruled out even if we were not members of the exchange rate mechanism.
The net worth of companies, damaged by recession, will take some time to recover.
As we have shown, this is one of the main factors determining company decisions on output, employment and investment.
Nevertheless, though industrial and commercial companies remain in financial deficit, it has shrunk greatly since 1990 and bank borrowing has been reduced substantially as a result; in 1991 companies were net repayers to banks.
Companies thus appear to have made some strides towards repairing net worth, partly as a result of responding early to signs of recession.
But the evidence suggests that they have some way to go still.
The other main factor — bankruptcy risk, will also remain a depressing influence on output and investment.
It is a phenomenon of recoveries that increasing demand for working capital can cause bankruptcies among businesses which have successfully managed to weather the worst of the recession.
This will cause businesses to remain cautious borrowers, and banks cautious lenders.
However, allied to the improvement in companies' financial position has been an increase in large companies' liquidity ratios, to their highest level since the end of 1987 (though this may have been partly at the cost of the liquidity of smaller companies, because of trade credit effect).
Higher liquidity should help to reduce the risk of bankruptcy.
We can conclude that, while it was a supply shock which caused the depth of the recession, it will require a recovery in demand to pull the economy out of recession.
The risk-averse businesses we have described above will be reluctant to increase investment, stockbuilding, output and employment until evidence of a recovery in demand is strong enough to make them much more optimistic about the future.
That could be some time coming.
commentary
Can auditing work without a break with tradition?
Is it time to abandon the traditional notion of corporate ownership by, and accountability to, shareholders alone?
Professor David Hatherley University of Edinburgh
The Cadbury Report has placed corporate governance firmly on the profession's agenda, but it scarcely provides any answers.
Its view of corporate governance is rather limited and it does not properly address corporate governance as the network of accountability relationships that exists between stakeholders in a company.
We need to reassess these relationships in the context of the non-committed ownership phenomenon which has often caused company auditors in the UK to work in a vacuum.
According to statute, the auditors are appointed by and report to the shareholder owners.
However, it is often the case that shareholders do not participate actively in this process.
This appears to be because institutional shareholders who account for the great majority of shareholdings on The Stock Exchange see themselves as managing a portfolio for which they buy and sell.
This portfolio management activity does not admit the need for a long-term commitment to any given company, its management, strategy or operations, even though these factors may be considered in assessing the future of the stock.
Auditors are often criticised for being too close to management, and many of the proposed remedies for the current crisis of confidence in the auditing profession are measures to inhibit this closeness.
They include a prohibition on management advisory services, and rotation of auditors.
And yet the effective auditor needs to understand management and to have a close working relationship with the managers.
However, the auditor also needs to be close to shareholders in order to have their requirements in mind when assessing the financial statements and fulfilling the other statutory duties.
Possible remedies for the lack of closeness to shareholders include the appointment of an intermediary group such as a supervisory board, more flexible audit reporting and the opportunity for a two-way dialogue between auditors and shareholders at the agm or in private.
It can be argued that audit committees are unlikely to be a remedy for the particular problem of auditor/shareholders relationships since, as members of the board, the audit committee members logically form a channel of communication with the board rather than with shareholders.
While measures for closer relations between auditors and shareholders are welcome, they may not provide the complete answer.
It is arguable that the performance measures based on portfolio performance, to which fund managers are currently held, do not provide an environment in which there would be any significant advantage for fund managers who had closer relations with auditors.
If this is so, then the directors of a company would continue to be accountable to a share price rather than to a body of committed stakeholders.
However, this is not how the law sees accountability.
Companies are ‘socially’ constructed under company law with a concept of ‘ownership’which anticipates the owner shareholders as active participants in an accountability relationship with directors.
The recent Caparo judgment reasserted this definition, when the House of Lords decided that the purpose of the financial statements was to allow shareholders to hold directors to account.
It was assumed that shareholders would have a long-term commitment to their company and that if there was a problem, it would be the directors rather than the shareholders who would change.
Commentators have criticised the Caparo judgment for lacking relevance in the days of sophisticated capital markets.
However, both the statutory construction of the company and the Caparo judgment embody a principle which should endure.
It is that the directors' accountability should be to those who do not direct but who are nevertheless committed to the company.
Stock exchanges and complex financial instruments may have decoupled the legal notion of ownership from this commitment, but the underlying principle endures.
Is it time, therefore, to abandon the traditional notion of ownership by, and accountability to, shareholders alone?
It could be replaced with a principle of accountability to ‘committed’ stakeholders.
These might continue to include long-term shareholders, particularly if they do not have the opportunity to sell, but should also include long-term bankers and possibly suppliers, employees and customers who are committed to the company.
It can be argued, for example, that a supplier that commits its productive facilities for the supply of one customer is more committed to that customer and carries more risks than the customer's shareholders, who can quickly dispose of shares in the market.
Similarly, bankers become committed to a customer if they cannot withdraw facilities without causing that customer financial distress.
These committed groups, or a committee to represent them, could appoint the auditors and receive their report.
If these groups also appoint the directors, then the committed stakeholders have effectively assumed the rights and responsibilities of ownership.
Share capital could continue in being as a financial instrument tradeable in an exchange and offering a return which could be tied by an agreed formula with profitability or other measures of performance.
Share capital, however, would not automatically confer the privileges of ownership.
A company constructed in this way is an ‘inversion’ of the traditional company.
Shareholders who do not have a long term commitment are replaced by stakeholders who do, as the ‘owners’ of the company.
Such ideas are no doubt fanciful and need a lot of thought.
In particular, the terms of contracts and relationships deemed to exhibit the necessary commitment would need careful consideration and definition.
However, reporting to a body of committed stakeholders, the auditor would no longer be working in a vacuum.
Moreover, rethinking our conception of the company may be the key element in moving away from short termism and toward the regeneration of British business.
The importance of accountability relationships to economic success has been recognised by those writers who point to the rise of the Japanese version of ‘collective’ capitalism.
Is it time to rethink our conception of the company?
Investment business — grasping the nettle Investment business holds pitfalls for the unwary but it also offers a significant business opportunity
Roy Kemp Accountants Consultancy & Training Co
Over the past year so much time and energy has been devoted to considering the implications of the new audit regulatory regime that investment business has been given scant attention by commentators and the profession alike.
Yet it is an area which practitioners can ill afford to ignore.
For many, investment business activity carries with it the very real threat of punitive action, whether arising from failure to comply properly with the regulations or, worse still, from committing the criminal offence of conducting investment business without being authorised at all.
For a large number of firms it also represents a substantial lost business opportunity.
Because investment business is peripheral to their main activity (and it is a condition of authorisation that it should not normally exceed 20% of total fee income), many firms allow themselves to remain woefully ignorant of the regulations and of how to apply them within their own practice.
The fact that a practitioner has a copy of the Blue Book (which contains the Institute's regulations and guidance notes on investment business) on his shelf does not necessarily mean that he has read and understood it, and in some firms the Institute's Investment Business Gazettes (which announce changes to regulations and other requirements, and provide a general round-up of developments likely to affect authorised firms) are filed away unread if they are kept at all.
While it is fair to say that the regulations in the Blue Book are complex to read and interpret, the guidance notes are eminently readable and practical.
Similarly, the Investment Business Gazettes offer concise and very useful supplementary information.
Ignorance is not a credible excuse and any practitioner found in serious breach of regulations — which have been with us now for more than four years — can expect the Joint Monitoring Unit to be less than sympathetic.
It should also be noted that breaches tend to have a ‘ripple effect’ and that a practitioner who does not fully understand his obligations has only to proffer one piece of investment advice (which may in itself be perfectly sound) and he will almost certainly have breached several regulations in the process.
Unwitting breaches
Unfortunately it is all too easy for firms which are not authorised and do not understand what constitutes investment business to dabble unwittingly in this activity.
Typically, discussion of a client's tax affairs will lead naturally into consideration of investment options, such as pensions, which might be used to offset part of the tax liability.
Should the discussion stray just once from generic to specific advice, however casually (‘the Borsetshire Union has quite a good deal on offer at the moment’), investment business has been carried out.
Similarly, corporate finance activity, for example advising on a proposed management buy-out, can easily fall within the scope of the investment business regulations.
In either case, an unauthorised practitioner will have committed a criminal offence under the Financial Services Act, and pleading that he did it only once or that it happened by accident is not going to impress anyone.
It is therefore hardly surprising that there are firms which have chosen to take out what is effectively ‘protective authorisation’; in other words, while they have no intention of conducting any investment business, they regard authorisation as a sensible precaution in case they inadvertently slip into it.
Attractive as this option may seem, protective authorisation does not provide firms with exemption from the regulations.
Investment Business Gazette Number 10 (October 1990) sets out the minimum compliance requirements for such firms, included in which is the obligation to conduct a properly documented annual review of compliance procedures.
Firms are authorised for investment business within one of four categories which permit varying degrees of responsibility for client transactions and assets.
Here again it is easy for the unaware to extend their activities beyond the scope of their authorisation, a breach which, understandably, is treated particularly seriously.
The JMU aims to visit firms in categories 2, 3 and 4 every two years and those in category 1 at least every five years.
After four and a quarter years, some firms will already have had at least two visits and many in category 1 will be facing a second visit in the near future.
The JMU will take a dim view of any practice in which it discovers repeat breaches or a failure to meet undertakings given at an earlier inspection, regardless of whether or not these were the subject of subsequent correspondence with the Institute (the fact that they were raised and documented at the closing meeting with the Inspector is a sufficient record).
So, if it is easy to transgress, how likely are any infringements to be discovered?
Increasingly the answer is ‘very likely’.
In the past, firms not authorised for investment business could feel fairly secure in the knowledge that if they did stray into it they would only be investigated in the event of a complaint.
However, now that the JMU is also monitoring compliance with the audit regulations, there exists another significant route whereby unauthorised (and poorly handled) investment business activity may be identified.
Indeed, the JMU will automatically consider adding an investment business inspection on to an audit monitoring visit to an authorised firm.
A logical extension
Although it is true that investment business can hold many pitfalls for the unwary, I find it surprising that so many firms fail to grasp it as a significant business opportunity.
Offering a financial advisory service is so often a logical extension of tax advice and other staple accountancy functions that it seems almost perverse not to realise its potential and reap the rewards (and this will be even more the case once we start to move out of the recession).
Clients will often look to their accountants for impartial guidance on a wide range of investment issues, yet too few practitioners meet this need with a pro-active approach to enhancing their clients' overall financial wellbeing, whether directly or via an associate.
Of course, some or all investment business can be referred to a suitably qualified independent third party (from whom the practitioner may still receive an introductory commission) but, while this undoubtedly has merit in certain circumstances, it is often used as a convenient way of avoiding involvement in an area of activity that is regarded as intrusive rather than welcome.
What is required to develop investment business successfully and profitably is a practical commitment to understanding and observing the regulations and to keeping thoroughly abreast of the products and services on offer.
While this is obviously demanding of professional time and effort, it need not be particularly difficult to achieve, and the investment should repay itself with dividends.
Alternatively, any firm which has made a definite decision not to seek authorisation must ensure that it understands what constitutes investment business and, having established that it can refer clients to suitable authorised independent advisers, avoid further involvement like the plague.
Incorporation and the damages ceiling All firms with more than 20 partners should be required to incorporate
Hugh Markus Wirtschaftsprufer and chartered accountant
Until the Partnership Act was amended some 25years ago, the maximum number in a partnership was limited to 20.
This was a good rule, and its return — to include the requirement for all firms with more than 20 partners to convert to limited company status — would go some way towards solving the problem of astronomical negligence claims and the consequently soaring costs of professional indemnity insurance.
Claims for damages against British accountancy firms have proliferated since the 1970s, when the aggressively litigious environment that US accountants had operated in for many years spread to the UK.
The March issue of ACCOUNTANCY (see p 16) reported a $200m court ruling against a US Big Six firm, while another settled out of court for an undisclosed sum.
A third is reportedly facing around $1bn in outstanding claims, and nearly all the top 20 firms are facing claims of some sort.
For accountants the position is aggravated in as much as, because of these enormous claims, adequate insurance cover is difficult to obtain and, if available, extremely expensive.
It cannot have come as a surprise when, in November 1990, the ninth biggest US accounting firm, Laventhol & Howarth, had to seek Chapter 11 protection from its creditors, with the ensuing risk of personal bankruptcy for its partners.
The same issue of ACCOUNTANCY (also p 16) reported that the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) had agreed to a change in its code of professional conduct to allow firms to incorporate.
For the time being, the practical effect of the change will be limited to accountants lobbying for a change in the law in the vast majority of states that do not permit accountants to incorporate — only Colorado, Hawaii, Kansas and Wyoming allow it at present .
In considering the claims filed against accountants, it must be emphasised that in many cases the underlying reasons for such suits are not negligence or incompetence on the part of auditors, but the consequence of faulty business policies and management decisions, or even carefully planned and executed frauds.
With the benefit of hindsight, cases are brought against others, including auditors who had connections with the companies, in an attempt to recover maximum damages.
To the extent that professional indemnity insurance is known to be available there is, in fact, an encouragement to litigate.
This propensity to seek damages out of all proportion to the alleged negligence must be stopped; otherwise the time will inevitably come, and soon, when promising young accountants will not be attracted by partnership in accounting firms, as they will not wish to put their personal wealth at risk.
Partners are jointly and severally liable for a partnership's debts, and their dealings with each other require the utmost good faith; implicit in this is that they all know each other, including their strengths and weaknesses.
In a partnership consisting of several hundred partners — sometimes over a thousand in the US — the partners cannot know each other.
In fact, such partnerships are run as if they were limited companies, managed by executive committees with functions equivalent to those of a board of directors.
The prerogatives of individual partners, who continue to have unlimited liability for the partnership's debts, are generally restricted to electing their executive committees.
Their status resembles more that of senior executive with shareholding.
So the limitation on the number of partners should revert to 20, and all firms with more than 20 partners should incorporate.
To prevent such conversion of status from generating substantial tax liabilities, some specific tax legislation may be required to facilitate the changeover.
In a number of continental countries, Germany included, the limited company is a common form of organisation for an accounting firm.
Although, legally, partner status is no longer possible, the status of a ‘partner equivalent’ is used in practice.
If such changes were made, the board of directors would not consist of all previous partners, but only of those who have been elected to the executive committee or their current equivalents.
Eliminating anonymity
However, in contrast to the present position where audit reports are signed only with the name of the firm, in the case of a limited company acting as auditor the report could also include, as is currently the case in Sweden and Germany, the name or names of one or more individuals responsible for conducting the examination.
The signatures of these ‘partner equivalents’ would serve to document the individuals' responsibility for the examination; to that extent it eliminates for the outside world the element of anonymity currently inherent in the practice of signing audit opinions only in the names of the firms.
This documentation of personal responsibility could, in my opinion, be an important factor in coming to grips with the current system of punitive damages sought from auditors for alleged negligence.
Some upward limit will have to be set.
It could be a fixed amount (it would obviously have to be something substantially higher than the DM500,000 limit per examination currently applicable to statutory examinations in Germany) or based on a multiple of fees.
In return for setting such a ceiling on damages, individuals who have signed accounts which subsequently generate court actions would automatically have to justify themselves before a disciplinary committee of their institute.
This could, depending on the gravity of the matter, suspend the individual from practice for a period of time or even permanently.
A side effect of such a procedure would be to strengthen the position of the individual auditor both in relation to his clients and to his ‘partner equivalents’; in today's highly competitive audit market, the auditor does encounter clients who exert considerable pressure to accept controversial accounting practices.
The foregoing, while not entirely eliminating such cases, would probably reduce them.
books LAW AND ACCOUNTANCY Law and Accountancy: Conflict and Cooperation in the 1990s Edited by Judith Freedman and Michael Power Paul Chapman Publishing Ltd, 196pp £29.95 h/b This welcome and stimulating book reproduces the papers first published in a special issue of The Modern Law Review in November 1991.
Their purpose is to examine different aspects of the relationship between law and accountancy.
Perhaps it is inevitable that the relationship should be difficult.
Both professions are concerned with the application to commercial life of rules that often embody generalised concepts.
They are therefore both concerned to establish on a number of different fronts how the precepts of law can be related to reality.
However, the backgrounds and training of the members of the two professions do not naturally encourage mutual understanding; and their commercial interests often lead them to compete with each other.
Against this background it is not surprising that from time to time the relationship is productive of misunderstandings, mistrust and conflict.
Indeed, in his forewood to the book, Mr Justice Hoffman tells how ‘Like many rival tribes, accountants and lawyers have opinions of each other which are largely based on ignorance’ thinking of each other as ‘…pedants who try to confine the realities of commerce within an artificial construction of arbitrary rules’.
A new alliance
In the 1980s this traditional misunderstanding found new expression.
The implementation of new legislation on financial reporting, inspired by the European Community, changed the relationship between the law and financial statements.
The frenzied Stock Exchange activity of the 1980s, followed by recession, then exposed the weaknesses in the system of regulating financial reporting.
At the heart of the Dearing Report's proposals for a new system for setting accounting standards is an attempt to create a new alliance between accountancy and the law to improve the quality of financial reporting.
Three of the papers in this collection examine the relationship between these two professions from a historical perspective.
Christopher Napier and Christopher Noke take arguments over share premiums, share premium accounts, merger accounting and pre-acquisition profits as an example of the issues which have given rise to controversy.
They show in particular how accountants came to feel frustrated by their attempts to set standards within what they saw as an unhelpful legal environment.
Graeme Macdonald compares experience of arguments between substance and form in the financial reporting and taxation contexts.
He suggests that there are similarities between the experiences in these contexts and indeed that arguments of this type are potentially applicable wherever there is a rule-governed activity.
In this light, there is no logical reason for lawyers and accountants to believe that they are pitted against each other.
The third historical paper, Yves Dezalay's Territorial Battles and Tribal Disputes , treats disputed areas of competence as episodes in battles for commercial success.
The limits of formalism
Three further papers consider the implications for future developments.
Doreen McBarnet and Christopher Whelan in a paper entitled The Elusive Spirit of the Law consider the limits of formalism in attempts to control market activity and the possible effectiveness of anti-formalist strategies such as that claimed by the ASB.
They suggest that anti-formalism is unlikely to survive.
Andrew McGee reviews the debate over the meaning of the true and fair view, arguing that the development of a better understanding of its significance and content will be crucial to the survival of the current scheme of financial reporting.
Finally, Peter Pope and Anthony Puxty examine the definition of equity and the accounting treatment that is appropriate for new financial instruments in the interstices between the law, accounting and economics.
They argue that the current distinction between debt and equity made by company law is unjustified, but will restrict attempts to develop sensible accounting practice in this area.
Two final papers consider public sector auditing.
Mike Radford's paper,Auditing for Change , reviews the work and effectiveness of the Audit Commission, arguing that the Commission has had a profound effect on the debate about the future of local government.
J F McEldowney reviews the National Audit Office and its effectiveness in reporting on the Government's privatisation sales.
Anyone seriously interested in the interface between accountancy and the law should read this book.
Like any stimulating text it leaves the reader pondering on more questions than it answers.
At present, company law reflects a model of a company as a creature of the shareholders acting as a body, but this does not reflect economic reality as perceived by the market.
How does the conflict between the legal model and market perceptions affect financial reporting?
Does it not mean that preparers of accounts and auditors can never satisfy the market's reasonable expectations?
If a formalistic approach to the regulation of financial reporting is unavoidable, how will the boundaries between the professional knowledge and competence of accountants and lawyers be re-drawn?
What is the significance of changes in these boundaries for the training of members of these two professions, their relative attractiveness to potential recruits and their long-term standing in society?
At present, company law reflects a model of a company as a creature of the shareholders acting as a body, but this does not reflect economic reality as perceived by the market
Chris Swinson
LIBRARY
Books reviewed in ACCOUNTANCY can usually be borrowed from the Institute library.
Book loans can be made by post, users only incurring the cost of returning the material, and photocopies can usually be supplied within 24 hours for a small charge.
The library is at the Copthall Avenue end of Chartered Accountants' Hall, Moorgate Place, London EC2.
Its services are available to chartered accountants and to registered students of the Institute.
It is open from 9am to 5.30pm, Monday to Wednesday; 10am to 5.30pm, Thursday and Friday.
Book loans to registered students can only be made to them in person, or on written application, if they quote their registration number.
All enquiries to .
readers ask
Wife's company car
Mr X is managing director of a limited company that has traded for several years.
Mrs X, who also has other employment, is company secretary.
Mr X receives a salary and is provided with a company car which is available for private use.
Mrs X, by virtue of her employment with the company, is also provided with a company car.
She uses her car for company business (about 2,000 miles a year) and it is also available for her private use.
The inspector of taxes is now attempting to assess both cars on Mr X, claiming that the statutory authority is to be found in s 168(6) (b) ICTA 1988.
The inspector has also suggested that Extra Statutory Concession A 71 would not be applied in this case, as he would not be convinced that any of the following three criteria apply:
Mrs X receives the car in her own right;
an equivalent car would be available to a company secretary who was not related to the managing director of the company;
normal commercial practice is for a company secretary to receive a company car.
It seems to me that the inspector, on instructions from his legal department, is adopting an inappropriate course based on the facts of this case.
I would be interested to hear any arguments you can suggest to counter this.
The weakness of the case is the fact that the managing director's wife has other employment, as this problem is likely to be settled on facts rather than legislation.
Having said that, the fact is that Mrs X is company secretary and therefore a company employee.
The inspector is therefore on doubtful ground in insisting that s 168(6) (b), ICTA 1988 should be applied without concession.
For this reason the terms of Extra Statutory Concession A 71, published on 2 August 1989, assume great importance.
Commenting on the first condition of the concession, it is clear that Mrs X does receive the car in her own right as an employee, and more importantly, company secretary.
How many hours a week does she work for the company?
How much is she paid?
Presumably the latter figure is under £8,500 a year.
If these factors are favourable, then they should be stressed to the inspector.
Whether an equivalent car would be made available to a company secretary who was not a family member is a question of fact — perhaps depending on the size of the company and customs in the particular trade.
Once again these facts may be helpful.
As regards the third condition, can it be established that the provision of a company car for the company secretary is the normal commercial practice within that trade?
Can evidence from friends/competitors within the trade be obtained in order to promote the case?
On the facts, it does appear that the inspector is being unreasonable.
Whether the case is worth taking to the Commissioners is doubtful, bearing in mind the costs involved for one business.
However, if the Revenue's approach represents a new hardening of attitudes that will affect all small family companies, then this matter ought to be explored at a high level by the appropriate professional body or be taken through the courts by a consortium of practitioners.
Personal equity plans
Can you please tell me what the rules are as regards holding cash, as I have recently taken out a personal equity plan?
Under PEPs where you select your own investments, it is possible to keep the plan in cash without time limit until you decide to invest into equities.
However, in the case of single company PEPs, you have a limit of 42 days before subscriptions must be invested.
CGT on house sales
On 29 September 1980 I purchased a house for £9,000 cash from my father, who owned it exclusively in his own name from 1968 when I, along with him, my mother and sister, came to live there.
I have continued to live there as my sole residence and do not have any other home or accommodation.
As the transfer was not at arms' length I had to obtain an estimate of the market value of the house and forward this to the Inland Revenue Stamps Office.
When my mother separated from my father in April 1981 I wanted to afford my father the security of a home so I entered into a verbal agreement to allow him to stay in the house during his lifetime and described this as a life tenancy on form ‘Stamps L(A)451’.
We have continued to live in the house as father and son as before, sharing the same facilities, and the house is not separated in any way.
I pay all the bills and my father has never paid any rent.
I would like to purchase a new house and move to it.
My father would be willing to move with me and this of course would allow me to sell my present house.
I am still not married.
Would I be liable to CGT on the sale of the house?
Would there be any likelihood of a future charge under inheritance tax?
What would be the position if I sold the house back to my father, who is 65 years old — would I have a liability to CGT and what discount, if any, could I offer my father?
The market value of the house is around £90,000.
It appears that the verbal agreement described as a life tenancy on the Stamp Duty form is, in fact, a recognition that although the reader owns the property, the home is being occupied by father and son as tenants-in-common, but with the son paying all the bills.
This tends to complicate the tax issues.
On the face of it there would be no CGT on a current sale at full market value, either to a third party or the father.
The property is personally owned and occupied, used as a single main residence and there is no letting.
Even if CGT applied, the combination of s 80, FA 1980 (as amended by s 94(3), FA 1991) means that the application of market value at March 1982, indexation relief and the £40,000 exemption might well reduce or eliminate CGT on any part deemed to be let.
The original gift by the father took place in September 1980, in so far as the market value at that time exceeded the £9,000 paid.
This gift was subject to the capital transfer tax, not inheritance tax, provisions, and by dint of the passage of more than 10 years is outside any tax charge.
The gift with reservation provisions did not apply to CTT.
A full sale of the property (for whatever reason) back to the father might invoke the inheritance tax gifts with reservation provisions if the son continued to live there and the property was sold at less than full value.
For reasons already stated, it is doubtful if any CGT would be assessed.
Professional advice from a surveyor, on the basis of an informal tenancy-in-common, would be necessary to fix the sale price discounted from the £90,000 current market value, and for the purposes of any contract between father and son.
Splitting a business for VAT
A limited company which is already registered for VAT has as directors Mr A, Mr D, who is married to a daughter of Mr A, Mr E, who is married to another daughter of Mr A and has as its secretary Mr D. The staff include the two daughters, the directors on a part-time basis, and a son, F, of Mr and Mrs A.
Could a related business activity be carried on within one area of the shop by any of the family members without registering for VAT (the turnover of this activity is expected to be low)?
Would a possible solution be for the son F to set up as a sole trader and eventually move to separate premises with perhaps other family members becoming partners of this business?
The limited company does not wish to change its objects clause in its Memorandum and Articles of Association.
Customs can make a direction to treat persons as a ‘single taxable person’ for VAT registration purposes if Customs (not necessarily any other person) are satisfied that:
the main, or one of the main, reasons for the business' structure was to avoid registration (not, say, due to the partial exemption rules or to get limited liability protection or facilitate a part sale);
the constituent members make taxable supplies and would be liable to register if looked at as a whole;
the activities of each constituent member ‘should properly be regarded’ as those of the business described in the direction, carried on concurrently or previously (or both)(VAT Act 1983, Sch 1, para 1A(1) and (2) as inserted by FA 1986, s 10(1)).
The tribunal will only allow a trader's appeal against such a direction if it considers that Customs could not reasonably have been satisfied: for example, if Customs have ignored a relevant matter or if they have taken an irrelevant matter into account.
So the tribunal has a mere supervisory jurisdiction and will probably not substitute its view for Customs' (VAT Act 1983, s 40(1) (hh)).
Customs have won most cases on their directions.
Whether activities ‘should properly be regarded as those of the business described in the direction’ is an issue of fact.
The question gives no details of the company's shop business or the ‘related business activity’.
The corresponding provision in the Sixth Council Directive 77/388 of 17 May 1977, article 4(4) refers to legally independent persons who are ‘closely bound to one another by financial, economic and organisational links’.
Customs have stated that ‘persons carrying on genuinely separate and distinct small businesses will not be affected’(press notice No 1135 (14 August 1986)).
In their press notice No. 762 (20 September 1982) Customs indicated the criteria they expect to be met when a previously single business is divided:
1.
Premises and equipment are owned or rented by the person carrying on the business.
2.
Records identify the business.
3.
Invoices are in that person's name.
4.
That person should be liable for the business expenses and entitled to the sale proceeds.
5.
Any bank account should be in that person's name and he should be the sole drawer to the account.
6.
That person should pay the staff wages.
7.
The income tax assessment should be made separately on that person in respect of the business.
These seven matters are only Customs' view and are not the law, but the tribunal would probably consider most of the matters relevant to the majority of cases.
Subject to the above, the related activity could be carried on within one area of the shop by any of the family.
In Myers & Anor (MAN/89/157) No 3951;(1989) 4 BVC 1,383, a husband and wife traded as furniture retailers and supplied free coffee to potential and actual customers.
Eventually the wife's parents took over the coffee supplying and started a tea room in the shop.
The tribunal allowed the appeal against the direction because VAT avoidance was not seen as the main reason for having two businesses.
The second business had ‘evolved’ from the first, not been ‘split’from it.
The related business person's turnover will be under the current registration threshold if (broadly) it is not over £36,600 in any of the last 12 calendar months and is not reasonably expected to exceed that amount in the next 30 days from any time (VAT Act 1983, Sch 1, para 1(1)).
One good point is that an original direction, but not a supplementary direction, cannot be retrospective as it only has ‘effect from the date of the direction’(para 1A(1) and (4)).
So if there are good records etc, the split should work at least until any valid direction is made.
In Grisdale & Anor (MAN/89/141) No 4069;(1989) 4 BVC 1,397, a publican's wife separately ran a catering business at the premises.
Customs failed to speak to the wife before making the direction.
The tribunal decided that Customs had unreasonably made a mistaken inference that the wife's business was separate to avoid a tax liability.
A factor in the wife's favour was that the previous publican had provided no food.
So no existing business was split.
If the family wants complete peace of mind, it should provide Customs with all the facts once the new activity has started and ask for a written ruling.
Customs will probably refuse to give an advance ruling on a mere prospective transaction.
Company meetings by phone
I would be interested to know how you think company meetings by telephone — particularly in the case of directors' meetings — should be evidenced in the minute book.
If meetings are held then minutes will have to be prepared.
S382 of the CA 1985 provides that ‘every company shall cause minutes of all proceedings of general meetings, all proceedings at meetings of its directors…to be entered in books kept for the purpose.’
This seems to exclude taped minutes.
We think we can operate by analogy with Art (Reg) 93 of Table A to the CA 1985, which allows written resolutions of the board to be effective without a meeting.
This article would have to be amended to allow resolutions to be made effectively, not only by circulating a written resolution but also by oral contact with individual members of the board.
Once such an amendment of the articles is in place we would suggest that the chairman of the board (or the company secretary) should ascertain each board member's decision by phone and minute as follows: ‘Following the procedure laid down in Art 93 (or whatever) of the company's articles the board resolves that…‘.
The date of the resolution would be the date on which the decision of the last board member to be contacted was obtained.
Minutes do not in any case include discussions leading up to a decision but only the decision itself.
We see no reason why the decision should be unanimous so long as there is a majority in favour.
Exemption from cash flow standard
Please clarify the exemption contained in para 8(a) of FRS1 which applies to small companies as defined by the CA.
Can a company that is the holding company of a small group avail itself of the exemption under ss 248 and 249 of the CA 1985, and apply s 8(a) of the standard and not prepare either a cash flow statement or a consolidated cash flow statement, whether it prepares group accounts or not?
My understanding is that a small group need not prepare a consolidated cash flow statement, even if the holding company of that group prepared group accounts.
I believe that the standard enables small companies that can apply the exemption for group accounts under ss 248 and 249 to apply the exemption and the need to prepare a group cash flow statement merely because of its size.
Although para 8(a) of FRS1 refers to ss 248 and 249 CA 1985, it does not go far enough to state properly whether the exemption does in effect apply to a small group.
The exemption you refer to certainly needs clarification.
The key words in para 8(a) of FRS 1 are: ‘entities that are…entitled to the exemptions available in sections 246 to 249…
‘. Yours is a common-sense interpretation which says that the company is entitled to the exemptions but that it chooses not to use them.
A stricter interpretation, however, is that the company would be entitled not to prepare group accounts if it obtained and published the auditors’ report required by s 248(3) (which confirms that the company is so entitled) but it is not otherwise.
If a company heading a small group chooses not to take advantage of the exemption from preparing group accounts, its group accounts will not normally contain the auditors' report required by s 248(3).
S 248(4) provides that the exemption ‘does not apply’ unless the auditors' report on entitlement is attached to the company's individual accounts.
I believe that the stricter interpretation above has to be preferred to the common-sense interpretation, because I believe the ASB was trying to follow the exemption in the Companies Act, so that cash flow statements would be included or excluded on the same criteria as group accounts.
However, if there is an overriding reason for wanting to publish group accounts (as statutory accounts) without a cash flow statement, there may be a way.
If the auditors' report under s 248(3) were included in the accounts (in a way which did not cause confusion), the company would be entitled to the exemptions, even if it did not take advantage of them.
It would thus be entitled to omit a cash flow statement under FRS1.
In such a case, the auditors' report referred to in s 248 would be better separated from the main audit report and included instead in a note which explained that, although it was entitled to the exemption, the company was not taking advantage of it.
Unfortunately, a Catch 22 comes into play here.
This is that, by ensuring that the company is not required to prepare group accounts, you deny yourself the exemption from publishing a parent company p&l account in s230 (see Accounting Solutions ,ACCOUNTANCY , April, p 77).
So you may omit a parent company p&l account or a cash flow statement, but not both at the same time!
Audit stamps — risks of misinterpretation
Many years ago when I started in the profession, it was standard practice for auditors to mark clients' records with a vouching mark or audit stamp.
This practice was largely to indicate that documents and records had been produced to the auditors and would also indicate an audit trail.
Of course the actual procedures to which the document or records were subjected would be recorded in the audit working papers.
However, a risk may be perceived, especially in regard to small business audits where the marking of client records might assist in accounts preparation.
The risk is that the procedure could possibly self-incriminate a firm if, for instance, it marked a document which subsequently proved to be fraudulent or defective and which at the time gave no rise for any audit comments.
This risk might come from subsequent investigation of the audit, or from investigations carried out by any of the various regulatory bodies such as the Inland Revenue Investigations Branch or one established under the Financial Services Act.
In the light of the above comments, can some guidance be given with regard to the use of audit marks or audit stamps and whether their use is current best practice?
In particular, please draw attention to any risks there may be.
It is relatively rare for accountants to find themselves in trouble, whether legal or ethical, because work they have done has been misinterpreted or misunderstood.
Sins of commission or omission far more usually cause such problems.
In this instance the reader is concerned that marks or stamps the auditor made on a document in the course of preparing accounts could mistakenly be regarded as evidence of authentication when such had not in fact occurred.
The purpose of an audit mark or stamp on clients' documents is twofold: it provides evidence that the document has been examined for a particular purpose (which should be clear from the audit file); and it helps to avoid the document's being re-presented as support for a duplicate entry.
Provided (i) the audit file explains the context in which particular stamped documents have been examined, and (ii) the significance of special audit marks or ticks are standardised and understood by the audit staff, there should be little risk of misinterpretation by third parties after the event.
It is also worth reminding the reader that searching for fraud is not the audit's primary purpose.
Assuming that neither the document in question, nor the tests of which its examination formed a part, gave the auditor reason to be put on enquiry, he can hardly be criticised if it subsequently transpires that the document was fraudulently created or used.
Paragraph 14 of the Auditing Guideline on The Auditor's Responsibility in Relation to Fraud, Other Irregularities and Errors (see ACCOUNTANCY , April 1990, p 148) seems to confirm this view: ‘current audit practice does not normally involve the auditor in establishing the authenticity of original documents.’
It is now widely accepted that accounts preparation work can provide a significant measure of audit assurance.
It is therefore advisable that those documents referred to in an accounting context at the same time be considered as audit evidence, and the audit objectives achieved thereby noted clearly on the file.
This will reduce still further the risk of unwarranted significance being imputed to the audit stamps used.
taxation
GET YOUR ACT TOGETHER Companies can enhance their cash flow by carefully managing their ACT
Peter Rayney
This article, the first of a two-part series, examines the available methods of using advance corporation tax (ACT).
The second part will deal with a number of ACT planning manoeuvres and potential ACT traps.
Unless stated otherwise, all statutory references are to the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988.
A UK resident company must account for ACT when it pays a dividend (or any other qualifying distribution) to its shareholders (s 14).
The current rate of ACT is 25/75ths.
Thus, if the company pays a dividend of £60,000, it will be liable to account for ACT of £20,000 (ie £60,000 * 25/75ths).
(A dividend plus its related ACT is defined as a ‘franked payment’ or FP.)
The ACT must be accounted for on the CT61 form under the quarterly accounting procedure, under which the ACT must be paid within 14 days after the end of each return period.
In computing its ACT liability, the company can offset tax credits on dividends it receives from other UK companies (s 241).
(A dividend plus its related tax credit is known as ‘franked investment income’ or FII.)
Companies do not pay tax on their FII since it represents dividends paid out of profits that have already been taxed in the corporate sector (s 208).
Group income election
Subsidiary companies included in a valid group income election can pay dividends up to their holding company without having to account for ACT (s 247(1) (2)).
The holding company will then receive the dividend as group income without any tax credit.
A group income election is flexible in that it is possible for a dividend to be paid outside the election by informing the Collector of Taxes (s 247(3)).
This is done by making the appropriate entry on the form CT61.
A dividend paid outside the election will generate ACT in the subsidiary company (and FII in the parent), which may be desirable for certain planning strategies.
Given that there is no downside, groups should ensure that a valid group income election is in place for all members.
The election must be in place before any dividend is paid.
Although the Inland Revenue has up to three months in which to confirm the validity of the election (s 248(2)), in practice it is usually prepared to give confirmation within a much shorter period.
Set off of ACT
The amount of ACT arising on the net dividends paid in the accounting period (ie after relief for any FII) can be offset (subject to certain limitations) against the company's corporation tax liability for that same accounting period (s 239(2)).
This effectively reduces the company's tax liability, which will be payable nine months after the end of the accounting period.
There is a restriction on the amount of ACT that the company can offset against its corporation tax liability for the period.
The maximum ACT offset is limited to the amount of tax that would have been payable on the profits assuming they had been charged at the basic rate of tax (s 239(2)).
The current restriction is therefore calculated as profits chargeable to corporation tax (ie income and capital gains) x 25%.
Any ACT that cannot be offset against the relevant period is known as ‘surplus ACT’.
Surplus ACT can be recovered in one or more of the following ways:
by making a claim to carry back surplus ACT against the company's tax liabilities for accounting periods beginning in the previous six years;
by making a claim to surrender ACT to any 51% subsidiaries of the company; and
by carrying any remaining surplus ACT forward to reduce tax liabilities of future accounting periods.
Six year carry back of ACT
A claim can be made under s 239(3) to offset a company's surplus ACT against the tax liabilities on its total profits for accounting periods beginning in the preceding six years.
(ACT carried back against pre-17 March 1987 periods can only be offset against a company's income — ie excluding capital gains.)
It is possible to limit the claim to part of the surplus ACT.
ACT carried back is offset as far as possible against the most recent period first and then the next most recent period, and so on until the claim is exhausted or the six year time limit is reached.
Surplus ACT carried back is deducted after utilising any ACT that was paid in respect of the earlier accounting period.
The ACT offset is always subject to the same ‘basic rate’ restriction as the current year offset.
The example in the panel illustrates the mechanics of an ACT carry back claim.
It is not possible to carry back any surrendered ACT (see below).
To obtain prompt relief, the company must be able to demonstrate to the Revenue that there is an ACT surplus.
Therefore tax computations for the relevant period, including the calculation of the surplus ACT, must be submitted as soon as possible.
A claim to carry back ACT must be made within two years after the end of the accounting period in which the surplus arose.
The amount of surplus ACT included in the claim must be capable of being determined by reference to circumstances that existed at the time of the claim (see Proctor & Gamble Ltd v Taylerson (1990) STC 624).
If a company later makes a claim to carry back trading losses under s 393A(b) (ii)(see my article in ACCOUNTANCY , November 1991, p 78), this may displace the ACT offsets.
If the ACT for any particular accounting period is displaced, the ACT is carried forward and treated as paid in the next period (see below).
As a result of the loss carry back, this ACT will be surplus and, provided a claim can be made within the two year limit, the ACT can be carried back from that later period.
Corporation tax that is repaid as a result of a carry back of ACT will not generally give rise to a repayment supplement.
This is because the repayment of tax is treated as being made in respect of the accounting period in which the surplus ACT arose (as opposed to the periods in which it was offset)(s 825(4) (a)).
This generally means that the repayment supplement will only arise if the ‘surplus ACT’ was repaid more than 21 months after the end of the accounting period producing the surplus.
Surrender of ACT
A parent company can surrender its ACT down to one or more 51% subsidiaries.
The surrendered ACT can be divided, as required, among any number of subsidiaries.
If it wishes to, a company can surrender its entire ACT (as opposed to merely the surplus amount).
A subsidiary company can only receive surrendered ACT in an accounting period if it was a subsidiary for the whole of that period (s 240(l)).
ACT cannot be surrendered if there are ‘arrangements’ in force whereby the subsidiary company may leave the group (s 240(11)).
It is not possible, however, for a subsidiary to surrender ACT up to its parent company.
The subsidiary company can only use the ACT in any period throughout which it remains a subsidiary of the surrendering company.
Thus, if a subsidiary company is sold off by the group with surrendered ACT, it ceases to be available for offset.
Surrendered ACT can only be offset against the current year of surrender and against future years (provided the company remains a subsidiary).
It is not possible to apply surrendered ACT in a carry back claim.
However, a carry back of ACT may be generated by paying up dividends outside the group income election (as discussed earlier).
A claim to surrender ACT may be made within six years of the end of the accounting period to which it relates, and requires the consent of the subsidiaries concerned.
Once the ACT surrender claim has been submitted and accepted by the inspector, it is not possible to withdraw and reallocate the ACT, for example, to a different subsidiary, even within the six year time limit.
However, under SP7/89, a parent company can surrender ACT that was previously set off against its mainstream tax liability in an assessment which had become final.
Carry forward of surplus ACT
Any ACT that cannot be used, carried back or surrendered, may be carried forward without time limit for use against tax liabilities (again subject to the same basic rate restriction).
Surplus ACT carried forward is treated as ACT paid in the next accounting period (s 239(4)).
Surplus ACT is, usually, in the first instance, set against deferred tax liabilities (bearing in mind the profits restriction on set off).
According to SSAP 8, to the extent there is no deferred tax liability, an ACT asset may only be shown in the accounts if it can be demonstrated that there will be sufficient profits in the next 12 months to enable the surplus to be recovered against the corporation tax thereon, bearing in mind anticipated dividends.
Otherwise ACT is written off in the profit and loss account.
Anti-avoidance restrictions
A company may lose its ability to carry forward surplus ACT if there is a change of ownership of the company that is accompanied by a major change in the nature of the trade or business within three years either side of the change in ownership, or a substantial revival of the trade or business (s 245).
There is no comprehensive definition of a major change in the nature or conduct of the trade, but it will include a major change in the type of property dealt in, or services or facilities provided in the trade; or a major change in customers, outlets or markets.
As indicated in SP10/91, the Revenue may have regard to other factors, such as changes in manufacturing methods, pricing policies and so on.
However the Revenue will not seek to apply s 245 where changes are attributable to increased efficiency or to keep pace with developing technology.
Furthermore, a major change of trade or business also encompasses a trading company becoming an investment company or vice versa and, in the case of an investment company, it includes a major change in the nature of its investments (s 245(4)).
In addition, where a company with (its own) surplus ACT is taken over, the acquiring group cannot (within three years of the takeover) use the company's ACT to shelter its chargeable gains by routing the disposal of assets through that company.
This is to counter the transfer of assets through a newly acquired ‘surplus ACT’ company under the no gain/no loss rule in s 171, TCGA 1992, which are then sold out of that company, thus eliminating or reducing the taxable gain (s 245B).
However, this provision applies only where the gain accrues on the disposal of the asset within three years of the change of ownership.
CORRECTION
There was an error in Finance lease rentals: SSAP 21 rules OK?in the July issue of ACCOUNTANCY .
Near the top of column three on page 79 the text read ‘the net originating difference of £12,050 is taxed at 33%, and so £3,976 would be credited to the deferred tax account (assuming a full tax charge)’.
In fact, £3,976 should be debited to deferred tax, as the accounting profits are lower than the taxable profits.
students
TRANSFER PRICING EXPLAINED Transfer prices can be a powerful management tool in controlling how divisions decide to operate
Ken Garrett
Transfer pricing is a topic that students completing the old PE2 syllabus need to have a good grasp of.
And now, under the new syllabus, it is a topic set at Intermediate level.
A decentralised business will usually consist of independent profit centres or divisions.
If the divisions trade with each other transfer prices will have to be agreed.
Although on consolidation the accounting effects of any trading within a group should cancel, the transfer price can have a profound effect on the motivation and performance of the group.
In particular, transfer prices will affect the following:
Divisional profits and motivation .
It is generally accepted that managers are motivated to pursue profits, whereas they are not greatly motivated to keep within a cost budget.
If transfer prices are set high enough then, as a division sells goods to other divisions, it will be able to make profits.
It changes from being a cost centre to a profit centre, and this should stimulate management to aim for better performance and should provide increased job satisfaction.
Performance measurement .
If a division's performance is to be measured fairly, it must be allowed to sell goods to other divisions at a fair price.
Similarly, if buying from another division it should be made to pay a fair price.
In this context, ‘fair price’ will usually mean the open market price — if one exists.
Using the market price means that each division must stand on its own feet, as though it were an independent company.
For example, if the transfer price is set below market price, then the selling division might feel penalised and the buying division would be ‘feather-bedded’.
Goal congruence and autonomy .
It is usually assumed that the aim of group management is to maximise group profit.
However, once divisions are given some independence they may make decisions that are not in the best interests of the group as a whole.
Look at Figure 1.
Here a transfer price of £50 has been set so as to give each division some of the profit.
Assume now that the group cannot sell all it can make at the normal price of £120 but division B sees that it could win a large order if it were to offer goods at £80 each.
Division B's managers would probably reject this offer as they would see each unit costing that division £90 (£50 + £40) but yielding only £80; Division B would make a loss of £10 a unit by selling at £80.
However, to the group as a whole, the variable costs amount to only £70 (£30 + £40) and it could earn a positive contribution by accepting the order.
Head office could ensure goal congruence by working out a masterplan and then issuing detailed instructions to each division: make this many units, transfer them to that division in the following numbers at the following prices.
This approach would work, but to what extent are the divisions still decentralised?
How will the talented managers at each division like being told exactly what to do?
We will see that a cleverly chosen transfer price will manipulate divisional managers into making the decisions that are best for the group as a whole.
Theoretical transfer pricing
Assume that one division, Division A, buys raw materials and makes components.
These are transferred to Division B, which assembles the finished product and sells it to the public.
There is no outside market for the output of Division A. We are to find a suitable transfer price.
As the problem stands, it is a little unfair, as it really conceals two parts:
A conventional pricing problem in which divisionalisation is ignored.
The aim is to find where group profits are maximised, and this is when:
Marginal cost to group = Marginal revenue to group
The marginal cost to the group is simply the sum of the marginal costs in each of the divisions that the unit passes through.
As there is no outside market, the marginal revenue to the group is simply the marginal revenue from the end-selling division, B.
This part of the solution is indispensable as it tells us how the group can achieve its aim of profit maximisation.
In particular, it tells us what volume of sales will maximise profits and this is management's lodestar.
Only after knowing what our target is can we go on and set a transfer price that encourages each division to operate at the required volume.
Now we get to the true transfer pricing problem.
Each division will be looking after its own interests and will try to maximise its own profits.
Thus, Division A will try to equate:
Marginal cost in A = Marginal revenue in A
Of course, the marginal revenue of Division A is simply the transfer price as it can only sell to Division B. So we should work out A's marginal costs at the required level of group activity and set the transfer price equal to that.
Offering that transfer price to Division A will induce it to trade at the required volume as we have arranged that, at that volume, its marginal cost is equal to its marginal revenue (the transfer price).
Trading at this volume will maximise Division A's profits.
Things are a little more complicated for Division B. It will be seeking to maximise its own profit by equating marginal costs and marginal revenues.
In particular:
Transfer-in price + Own marginal costs = Marginal revenue from customers
This can be rearranged to give:
Transfer-in price = Marginal revenue from customers — Own marginal costs
The right hand side of this equation is known as the net marginal revenue, the net increase in wealth before accounting for the transfer-in price.
Again, the trick is to work out the net marginal revenue at the required level of activity and charge a transfer price equal to that.
This will induce Division B to operate at the level we want as it will perceive that its profits will be maximised there.
Look at the question in Figure 2A; you are asked to work out the transfer price, but first you must work out what volume the group should operate at.
The question can be solved either by using differentiation (more accurate) or by tabulation (approximate).
Students studying for PE2 need to understand both methods, but Intermediate students do not need to know differentiation.
The solution using differentiation is shown in Figure 2B, where I have shown that the same transfer price is spot on for both divisions.
The solution using tabulation is shown in Figure 2C.
Tabulation is a crude method so the answer using that is slightly different and there is a range of possible transfer prices rather than a single accurate one.
However, the approach in both methods is the same: first find what the group should do to maximise profits, then set a transfer price that encourages each divisional manager to decide to operate at that level.
Note that to get the divisions to operate as we wish, all we have to do is to impose a transfer price and then let them get on with it.
Interference in the divisions' management decisions is kept to a minimum and their autonomy is largely preserved.
This article has looked at how a theoretical transfer price can be calculated in a simple situation.
A future article will look at more complicated problems and at various practical methods of setting transfer prices.
audit regulation
WHAT THE PRACTITIONERS THOUGHT Every small practitioner dreads a visit from the Joint Monitoring Unit.
Two partners told ACCOUNTANCY what it's really like
Stephanie Bidmead
My first impression of the JMU was that I hope they don't visit us,’ admitted Robert Dicketts, South Eastern Society of Chartered Accountants president and partner of Sevenoaks-based Lee Dicketts & Co.
His firm heard of an impending two-day Joint Monitoring Unit visit just three weeks after audit regulation was implemented last October, but it was later delayed until February.
Howard Gross of two-partner City firm Gross Klein & Co was more optimistic.
‘My only impression related back to the Financial Services Act when they were very cooperative and very helpful,’ he said.
Along with notification of the visits, the first item to arrive was a copy of the audit pre-visit questionnaire, or PVQ.
Covering five areas — firm procedures, internal audit quality control review, specialisation, listed/regulated audit clients and a summary of audit fees and clients — it is designed to help the JMU understand the firm.
Unfortunately, complained the partners, it took ‘hours and hours’ to complete.
In addition, extra information ranging from the professional indemnity policy to personnel files, correspondence files, and firm accounting records had to be ready.
The first day was taken up by an introductory meeting explaining the visit's purpose, the examination of these files and various job files.
‘The inspectors were perfectly pleasant and apart from the odd query you'd hardly know they were there,’ said Mr Dicketts.
But he criticised the file examination structure and said it was difficult to work.
Mr Gross, on the other hand, felt there was insufficient advice over what information would be required, and was in favour of pre-visit lectures.
‘It would be useful,’ he said, ‘if practitioners were made aware of the information that is required from them so they can build it up over a period of time.’
He felt that on the final day of their three-day visit the inspectors went through the files with the respective partners too quickly.
‘If they found a point they wished to query us on we had to give an instant, pressurised response,’ he said.
‘It's unreasonable.’
He would prefer a seven day delay between the file examination and the final meeting to ensure that any points raised are dealt with in a more relaxed fashion and at whatever depth the JMU wishes.
The points can then be closed off.
‘If you can't do that then the JMU's got good reason to query it.’
Mr Dicketts also claimed that the inspectors were not as knowledgeable as he expected.
‘We were doing certain things we felt were recommended by the Institute and they didn't understand that.’
Mr Gross agreed, and identified three areas where the Institute's operational guidelines (s 3.201 of the 1992 Members Handbook , paras 1, 3, and 10) and JMU's best practice diverge.
According to Mr Gross, the JMU demands more than adequate planning, controlling and recording of work; does not distinguish between small and large companies; and expects a memorandum setting out the outline ordered approach.
‘I'm not saying best practice is wrong,’ he said, ‘but someone must change the operational guidelines because you can't have one set of guidelines issued by the Institute and another being operated by the JMU.’
He also described minute-taking at the final meeting as unfair.
‘They give you 15 days to respond.
If you've got points you've been unable to answer you've got to make them part of the report back which wastes yet more valuable practitioner time.’
The 15 day limit also cuts into the time that should be spent assisting clients.
Finally, Mr Dicketts did not receive a response from the JMU for over five months.
‘If I hadn't replied to a client for five months I would almost expect a visit from them in response to a complaint!’
Overall, Mr Gross believes the point of the audit is being lost.
‘There's a lot of attention to the form as distinct from the substance of the audit,’ he explained.
‘If you made an incredible blunder it wouldn't seem to worry anybody as long as it is recorded…
We will become compliance officers for business and not advisers.’
He also said that he would not undertake to follow best practice while it differs from the operational guidelines.
Although the firm has received a response the ‘matter is not yet concluded’.
‘I don't think the firm has any problems with the visit itself.
It has problems with matters of principle and the way the visit is conducted.’
The visit could be ‘frightening’ to a practitioner who doesn't know what to expect.
‘He should either be told he has complied or he hasn't,’ said Mr Gross.
‘Minor breaches in regulation should be ignored.’
In Mr Dicketts' view the whole system is a ‘sledgehammer to crack a nut’ and both partners were concerned that clients would not accept fee increases despite the considerable costs of compliance incurred.
On the positive side, however, Mr Gross acknowledged that high standards are in the public interest and that, because of the threat of JMU visits, staff know their standards must remain high.
Mr Dicketts was ‘happy to comply even more’ and confessed: ‘If they came back now we'd probably feel much happier.’
ACCOUNTANCY subsequently put Mr Dicketts' and Mr Gross's comments to Jo Holden, head of the JMU.
He replied that although the PVQ was designed to be completed easily, the JMU was always open to suggestions for improvements.
He accepted that it might well be difficult for practitioners to give instant answers to queries on old files, but pointed out that allowing a seven day delay for answers to be prepared would increase the number of days required for each visit; this would both increase disruption to practitioners and put up costs, possibly even doubling them.
He did not feel that the 15 day limit for minutes of the final meeting and responses to issues brought up at it was inadequate.
On the subject of delays in responding to minutes, Mr Holden pointed out that speeding up the process would also add to costs, and that some delay arose because reports had to be considered by the Institute as well as by the JMU; any suggestions on how to cut down on the time involved would be gratefully received.
He accepted that the JMU had had some teething problems, but pointed out that the audit monitoring process was still in its early days; it was improving and would continue to improve with experience.
Robert Dicketts: Happy to comply
accounting issues
The future for financial reporting in New Zealand The New Zealand financial reporting regime is going through a period of radical change
Following the crash of the New Zealand share market in 1987, and the subsequent failure of many large companies, there have been frequent demands from the public for improved standards in financial reporting.
In response to these demands, recent developments promise the most significant enhancements to financial reporting standards seen in New Zealand for many years.
In December 1991, the Financial Reporting Bill was introduced into Parliament.
This Bill provides for the establishment of an Accounting Standards Review Board, whose principal function will be the approval of accounting standards.
If the financial statements of an issuer of securities to the public fail to comply with an applicable accounting standard, the issuer and its directors will be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $NZ100,000.
In February 1992, the New Zealand Society of Accountants (NZSA) published a proposed framework for financial reporting which is designed to cover both public and private sector financial reporting requirements.
The framework includes an explanatory foreword, a statement of concepts (SOC), an interpretation of the SOC for public sector entities, a framework for differential reporting, and proposed revisions of accounting standards on disclosure of accounting policies and presentation of financial reports.
The SOC is based largely on the Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements , published by the International Accounting Standards Committee, and it implements several of the recommendations made in the UK publications The Future Shape of Financial Reports and Making Corporate Reports Valuable .
For example, ED 65,Presentation of Financial Reports , proposes that the statement of financial performance should disclose separately the revenue and expenses from continuing activities, new activities, discontinued activities and investment activities.
In addition, ED 65 proposes that comprehensive income and the change in financial wealth for the period should be disclosed in a new statement known as the Statement of Changes in Financial Wealth (SCFW).
The discussion that follows deals with two of the more controversial aspects of the regime.
The SOC states that, under the historical cost system, income fails to recognise valuation changes and is accordingly considered an inadequate measure of financial performance.
It is considered that an adequate measure should include all changes in equity, including changes in values but excluding those from owner sources.
This measure is referred to as comprehensive income.
Comprehensive income includes the net surplus as disclosed in the statement of financial performance, revaluation gains or losses, the currency translation difference on the net investment in independent foreign operations, and other changes in reserves.
The measure of comprehensive income will differ in accordance with the methods used to value assets and the concept of capital maintenance employed.
The SCFW also discloses the change in financial wealth for the period, which represents comprehensive income less the amount of distributions to owners.
The SCFW is required to show that the change in financial wealth represents the difference between the entity's opening and closing equity for the period, after taking into account prior period adjustments and contributions from owners.
ED 65 does not require that non-current assets or other elements of the financial statements should be revalued.
ED 65 states that, if changes in values are not recognised, there should be a positive statement, immediately below the SCFW, that the measure of comprehensive income is incomplete, and an indication of the manner in which it is considered to be incomplete.
Although ED 65 does not give detailed guidance on the circumstances in which it is considered that the measure of comprehensive income is incomplete, the discussion paper on ED 65 acknowledges that, under the modified historical cost system, the proposed SCFW may not give a complete reflection of the real change in financial wealth.
The statement of gains proposed in The Future Shape of Financial Reports discloses the change in financial wealth for the period less a capital maintenance adjustment to give a ‘real’ change in financial wealth.
However, ED 65 does not require a capital maintenance adjustment to be made, and the SCFW is not required to disclose a ‘real’ change in financial wealth.
Although it may be argued that a meaningful measure of comprehensive income cannot be provided unless a full system of current value accounting is employed, the introduction of the SCFW is likely to encourage the preparers of financial statements to move away from the historical cost system and to value relevant assets at current values.
Therefore, the NZSA is to be commended for proposing the SCFW in an attempt to persuade entities to deal with some of the historical cost system's deficiencies.
It is proposed that the SOC will apply to the general purpose external financial reports of all entities, whether in the public or private sector.
ED 61,Interpreting ‘Concepts for General Purpose External Financial Reporting’ for Public Sector Entities , mentions that any asset which meets the definition and the recognition criteria in the SOC should be included in the statement of financial position, even if the entity encounters difficulties in valuing the asset, or if the entity's authority to dispose of the asset is limited.
However, the present Statement of Public Sector Accounting Concepts permits the non-recognition of assets known as community assets.
These are often infrastructural assets which have no determinable useful life, are not readily disposable, have no readily determinable market value, and which provide a social rather than a commercial service.
The New Zealand government, in its audited financial statements for the six months ended 31 December 1991, has led the way by including, for the first time, valuations for infrastructural assets such as state highways, national parks, national archives, and national library collections.
Most assets have been valued at current values.
Although public sector entities may experience difficulties with the recognition and measurement of certain assets, the example the audited Crown financial statements have set shows that verifiable valuations can be placed on most public sector assets.
Even if certain of the valuations are not as objective as historical cost valuations, it may be argued that an approximate current value is of more benefit to users of the financial statements than a zero valuation or a precise but irrelevant historical cost valuation.
The audited Crown financial statements have shown that verifiable valuations can be placed on most public sector assets
Never mind the colour; what does it mean?
Graphs are frequently used in UK reports and accounts, but they are often inaccurate and misleading
These days graphs are very popular with companies that need to present quantitative financial information.
The use of colour and the generally attractive presentation draw the eye and command attention, offering a welcome haven of interest in otherwise drab statutory documents.
Communication is potentially enhanced by a graph's ability to summarise and simplify trend data.
This has been recognised in particular by UK companies, and only a minority of large UK companies do not now use graphical means of data presentation in their corporate annual reports.
So we need to ask whether graphs faithfully represent the underlying financial numbers in a neutral manner.
Faithful representation and neutrality are essential components of reliability, considered by both the Accounting Standards Board and the International Accounting Standards Committee to be key qualitative characteristics of financial statements.
Both of these bodies agree that reliable information must represent faithfully the effect of the transactions it either purports to represent or could reasonably be expected to represent.
The concept of neutrality is closely interrelated with representational faithfulness.
To be neutral, information must be selected and presented without bias.
Until recently, attention has focused on the measurement and disclosure issues associated with representational faithfulness and neutrality.
Little attention has been paid to alternative presentational formats, such as graphs.
This lack of attention is surprising given the widespread use of graphs revealed in the study, sponsored by the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants, of the corporate annual reports of 240 large UK companies that we have recently completed.
Our study found that 79% of large listed UK companies use graphs, with 65% graphing at least one key variable.
Moreover, the average number of graphs per annual report (of those companies using graphs) was 7.5, with financial graphs tending to be prominently displayed near the front of the report.
Our study is the first large scale research study of the extent, nature and reliability of UK financial graphs.
The findings, some of which are briefly summarised below, relate to three types of graphical infidelity: selectivity, measurement distortion and presentational infidelity.
Reliability implies that there is no bias in selectivity.
The fundamental selectivity issue which can occur when graphing financial information is the basis of deciding whether or not to use graphs.
The second issue concerns the choice of particular variables to be graphed.
In order to test whether this process of graphical selection involved any such lack of neutrality we tested whether graphical selection was dependent on financial performance.
We found that it was.
First, graphs of key financial variables are more likely to be included in the annual reports of companies with ‘good’ rather than‘bad’performance in terms of the change in eps.
Second, graphs of specific key financial variables are more likely to be included in the annual reports of companies with ‘good’ rather than‘bad’performance in terms of the specified variable.
There is thus evidence that UK corporate annual reports are more likely to include graphs which will present a more favourable view of the company's financial performance than would be given by a more even-handed approach.
If financial graphs are to reliably portray the underlying financial events, then certain basic rules of graph design and construction should be followed.
In particular, there should be an absence of measurement distortion, which occurs where the representation of numbers, as physically measured on the surface of the graph, is not directly proportional to the numerical values of the variable being represented.
For example, take a company which displays a doubling of turnover over a five-year period using a column graph (vertical bar chart).
Measurement distortion will occur if the height of the last column is not exactly twice that of the first.
If the last column is more than twice that of the first, then the company's profit trend will be enhanced (positive measurement distortion).
On the other hand, if the last column is less than twice that of the first, then the company's profit trend will be understated (negative measurement distortion).
We found that of the 465 graphs of key financial variables, there were 142 instances (30%) of measurement distortion greater than 5%. 129 of these were distortions of a rising trend, with 98 exaggerations and 31 understatements.
In other words, the graphs investigated were three times more likely to exaggerate, rather than underestimate, an upward trend.
The binomial test found this result to be very significant.
Investigation of these causes of the material distortions revealed that in only 26 cases was the distortion attributable to a specific factor, such as a broken vertical axis.
Most commonly, the graphic distance was simply not in direct proportion to the numerical values represented.
Often this was facilitated by the lack of proper axes and poor adherence to basic rules of graph construction and design.
The third way in which reliability might be breached is when, by judicious presentational techniques, a graph gives a more, or less, flattering view than is warranted by the underlying data.
Presentational infidelity is less clear-cut and less readily identifiable than selectivity or measurement distortion.
However, it was evident that many annual reports included creative presentational techniques which were likely to enhance the user's perceptions of the company's performance.
An example of presentation infidelity, uncovered in our survey, was where companies showed a series of columns sloping back towards the right away from the common baseline of the X axis.
As a result, the performance in later years could very easily be enhanced.
So there is evidence that the financial graphs in UK corporate annual reports are not reliable portrayals of the underlying accounting numbers.
They erode the reliability of financial statements by not being wholly neutral and representationally faithful.
The potential of graphs to communicate effectively is consequently being undermined.
Given the prevalence of graphical presentation, it is surely time that the ASB addressed this issue.
A set of specific guidelines should be developed, to enable preparers and auditors to portray financial information graphically in a neutral and objective way.
If this is not done, Gresham's law may well prevail: bad graphs will drive out the good.
The graphs investigated were three times more likely to exaggerate, rather than underestimate, an upward trend
accounting solutions
Goodwill
Five years ago a parent company acquired a recruitment agency subsidiary.
The subsidiary has 50 offices around the country.
During the year management decided to reorganise the business and 10 offices were closed as part of the reorganisation.
The goodwill arising on the acquisition of the subsidiary was written off directly to reserves in the year of acquisition in the parent's consolidated financial statements.
Does UITF Consensus No 3 apply in this case?
UITF Consensus No 3 states in para 7 that ‘the amount included in the consolidated profit and loss account in respect of the profit or loss on disposal of a previously acquired business, subsidiary or associated undertaking should be determined by including, if material, the attributable amount of purchased goodwill where it has previously been eliminated against reserves as a matter of accounting policy and has not previously been charged in the profit and loss account’.
It also states in para 12 that ‘the principles set out above in respect of disposals also apply to closures of businesses and to negative goodwill’.
In this case the business of the subsidiary, ie recruitment agencies, is continuing and it is only certain offices that are being closed.
Consequently it would seem that UITF Consensus No 3 does not apply.
However, there will be occasions where a reorganisation amounts to a closure of a business.
Such a case could have arisen if the subsidiary had comprised both (say) estate agency and recruitment agency businesses and all the estate agency offices were closed.
In this situation, that proportion of the goodwill written off directly to reserves that relates to the estate agency business should be charged to the profit and loss account as part of the costs of closing that activity on the grounds that it is a separate business.
Deemed disposal
At the beginning of the year a group had a 55% interest in a lossmaking subsidiary.
During the year the subsidiary made a 1 for 2 rights issue priced at £4 per ordinary £1 share.
The group did not exercise its rights but sold them to a third party for £200,000.
The third party then exercised those rights, as did other minority shareholders owning 40% of the remaining 45% of the company's share capital; therefore 95% of the rights issue was taken up.
The subsidiary's share capital was £2m (ordinary £1 shares) and its net assets were £10m immediately prior to the rights issue.
No goodwill arose on the original acquisition.
How should the group account for the transaction?
This transaction is of the type categorised in para 87 of FRS 2 Accounting for subsidiary undertakings (see this issue p 124 to p 135) as a deemed disposal.
The group owned 55% of the share capital prior to the rights issue, ie, 1,100,000 shares.
As it exercised no rights it also owned 1,100,000 shares following the issue.
The number of shares of the subsidiary in issue following the rights issue can be calculated as:
This loss would be shown as a charge in the profit and loss account.
If material, it would be treated as an extraordinary item.
Assuming the voting rights follow the share capital, the company is no longer a subsidiary and should not be consolidated.
However, it should almost certainly be treated as an associated company and be equity-accounted in future.
Pension scheme refunds
A company with a 31 December 1992 year-end has a pension scheme that is substantially over-funded.
The company is expecting to receive a refund of contributions to the scheme amounting to £1m (gross of tax) in January 1993.
The refund is in respect of contributions paid by the company prior to 31 December 1992.
In which period should the refund be taken to the profit and loss account?
Should it be shown gross or net of taxation?
The general rule set out in para 80 of SSAP 24 is that ‘variations from the regular cost should be allocated over the remaining expected service lives of current employees in the scheme’.
The refund may therefore be spread over the remaining expected service lives of current employees who are members and set against the regular cost for those years.
There is, however, a specific exemption from the general requirement to spread variations from regular cost: ‘Where a refund that is subject to deduction of tax in accordance with the provisions of the UK Finance Act 1986, or equivalent legislation, is made to the employer, the enterprise may depart from the requirements of paragraph 80 and account for the surplus or deficiency in the period in which the refund occurs.’
(SSAP 24, para 83.)
The company may therefore elect to treat the whole surplus of the scheme as a credit in the period in which it is received, that is, in the financial year ended 31 December 1993.
The refund should be accounted for gross, with the tax shown as part of the tax charge.
This seems to be the logical approach, as the surplus giving rise to the refund arose from excess contributions in past years on which tax relief was claimed.
However, as the rate of taxation deducted by the pension fund from the refund is 40%, and the standard corporation tax rate is 33%, the company will need to explain the basis of the tax charge in the notes to its financial statements.
reports & accounts
3i GROUP
Insight into venture capitalists
Retiring chairman John Cuckney says that 3i Group's 1992 annual report and accounts ‘are designed to give a greater understanding and insight into 3i's investment activities’.
The group, which provides permanent and long-term investment capital to businesses of all types, has decided to postpone its stock market flotation until next year, when the UK economy should definitely be emerging from the recession.
In its accounts for the year ended 31 March 1992, 3i has changed its policy for accounting for operating costs.
Previously it charged all operating costs, including those related to the management of investments, to revenue account.
As these costs are incurred in pursuance of the group's investment objectives, which include the attainment of long-term capital growth, the directors have decided, after consultation with the auditors (Ernst & Young), to charge 50% of the investment division's operating costs to the investment realisation profits reserve.
The change has been dealt with as a prior year adjustment: £64.267m has been credited to group revenue reserve and the same amount debited to investment realisation profits.
3i's valuation policy has been refined after internal discussions and with the external help of Professor Brealey of the London Business School, and the auditors.
Under the revised policy, the group now values USM stocks at mid-market prices; before it deducted a 20% discount.
In the case of investments in companies with a capitalisation of under £5m, 3i has reduced the discount applied from 40% to 30%.
The changes applied with effect from 31 March 1992, and since this represents a change in accounting policy, the group has restated the prior year figures.
The report includes brief details of investments with a value of over £5m, plus an analysis of the portfolio by geographical region and industrial sector.
The group's total portfolio investments amounted to £2,596m at 31 March 1992: equity shares came to £1,145m, preference shares £228m, loan investments £1,088m, investment properties £16m, associated undertakings £85m and investment leases £34m.
The directors consider that in general the group's 2,600 equity share investments do not come within the CA 1989 definition of associated undertakings, since 3i's role is normally that of a passive investor.
It is possible, however, that 3i does exert significant influence over a small number of equity investments.
The accounting policy note on associated undertakings goes on to state that the directors believe that equity accounting for associated undertakings would not give a true and fair view of the group's income.
Exceptions would be undertakings whose business is similar to the group's, are intended to be retained as long-term investments, and in which 3i has both active general management involvement and more than 20% of the equity.
Group income is better measured by the inclusion of dividend and interest income.
Note 46 to the accounts shows the effect on revenue and reserves of adopting equity accounting for the whole of the equity investment portfolio regardless of whether the investments are associated undertakings or not.
This would increase group revenue before tax by £171m in respect of companies which are profitable and reduce it by £141m in respect of loss-making companies.
In 1991/92 the group reported a revenue surplus of £32m (v £44m), earnings per share (based on revenue profits) of 13.6p (v 17.9p) and net assets per share diluted of 529p (v 512p).
FOOTBALL CLUBS
Moving the goalposts
The majority of first and second division football clubs deal with transfer fees through the p&l account; only Tottenham Hotspur and Portsmouth put their players on the balance sheet.
In a Survey of Significant Accounting Policies on Football Clubs , Touche Ross says that this is a reason why many clubs show big losses or severely depressed profit levels.
The survey is based on the latest published accounts of all first and second division clubs.
Touche believes the balance sheet treatment of capitalising expenditure on players' registrations as an intangible asset has commercial logic, but does not favour revaluing players' registrations in the accounts according to their current market worth.
Spurs capitalises the cost of registrations for players it has bought as an intangible asset, and amortises the difference between this cost and estimated residual value over the life of a player's contract.
Portsmouth values all its players in its balance sheet at directors' valuation.
Manchester United and Everton use a transfer fee movement mechanism to appropriate profits to reserve account when transfer expenditure is low or transfer revenues high, and debit this account when transfer payments are significant.
Football club balance sheets do not always show the full value of the assets: 48% do not revalue land and buildings.
At a time when clubs are having to spend heavily on ground improvements to meet the requirements of the Football Licensing Authority, Touche concludes that ‘revaluation of fixed assets in the accounts is a justified, proven and acceptable way to reflect commercially a club's net asset value’.
The survey also considers that accounting for signing-on fees is non-standard and patchy: ‘Our view is that signing-on fees are more akin to an emolument of a player rather than a transfer cost.
While the ‘full accruals basis’, is undoubtedly prudent, we believe there is more commercial logic in accounting for such costs on an ‘earnings’ basis, which better reflects both the legal form and the substance of the transaction'.
HARLAND SIMON
Ownership unconfirmed
Auditors Price Waterhouse have qualified their audit report to members of Harland Simon (design, manufacture and installation of control, automation and image processing systems) because they have been unable to obtain direct confirmation of the beneficial ownership of a shareholding in Perfect Information Ltd.
At 31 March 1991, Harland Simon held 50% of the equity share capital of Perfect Information but did not treat this as an associated undertaking because the investment was held for the short term and was disposed of in August 1991.
At that time Sandford Etablissement, a Liechtenstein trust, acquired these shares and subscribed for further shares, carrying a total of 47.5% of the voting rights.
‘Information obtained during the course of this year's audit has caused us to seek direct confirmation of the beneficial ownership of this shareholding,’ say the auditors.
As confirmation was not forthcoming, PW was unable to conclude whether Perfect Information was an associated undertaking at 31 March 1992 and should have been treated as such at 31 March 1991.
‘In this respect we are unable to conclude on the completeness and accuracy of the company's accounting records.’
Note 2 to the accounts, covering a whole page, gives details about the investment in Perfect Information.
Provisions amounting to £5.1m have been made against Harland Simon's total exposure of £5.1m at 31 March 1992.
PW points out that had Perfect Information been accounted for as an associated undertaking, ‘in our opinion up to £2m of the loss recognised this year would have been reflected in the year ended 31 March 1991 by elimination of profits arising on sales made to Perfect Information Ltd.
Net assets of the group at 31 March 1992 would be unchanged’.
Teredo Petroleum.
After discussions with its auditors, the oil company has decided to adopt the successful efforts method of accounting for oil and gas expenditure for the current financial year to 30 September 1992 instead of the full cost method.
The interim report to 31 March 1992 explains that ‘the new accounting policy is more appropriate to a company with Teredo's changed direction and brings the company into line with others where the initial speculative exploration phase has been completed’.
As a result, Teredo has charged £18.8m against reserves.
Companies using the successful efforts method capitalise only those costs which relate directly to the discovery and development of commercially exploitable oil and gas reserves.
Those using the full cost method usually smaller exploration companies — capitalise all costs incurred in exploring and developing oil and gas reserves.
Rothmans International.
The tobacco and luxury products group considers that the definition in FRS 1 of cash and cash equivalents as only those deposits, securities and borrowings which have an initial maturity of less than three months, may result in a misleading view of the group's liquidity.
This is because, as the financial review section of the annual report and accounts for the year ended 31 March 1992 states, highly liquid securities, even if listed on a recognised stock exchange, are excluded from cash equivalents since, technically, the maturity of these securities when acquired was greater than three months.
In practice, says the review, ‘such securities are more liquid than a fixed-period bank deposit with a maturity of less than three months, although the latter falls within the definition of cash equivalents’.
To rectify this, Rothmans includes a summary cash flow statement that shows the movement during the year in net cash and securities, comprising cash balances, bank deposits and short-term securities, less short-term borrowings.
The cash flow statement in the accounts is prepared on FRS 1 lines; a note to the accounts reconciles the cash and cash equivalents to net liquid funds.
Rank Organisation.
The leisure group, which has a significant holding in Rank Xerox, has included a summary unaudited balance sheet in its interim report for the first time (the report covers the 28 weeks ended 16 May 1992).
Recent interim reports do show an apparent trend towards fuller information comprising summary balance sheets and even cash flow statements.
Hogg Robinson.
At the bottom of its cash flow statement for the year ended 31 March 1992, the travel agency, transport and financial services group remarks that in accordance with FRS 1, cash and cash equivalents do not include money market deposits with an original maturity date of more than three months.
The directors consider that money market deposits form an integral part of the group's net cash balances.
Therefore net cash balances comprise cash and cash equivalents together with money market deposits.
Property Security Investment Trust.
The property investment and dealing company has charged all interest and finance charges to revenue in the year ended 31 March 1992.
Previously this had been the case for interest on development of investment properties, but interest on dealing activities was capitalised.
That policy was reasonable in a buoyant market, but the directors now feel that even capitalisation should discontinue: ‘Your company is one of the very few in the sector which does not capitalise any interest or other finance costs and has no off-balance sheet accounting of any kind.’
RECENT RESULTS
THE POST OFFICE
Enter the direct method
The Post Office has chosen to arrive at its net cash flow from operating activities by using the direct method rather than the indirect method.
This can be seen from the group cash flow statement for the year ended 29 March 1992 (see table below).
FRS 1,Cash Flow Statements , encourages reporting entities to provide the information on the direct method where the benefits to users outweigh the costs of providing it.
However, in practice so far most organisations have selected the indirect method.
Indeed the Post Office is believed to be the first major organisation to provide the details by the direct method.
Group financial accountant Tony Hall told ACCOUNTANCY that a decision to use the direct method was taken back in December 1991 so that adequate time could be devoted to making the necessary analyses.
He believes that ‘the direct method gives a truer indication of cash flow than the indirect method’.
It supplies a lot more information about the business, in Mr Hall's estimation, and the Post Office is in favour of being as open as possible.
The Post Office accounting staff studied the examples of cash flow statements prepared on a direct basis as shown in FRS 1.
A problem arose over the interpretation of the definition of cash and cash equivalents as including highly liquid instruments only if they have less than three months remaining to maturity when purchased.
The Post Office uses a number of short-term investments with lives of over three months, but which it regards as highly liquid.
The Post Office accounts for 1991/92 include the separate accounts of its main activities Royal Mail, Parcelforce, Post Office Counters — all with their own cash flow statements, which enable readers to gain a clear perception of the group's financing.
The Post Office discovered that the treatment of VAT caused some problems and would have welcomed further explanation of this matter in FRS 1.
Another area of difficulty was the elimination in the group statement of the considerable inter-group business, which required a lot of detailed workings.
Mr Hall is surprised that other entities have not used the direct method: he believes it supplies new, clearer information about a business.
PILKINGTON
Goodwill write-off prompts amendment
Pilkington (glass and plastic products) has issued an amendment to its report and financial statements for the year ended 31 March 1992 to disclose the amount of acquisition goodwill written off.
The supplementary note disclosed that over the past six years £298m goodwill arising on acquisitions has been written off to reserve.
In addition £219.9m was set off against share premium account in 1988 under s 133, CA 1985 and not recorded in the accounts.
This was inadvertently omitted from the report and accounts.
These figures exclude goodwill arising on acquisitions more than six years ago and any adjustments to goodwill in relation to part disposal in the year, since the relevant information is not available.
As required, the supplementary note includes a report from auditors Coopers & Lybrand.
professional briefing
INSTITUTE
Planning for disasters
The Institute's Information Technology Faculty has issued a new statement on IT contingency planning, the importance of which, it says, has been highlighted by the recent terrorist activity in the City of London.
The statement sets out general principles — appropriate to all computer users — relating to efforts to minimise disruption of an organisation's activities and business, and potential financial loss as a result of computer failure.
Their application, it says, will vary according to the complexities of the systems and the level of dependence on them.
It gives guidance on the identification, measurement and prioritisation of business risks, alternative processes and procedures, documentation and communication, and implementation and testing.
Copies of IT Contingency Planning are available, price £5, from the IT Faculty at the Institute.
Telephone 071–628 7060.
New insolvency guidance notes
The Institute and the Society of Practitioners of Insolvency have published three new guidance notes, dealing with disqualification of directors, employees' non-preferential claims and directors' claims as employees.
The first note,Disqualification of Directors — Statutory Reports , provides an explanation of the procedures involved in filling in and submitting a D-form to the disqualification unit at the Department of Trade and Industry.
The second,Non-preferential Claims by Employees Dismissed without Proper Notice by Insolvent Employers , gives guidance on those factors that should be taken into account in calculating employees' claims under the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978.
The third note,Treatment of Directors' Claims as ‘Employees’ in Insolvency Administration , explains the criteria that have to be met for such claims to be accepted.
Copies are available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
STANDARDS
Operating and financial review responses
The Institute has released its response to the Accounting Standards Board's proposals for companies to produce an operating and financial review.
While the Institute welcomes the proposals which, it believes, will help to solve some of the long-standing accounting problems, it does not agree with the ASB's suggestion that the OFR should be voluntary.
As a minimum, it says, The Stock Exchange should require listed companies to publish an OFR that has been reviewed by its auditors for consistency with the financial statements.
The Institute also recommends that the Financial Reporting Council use its annual review to draw attention to those aspects of the OFR that have been adopted and those that have not.
In its response, the Scottish Institute also says that the OFR should not be voluntary, and recommends that, after five years, the requirement to prepare an OFR should become part of The Stock Exchange's continuing obligations.
Copies of the Institute's release, FRAG 20/92, are available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
Lloyd's auditors — APB guidance published
The Auditing Practices Board has issued a Practice Note for Lloyd's auditors, which has been drawn up in close cooperation with the insurance market.
It deals with the special factors to be taken into account in the annual audit of syndicates, managing agents and Lloyd's brokers, and covers the procedures to be followed in making regulatory and pro forma reports on items such as the annual solvency test, the financial position of agents and brokers, cash calls on Names and run-off years of account.
The Practice Note, No 2,The Lloyd's Market , is based on an exposure draft issued at the end of 1990 (see ACCOUNTANCY , February 1991, p 37) and the comments received in response.
Copies are available, price £6.50, from the Publications Department at the Institute.
Practice Notes are intended to be persuasive, rather than prescriptive, and have a lower level of authority than Statements of Auditing Standards.
Their purpose is to provide auditors with timely guidance on new or emerging issues, and to explain the interpretation and application of auditing standards.
The first Note, which was issued in June, looked at audits of investment businesses (see ACCOUNTANCY , August, p 84).
IASC exposure draft on extraordinary items
The International Accounting Standards Committee continues its whirlwind progress on the Comparability and Improvements Project, with the publication of its sixth exposure draft in three months.
The latest, E 46,Extraordinary Items, Fundamental Errors and Changes in Accounting Policies , incorporates the changes to IAS 8,Unusual and Prior Period Items and Changes in Accounting Policies , which were agreed in the project's original Statement of Intent in July 1990.
Those changes relate to fundamental errors and adjustments resulting from changes in accounting policies.
They introduce a benchmark or preferred treatment which, in both cases, requires adjustment of the opening balance of retained earnings and a restatement of the comparative information.
The allowed (but not to be encouraged) alternative treatment permits the correction of the fundamental error or the adjustment resulting from the change in accounting policy to be included in the determination of net profit or loss for the current period.
The comparative information is presented as reported in the financial statements of the prior periods, and additional pro forma information is presented in accordance with the benchmark treatment.
The exposure draft also incorporates substantial revisions to the IAS, including: disclosure of the profit or loss from ordinary activities and extraordinary items on the face of the income statement; guidance to assist in the identification of extraordinary items (outside the ordinary activities of an enterprise and of a non-recurring nature); a requirement to disclose the nature and amount of items of income and expense within profit or loss from ordinary activities that are of such size, nature or incidence that their disclosure is relevant to explain the performance of the enterprise for the period; and additional disclosures in respect of discontinued operations.
Copies of the draft are available, price £5, from the IASC, 167 Fleet Street, London EC4A 2ES.
The deadline for comments, which should be sent to the same address, is 30 November.
FASB drops accounting for investments project
The Financial Accounting Standards Board has withdrawn from its agenda a project on accounting for investments with prepayment risk.
The FASB issued an exposure draft on the subject in September 1991, and was expected to issue a statement later this year.
But, after considering the comments it received on the ED, the board has decided not to pursue the subject as a single project.
Many of the key issues involved will be covered in the FASB's project on present value-based measurements.
Fair value accounting
The Financial Accounting Standards Board is to press ahead with an approach that would expand the use of fair value accounting for investments in debt and equity securities.
The FASB plans, however, to retain the current practice of using the amortised cost method for debt securities that management has a positive intent to hold to maturity.
A formal draft for public comment on fair value accounting is expected shortly.
Two IAPC exposure drafts circulated
The International Auditing Practices Committee has issued two exposure drafts for comment: the first is a proposed international standard on auditing,Reporting on Comparatives , and the second is a proposed international statement on auditing,Communication with Management .
The first draft provides guidance on the auditor's responsibilities relating to the audit of figures from preceding periods which are required to be included in, and therefore form part of, the current financial statements.
Issues discussed include general and reporting guidance for both the continuing auditor (who audited and reported on the previous financial statements) and the incoming auditor (where the previous financial statements were either audited by another auditor or not audited at all).
Guidance is also proposed for situations in which the predecessor auditor's report is to be re-issued.
The second draft discusses the relationship between the auditor and management and draws together in one document relevant sections from a number of international standards on auditing which relate to the different aspects of the auditor's responsibilities in this area.
Copies of both documents are available free from International Affairs (ext 2450) at the Institute.
The deadline for comments, which should be sent to the Director General, International Federation of Accountants, 540 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10022, US, is 31 January 1993.
CITY REGULATION
Imro's supervision of Maxwell companies
The Securities and Investments Board has decided to strengthen Imro after studying the SRO's report on its regulation of two Maxwell companies, Bishopsgate Investment Management and London and Bishopsgate International Investment Management.
Imro concluded that it was ‘not good enough’— monitoring was applied over-literally, higher-risk members were less easy to identify, and the response to the crises of the last days was not adequate.
The SIB is concerned that the failures reveal a more general lack of market awareness and scepticism in dealing with information about transactions and in monitoring returns.
Imro is already making organisational changes and is to strengthen its monitoring resources.
The SIB is reviewing the supervision of the custody of investor assets and the arrangements for communications between regulators.
One recommendation in the Imro report concerns the professional advisers to the companies involved.
This says that ‘greater freedom of communication by those professional advisers to the regulators might have had a significant effect on subsequent action, and hence on the later course of events’.
As a result the SIB will review with SROs and the accountancy bodies relations between auditors and regulators, in particular the mechanisms by which auditors may pass critical or relevant information direct to regulators.
Counsel has advised the SIB that the full report cannot be published at present.
Consequently, the SIB has only issued the introduction and a summary of conclusions and actions taken.
Marketing life assurance
The Securities and Investments Board has published new rules on disclosure and standards of advice in connection with the marketing of life assurance.
Lautro has published corresponding new disclosure rules.
The new rules include more timely provision of information to investors, spell out the consequences of surrender, and show the effect of expenses by a deduction as pence in the pound from premiums paid (see ACCOUNTANCY , July, p 96).
The new rules will not be brought into force until the Director General of Fair Trading has scrutinised them.
Copies of The Financial Services (Miscellaneous Amendments)(No 21) Rules and Regulations 1992 , price £10, are available from the SIB, Gavrelle House, 2–14 Bunhill Row, London EC1Y 8RA.
Guidance for housebuilders
The Securities and Investments Board has published guidance about the position under the FSA 1986 of housebuilders who help prospective buyers by introducing them to mortgage lenders.
Where they introduce people to lenders who are tied to authorised investment providers, such as life offices, they require authorisation or exemption.
There is a specific exclusion where the introductions are made to an authorised independent financial adviser.
The guidance note will also be of interest to mortgage brokers and estate agents.
Copies of Introduction by Housebuilders to Tied Lending Sources , guidance release 2/92, are available, price £5, from the SIB, Gavrelle House, 2–14 Bunhill Row, London EC1Y 8RA.
Investor compensation
In the year ended 31 March 1992, the Investors Compensation Scheme paid £12.5m to 1,598 investors.
This compares with £1.8m paid to 239 investors in the previous year.
Denis Child, the outgoing chairman, characterises the year as seeing ‘a very large increase in defaults, claims and settlements and no diminution in the complexity of the underlying activity’.
Of the £12.5m, the largest component was £4.1m paid to 167 investors as a result of the default of Dunsdale Securities.
Copies of the fourth annual report are available, price £5, from the Investors Compensation Scheme, Gavrelle House, 2–14 Bunhill Row, London EC1Y 8RA.
Support for Taurus
Twenty-eight companies have already obtained shareholder approval to move their stock into Taurus, the new paperless share transfer and registration system, when it is phased in from mid-1993.
Many other companies intend to vote on the Taurus resolutions at their 1992 agms.
Changes at Lloyd's
The Council of Lloyd's has agreed on a timetable for implementation of changes to its governing structure.
The recommendations, including a halving in the size of the Council and the separation of its regulatory and business functions, were contained in the report of a working party chaired by Sir Jeremy Morse (see ACCOUNTANCY , August, p 85).
An explanatory guide to the operation of the new stop loss scheme for Lloyd's Names has been issued; copies will be sent to all existing Names.
From 1 January 1993, disclosure will be made of all the business interests and those of connected persons of members of the Council and the new Lloyd's Market Regulatory Boards.
The requirements are based on the Companies Act 1985, and the central register containing details will be available for inspection by all members.
It will include details of salary, pension and profit-related pay drawn from Lloyd's sources.
Lloyd's is now releasing through its magazine,Limelight , financial figures for all the syndicates.
Stock Exchange supports Cadbury
The Stock Exchange believes that every listed company should report on its compliance with the code of best practice drafted by the Cadbury Committee, but it does not intend to require compliance.
New applicants for a listing will be expected to report on how they comply with the code as part of their listing particulars.
As regards financial reporting, The Stock Exchange is considering whether balance-sheet information should be included in interim reports, provided the unaudited nature of the figures is explained.
WESTMINSTER UPDATE
Money laundering legislation Institute response
Moves by the Government to incorporate the EC directive on money laundering into UK law at the earliest opportunity have received strong support from the Institute's Financial Reporting and Auditing Group.
But it has expressed its concern over proposals in the Treasury's consultative document which seek to impose similar formal and detailed requirements for control and communication on professionals, such as lawyers and accountants, as well as on banks and building societies.
‘While it is almost inevitable that in any money laundering activity a credit or financial institution will be involved,’ FRAG says, ‘there is a much lower probability of an accountant being involved…
Not only does this mean that the accountancy profession is not likely to encounter money laundering to any major extent, but also the relatively few transactions that pass through their hands are more identifiable and hence those that relate to money laundering are more likely to be recognised.
We therefore do not think that formal procedures for the identification of money laundering transactions are necessary.’
As a result, FRAG believes that the requirement procedures should distinguish clearly between those appropriate to accountants and lawyers and those appropriate to financial institutions with their higher volume of transactions and less close client relationships.
‘Not to do so would be very costly in the imposition of formal controls, without improving on the effectiveness of the informal controls that are inherent in the nature and purpose of professional work.’
FRAG is currently drafting guidance for members on the recognition of suspicious transactions and the action to be taken in relation to them, which, it argues, should provide sufficient regulation.
It also takes the Treasury to task over its intention to create a new offence which will be committed by any person acting in the course of any trade, business or profession who does not report his money laundering suspicions.
This requirement, it says, is far more burdensome than the equivalent requirement in the directive, which is limited to credit and financial institutions.
It rejects the proposal that accountants should not be allowed to report suspicions to senior management before reporting to the appropriate external authorities, and stresses that those that do report externally must be protected from any possible claims of breach of confidentiality.
Copies of FRAG 23/92 are available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
Charities Act 1992
The Charities Act 1992 makes changes to company law insofar as it applies to charitable companies.
It will be implemented by a number of statutory instruments starting in September 1992 and probably concluding in autumn 1993.
Ss 4 and 5 contain provisions under which a charity can be required to change its name if it is too much like another's, or is misleading in other ways.
S 10 gives the Charity Commissioners power to petition for the winding-up of a charitable company.
Previously the appropriate authority was the Attorney General, who retains the power to petition in certain circumstances.
Ss 19–27 make provision for keeping accounting records and the submission of annual reports accompanied by statements of account by charity trustees, together with provisions requiring independent examination or auditing of accounts.
S 40 provides that a charitable company must obtain the Commissioners' consent before it makes a change in its objectives.
This is now extended to the alteration of any other provisions in the memorandum or articles that restrict the way the company's property can be used.
S 41 states that a charitable company must get the Commissioners' consent before it carries out certain transactions with its directors, such as payments in respect of loss of office or retirement.
S 42 ensures that the name of a charitable company appears on all its correspondence.
S 45 contains provisions disqualifying certain individuals, such as those subject to an order disqualifying them from acting as company directors, from acting as charity trustees.
S 46 makes it an offence for a person to act as a charity trustee while disqualified.
Speedier bad debt payment proposals
The Smaller Firms Council of the Confederation of British Industry is to press the Government to introduce changes in court procedures which would speed up the time it takes to pay bad debts.
It has come up with a series of proposals in conjunction with City solicitors Davies Arnold Cooper which, it says, could enable judgment to be reached in 38 days in an undefended case and 66 days in a defended case.
Undefended cases currently take an average of 60 days in the High Court and 114 days in the County Court, while defended cases take around 100 days in the High Court and 128 in the County Court.
The proposals include: setting up a system of area judicial debt recovery tribunals by upgrading the debt recovery function of County Courts to the level of District Registries of the High Court; putting County Court bailiffs on to a results-based salary similar to that of High Court bailiffs; and putting a £500 ceiling on County Court bad debt claims, with larger claims going to the High Court where better results can be achieved.
The Council also says that taking legal action should be possible without having to send a solicitor's letter first, as seems to be general practice at the moment.
Review of Companies House
The Department of Trade and Industry has announced a review of Companies House which could lead to partial or full privatisation.
Consultants are to be appointed shortly to examine its role as an executive agency and to consider how its work might be best carried out in the future.
According to Michael Heseltine, President of the Board of Trade: ‘It has always been this Government's policy to put current services into the private sector where this makes sense.
The Government's job is to govern, not to administer.’
Implementation of branches directives
The Department of Trade and Industry has published a consultative document on implementation of the EC Eleventh Company Law Directive and the Bank Branches Directive.
Both pieces of legislation should already have been incorporated into UK law, although neither applies until 1 January 1993.
The Eleventh Company Law Directive deals with the disclosures, including accounting documents, which have to be made by branches established in one member state of companies registered in another member state or outside the European Community.
The Bank Branches Directive, which is complementary to the Eleventh Directive, sets out the special requirements relating to disclosure of accounting documents by a credit or financial institution which has established a branch in a member state but has its head office elsewhere.
Copies of the consultative document, which contains draft regulations, are available free from the DTI, Companies Division, Room 519, Ashdown House, 123 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0NN.
Comments should be sent to the same address by 23 September.
Package Travel Directive proposals
A compensation fund for package holiday customers is one of several additional proposals relating to Art 7 of the Package Travel Directive recently announced by Consumer Affairs Minister Baroness Denton.
The proposed fund — which is based on an initiative by the five main trade associations — would compensate package holiday customers not covered by the existing Air Travel Organisers' Licence Arrangements.
Customers of companies joining the scheme would be expected to pay a fixed sum until the fund reaches an appropriate level, and if extra calls were made, further levies might be added.
In addition, companies would not be required to join trade associations but would be free to do so if they wished; members would be bonded to the management of the fund for a prescribed percentage of turnover on non-ATOL packages; and they would also be able to bond at lower levels than those bonded to other bodies.
European ruling on NI contributions
UK National Insurance contribution arrangements will continue as before, following a recent ruling by the European Court of Justice.
The Equal Opportunities Commission brought an application for judicial review in December 1990, claiming that it was against European law to require men to pay NI for longer and to make five more years' contributions than women in order to receive full pensions entitlement.
The High Court referred the application to the European Court of Justice, which found that the differences were permissible in terms of EC law.
Equal pension ages
The state pension age for men and women should be equalised at 65, and gradually implemented over 15 years from 2000, according to a recently published report from the Social Security Advisory Committee.
Consequential savings of approximately £3bn could then be used to assist vulnerable groups not adequately provided for at present.
These include low earners, particularly women; divorcees; women returners; carers; the long-term sick and disabled; and the long-term unemployed in their mid-50s or over.
Such support would be provided through enhancement of the State Earnings Related Pension Scheme (SERPS) to assist low earners and those with broken employment records; enhanced home responsibility protection; extension of the invalid care allowance to 65 for women; enhancement of invalid care allowance and severe disablement allowance to the contributory benefit rate; and a review of the relationship between invalidity benefit and retirement pensions.
In addition, a new premium with income support for people unemployed over two years will be introduced.
This will also apply to long-term sick and disabled people over 55.
Copies of Options for Equality in State Pensions Age — A Case for Equalising at 65 are available, price £5.85, from HMSO.
SCAM WARNING
The Confederation of British Industry has warned companies to be on the lookout for letters from overseas publishers inviting them to submit entries in fax, telex and trademark directories.
Many are bogus and victims could find themselves parting with thousands of pounds with no return.
The CBI advises companies to examine any directory letter with the utmost care before forwarding any money.
It adds that trademark directories seem to be this year's most popular scam.
Reducing surpluses OPB guidance
The Occupational Pensions Board has issued guidance on the information required from occupational pension schemes where they seek to reduce or eliminate statutory surpluses.
The guidance must be read in conjunction with Memorandum 23, which will be modified in due course.
Potential applicants with queries should contact the OPB on 091–225 6404.
The OPB has also published Memorandum No 78,Preservation, Voluntary Contributions, Revaluation and Transfer Values , which updates the 1982 version as amended.
National Insurance visits to increase
Visits by National Insurance inspectors are to increase by 30% over the next year, according to the Contributions Agency's new Business Plan.
Additional targets set by Minister for Social Security Peter Lilley include: the identification of at least 40,000 extra self-employed people who should be registered; a £12m increase in returns from identified Class 1 NI underpayments; a £13.3m increase in payments of arrears; and efficiency savings of £2.6m. 95% of customers can also expect a response to their enquiries within 10 working days.
Copies of the Business Plan are available free from the Contributions Agency, Communications Section, Room 87B, Long Benton, Newcastle-Upon-Tyne NE19 1YX.
Tax havens
A Private Members Bill, Transactions with Tax Havens, which has all-party support, has been introduced in the Commons by Conservative backbencher David Shaw.
The Bill would make it illegal to carry on business with tax havens.
Accountants, lawyers and other professionals who engage in such business would face enormous fines and up to 10 years' imprisonment.
In Mr Shaw's view, his Bill, if it had been law, would have prevented the Maxwell fraud and the problems with BCCI, as well as saving billions of pounds lost to the Exchequer every year because of tax haven activity.
LAW Edited by Denis Keenan
Statutory Instruments
Single-member companies
— SI 1992/1699 (£1.50).
These Regulations,which are now in force , implement the Twelfth Company Law Directive on single member private limited companies.
The Regulations amend the Companies Act 1985 and the Insolvency Act 1986.
The major amendments are: to s 1, CA 1985 to allow a private limited company to be formed or to operate with only one member; to s 24, CA 1985 so that it no longer applies to private limited companies (so, if a company becomes a single member company as a result, say, of the transfer of the shares of one of two members to the other, the sole member will not lose the benefit of limited liability as could formerly be the case); to s 122(1) (e) of the Insolvency Act 1986 so that it no longer applies to private limited companies.
That section enables the court to wind up a company if its membership falls below two.
There are a number of special requirements, including entering on the company's register of members a statement that the company has only one member and giving the name and address of that sole member.
There is no requirement to notify Companies House of this event.
Resolutions will have to be evidenced in writing and all contracts between the company and the sole member (if the sole member is also the sole director, bearing in mind that a director need not be a member) will have to be in writing unless entered into in the ordinary course of the company's business on its usual terms and conditions.
Partnership
— SIs 1992/1438 (65p) and 1439 (65p).
These Regulations,which are now in force , allow partnerships of unlimited size if they are formed for the purpose of carrying on practice as consulting engineers, provided a majority of the partners are recognised by the Engineering Council as chartered engineers.
They replace and revoke earlier Regulations (SI 1970/992 ) which provided for exemption from s 716 of the CA 1985 in relation to engineers recognised as chartered engineers by the Engineering Council's predecessor, the Council of Engineering Institutions.
Note.
S 716 of the CA 1985 prohibits the formation of partnerships consisting of more than 20 persons.
There are many exemptions including, since 1967, firms of accountants, solicitors and members of The Stock Exchange.
Pensions
— SI 1992/1531 (£3.55).
These Regulations,which take effect on 28 September 1992 , tighten the disclosure rules in terms of information provided by trustees of occupational pension funds (see also ACCOUNTANCY , August, p 86).
The trustees must disclose to members, prospective members, beneficiaries and trade unions: the address and functions of the Pensions Ombudsman; the role of the Occupational Pensions Advisory Service; whether an insolvency practitioner has been appointed as an independent trustee; whether the Registrar of Occupational and Personal Pensions has accepted registration of the scheme; and whether the trustees have access to the guidance of the Occupational Pensions Board.
— SI 1992/1555 (£1.05).
These Regulations,which are now in force , implement s 58B of the Social Security Act 1990.
The section provides that a deficiency in a pensions scheme that is wound up becomes the debt of the employer.
It follows therefore that the trustees can make a claim on the employer to make up the deficiency and claim a share in the company's assets if the employer goes into liquidation.
LAW CASE REVIEW Edited by Denis Keenan
Auditors not liable
A recent High Court decision has considered the liability of auditors who were at fault in failing to qualify their report on a company's accounts.
In Berg Sons & Co Ltd and Others v Adams and Others, Financial Times Law Reports, 10 July 1992 (see ACCOUNTANCY , August, p 20), a winding-up order was made against Berg Sons & Co Ltd on 21 May 1985.
The petitioner was Union Discount Co (London) plc, a creditor of Berg.
A liquidator was then appointed to Berg, which was an insolvent company and heavily indebted to a number of banks and discount houses.
These proceedings were brought by Berg and Union Discount against Berg's auditors, Dearden Farrow.
Berg alleged breach of duty in contract and in tort owed to it by its auditors as a result of which Berg had, so it was alleged, lost about £13m.
Union Discount alleged breach of a duty of care in tort and claimed in respect of the dishonour of four bills of exchange drawn by Berg, three of them on a company called Esal Commodities Ltd.
The allegations of breach of duty related to an unqualified report signed by the auditors for Berg's accounts for the year ended 31 March 1982.
It was alleged that the accounts should have shown a turnover of £2.19m and not £23.69m and that bills of exchange for £2.39m (referred to as the ‘Gimco’ bills), included as ‘bills receivable’, should have been treated as irrecoverable.
The audit report, which was addressed to ‘the members’ of Berg, was signed on 8 October 1982.
The auditors' report said: ‘In our opinion the accounts give a true and fair view of the state of affairs at 31 March 1982.’
A Mr Golechha (G) was in effect the sole proprietor and directing mind and will of Berg.
His knowledge was also that of the company.
Although the auditors' report was addressed to ‘the members’ of Berg, it was for all practical purposes addressed to G alone.
The auditors had carried out a specific investigation of the Gimco bills and with regard to recoverability, they had no more than an assurance from Gimco, an Abu Dhabi entity, that the bills would be honoured ‘within three to four months or earlier when able’ and an unsupported statement by G that he believed Gimco would pay.
They had effectively no verification of recoverability.
In the judge's view, the auditors should have said ‘bills receivable include bills…payable by an overseas debtor the credit-worthiness of whom it has not been possible to verify’, and ‘subject to satisfactory recovery of the monies, in our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view’.
The judge then considered Berg's and Union Discount's claims.
Berg's case was that the unqualified report by the auditors gave the company an opportunity to continue to carry on business and to borrow money from third parties.
But, the judge said, such matters did not fall within the scope of the duty of a statutory auditor.
Berg also argued that the fact that G was fully informed and not misled by the report was irrelevant, since it was alleged that he was not acting in Berg's interest so that his knowledge should not be attributed to the company.
The judge did not accept that argument.
Berg and G were in effect one and the same.
If Berg was successfully to allege that it was fraudulently misled, it must show that some natural person connected with it had been misled, and Berg could not do this.
Union Discount alleged that it was owed a duty of care by the auditors when they reported on the audit.
It said that the auditors knew that Union Discount was extending credit to Berg and it was foreseeable that it would be sent copies of the accounts and would rely on them when making decisions whether or not to continue or extend credit.
The judge said that Union Discount had not proved that the purpose of an audit was other than to satisfy statutory requirements.
The judge went on to say that in the Al Saudi Banque case [1989]3 All ER 361, Mr Justice Millett had held that foreseeability that a lender might rely on audited accounts was not enough in itself to establish the duty of care.
That decision was approved by the House of Lords in Caparo [1990]1 All ER 568.
As Caparo showed, there had to be a specific relationship between the function that the defendant was requested to perform and the transaction in relation to which the plaintiff said he had relied on proper performance.
The transactions by which Union Discount had alleged it had suffered loss were too remote from reporting on the accounts.
Union Discount could not establish the existence of a duty of care owed to it in relation to the audit.
Berg's claim failed because the company was not misled and did not rely on the report and because the facts did not raise a situation where G was acting in fraud of the company or its creditors.
Furthermore, the judge held that both claims failed for want of proof of causation.
He said that, had the auditors refused to sign an unqualified report, the effect on Berg's affairs would have been insignificant.
G's business activities depended very much on his own personality and his personal relations with the relevant bank managers and the banks' assessment of his business standing.
The accounts were not critical.
They did not provide any basis for extending substantial credit to Berg.
The reason why Berg ultimately failed was Esal's failure as a business and Berg's unsuccessful commodity dealing in the year ended March 1984.
The cause of Union Discount's failure to recover on the bills was Esal's and Berg's failures.
Surety used set-off against BCCI
MS Fashions Ltd (Fashions) and MS Fashions (Wholesale) Ltd (Wholesale) had been customers of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International since 1980.
They had been given borrowing and overdraft facilities.
Mr Sawar had acted as surety for the two companies when they borrowed from BCCI and he had, in December 1985, charged the sum of £300,000 standing to his credit with BCCI with payment of the debts of the two companies to BCCI.
In July 1991 a provisional winding-up order was made against BCCI and in November 1991 the bank demanded payment of £600,000, the debts of Fashions and Wholesale.
Fashions, Wholesale and Mr Sawar brought proceedings against BCCI asking for a declaration that the amount of the debt due to BCCI could be reduced by the operation of Rule 4.90 of the Insolvency Rules 1986, to the extent of the sum standing to the credit of Mr Sawar in his deposit account with BCCI at the date BCCI went into liquidation.
The Court dismissed their appeal at first instance but they appealed (see MS Fashions Ltd and Others v Bank of Credit and Commerce International SA [1992],The Times , 23 June).
Where there have been mutual credits, debts or other mutual dealings between a company before it goes into liquidation and any other creditors, Rule 4.90 provides that account should be taken of what is due from each party, and the sums due from one shall be set off against the sums due from the other.
In the Court of Appeal Lord Justice Scott said that the set-off under Rule 4.90 operated at the date of the winding-up so as to leave the net amount claimable by a company in a liquidation from the other party or provable as a debt in the liquidation.
In this case, BCCI argued that it was not open to Fashions and Wholesale to take advantage of the set-off effect as between BCCI and Mr Sawar.
It was not disputed that the effect of Rule 4.90 between Mr Sawar and BCCI was to reduce his indebtedness to BCCI by the amount outstanding to his credit in the deposit account.
However, it was contended for the bank that Fashions and Wholesale remained indebted to BCCI for £600,000 and BCCI then became accountable to Mr Sawar for £300,000; this amount would then be limited to the dividend payable in the liquidation.
The judge did not accept this argument.
He said that it was clear that payment by a surety, whether in whole or in part, not only released the surety but also reduced the liability to the creditor of the principal debtor.
Therefore the effect of Rule 4.90 in reducing Mr Sawar's liability to BCCI from £600,000 to £300,000 corresponded to a payment of the same amount by Mr Sawar to BCCI, thus reducing the total indebtedness of Fashions, Wholesale and Mr Sawar to £300,000.
Mr Sawar could use the set-off effect of Rule 4.90 to reduce the debt owned to BCCI.
The appeal was allowed.
Shareholders' agreement may prevail over articles
During the 1970s, Northern Bank and its subsidiary Northern Bank Development Corporation (NBDC) lent substantial sums of money to two brickmaking companies, one in County Down and the other in County Tyrone, or invested heavily in them.
The former was unsuccessful but the latter prospered.
In 1979 NBDC devised a scheme whereby control of both companies came to be vested in a new holding company, TBL, with an authorised share capital of £1,000 divided into 1,000 £1 shares.
The four executives who ran the County Tyrone works were to manage TBL, and 20 shares in TBL were allotted to each.
A further 120 shares were allotted to NBDC but no allotment of the remaining 800 shares was made.
On 14 November 1979 a shareholders' agreement was executed by the four executives but, although TBL was named as a party to the agreement, it never executed it.
This agreement stated that its terms should have precedence over the company's articles of association.
It went on to state, in clause 3, that ‘no further share capital shall be created or issued…without the written consent of each of the parties hereto’.
On 10 March 1988, the TBL board called an egm of shareholders for 30 March to consider increasing its share capital, which it had power to do under its articles of association.
Before the meeting, Mr Russell, one of the four executives, issued a writ against the other original shareholders, claiming an injunction to restrain them from voting on the resolution.
He contended that to do so without his consent would be a breach of clause 3.
The Court of Appeal in Northern Ireland, upholding the trial judge's decision, ordered that TBL be joined as defendant and dismissed the action on the ground that clause 3 of the agreement constituted an attempt to fetter TBL's statutory power to increase its capital and was therefore invalid.
Mr Russell appealed to the House of Lords (see Russell v Northern Bank Development Corporation Ltd & Others [1992]Financial Times Law Reports, 18 June).
Lord Jauncey stated that the issue was whether clause 3 amounted to an unlawful and invalid fetter on TBL's statutory power to increase its share capital or whether it was not more than an agreement between shareholders about their manner of voting in a given situation.
Both parties accepted the long-established principle that a company could not forgo its right to alter its articles of association.
His lordship held that, while a provision in a company's articles that restricted its statutory power to alter those articles was invalid, an agreement outside the articles between shareholders about how they should exercise their voting rights on a resolution to alter the articles was not necessarily invalid.
Therefore, so far as the original shareholders were concerned, clause 3 of the shareholders' agreement did not amount to an unlawful fetter on the company's statutory power to increase its share capital; it was simply a personal agreement outside the articles between the shareholders who executed it about how they would exercise their voting rights in relation to the creation or issue of shares, and did not purport to bind future shareholders.
On the other hand, the agreement by TBL that it would not increase its capital without the consent of each of the shareholders was unenforceable.
That was, Lord Jauncey said, a clear undertaking by TBL not to exercise its statutory powers for a period that could last for as long as any one of the parties to the agreement remained a shareholder and long after the control of TBL had passed to shareholders who were not party to the agreement.
As such that undertaking was as obnoxious as if it had been contained in the articles of association, and was therefore unenforceable, being contrary to Art 131 of The Companies (Northern Ireland) Order 1986 .
This latter undertaking was, however, independent of and severable from that of the shareholders and there was no reason why it should not be enforceable by the shareholders among themselves as a personal agreement that in no way fettered TBL in the exercise of its statutory powers.
The appeal would therefore be allowed.
Comment.
Thus, while a company cannot deprive itself of its power to alter its articles, an agreement by which shareholders (without binding future shareholders) agree personally between themselves about the manner in which they will exercise their voting powers is enforceable.
This is analogous to the 1970 decision of the House of Lords in Bushell v Faith [1970]1 All ER 52, in which a provision about voting rights, which had the effect of making a special resolution incapable of being passed if a particular shareholder or group of shareholders exercised his or their voting rights against a proposed alteration of articles, was held to be enforceable; an article in terms that no alteration shall be made without the consent of a particular member would be invalid, as it would come into direct conflict with statute law.
The principles of company law the Lords applied in this case are also relevant to companies registered in the jurisdiction of England and Wales.
EMPLOYMENT
VDUs — no miscarriage risk
A Health and Safety Executive survey of 450 pregnant women has found that the risk of miscarriage is not increased for women who work with visual display units.
According to author Dr Eve Roman, ‘it made no difference whether a woman worked on a VDU as part of her general day, whether she just used it occasionally or whether her only contact with a VDU was that it happened to be in the same room’.
This finding supports earlier studies published in North America.
Sick building syndrome inconclusive report
Despite extensive research, the causes of sick building syndrome have not yet been clearly established and so are unlikely to be eradicated in the near future, according to a new report from the Health & Safety Executive.
However, researchers have indicated that the main risk factors which might contribute to the symptoms associated with SBS (such as eye, nose and throat irritation and fatigue) include problems relating to ventilation, airborne chemical pollution, micro-organisms contained in airborne dust, high temperatures when combined with low humidity, poor lighting and routine jobs.
And they suggest that improvements might well be achieved by taking these factors into consideration in the process of specification, design, construction, installation, commissioning and maintenance of buildings and their services.
Copies of HSE Research Report No 42/1992,Sick Building Syndrome: a Review of the Evidence on Causes and Solutions , are available, price £25, from HMSO.
Competing while still employed
The Employment Appeal Tribunal has decided that a company acted reasonably in dismissing its managing director after discovering that, along with another manager, he was planning to set up in competition with the company and take on the business of its best customer (see Marshall v Industrial Systems and Control Ltd [1992]IRLR 294).
Mr Marshall (M) was the managing director of Industrial Systems.
One of the company's most profitable activities was the distribution of a piece of software made by Boeing.
The company regarded itself as having exclusive European rights from Boeing to market the item.
In the autumn of 1990 a problem developed between M and other board members.
M was informed that his fellow directors had lost confidence in him, that they were not satisfied with his performance and that he must improve.
He was not told that he was being dismissed, but the EAT found that he could reasonably have assumed from what was said that his continuing employment prospects might well be limited.
In December 1990 it came to the other directors' knowledge that M and another manager, Elizabeth Melon, the software sales manager, intended to start a new company and to take over the distribution of the Boeing software.
It appeared that they had already approached Boeing on this matter and had tried to induce another key employee to join them.
M was dismissed and complained of unfair dismissal.
He based his case on the EAT's decision in Laughton v Bapp Industrial Supplies Ltd [1986]IRLR 245, which said that an employee did not breach his duty of loyalty merely by indicating an intention to set up in competition with the employer in the future.
However, the EAT said that this case was entirely different from Laughton.
It was one thing to form an intention to compete while employed, but quite another to take active steps to induce other managers to join the competing enterprise and negotiate to deprive the employing company of its best customer.
M was fairly dismissed.
Racist remarks at work
A South London Industrial Tribunal has ruled that racist remarks made by an employer to an employee can amount to unlawful discrimination at work.
The Commission for Racial Equality has said that this is the first such ruling and extends the definition of unfair treatment, which may well influence other tribunals' decisions in future.
It appears from a note in the Financial Times of 29 July 1992 that the Tribunal reached its decision following evidence that Mark Perl, a manager at National Leisure Catering at the South Bank Centre in London, said of five black workers: ‘I'm going to see my black slaves’.
He was also reported to have told a white worker not to resign, as management was ‘only after the blacks’.
Mr Perl denied making the remarks but the tribunal found against him.
The remarks followed the company's attempt to demote the men.
The five workers were dismissed when they refused to accept the demotions.
The company was ordered to pay the five workers £2,000 compensation each for injury to feelings.
The Tribunal found that the remarks would have affected working conditions and that the five workers ‘must have suspected their jobs were under fire’.
Pregnancy dismissals
In the March issue of ACCOUNTANCY (see p 50), we reported the Court of Appeal's decision in Webb v Emo Air Cargo (UK) Ltd [1992]142 New Law Journal 16.
The Court decided that, although as a general rule dismissing a pregnant woman for a reason arising from or related to her pregnancy will result in direct discrimination under the Sex Discrimination Act 1975, this is not an inevitable consequence.
The question to be addressed by an industrial tribunal in a particular case is whether a man would have been dismissed by the employer if, in the same circumstances, he would have been absent for the same length of time for medical reasons.
The Court of Appeal has taken the matter a step further in Shomer v B&R Residential Lettings Ltd [1992]453 Industrial Relations Legal Information Bulletin 2, by holding that in making the comparison with a hypothetical sick man, all relevant circumstances must be taken into account so that where, as in this case, there had been misconduct by the pregnant woman, the correct comparison was with a sick man who had also been guilty of misconduct.
Jacqueline Shomer (S) was employed by B&R as a negotiator.
She introduced prospective tenants to properties and arranged lettings.
She had a company car and was allowed private use of it.
In September 1987 S told the managing director, a Mr Brown, that she was pregnant and that the baby was due in April 1988.
A few days later S made arrangements to go on holiday and told Mr Brown of her holiday plans.
An argument developed because Mr Brown told her that the new chauffeur the company had just taken on could use her car while she was away, as the car that had been ordered for him had not arrived.
S said that she needed the car to take her family to the airport and that in any case they were only abroad for one week out of two, so she would need the car again on her return.
After further confrontation about the car, it was agreed that S would leave the vehicle outside her home to be collected by another member of staff while she was away.
However, contrary to Mr Brown's instructions, S took the car to Gatwick and left it there while she was on holiday.
When she returned she found a letter of dismissal waiting for her and a cheque for payment in lieu of notice.
She complained to an industrial tribunal that the main reason for her dismissal was that she was pregnant so that her dismissal was an act of unlawful sex discrimination contrary to the 1975 Act.
The Tribunal concluded that S would not have been dismissed if she had not been pregnant.
The matter eventually reached the Court of Appeal which said that the Industrial Tribunal had failed to take all the relevant matters into account.
The question was whether an employee who was going to suffer from a disability, and was then guilty of misconduct, would have been dismissed if he had been a man.
The Court then decided that the Tribunal's decision was perverse, because there was no material from which to conclude that the hypothetical man guilty of misconduct would not have been dismissed in the same way as was S. Her appeal was dismissed and leave to appeal to the House of Lords was refused.
Comment.
There have been two other decisions in this field.
In Leeds Private Hospital Ltd v Parkin [1992]453 IRLIB 3, the Employment Appeal Tribunal upheld an industrial tribunal decision that a man with a known disability who had been absent from work for four days, as had the pregnant employee in this case, would not have been dismissed.
Therefore the woman's dismissal was unlawful sex discrimination.
In Brown v Rentokil Ltd [1992]453 IRLIB 4, the EAT ruled that an employee who had been dismissed in accordance with sickness absence rules when she was away from work because of pregnancy-related illness, was not discriminated against.
It upheld the industrial tribunal's decision that a man in comparable circumstances would also be dismissed.
There was a company rule incorporated into the woman's terms and conditions that where an employee exceeded 26 weeks' continuous sick leave, he or she would be dismissed.
It was after the prescribed absence that the woman was dismissed.
The EAT was of the opinion that there was no reason to distinguish an illness caused by pregnancy or childbirth from other illnesses, since although certain illnesses affect only one sex, male and female employees are equally affected by illness overall.
Health and Safety
Regulations,which are now in force , put health and safety duties on the original supplier of equipment which is leased for use at work, rather than on the lessor (SI 1992/1524 , £1.05).
Obligations under the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 are therefore transferred to the supplier of the item, and his obligations continue where the equipment is subject to a further lease in continuation of the original one.
tax briefing
TAX Compiled by Chris Greene and Christina Maddalena of Clark Whitehill
Accident insurance
The Inland Revenue has announced that it will no longer regard certain accident insurance policies as giving rise to taxable ‘gains’ under the general provisions (ss 539–554, TA 1988) which tax ‘gains’arising in connection with life insurance policies.
The new approach is set out in a Statement of Practice, SP 6/92,Accident Insurance Policies , and is more consistent with the aims of the legislation.
The new practice will apply to gains arising from an accident insurance policy that affords protection against the risk of dying only if death is as a result of an accident, has no investment content, and does not acquire a surrender value (other than one equal to the proportion of the premium paid which is refundable if the policy is terminated early or in other circumstances).
The change of practice does not extend to group accident insurance policies that are capable of giving rise to more than one death benefit, typically the type of policies used by employers to cover their employees and by other groups such as partnerships.
Taxable ‘gains’ can arise from such policies if more than one death benefit is paid, even where the policy has no investment content and no surrender value, because of the rule dealing with partial surrenders of the rights conferred by a policy.
The Statement of Practice will be applied in settling any tax liability that is not final at 3 July 1992.
It does not affect policy benefits that are otherwise chargeable to tax, for example, as receipts of a trade or profession.
Group relief claims
The form in which group relief claims should be made has been determined by the Inland Revenue under s 42(5), TMA 1970.
A claim for group relief must give the following details: the identity of the claimant company; the accounting period for which relief is claimed; the identity of the surrendering company or companies; the relevant accounting period(s) of each surrendering company; amounts claimed in respect of each; and the total amount of the claimant company's profits claimed to be covered by group relief.
For this purpose, a company may be identified by stating its tax district and reference number or its company registration number.
Where the claimant company's profits or the amounts available for surrender as group relief by a surrendering company have not been ascertained, the profits to be covered and/or the amount(s) claimed may be given as an estimate to the best of the claimant's ability.
Alternatively, a formula may be given which fixes the basis by which the relief is to be computed when profits and/or amounts available for claim are ascertained.
The claim must incorporate a declaration that the particulars of the claim are correct to the best of the signatory's knowledge and belief.
In practice, it may be more convenient to submit a single notice of claim containing claims by several claimant companies, sometimes in the form of a matrix.
The Revenue will regard the above requirements as satisfied by such notices, provided that the information required to be specified is given for each pair of claimant and surrendering companies, and a declaration is made on behalf of each claimant company.
A new extra-statutory concession has also been published to the effect that the Board of Inland Revenue will accept group relief claims signed by a person the company has authorised to make the claim, except where a liquidator has been appointed.
The strict position is that the company secretary or the liquidator (see s 108, TMA 1970) should sign the claim.
Both the prescribed form of group relief claim and the extra-statutory concession apply to all claims made on or after 1 September 1992.
However, the Revenue has not specified the form of group relief surrenders, and these will continue to require the signature of the surrendering company's secretary.
Company cars
Proposals for introducing a system of price-based scales to tax the private-use benefit of company cars have been put forward in an Inland Revenue consultative document,Company Cars: Reform of the Income Tax Treatment .
In the foreword to the paper, the Chancellor states that the Government recognises that company cars are an important feature of modern business life and of the UK car industry.
In line with the general policy on benefits in kind, the Government has sought to improve the neutrality of the tax position between employees provided with company cars and those who are not.
Existing scale charges are not sufficiently refined to reflect the level of benefit of any particular car provided to an employee.
The consultative document cites as an example the fact that both a Ford Fiesta and Mercedes 1.90 fall within the same scale charge band.
The Government's preferred approach is to move to a price-based system.
However, the document seeks representations on whether this approach or alternatives, such as the cost to the employer or the original market value of the car, should be used.
In addition, opinions are canvassed on whether there should be bands of scale charge; whether there should be lower charges for older cars and a special regime for classic cars; whether the distributional impact of the change would be inequitable, given that it would be revenue-neutral; and whether free car fuel should continue to be determined by engine size.
The Government would like to introduce the new system from April 1994, but is seeking comments on this timescale.
No transitional provisions are proposed, although representations are sought on whether or not to have such rules.
The intention is that any change would be revenue-neutral, but the level at which any scale charge is set will remain a matter for the Chancellor's judgment and will be announced annually in each Budget.
Copies of the consultative paper are available, price £1.50, from the Inland Revenue Reference Room, Room 8, New Wing, Somerset House, London WC2R 1LB.
Comments should be sent by 13 November to Company Cars Consultation, Room 39, at the same address.
TCGA 1992 error
An error that arose on the consolidation of the capital gains legislation into TCGA 1992 will be corrected in next year's Finance Bill.
The error occurred in a cross-reference involving the measures relating to transfers of life assurance business.
If not corrected, this would exclude a transfer of insurance business to or from the UK branch of an overseas life assurance company from the relevant intended relief.
No transfers fell under the defective provisions, and the amendments in the first of the 1993 Finance Bills will be effective from 17 July 1992.
Pension business tax repayments
For accounting periods beginning on or after 2 October 1992, insurance companies will be able to claim provisional repayments of tax credits attached to, or income tax deducted from, investment income linked to pension business.
Regulations have been laid before Parliament to apply the statutory provisions introduced in FA 1991.
The new rules are linked to the introduction of Pay and File, planned to apply to accounting periods ending on or after 1 October 1993.
The claims will be made on a quarterly basis similar to that applied in accounting for ACT.
There will be a transitional period, details of which have yet to be released, during which the amount of the repayment within an accounting period will be reduced.
Reallocation of overpayments
The Inland Revenue's policy on the allocation of overpayments of tax against underpayments, and the interest consequences thereof, have been published in an appendix to the notes of a meeting between the Revenue and the Institute's Tax Faculty (see ACCOUNTANCY , August, p 90).
The general policy is to set off overpayments in the manner that is most advantageous to the taxpayer.
The collector will reallocate overpayments first against any charge that is overdue.
If the overpayment is established after 1 June, reallocation will be from a Sch D first instalment to the Sch D second instalment; if it is before 1 June, this reallocation will be effected only if that amount is less than £1,000.
Reallocations will not be made automatically if the taxpayer has asked for them not to be.
However, the collector will suggest a reallocation if there is an overdue charge against which a repayment can be set and will proceed with the reallocation unless he receives contrary instructions from the taxpayer.
Any specific requests from the taxpayer regarding reallocations must be honoured by the collector.
The statutory interest rules continue to apply where there is a set-off such that any repayment supplement due on the overpayment will run only to the date of set-off.
Similarly, any interest on the overdue tax will cease to accrue from the same date.
Any unallocated payments are held in a suspense account, but once an appropriate charge is identified, the amount is treated as if allocated on the original date of the overpayment.
Pay and File penalties
The Institute's Tax Faculty has issued a guidance note on a company's exposure to penalties on submitting a corporation tax Pay and File return containing estimated figures.
The note has been agreed with the Inland Revenue.
The Revenue states that, while a company has an obligation to deliver a return on time, complete and correct to the best of its knowledge and belief, there may be exceptional circumstances in which the company is unable to produce final figures.
In that case the company ought to make an estimate to the best of its ability, tell the inspector that the figure is estimated and explain the basis of the estimate.
A return form completed in this way and filed on or before the due date will satisfy the obligations under s 11, TMA 1970, and the company would normally not be liable to a late-filing penalty under s 94, TMA 1970.
However, a return that was submitted on time but was clearly incomplete, ie, entries were missing, would be the subject of late filing penalties.
Where the company subsequently becomes aware that its figure is no longer the ‘best estimate’, or can be replaced by an accurate figure, this information should be sent to the inspector without unreasonable delay.
The Revenue has said that, provided the final figures are sent to the inspector as soon as they are available, s 97, TMA 1970 would ensure that the company would not be liable to a s 96 penalty unless fraud or negligence were involved.
Where a company supplies estimated figures which prove to be unreasonable, this will not invalidate the return for the purposes of s 11, but may render the company liable to penalties under s 96 for submitting an incorrect return.
A penalty imposed in such circumstances would be subject to the normal appeal provisions.
The company may be given more time in which to submit its return under s 118(2), TMA 1970, but this must be agreed with the inspector.
Copies of the guidance notes, TAX 12/92, are available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
Stamp duty threshold reduced
The temporary increase in the stamp duty threshold for purchases of land and property other than shares from £30,000 to £250,000 expired on 19 August.
In response to the numbers of queries it has received, the Stamp Office has issued a guidance note on which documents can benefit from the higher threshold, in particular circumstances where the documents are signed on or before 19 August but relate to a sale which may not be completed until 20 August or later.
If a transfer is to benefit from the £250,000 threshold, the instrument must be executed before 20 August.
Execution is a process involving signature and unconditional delivery of the instrument, delivery requiring the use of acts or words sufficient to show that the person intends it to bind him as a deed.
The position in any particular case will depend on the precise circumstances.
An instrument will not be executed before 20 August where it is not binding until certain conditions are fulfilled and these are not met until after 19 August.
Instruments may, however, be executed before 20 August if they are binding and are signed and delivered unconditionally before that date even though the property may in certain circumstances be delivered after that date.
Where an instrument transfers property in contemplation of the sale of the property at a later date, its treatment will depend on whether it falls within the terms of s 90, FA 1963.
Retrospective legislation
The Government proposes tax legislation with retrospective effect only after very careful consideration of the circumstances, according to Financial Secretary Stephen Dorrell.
In answer to a Parliamentary Question, he said that where, following a successful challenge in the courts, retrospective legislation is introduced to restore the previous understanding of the law, it has long been the Government's policy that the successful litigant should not be deprived of the benefit of the court judgment in his favour.
Any other taxpayers who have agreed with the Inland Revenue that an action is a test case and that they will also benefit from the decision against the Revenue, should also not be affected by any retrospective amendment.
However, where it is discovered that the tax law does not have the effect that the Government and taxpayers generally thought it had, there are circumstances in which it is right to introduce legislation to restore the position retrospectively to what it was thought to be.
This is done only in exceptional circumstances and where the Government considers such action necessary to protect the interests of the general body of taxpayers.
Regulations extended to cover physiotherapy
Premiums for private medical insurance contracts that cover physiotherapy on a general practitioner's referral will be eligible for tax relief for the over-60s under The Private Medical Insurance (Disentitlement to Tax Relief and Approved Benefits)(Amendment) Regulations 1992, SI 1992/1619 (65p).
For private medical insurance premiums for someone aged 60 or over to qualify for tax relief, the contract may only cover specific types of charge.
Contracts can cover charges for medical and surgical procedures (including diagnosis) given by or under the supervision of a registered medical or dental practitioner, to the insured as a private inpatient or outpatient of a hospital.
Surgical procedures performed privately by a GP are also permitted.
Physiotherapy was thus not previously an allowable treatment unless included in the above.
Insurers currently approved by the Inland Revenue to offer tax relievable private medical insurance contracts have been given details of how to proceed.
Manufactured interest rules in force
The new rules for taxing manufactured interest, payments made to compensate for the loss of interest, where for instance a security is ‘sold cum interest’ but acquired by the seller ex interest in order to meet the sale, took effect on 29 June 1992 and apply from 30 June 1992.
Royal Assent
The Finance (No 2) Act 1992 received Royal Assent on 16 July.
National Insurance Regulations amended
A number of minor amendments have been made to The Social Security (Contributions) Regulations 1979, SI 1979/591 .
These include the requirement that on cessation of a business an employer shall pay any Class 1A contribution in respect of the current year within 14 days after the income tax month in which he makes his final payment of earnings to employees.
Similarly, where there is a change of employer, the employer before the change must pay any Class 1A contribution in respect of any employee whose employment ceased before the change.
The amendments are contained in The Social Security (Contributions) Amendment (No 6) Regulations 1992, SI 1992/1440 (£1.90).
Pension Scheme Office relocated
On 20 July, part of the Pension Scheme Office's work was relocated to St Nicholas Court, Castle Gate, Nottingham HG1 7AR.
This included part of the general section work, so correspondence relating to occupational pension schemes where the initial letter of the principal employer's name is in the following alphabetic ranges should in future be sent there: SF prefix 1, 7, 12, 15, 16, 18, 21, 23, 25, A, G, L, O, P, R, U, W and Y.
Applications for mandatory approval under s 590, TA 1988 and authorisations for schemes to invest in exempt unit trusts or to receive dividends without deduction of UK tax should also be sent to the Nottingham office.
New applications for approval for pension schemes should continue to be forwarded to the PSO's office at Thames Ditton, Surrey.
TAX CASE REVIEW Compiled by Chris Greene and Christina Maddalena of Clark Whitehill
Woolwich wins again
The Woolwich Equitable Building Society was entitled as of right to interest on the repayment of a capital sum that had been paid to the Inland Revenue pursuant to Regulations that were ultra vires and void.
The House of Lords so held in Woolwich Equitable Building Society v IRC [1992]STI 746, dismissing the Crown's appeal against the Court of Appeal's ruling.
The Woolwich paid the capital sum of nearly £57m in three instalments to the Revenue under The Income Tax (Building Societies) Regulations 1986 , whose validity it disputed.
The payment was made ‘without any prejudice to any right to recover any payments which might arise as the result of legal proceedings’.
The Woolwich feared that failure to make the payment would damage its reputation and that any penalties that could be enforced if the Regulations were valid would exceed the return that could be made by investing the sum.
On 15 July 1987, the Woolwich issued a writ to recover the capital sum and interest thereon.
On 31 July 1987, Mr Justice Nolan held that the Regulations were ultra vires and void as regards imposing a tax on dividends and interest paid by building societies prior to 6 April 1986.
The Crown then repaid the capital sum with interest from 31 July 1987 but refused to pay interest for earlier periods.
The Woolwich claimed that the capital sum was recoverable as a debt due with interest payable from the respective dates of the initial payments under the general principle of restitution.
Although Mr Justice Nolan rejected the Woolwich's claim, a majority Court of Appeal decision found in the building society's favour.
The Crown appealed.
Lord Goff, dismissing the Crown's appeal, said the case was of importance not only to the parties concerned but also for the future of the law of restitution.
In general terms, where any tax or duty was paid by a citizen pursuant to an unlawful demand, common justice seemed to require that that tax or duty ought to be repaid, unless special circumstances or some principle of policy required otherwise.
There were a number of objections to that simple call of justice.
First the law of restitution had developed to deal with actions for the recovery of money paid under a mistake of fact or certain forms of compulsion but did not encompass actions for the recovery of money that was not due.
However, the Bill of Rights 1688 had established the fundamental principle that taxes should not be levied without the authority of Parliament, which necessarily required the return of taxes executed under an unlawful demand as a matter of right.
In addition, a failure to pay a demand for taxes that was implicitly supported by the coercive powers of the state might result in unpleasant social and economic consequences for the taxpayer who did not pay.
The second objection was that in recognising such a right of recovery, the House of Lords would overstep the boundary that separated the legitimate development of the law by judges from the laws developed by legislation.
However, although the boundary existed, its position had varied from case to case.
The Crown's practical arguments were that the case was so rare that it could not call for a fundamental reformulation of the law and that it was impossible for their lordships to set limits on the application of the principle which, being a matter of policy, was a question for the legislature.
However, these arguments were not sufficiently persuasive to deter Lord Goff from recognising the underlying justice of the Woolwich's case.
There were practical reasons for establishing the principle of restitution in this case.
Those cited by him included the following: it was a one-off opportunity; there was a fear that despite the justice of the case it would not be sufficient to persuade the Government to recognise the principle by proposing legislation; the practical impact would be limited as most cases would continue to be regulated by the various statutory regimes; and it was consistent with Community law.
Money paid by a citizen to a public authority in the form of taxes or other levies paid pursuant to an ultra vires demand by the authority was therefore held to be prima facie recoverable by the citizen as of right.
Further, this principle should not be inapplicable simply because the citizen paid the money under mistake of law.
The Crown's appeal was accordingly dismissed with costs.
Lord Bourne-Wilkinson and Lord Lynn delivered concurring judgments and Lord Keith and Lord Jauncey dissenting judgments.
Mirror deducts correctly
A payment made by a third party to a company's employee, but taxable under Sch E as arising from his employment, was subject to deduction of income tax at source under the PAYE Regulations, according to the High Court in Booth v Mirror Group Newspapers plc [1992]STI 662.
The plaintiff, B, entered into an agreement with Mirror Group Newspapers on 3 June 1988 that if he took up employment with Pergamon Media Trust, he would receive from MGN a sum of money in certain circumstances.
B subsequently became an employee of Pergamon, and on the completion of his contract with Pergamon received a payment from MGN in two instalments.
Basic rate income tax was deducted by MGN in accordance with The Income Tax (Employments) Regulations 1973, SI 1973/334 .
It was common ground that the sum was emoluments of B's employment by Pergamon.
However, B contended that, since he had never been an employee of MGN, MGN was not entitled to deduct income tax from the payments.
The question was whether or not such payments fell within the Regulations.
Reg 2 defined ‘employer’ as ‘any person paying emoluments’and B accepted, literally applying that definition, that MGN was an ‘employer’.
B argued, however, that the definition had to be given a narrower definition either as regards the Regulations as a whole or those relevant to the instant case: the Regulations contemplated an actual employment relationship between employer and employee, and the definition in Reg 2 could not be applied literally.
It was also contended, as being clear from the Regulations as a whole, that they contemplated that such an actual relationship would exist.
Mr Justice Hobhouse dismissed B's claim, saying that the statutory intention behind the Regulations, stated in s 203, TA 1988, was that income tax should be deducted by a person making any payment of or on account of any income assessable to tax under Sch E. There was a statutory obligation to deduct tax unless either the Regulations showed that there was to be no such obligation or they failed to provide any machinery whereby the payer could make a deduction.
The definitions in the Regulations appeared to have taken full advantage of the enabling power and did not exclude any class of payer.
The question was therefore whether there was any mechanism whereby MGN could make the deduction.
Under Reg 20, an employer was to deduct tax at source at the basic rate where he had made a payment to an employee in respect of whom he had not received a code of authorisation, subject to certain conditions.
Although Reg 20 obviously contemplated primarily an actual employer and employee, it was clear that, having regard to the statutory scheme as a whole, Reg 20 was intended to have a general application.
The payments made by MGN would fall outside the scope of the scheme only if it could be shown that they did not fall within any of the individual Regulations.
The payments in question could be brought within the wording of Reg 20 and it followed that MGN had been under an obligation to deduct tax at source.
B's appeal was accordingly dismissed.
Premises or plant?
The question of whether mezzanine platforms and ancillary lighting erected in a warehouse could be regarded as plant for capital allowance purposes was considered in the case of Hunt v Henry Quick Ltd; King v Bridisco Ltd [1992]STI 665.
The High Court found that the General Commissioners had correctly concluded that the mezzanine platforms should be regarded as plant based on their findings of fact, but that they had erred in law in allowing the claims for capital allowance for the lighting.
The two taxpayer companies, H Ltd and B Ltd, were wholesalers of footwear and electrical goods respectively and each operated from its own warehouse.
Both companies extended their storage capacity by installing mezzanine floors and both made claims to treat the floors and associated lighting as plant for capital allowance purposes under s 44, FA 1971.
In the case of H Ltd, the existing mezzanine floor was extended by the addition of a steel grid platform covered with chipboard flooring panels and supported by steel columns bolted to the warehouse floor.
The structure occupied most of the floor area of the warehouse and access was gained by two stairways.
Racking was used to store the goods both on the warehouse floor and on the platform and was bolted to supports for safety.
Additional lighting was also installed under the platform.
B Ltd installed four mezzanine floors, one of which was subsequently dismantled as storage methods changed.
Access was provided by one staircase and goods were stored either directly on the platform floors or on low racking.
Goods were also stored on the warehouse floor, by high-rise stackings.
The structures covered approximately 60% of the warehouse floor area and further lighting was added under the mezzanine floor.
The Inland Revenue refused the claims of both companies to capital allowances on the mezzanine floors and lighting and the taxpayer companies appealed to the General Commissioners.
The General Commissioners upheld the taxpayers' claims to allowances and the Crown appealed to the High Court.
In allowing H Ltd's contentions that the mezzanine platforms should be eligible for capital allowances, Mr Justice Vinelott said that the issue was whether the platforms passed the ‘premises test’— in other words, whether the platforms were apparatus used for carrying on the trade or merely part of the setting in which the trade of the companies was carried on.
Wimpy International Ltd v Warland [1988]STC 149 had determined that the facts to be considered were: whether an item appeared visually to retain a separate identity; the degree of permanence with which it had been attached; the incompleteness of the structure without it; and the extent to which it was intended to be permanent.
When the General Commissioners reviewed the facts, they had regarded three matters as important: first, that the storage racking was bolted to the floor for safety purposes — the Commissioners took the view that there was no distinction between the racking (which was plant) and the platform; second, that members of the public were rarely admitted to the platform which was essentially for storage; and, third, that, although the platforms were large, there were cases where very large structures had been deemed to be plant.
Although these facts were not matters to which any great weight could be attached, they were relevant.
The General Commissioners had in mind that the fact that the platform was used solely for storage, and its size, were not conclusive against its being plant.
They also had in mind that the platform could be removed, leaving the warehouse in substantially the same state as it was before it was installed.
Further, it was clear that the supports and chipboard floor could also have been removed.
Looking at the facts as a whole, the General Commissioners were entitled to conclude that the platform fell within the definition of plant.
They had referred to all the relevant authorities and had properly understood the principles and so could not be said to have erred in law.
In considering the case of B Ltd, he stated that it was easier to conclude that the mezzanine platforms were plant as the four platforms had been installed at different times, covered only 60% of the floor area and one had actually been dismantled.
It followed that if the General Commissioners were entitled to their conclusion in H Ltd's case, it was amply within their power to reach the same conclusion for B Ltd.
As regards the claim in respect of additional lighting, he said that Wimpy International v Warland had decided that lighting that did no more than provide general illumination was not plant, as it was not used for carrying on the business.
Therefore, the lighting that had been installed to provide a normal level of additional illumination could not be described as plant.
It was immaterial that the General Commissioners had found that H Ltd's platform was a temporary structure and that the lighting could have been removed if the platform was dismantled.
The General Commissioners had erred in law in concluding that the ancillary lighting was plant.
The Crown's appeal in relation to the mezzanine floor was thus dismissed, but in relation to the lighting it was allowed.
VAT Compiled by John Brown and Suzanne Chadwick of Ernst & Young
VAT and staff discounts
Customs have reviewed their policy on staff discounts and have announced a change to their previous treatment.
With effect from 15 May 1992, VAT is only liable on the price actually paid for goods supplied at a discount to employees.
The price paid would include any consideration the employer receives from a third party.
Previously Customs have always accepted that where the discount is unconditional, the discounted price paid is the only consideration from the employee for the goods.
However, in other situations Customs have deemed that there is a non-monetary consideration in addition to the price paid and that VAT is therefore due on the goods' normal selling price.
These include schemes where an employee is entitled to a discount under the terms of a contract of employment, and could sue the employer if the discount was not given.
Following trade representations, Customs have now decided that there is little practical difference between the schemes and will accept that output tax is due only on the payment from the employee and any third party.
VAT on company cars clarified
The VAT (Treatment of Transactions) Order 1992 confirmed that no output tax liability arises if an employee sacrifices part of his salary in return for a company car.
Customs have now announced further clarification in the area of employee benefits.
If an employee trades up to a more expensive model and the employer makes a charge, an output tax liability arises on the value of that charge, except where the employee pays by way of deduction from gross salary.
If an employee trades down to a cheaper model and sacrifices less salary, no output tax liability arises.
Similarly, no output tax liability arises if the employee sacrifices benefits, such as private health insurance or longer holidays, rather than part of his salary, in return for the company car.
VAT — second hand car scheme
Since 1 August, the self-drive hire firms, private taxis and driving schools have been able to reclaim tax paid on cars purchased for their businesses.
Customs have now announced a change to the way the second hand scheme for cars operates, so that second hand car dealers who acquire cars from these businesses may continue to sell them through the scheme.
The proposal is that from 1 August, self-drive hire firms etc should account for tax on a tax-inclusive basis on disposal, so allowing the margin scheme to operate as now.
The supply would not be on a tax invoice, so the buyer would not be able to reclaim the tax paid.
If, however, a registered self-drive hire firm etc sells to another registered self-drive hire firm, then the normal VAT rules would apply — the seller would issue a tax invoice, accounting for tax on the full selling price, and the purchaser would use that invoice as evidence for reclaiming the tax paid on the purchase.
An amendment to Public Notice 711 will be issued in due course, but Customs are willing to accept comments or views on the proposed scheme in the meantime.
VAT on boats in EC water
Customs have issued a news release in response to numerous enquiries from individuals about the VAT treatment of boats in EC waters from 1 January 1993.
Boat owners are worried that they may be unable to move their vessels freely in EC waters unless they can prove that VAT has been paid.
From 1 January 1993 fiscal frontiers between member states will disappear, allowing people to move most VAT-paid goods freely between member states without imposition of further tax.
The Commission wants to avoid unjustified double taxation of boats, and will be making proposals accordingly.
Customs are drawing up a paper to assist the Commission, in consultation with the Royal Yachting Association, the British Marine Industries Federation and others.
Once the Commission has made its proposals, they will have to be agreed by the member states.
Meanwhile, the Commission has assured boat owners in an answer in the European Parliament that, where pleasure craft are kept in a member state under the temporary importation rules and on which VAT has already been paid, there will be no obligation to pay VAT again after 31 December 1992.
The Government believes that no payment of VAT should be required on boats supplied in the UK before 1 April 1973 (when UK VAT started), or on boats imported into the UK on a duty paid basis before that date.
The Commission recognises that suitable arrangements will have to be devised to cover pleasure craft in the transition to the new VAT arrangements.
There are a substantial number of boats berthed in EC waters, often under temporary importation arrangements and on which VAT has not been paid anywhere in the EC.
In many cases, these boats have remained in EC waters for many years and have changed ownership several times.
The view is almost certain to be that these tax-free boats should not remain in EC waters unless VAT is paid.
Customs recognise that the present uncertainty may cause problems for boat owners or potential owners, and they will issue hard information as soon as possible.
Flat rate scheme for farmers
An important amendment to the Finance Bill, before it received Royal Assent, was the introduction of a flat rate scheme for farmers with effect from 1 January 1993.
The flat rate scheme is an alternative to VAT registration; any farmer will have the choice of staying VAT-registered, or deregistering and becoming a flat rate farmer.
Farmers whose turnover is below the registration limit, currently £36,600 a year, may use the scheme if they qualify for voluntary VAT registration.
Application will have to be made to Customs to become a flat rate farmer, and a certificate with a unique reference number will be issued as proof that a farmer qualifies.
How the scheme works .
As flat rate farmers are not registered for VAT, they will not account for VAT on their sales, nor will they be able to make a claim for VAT incurred on business purchases.
However, in certain circumstances they will charge VAT-registered traders an additional amount (the flat rate addition) when supplying agricultural goods and services.
They will keep this addition, which is intended to compensate for the VAT they cannot reclaim.
The flat rate addition will be expressed as a percentage but, as the formula for calculating it and the figure itself have yet to be agreed with the European Commission, the amount of the addition has not been announced.
There will be one compensation rate for all the agricultural goods and services eligible for the flat rate scheme.
Flat rate farmers will be able to charge the flat rate addition when selling zero-rated agricultural produce to VAT-registered traders.
The flat rate addition is not a rate of VAT, it merely compensates farmers for the VAT they cannot reclaim on business purchases, as they are not VAT-registered.
Provided the goods qualify, the VAT liability of those goods has no relevance to payment of the flat rate addition.
VAT-registered traders will be able to reclaim flat rate additions on their VAT returns as though they were input tax.
The flat rate addition will not be charged on supplies between flat rate farmers.
Farming activities that qualify .
For the purposes of this scheme only, a farmer is someone who engages in any of the agricultural production activities and services set out in Annexes A and B of the Sixth VAT Directive.
A draft Treasury Order to be published later this year will set out in more detail which agricultural goods and activities will be covered.
Individuals whose primary activity is to buy and sell animals, for example, will not be eligible to be flat rate farmers; neither will trainers of animals.
Similarly, anyone who engages in an activity once removed from farming, such as processing farm produce, will not qualify either.
Farmers who engage in activities other than those listed will have to treat those other activities as separate businesses from their flat rate farming activities.
If non-farming activities reach the VAT registration threshold, farmers will be required to register for all their activities, farming and non-farming, and will not be able to carry on as flat rate farmers.
Farmers who choose to register voluntarily for VAT where sales from their non-farming activities do not exceed the registration threshold, will also lose their flat rate status.
Invoices .
Flat rate farmers will have to issue invoices for all supplies of goods and services where the flat rate addition is added.
Customs' regulations, available later this year for comment, will cover the information required on such invoices.
Flat rate farmers will not be required to keep detailed records, but Customs would expect paperwork to be available if a check of transactions became necessary.
Sales within the EC .
If UK flat rate farmers sell agricultural produce to a VAT-registered trader in another member state, they will be able to charge the flat rate addition.
It may not be charged on similar sales to purchasers outside the EC.
European briefing
DIRECT TAXATION Edited by Bernard Jeffcote of Ernst & Young
Italy
Extraordinary property tax
An extraordinary property tax has been imposed on the value of buildings in Italy held at 11 July 1992, irrespective of the buildings' use.
The tax due is 0.2% of the value of the building, based on the application of particular multipliers.
The tax is also levied on non-residents in Italy and is due this month; it may be delayed until 15 December, but a 3% interest charge will then be payable.
This property tax is not deductible for tax purposes.
Extraordinary tax on bank deposits
A tax of 0.6% has been withheld at source on the amount of bank deposits, term and deposit certificates etc held at 9 July 1992.
This tax on bank deposits is not deductible for tax purposes.
COMPANY LAW Edited by Jo Dishington, solicitor with Allen & Overy, Brussels
European Company Statute deadlocked
Discussions at the meeting of the Council of Internal Market Ministers held on 18 June failed to result in any agreement on the long outstanding European Company Statute, first proposed in 1970 and long deadlocked on the issue of employee participation.
Again, it was this issue which caused discussions to founder.
The UK, in particular, is fundamentally opposed to the idea of compulsory employee participation, believing that this is an area best left to individual company policy and fearing that giving in on the issue in this context could lead to similar measures becoming a compulsory feature of EC company law.
Second Company Law Directive amendment
On 19 June the Internal Market Council formally adopted a directive amending the Second Company Law Directive (Directive 77/91).
(See ACCOUNTANCY , July, p 109, for a report of the adoption of the Council's agreement in principle.)
The newly-adopted directive extends the Second Company Law Directive's minimum restrictions on the acquisition by a public company (or its nominees) of its own shares to acquisitions of shares in a parent company by a subsidiary.
As a result, a subsidiary will be able to acquire shares in its parent only to the extent that the parent is able to acquire its own shares.
COMPETITION LAW Edited by Isabel Morgan of Clifford Chance, Brussels
Green Paper on postal services
The European Commission recently formally adopted the Green Paper on Postal Services following a proposal by Sir Leon Brittan, the Commissioner responsible for competition, and Filipo Pandolfi, the Commissioner responsible for communications.
The Green Paper is a discussion document; it includes an analysis of the current situation in the member states, postal services problems facing the Community, objectives to be attained and possible solutions.
Consultation on the Green Paper will continue until November, and should be followed by the drafting of proposed legislation.
The Green Paper emphasises the importance of the postal sector in terms of Community gross domestic product; it contributed nearly 1.3% in 1989.
The ratio in terms of turnover between public and private service is 60:40.
At present the service offered varies considerably between member states, in particular in the cross-border sector.
Domestic delivery is ensured within an average of 1.5 to two working days while cross-border delivery takes an average of four.
There are three principal product areas: letters, express mail and parcels.
The latter has been liberalised in all 12 member states.
The Community's objective is the provision of a universal service, namely the supply of a satisfactory postal service to all consumers at affordable prices.
The Commission recognises that to achieve this objective it is necessary to reserve certain areas exclusively to the national postal administrations.
Postal administrations must be guaranteed certain revenue to offer a service open to all.
This reserved area, however, should be strictly limited to what is necessary to provide a universal service.
Other areas should be open to free competition.
The definition of a universal service and hence of reserved services has yet to be drawn up.
This is one of the objectives of the consultation process.
At present, the Commission's thinking is that express services should be liberalised where this is not yet the case.
Further, it envisages the liberalisation of cross-border mail, international mail and direct mail.
But it recognises that these are controversial issues.
The reserved area, on the other hand, would cover domestic letters — both private and business — subject to certain limits defined in terms of weight and price.
Harmonisation measures will be needed in three principal areas:
Access .
Rules should be made permitting access to postal services on the same basis by all users meeting the same conditions.
There should also be rules to meet the needs of other service providers.
Service standards .
These should be defined.
Tariffs .
These should be related to the average cost of the services.
The Commission also advocates separation between operators and regulators.
An independent regulatory body should monitor the performance of all operators.
Fines in the shipping and banking sectors
The European Commission has recently imposed fines in two important sectors of the economy — shipping and banking.
For the first time both sets of fines were imposed for infringements of EC competition rules as laid down in Arts 85 and 86 of the Treaty of Rome.
In the first decision of its kind, the European Commission has fined France's top shipping group, Groupe Bollore, Ecu 15m for operating an illegal cartel that had controlled traffic between Europe and west and central Africa.
The decision followed complaints by Danish authorities and independent ship owners (notably Denmark's Maersk line) and is the first fine based on breaches of Arts 85 and 86 in relation to the shipping industry.
Although Groupe Bollore was identified as the cartel's ringleader, 13 other European shipping firms were fined Ecu 300,000 for their lesser role in what was described as a ‘particularly harmful cartel’ that had shut out rival shipping lines and led to excessive prices.
In particular the members of the cartel systematically shared the maritime traffic between France and African countries (including Benin, Congo, Togo, Senegal and Cameroon) on a monthly basis.
Consequently, competition was eliminated and tariffs reached an excessive level.
Furthermore, the members implemented certain measures that the African authorities had granted, reserving all traffic to these companies.
The effect of this was to prevent outsiders from entering the sector or to hinder the continuance of their activities.
Commission sources indicated that the fines were only half the sum originally proposed following major commitments by Groupe Bollore to meet EC rules.
The competition Commissioner noted that although cooperation agreements between shipping companies are not in themselves illegal, once they result in elimination of effective competition they become illicit cartels.
For instance, shipping conferences or consortia are not intrinsically anticompetitive, but would only get EC clearance if member firms still had to compete with independent lines on any given route and if the cost savings and other spin-offs from collaboration were passed on to clients and consumers.
In the banking sector, the Commission imposed fines on Eurocheque International (EI) and Groupement des Cartes Bancaires (CB), a group of French financial institutions that operates the Eurocheque payment system in France.
EI and CB were parties to an agreement — the Helsinki Agreement — that related to the acceptance by traders in France of Eurocheques drawn on foreign financial institutions.
The agreement included a feature whereby all French banks agreed among themselves to bill their French trader customers affiliated to the payment system of Eurocheque a commission equivalent to that which they charged them on payment effected by holders of their credit or debit cards.
The trader would not therefore receive the full amount of a Eurocheque but would have to pay the commission the French banks imposed.
This was at variance with the Eurocheque system as exempted by the Commission in 1984.
Under that system, the Eurocheque is free of charge to its payee, the costs being borne by the drawer.
The Commission took the view that the agreement established an unjustified link between payment by Eurocheque and payment by card with the aim of aligning the price of payment by Eurocheque for French traders to the price of payment by card.
On top of that, French banks were paid twice for the same service, first by French traders as a result of the Helsinki agreement and, second, by foreign banks (those that the drawers of Eurocheques banked with) as a result of the Eurocheque system exempted by the Commission in 1984.
The effect was to render the acceptance of Eurocheques less attractive for French traders and, together with the additional prohibition imposed on French banks on issuing Eurocheques for domestic use, the agreement had impeded the development of Eurocheques within France as a domestic means of payment.
The Commission, in setting the level of the fine, took into account, as it had with the shipping fine, the fact that this was the first time a fine had been imposed in this particular sector.
Car prices: Commission issues circular
In the wake of the European Commission's investigation into the excessive differences in car prices between member states (and the difficulties encountered by cross-border buyers and sellers of cars), Sir Leon Brittan has written to all EC car manufacturers.
He asks for a review of wholesale pricing policies and asks that all dealers should be contacted.
The dealers should be assured that the manufacturer is willing to supply, within a reasonable time, models and specifications not normally demanded in the dealer's member state.
(This should assist, for example, the UK resident wishing to order a right hand drive model from a German dealer.)
Such cars should be supplied at the same basic price as charged for the dealer's regular supplies.
Producers should also remind dealers that they are free to supply intermediaries and to sell to dealers in various member states and, furthermore, without penalty from the producer.
The Commissioner then turns to the issue of price transparency.
Producers are asked to make available every quarter a price list covering their entire range, prepared in Ecu as well as local currency, for ease of comparison.
In addition, every six months they will be asked to complete a standard form, to be prepared by the Commission, containing an analysis of the prices recommended to dealers in various member states for one standard model in each range of production.
The standard letters sent to the dealers and the information on prices should be sent to the Commission, the national competition authorities, the European Consumers Organisation and be made available to other interested parties.
Data that producers provide will be subject to‘possible publication’, but this matter will be discussed with the industry.
Sir Leon ends by describing the new procedures as ‘imperative in order to increase public confidence in the system of selected distribution’.
He requests a ‘prompt and positive response’ to the letter and states pointedly that ‘such a response is in everybody's interest’.
FINANCIAL SERVICES Edited by Ralph Aldwinckle of Linklaters & Paines
EC
Investment Services Directive
It is now likely that a common position will be reached on the European Community's Investment Services Directive before the British presidency ends in December.
Proposals agreed to by European finance ministers in June will be put forward for full approval this month.
Fair deal in financial services
The European Commission has said that it is prepared to apply sanctions against non-Community countries that discriminate against EC banks, securities firms and insurance companies.
This statement comes ahead of a report soon to be issued, covering the Community's financial relations with 26 countries, pursuant to the Second Banking Directive.
It will concentrate on comparing third world countries' treatment of EC financial institutions with the Community's own policy, paying particular attention to national treatment and effective market access.
Art 9(4) of the Second Banking Directive, 89/646, allows the Commission to take retaliatory measures against discrimination, such as blocking takeovers or new applications for operating licences from non-EC financial services firms.
The statement makes clear that sanctions will be used only in the last resort.
The Commission has not stated or indicated which countries are discriminating against financial institutions from EC member states; but so-called economic needs tests in Canada and Australia were cited as examples.
Under these tests, a country reserves the right to refuse an operating licence to a foreign firm if it deems that it already has enough similar companies on its territory.
The Commission did, however, add that relations with the US and Japan, the Community's two biggest trading partners, were basically good.
The Commission stressed that it would not act outside the GATT rules unless the Uruguay round talks failed or a country broke those rules.
EMPLOYMENT AND PENSIONS LAW Edited by Simon Jeffreys of McKenna & Co
EC
UK plans for social affairs
The UK presidency has planned only one Social Affairs Council, to be held on 1 December.
The new president in office at the EC Social Affairs Council, Tristan Garel-Jones, told the European Parliament in July that he was ready to place a great deal of importance on social problems and to work for the improvement of social conditions for all European citizens.
He said he would also like to see progress on workers' safety and health, with the adoption of the directives on pregnant women and working time.
At the same time, members of the European Parliament have asked the European Commission to revise the social affairs proposals stalled in the Council of Ministers for months.
Elmer Brok of the European Peoples Party urged the Commission to produce these new proposals on European Works Councils, part-time work, sub-cot-racting and so on, so that they can be negotiated in the context of the Maastricht Treaty Social Protocol.
Subsequently, at a speech to UNICE on 22 July, Gillian Shephard, the British employment secretary and current chair of the EC Council of Social Affairs Ministers, stated that the Government will be reviewing European Community legislation on social and employment matters to ensure that it conforms with the principle of ‘subsidiarity’.
This should be seen in the context of the UK Government's attempts to salvage the Maastricht Treaty by emphasising the principle of subsidiarity as well as in the context of the UK's general hostility to regulation of labour and social affairs matters at EC level.
Lorry drivers' working hours
During the European Parliament's plenary session between 6 and 10 July, MEPs called for Community social legislation to deal with road transport drivers' working conditions.
The European Commission has now decided to draft a proposal dealing specifically with heavy vehicle drivers to enforce harmonisation of working conditions and in particular to ensure a consistent definition of ‘working time’ as well as driving time.
In order to close a loophole, the Commission also intends to apply the new laws to all drivers whether they are employed or independent.
At present some member states do not apply national legislation on working time to independent drivers.
This leads to considerable evasion, with drivers claiming to be independent when they are in fact employees.
Germany: immoral private behaviour no ground for dismissal
Dismissal cannot usually be justified merely because the employee's private life is scandalous or involves immoral conduct, and this has been reconfirmed by a recent Higher Labour Court decision (LAG Hamm, 17 Sa 1326/89).
The employee was married and had been with a savings bank in a small town for more than 26 years.
He often had extramarital affairs.
His employer warned him that his behaviour had already caused several customer complaints and was even affecting business relations, and demanded that he stop.
A little later, another customer complained about the employee because he had started a relationship with the customer's wife.
The customer also threatened to terminate his business relationship with the employer.
The employee was therefore dismissed without notice.
The Higher Labour Court decided that having extramarital affairs with married women was not a violation of the contract of employment that would justify a dismissal, as this would have the effect of punishing someone for interfering in marital relations, which the German Code of Civil Procedure would not permit.
The court, however, went even further and stated that the dismissal did not fall within the scope of the provision allowing ‘dismissal due to pressure’.
Pressure in this sense was exercised by the customers, and especially by the customer with whose wife the employee had an affair.
S 104 of the German Works Constitution Act (BetrVG) provides for ‘dismissal due to pressure’.
It covers the situation where the works council demands the dismissal or transfer of an employee who behaves in an illegal or socially harmful way.
In the case of pressure by customers, however, according to the court decision, the employer can only dismiss an employee if he faces substantial economic damage due to the customer's threat to end his business relationship.
Germany: part-timers entitled to proportional treatment
Part-time work relationships can serve the interests of the employer as well as the employee for very different reasons.
Consequently, these relationships enjoy unrestricted support and protection.
Labour law application for full-time employees generally applies to the full extent also for part-time employees.
S 1 of the German Law Concerning the Promotion of Employment (Deutsches Beschaftigungsforderungsgesetz ) expressly states that the employer may not discriminate against part-time employees in favour of full-time employees solely because of their part-time status.
These employees may only be handled differently when the employer has a justifiable reason.
Recently, the BAG handed down a decision (4ASR 293/91) in which it stated that there were no justifiable reasons for a differential in wages.
The part-time worker has the right to a monthly salary proportionally equivalent to that of a corresponding full-time employee.
Hence, if the salaries for full-time employees are increased through a union agreement, the salaries for the part-time employees must be increased accordingly, even when this is not provided expressly in the agreement.
As far as the increase for the part-time employees is concerned, the reasons for the increase in the salaries for full-time employees are irrelevant.
As a result, if the working week is shortened for full-time employees, the hours worked by the part-time employees must be reduced proportionally.
The union agreement relevant to this case contained provisions for a shortened working week and at the same time an increase in monthly salary for full-time employees.
Reduction of the hours worked for the full-time employees and not for the part-time employees would result in a financial advantage for the full-time employees.
The BAG concluded that this would be discrimination against the part-time employees and was therefore not permissible.
There was no justifiable reason for differential treatment of the part-time employees concerning the increase in salary and reduction in work hours.
In future, therefore, employers will have to pay much closer attention to the principle of non-discrimination against part-time employees.
FINANCE AND INVESTMENT Edited by Robin Dunham, City editor of Accountancy
Helping high technology
Nine financial organisations from European countries have joined the EC Eurotech Capital Initiative and made Ecu 150m available for investment in small and medium-sized enterprises involved in high technology.
The Eurotech Innvest Service undertakes liaison between companies looking for capital through this initiative and with the investors.
Since 1991, 70 full proposals have been received, of which 50 have been selected and circulated to the financiers.
Of these, in 27 cases the investors have shown further interest and five are in the final stages of negotiation.
To be eligible an enterprise should be registered in an EC member country and have a product or process aimed at a transnational market.
The firm will have to provide information about its management team and product as well as financial details.
All information is treated in confidence.
For further information contact Eurotech Innvest Management Team, Longman Cartermill Ltd, The Technology Centre, St Andrews, Fife KY16 9EA (phone 0334 77660).
Details about Eurotech Capital and other initiatives are available from Jean-Marie Magnette, Commission of the European Communities, DG XVIII, Batiment Wagner, 2929 Luxembourg (phone ).
Guide to the European bond markets
The fifth edition of The European Bond Markets — An Overview and Analysis for Issuers and Investors covers 19 markets Austria, Denmark, Germany, Italy, Norway, Sweden, Belgium, France, Ireland, the Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, UK, the Ecu, Greece, Portugal, Finland, Luxembourg and the non-European Eurobond markets.
Each country chapter gives full descriptions of the composition of the market, types of securities, issuers, investors, methods of issuance and so on.
Produced by the European Federation of Financial Analyst Societies in association with the International Securities Markets Association, the new edition contains several articles about the structural changes taking place in Europe.
For further details contact the Institute of Investment Management and Research on .
The buyout as restructuring tool
In 1991, 62% of management buyouts recorded in continental Europe consisted of divestments from domestic or foreign companies and only 33% from private or family companies.
In the previous year only 53% of buyouts came from corporate restructuring.
The 1992 Europe Buyout Review notes a fall in the number of continental buyout deals from 411 in 1990 to 318 in 1991, and a slight drop in total value from £4bn to £3.9bn.
In the UK 564 (v 595) deals valued at £2.8bn (v £3.2bn) took place in 1991.
Copies of the review, price £255, are available from Initiative Europe (call ).
Providing translators
Now that the barriers with Eastern Europe have been removed, businesses need to translate documents into many more languages than just those of the EC member states.
Buckham Hill Meetings keeps a database of nearly 1,000 linguists which contains not just specialists in particular languages but also ones conversant with different industries and skills.
Recently the company was able to supply Ernst & Young at short notice with a Slovak speaker who had an understanding of insurance and actuarial terminology.
Phone  for full details.
DTI investigations
CONFESSIONS OF A PRIVATE INVESTIGATOR Confidential DTI inspections under s 447 of the Companies Act happen more frequently than the well-publicised kind — and offer the accountant on secondment a fascinating insight into the role of central government
Desmond High
High-profile company inspections under ss 432 and 442 of the Companies Act 1985 are the ones that attract the publicity (Neasa MacErlean focused on these ‘external appointments’ in her article on p 104 of ACCOUNTANC'sY August issue).
However, in the year to 31 March 1992, there were 155 (1991: 171) appointments under s 447 of the Act.
These were confidential, unannounced enquiries, requiring production of a company's books and records and explanations of them.
Years ago these enquiries were a precursor to the outside appointments; now they are the substance of the work of the Companies Investigation Branch of the Department of Trade and Industry's Investigations Division.
The purpose of s 447 is to allow suspicions of misconduct, such as fraudulent trading, theft, disqualified directors or undischarged bankrupts acting as directors, prospectus offences, and so on, to be investigated without the risk of publicly harming the company.
Occasionally the enquiry becomes public knowledge; a few years ago a copy of the authority for an enquiry into a well-known high street retailer appeared on the front page of a national newspaper.
From time to time the press carries rumours of such enquiries, but they usually remain rumours unless legal action takes them into the public domain, because the DTI never comments or publishes the findings.
I should explain my interest.
In February 1990 I was one of the first two secondees from the accountancy profession to join the Investigations Division at the DTI.
I became one of about 30 examiners out on the road, either on my own or with one colleague, and in my two year stint conducted 10 separate enquiries (often involving more than one company).
I also spent about three months vetting requests for enquiries.
There always has to be good reason (which is not defined, but is a sort of distilled wisdom) for undertaking a statutory enquiry; it can't just be a fishing expedition.
The procedures adopted on enquiries are a complete contrast to those in professional practice.
Initially the examiner, who has read a file detailing the main points of the complaint, but inevitably does not have the full story (hence the reason for the enquiry), turns up unannounced at the company's premises (which are not always easy to find) and has to get past well-meaning but defensive receptionists and secretaries without revealing the purpose of the visit.
The proper method of commencing an enquiry is to speak to one or more of the company's directors.
To flush some out it is occasionally necessary to put a copy of the authority in a sealed envelope and insist it be conveyed at once to the chief executive.
This invariably gets the required response.
Once the examiner's powers are explained to directors they generally recognise the seriousness of their position and are grateful for the confidentiality.
Although the actual purpose of the enquiry is not explained, directors invariably endeavour to cooperate fully, although a cynic might say: ‘They would, wouldn't they?’
It will be appreciated that the enquiries usually involve the need to think on one's feet, and a fair degree of ingenuity.
Returning to the office empty handed is not considered particularly satisfactory!
An enquiry is first and foremost a fact finding exercise.
It may show there has been no irregularity or malpractice, in which case the process ends.
In many cases, however, information obtained during the enquiry is a basis for further action, either by the DTI or others.
The most substantial power available to the DTI, in the short term, is the ability to petition in the High Court for the company to be wound up.
However, for every one of these petitions presented — there were 16 in the year to 31 March 1992 (1991: 34) many more cases involve passing information to other bodies, as permitted under s 449 of the Act.
These include the Serious Fraud Office, the Crown Prosecution Service, the Securities and Investments Board and other self-regulatory organisations.
In the year to 31 March 1992 the DTI disclosed information obtained from statutory enquiries to other bodies on 127 occasions.
Other than these disclosures, the DTI may also take action towards disqualification or prosecute on other Companies Act offences.
Regrettably, the delays experienced in taking a matter through to a court hearing, together with the passing of information to other bodies, make it very difficult for outsiders to assess the effectiveness of s 447 enquiries.
Even the Trade and Industry Select Committee, which produced a lengthy report on the investigation system during 1990, almost totally ignored the very existence of the s 447 enquiries, preferring to concentrate on the public inspections.
The DTI often receives criticism of these, yet little by way of praise when it nips a fraudulent trading operation firmly in the bud.
A number of the s 447 enquiries are deemed ‘public at risk’ and go to the head of the appointment queue.
This particularly applies where it appears the public is being parted from its money without receiving, or being likely to receive, anything in return.
In such cases there may be insufficient evidence for the use of police powers.
The immediate remedy is usually to petition for winding up in the public interest, so that a provisional liquidator (the Official Receiver) can be appointed, halting the company's activities.
A secondment to the DTI's Investigations Division is a fascinating introduction to the role of central government, and an opportunity to assimilate a knowledge of corporate legislation and the regulatory system at work.
For an accountant in practice who is keen on a secondment to the regulatory sector, the range of experience offered at the DTI would make it time well spent.
DTI: S447 work often overlooked
accounting
ANALYSTS AND THE CASH FLOW STATEMENT Analysts may not view the annual report as the best source of information about a company, but they do prefer the cash flow statement to the funds flow statement
Roger Hussey and David Bence
As part of a research project funded by Wellcome plc, we sought the views of investment analysts on Wellcome's annual report for 1991, which includes a cash flow statement prior to FRS 1's becoming effective on 23 March 1992.
We interviewed 21 investment analysts who are known to have a specific interest, and responsibility, in the health and household sector.
All the respondents in our survey are highly experienced in this sector; some hold scientific doctorates and one is a qualified accountant.
Before they were asked for their views on the cash flow statement, the analysts were asked to rate the importance of sources of information about the company for investment decisions.
The importance of each source was measured on a scale of 1 (extremely important) to 5 (of no importance).
We calculated the mean score for each source to produce a ranking (see Panel 1).
To appreciate the relatively low position of the Wellcome annual report as a source of information for decision-making, it is necessary to understand this company's reputation and the main features of the pharmaceutical industry.
The analysts we interviewed have the highest regard for Wellcome's annual report and are confident that the company does not indulge in creative accounting or any other dubious practices.
So a time-consuming, fundamental analysis of the document is unlikely to uncover dramatic information.
In addition, the analysts we interviewed do not regard the annual report as sufficiently timely or relevant to be critical to investment decisions in an industry in which the potential successes of individual products and the market direction of research and development are more important.
But they do value the report as a reference document.
The analysts were also asked whether they consider that the cash flow statement is an improvement on the funds flow statement and, if so, why.
Panel 2 shows their preferences.
Not all the respondents in our survey gave reasons for their choice and some offered more than one.
Therefore the lists of reasons below are merely an indication of the range, rather than a ranking.
We make no comment on the validity of the analysts' reasons.
Reasons for preferring the cash flow statement:
It aids factual prediction.
It gives a better guide to where the money has been used.
It contains more information.
It is a more standardised approach than the funds flow statement.
It enables users to see whether the company is self-financing.
It removes non-cash items.
It is easier to understand.
The analysts who expressed a preference for the cash flow statement did not indicate whether they preferred the direct or the indirect method.
Reasons for preferring the funds flow statement:
It gives a clearer indication of future cash flows.
It shows depreciation clearly.
It shows the net cash position clearly.
It shows the position with working capital, which is vital.
It is easier to reconcile with the profit and loss account
From the open-ended question asked, we can make some comments on the extent to which analysts actively use the information given in the cash flow statement for investment decisions.
Eleven analysts had stated that they were keeping a spreadsheet model of the company.
But only four specifically stated that they would extract information from the cash flow statement to build into their model.
Some appear to use the cash flow statement in an impressionistic way, in the words of one interviewee, ‘to get a feel for investments and for management action’.
But we would add a word of caution: these are early days in the life of the cash flow statement and experience is needed to discover the most appropriate method of analysis.
Since our research has concentrated on one company in a particular industry, we are not attempting to draw general conclusions for all company reports.
However, our findings certainly show that interested analysts do not regard Wellcome's annual report as the most important source of information for making ongoing investment decisions in their day to day work.
The majority of the analysts interviewed believe that the cash flow statement is an improvement on the funds flow statement, although it has not yet radically changed analysts' approach to their work.
The perceived value of the statement is that its standardisation makes comparisons between companies and industries more reliable.
The analysts want to feel confident that information has been prepared consistently, which is not too much to expect from any financial statement.
Perhaps with FRS 1 we are getting closer to achieving this ideal.
ethics
THE CAASE FOR PROBLEM SOLVING The Chartered Accountants' Advisory Service on Ethics answers a variety of members' enquiries.
A look at two of the most common problems gives a flavour of the service
Julian Osborne
It's the variety of questions asked by practitioners that makes life so interesting for the secretariat of CAASE (Chartered Accountants' Advisory Service on Ethics), the successor to the old Ethics Committee.
Questions range from the extreme —‘My client's been arrested for murder’— to the mundane —‘I have just received a mailshot from another firm which is quite appalling.’
Every question needs proper attention because behind what appears to be a straightforward enquiry there can often be an underlying significant problem about which the member either wants reassurance or, as is sometimes the case, seeks a secretariat endorsement of something which is improper.
In any event, a dissatisfied enquirer can be a disgruntled member!
It is not possible to describe the whole service, how it fits into the Institute's structure, and its relationship with the chartered accountants' Joint Ethics Committee within the constraints of one short article.
So therefore it might be of more interest to practitioners if I take some typical enquiries and describe the way they are tackled.
The most popular enquiries include ‘professional clearance’, mailshots, clients' money, the description ‘chartered accountants’, practising certificates, independence issues, and the duty of confidentiality.
The first two are normally fairly straightforward to deal with but the last two can be more difficult and sometimes fraught with very real problems.
In this article I will deal with the first and the last —‘professional clearance’ and confidentiality.
Many practitioners use the phrase ‘professional clearance’, but this is in fact a misnomer.
It describes the process whereby the prospective auditor/adviser enquires of the incumbent auditor/adviser whether there are any professional reasons which, in the opinion of the incumbent, would affect the successor's acceptance of the nomination.
But its real purpose is for the prospective auditor/adviser to be made aware of all the relevant facts before taking on the assignment.
Most questions on professional enquiry are procedural, and often arise because of a misconception of the process.
A typical problem raised by practitioners is: ‘He won't give me professional clearance because there are fees outstanding.’
The secretariat answer to such a problem would be as follows: ‘First, let me put right the misunderstanding caused by this phrase ‘professional clearance’.
What it describes is an enquiry process which enables a ‘new’ adviser to have all the relevant information about the client before accepting the assignment.
It is not a negotiable matter: the present adviser is expected to answer your questions.
So, did you break your letter down into two parts…first, did you enquire whether there were any professional reasons which would prevent you taking up the appointment and, second, can I have the following information etc?’
Without going into whether the information would come from his audit file or the client's file, the Institute has a stated policy that it will not put pressure on the incumbent auditor/adviser to supply information to a successor while fees remain outstanding — though the incumbent should be prepared to demonstrate that he is taking active steps to collect the outstanding fee including, if necessary, a writ or summons.
The conversation might go on to discuss the ownership of papers, and how to come to an agreeable settlement of the outstanding fees — a typical example of a problem facing many practitioners.
These steps might, at first sight, appear unnecessary and bureaucratic but it is this flow of information between practitioners, even where there is a fee dispute, that enables the ‘public interest’ to be upheld.
It is very important that the prospective auditor/ adviser be made fully aware of all the relevant facts which might have led to the breakdown of the previous client relationship.
The amendment to the 1985 Companies Act has highlighted misdescription problems.
For instance, there are firms or individuals describing themselves as ‘chartered accountants’ when they are not entitled to do so and where none of the principals involved is qualified to audit.
In such cases the nominated auditor still has to make professional enquiry of the existing auditor even if he is not qualified to audit, and whether or not he is a member of the Institute.
The other and sometimes more difficult problem arises when the other firm does not exist at all, someone having, quite simply, forged a letterhead.
The ‘new’ auditor/adviser cannot make professional enquiry in such circumstances as there is no one to contact.
However, a call to the Institute's members' registrar will confirm whether a firm of a similar name exists, or whether it is a case of ‘misrepresentation’ that has already come to the Institute's attention.
Turning now from procedural problems to those with more serious overtones: confidentiality/fraud.
In these cases the practitioner often receives a telephone call from the local police asking for information regarding one of his (or her) clients, followed by a request to come round and see them.
He might be told that his client (a) has been arrested on a serious charge,(b) might be arrested on a charge yet to be defined, or that (c) the police are following a line of enquiry.
The practitioner might already harbour suspicions regarding his client and his ‘natural’ instinct is to supply answers and papers without further question.
No!
He should remind himself that he has a duty of confidentiality to his client and he should not be afraid to say so to the police.
The police already know that they can obtain the necessary legal authority to require the practitioner to attend a court hearing and, if necessary, to examine his papers.
Both these steps will overcome the practitioner's duty of confidentiality, thereby giving him effective immunity from an action for damages on the part of the client.
The practitioner should then tell the police: ‘I will certainly contact my client, or his solicitor if he has one, and seek his permission to supply the information and, if necessary, answer your questions.’
However, where the police or Customs & Excise officers are acting under the authority of the Drug Trafficking Offences Act 1986 it is an offence for the practitioner to tell anyone anything regarding their investigation; even the fact that one is taking place.
Should the police obtain an order enabling them to gain access to client papers the order usually specifies the client's — the practitioner should be prepared to have the necessary files ready on the day they visit.
This would prevent the police from taking other non-relevant files relating to other clients, which has been known to happen.
The ability to discuss the situation with the CAASE secretariat — which has a wide relevant experience — can be very helpful.
For example, should the member believe that the issue may be sufficiently important to be disclosed to the relevant authorities in the ‘public interest’, then the chance to talk through the matter can be helpful.