

NOTICE BOARD
LIFE BUILDER BIBLE STUDIES
can be used by individuals or by groups who want to grow in knowing Jesus.
‘MEETING JESUS’ by Leighton Ford contains 13 studies each of which looks at a different aspect of who Jesus is.
Who is the real Jesus?
Use a Lifebuilder Bible study to dig into what the Bible shares.
Real value at £1.95
THE BEACON CENTRE
The Beacon Centre is on the move, yet again!
As from Thursday 1 October we will be meeting in Camphill Queen's Park Church.
We feel this will be significant for us as we have not as yet really ‘advertised’ the Centre because we felt we had no real permanence of venue.
Our own Ian Smith is drawing up posters for us so we can be sure they will be eye-catching.
The fact that we are situated right next to the park does not escape our notice and we have in fact had people in from the park who sleep rough there.
Many of our own folks come along to help out or just be part of the gathering.
Now that we have a permanent place to meet we would like to start up a library as some folks cannot afford to buy reading material so if you have any books that you have finished with or which are duplicates and would like to make room for new editions we will be happy to give them a good home where they will be used and appreciated.
We recently acquired a darts board and this has proved very popular so if you have spare darts and/or a darts board, carpet bowls or skittles these too will be received with gratitude.
Please pass on to Rosina Kilpatrick or Eleanor McCallum.
We greatly value all the prayer support we have had in the past and would continue to seek your prayers for the way forward and that those who come along and don't know Christ may find him.
We would also appreciate any financial support you may give — no matter how small!
Matthew 25: 35–40’…whatever you did for one of the least of these brothers of mine, you did for me.’
BMS BIRTHDAY SCHEME
Christopher Hutt, BMS financial secretary writes…
We would like to thank you for your support and interest in the medical work of the Society as demonstrated in your gift of £401.88.
While we remember those involved in medical missionary work overseas, let us also remember those who are currently in training to go overseas for the first time.
Our Society has four doctors who have been accepted for service.
They were originally intending to work in Zaire, but the situation is still somewhat unstable and it seems that the time is not quite right for them to go there.
Please remember these particular missionaries as they seek God's will and direction for their gifts and talents.
Let us also remember the country of Zaire and all missionaries who were evacuated, many of whom long to return again.
MISSION BOARD
This is the second and final article on the life and work of William Carey whose vision inspired the creation of the Baptist Missionary Society.
India: The Early Years
India in 1793 was largely a Hindu country and in those days dominated by the ceremonies and superstitions of that religion, rigidly divided by a caste system into which a person was born and could not escape.
Customs such as‘sati’, where a widow was burned alive on her husband's funeral pyre were not uncommon.
In contrast to the terrible poverty of the majority, the European elite who were there for commercial purposes often lived in luxury.
The British East India Company was largely opposed to the idea of missionary work, fearing that it might cause hostility among the natives and disrupt its trade.
The first six months in India were very difficult for the Careys.
Within three months in Calcutta, all their money to last a year had gone.
The Carey family had to rely on a house provided by a Bengali moneylender to save them from destitution.
But despite this and the sickness of his family, William pressed on with his study of Bengali with a native teacher named Ram Basu.
Then came an offer of land in the swampy jungle area 40 miles to the east of Calcutta, known as the Sandurbans.
Carey set to work clearing the jungle and erecting a little bamboo hut with fences to keep out tigers!
His aim was to grow enough food to feed his family.
Even in his darkest moments of discouragement, when he was distressed both by his circumstances and by his own seeming lack of spirituality, he clung to his faith in God's providence.
He wrote, ‘Well, I have God, and His Word is sure’.
After nearly six years in India and despite attracting people to his preaching there was not a single native convert.
Carey was often discouraged and frustrated but stubbornly pressed on with his translation work, realising its vital importance in the foundation of any missionary venture.
By 1795 significant sections of the Bible had been translated into Bengali and by 1798 he had completed his translation of the whole Scripture.
In 1796, Carey had begun to learn Sanskrit, the key to mastering many other Asian languages.
He translated a Sanskrit grammar and dictionary into English and compiled his own Sanskrit/Bengali/English dictionary.
Colonel Bie, the Danish governor at Serampore, urged the missionaries to settle there.
Although he would be at a considerable financial loss, Serampore had a number of significant advantages: far more people, a good site only two hours boat journey from Calcutta, complete freedom to engage in evangelism and the chance to operate a printing press freely.
The day of the first Indian conversion was coming.
Krishna Pal, a 35 year old carpenter, injured his shoulder and one of Carey's fellow missionaries, John Thomas, was called to give medical aid.
Krishna, with his friend Gokul, began to attending the mission house daily to learn more about Jesus.
On December 22nd 1800, both men confessed their faith in Christ.
They sat down for a meal with the missionaries, fully appreciating the significance of their actions.
On December 28th 1800, a baptismal service took place in the river.
Carey wrote with jubilation, ‘Yesterday was a day of great joy.
I had the happiness to desecrate the Gunga by baptising the first Hindu, viz Krishna and my son Felix…’
Carey had, from the beginning, planned for the work to be extended through native evangelists and Krishna went on to become one of the best ambassadors for Christ to his own people.
One of his Bengali hymns, translated by Joshua Marshman, still features in the Baptist Hymn Book.
William Carey always had a great social concern and had been horrified to witness the practice of ‘Sati’ in 1799.
He calculated that 10,000 women lost their lives annually due to this rite and he campaigned with many others for it to be banned.
When he was handed the official document making Sati illegal in December 1829, he left the preaching to another and hurried to translate the order into Bengali.
Even an hour's delay, he said, meant the loss of many lives.
He also shared in the efforts to end child sacrifices which were eventually prohibited in 1803.
His concern for leprosy sufferers, whom he had seen being thrown alive into burning pits, led to the establishment of a leprosy hospital in Calcutta — a very advanced concept for the time.
Solid Joys and Lasting Treasures
Towards the of his days, when he could no longer walk, he was wheeled in a chair into his garden.
Later still when too weak even for these outings, he would lie in his bed overlooking the grounds of the Serampore College he established in 1822.
He completed the revision of his Bengali translation of the Scriptures and received progress reports of the mission's activities.
Most of his family and friends had predeceased him and he died on 9th June 1834, aged 72, trusting only in the grace of God for his salvation.
William Carey had achieved a prodigious amount in many different spheres: evangelism, translation work, social reform, education, co-operation with other Protestant missionaries, botany — the list goes on and on.
He had set the pattern for the modern missionary movement but his own assessment of himself was typically modest: ‘I can plod.
That is my only genius.
I can persevere in any definite pursuit.
To this I owe everything’.
Grateful thanks go to David Pountain of the BMS for helping with these articles.
A fuller account of Dr Carey's life and work can be found in ‘Say Nothing About Doctor Carey’ by Lesley Rowe.
CHILD EVANGELISM FELLOWSHIP
SAT 10TH OCTOBER 7PM — 9PM
A presentation of the work of Child Evangelism Fellowship in the Glasgow/ Renfrewshire Area.
This Ministry involves:—
’ Good News Clubs’in homes,
Summer 5 day Clubs,
Outdoor Camps,
Trips, etc.
Reports of activities will be given, and Jim Graham a local fulltime C.E.F. worker will bring the epilogue.
There will also be an opportunity for fellowship and a cup of tea after the meeting.
CHRIS AND MARION COLLICT WRITE…
We arrived back in Brazil on 6 February to our new location in So Bento do Sul in the state of Santa Catarina, a little bit further south than Dois Vizinhos.
Eventually we found a house and moved in two days after Aaron started school.
So Bento do Sul is an interior town with 65000 inhabitants, 50% German speaking and the rest of German descent.
they have preserved their German culture and do not see themselves as Brazilians.
Chris is Director of the Association of Churches.
He is responsible for the planting of new churches and the leadership training of the pastors.
The job entails a lot of travelling, our furthest church is 2½ hours away (125 miles).
Our children have adapted very quickly.
Aaron (7) was given an entrance exam which he passed and it allowed him to jump a grade.
Joel (4) is going to a very good Lutheran school.
Unfortunately his ear problem has continued and if anything has got worse since our return.
His last audiogram showed a loss of 50% in both ears.
This is causing us great concern.
Rebekah is growing stronger and cheekier every day.
She was 2 in August and has already started the ‘terrible twos’.
Thanks for all your letters and tapes.
Remember we have a spare room if you fancy a ‘wee’ holiday.
Love in Christ 
From the Pastor
 Dear Friends 
By the time you read this we will have had the Gift Day and be well on our way with the Camphill Development Project.
With a project of this kind there will be times when very little seems to be happening.
That is inevitable when we are dealing with official bodies, but please be assured that a lot of work will be going on behind the scenes.
It is important that we pray regularly for those who have the responsibility of directing the technical aspects of the project — Rodney Beaumont, Douglas Fergus, John Hilditch, Don McLean & Ronnie Martin.
We are fortunate to have men of such commitment and expertise amongst us and we need to support them by our prayers.
Our first priority is to make the building weathertight to avoid further deterioration of the fabric.
However, it has been good that, thanks to the work of Ronnie Martin and his helpers, we have been able to have some use of the building on Sundays for our expanding Learning Together programme.
September has been a month for changes.
At the Church Meeting on the 9th, we appointed Jim Brooks as our new church secretary in succession to Malcolm Brown who had intimated in June his desire to step down from the post.
Malcolm has served the church very faithfully during his term in office in spite of being under severe pressure of work during much of that time.
He has helped guide us carefully through some difficult decisions and seen through the establishment of the pastoral team and the purchase of the Camphill building.
Fortunately, he will continue to be very involved in the leadership and life of the church with particular responsibility for our music ministry.
As Jim comes into office, with a complete commitment to Christ and to the work and witness of this fellowship, we need to assure him of our love and prayers and support.
The new format of the double morning services is working well and everyone has been very co-operative.
One big advantage is that is now much easier to recognize visitors amongst us.
The more manageable numbers make it easier for us to relate to one another.
I hope you will use the opportunity to get to know new people and make visitors feel welcome.
Remember that is the whole purpose of the exercise — to make space for others to come amongst us.
They will only come if we bring them.
You may find the special Family Service is a good time to invite others, especially people with children.
Our first one is next Sunday, 4th October and will celebrate the B.M.S. Bi-centenary, but planned with visitors in mind.
It would be good for each of us to take time this week to thank God for the work of world mission that was revived in 1792 through the effort of William Carey and those around him.
It seems incredible to us today that Carey should have had such difficulty in convincing christians of the necessity of sharing the Gospel with ‘the heathen’, but this is because we take for granted the radical influence his views have had upon our modern view of mission.
We thank God for such men and their determined perseverance to fulfil the vision God had given.
Looking ahead, we are privileged to have with us for a Conference on 23rd & 24th October, Roger Forster, leader of the Icthus Fellowship in London.
The story of Icthus is one of dynamic church planting and growth and the development of a well-balanced ministry of social care and evangelism.
Roger has much to share.
Make a point of being part of this conference.
Our Anniversary Sunday will be celebrated later this year, on 8th November, but we are particularly glad to have Rev. Brunton Scott, the previous pastor of this church, with us for the day.
Mark it in your diary!
Today, we are pleased to welcome Lenna & Julyan Lidstone to our services.
Many of you support them faithfully in prayer and I know we will all benefit from their challenging ministry as they share with us something of their work in Turkey.
Yours in fellowship,
DISCIPLESHIP TRAINING SCHOOL REPORT
GARY KILPATRICK
On 1 January 1992 I finally flew out of Glasgow Airport to begin my Discipleship Training School (DTS) with Youth with a Mission (YWAM) in Lausanne, Switzerland.
The school would span five months split into two phases, a three-month lecture phase and a two-month outreach.
‘To know God and to make him known’ is the motto of the schools.
I found myself living on the base with a dozen nationalities thrown together to know our God more.
France, Australia, Hong Kong, South Africa, Italy, Canada and USA were only some of the nations represented.
Our lecture topics included Intercession, Spiritual warfare, Worship, Evangelism and Biblical meditation.
A major emphasis was placed on Intercession and listening to God This was invaluable as we prepared for the first section of outreach in Budapest, Hungary.
We arrived in Budapest on a wet March day.
In partnership with a local fellowship there we began our outreaches on the streets of Budapest.
Using worship, dance, drama, testimony and preaching we began to communicate the truth of Jesus to the Hungarians.
I never imagined that we would get the response we got.
Crowds of hundreds would stand and watch and listen and many people made commitments to the Lord.
God moved mightily as he touched people's lives.
Two young atheists came to two of our outreaches and made commitments.
Yohan, an old man, was moved to tears as he read a tract, as he realised for the first time how much God loved him.
Many more lives were changed.
The Hungarian people are warm and friendly and very open to the Gospel.
Now is the time for God's banner to be lifted high in that country.
Our next destination, in a small team of nine, was Kenya, Africa.
Kenya has a large ‘Christian’ population, also a large Muslim representation alongside many unreached people-groups.
Kenya was in turmoil during our stay there; rioting and deaths were common-place.
We stayed in Nairobi for ten days, working with a Kenyan street evangelist, doing dramas etc.
After Nairobi we moved to the south of Kenya to Mombasa on the coast, a predominantly Muslim area.
We stayed at the YWAM Shimba Hills base.
We worked with local schools, working at a clinic, doing hut to hut and outreaches in local villages.
Walking through jungles was a daily routine.
Our living was basic — creek water showers, with the odd tadpole included.
Our diet was maize and vegetables.
We encountered many ‘native’ Africans, ie baboons, snakes, spiders etc.
This was a taste of Masai land.
The Masai are one of the largest tribes in Kenya and to many of the people Jesus is unknown.
Staying in tents in one of their villages for five days was a real cross-cultural experience.
With our Masai translator and guide we lived with them and accepted their hospitality which was our biggest witness to them.
The village was in complete wilderness, our toilet a local bush — keeping our eyes peeled for lions!
We also drank their special soured milk — tasted like a cross between yogurt and smoked cheese!!
We shared our faith with them and they shared their lives with us.
They are a noble people whom I will never forget.
Returning to Switzerland for a week it was time to say our goodbyes to each other.
When I arrived back in Glasgow on 10 June I wondered if anything was going to be the same again.
In mid-October I return to YWAM Lausanne to join as staff there.
God has placed on my heart a real desire to be involved in training, encouraging and equipping Christians to know their God intimately as a Father, and to share my faith in evangelism, taking the Gospel to the people.
I will be on staff for the january 1993 DTS, leading a small group, outreach team etc.
I'm excited about my future as God reveals more of his plan for my life.
Please talk to me or to Carol or John Booth if you want any more info.
ROYAL MAIL HELPS WOMEN IN NEED
(Graeme Clark has been a Baptist minister for the last ten years and was appointed Executive Director of Glasgow City Mission in May 1992.
For the last two months he has been attending Queen's Park with his wife Christine and three children.)
In the first week of September the Royal Mail accepted the challenge from Glasgow City Mission to build a Crisis Centre for women and children in need.
It intends to use its contacts with architects, builders, joiners, electricians etc to provide a building and hopefully also assist in raising income for the first few years' running costs.
The need for such a centre has been recognised for some time.
Earlier this year the mission was greatly encouraged when one woman was led by God to donate £36,000 towards the Crisis Centre and since then there has been one other substantial gift of £1,000.
The Centre would be one step on from Glasgow City Mission's Refuge Centre in Holm Street.
There Hugh and Maureen McKenna and 60 volunteers from 11 Glasgow churches provide a place where street prostitutes can come for food, heat, counselling and help.
Many of the girls come from the most appalling backgrounds of abuse and violence and approximately 60% are addicted to drugs.
For some the Refuge Centre is the only hope of a new and different life.
The Refuge Centre itself grew out of Glasgow City Mission's street work on the Night Patrol.
This was established in 1980 to bring food, blankets and clothing to those sleeping rough in bus stations, under bridges and flyovers, next to warm-air vents.
Gradually contact with street prostitutes began to grow and a relationship of trust began to be established.
It was however hard to speak to the girls out on the streets and so in 1991 a Refuge Centre was opened at Holm Street.
Now as some of the girls become christians and others wish to change their lives the need for a Crisis Centre becomes ever more urgent.
A place where girls, women and children can get the vital help they need.
We praise God for the progress already made and ask for your prayers and support as we seek to make this project a reality.
I feel shattered Lord
Like a wrung-out dishcloth
Having to deal so suddenly
With another's grief.
She didn't realise, I hope
The shock I felt
Or how inadequate to help
Or give her some relief
And yet I am one who hopes to care
For those who are in need
Who tries to counsel others
And bring them to belief
In Your love and mercy
Oh Lord of heaven I pray
That you will cover
my inadequacy
Console her Lord and let
My few stumbling words
About Your love and strength
Bring her to You
That You might bring her peace
And let me remember Lord
How much I need Your grace
And the power of Your Spirit
To ever face
the task of counselling.
(After counselling a student on failing an exam and discovering a beloved Grandfather was dying.)
THE WONDERFUL WORKS OF GOD IN BULGARIA
In 1974 the great International Congress on World Evangelisation was held in Lausanne and thousands of delegates came to it from all over the world.
I had the privilege of being there and I will never forget the experience.
Among those who came there was a small group from Eastern Europe.
There were not many of them but they made an impact on the Congress that was quite out of proportion to their small numbers.
During the Congress I witnessed something very moving.
The Hungarian uprising took place in 1956 and at that time many Hungarians, including some Christians, escaped to the West.
There were two Hungarians present at the Congress.
One had left Hungary in 1956 and the other had stayed.
They were friends and they expected never to see each other again.
Neither knew the other was at the Congress.
I witnessed the moment when they recognised each other.
I have never seen such joy or heard such spontaneous praise to the Lord.
At that Congress several Communist countries were represented.
The Yugoslav group was quite large.
Three other countries were represented in a small way, including one man from Romania.
There was nobody from Bulgaria.
That country was held fast in the grip of a most oppressive regime and there was never the remotest possibility that anyone could come.
I am writing these words on Wednesday 16 September 1992.
I am in Sofia, Bulgaria's capital city.
I preached on Sunday morning to a church crammed with Christian believers.
Many of these had not been Christians for very long.
How they listened!
This week I am lecturing on Preaching to a group of most eager students.
Where are these lectures taking place?
In a fine auditorium equipped with every teaching aid and where the curtains are operated by an electric switch.
I have never lectured in a finer classroom.
But you may say, ‘I thought the Bulgarian Christians were poor.
How could they afford to own such fine premises?’
This classroom and its ancillary facilities do not belong to the Baptists.
This was part of a huge complex of buildings that had been owned by the Bulgarian Communist Party.
What was the purpose of these buildings?
They were a centre for training Communists from all over the world who would go back as leaders into strategic posts in their own countries.
These buildings now stand empty and unused.
The authorities were glad to be able to recoup just a little money by renting this fine room to the Baptists for a week.
Last evening I had a meal at the home of Theo Angelov, the President of the Baptist Union of Bulgaria, and really the leader of the whole denomination.
He and his wife shared many things with me.
During the long, bleak reign of Communism in the country the Baptist churches had experienced much persecution.
His father, the last trained pastor in the country, had been in prison and suffered greatly there for 8 years.
Theo and his wife had faced harsh interrogation and house searches.
They never expected to see any freedom in their lifetime.
Then suddenly, in November 1989, it was all over.
God was working a miracle all over Eastern Europe in country after country, and at last they were free.
What joy was theirs!
This freedom brought great blessing in its train.
The churches are growing and multiplying rapidly.
There are now a number of Baptist churches among the gypsies also.
Every day Theo hears calls for help and especially for pastors for the infant churches, which cannot be met as the personnel are not available.
This new Theological School, with its week-long intensive courses, is therefore highly strategic for the whole future of the Baptist work in the country.
What a privilege to have a part in it!
There is no space to tell you of the depth of fellowship I am experiencing, of the great joy I have in teaching such folk, of all I am learning from these believers who have suffered so much, of the hardening opposition by the Orthodox Church, of the great work being done by the Baptists among Bulgarian orphans and of the plans for an orphanage, school and seminary.
There must, though, be space to say how deeply Eva and I have appreciated all the love and generosity Queen's Park has shown to us and to the Bulgarian Baptists and to say a big ‘Thank you!’ for making my visit possible.
Please pray for these dear brothers and sisters in Christ, and try very hard to hear Theo Angelov when he speaks at the Scottish Baptist Assembly in Edinburgh at the end of October.
A friend is one who cares,
who listens and who gives
himself and all he is
for me.
A friend is one who talks,
who tells the truth kindly,
not afraid to chide
me.
A friend is one who cheers,
who  comforts and uplifts
my heart which turns to
Jesus.
 Dear Friends,
I saw this little cutting and thought it might encourage some of us who have passed our sell by date stage.
A word of encouragement can mean a lot and Barnabas was a fine example (see Acts 15 verses 36/41).
On a personal note there are two things give me encouragement.
One is the B1 House Group led by Geoff Grogan.
The other is the words that come from the Pastor as he opens the bible to read.
The words are as follows —‘This is the Word of GOD’ said with assurance and firm belief.
Think about it!
Yours sincerely 
When I visited old Andrew last week, he was feeling down.
‘I really don't know what good I am to anyone,’ he sighed.
‘I've never done anything worthwhile like writing a book or painting a wonderful picture.’
‘No,’ I replied.
‘But you've comforted many a weary soul, listened to lots of troubled folk and even given one or two the will to live again.
You're one of life's sowers, Andrew.’
Then I told him about Clifton Robinson, the minister who planted just 360 grains of wheat.
Each year for six years he gathered the seed and planted each grain again.
The last harvest yielded 66,560 bushels.
‘It's like that with you, Andrew,’ I pointed out.
‘Although you may never see the harvest of your care and thoughtfulness, rest assured it will go on multiplying.’
Yes, we owe a lot to life's sowers.
DIARY OF JONAH — OCTOBER 1992
MONDAY —
Poor Mum, she's had to go into hospital for an operation.
I am not very sure what's wrong with her but I can tell by the way they start discussing the weather when I come into the room that it must be Women's Trouble.
Of course, I can't let on to my silly wee sister that I don't know what's wrong with Mum.
I just put on my superior knowledgeable look and tell her she'll be told when she's older.
Gran told her that mum had to go into hospital because she was hysterical!!
TUESDAY —
Went to visit Mum tonight.
She has lots of cards.
I am sure she has more cards than anyone else on her ward.
Dad says that's what she gets for being a Baptist.
There are certainly lots of verses of scripture in them.
Mum says that it took her hours to look up all the verses.
WEDNESDAY —
Went to visit Mum again.
Only got in for a few minutes as half the church was there.
She's got some nice packets of sweets but people seem to bring her only magazines for ladies.
I mean, I would have expected something a bit more spiritual for a time like this.
THURSDAY —
Went to see Mum again.
Didn't get in at all tonight as there were so many other folk there.
Dad says he's going to start taking bookings.
It's alright for the Pastor.
He can get in anytime.
FRIDAY —
Went to the hospital again tonight.
It's very interesting.
I think I might consider a medical career when I grow up.
I didn't actually visit Mum for very long but old Mrs McSporran told me all the news of the Senior Citizens and our deacon gave me a few tips about growing rhubarb.
SATURDAY —
Was at the hospital twice today.
Visited the lady across from Mum.
She says she feels neglected when she looks at all the visitors Mum gets.
I told her we were Baptists and she said she would tell her husband because he thought Gran was an amazing woman having such a large family, but she had told him that we probably belonged to ‘one of these odd religions!’.
If I can get near Mum I must tell her that she should do a spot of witnessing to the woman across from her.
Odd religions indeed!
SUNDAY —
A wonderful sermon!
I would have liked to have heard it again at the second service but Dad made us hurry home.
He's a changed man since Mum went into hospital.
At first he kept saying that housekeeping was a piece of cake and that women made a big fuss about nothing but since the washing machine broke down he hasn't said that.
We didn't have the usual Sunday dinner but fish finger and beans make a change.
My silly wee sister has made Mum a Get Well Quickly card.
Of course, I am missing her but I don't think she should come home until she is well.
I mean, there are so many opportunities in hospital to witness.
She'll maybe get to go through ‘The Bridge’ with somebody!
*** SPECIAL OFFER ***
For Two Weeks Only
A special offer of service to QP members and friends.
Ken and Pat Ferguson would like to re-cover your dining-chair seats for a labour charge of only £5 each plus the cost of fabric, which you can choose from a selection of pieces available in stock at reduced prices, or supply your own fabric.
For the next two weeks we would like to re-cover such things as divan headboards, fireside chairs etc.
The labour cost of this work would be presented to the Camphill Building Fund as our gift/donation.
Please help us to give by providing us with this work.
FREDA KENNEDY WRITES…
 Dear Editor,
May I borrow some space in your magazine to say a big thank you for all the good wishes we have received in connection with the Presidency of the Baptist Union of Scotland?
I am conscious that it is a great honour and carries a big responsibility.
We are grateful to God, look to Him, and will value very much your prayers.
As a family Queen's Park Baptist Church means a lot to us, and it is good to be going into this task with such a strong church behind us.
It has been a special joy in recent times to see the growth in the church of a truly global mission concern, and we look to your continued support as we try to make the challenge of Mission in its fullest sense the emphasis at this year's Assembly, and beyond.
BRAIN-TEASERS
Q What's green and fly through walls?
A Casper the friendly cooking apple.
********
Q What's black and shiny and sails the seven seas?
A Binbag the sailor.
(PS The Editor's brain can't manage the first teaser.
Can anyone help?)
 Dear Folks 
Just a little note (—) to say thank you to everyone who sent cards and good wishes over the past few months.
I also want to express my deep appreciation especially to those who took the time to pray for me.
May God bless each and every one of you richly.
With much ♥ in his name
MISSION BOARD PRAYER DIARY
Mondays
Pray for peace in Europe.
Pray that those who seek to bring the light of the Gospel into Europe would know the Lord's guidance and will at this time.
Tuesdays
Give thanks to the Lord for Jack and Dorothy McConnochie and the family.
Pray that they would quickly settle into their new life in Nuneaton.
Wednesdays
Ask the Lord to guide, protect and encourage all the missionary support groups within QP.
Thursdays
The Meikle Family, one of our World Mission link families.
Thank the Lord for the way in which they have settled into their new life in Brazil.
Pray that the Lord would help Robert adjust to his new school.
Fridays
Lift up Esther Maddox and Iain Clark before the Lord in prayer as they commence their time in the ‘Frontline’ with the Oasis trust.
Thank the Lord for his faithfulness to them at this time.
Saturdays
’ I can plod.
That is my only genius.
I can persevere in any definite pursuit’— William Carey.
Listen to II Chronicles 20: 13–17
GLORIA MYRICK WRITES…
As we walked into our first service at Queens Park, we immediately found a congregation of loving Christians who welcomed our family warmly into an atmosphere of worship and praise to the Lord.
A year ago we came from Nashville, Tennessee, USA, transferred by Jeff's employer, Cigna, Inc., for a couple of years — a temporary move, but one of great significance in our lives.
Having been deeply involved in our home church, we left behind many Christian friends and family members who were praying for us.
But our concern was to find a church in Scotland that would give us the love and teaching that our family needed.
Our children, Ashton and Taler, fell in love with the Learning Together program, and soon made friends with the other children.
We have enjoyed the openness in prayer and praise in the worship services.
We needed a time to be fed from the Word of God.
Pastor Gunn and his fellow associates have given so much to us through their encouragement of truly living the Scriptures.
We are preparing to move back to the States within the next month, and we will miss all of those persons who have made our stay at QP a pleasant one.
Keep us in your prayers as we find a new church home.
We will continually pray for your and the future of QP.
Always remember to keep the Lord first and He will provide for you in any circumstance.
Sincerely in Christ,
GINGER BISCUITS
12oz (350g) Self Raising Flour
8oz (225g) Sugar
5oz (100g) Margarine
2tbsp (2x15ml sp) Golden Syrup
1 (1) Egg (beaten)
1tsp (1x5ml sp) Bicarbonate of Soda
2tsp (2x5ml sp) Ginger
Melt sugar, margarine and syrup in a pan.
Put flour, ginger and bi-carbonate of soda in a bowl.
Add the beaten egg and syrup mixture.
Mix to a smooth dough.
Make into balls, flatten slightly.
Place on a greased baking tray (keep well apart) and bake at 180oC (350oF) Gas mark 4.
Bake 15–20 minutes, or until golden brown.
SERMONS FROM THE SEA (SECOND EDITION)
Once again Neil Ramage bravely took a party from QP sailing off the West coast of Scotland.
Yes, we did see another whale — or rather, Walter said he thought he did.
The weather was a lot worse this time and there was plenty of opportunity to think about things that are really important.
This one is called ‘Casting Off’.
It was the saddest part of the whole voyage.
The big blue-green buoy with ‘HIDB’ in large white letters represented safety and security, but we had to leave, there really was no alternative.
The beautiful island of Gigha spread out before us with a cluster of houses around the little bay of Ardminish.
Over to the right the tiny Islay ferry boat was just leaving, taking only a few cars and their passengers on the trip.
In the early summer, so the guide books tell us, the rhododendrons and azaleas make a wonderful show in the famous gardens.
But today was different.
Although the sun was shining brightly, the wind was distinctly fresh and getting stronger.
The trip from Jura that morning had been exciting enough, with a following sea cork-screwing the boat wildly as we ran before it, with the occasional shuddering ‘gybe’ when a shift of wind took us by surprise.
We had to get back to Crinan by nightfall, over 30 miles away to the North, and time was running out.
We listened anxiously to the flat voice of the announcer on the shipping forecast —‘Malin, Hebrides; north-westerly 5 to 6, occasionally 7…’
We were in for a long, rough passage, battling into the wind for seven hours or more.
Force 6 is not a gale, it has to be force 8 or more for that, but it is still rough enough, with every wave breaking over the bows and sometimes over the whole boat, drenching us as we sat in the cockpit at the back.
It was very tempting to just stay put but the longer we put it off the worse it would be.
And so, while the others got ready for the voyage, I knelt in the bows, undid the rope and watched sadly as that big mooring buoy, our last link of security, slid slowly away from us.
The boat turned into the wind and the waves and headed north.
Letting go of secure things is always difficult.
We like to know that we have financial security, family security and health security.
Indeed we sometimes spend a lot of our waking hours making sure that everything is as secure as we can make it.
But a sleek sailing boat that spends all its time in harbour is no use to anyone.
Casting off may be daunting, but it has to be done.
This is something I had been thinking a lot about recently, using Psalm 37 as a basis.
‘The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord: And he delighteth in his way.’
(v 23, KJV).
(My father always liked that verse.
His friend Mr Goodman claimed it was written just for him!)
It goes on to say ‘though he stumble he shall not fall for the Lord upholds him with his hand’.
Believing in God's goodness is easy when we are moored in calm water.
When there are gale warnings about, it takes a lot more faith.