

WOMEN'S AGLOW FELLOWSHIP
Venue Lesser Hall, Langside Hall Shawlands
Time 7.15 p.m.
Tea and Coffee, 7.45 p.m.
Start of Meeting
Date Monday 2 November 1992
Speakers Mrs May Martin (Lydia Fellowship)
All Ladies most welcome!
Our December meeting is open to the men also.
Date Monday 7 December 1992
BATH UPDATE
This short article is to let you know what has happened to us over the last few months.
We finished John's leadership training in September, with 4 weeks of outreach in Northern Ireland.
This was a busy and fruitful time, and the team were given a warm welcome in all the places we worked.
At the end of the school we came back to our flat in Glasgow again.
Because of continuing financial difficulties and still not having sold the flat, we have had to leave YWAM for the moment.
This was a difficult decision, but since we moved back God has been very gracious, and we have all settled in really easily.
We still very much believe we have been called to work in missions and as soon as we are able to do so, hope to return to that work.
We have appreciated so much the support, encouragement, prayers and interest of many from the fellowship over the last year.
God has certainly blessed us through you — thank you.
If any one would like to find out more of what we've been doing — just let us know.
DANCE GROUP OPEN NIGHTS
The Dance Group is planning to hold regular open nights for all those interested in exploring movement in personal worship and the use of ribbons and flags.
These open nights will be held on the last Thursday of each month (not December) at 7.30pm in the church sanctuary, enter by Nithsdale Road.
Comfortable clothes and footwear for movement and exercise should be worn.
Next open night — Thursday November 26th
See weekly notice sheets for confirmation.
DID YOU KNOW…
The bookstall is open every Sunday — after the 9.30 and 11.15  services , before and after the 6.30 service.
10 % of all book sales at QPBC bookstall will go to help fund a project to translate Scripture Union's ‘Learning Together’ teaching material into Hungarian so that Christians in Eastern Europe can be helped in their work with children.
We can order books for you.
Normally orders placed on Sunday will be available for collection the following Sunday.
Titles stocked are selected to develop themselves on the  morning and evening sermons.
Other titles are recommended by those running QP training courses.
You are welcome to browse.
Our friendly staff look forward to meeting you.
CHERRY CAKE
8 oz glace cherries
3 oz self-raising flour
3 oz plain flour
pinch salt
6 oz butter
6 oz castor sugar
finely grated rind of 1 lemon
3 eggs beaten
3 oz ground almonds
little milk if necessary
Grease a 7 inch cake tin and line with greased greaseproof paper.
Rinse cherries (see quick tip below).
Cut each cherry in half.
Sieve the flours and salt together twice then toss the cherries in a little of the flour.
Cream butter, sugar and lemon rind together until the mixture is pale and creamy.
Add beaten egg a little at a time, beating well after each addition and keeping mixture stiff.
Add a tablespoon of flour with last amount of egg.
Fold in flour, cherries and ground almonds adding a little milk to make a fairly stiff dropping consistency; the stiff consistency will help cherries to remain suspended evenly in cake while it is baking.
Turn mixture into prepared tin and bake in a moderate oven for about 1 hour 20 mins, or until a skewer inserted in centre comes out clean.
Leave cake to cool in tin for 5 mins then turn it out on to a wire tray to finish cooling; remove paper.
When cold, wrap in foil or store in an airtight tin.
oven 350, gas 4
QUICK TIP
To remove the syrup from glace cherries before using, put into a sieve and rinse under running water.
Drain thoroughly on absorbent kitchen paper.
MARK 2 PROJECT
Christmas Dinner Dance
Saturday 5th December 1992
Tinto Firs Hotel
7–7.30 till midnight
Ceilidh Dance Band & Fiddler
Tickets £15.
All proceeds to Project Funds.
GRAEME DUFFIN WRITES…
We asked Graeme to write this month's Mission Board contribution to the Magazine:
‘I will praise you, O Lord, with all my heart; I will tell of all your wonders.
I will be glad and rejoice in you; I will sing praise to your name, O Most High.’
Psalm 9: 1,2
These are times of great blessing at Q.P. As we have asked of God, and listened, so He answers.
The excitement of the Camphill Project, the expansion of the congregation to swell the numbers in both morning services on a Sunday and the continuous flow of new members into the church are all things for which we can be glad and rejoice, because God is at work.
‘If there is a poor man among your brothers in any of the towns of the land…do not be hard-hearted or tight-fisted towards your poor brother.’
Deuteronomy 15:7
The result of receiving blessing from the Lord within our own fellowship must be made evident by our concern for our poorer brothers and sisters in:
1)
Our community
2)
Our country
3)
Globally
As we move on with God and seek his will for us as His church, we must be seen to be addressing the issues which face us today.
‘The earth is the Lord's and everything in it.
The world and all who live in it.’
Psalm 24:1
‘The times cry out for a dramatic change in our relationship to our neighbour, the Earth and, at root to God.
In more evangelical language, the crisis in which we now find ourselves — politically, environmentally and spiritually — calls for revival.’
(Jim Wallis)
The amount of a christian's concern for these issues should not be based upon denominational preference or doctrinal bias, but upon a willingness to allow the compassion of loving God to affect us at the deepest level of our beings.
Only then will our worship become the sweet fragrance to God that it ought to be.
‘Away with your hymns of praise — there are mere noise to my ears.
I will not listen to your no matter how lovely it is.
I want to see a mighty flood of justice — a torrent of doing good.’
Amos 5:21 — 24
‘Now this was the sin of your sister Sodom.
She and her daughter were arrogant, overfed and unconcerned; they did not help the poor and needy.’
This concern was top priority for the first apostles as Paul and Barnabas reported about their discussion with Peter, James and John.
‘All that they asked was that we should continue to remember the poor.’
Galatians 2:10
‘A new individual gospel without a social gospel is a soul without a body, and a social gospel without an individual gospel is a body without a soul.
One is a ghost and the other is a corpse.’
(Stanley Jones)
‘Anew spirit is blowing in the churches.
The resurgence of a confessing community in our land has already begun.
The key to it is the integration of spiritual and social renewal.’
(Jim Wallis)
‘He has showed you, O man, what is pgood.
And what does the Lord require of you?
To act justly and to love mercy and to walk humbly with your God.’
Micah 6:8
PAT FERGUSON WRITES…
 Dear Mag Team 
I wonder if you would be good enough to place the following thank you in next months mag?
To all my brothers and sisters who took the time to visit and send cards when I was ill, thank you for the encouraging words and scripture.
May the glory of my quick healing go to Him.
Amen
Love in Jesus
LETTER FROM ARABIA NUMBER TWO — WHY?
 Dear Friends,
In my last article in the magazine I told you all about my trip to Saudi Arabia, but I didn't tell you why I went or what I hope to do next.
I have shared this with a number of you personally, but I thought more of you might be interested.
It all began because my friend Pat was called by the Lord to work as a nurse in Saudi, and her experiences there gave me an interest in that country and especially in the Women as they seem to have such a hard life.
I started really to pray into that situation.
Then I started to get a feeling that the Lord was going to move me from my present job.
Next I listened to a message from Andy Kennedy talking about the unreached peoples of the 10–40 window, which includes Saudi Arabia, and how the Lord wanted them to hear the good news.
Well-that's when I made my big mistake.
I prayed that someone would go out there and help those people.
The Lord spoke to me right there in the church and said why don't you go?
I then made another mistake.
Yes I'll go Lord if you get me a job there secure in the knowledge that
1.
I was too old
2.
There were no colleges of nursing in Saudi to get a job in.
Well by now I'm sure you're way ahead of me.
The very next week an advertisement came round the office from Scottish Overseas Health Support looking for nurse teachers to go out to Saudi Arabia to set up a training programme for dental hygienists, medical records officers and (you've guessed it) nurses, CAUGHT!!
What could I do!
Seriously, I did offer myself to the Lord, but when the opportunity came, it was quite a shock.
However I applied and then sought the advice and prayers of Christian friends and we prayed that if it wasn't from the Lord I wouldn't get accepted.
I was also advised by the Leadership not to go without my Husband's support.
Well I not only got the job, I was made principal (and that another miracle) and Douglas not only supports me, He's going to join me later.
Apart from doing the job of Principal (for which I shall need a lot of help from the Lord), and living as a Christian I don't yet know what the Lord wants me to do out there.
Whatever it is I'll need a lot of prayer.
If you would like to receive my prayer letter please contact Joyce MacPherson who has kindly agreed to distribute it for me.
My thanks to all who have already expressed an interest.
Please keep praying, and remember if he can use me he can use ANYBODY.
Love to all.
DIARY OF JONAH
Monday
Still excited about last's night Sermon.
What a wonderful vision the lady who lives at the top of our road shared with us all!
It must be great to have visions like that.
Tuesday
Have just been reading the book of Joel.
It says there that ‘your young men will see visions’.
I mean, I am nearly a young man.
Wednesday
Sat for ages tonight trying to have a vision but nothing happened.
I mean, I don't think a packet of crisps and a choc ice is a very spiritual vision.
Thursday
Met the lady who lives at the top of our road who shared the vision on Sunday night.
She hasn't had any more visions but she was telling me that she sometimes has dreams.
She says that God spoke to many people in the Bible through their dreams, like Jacob, Joseph and Nebuchadnezzer. so why not her?
Maybe me too.
Friday
Went to bed at 8 p.m. tonight but can't get to sleep, never mind dream.
Mum keeps coming in to ask me if I feel ill.
Saturday
No dreams last night.
I am going to have another early night.
I mean hearing from God is much more important than scotsport, isn't it?
Sunday
I still haven't had any dream.
I must speak to our Pastor about this.
He looks as if he's always having dreams.
Later Wonderful Sermon.
Our Pastor says that there is nothing to worry about.
God can speak in all sorts of different ways.
All we have to do is listen.
That's a relief.
I mean, some of me favourite TV  programmes start at 8 p.m.
Article for QP Church Magazine November Edition
We are moving to Surrey on the 24th October, so by the time you read this we will actually have moved!
The reason for the move is that Phil took redundancy from BP when they announced that they were closing their Glasgow office and has since found a job with a Swedish oil company in London.
We have felt very much a part of Queen's Park during our 3 years in Glasgow, a lot of which is owed to our friends in the 2 fellowship groups which we have been involved with.
We have also enjoyed working alongside the children and leaders in the Learning Together programme.
We will certainly miss everyone.
However, our prayers will be with the Fellowship as you embark on this exciting period of change in the church.
MISSIONARY PRAYER CALENDAR
Mondays
Give thanks to the Lord for the ‘Positive Response’ coffee morning.
Pray for Tear Fund as it seeks to bring the whole Gospel into lives which have been shattered by famine, war and disaster.
Tuesdays
Please pray for Esther Maddox and Iain Clark as they continue their work with Oasis Trust.
Ask the Lord to guide their steps daily and to enlarge their understanding of his love.
Wednesdays
Gary Kilpartrick has now started working with YWAM in Switzerland.
Give thanks to the Lord for the way in which He has led Gary.
Thursdays
Many theological students and those training for the mission field have started back at University and College.
Pray that those students would know the Lord's hand on their studies and in their lives during this academic year.
Fridays
Chris and Marion Collict's son, Joel, has ear problems and has much reduced hearing.
Please pray that the Lord would heal Joel's ears and that the family would continue to know the Lord's blessings as they serve Him out in Brazil.
Saturdays
Ask the Lord to help us as a church to be faithful in supporting our World Mission Link with the Meikle and Collict families.
The Meikle and Collict prayer letter can be obtained from either Freda Kennedy or Bill Howieson.
MARK 2 PROJECT
In case you thought that the Mark 2 Project had died quietly in a corner somewhere (given the lack of information on it recently) it is in fact still very much alive and is making slow but steady progress.
(For those wondering what this is all about, Mark 2 is a scheme to provide a fashionable but alcohol — free meeting place in the Shawlands area for young people.
Six local churches including Q.P. have so far committed themselves to the vision and are represented on the Mark 2 board.)
In the last 18 months a company has been formed and charitable status obtained.
A business plan for the project is in the final stages of preparation, as are publicity brochures and leaflets.
Many organisations and companies have been approached for support, with a measure of success.
In June a prayer and praise night for the project was held in Shawlands old C of S, drawing over 70 people from the local area.
Much enthusiasm for the vision was expressed that evening.
As you would expect, a project of this kind requires substantial sums of money to set up.
Grants, trust money and corporate giving will go to some way to meeting the bill but support from individuals will play a very important part.
You could support the scheme (and provide free advertising at the same time) by purchasing a chic Mark 2 tee — shirt.
A stylish little number this with original design, it comes in sizes S, M, L and XL and is available at the positively give — away price of £6.75!
Items such as pens and mugs will also be available for sale in due course.
Alternately why not attend the Mark 2 Christmas Dinner Dance at the Tinto Firs Hotel on the 5th December (details on the notice board page of this magazine).
All proceeds from the evening will go towards project funds.
While all this activity may seem appropriate, it cannot be stressed too often that ‘Unless the Lord builds the house, its builders labour in vain’ Psalm 127:1
If you share in the vision to establish a project such as this in our community for our young people then by far the most valued support you can offer is regular prayer for:
The directors on the Mark 2 board
The raising of funds
The identification of suitable premises
The confirmed unanimity of the participating churches
If, on the other hand, having read this you're left with the feeling ‘so what’ then let me leave you with the words of two teenagers who frequent similar established alcohol — free projects in England
15 YEAR OLD BOY —‘It doesn't matter that you can't get alcohol here.
We come because its the best place to meet your friends.
Until it opened the only fun was stealing cars, fighting and smashing things up.
Since coming here, I've not been in trouble for a year’.
17 YEAR OLD BOY —‘For me it's a relief to be able to come here and not have to drink to impress my friends’.
A STORY
Deep in the QP forest, the animals met for their regular tete a tete.
There was an air of disquiet, much muttering and whispering as they tried to find a solution to the problem facing them — a greater broad backed bookworm had been spotted.
Not just spotted.
Evidence of his whereabouts had been carefully noted.
A well thumbed copy of ‘Discipleship’ had been found beside a comfortable log, notes had been found headed ‘Packer — on Holiness’.
What were the animals to do?
‘This greater broad backed bookworm must be found before he encourages other animals to read those books he seems to devouring just now,’ said laid back Rabbit.
‘Quite’, replied Mole, who preferred to busy herself digging, keeping her head down.
Activity was all important.
‘Think of the damage a greater broad backed bookworm could do in a place like this if others became discriminating readers’.
Fox never could understand why the bookworm had to read to gain knowledge.
Why didn't he know most things by intuition — and by listening to the other animals talking?
Who needed books?
Who indeed?
‘Wait a minute’, cautioned Owl, always ready with a wise word — or two.
You don't need to be afraid of learning a little more.
A little learning is a dangerous thing — but great wisdom comes with much learning.
Perhaps you'd be an even more valuable member of our gathering if you'd read a little more Silence fell as the animals considered Owl's remarks.
(to be continued)
CAN YOU HELP?
If you have spotted the greater broad backed bookworm in QP, please would you assist in tracking him /her down.
Drawings, identikit pictures, character descriptions will all help our enquiries.
Please forward any information, no matter how insufficient it may seem to ‘Greater broad backed bookworm enquiry’ QPBC bookstall.
Thank you for your help.
CLOSED AND OPEN
‘I have placed before you an open door that no one can shut’
So says Christ to the church in Philadelphia.
Often when we talk about guidance and opportunities we speak of ‘open doors’.
My experience over this past year has been of closed doors.
The door of service in Zaire closed behind us when we left during the troubles last September.
Various doors of service have remained closed despite my knocking.
After a number of closed doors there was a feeling of discouragement and uselessness but I thank God that another door has opened — not in a direction I had originally looked but one which I am sure is right for now.
On the very last day for applications (by coincidence???)
I contacted Glasgow Bible College and have since been accepted and begun the course for a B.A. (theology).
It looks like hard work but exciting too.
I expect to be there for 2 years.
Afterwards I will have to knock on other doors but I am sure that yet again the right door will open at the right time.
But what about Zaire?
The situation there remains very unstable.
There is a conflict between the President and the Prime Minister, at one point causing tanks to be deployed on the streets of Kinshasa.
There has also been fighting in Shaba region between followers of the Prime Minister (Tshisikedi) and followers of the recently ousted Prime Minister, Karl I Bond.
The economic position remain appalling with the value of money plummeting and prices soaring.
Please continue to pray for Zaire and for the church there.
I thank you for all your prayers and support over many years and look forward to these 2 years in and around the fellowship.