

The Language of Book-Collecting (ii)
The language of book-collecting, if there is such a thing, is a hotch-potch in which the chief ingredients are borrowed from the language of bibliography, borrowed, that is to say, at second-hand from the various book-productive and book-distributive trades.
It is inevitably so.
For every book-collector, and every bookseller, is in greater or less degree a bibliographer.
Simon Nowell-Smith in Talks on Book-Collecting (1952)
It is time that we turned to the inside of our book and began to explore its mysteries and terminology.
The normal book, when it is opened, will display two pages or ‘papers’ empty of print, though they may be decorated.
On the left is the ‘paste-down’ or ‘paste-down endpaper’, on the right the ‘free endpaper’.
Though these may be plain, use is often made of paper of a different texture, and even of colour, from that of the main text.
Such comparatively unimportant details can sometimes help to determine priority of issue.
For example, the first issue of the first edition of Dickens's A Christmas Carol , according to some of the pundits, has green endpapers, while the second issue has yellow.
If the publisher wishes to make his book more attractive, he may decide to have ‘marbled’ endpapers.
Marbling was practised in the east well over a thousand years ago, but it was late in arriving in Europe.
Francis Bacon, writing in 1627 said ‘The Turks have a pretty art of chambletting paper which is not in use with us’, though, in fact, it did reach this country at about that date.
A manual describing the art was written in Holland in 1674, and at that time it was the Dutch who produced the best work.
In recent years British papers have been widely used all over the world.
The process is complicated, but produces some beautiful effects.
It consists, basically, of transferring floating colours, combed or twisted into delicate patterns, from the surface of a gum solution.
The best results are obtained from watercolours, oils being less clean and controllable.
It should not be difficult to distinguish between the genuine work and the more shoddy effects produced by lithographic reproduction.
One volume of an 1847 edition of Walpole's Memoirs of the Reign of George II, illustrating the marbled paste-down (left) and the free endpaper (right).
In some elaborately produced books you will meet a stiffer type of endpaper with a wavy pattern like rich fabric.
This is ‘watered silk’.
Another elaboration is the use of leather, often decorated, for the paste-down.
Such inside linings, more common in Continental books than English, are known as ‘doublures’(from the French doubler , to line), there being no English equivalent.
If the binder has gone to town with his gilt on the outside, he may well have been tempted to spill over onto the inside edges, giving pleasant lacy-patterned borders to the paste-down, usually termed ‘inside dentelles’.
On the outside they would be ‘dentelle borders’, wide or narrow.
Again, we borrow from the French, this time for lace or tracery.
Turning over the free endpaper to the next double page, we shall usually arrive at the first appearance of print, unless the publisher has been very free with his endpapers and given us some blanks.
On the right will be found a simple version of the book's title, without author's name or publisher's imprint.
This is the ‘half-title’.
It is sometimes (especially in America, where, unfeelingly, they have often adopted their own bibliographical terminology) called the ‘fly’ or ‘bastard’title.
This insignificant looking page is of much more importance than might appear.
Rebinders often discard it and thereby do the collector a serious   disservice.
The purist bookman wants his book complete with the half-titles, if they were there in the first place, and it is an appreciable demerit mark if the cataloguer has to confess ‘lacking half-titles’ or ‘volume III without half-title’, even though they are present in the other two.
Some of the greatest sufferers in this respect are such prized works as Jane Austen's, where it can make a surprising difference to the price.
A Commonwealth imprimatur in Thomas Shepard ‘s Theses Sabbaticae.
Or, the Doctrine of the Sabbath (1649); the licence in this case granted by Joseph Caryl, a divine who frequently preached before the Long Parliament.
The half-title often carries on the ‘verso’(back) the printer's imprint, as distinct from the publisher's, and perhaps a list of other works by the same author.
In early books, especially those of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, this page may well display an ‘imprimatur’(Latin for ‘let it be printed’), a licence from some official, religious or secular, authorising the publication.
Normally, this is reserved nowadays for works approved by the Roman Catholic Church.
Other phrases with more or less the same   meaning are nihil obstat (‘nothing hinders’) and cum licentia (‘with licence’ or ‘with permission’).
If the formula appears on a separate leaf, this is often referred to as the ‘licence leaf’ or ‘privilege leaf’.
Right: Another seventeenth century licence, this time incorporated in the title-page; below: a modern licence granted by the Archbishop of Milan.
This oppressive measure on the part of the authority aroused much  anger among writers.
In 1693, Charles Blount wrote:
Learning hath of late years met with an obstruction in many places which suppresses it from flourishing or increasing…and that is the inquisition upon the press, which prohibits any book from coming forth without an imprimature.
And earlier, in the noblest of all defences of the freedom of the press, Milton had protested:
What advantage is it to be a man, over it is to be a boy at school, if we have only ‘scaped the ferule [cane]to come under the fescue [rod]of an Imprimatur?
We arrive at what, from the collector's point of view, is one of the most important parts of the book — the title-page.
If you are fortunate enough to own, or to find, an incunabulum or book printed before 1500, do not be too alarmed if it has no title, since many books of the period had none, at least in the sense that we understand, the publisher/printer contenting himself with a curt statement of the title and author's name, known as a ‘label title’, or else a small introductory paragraph (sometimes using a different coloured ink) known as the ‘incipit’, from the Latin ‘it begins’.
The term ‘initia’ is sometimes used, but much more rarely.
The label title to Caxton's The Chastysing of goddes chyldern, c.1471.
In a later chapter, on the cult of the first edition, I shall have more to say on what a vital part the title-page can play.
On it we normally get the full title and sub-title, the author's name or pseudonym, his qualifications and, sometimes, the titles of other important or popular books he has written with, at the foot, the publisher's imprint and, more often than not, the date.
One of the most famous publisher's imprints and devices, that of Aldus Manutius (1450–1515), founder of the Aldine Press in Venice and introducer of italic type.
At the date of this book, 1569, the press had been taken over by Aldus's youngest son, Paulus.
The celebrated dolphin and anchor device (the dolphin for swiftness and grace, the anchor for strength and reliability) was adopted by the English printer William Pickering.
A fine seventeenth century copper-engraved title-page.
The attractive engraved title of a famous botanical work, printed in five volumes, 1836–42.
It is sometimes known as a factotum title, since it was designed for general use, leaving the volume number to be filled in.
A vignette title-page, 1828.
A vignette is an illustration without border or frame, the picture shading off into the surrounding paper.
To quote, at this stage, only one or two examples of the significance all this can assume, the first appearance (first edition, first issue) of Lamb's famous Elia (1823) has the imprint:
LONDON: PRINTED FOR TAYLOR AND HESSEY, FLEET STREET.
1823.
The second issue gives the address as 93 Fleet Street and 13 Waterloo Place.
Incidentally, just to show how difficult life can be, the true first issue has no half-title — one of the rare instances when its absence is a point in its favour.
There are four variants of the title-page of Dickens's Battle of Life ; two have dates, two do not, in two the title is on a scroll with a cupid, on one the scroll has no cupid, in one there is no scroll at all.
A mad world, my masters.
The bibliographer Lowndes, over a hundred years ago, categorically listed eight different title-pages for the first edition of Milton's Paradise Lost , pointing out such differences as large or small italic capitals for the poet's name; in one case the use of his initials only-groups of stars between words, or none; with or without fleur-de-lis ornaments, etc.
It took the industrious Lowndes nearly a hundred lines to explain it all.
Then, in 1927, Sawyer and Darton wrote that his fifth and sixth titles could not be traced.
Never having cornered Milton, I am content to take their word for it.
While we are dealing with titles, it will be convenient to mention the ‘drop title’ or ‘dropped-head title’.
These refer to a title set lower than the first line of a page of ordinary text.
In a publication such as a pamphlet, which may well have no separate title-page, the title often appears as a dropped head on the opening page of the text.
Chapter headings are almost always ‘dropped’ to a standard height throughout a book.
There is also the ‘running head’ or ‘running title’, which is the line of type, consisting of the title of the book or of a section of it, above the text.
Facing the title-page is often to be found the ‘frontispiece’, devoted to a portrait or some interesting part of the subject matter.
When illustrations are numbered, the frontispiece is not usually included, and a catalogue description should always make it clear whether or not the stated number of plates has taken account of it, e.g. ‘12 plates including frontispiece’ or ‘frontispiece and 20 plates’.
The frontispiece can sometimes provide another piece of valuable evidence in  determining the edition or issue of a book.
In Gulliver's Travels (Travels into Several Remote Nations of the World), 2 vols., 1726–27, the true first edition has a frontispiece oval portrait with an inscription set in two   lines beneath the oval, not round it.
On such slender threads hang small fortunes and great acquisitions.
A typical ‘opening’.
On the left is the verso (back, reverse) of one leaf, on the right the recto (front, obverse) of another.
Note that the verso always carries the even page number and the recto the odd number.
Note also the running title (top left) and the drop-head title (right).
We can now turn right to the other end of the book, where there should be another paste-down and free endpaper, though in earlier books the latter will often be missing, having been appropriated by some seventeenth or eighteenth century housewife as a shopping list or for copying a cooking recipe.
Shelley was known to use endpapers for making paper boats.
Since the first printers often did not use a front title-page, or did not include on it all the important information we are accustomed to see there today, they employed instead the device known as the colophon (from a Greek word variously translated as ‘summit’, ‘top’ and ‘finishing stroke’) right at the end of the main text and, normally, before the index.
Such printer's inscriptions form a study in themselves, varying greatly in length  and detail and often being attractively arranged in the shape of a diamond, a wine or hour-glass, etc., and accompanied by a majestic printer's device or coat of arms.
The colophon of Caxton's The Game and Play of the Chess Moralised reads:
And send yow thaccomplisshement of your hy noble Joyous and vertuous desirs Amen: Fynsshid the last day of merche the yer of our lord god.
a. thousand foure hondred and lxxiiii.
In The Dictes and Sayengis of the philosophres (1477) he gives rather more information:
Here endeth the book named the dictes or syengis of the philosophres enprynted by me william Caxton at Westmestre the yere of our lord MCCCC Lxxvii.
Since complete title pages, in the modern sense, appear in most books from about 1520, the colophon thereafter declined in use and, where found, gives only cursory information in extension or confirmation of what was stated at the outset.
There has, however, been some revival of the device, especially with modern private presses affecting a fondness for the past and for the great days of the colophon, beginning with the great Mainz Psalter of Fust and Schoeffer in 1457.
Another very early feature was the use of advertisements.
I have already quoted one used by Caxton, and by the seventeenth century the booksellers and publishers were in full cry.
It may be noted in passing that the advertisement supplement, far from being a modern development first appeared in 1666 in this country.
The London Gazette in June of that year declared that ‘a Paper of Advertisements will be forthwith printed apart, and recommended to the Publick by another hand.’
Advertisements may be found at either end of a book, but occur much more often at the back.
They are of two sorts — those which are an integral part of the book, printed on the same paper and gathered up for binding with the rest of the sections (though they will usually be paged separately); and leaves or sections printed separately, sometimes on different paper altogether, which may even be of a different size.
As might be expected, most advertisements incorporated in books proclaim the publishers' own wares-but with books issued in parts, such as those of Dickens, they can be a joyous medley covering everything from top hats to mouse traps, pills to perambulators and hair oils to phrenology.
Such extraneous matter as a sample of cork or a piece of heather may swell the fun.
To the ordinary reader advertisements may count for nothing; but to the bookseller and book-collector they can make the difference between £50 and £500.
Leaving aside publications in parts, which are a special   problem, books which should contain advertisements cannot be reckoned complete without them, so that, if they have been removed or discarded in a rebinding, the value suffers considerably, even though the text is perfect.
Moreover, they can furnish valuable bibliographical evidence.
The following examples from Book Auction Records illustrate the importance attached to their presence:
AUSTEN, JANE — Emma.
1816. 1st Edn 3 vols, hf title for vol 1 bnd at end, no hf titles to vol 2 & 3, publrs advt at end of vol 3.
Advertisement leaf from the fourth volume of Doctor Johnson ‘s Lives of the most eminent English Poets (1781).
The value would be affected adversely without it.
STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS — Kidnapped.
1st Edn.
With advt for Treasure Island on p-312, 16pp of advts dtd 7–86.
KINGSLEY, REV.
CHARLES — Westward Ho.
1855. 1st  Edn. 3 vol. hf titles, adt lf bnd at front, & 16p publ cat dated Feb. 1855 bnd at end of vol I, front free end papers torn away, orign.cl.
EVANS, MARIAN or MARY-ANN ‘George Eliot’— Silas Marner. 1861. 1 st Edn.
Hf title 811 of advts at end.
If you can readily interpret all this laconic shorthand you are either a well-tried collector or an extraordinarily apt pupil.
As well as the references to advertisements, you will, I hope, have noticed the importance attached to half-titles.
Since advertisements are often dated, they can be useful in establishing priority of issues; but they can also be misleading and should always be interpreted with caution.
It is not unknown for an advertisement section to be switched from one book to another, to convert an ordinary work to a more coveted one.
A curious errata notice from Holden's Triennial Directory of London, 1805, with the printer misspelling errata.
Other apparently trivial features are the ‘errata’(sometimes ‘corrigenda’) and ‘addenda’, which are the mistakes and omissions discovered after the book has been printed or during the final stages.
If the work has not gone too far, there is often some blank page, or part of one, where these can be noted; otherwise they will normally be printed on a special slip or leaf which can be ‘tipped-in’(lightly attached by glue or paste at the inner edge).
Johnson's Journey to the Western Isles of Scotland (1775) has eleven errata on twelve lines, the second issue having only six.
The true book-collector must accept this sort of eccentricity along with all the other criteria.
Obviously, a lifetime of experience is needed to recognise or remember such minutiae, and most of us will need to fly to our bibliographies.
Printers began the errata business very early, for a 1478 edition of Juvenal lists mistakes on two leaves, the printer attributing them to the carelessness of a workman.
I am fond of a notice which appears on a rare advertisement leaf in some copies of Robert Boyle's Experiments and Notes about the Producibleness of Chymicall Principles (1680):
The Reader is desired to take notice, that as, the Date of the License witnesses, this Booke, should have been Printed long agoe, and there has been a mistake in the bot-tome of the Title Page, where the Year 1680 has been put instead of the Year 1679. in which it was really Printed off, though not publickly expos's to Sale, til the beginning of this Month of January.
16  
‘The Art, Mystery and Manual Occupation’ of Bookbinding
(Elizabethan Statute of Apprentices)
Nevertheless, Sir, there are some things more fit to be looked at than others; for instance, there is nothing more fit to be looked at than the outside of a book…
It is, as I may say from repeated experience, a pure and unmixed pleasure to have a goodly volume lying before you, and to know that you…need not open it unless you please…
There is no place, in which a man can move or sit, in which the outside of a book can be otherwise than an innocent and becoming spectacle.
Thomas Love Peacock, Crochet Castle.
While we are dealing with format it will be appropriate to consider the binding.
The Greeks, as ever, had a word for it — two words, in fact, literally meaning ‘to fix a book’, which, as a rough definition, is as good as any to describe the process of putting a protective cover round the printed sections.
Biblion and pegnunai give us ‘bibliopegy’, which is the art of binding books, and ‘bibliopegist’, the student and lover of bindings.
The aspirant to such a designation, if he wishes to collect, has a number of courses open to him.
If he is an oil sheik he can concentrate on books which have been bedizened with gold and silver, with diamonds, rubies, pearls and the whole galaxy of precious and semi-precious stones; with rich brocades, velvets, silks and laces, along with skins from ostriches, peacocks, reindeer, elephants and other denizens of field and forest.
There is the world of the bibliopegically curious which, full of charming conceits, can be expensive to journey in.
The eighteenth century book-collector Clayton Mordaunt Cracherode had a father who travelled round the world in buckskin breeches.
The dutiful son had a book bound in what one writer has called his ‘circumnavigating unmentionables’.
The third Duke of Roxburghe (1704–1804), a collector on the grand scale after whom the exclusive bibliophilic Roxburghe Club was named, had a number of tracts concerning Mary Tofts, who perturbed the   gynaecologists of her day by claiming to have given birth to a litter of rabbits.
The Duke, with a grave sense of the appropriate, had the tracts bound in rabbit skin.
Surviving adherents of the House of Stuart would doubtless like to acquire one of the books bound in Charles I's waistcoats.
More of us would covet a Wordsworth volume bound in a piece of Dorothy's gown, green with white sprays on it.
Students of our naval past may treasure those small books bound in wood salvaged from the Mary Rose , which heeled over and sank off Portsmouth in 1545; or brought up from the Royal George which, a tarnished monument to the neglect of the Admiralty, went down at Spithead in 1772 with nearly a thousand souls.
A typical Stuart embroidered binding, covering a copy of a 1628 Bible bound with a Book of Psalms, showing roses, cornflowers and strawberries, worked with silk and silver thread.
Such examples could be multiplied.
But most of us would probably eschew the ostentatious and eccentric, and settle for an honest and straightforward run of bindings that have a plain tale to tell of their place and time.
The collector is at once confronted with a choice: shall he assemble his collection with only the binding in mind, or shall he pay regard to the contents of the book as well?
There is no doubt that, given patience and pertinacity, he can follow the first course at relatively small cost.
It is, for example, some sort of  commentary on our times that, if one is content to stick to theology, with some Greek and Latin texts thrown in, it is possible to assemble a representative collection from the sixteenth century onwards.
The folios and quartos laboured on so industriously by forgotten clerics and divines, the erudite editions of minor classical writers, have long been gathering dust in countless book shops.
Even completeness is not essential to the dedicated bibliopegist.
An odd volume, acquired for a few shillings, tells its story as adequately as a complete text.
A copy with its title missing and lacking a plate or two is as eloquent, binding-wise, as its more perfect brother.
It is significant that auction houses often sell an interesting example with the caveat ‘as a binding, not subject to return’, meaning that they do not guarantee the contents of the book which, in such cases, are of secondary importance.
In many imposing antique shops you will see stately bookcases full of attractive calf and vellum.
Look closely and you will often find that this splendour is composed of odd volumes and unwanted subjects, but, as an enhancement to the bookcase, they are an invaluable aid to selling it.
More shamefully, some owners of newly acquired imposing homes delight in ‘libraries’ which, seen in the gloom or at a distance, bestow a pretty glow of opulence and erudition but which, at close quarters, disintegrate into a heterogeneous muddle of worthless books, sometimes bought in bulk.
I once saw a cellarful of pleasant bindings, all cleaned and polished, waiting shipment to America.
It was binding as mere furniture that Burns had in mind when he wrote:
Through and through the inspired leaves
Ye maggots make your windings;
But, oh! respect his lordship's taste,
And spare his golden bindings.
We cannot escape some simple technicalities.
When you take a book from the shelf, you probably lay your forefinger along the top edge or ‘head’, and either pull it straight out or tilt it down.
Your finger is crooked over the ‘headband’ and your palm is cradling the ‘spine’, at the foot of which is the ‘tailband’.
Since about 1750, except in the most expensive and exclusive type of work, most head and tailbands have been purely decorative and functionally useless, used to give a respectable air of antiquity and good craftsmanship.
Originally these bands were made of silk or cotton worked over cord, leather or vellum and fastened inside the spine.
You will frequently see old headbands cracked or torn where ruthless fingers have hooked over them to wrench books from shelves.
If you catch a guest doing this, do not invite him any more, unless it be to allow him to apologise.
Broadly speaking, there are two ways of putting a cover round a book.
The stitched sections can be held together by strips of muslin or canvas called ‘mull’ or sometimes ‘scrim’, with overlaps each side.
The ‘boards’ or stiff covers, with the selected covering material, are made up separately.
The printed book is then inserted into the case by machinery and attached to the boards by gluing down the mull overlaps, after which the endpapers are pasted down to hide them.
If you glance inside the average modern book you will clearly see the mull or tape strips under this paste-down (as compared with the free endpaper).
This is a ‘cased’ binding, which serves for the majority of modern editions.
‘Case’ can be used in other senses, e.g. in ‘solander case’, from its inventor Daniel Charles Solander (1736–82).
When used in connection with books, the solander is a protective box with fall-down sides, often itself shaped like a book.
Experiments have been made with other ways of attaching the printed pages to the external case.
One of the least fortunate was the ‘gutta-percha’ or ‘caoutchouc’method, popular from about 1840–70, especially for illustrated table books.
i.e. elaborately produced editions for display in the drawing room rather than reading.
A rubber solution was substituted for sewing to hold the leaves together.
Satisfactory for a time, this afterwards perished, with the result that it is now almost impossible to find an example where most, if not all, of the leaves are not loose in the binding.
An early specimen was Lear's Book of Nonsense (1846).
A clever and decorative composition often mistaken for wood (especially ebony) was the rock-hard papier mache used with great effect by publishers such as Longman in the 1840–60 period to give an impressive Gothic appearance.
Good examples are The Parables of Our Lord (1847) and The Miracles of Our Lord (1848), both illustrated by Noel Humphreys, and the particularly fine Record of the Black Prince (1849), with its 6mm-thick carved covers, pierced to show a regal red lining beneath.
Such books, usually splendidly ‘illuminated’ within, in the spirit and tradition of early handwritten manuscripts, cost about 21s. (105p) in their day.
Thirty or forty times that would be a fair price today and they will undoubtedly continue to rise in the market.
Owen Jones's The Preacher (1849) shows another experiment, the designs being burnt into wood covers.
Setting these and other tricks and experiments aside, we must turn to the second of the two chief methods of covering a book which, oddly enough, is by binding it.
The reader may well ask what I have been talking about hitherto.
The answer is that, properly speaking, the honourable word ‘bound’ should not be applied to a cased book, though it is admittedly in general use.
Satisfactory though casing may be for books which a careless age does not expect to be long-lived, it cannot compare in craftsmanship and durability with the old method properly practised.
In a ‘bound’ book, the printed gatherings are sewn onto four or five   horizontal cords, the ends of which pass through holes in the covering boards and are firmly glued.
Here is the vital distinction: binding and printing are structurally one, not separate as in a cased book.
All that remains is to wrap the covering material round and glue it down to the boards.
It will follow that, unless they have been sunk into prepared grooves, the horizontal cords will stand out on the spine as pronounced ridges, and the leather or other covering will have to be moulded or ‘nipped’ over them.
The result is the distinctive ‘raised bands’ of early books, the spaces between the bands often being referred to as compartments.
One must add the necessary, and perhaps confusing, word of caution that many cased books appear to have raised bands.
This is an amiable trick intended to deceive.
They are phoney devices built up of strips of card or other material to give an appearance of genuine binding.
Incidentally, if you see a catalogue description of ‘antique’ applied to a binding, it usually means exactly the opposite.
The collector will know that it is faked up in the style of an earlier period.
The Sentiments and Similies of William Shakespeare, designed by H. Noel Humphreys (first edition 1851, second edition 1857).
A papier mâch é'; binding with terra cotta portrait medallion and crimson backing.
I have already used the term ‘boards’ several times, and much will be  seen and heard of them in book-collecting.
In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries covers were often boards in the true Anglo-Saxon sense, being of oak or beech covered with leather.
If the paste-down is missing or adrift, you will experience the pleasant sight of wood looking clean and fresh from the plane that smoothed it four hundred years or more ago.
Nowadays boards can means pasteboard, cardboard, strawboard or any other stiff material used in hard-covered books.
I shall have something to say about original boards a little later.
In the sixteenth century and later there was much covering in limp parchment or vellum, the difference between the two being almost impossible to define accurately.
That was the case in 1519 when William Horman, vice-provost of Eton, described the material as ‘that stouffe that we wryth upon: and is made of beestis skynnes; is somtyme called parchement, somtyme velem.’
It is fairly safe to say that ‘vellum’ is now usually reserved for the finer types.
To make life difficult, ‘Japanese’ or ‘Japon’vellum — beloved of producers of editions de luxe— is not vellum at all , but a smooth, glossy-surfaced.paper with a yellowish tint.
Another common early covering material was forel, an inferior off-white parchment.
It has been described as roughly dressed deerskin, as used by certain monastic binders.
Early publishers often sent out books simply sewn, with no proper covers at all, or in a temporary binding, in the expectation that many of their customers would wish to have volumes bound in their individual preferred styles, perhaps to match the rest of their libraries.
Examples of this exclusiveness are naturally highly prized and expensive.
Mary Queen of Scots chose black morocco emblazoned with the royal lion of Scotland; the French statesman Jean Baptiste Colbert had his 50,000 books bound in a morocco specially imported by treaty with the Sultan of Morocco; one of the d'Urfe family opted for green velvet for his library of four thousand; Madame du Deffand, friend of Voltaire and Horace Walpole (to whom she left the care of her dog Tonton), endeavoured to immortalise her cat by using a gold stamp of it on the spines of her books; the three daughters of Louis V each had her own colour with the fleur-de-lis in the centre of each cover — Adelaide red, Victoire olive green and Sophie citron.
A hundred other examples could be found.
A ‘Grolier’ binding is one of the greatest treasures a collector could wish for.
Jean Grolier, Vicomte d'Aiguisy (1479–1565) was one of the greatest patrons of fine bindings the world has known.
His library of three thousand volumes was dispersed in 1675 and the whereabouts of some 350 are known.
His chief binder was Claude de Picques, who worked under Grolier's close supervision so that, amidst the intricate variety of decoration, a number of common features can be found.
In particular, Grolier's books are famous for gilt stamps on the upper covers: sometimes  ‘Grolierii Lugdunensis et Amicorum’('for Grolier of Lyons and his friends', Lugdunum being the Latin name, appearing in many publishers' imprints, for Lyons); sometimes just ‘Io Grolierii et Amicorum’(for Grolier and his friends); and, almost always on the lower cover, a text from the Vulgate, Psalm cxli.
6, ‘Portio mea Domine sit in Terra Viventium’(My portion, Lord, be in the land of the living).
Even the  munificent patronage of binders by Grolier was outclassed by that of his sovereign Henry II (1519–59).
Described as ‘cold, haughty, melancholy and dull’, he at least came to life in the splendour of his books, some eight hundred of which are in the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris.
Some of the most distinguished English binders in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were Samuel Mearne (working c. 1660–83), in whose shop much work was done for Charles II; several unidentified craftsmen working for the two Queens — Catherine of Braganza and Mary of Modena —(known as Queens' Binder A, B, and C) and William Nott (who may have been Binder A), of whom Pepys wrote in 1669:
W. Hewer and myself towards Westminster; and there he carried me to Nott's, the famous bookbinder, that bound for my Lord Chancellor's library: and there I did take occasion for curiosity to bespeak a book to be bound, only that I might have one of his binding.
The finest of them all was probably Roger Payne (1739–97), paradoxically an uneducated, hard-drinking workman, content to live in squalor, yet, over the years 1770–97, producing for such patrons as Lord Spencer work that influenced the craft not only in England but in France, whose binding had for so long been supreme.
Payne cut his own tools from honeysuckle, acorns, vines and leaves and worked in a restrained manner on a red-brown calf impregnated with birch bark oil — a leather often known as ‘russia’.
Contemporary with Payne was a famous Yorkshire family of father and sons who achieved fame in three fields.
‘Edwards of Halifax’ covers William (1723–1808) who founded the firm, c.1755, and his sons James, William, Thomas and Richard.
Of the five, probably only William Snr. and Thomas were practical binders, the rest migrating to London and proving themselves good businessmen as booksellers, travelling widely and selling fine books, including the Halifax products.
The particular bindings associated with Edwards are known as ‘Etruscan’, usually of calfskin and decorated with classical motifs from vases and other ornaments.
Edwards produced his effects by burning the patterns into the leather with acid.
The second specialisation was fore-edge paintings, the technique of which is described later in this chapter.
The third, and perhaps the most celebrated, was the use of vellum, made transparent, so that delicate paintings could be placed underneath and remain protected.
It has often been said that the family kept the process secret, but this seems unlikely, since it is known that pearl ash was used to secure the transparency.
Though father William probably invented the technique, it was his son James who, in 1785, took out a patent for his ‘new invention of Embellishing books bound in vellum, by making drawings on the vellum which are not liable to be defaced but by destroying the vellum itself.‘
By the eighteenth century the older and rougher leathers had largely given way to finer products, often polished and patterned in a variety of ways, e.g. calf could be ‘sprinkled’(speckled by acid in a regular pattern), ‘mottled’(having an irregular all-over pattern, also produced by acid) or ‘diced’(having a pattern of diamond squares).
‘Half-calf’ or ‘half-bound’means that the spine and overlap of about an inch, together with the outer corners, are covered with calf, leaving the rest of the sides in cloth or paper, often attractively marbled.
A book with only the spine covered is termed ‘quarter calf’, ‘quarter morocco’, etc.
If the leather or vellum portions are unusually wide, the term ‘three-quarters’ may be used.
One popular nineteenth century patterning was ‘tree calf’, a delicate arboreal effect being produced by the interaction of chemicals.
Less lovable was ‘divinity calf’, which John Carter, with restrained distaste, called ‘an unpleasant kind of smooth calf, usually of a colour between lavender and cocoa’; but, with its bevelled boards and red edges, it should have its place in a collection.
A case of appropriate bindings — marbled boards and a handwritten label for the Rough Minutes, polished calf and a morocco label for the finished Trustees Accounts.
Right: A handsome array in calf, morocco and vellum.
The Iliad and Odyssey are in niger morocco, a soft locally tanned skin from West Africa.
Eros and Psyche is in pigskin.
An elegant morocco binding, with the royal arms.
The typical morocco patterning is clear.
A fine nineteenth century calf gilt binding.
Such work was often ‘signed’ with the binder's ticket or, after about 1830, with the name stamped in very small letters on the inside edge of the front or back cover.
More esteemed than calf is ‘morocco’, always fashioned from goatskin.
Whereas calf is smooth, without perceptible grain, morocco can vary considerably in texture.
Devotees can explore the mysteries of ‘hard grain', ‘straight grain', ‘levant’, ‘crushed’, ‘turkey’, etc., but there is no space to elucidate them here (the glossary at the end of the book will help with many terms).
A combination of calf and morocco is not uncommon, through ‘inlaying’ one with the other or by the use of morocco title and author labels on the spines of calf-bound books.
In the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries it became the custom to bind a number of small books and, especially, pamphlets up together in calf or morocco, often suitably labelled on the spine.
Sometimes time has decreed that certain books or pamphlets are of much greater importance that the others and some booksellers have an objectionable habit of dismembering the volumes and pricing the ‘disbound’ portions separately, to their financial advantage.
In my opinion it is a practice to be resisted.
If the binding is pleasant, what matters if there be curious friends and bedfellows within?
Most of us are happy in mixed company.
Then, too, the question of rebinding the extracted portion arises, when it emerges with its pathetic trails of thread and dabs of glue.
With leathers becoming increasingly expensive and the demand for books ever increasing, publishers looked for cheaper methods of production, especially for large editions.
The answer came with ‘cloth’, introduced in the 1820s.
The vital date was long held to be 1825, on a work published by Pickering; but other claims are being advanced, and some inexpensive fun may be had by searching booksellers' shelves in the endeavour to push the date back a little.
A similar quest can be pursued for the first book with gilt lettering on the spine — generally accepted as being the third volume of a set of Byron published by Murray in 1832.
The firm of Longman claims the first dust jacket, on Heath's Keepsake for 1835.
None of these dates or examples is sacrosanct.
Decorated and pictorial paper covers or ‘wrappers’ are another noteworthy feature of the nineteenth century, especially for popular authors.
Much of Dickens was first published in monthly parts — often ‘20 in 19’, the last number being a double one.
Distinctive colours were used, green for Dickens, yellow for Thackeray.
Cloth-bound editions were issued almost simultaneously and others in calf and morocco soon appeared.
Fashion being what it is, with rarity the overriding factor, the position arises that the collector will have to pay very much more for the ephemeral, roughly produced parts, with their many inaccuracies and  jumble of advertisements, than for the vastly more elegant and durable leather.
It should be noted that, properly speaking, wrappers are quite different from jackets or dust wrappers, which are not part of the binding but simply an extraneous protection.
This fanatical regard for esteemed works as they were first given to the public leads to intimidating variations in price.
A fine copy of Pride and Prejudice in original boards, uncut, and with paper labels, can take the buyer into four figures; a beautiful set in calf or morocco costing perhaps a tenth of that, and one in cloth considerably less still.
The board-and-label copy of Marryat's Mr. Midshipman Easy illustrated earlier admittedly with the added attraction of being Admiral Sir Thomas      Masterman Hardy's copy — cost the buyer some £165 recently.
He could have found a much more durable and attractive later edition for £20-£30.
First editions of Byron, Shelley, Keats, Hazlitt, Wordsworth, Carlyle, Tennyson, Lamb, the Brontes, Scott, George Eliot, Trollope, Jane Austen, Wilkie Collins, De Quincey, Coleridge, the Brownings, Meredith — all the nineteenth century novelists, essayists and poets, show, within different scales of popular esteem, the same sort of comparative values in their bindings.
These criteria, sensible or not, apply almost exclusively to literary works.
Thackeray ‘s The Virginians and The Newcomes handsomely bound in three-quarter morocco gilt and in half-calf gilt, in each case with marbled sides; impressive, but not worth nearly as much as the humble original parts in paper wrappers.
A representative nineteenth century collection, with Thackeray in original wrappers at either end, Charles Reade, George MacDonald and John Stuart Mill in original cloth; and Tales of my Landlord and Walks in Oxford in boards with paper labels.
Gilbert White's Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne (first edition 1789) in elaborate cloth gilt, 1887.
Frightened off by such high figures, many collectors renounce the attempt to assemble a complete range of bindings over the centuries and, sensibly, turn to more limited fields; for example, to books stamped with the coats of arms or crests of early owners in gilt or ‘blind’(without gold or colour).
Often the bookseller or cataloguer has not bothered to identify the arms, so that a good deal of pleasure can be obtained from rectifying their indolence or ignorance.
Schools and colleges, cathedrals and learned institutions, may all be found represented in this group.
The lavish decoration of cloth with gilt and coloured pictures by the Victorians is receiving increasing attention.
On Marryat's The Pacha of Many Tales (1835) you will find a splendid full-rigged ship of the line stamped in blind on dark blue; Septimus Piesse's holiday book for children Chymical, Natural, and Physical Magic (1865) has a white cloth cover printed in six colours and gold; an 1887 edition of The Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne has, in bright gilt on blue cloth, an owl, two bats, a snail, two mice, a swallow, a spider in its web and a variety of foliage, including ivy, fields grasses and cornstalks.
A volume by Noel Humphreys on the art of illumination can boast at least ten colours on white leather blocked in gold.
Colour-printed cover pictures of pets, harvest fields and American Indians vie with beefeaters, pious children and exotic birds.
On one Jules Verne edition I have counted nearly forty different objects including a submarine, a balloon, a camera, an elephant, a variety of telescopes and other navigational instruments, a ship's wheel, enough spears to equip a Zulu regiment and sufficient chains to furnish a galleyful of slaves.
If you want the whole rumbustious, arrogant, self-satisfied, smug, righteous, courageous, opinionated, dedicated, class-ridden, adventure-seeking, patriotic life of an era in full technicolour, you can do no better than collect Victorian bindings.
One mark of pride in this ‘art, mystery and manual occupation’ is the ‘signed binding’, i.e. one on which the binder has left his recognisable mark.
In early books this often occurs in the form of a cipher, initials incorporated in the decoration, or even a name stamped in blind.
It is sometimes obscure and the writer confesses with some shame that he possessed for some forty years a Tudor binding with the cunningly    interwoven  initials ‘R.B.’— those of an unidentified London binder working c.1550–81.
I discovered them almost by accident through the researches of J.B. Oldham, who had traced over 160 examples of bindings from this workshop, which used various ‘rolls’(tools having a continuous or repeated design round the edge of a wheel), including Tudor emblems, the falcon and the golden fleece, as well as the signed one —‘R.B.’ with heads in medallions.
It is curious that a much-employed binder, as he obviously was, should have left no trace in the records.
Mrs. Mirjam Foot of the British Library (and currently Editor of the British Library Journal ) who kindly looked into the problem for me, pointed out that while there were some stationers whose initials and dates fitted, such as Richard Baldwyn, who worked in London till 1590, there is no evidence of any one of them having been a bookbinder.
A signed Tudor binding of blind-stamped leather over beech boards, showing heads in medallions.
It is one of a group from an unidentified binder who incorporated his initials, R B., in his cover decorations and has twice interwoven them here.
From about 1780–1820, binders' tickets were fairly widely used, i.e. printed or engraved slips pasted in the front of the book.
A third method is for the binder to stamp his name (usually in minute letters) on the inside edge of a front or back cover, or sometimes on a fly leaf.
A collection of signed bindings can be a fine sight, but the collector must not expect to get away with it lightly.
The most famous names (in addition to those already mentioned), Hering, Bedford (1799–1883), Rivière (1808–82) whose work included the binding of Domesday Book , Zaehnsdorf (1816–86) who specialised in restoration work, Sangorski and Sutcliffe founded in 1901 and binders of Elizabeth II's Coronation Bible, Douglas Cockerell (1870–1945) who served his apprenticeship with the Doves Press, and his master Cobden-Sanderson (1840–1922), will sometimes cost him dear.
He must also be forewarned against misguided optimism (or calculated misrepresentation) on the part of the seller.
Signed bindings by superb craftsmen deservedly command a higher figure than those less certainly identifiable, and some booksellers and auctioneers yield to the temptation of ascribing a binding on very slender evidence.
It has even been known for an esteemed binder's ticket to be transferred from a battered volume to a more handsome specimen with which he had no demonstrable connection.
The moral is, deal with an expert who will lay his reputation on the line and back his opinion with a receipt.
Never buy without close examination of the evidence, and treat with caution the auctioneer's ‘sold as a binding, not-subject to return’, since in any case there is probably something unsatisfactory about the book and the doubt may extend to the attribution.
Of course, even a famous binder can have an off-day.
There is on record a confession of Cobden-Sanderson's, who said of a failure to bind a  copy of Tennyson's In Memoriam to his satisfaction: ‘I could spit upon the book, throw it out of the window, into the fire, upon the ground and grind it with my heel.‘
While we are dealing with the externals of the book it will be appropriate to finish with a note on the fore-edge, which is sometimes the object of special attention.
Interesting, though scarcely decorative, was an early custom of writing the author's name and title in ink on the fore-edge — a reminder of times    when spines carried no information and books were often put on shelves in a way we would consider back-to-front, with the fore-edge outwards.
A watercolour of Cartmell Church (Co.
Palatine of Lancaster) on the fore-edge of a 1660 Bible in a later dark blue morocco binding.
A romantic landscape on the fore-edge of an edition of Byron's Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, 1812.
Sometimes the fore-edge will be found ‘gauffered’(gauffred or goffered), i.e. decorated by the impression of heated tools into the gilt.
Our grandmothers used a goffering-iron for plaiting and crimping parts of their garments and aprons.
On some early gauffered edges traces of colour will be discernible.
But by far the most attractive and skilful decoration of the fore-edge is in the form of ‘fore-edge painting’.
Though other, and earlier, examples are known, the term is normally employed for a typically English technique first evolved in the seventeenth century but not fully developed till the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
This special art involves slightly fanning out and cramping the fore-edge to give a firm surface, and then painting on it, in very dry watercolours, a landscape or conversation piece.
The picture accomplished, the pages are restored to their normal position and the edge gilded.
The fascinating result is that the painting is now completely invisible till the pages are fanned again.
In the most intricate examples, the fore-edge is fanned both ways and a double picture is secured.
At their best, these exercises are remarkably skilful and attractive, and the collector must expect to pay appropriately, especially for authentic early examples.
It must be said that, if the artist knew his, or her, job, it will be a bold man who can unhesitatingly distinguish between a fore-edge painting of 1780, 1880 or 1980, with their delicate muted effects.
A number of nineteenth and early twentieth century publishers, in response to public demand, employed special artists in this field and made no pretence that they were anything but modern.
Less honestly, there are some booksellers who have a little man round the corner who will always oblige with a ‘contemporary’ painting on the fore-edge of an 18th or early 19th century book.
The writer was once with a small London bookseller who unblushingly pointed out a volume of Arctic travel which he was just about to despatch for the full treatment of glaciers, polar bears and seals.
It is a popular field of collecting, pleasant to behold and with a spice of magic about it.
Remember, the paintings are invisible; and there is always the chance that one has remained undetected on the fore-edge of some travel book, bible, prayer book or collection of verse.
The book is unlikely to be very valuable in itself, for owners are understandably chary of submitting precious items to such manoeuvres as splaying and clamping.
It is always worth gently riffling the pages of a gilt-edged book when the bookseller is not looking; though the devious fellow has probably done it already.
The Illustrated Book
While the plodding votary of meaning is anxiously inquiring out the sense…his fellow-worshipper, remembering that our eyes were not given us for nothing…roves, in gazing ecstasy from page to page, till here and there arrested by the choice vignette or richly tinctured plate.
James Beresford, Bibliosophia
Illustrated books have a special appeal for many collectors, who are fortunate in having a very wide field and a range of prices to suit almost everyone.
The earliest form of printed book illustration was the woodcut, and the art, with varying fortunes, has survived to the present day, so that the collector has more than five centuries to survey and a range of skill, from the superb work of Albrecht Dürer (1481–1504) to the charming absurdities of the chapbook printers, who inserted the same cuts in different publications with a reckless disregard for subject and appropriateness.
The early popularity of the woodcut may be judged by the fact that, as early as 1493, the Nuremberg Chronicle , a history of the world to 1492, contained 1,809 cuts — 645 different and 1,164 repeats.
Though the distinction is rarely noted (or perhaps known) there is a difference between the woodcut and the wood-engraving.
The first is cut with a knife along the grain, the second on the cross-section with a burin.
Many illustrations described as woodcuts are not, strictly speaking, woodcuts at all since, from about 1830, it became common to make stereotypes and electrotypes from the original wood blocks, which would stand up to only comparatively small editions.
In such works as Bewick's, it is possible to see the deterioration that has occurred from the use of badly worn blocks.
It takes a considerable expert to distinguish impressions from good wood blocks and the metal blocks made from them.
Great names along the trail include Albrecht Dürer, Hans Holbein, Hans Lutzelburger, Jean Cousin, Bernard Salamon, Jean Michel Papillon (who wrote a famous treatise on the art in 1766), Thomas Bewick, William Blake, Thomas Stothard, the Dalziel Brothers and Gustave Dore.
Among the many modern practitioners are John Nash, Paul Nash, Eric Gill, Stephen Gooden, Eric Ravilious, Reynolds Stone, Agnes Miller Parker, Blair Hughes-Stanton, Cecil Buller and John J.A.
Murphy.
These and many others have worked for private presses and in limited editions where fine illustrations are especially prized.
A woodcut illustration from Caxton's The Game and Play of Chess Moralised, c.1475
Woodcut zone map from Ambrosius Theodosius Macrobius's Somnium Scipionis ex Ciceronis Libro de Republica Exerptum (1483), the first printed map of the world on which ocean currents are shown.
A wood-engraved illustration ‘in text’.
A wood engraving by Eric Gill from the Four Gospels of Jesus Christ, Golden Cockerel Press (1931).
A double-page copper-plate engraving (much reduced) from one of the most famous books on horsemanship, the Duke of Newcastle's Methode et Invention nouvelle de dresser les Chevaux (1658), translated as A General System of Horsemanship (1743).
As ever, fashion and altered taste can be irrational, if not unfair.
Despite all his brilliance as illustrator of Fielding, Milton, Richardson, Shakespeare, Spenser, Pope and the rest, there is now little demand for Stothard.
Edward (1817–1905), George (1815–1902) and Thomas (1823–1906) Dalziel (there were in all seven brothers Dalziel), who were in the forefront of the revival of the woodcut after the temporary predominance of the steel engraving, may be bought cheaply in a profusion of books (if rather more expensively in Lear's Book of Nonsense and some of Lewis Carroll's classics).
Gustave Dore (1882–83) has paid the penalty of producing too many books too large for modern taste.
His Milton and Dante fetch pathetically small sums in comparison with the labour and skill they cost.
The one book in constant demand is his London .
A Pilgrimage (1872) which, with its vivid pictures of the life and people of the period, will make about £100.
Copper-plate engravings were first used for book illustration in England in 1540, when Richard Jonas published a translation of a    German work on childbirth, and the first copper-plate title-page came five years later, with Thomas Gemini's Compendiosa totius anatomie delineato .
The next two centuries saw an extensive use of this method of book illustration, but it was too costly and delicate for large editions.
It proved a splendid medium for the copy books of the writing masters, such as George Bickham, whose best known book,The Universal Penman , is an expensive item.
Occasionally whole books were copper-engraved, the most notable example, probably, being an edition of Horace by John Pine (1690–1756), which gave an effect of fine precision but was ruinously expensive, since the text was first typeset, then an impression on paper was transferred to copper, on which the engraver exercised his skill.
Early music is often engraved throughout, the rectangular plate-marks being clearly visible.
Fine engraved frontispiece by Sydenham Edwards to Green's Universal Herbal, 1823.
Steel engraving followed the copper-plate in the 1820–30 period, an innovation which gave plates less susceptible to wear, but too often involved a loss of artistic merit.
A plethora of books of topographical views at home and abroad used steel engravings, many of them of poor quality.
They have enjoyed a vogue in recent years which they do not always merit and they now seem to be losing some of their popularity.
Commenting on a considerable drop in sales at a book fair, one experienced bookman wrote about these travel books: ‘That such a range of books which I find boring beyond belief — I prefer to call them non-books — was due for a shake-out, appeared inevitable to me.’
Collectors are naturally anxious to secure, if they can, the first examples of the various media used for illustration.
While they are unlikely to be successful with the woodcut and the copper-plate, they may well achieve their ambition with some other processes.
The first ‘lithographed’ book in England was Philip Andre's Specimens of Polyautography (1803), a collection of prints by Thomas Stothard (1755–1834) and others.
The first ‘relief half-tone’ appeared in 1854 with a print by Paul Pretsch (who took out the patent in London) and de la Rue of ‘The Scene in Gaeta after the Explosion.
’ The beginnings of ‘photogravure’came in 1826 with the reproduction of a portrait of Cardinal D'Amboise by a photo-mechanical method.
The first published book using photographic illustrations was William Henry Fox Talbot's The Pencil of Nature , which appeared in six parts, 1844–46 and is an important landmark in that it was the first book in the world illustrated without the aid of an artist in pen, pencil or paint.
Richard M. Cooper, former archivist of the house of Longman, who published the book, makes the point, however, that a small ‘privately printed’ pamphlet published a month or two before The Pencil of Nature contains a single photographic frontispiece ‘and therefore can perhaps take prior claim to be the first book in the world illustrated by    photography, but it did not play the significantly influential part of The Pencil of Nature in establishing photographic illustration.
’ In 1977 a single part of the work (Part 2, of six) made £3,400 at auction.
Lithographed plate from George Maw's A Monograph of the Genus Crocus (1886), the drawings for which Ruskin described as ‘most exquisite…and beyond criticism.’
Lithography (stone printing, often using smooth limestone), was first used in England in 1803.
All these inventions and processes involve technical processes whose details have no place in a book of this compass.
Those who wish to pursue the matter further can readily turn to specialist books or to such admirable general works as Geoffrey Ashall Glaisher's Glossary of the Book (first published 1960 and recently reissued).
Any account of English book illustration would be inadequate without a tribute to Edmund Evans (1826–1905) who brought to a wonderful peak of success the revival of the art of colour printing from wood blocks and gave us the delightful colour plate books of Kate Greenaway,’ Richard E. Doyle, Randolph Caldecott and Walter Crane.
Kate Greenaway has long been a firm favourite among collectors who will pay £2,000-£3,000 for a collection of her Almanacks and £30-£50 for most single specimens.
Doyle's most popular book is Fairyland (1870) which, with its sixteen coloured plates — almost always loose — is likely to cost the collector about £50.
Caldecott and Crane continue to rise steadily.
Sometimes in this chapter we have been talking about processes, sometimes about artists.
They are separable; but in the end it is only when process and artists come together that the most memorable work is achieved: when Dürer and woodcut, Daniell and aquatint, Greenaway and colour printing meet in immortal partnership.
Another unforgettable alliance is that between artist and author.
Who can think of Alice without Tenniel, of Dickens without ‘Phiz’(Hablot K. Browne), of A.A. Milne and Pooh without Ernest Shepard?
Hugh Thompson and H.M.
Brock are two others whose names are becoming increasingly linked with the authors they have illustrated so admirably, and their work will make a sound investment.
Book illustration is a field marked by sharp increases in price over the last two decades.
Arthur Rackham's Peter Pan in Kensington Gardens in the limited signed edition could be bought in 1960 for around £40-£50 and the Peter Pan Portfolio for about the same amount.
Either is likely to cost £200-£300 now.
Edmund Dulac (rising rapidly) now fetches £60-£100 for a good copy.
In the 1960s £2-£3 would have been enough.
Kay Nielson's East of the Sun and West of the Moon in the limited signed      edition will take £300-£400 from your bank balance today.
Twenty years ago, with your wits about you, you might have bought it for £5 or less.
The unsigned edition fetched over £200 recently in a provincial sale.
It goes without saying that any original drawing for an illustration by an esteemed artist (see frontispiece) is likely to fetch a large sum.
A Heath Robinson drawing was recently offered for about £800.
Calligraphic (from the Greek words for ‘beauty’ and ‘writing’) title-page of a famous work by Thomas Milton, illustrated by one hundred aquatint plates.
‘Entry to Ramsgate Harbour.’
Aquatint plate from Philip James Loutherbourg's Romantic and Picturesque Scenery of England and Wales (1805).
Original watercolour by W. Heath Robinson (1872–1944), book illustrator whose work is rising rapidly in value.
‘Falco pelegrinus.’
Hand-coloured lithograph plate from John Gould's Birds of Great Britain (five volumes 1862–73).
Generally considered the greatest of British bird illustrators, Gould produced in all forty-one folio volumes illustrated by 2,999 plates.
Some people find it difficult to distinguish between a ‘plate’ and other types of illustration.
If engraving has been involved this is normally simple since, unless the book has been heavily cropped, the rectangular plate mark is visible as a slight indentation.
But, as used generally, a plate is a whole page illustration, coloured or otherwise, printed separately from the text and usually on a different type of paper which lends itself to glossy reproduction.
Other illustrations may be incorporated in the text and are often called ‘cuts’ or ‘figures’.
Catalogues will say, for example‘40 coloured plates, other illus. in text’, sufficiently distinguishing between the two types.
Unless the ‘cuts’ are by a famous wood engraver such as Bewick, not much attention is paid to illustrations in the text; but there is enormous demand for certain types of ‘plates’.
At the top of the list are botanical, ornithological and topographical books from the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries; and if you can find any important book from that era, especially if the plates are hand-coloured, for less than double figures, you have done very well.
Some invariably go well into four figures.
Even parts of series, e.g. Sir William Jardine's Natural History of Humming Birds , in two small volumes from the long series of The Naturalists' Library in forty volumes, can fetch £100 or over.
The full set has over 1,300 hand-coloured plates and is now worth upwards of £1,000 in good condition.
John Gould's Birds of Great Britain in five large volumes, 1862–73, with every tiny iridescent feather almost as meticulously coloured as its Maker fashioned it, has reached some £14,000 and regularly fluctuates, according to condition, in the £6,000-£10,000 bracket.
John Prideaux Selby's Illustrations of British Ornithology (two volumes ‘elephant’ folio, 1821–34) will now cost £3,000 or more.
Of the most famous of all bird books, John James Audubon's Birds of America (1827–38), I will only say that you will need to sell some fifteen or sixteen of your collection of Shakespeare First Folios in order to buy it.
Of the topographical and travel works there is none finer or ranking higher than William Daniell and Richard Ayton's A Voyage Round Great Britain , eight volumes, 1814–15, with over three hundred superb coloured aquatint plates.
Martin Hardie wrote: ‘Where all the plates are so excellent, it seems unfair to make distinctions, but where Daniell especially excels is in suggesting the warm haze that hangs over a summer sea, or sunlight playing on the roofs of a fishing village and the walls of its harbour.
’ Anyone who has had the privilege of handling the book, even though he may never possess it, will not dispute the wisdom of the £13,000 it has fetched.
It is often offered ('often' being something of an exaggeration) as ‘8 vols. in 4’ instead of the original eight separate volumes.
The word ‘aquatint’ has begun to obtrude itself, and it is worth taking  space and time for this particular form of illustration, because of its particular beauty and because fashion, in this case probably rightly, has elected it to the aristocracy, if not the crown royal, of the illustrated book world.
The aquatint, as a book illustration, was predominant in the period 1790–1830.
A French scapegrace painter named Jean Baptiste Le Prince has been credited with its invention or at least its perfecting.
The secret came, via the Hon.
Charles Greville, into the hands of Paul Sandby (1725–1809) who, in 1775, published Twelve Views in Aquatinta and thus began a vogue that reached its artistic peak with such artists as Thomas Malton (1748–1804) and William Daniell (1769–1837), mentioned above.
Title-page of ‘the greatest colour-plate book of all time’— Daniell and Ayton ‘s A Voyage round Great Britain (1815).
‘Westerham Mill, Kent.’
Aquatint plate from John Hassell's Aqua Pictura (1813).
An aqua ‘tint’ is produced by acid biting into a copper plate.
If the finished illustration is examined under a magnifying glass, the surface will appear as a mass of tiny rings, all linked but of varying size.
Various methods have been tried for producing this ‘ground’.
Sandby seems to have covered the plate with a fluid consisting of resin dissolved in spirits of wine, a solution which, when dried out, leaves a granulated surface.
A more common method was to use a whirling fan to cover the copper plate with fine resin dust.
When the plate was heated and the resin brought to melting point, myriads of dust particles adhered, touching each other but with minute spaces between.
When acid was applied these interstices, which were unprotected, were bitten into.
If ink was then rolled on and the plate washed, the ink remained only in the tiny ‘bitten’ spaces, giving the finely granulated appearance of the finished aquatint already referred to.
The colouring of the prints throws up some great names, for it was an apprenticeship training undergone by artists of the calibre of Girtin and Turner.
After two or three fairly neutral coloured inks had been used for the printing — say, brown for the foreground and blue for the sky and more distant scenery — the finishing was by hand, and washes of great subtlety and precision were laid on to give the desired effects.
It could be monotonous work for an aspiring and impatient young painter and Thomas Girtin (1775–1802) for one rebelled against the repetitive work, with the result that his master Edward Dayes had him put in prison for breaking the terms of his indentures.
Publishers such as Ackermann had to employ a considerable body of engravers and watercolourists to keep the work moving smoothly.
Rudolph Ackermann issued some fifty books with coloured plates, including the well-known Repository of Arts, Literature, Commerce, Manufacture, and Politics , which appeared monthly over a period of nearly twenty years.
Even broken sets can fetch large sums, and a complete bound run is likely to cost the buyer anything up to £4,000, which would have gone a long way to paying Ackermann's army of workmen.
Martin Hardie, in English Coloured Books (1906) has pointed out that Ackermann's Microcosm of London (1810) contains 104 plates and that a thousand copies were printed, thus involving, for this work alone, the meticulous hand-colouring of 104,000 separate plates.
Ackermann was no soft taskmaster.
It is worth quoting in full Hardie's graphic account of a typical day's work by one of the artists:
Let us consider for a moment how one of Rowlandson's plates for this work would be produced.
The artist was summoned to the Repository from his lodgings in James Street, in the Adelphi, and supplied with paper, reed pen, Indian ink, and some china saucers of watercolour.
Thus equipped, he could  dash off two caricatures for publication within the day: but in the case of the coloured books he worked with greater care.
With his rare certainty of style, he made a sketch, rapid but inimitable.
This he etched in outline on a copper plate, and a print was immediately prepared for him on a piece of drawing-paper.
Taking his Indian ink, he added to this outline the delicate tints that expressed the modelling of the figures, and the shadowing of interiors, architecture, or landscape.
The copper plate was then handed to one of Ackermann's numerous staff of engravers — Bluck, Stadler, Havell, and the rest.
When Rowlandson returned in the afternoon he would find the shadows all dexterously transferred to the plate by means of the aquatint.
Taking a proof of this or his own shaded drawing, the artist completed it in those light washes of colour that are so peculiarly his own; and this tinted impression was handed as a copy to the trained staff of colourists, who, with years of practice under Ackermann's personal supervision, had attained superlative skill.
There were a number of special difficulties in the successful accomplishment of what was very delicate work and, all in all, the collector of aquatint books is getting full value for money, high though the price may be.
Among the most prized of Ackermann's books are his histories of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge and of various famous public schools, his Picturesque Tours in England and many foreign countries, and his illustrations of costume and architecture.
Staying, for the moment, with coloured illustrations, an interesting collection could be made of so-called ‘nature printing’, which had a short life in the nineteenth century.
The technique was used to obtain exact representations of botanical and natural history specimens (and even of textiles) from the objects and materials themselves.
These were subjected to such heavy pressure on a soft metal plate such as lead, that an image was left with the delicate detail of the original.
Colours were then applied and copies taken off.
This is to describe the process in the most rudimentary way.
The details were such that Austria and England were nearly involved in war over the matter.
Alois Auer, Director of the Government Printing Office in Vienna, had published a pamphlet,The Discovery of the Natural Printing Process , in 1853, and this was immediately translated into a number of different languages.
Commercial rivalry was involved and the wish to better the lithographed lace sample books circulated by the trade in England.
Auer did, in fact, produce such fine raised patterns that Austrian government representatives found the resemblance so close ‘that they took them to be real lace, until, by  touching and closely examining them, they convinced themselves that they were the production of the printing press’.
Auer went on to produce other types of impressions, including some remarkable oak leaves and, in 1852, took out a patent for his Naturselbstdruck or natural self-acting printing method.
At this point an Englishman, Henry Bradbury (1831–60) put a cat among the pigeons.
He had himself studied nature printing in Vienna and was intent on proving that Austria had no claim to exclusive rights.
He pointed to experiments in the process two and a half centuries before (and could, in fact, have gone back to the fifteenth century).
Bradbury delivered a lecture to the Royal Institution of Great Britain on Nature-Printing: its Origin and Objects and published it in 1856.
Before that, in 1854, Bradbury and Evans had published a series of twenty-one plates with the title A few leaves from the Newly-Invented Process of Nature-Printing .
The in-fighting was considerable and not all the fault was on Auer's side.
When Bradbury died before the age of thirty, most of the interest in the process seems to have perished with him.
He accomplished fifty-one large folio plates for Moore and Lindley's The Ferns of Great Britain and Ireland (1855), the first English book so illustrated, and two hundred plates for the four-volume Nature-printed British Sea-Weeds (1859).
As with Auer's lace, the verisimilitude was striking and The Times reported that touch alone could convince the beholder that the minutely detailed weeds with their infinitely varied tints were not actual specimens from the sea shore.2
Nature printing is a very good example of a field of collecting in which the serious student can come to command a knowledge and expertise that the general bookseller is unlikely to match.
Nevertheless, the well-known examples will probably be costly.
The Sea-Weeds (text by William Gorstart Johnstone and Alexander Croall) is likely to make £200-£300; and a copy of the Ferns , with one of the original copper plates showing the plants in high relief, made £450 in 1978.
A special category of illustrated book is the ‘extra-illustrated’ or, ‘grangerised’work, so called after James Granger (1723–76) who, in 1769–74, published a five volume Biographical History of England with blank leaves for the purchaser to add additional illustrative material-portraits, facsimiles, plans, topographical scenes, even original letters and documents.
Sometimes such material is simply tipped-in or stuck down on a blank; the professional may prefer to inlay it on paper to match the size of the volume, which will often be fairly large.
If the extra illustrations are copious enough, the whole will need rebinding.
The description ‘extended’ can be used to describe a two- or three-volume work which has   been enlarged to eight or ten volumes by the accumulation of extra illustration.
Biographies are frequent subjects for this type of exercise, a period of history or a topographical work.
A famous example is housed in the Bodleian: Clarendon's History of the Rebellion and Burnets History of his Own Time expanded to fifty-seven volumes, with four additional volumes of outsize plates.
A copy of Dibdin's Bibliographical Decameron (1817) is recorded with 1,500 extra illustrations.
Some sixty years ago a copy of Lady Dilke's French Illustrated Books , extended to fifty-eight volumes, with nearly 10,000 additional illustrations, was offered for sale at £2,000.
A bookseller named James Gibb extended his Bible to more than sixty folio volumes, each so heavy that it could be lifted only with difficulty.
Well done, extra-illustration can be a valuable achievement and a source of enjoyment to the collector for many years.
Discredit occurs only when an otherwise amiable pastime is perverted by the destruction of many books to glorify one.
Unhappily, too, extended works which have taken much love and toil to compile can be a quarry for the despoiler, who will ruthlessly remove for separate sale topographical prints, autograph letters, etc., which have much increased in value since the extra-illustration was carried out.
When buying extended works, the collector should make sure that they have not been the subject of depredations of this nature.
‘Pretty things,’ wrote Sawyer and Darton of illustrated books in general, ‘pleasant to fondle, more ready to display to a bibliophile those tiny points of an exquisite technique over which it is legitimate to gloat…the spot of ink adjusted on a Corinthian's cheek to a thousandth of an inch, or a black line so thin and firm that you can almost see the metal caressing it on to the honest untimbered white paper.’
Private Press and Press Books
I hope it will not seem chauvinistic to claim that the modern movement for the betterment of printing was, in its inception, an English one.
The best books of today do not look in the least like Kelmscotts, but without Morris they might never have been created at all.
Alan G. Thomas, Great Books and Book Collectors
Among the many different groups of collectors is a fastidious band who are content only with the finer, more exclusive (and in some cases, more quirky) examples of the printer's art in the shape of so-called ‘press books’.
Though the term is commonly used as an umbrella to cover all types, we should properly attempt a distinction.
To be accurate, ‘private press’ should be applied only to a press where the owner's or operator's chief objective is to print a fine book, without being at the mercy of a publisher's instructions and a first necessity to show a profit, even though he may sell his wares through commercial channels.
In other words, and in this case Eric Gill's, ‘a private press prints solely what it chooses to print.’
It was Gill's opinion, not shared by everybody, that ‘the distinction has nothing to do with the use of machinery or with questions of the artistic quality of the product’.
John Carter, on the other hand, concluded that ‘as generally understood, the term private press would be applied only to a shop where the work was hand-set and hand-printed’.
In either case, though not invariably, editions are limited to modest, and sometimes very small, numbers.
There have been a number of attempts at detailed classification, some very involved and certainly not avoiding a great deal of overlapping of the categories.
There are presses which are strictly private in the Carter sense, operating in anything from a back kitchen to a fully equipped shop, perhaps content simply to joy in the smell of printer's ink and the magic of creation, without aiming to sell a single book; publishing firms calling themselves presses who rightly pride themselves on the high quality of their output; commercial printers who are equally jealous of the standard of their press work; teaching establishments attached to universities, colleges and schools for experimental and training purposes; official  presses, controlled by governmental or other agencies; fugitive and clandestine presses, often short-lived and hazardously operated, because of an adverse political or religious climate, or because their owners are dodging copyright laws; and there is a hotch-potch of firms who pretentiously arrogate to themselves the word ‘press’, to which they have little or no right in terms of either fine printing or independence.
Though there are many earlier examples,; both in this country and abroad, the private press movement in England is very largely a feature of the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, with William Morris as its    most magnificent pioneer at the Kelmscott Press.
Through all his work as artist, printer, writer and craftsman comes the breath of another age, a quality felt by all who knew him.
The portrait painter William Richmond wrote
He was the manliest fellow that ever tried to pull an effete society together.
He had the roughness and strength of a Norseman together with the tenderness, nay, even shyness, of a woman; a great, big, generous character…
A Caxton Press title-page of 1823, from the printer-in-ordinary to George IV.
and the poet W.B. Yeats recalled:
The broad vigorous body suggests a mind that has no need of the intellect to remain sane, though it gives itself to every fantasy...
A never idle man of great physical strength and extremely irascible — did he not fling a badly-baked plum pudding through a window upon Christmas Day?— a man more joyous than any intellectual man of our world…
Though his press lasted only eight years, it gave an impetus to later fine work which it is difficult to overestimate.
With Emery Walker he turned back to the Roman types of four hundred years before and to the beauty of woodcut title-pages.
Much of the work was based, not on the single, but on the double page as the right unit for design.
Of the more than fifty books to come from the press, there is no doubt that the finest was his Chaucer of 1896, reckoned by many to be the greatest book printed in England since Caxton, of which he printed 425 copies with an additional thirteen on vellum.
It contained eighty-seven woodcut illustrations after Edward Burr e-Jones and woodcut borders and initials by Morris himself.
For a great book by a great man, in the original holland-backed boards, collectors do not begrudge £3,000-£4,000, according to condition.
A vellum copy will necessitate consultation with a bank manager.
While we are with the greatest works of the period, mention must be made of a work of comparable distinction, the Doves Press edition of the Bible (five volumes, 1903–5), described by Colin Clair as ‘in its magnificent simplicity one of the noblest books ever produced in this country’.
This miraculous work was achieved on one hand press by a single compositor, J.H. Mason, who went on to become head of the London School of Printing.
Despite its beauty, many would think superior to Morris in its majesty, it may well cost the collector less than a third of the price of the Kelmscott Chaucer.
But not many will be able to move in this rarefied atmosphere and, mercifully, there are lower strata in which to breathe and have one's being.
The press and private press world is a wide, and sometimes wild, one showing a great diversity of taste, standard and price.
Products range from the truly estimable and inspired to the merely pretty and, sometimes, meretricious.
The ordinary collector should not, I feel, concern himself overmuch with subtle distinctions between altruism and commercialism, teaching and doing, hand and machine setting, very limited and less limited editions.
Exclusiveness can be pretentiousness; amateur status can sometimes be an excuse for shoddiness and inefficiency; addiction to antiquity can result in obscurity and a tedious nostalgia.
A typical Kelmscott Press page from William Morris's edition of Swinburne's Atalanta in Calydon (1894).
The type is Morris's Chaucer, as used in the masterpiece.
Whatever their character, there is one curious feature shared by most private press books, which is that they are very rarely read — a fact testified to by the fact that an extraordinary number are found unopened, as though their charm and beauty may not be defiled even by the gentlest slitting of the sacred sections at the top and fore-edges.
I think I have read somewhere a bookseller's comment that it would be fair to describe an ‘opened’ private press book as ‘rare in this state’.
Be that as it may, these books are certainly easier to find in fine condition than almost any other kind, even after fifty or sixty years.
There is, however, one category to which this does not apply.
I refer to the type of work produced by the fugitive and clandestine presses which, in their nature, usually had a ready and eager public not too scrupulous in its handling of reading matter.
Rather, if found at all, such work is likely to be roughly handled and very much read.
The story of some of these presses is a fascinating one to follow, as the printers surreptitiously pull off their pamphlets and broadsides in some kitchen or remote country house, load up and press on to the next location, with an eye ever over their shoulder for the pursuers.
None is more famous than the so-called Marprelate Press which, in the hands of a group of bigoted Puritans, launched a series of scurrilous attacks, from about 1580–90, on Archbishop Whitgift and the bench of bishops.
Izaac Walton said’ these were grown into high esteem with the common people’who, as always, dearly loved anyone and anything tilting at their lords and masters, spiritual or secular.
The prime mover was Robert Waldegrave, son of a Worcestershire yeoman, who, having served an eight-year apprenticeship, set up his own press and was soon in trouble.
In 1588 his press was seized and much of his type defaced.
With the remnants he escaped to East Molesey and began again.
He reappeared at Fawsley, near Daventry, at Coventry and at Wolston Priory, after which he fled to La Rochelle, leaving others to carry on.
His career had an extraordinary culmination when he eventually turned up in Scotland and was appointed Royal Printer to James VI, afterwards James I of England.
But, apart from such celebrated examples, the private press movement really belongs to the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, as the following selection of some of the best-known will show.
I have not attempted to distinguish between ‘presses’ and ‘private presses’.
Collectors are recommended to study closely the books and prices in any sale especially devoted to the works from this selection of presses as well as from other presses, particularly if sound investment is a consideration.
While there are inevitable deviations and eccentricities such a survey is likely to give a fair indication of:
1
The reputation of one press compared with others.
While fashion may play a small part, the overall picture will probably be a very sound reflection of the varying standards of craftsmanship and of the final judgement of shrewd buyers.
2
The difference in value, at one press, between its various books.
This will depend partly on such factors as limitation of numbers, the nature of the binding and the standing of the illustrators; and partly on the fact that, with many presses, all the magic of the crafts, predictably or unpredictably, comes together in certain books and they produce masterpieces, minor or major.
3
The esteem in which certain authors and works are held.
4
The difference a particular artist can make.
5
The importance of format and condition, with even such small matters as the presence or absence of silk ties affecting the value.
Thus, a modest survey for the purposes of this chapter, of twelve presses from the foregoing list (Kelmscott, Doves, Ashendene, Essex House, Eragny, Vale, Shakespeare Head, Riccardi, St. Dominic's, Nonesuch, Golden Cockerel and Gregynog) featured in a recent fairly important sale, threw up the following facts:
In the price range £100-£1,000, no less than twenty-one of the twenty-two highest prices were paid for the products of six presses — Kelmscott (5), Doves (6), Ashendene (3), Golden Cockerel (2), Shakespeare Head (2) and Gregynog (3).
Far ahead of the rest was a Doves Press Bible at £900, the next price being nearly £400 less.
A Kelmscott Chaucer with an estimate of £4,000-£5,000 either did not reach its reserve or was withdrawn.
The two-volume Doves Press edition of Paradise Lost and Paradise Regained with capitals by Edward Johnston and Graily Hewitt was also unsold, against an estimate of £300-£400.
The falsity of the impression that all private press books are expensive is demonstrated by the fact that fourteen examples from the Essex House (3), Vale (1), Shakespeare Head (1), Riccardi (1), Nonesuch (3), Golden Cockerel (4) and Gregynog (1) presses fell in the price range £18-£40, and the uniformity of some of the prices suggests that only protective reserves pushed them as high as that.
The average price of these was a little over £26.
Surprisingly, perhaps, in an irreligious age, nearly a third of the highest prices were for works associated with the Bible, showing that, if the conclusion is not too naive, respect and affection for it is still deeply ingrained and that, at least in fine editions, it is still a best-seller.
Cobden-Sanderson, co-founder of the Doves Press, was a celebrated binder as well as printer.
This binding, executed in 1889, sold for £900 several years ago.
Note the raised bands, spine in compartments, and gauffered fore-edge.
Old friends and established reputations still command the money — Shakespeare, Caxton, Milton, Swift, Keats, Swinburne and the rest.
Modern writers and newcomers are not so much at home in the world of the major private presses.
Finally, in this small sample, a note might be made of the £520 paid for the Descriptive Bibliography of the Books Printed at the Ashendene Press 1895–1935 , published in an edition of 390 copies signed by C. H. St. J. Hornby.
All such bibliographies — and most reputable private presses have issued them — are of considerable value as sources of reference for booksellers and collectors and are paid for accordingly.
As for the modern scene, the collector can wander happily in a wonderland inhabited by presses with such names as the Cracked Bell, Happy Dragons, Shoestring, Ten Fingers, Apple Barrell, Vanishing and Toothpaste.
He may meet the Pegacycle Lady or the Poltroon, rest beneath the Lilac Tree or in the Crabgrass.
The ornithologically-minded will be well content because, for some reason unknown to me, birds figure very largely in the names of present-day presses, among them the Cygnet, Four Ducks, Night Owl, Tern, Waddling Duck, Heron and Whippoorwill.
The most recent list of private press books I have seen (for the year 1975, published by the Private Libraries Association, Pinner, in 1978) cited nearly three hundred publications from some 125 presses, at home and abroad.
In this survey, I have elected to concentrate on English presses, in the belief that it is they that will be largely sought by English collectors; but I am much aware of the many fine examples in other     countries, not least in America, where such names as Bruce Rogers of the Riverside Press, Cambridge, Mass., Frederic Goudy of the Village Press, Park Ridge, Illinois (and later Marlborough, New York) and Daniel Berkeley Updike, who set up the Merrymount Press, will always be honoured.
The last-named's Printing Types: their History, Forms and Use will be remembered long after many presses are forgotten.
Title-page of a pirate press edition of an article by Max Beerbohm (no place or printer) on japan vellum, with, below, part of a letter from Beerbohm (1924) protesting at the piracy and endeavouring to find who was responsible.
An important function of the private presses has been to reprint rare works of historical and literary importance.
The Argonaut Press printed 975 copies on japan vellum of this work of Sir Walter Raleigh's.
Edwin and Robert Grabhorn, who founded the Grabhorn Press in San Francisco in 1920, worked so amicably together that it was said of them: ‘When Ed's away the shop goes to pieces; when Bob's away, Ed goes to pieces’; but it would be a mistake to think that relationships between printers were always so harmonious.
Cobden-Sanderson quarrelled with Emery Walker and, through the mediation of Sydney Cockerell, came to an agreement that Cobden-Sanderson should retain the Doves type for his lifetime, after which it should pass to the younger man.
This promise he deliberately and ruthlessly broke, going out night after night in 1917 and hurling his load, punches, matrices and type, into the Thames from Hammersmith Bridge, 2 on one occasion missing a barge by inches.
This jealous guarding of types is not uncommon.
Ricketts, too, pitched his types into the Thames when the Vale Press closed in 1904; and, fortunately for the river which, as Alan Thomas observed, must have been pretty well clogged with type, Lucien Pissarro chose the English Channel for the Eragny equipment.
But, whatever their idiosyncrasies and complexities, this highly individual body of printers served the book well and, if they sometimes failed in their human relationships, achieved in print a beauty and harmony that have been of inestimable benefit to us all.
For a comprehensive account on the subject of private press and press books, the collector is referred to such books as Roderick Cave,The Private Press (1971).
The Cult of the First Edition
Take care not to understand editions and title-pages too well.
It always smells of pedantry, and not always of learning.
Lord Chesterfield, Letters to his Son
‘Why do you collect first editions?
I mean, isn't the print the same in the second or third or fiftieth edition?’
‘Well, yes, bu…’
‘Well why then?’
Relentless.
‘It's difficult to explain…’
‘I see…’
He does not see.
Joseph Connolly, Collecting Modern First Editions (1977)
Two questions that are frequently asked are: how can one tell a first edition? and why bother with it anyway?
The first, though the answer may sometimes be complicated, is much more easy to deal with than the second, because in one case one is dealing with fact and in the other with personal preference and feeling, which are unpredictable and difficult to justify to the determinedly sceptical.
We can at least begin with a straightforward and incontrovertible definition.
An ‘edition’ of a book is the whole number of copies printed from the same setting of type.
After that, life becomes more complicated, and perhaps I can best illustrate some of the points involved by taking a number of books from my own bibliographical collection listed on the following three pages:
This looks a fairly chaotic sort of table and one indicative of the problems posed for the uninitiated in the matter of editions and the like.
But it is not as bad as it seems, and it is fairly typical for any dozen books selected at random.
One facile answer I have heard, or read, to the question: How do you tell a first edition? is: When there is no evidence that it is anything else.
There is, in fact, a basic stratum of truth in it; but there are so many exceptions that the collector who took the dictum as gospel would make many blunders and lose a great deal of money.
It may be of some comfort to read some words written recently by Gaby Goldscheider, an experienced antiquarian bookseller, in the Antiquarian Book Monthly :
We are, most of us, inclined to put first editions on pedestals.
Antiquarian booksellers, like myself, and ardent collectors, feel it is all-important for a book to be a first edition and will sometimes pay the earth to buy such a treasure.
Moreover, most of us seem to be so certain that a first edition is really a first edition.
I may unnerve you by saying that many of us err in this.
And it is not surprising when one considers that normally one detects a first edition simply by looking on the title verso for information.
‘Hurrah’ I have frequently told myself in some second-hand bookshop, ‘I have found a valuable first edition for a mere song!’
The reason why I have thought it to be so definitely a first edition is usually only because the title verso states: ‘First published 19XX’ or some such wording, and there is no mention about a second or third impression, or, because there was a date on the title page and a blank on the title verso; or the title verso had only the copyright date on it.
In all these instances I could have been, oh, so wrong.
Let us begin by taking that important clutch of words ‘edition’, ‘impression’ and ‘issue’.
To elaborate a little on the definition I gave earlier, an ‘edition’ is any number of books, small or large printed from one setting of type.
That type may then be broken up or ‘distributed’, if the publisher has decided to limit the first edition to a stated number, or if there is no demand for additional copies.
If, on the other hand, the book proves popular, the publisher may order the printer to produce another 3,000 copies from the same type, perhaps making some very minor corrections.
This is a ‘second impression’ of the first edition.
With that impression exhausted, and demand continuing, the publisher may decide on another 2,000 copies, thus giving a ‘third impression’.
Each separate printing from the same type-setting is an impression, first, second, fifth or tenth; but they all add up to one edition.
Now we will suppose that the author has lighted on important new material or has had a significant number of errors in the first edition pointed out to him.
His publisher may then decide that it is worth incorporating all the additions and corrections in another edition.
This will inevitably involve a substantial resetting of type, and a second edition will result.
If the demand holds there can also be second, third, fourth, etc., impressions of the second edition.
Some books become such classics that they run on into innumerable editions and impressions, with the original so much extended, altered and corrected that there is scarcely a vestige of it left.
A supreme example is the work familiarly known as ‘Gray's Anatomy’.
This medical textbook, by Henry Gray, was first published by J.W. Parker in 1858 and taken over by Longman in 1863.
Gray died tragically early from smallpox when he had published a second  edition; but willing hands carried on the work, and the 35th edition was published by Longman in 1973.
This, of course, illustrates the vital necessity of keeping medical and scientific works up-to-date, and the fact that outmoded editions are worthless until they have attained the status of historical curiosities.
The further back a collector goes, the more he will have to pay.
A ‘Gray's Anatomy’ of the 1920s may well be found for less than £5.
The first edition of the Anatomy, Descriptive & Surgical (1858) with 363 wood engravings, is likely to fetch around £200.
One curious example may have been noticed in the foregoing listing-that of the Rev. Henry Cotton's invaluable A Typographical Gazetteer , which is in the original binding.
This is clearly stated to be the ‘second edition, corrected and much enlarged’ and the original, reprinted, Introduction establishes the first edition as 1824.
At the end of the book, however, there are thirty-two pages of publisher's advertisements, dated 1885, which have not been tipped-in but bound in as an integral part.
This can only mean that the University Press at Oxford kept the type of the second edition standing for over fifty years, or else had a large number of the second edition sheets left over and stored.
This would by no means be a record.
Stephen Pile's Book of Heroic Failures quotes David Wilkins's translation of the New Testament from Coptic into Latin, published in 1716 by the Oxford University Press, as having remained in print till 1907, by which time only 191 copies had been sold!
We have still to take the matter of editions a little further.
If the second edition of a book contains revision material, it is the first revised edition.
This does not alter the fact — and it is imperative to grasp this — that even if there has been no alteration or amendment whatever, and every word is identical, with exactly the same sort of type and format, a new edition is created every time there is a new setting of type.
We arrive at the vexed question of ‘issue’, which is something quite different from impression.
A different or ‘variant issue’ can occur as part of the first edition when, after some copies have already been published, some alteration is made and even another title-page substituted.
We then have two issues of the first edition.
The term issue is normally used when it is possible to show beyond any reasonable doubt that the variations occurred after some of the edition had already been published, so that first and second issues (and even more) are recognisable.
When priority is not clear and variant copies are, or were, on sale indiscriminately, it is more usual to talk about ‘states’.
Part of this confusion occurs because, particularly in early centuries, authors were allowed to visit the printers while their books were being run off and to make alterations.
It will be noted that, in the case of Lowndes's Bibliographer's Manual , No. 13 above, the publisher has used ‘issue’ in another sense.
This is because the book trade has a habit of using terms less precisely than the bibliographer and collector.
Since he was bringing out something in cheap  and popular form, involving new type-setting and format, it was clearly a new edition, not another issue of the first edition.
At this point let us look back at our whole table of books and, in the light of our examination to date, try to draw some conclusions.
It is completely safe to assert, from the evidence given, that half the fourteen books (Nos. 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13) are not first editions because they carry specific statements about earlier editions and impressions.
With another five (Nos. 3, 4, 5, 10, 14), I should regard the evidence that they are ‘firsts’ as entirely satisfactory because of the coincidence of dates on title, verso, preface, etc.
If there were a great discrepancy it would be a matter for thought.
This leaves only two (Nos. 1 and 2) where, without further checking, evidence might be considered too slight.
Since I can find no copy in such sources as Book Auction Records bearing any other date, I am happy to accept Plomer; and, since I am not much troubled one way or the other, Partington will pass muster without further investigation.
(As a matter of fact, a previous owner has pencilled ‘First Edition’ inside the cover, but, bearing Gaby Goldscheider's confession in mind, what the soldier said isn't evidence.)
There are one or two other important points to be borne in mind.
As we know, some important and much-collected works were issued in ‘parts’, usually monthly, before they appeared in book form.
It is not perhaps generally realised that this practice began as early as the late seventeenth century and that many of the splendid coloured aquatint books of the nineteenth century first reached the public in this way.
Even the celebrated Mrs. Beeton's Book of Household Management (1859–61) was so issued.
' But to book-collectors publication in parts is usually only a matter of much interest with such fiction writers as Dickens, whose Pickwick Papers (to give them their familiar short title) established a great new vogue in 1836–37.
The description ‘first edition in book form’ normally means that the work was first published in parts or serialised in a magazine or newspaper.
Usually, as with the aquatint books and with Thomas Hardy, it is the book form that collectors prefer; but with Dickens and Thackeray, among others, it is the original parts (if complete and with all covers and advertisements) that command big prices.
A fair price for David Copperfield in book form (first edition 1850) would be £30-£40.
A good set of parts could well be ten times that.
Thackeray's Vanity Fair (first edition, first issue, 20 parts in 19, 1847–48) sometimes   reaches £1,200-£1,500, whereas the first edition in book form can go on your shelves for perhaps £50-£80.
An expression that sometimes causes puzzlement is ‘first published form’, or something similar.
This can be taken to mean that the work has already been printed for a limited number of people by private gift or circulation, but has not been published in the sense that it has been offered to the general public.
‘First general circulation’ has much the same meaning.
The private circulation, because of its rarity (though it is also frequently better produced) normally commands a much higher price.
One of the best examples is Lawrence of Arabia's famous Seven Pillars of Wisdom .
So large was the first general edition of 1935 that you should easily find a copy for not more than £10.
For the previous privately printed and limited edition of about 170 copies you will be fortunate if you are not parted from £2,000.
After a long pause for refreshment, we can return to the question we started with — how to tell a first edition.
Despite problems and exceptions, the key to the situation is likely to be the combination of title-page and verso, plus dated prefaces, forewords and advertisements.
If title-page and the information on the reverse agree as to date, and there is nothing to indicate earlier editions, then you may well have a ‘first’.
Whether it is the first impression or first issue of the first edition may be more difficult to establish, and you will be well advised to check from a standard bibliography.
Do not be intimidated by the often unreliable burrowings of what John Carter called ‘issue-mongers’ and ‘points maniacs’.
A ‘point’ is an idiosyncrasy or peculiarity about a work which may be held to determine priority of edition, impression or issue.
A number of these are entirely legitimate and cause great excitement among devotees, who will be found anxiously scanning the title of Pickwick to see whether Sam Weller's name on the inn sign-board is spelt with a W or a V; and, indeed, that particular work is notorious for the number of points a copy needs to score before emerging triumphant.
It is much worse than a judge at Cruft's checking over the points of a Pomeranian or Pekinese, and you are more likely to be bitten.
Points should never be worshipped to excess, and the unflagging zeal of bibliographical mudlarkers prodding for new ones should be mistrusted or at least treated with caution.
Sir Walter Scott had some notable words in The Antiquary :
Here were editions esteemed as being the first, and there stood scarcely less regarded as being the last and the best; here was a book valued because it had the author's final improvements, and there is another which (strange to tell!) was in request because it had them not.
One was precious because it was a folio, and another because it was a duodecimo; some because they were tall, some because they  were short; the merit of this lay in the title-page — of that in the arrangement of the letters in the word Finis.
There was, it seemed, no peculiar distinction, however trifling or minute, which might not give value to a volume, providing the indispensable quality of scarcity, or rare occurrence, was attached to it.
One of the best examples of the edition-impression-issue complex is that supreme nursery (and adult) treasure Alice's Adventures in Wonderland .
The story was first told by Charles Ludwidge Dodgson (Lewis Carroll) to a group of his young Oxford friends.
When he decided to publish it, in expanded form, he did so at his own expense.
Probably fifty-odd were bound up (of which over thirty seem to have been sent to hospitals) before Dodgson learnt that Tenniel, the illustrator, was dissatisfied with the reproduction of the pictures, whereupon the author decided to abandon the publication and recall the distributed copies.
These fifty or so gifts, of     which some twenty are known to have survived, constitute the true first edition of 1865.
The next printing, of 1866, was from new type and was therefore the second edition, often, if not accurately, called the first published edition, on the grounds that, since so few of the 1865 copies were published and a number were recalled by Carroll, it was really a private printing and doesn't count.
On the other hand, it can be argued more convincingly that it was fully intended to be an ordinary published edition before Carroll changed his mind.
Left.
Title-page of the extremely rare suppressed edition of Alice In Wonderland (1865).
Right: Title page of the ‘ordinary’ second, or ‘first published’edition of Alice in Wonderland (1866).
Advertisement and cover of the New York edition of Charles Dickens ‘s Travelling Letters and a choice subject for the ‘follow the flag’ debate.
They reappeared in England later in the year in Pictures from Italy.
The complications do not end there.
Macmillan, the publisher, had a quantity of ‘sheets’ left over from the first printing and shipped them over to Appleton & Co., the American publishers.
Alice in Wonderland (1865 printing) then appeared in America with a new title-page and the date 1866!
The perspicacious reader will by now have decided that, if we accept the 1865 suppressed edition as the first, this American printing was the second issue of the first edition, since it was printed from the original setting of type.
The so-called first published (English) edition is really the second edition.
But before you finally make up your mind, you must   decide where you stand in the ‘follow the flag’ controversy.2 I personally gave that one up decades ago.
Printed cover of a famous Edgar Wallace first edition.
Perfect copies must have the competition form and the fold-out sectional view of 44 Downing Street.
Two other minor aids to first edition detecting and one harsh rebuff.
If you find such terms as ‘Uniform Edition’, ‘Valima Edition’, ‘Border Edition’(and even ‘Author's Edition’) you will almost certainly be correct   in deciding that the volume cannot be a ‘first’ but forms part of a, later collected edition, all dressed up in a special format — a ‘uniform’, in fact.
There are very occasional exceptions.
Hardy's Wessex volumes, which are uniform, do include one or two first editions.
You will easily spot them by carrying out the title/verso exercise.
In the absence of other evidence, a manuscript inscription, while not decisive, is sometimes a guide to, or confirmation of, date of publication, in such examples as ‘Mary, the gift of her aunt, 7 February 1895’.
Such inscriptions are useful in fixing, for example, Kate Greenaway books, which are often undated, and catalogues will quote them.
The rebuff is that, having painstakingly laid a firm foundation, I must, in all honesty, now kick part of it away by revealing that certain misguided authors and publishers (especially the latter) have unscrupulously omitted all the data we require, printing books without dates or any reference to previous editions.
Collectors of such popular authors as G.A.
Henty and Edgar Wallace will run into this sort of trouble.
To quote an expert collector:
As regards first editions…no author could have left behind such confusion in the classification of his novels as Wallace, although it would be fairer to say that the fault lay not with him but with his publishers.
The rogues of the piece were undoubtedly the well established firm of Hodder and Stoughton, who seemed to have had an unusual and complex system of their own.
Not only did they omit to date their editions, but they had almost identical books in the 7/6d [37½p]and 3/6d [17½p]category in cloth covers of a great variety of colours.
They simply churned out dozens of reprints and impressions in a very short space of time to keep up with the ever growing demand by the Wallace clamouring public.
While many of the 7/6d were firsts, some of the 3/6d issues also come into this category, and to make matters worse even some of the smaller red-backed 2/ [10p]editions with the designed covers were firsts.’
W.O.G. Lofts, ‘Collecting Edgar Wallace’,Antiquarian Book Monthly , August 1977.
The only answer in this situation is to seek out the appropriate standard bibliography, if it exists, and to read expert articles in specialist periodicals.
Another example is Beatrix Potter, who has recently undergone a great deal of research to establish which are truly ‘firsts’ and which are only reprints without any indication of the fact.
Collectors, of whom there are understandably many, will find that one ‘point’ is the pattern of the endpapers!
Perhaps I should not leave our subject without a special mention of modern first editions, which have a special appeal to many collectors.
I    confess they have, for me, the serious drawback of requiring the collector to assume the mantle of prophecy as well as all the other gifts that are demanded.
Perhaps that is the great fascination, the spice of risk, the lure of spotting a winner.
With our Bacons, our Defoes, our Wordsworths, our Shelleys, our Austens and all the rest, we know where we are.
Time has established their worth, which is now unlikely to alter substantially, either in terms of esteem or financial value.
But the collector of modern first editions must perforce strive to anticipate the judgements of posterity, and that path is littered with blighted hopes and the debris of fickle fashion.
The rare reprints of Bernard Shaw's and G.K. Chesterton's addresses on The Future of Religion to the Cambridge Heretics Society in 1911.
Though both had appeared in the press and are very slight pamphlets, they rank as first editions in book form.
According to the edition, and sometimes with the aid of an inscription, Dylan Thomas (1914–1953) has been making £500 or more.
In my opinion it would be a very rash collector who banked on him staying at that level.
Will James Joyce, Ezra Pound, W.B. Yeats, Aldous Huxley, the Sitwells, Siegfried Sassoon, Henry Williamson, Edmund Blunden, Laurie Lee, T.S.
Eliot, Evelyn Waugh, Tolkien, Virginia Woolf, Gertrude Stein, Harold Pinter, Sylvia Plath, Max Beerbohm, to name a haphazard miscellany, advance, hover uncertainly, or slowly fade into obscurity?
I cannot answer.
I know some are already on the slide.
I know that when I see the books of a hitherto-collected writer being grouped in a catalogue in half-dozens and tens, instead of being offered singly, he is on the way out so far as the collecting world counts for anything.
‘He pleases many, and he who pleases many must have merit.’
On the basis of that opinion, Doctor Johnson might have backed his hunch and invested in John Pomfret.
He would have been wrong.
But undoubtedly he was right on the mark when he wrote in his essay on Thomas Parnell some words which might aptly be applied to many writers at present being collected:
I can only say that I know not whence they came, nor have ever enquired whither they are going.
They stand upon the faith of their compilers.
Substitute collectors for compilers and you have a fair estimate of the situation.
Faith is perhaps the operative word for the collector of modern books, the type of faith displayed with such success by booksellers such as Bertram Rota who was recently called by another specialist in this field the ‘master-mason of the modern first edition’.
I come to the hurdle which I confessed at the outset I might find difficult to clear: why collect first editions anyway, since the path is so littered with obstructions, difficulties and bibliographical rubbish, and the pilgrimage is often attended with so much expense?
It is a very good question, and if you are happy with your own charming and heterogeneous muddle of editions, impressions, issues and  bindings, early or late, in good condition or bad, God bless you.
I have no wish to disturb your contentment — a contentment which, as I look at my bookshelves, I must own I partly share.
There are three basic urges in first edition collecting — romanticism, acquisitiveness and snobbery.
The genuine and most lovable aficionados are those who wish to possess the book in the very form in which it first reached its author's hands in the bleak parsonage at Haworth, the placid genteel home at Chawton, or that of ‘The Great Unknown’ north of the border.
Drab and perhaps a little the worse for wear, sedate in unpretentious boards or cloth, they are cherished far more than copies reclothed and bedecked in elegant calf and morocco.
Others want first editions from greed for rarity and will pay almost any price to secure it, and yet others because they want to put one over on other collectors.
One hopes that only the first group will inherit the earth.
They will have Macaulay's words written on their hearts:
No substitute, however exquisitely formed, will fill the void left by the original.
The second beauty may be equal or superior to the first; but still it is not she.
And on their walls, decorously framed, will be a paragraph from Ralph Waldo Emerson:
They who make up the final verdict upon every book are not the partial and noisy readers of the hour when it appears Only those books come down which deserve to last.
Gilt edges, vellum, and morocco, and presentation copies to all the libraries will not preserve a book in circulation beyond its intrinsic dates…
The permanence of all books is fixed by no effort, friendly or hostile, but by their own specific gravity, or the intrinsic importance of their contents to the constant mind of man.
Association Copies
The sum is this: that varieties of association are excellent good for books as well as bookmen.
Holbrook Jackson, The Anatomy of Bibliomania
I propose to devote a whole chapter to so-called ‘association copies’, partly for the selfish reason that I am myself devoted to them and partly because, looking at them as objectively as I can, they seem to me to offer one of the most satisfying branches of book-collecting, especially to anyone with the slightest sense of history.
An association copy can be a book which its author has inscribed to a relative or friend.
Obviously the more interesting the inscription, the more valuable the book.
At the bottom of the scale would be a copy autographed by the author in some bookshop at the outset of a publicity campaign.
This is something coldly impersonal, whereas the essence of real association is something much more intimate and interesting.
It can be a book which formerly belonged to some famous person, preferably with some fair indication of that ownership, perhaps his signature and, much better, marginal notes and comments.
It could have shared the owner's adventures and vicissitudes, occupied his leisure hours, cheered his bleaker moments.
One would treasure the copy of Herodotus that Charles James Fox was reading by a roaring wood fire when he had completed the squandering of£140,000 at the gaming table.
‘What is a man to do?’ he asked.
‘When he is miserable, egad, he must keep good company!
’ Perhaps one would have an even greater fondness for the folio 1594 Biblia Graeca Septuaginta with which Doctor Johnson knocked down his temporary employer, the bookseller Osborne, when he accused his illustrious employee of negligence.
The book was in the hands of a Cambridge bookseller in 1812.
Some wry amusement at the choice of weapon could also be extracted from the folio Bible with which, according to Anthony Trollope in his Autobiography , his father used to fell him whenever he had been idle.
A special place of honour would be found for books having some close connection with an important event in history and perhaps even helped to shape it.
One could fly no higher than the signal book that young Lieutenant Pasco used at Trafalgar to send up the Immortal Signal.
Yet, in another sphere of human activity, perhaps a book I examined recently in the library of Chichester Cathedral excelled it.
It was a volume of the works of Hermann of Wied, Elector and Archbishop of Cologne, published at Bonn by Laurent Mylius in 1545.
Hermann made great efforts to carry through reforms in his diocese and, as a result, was eventually summoned before both Emperor and Pope, deposed and excommunicated.
His book, according to historians, was one of the chief sources consulted by Cranmer during the compilation of the Book of Common Prayer , first published in 1549 and revised in 1552, again by Cranmer.
The Chichester copy carries the signature ‘Thomas Cantuar’ on the title; so that it was this very book that had such a significant influence on one of the noblest achievements of our literature and one of the greatest moulders of English life and character.
If some slight evidence of that is required, the Oxford Dictionary of Quotations has over 550 entries for the Book of Common Prayer.
Title-page of Ecclesiasticae Historiae Autores (1549), inscribed by the translator Wolfgang Musculus ('little mouse') to Heinrich Bullinger, the friend of Calvin and Zwingli.
Note the printer's device of Johann Froben (1460–1527), the great printer of Basle who commissioned Hans Holbein to design title-pages, borders and other decorations.
Right: An unusual Doctor Johnson ‘association’ item: a manuscript ink and watercolour chart (much reduced) of the armies of Frederick the Great, drawn by an English soldier serving in the Emperor's Body Regiment and purchased in Berlin by Hester Piozzi (formerly Thrale), immortalised by her friendship with Doctor Johnson.
Just before she left England for the travels during which she acquired this souvenir, Johnson tore up all her letters in his anger at her marriage with the Italian musician Gabriele Piozzi.
Nearly a hundred years ago there emerged from an obscure Suffolk parish an eight hundred year old manuscript book of the Gospels.
In it was a faded inscription which revealed an astonishing story.
St. Margaret, Queen of Scotland from about the year of the Norman conquest to 1093, was riding in a litter attended by a company of soldiers and a priest who read to her from a Gospel Book.
As they crossed a stream the precious manuscript slipped from his hand and disappeared in the water.
The horses were reined in and a man-at-arms plunged into the stream, presently triumphantly holding up the dripping book, which was returned to the anxious Queen.
She, pious woman, had it carefully dried out and caused words of thanksgiving to God to be inscribed in it.
Those words can still be read in the Bodleian Library, a priceless association with one of Scotland's greatest women.
Near me as I write are a number of volumes which I should like us to examine together in order to illustrate further the fascination of association books; this time not inaccessible treasures but items of the type that can come to every collector.
I list them without bibliographical details, since these are largely irrelevant for our particular purpose; but I add what is more significant, the price paid for each, in or out of the saleroom, unless for some reason this is not known.
With the aid of these books, let us see what glimpses of the past can be vouchsafed to us, what men and events we can create, what manner of ‘association’ is established.
Tome of Homilees, 1571
The first book sets us journeying in Essex, to a village grown into a town and the parish church of St. Mary.
In Elizabeth I's reign (and, indeed, at other times) the standard of education and diligence among the clergy often left much to be desired.
The evils of pluralism were rife, absenteeism was common and taken for granted.
(In Henry VIII's reign, the great Dutch scholar Erasmus was given the benefice of Aldington in Kent and had it commuted for a pension of £20, charged on the living.)
Presentations to livings could be made by totally unworthy patrons, often crooks and loose-livers who were not above putting in incumbents almost as bad as themselves.
To remedy the worst excesses of lack of scholarship and poor teaching the Queen, following earlier examples, ordered Books of Homilies to be prepared for use in all parish churches.
Eminent churchmen, among them Cranmer, Hooper and Latimer, co-operated in writing the books.
The interesting feature of our book is that the title-page inscription gives the exact location and the method of purchase, translating: ‘From the sanctuary of the church of Stansted Montfitchet in the County of Essex, bought from the parish chest.
’ Such are the adventures and travels of books that how and why it left its home are likely to remain a mystery.
It was at one time in the library of Darcy Lever Hall, Bolton and in the 1930s it was rescued from a junk furniture shop in Kent.
Perhaps, after four hundred years, it should go home at last; for, exhibited in a glass case in St. Mary's Church and with one significant gap, are all the rest of its Books of Homilies.
Perhaps, too, the archaic words might for a brief minute live again:
…that we…may enjoye the continuance of thy great mercies towards us, thy right hand, as in this so in all other invasions, rebellions and daungers, continuallye saving and defendinge our Churche, our Realme, our Queene and people of England.
Virgil, 1572
Our second association item takes us to a late autumn in the next reign.
‘About the previous Christmas…we brought our myne unto the Wall, and about Candlemas we had wrought the wall halfe through.’
Now the tunnelers were right through and’ there was placed under the Parliament house where the king should sit, some 30 barrels of gunpowder, with great store of wood, faggots and bars of iron.’
A figure carrying a hooded lantern moved among the barrels, laying the powder train that on the morrow, once it was fired, would send king, princes, bishops, judges, lords and commons to their reckoning in one gigantic blast intended to ‘have ruined the whole estate and kingdom of England.
’ Came a sudden clatter of feet on the stone steps to the cellars, torchlight on the steel of the  men-at-arms, and Guy Fawkes, calling himself John Johnson, was caught in the act.
Leading the discovering party was the Justice of the Peace for Westminster, Thomas Knyvet or Knyvett, later to become Sir Thomas Knyvet, Baron Knyvet of Escrick.
His signature on the title of his copy of Virgil, probably written there in his quieter days at Jesus College, Cambridge, surely brings us much closer to that momentous day still celebrated in November and commemorated by the ceremonial searching of the cellars of the House of Commons.
Bible, 1599
The third example in our selected group, if the case is proven, must be reckoned the most precious.
We can note in passing that the book is a ‘Breeches’ Bible, but that need not delay us here since the misunderstood version is discussed elsewhere (see Chapter 9).
Much more important are the inscription and the bookplates of the Bernard family.
In 1607 Shakespeare's daughter Susanna married John Hall, physician, of   Stratford-upon-Avon.
Their only child, Elizabeth, was born a year later.
Shakespeare was devoted to her and, in his will, left her ‘All my Plate (except my brod silver and gilt bowl).’
She later inherited the poet's house, New Place, and the rest of his entailed property.
Fly-leaf of a 1599 Bible perhaps inscribed by her husband to Shakespeare's last direct descendant, his grand-daughter Elizabeth Bernard.
Elizabeth married, first, Thomas Nash of Stratford in 1626 and then, in June 1649, John Bernard (or Barnard — both forms were used), later Sir John, of Abington, Northants.
Both marriages were childless; so that Elizabeth was the last direct descendant of William Shakespeare.
If this is the right Elizabeth, can we come much closer to him than through the loved child christened at Stratford ‘Elizabeth, daughter of John Hall, gentleman’ and her Bible, so tenderly inscribed by her husband?
Taylor, Miscellanea Medica, 1761
We take up the fourth book and find ourselves with a work which, if we are not Latin scholars and particularly interested in medicine, might seem a dull dog.
But pause for a few moments with the two names it introduces us to — Robert Taylor, the author, and the book's recipient, Percivall Pott, whose characteristic signature it contains.
Taylor (1710–62) had a large and popular practice in London, was President of the Royal Society and physician to George II.
The redoubtable Pott (1714–88), who records the book as the gift of the author, was even better known.
After being bound apprentice to the barber-surgeon Edward Nourse, he rose to become master of anatomy to the Corporation of Surgeons and, for nearly forty years, Surgeon to St. Bartholomew's Hospital.
Your doctor today will tell you what Pott's Disease is and will probably delight in expounding upon Pott's Fracture.
It is so-called because of the compound fracture of the leg which Pott himself suffered as the result of an accident in 1756.
The surgeons shook their heads and unanimously recommended amputation.
Pott would have none of it and, with the aid of his old friend Nourse, successfully set it himself.
It was rumoured that Pott would not allow the bearers to take him to his own hospital, St. Bartholomew's, believing he would fare better elsewhere.
Crowe, Lewesdon Hill, 1788
Continuing our journey through the centuries we arrive at 1788 and a completely different type of association, linking past and present.
Lewesdon Hill is a fairly rare work in its first edition.
Though his name does not appear, it was written by William Crowe (1745–1829), who was at one time rector of Stoke Abbott in Dorset.
Outside the village rises the noble hill of Lewesdon, neighbouring peak to Pilsdon Pen, beloved of Wordsworth when he lived at Racedown and first began to dedicate his life to poetry.
Wordsworth much admired Crowe's poem, as did Coleridge and Samuel Rogers.
Lewesdon climbs nearly nine hundred feet and, unlike Pilsdon Pen, which is bare and rugged, is thick with trees to its summit.
Wrote Crowe:
Up to thy furze-clad summit, let me climb;
My morning exercise; and thence look round
Upon the variegated scene, of hills,
And woods, and fruitful vales, and villages
Half-hid in tufted orchards, and the sea
Boundless, and studded thick with many a sail.
Even poets must come down to earth and to the bottom of their hills, and the long poem ends:
Of This enough:
Tomorrow for severer thought; but now
To breakfast, and keep festival to-day.
One can still climb Lewesdon through its aisles of trees and see the wide scene with its distinctive landmarks just as Crowe saw it, though the crowding sails of the ships of the line and the merchantmen have gone.
But the book's greatest association interest is that another, and greater, poet found it worth studying for its content and craftsmanship.
‘I am returning the delightful Quarto edition of Crowe's poem, from which I have been able to observe what he did later with the piece.
(I have edn. 3).’
The two were less than two centuries apart, but it brings back to mind Flecker's verses To a Poet a Thousand Years Hence , which ends:
I send my soul through time and space to greet you.
You were a poet.
You will understand.
Lytton, Lucille
On for nearly another hundred years, and we are with yet another poet, whose early work was written under the pen-name of Owen Meredith.
Despite his aspirations to poetry, he became better-known as a prose writer in his minutes and despatches as a statesman, for ‘Owen Meredith’, better known to history as Edward Robert Bulwer Lytton, first Earl of Lytton (1831–91), became a distinguished diplomat, the climax of his career coming in 1876–80 when he served as Viceroy of India and in that capacity proclaimed Queen Victoria as Empress at Delhi in 1877.
On the voyage out to take up his appointment he fell ill and, as the inscription in Lucile records, he was sustained by Major L.S. Bence and enabled to arrive in Calcutta in good shape.
Collectors of the Lyttons, father and son, have an inexpensive line of country and are to be congratulated if they can distinguish infallibly between the two without recourse to their reference books.
Edward Robert Bulwer Lytton's father was Edward George Earle Lytton Bulwer-Lytton, first Baron Lytton as distinct from first Earl, and wrote some massive novels including Eugene Aram (3 vols. 1832),The Last Days of Pompeii (3 vols. 1834),The Caxtons (3 vols. 1849) and The Last of the Barons (1843).
I confess that I give pride of place to the story of his children on the occasion they organised a charade displaying a Crusader knight returning from the wars.
‘At his gate he was welcomed by his wife to whom he recounted his triumphs and the number of heathen he had slain.
His wife, pointing to a row of dolls of various sizes, replied with pride, ‘And I, too, my lord, have not been idle.’
’ George Russell,Collections and Recollections , 1898.
Tennyson, Miscellaneous Poems, 1877
On to the Poet Laureate, Lord Tennyson and Volume I only of his Works, a book which ordinarily, as an odd volume, might well have been sold for £1 or less had not the inscription on the title turned it into a desirable association item.
The poet gave it to Alice Stopford Green wife of that frail and ‘singularly attractive’ priest of St. Philip's, Stepney, who awoke one day to find himself famous with the publication of his Short History of the English People , one of the most vivid and colourful of histories, first issued in 1874 and later (1877–80) expanded to four handsome illustrated volumes.
His wife was a historian in her own right, an ardent Irish home ruler and a member of the Irish Senate.
Among her other political  activities , she sympathised with the Boers and visited St. Helena when it was used to house prisoners from the South African War.
Order of Coronation Service, 1902
This meander among association books ends with a royal occasion-the coronation of King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra in August 1902.
The vigilant will, I hope, have noticed the discrepancy in dates.
The printed date of the coronation is 26 June 1902, but Sir Frederick Bridge, organist at Westminster Abbey and Director of Music for the occasion, has written 9 August.
The already elderly Prince of Wales was called to the throne on 22 January 1901, and his coronation, on a magnificent scale, was set for 26 June 1902.
To the dismay of his countless subjects and, doubtless, of the organisers of the pageantry, two days before the king was forced to bow to his surgeons and undergo an operation for perityphlitis.
He made an excellent recovery, and the postponed coronation took place on 9 August, a dramatic sequence of events which this association volume faithfully records.
Left: Title-page of The Form and Order of the service... in the Coronation of Edward VII and Queen Alexandra, inscribed by the Organist and Director of Music and carrying the original and postponed dates.
Provincial Presses
If stationary men would pay more attention to the districts on which they reside…from such materials might be drawn the most complete county histories.
Gilbert White, The Natural History of Selborne
I feel there can be few more worthy objects for the book-collector who is suitably placed geographically than gathering the printed products of his town or city through the centuries.
The provincial presses, though they may lag behind their metropolitan brothers in equipment and technique, have a great story to tell.
Not only do they record the history of their localities, they are themselves the product of history, played on a far wider stage.
Left: Title-page of what was probably the first book printed in Chester.
Right: Title-page of the Oxford printing that saw Doctor Johnson's first appearance in print, a translation into Latin of Pope's Messiah, included without Johnson ‘s permission.
Thus, the first book we know of printed in Norwich was in Dutch, for the benefit of the refugees who had fled there from the persecutions of the Duke of Alva in the Netherlands.
When Charles I went north at the beginning of the rebellion that was to cost him his head, his Lord General sent to Robert Barker, the King's Printer, to bring a press to Newcastle-upon-Tyne, from which could be disseminated royalist proclamations and pamphlets.
Barker complied with the request by sending his son-in-law John Legatt.
The only piece of provincial printing in Queen Mary's bloody reign of five years came from Canterbury in Kent.
Numbers of novelists, poets, essayists and artists had early work printed by provincial presses.
Many woodcuts of Thomas Bewick's were used by Catnach at Alnwick, in Northumberland.
Doctor Johnson's first appearance in print (without his permission) was at Oxford in an     anthology of miscellaneous poems published by his tutor.
Lyrical Ballads was printed by Biggs and Cottle at Bristol.
Shelley's Original Poetry , by Victor and Cazire, saw the light at Worthing in Sussex.
Byron's second published work was at Newark.
Examples could be multiplied.
Many of these works, because they were printed in small numbers at obscure presses, are among the rarest books in our literature.
There may be little or no hope of finding those particular items, but there are many others to be collected, some as yet unrecorded.
There is the added attraction that, since little is known of publishing in many places, items are not always recognised as rare or significant, and are therefore comparatively inexpensive.
Title of a Newcastle printing of Thomas Bewick of 1805.
The great majority of his work was produced by provincial presses.
The most famous (and rarest) book to come out of Worthing, by Shelley and his sister Elizabeth.
No copy was known till 1898.
Only about one hundred copies had been circulated when Shelley asked for the destruction of the rest of the edition.
Starting overleaf is a list of some first or very early provincial printings in England, Scotland and Wales.
There is still a great deal of study necessary for anything like a full history.
Note: in some cases earlier printings have been recorded but no copy has ever been traced.
Provincial printings from Shrewsbury, 1848–52 and Hafod, 1803–10, the latter being Thomas Johnes's translation of Froissart's Chronicles.
Testimony to the interest and importance of this field of collecting occurred in October 1980, when Sotheby, Beresford, Adams of Chester held an auction almost exclusively devoted to provincial presses.
Items printed and published in over 350 localities in the British Isles were sold, and the cataloguer wrote:
One of the greatest fascinations of provincial printing in Britain is the diversity of localities where presses were set up, often, for example, along the line of canals, where labour was cheap and plentiful…another fascination being that this is a relatively unresearched area, its local beginnings in the eighteenth century often more obscure than the highly recorded beginnings of early printing.
Bibles
No man was a greater lover of books than he [Shelley].
He was rarely to be seen, unless attending to other people's affairs, without a volume of some sort, generally of Plato or one of the Greek tragedians.
Nor will those who understand the real spirit of his scepticism be surprised to hear that one of his companions was the Bible.
He valued it for the beauty of some of its contents, for the dignity of others, and the curiosity of all.
Leigh Hunt, My Books
If it seems odd to devote a chapter to one book, however important and significant, it must be appreciated that numerically it is by far the most commonly found book and one which has been published over such a long period that the collector will see it more frequently than any other.
Speaking only from a base financial standpoint, there is probably no book of which people hold higher hopes than the Bible, and none where they are more doomed to disappointment.
Few days go by without booksellers and auctioneers being offered, for instance, some imposing nineteenth century edition with brass clasps and bright chromolithographs; or a ‘very rare’ Breeches Bible, the latter almost inevitably rather battered and with a number of pages torn or missing.
I do not write derisively, only factually.
For the truth is that few Bibles produced over the last 370 years have any substantial value, neither have a great many from the period before that.
There is one obvious reason.
In crude terms, value normally depends on rarity, and no book can show a greater number of editions than the Bible.
It is astonishing to think that in the forty-odd years after the invention of printing, no fewer than ninety-four editions came off the presses of Europe; and that for four centuries there has been almost no year in which a new edition has not appeared in England.
In many years there were several.
It was the earliest best seller.
Of an edition of Luther's Bible printed in Wittenberg in 1534, it is estimated that 100,000 copies were sold in forty years.
Add to these statistics that translations have now appeared in some 850 languages and it will be apparent that, except in a few notable cases, rarity is not often a factor to be reckoned with.
Title-page of Rychard Taverner's edition of the Bible, 1539, partly adapted from Matthew's version and partly translated by himself.
It was soon superseded and complete copies are very rare.
Of the ten copies sold at auction in the last eighty years, only one has been perfect.
Since it has already been mentioned, let us take the case of the so-called Breeches Bible, from the reading in Genesis iii.7 ‘and they sowed fig leaves together, and made themselves breeches.
’ It seems to be an invincible belief that this edition is both scarce and valuable, whereas it is neither.
To begin with, this was not the first use of the curious rendering.
It had appeared in Caxton's edition of Voragine's The Golden Legend (1483) and in Wycliffe's translation of about a hundred years before; but the sobriquet is reserved for the Geneva version of the Bible, first printed there by Rouland Hall in 1560.
This was the first English Bible printed in Roman type and with verse divisions, which are among the reasons why it was enormously popular and, for the next fifty years, the most commonly owned and read version in England.
Dore, the historian of the Bible, tells us that ‘from that date [1560]until 1612 no year passed without one, two, or more editions being issued from the press.’
In fact, up to the outbreak of the Civil War in 1642, some 150 editions had appeared.
For some strange, probably mildly salacious, reason, it is the ‘breeches’ that popular interest has fastened on though, etymologically, there are other words of equal interest.
For example, in the Gospel of St. Luke, ii.
16, we find ‘So they came with haste, and found both Mary and Joseph and the babe layd in the cratch.
’ The word cratch was until recently in common use in Yorkshire for a large basket, and its antiquity is shown by the fact it occurs in a gloss in the Gospels written about the time of the Norman Conquest.
One of the five woodcut maps from the first edition of the Geneva Bible in English, printed at Geneva by Rouland Hall in 1560.
This was the edition most commonly used in England till the publication of the Authorised Version in 1611 and is often known as the ‘Breeches’ Bible from the rendering in Genesis iii.
7.
I have said enough, I think, to show that the version is a very common one and of small commercial value.
Often the title page has disappeared in the course of the centuries.
If so, the breeches and cratch references will establish the version.
Any edition of it, in good condition, will suit the collector, who should not be persuaded to pay a high price for it.
The only two comparative rarities are Hill's first edition of 1560, and the first English edition of the Geneva version, printed by Christopher Barker in 1576.
Of course, there are very valuable Bibles, both from the point of view of rarity and from their place in the history of literature and the troubled progress of religious belief.
In the service of no book have so many suffered exile, persecution, hardship and death.
No book bears the imprimatur of so many great names — Caedmon, Bede, Wycliffe, Tyndale, Coverdale, Cranmer among them; so that a collection of Bibles can be a worthy and exciting thing, even though the first editions of a number of landmarks will almost certainly be denied you.
A single leaf of the Gutenberg (or Mazarin) Latin Bible of c.1456 is likely to cost from £2,000-£3,000; even an imperfect copy of Coverdale (which is the only condition in which it occurs) will probably fetch from £5,000-£10,000 according to the nature of its  deficiencies ; and a reasonable copy of the first issue of the first edition of the Authorised Version would be hard to find for less than £2,000-£3,000.
Apart from these and some other editions and issues remarkable in one way or another, the collector can expect to have an easier time financially than in many other fields of collecting.
Sawyer and Darton put the position accurately and succinctly in English Books 1475–1900 : ‘Certain editions are valued for their peculiarities, their rarity or their beauty of production, but not, from a collector's point of view, so highly or so often as the amateur who possesses an old volume believes.‘
Let us pick up that word peculiarities.
I have already cited one example — that of the Breeches Bible — of an edition having an undeserved reputation because of an eccentricity of translation which, in fact, was not an eccentricity at all, having very respectable antecedents.
There are several others with oddities of translation, but many more with careless, and even horrifying, mistakes by printers.
Justifiably or not, these have their place among the desiderata of some collectors.
Some are reasonably  common, and therefore should be reasonably priced, some are fairly rare and correspondingly costly, and some are so scarce that, short of divine intervention, they will not be found in a lifetime.
I include them for their interest as sidelights on history, because a number, for the benefit of the collector, have been faithfully printed in facsimile, and as a reminder that, despite the plethora of them in our daily newspapers, printer's blunders are not the prerogative of our own day.
One of the craft was in a mighty hurry when he set Judas for Jesus at John vi.67, as happened in 1609; and so was his descendant in 1653 when, at Corinthians vi.9, he pronounced that ‘the unrighteous shall inherit the kingdom of God’, which must have been a great comfort to a considerable number of citizens under the Commonwealth.
To take a selection in chronological order:
The first complete Bible in the English language, translated by Coverdale, was published on 4 October 1535.
So far as I am aware, no perfect copy is known.
It contained the reading at Psalm xci.5: ‘So yt thou shalt not nede to be afrayd for eny bugges by night.
’ This translation is found in a number of later editions, so that the assiduous collector may well be able to ferret out a ‘Bug’Bible.
The word probably derives from the dialect boggart for bogies and other unpleasant denizens of the night.
Edmund Becke's 1549 revision of the so-called ‘Matthew’ version (Thomas Matthew being a fictitious name adopted to cover the true identity of the translator) was also a Bug Bible; but it is also known as the ‘Wife-beater Bible’because of Becke's annotation at I St. Peter iii.7.
The Authorised Version has: ‘Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them [i.e. wives]according to knowledge, giving honour unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of the grace of life.
’ Becke's revision reads: ‘He dwelleth wyth his wyfe accordinge to knowledge, that taketh her as a necessarye healper, and not as a bonde servaunte or a bonde slave.
’ Then, provoked by we know not what domestic disaffection, he adds: ‘And yf she be not obedient and healpfull unto hym, endevorethe to beate the feare of God into her heade, that therby she may be compelled to learne her dutie and do it.‘
Doubtless because of strong objections from the distaff side, Becke's truly Christian comment was not repeated in later editions.
A number of editions of Coverdale's translation contain the curious reading at Jeremiah viii.22: ‘there is no more Triacle [treacle]at Gilead’, which we are more familiar with as ‘no balm in Gilead’.
Find one of these copies and you will have added a ‘Treacle’ Bible to your store.
At one period in our history the Whig party was alleged to consist of ‘place men’, i.e. politicians willing to forsake any principle in order to secure a ‘place’ or Government appointment.
A 1562 edition of the Bible  ousted the peacemakers from their inheritance and, at Matthew v.9, proclaimed ‘Blessed are the place makers.’
It is not surprising that this has become known as the ‘Whig’ Bible.
The same edition made the unfortunate error of substituting ‘condemneth’ for ‘commendeth’in the St. Mark xii paraphrase ‘Christ commendeth the poore widdow.’
In 1568 Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury, published a revision of what is usually known as the Great Bible, of nearly thirty years earlier.
So many august prelates assisted him that it is called the ‘Bishops '’ Bible.
In Psalm 45 is a well-known reference to the gold of Ophir, the legendary and unidentified treasure house celebrated in Masefield's poem:
Quinquireme of Nineveh from distant Ophir
Rowing home to haven in sunny Palestine…
There has always been much speculation about the site of this region, guesses including East Africa, Abyssinia, Arabia, Spain, Armenia and Peru.
One of Parker's coadjutors contributed a remarkable note: ‘Ophir is thought to be the Ilande in the west coast, of late founde by Christopher Columbo fro whence at this day is brought most fine golde.’
The year 1599 was a bewildering one for Bibles.
Of the ten or so editions bearing that date and the London imprint ‘by the Deputies of Christopher Barker’(the Queen's printer, who held the monopoly of printing Bibles) most were printed abroad in centres such as Amsterdam and Dort and, probably, later than 1599.
They show slight variations, for example in the woodcut decorations.
One, on the separate title page of the Metrical Psalms, has the motto ‘God is my helper’ and the device of a goose, from which it derives its nickname of the ‘Goose’Bible.
In 1631 came an edition, from ‘R. Barker and the Assigns of Bill’, which stirred up more trouble than most, particularly for the printers.
From the commandment in Exodus xx.
14: ‘Thou shalt not commit adultery’ they made the catastrophic error of leaving out the word not.
It has been suggested that this was a deliberate fix to discredit the royal printer.
If so, it was very successful, for the incensed Bishop of London reported the matter to Charles I, who had the offenders brought before the Court of High Commission, where they were reprimanded and heavily fined.
Peter Heylyn gives an account in his Cyprianus Anglicus (1668):
His Majesties Printers, at or about this time, had committed a scandalous mistake in our English Bibles by leaving out the word NOT in the Seventh Commandment.
His Majesty being made acquainted with it by the Bishop of London, Order was given for calling the Printers into the High-Commission, where upon Evidence of the Fact, the  whole Impression was called in, and the Printers deeply fined, as they justly merited.
Since the whole edition was of only one thousand copies and only a small number had been circulated when the suppression was ordered, this is obviously a rare book and one that is likely to be costly unless the seller is ignorant of its history.
It is appropriately known as the ‘Wicked’ Bible.
An even rarer item is the ‘Souldiers Pocket’ Bible of 1643, a collection of short passages, mainly from the Geneva version, for the use of Cromwell's troops in the Civil War.
It was not positively identified till 1854, when an American collector described one.
Some other copies have emerged since, but it remains very scarce indeed.
The book had a strange subsequent history in that five distinct editions, totalling perhaps 50,000 copies, were reprinted for use by the Federal troops in the American Civil War (1861–65), more than two hundred years after the other Civil War.
With that number about little more than a century ago, it might be thought an easy matter to run one to earth.
Don't count on it.
Fifty years after the ‘Souldier's’ Bible had been carried in the pockets of the Roundheads to inspire them at Marston Moor and Naseby, appeared a reprint with some additions and alterations.
Published in 1693 by R. Smith ('under the Piazza of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill') with the title The Christian Soldier's Penny Bible, Shewing from the Holy Scriptures the Soldier ‘s Duty and Encouragement…fit for the Soldier ‘s or Seaman ‘s Pocket , it is thought to have been produced for our troops in Flanders.
Either they were very careless or it was a singularly destructive campaign, but there is only one copy known, in the British (Museum) Library.
Before we leave this troubled century, it may be worth noting an edition of the Bible printed in 1652 by John Field, ‘Printer to the Parliament of England’.
This is the first in which Parliament is mentioned on the title.
In 1682 a printer gave a boost to cannibalism by substituting ‘if the latter husband ate her’ instead of hate her in the verses on the Mosaic law of divorce at Deuteronomy xxiv.3.
Progressing to the next century, we arrive at an edition which might well satisfy one of Sawyer and Dartoll's criteria, that of beauty of production.
This was published at Oxford by John Baskett a printer of obscure origins who was able to acquire the patent as Royal Printer, the most lucrative monopoly in the kingdom, in 1709.
He was also astute enough to obtain a twenty-one year lease from Oxford University for their printing privilege.
In 1716–17 Baskett produced his masterpiece, a two-volume folio Bible characterised by splendid large type and fine steel engravings.
Unfortunately the fidelity of the typesetting was not   commensurate with the dignity of the design, with the result that Baskett suffered the mortification of having his edition labelled ‘A Baskett-ful of Errors’.
One occurred in the headline above Luke xx, which read ‘The Parable of the Vinegar’ instead of Vineyard.
It has since been christened the ‘Vinegar’ Bible and would be a fine (and weighty) addition to a collection, probably costing in the £200-£400 bracket.
The type, Roman and italic, is described in Baskett's stock list as ‘A very large ffount of Double Pica, new, the largest in England.’
Oxford, of course, holds a very important place in the story of the printing of the Bible since, apart from earlier editions, the copyright for printing the Authorised Version of 1611 (which, strangely enough, was never authorised in any official sense), and the Book of Common Prayer, is granted by charter to Oxford and Cambridge University Presses (and by licence to the Queen's Printers, Messrs. Eyre and Spottiswoode).
In 1881 Oxford produced ‘the rarest book produced at Oxford since the 15th century’.
Known as the Golden Gospel , it was St. John printed in gold letters on dark olive paper.
Aspirants to possession will have to rely on criminal entry, since only three copies were run off.
It is perhaps understandable that, the nearer we approach modern times, with their greater technical proficiency, the number of ‘curious’ editions should diminish.
At the same time, typographical excellence and beauty of design are easier to find.
We must not leave the eighteenth century without mention of the great typefounder and printer of Birmingham, John Baskerville (1706–75), who not only designed the famous type that bears his name but greatly improved the general standard of English printing and gave us, in 1763, one of the most splendid editions of the Bible.
This was produced in Baskerville's capacity as printer to Cambridge University, an office he held for ten years.
The original price to subscribers was four guineas unbound, but it did not sell well and was remaindered at 36s. a copy.
In a good contemporary binding it is unlikely to fetch less than £1,500-£2,000 today.
Much cheaper is the subsequent Birmingham printing of 1769–71, which will normally hover between £100 and £200.
The first issue was in 130 weekly parts at 2 % d. each, but apparently no complete set is recorded.
Passing to our own day, fine editions include the Nonesuch Press issue of 1924–27, in five volumes with engraved titles and head-pieces by Stephen Gooden; but many will give pride of place to the Doves Press The English Bible containing the Old Testament and the New , published in 1905, also in five volumes.
It was limited to five hundred copies and afterwards the type was destroyed.
I have omitted much in this survey of the centuries.
The collector must obviously have the Revised Version of 1881–95, and some other notable attempts (not, in everyone's view, attended with much success) to    improve on the Authorised Version.
He may also wish to take in such oddities as the Bible in shorthand and, if he can find them, the portions published in the dialects: of Cornwall, Cumberland, Dorset, Durham, Devonshire, etc., most of them privately printed for Prince Lucien Bonaparte, who included the Song of Solomon in twenty-four dialects among his list of nearly eighty publications, his English agent being Bernard Quaritch of 15 Piccadilly.
A French edition of the New Testament, 1826.
It is a good example of the so-called cathedral binding, i.e. one decorated in a Gothic architectural style, often incorporating a rose window.
In France the design was often blocked on the cover, i.e. imposed by a heated engraved plate set in a blocking or arming press.
Whichever way his tastes lie, and whatever the capacity of his purse and his bookshelves, it is certain that no other single work offers to the collector such variety of choice, experience and discovery as four and a half centuries of the book of which Lord Chief Justice Sir Matthew Hale (1609–76) wrote to one of his sons who had just recovered from smallpox:
I have been acquainted somewhat with men and books, and have long experience in learning, and in the world: there is no book like the Bible for excellent learning, wisdom, and use; and it is want of understanding in them that think or speak otherwise.
Completeness and Condition
Students who…may require this vast sea of books…may suffer many shipwrecks.
Isaac D'Israeli, Curiosities of Literature
The condition of a book must be seen to be realised, and condition more than anything else nowadays dictates value and will continue to dictate it.
Michael Sadleir
I have so far dealt only with what might be considered extraneous matters which are of little concern to the non-collector, who can read and enjoy a book without worrying about endpapers, half-titles, advertisements and the rest; though even the ordinary reader must reach a point where bibliographical matters begin to impinge.
Nothing can be more exasperating to the borrower of library books than to find a vital page or two missing from the denouement of his thriller.
Even so, he is in better plight than the collector, for he can at least attempt to supply the deficiency from his doubtless fertile imagination.
No such remedy is open to the dedicated book man.
His pearl is fatally flawed, and to supply the missing leaf, or leaves, in facsimile, even of the right size and type, is a desperate measure acceptable only in cases of extreme age or rarity.
He would doubtless suffer this blow to his esteem in a First Folio or a 1532 Chaucer, given half a chance, but in lesser books the wound is too serious.
The collector, then, will always examine the evidence that his book is complete in every respect and, as well as all the trimmings with which we have temporarily been preoccupied, will carefully test the completeness of the text itself.
This may seem a fairly straightforward task.
Are not all the pages numbered and therefore readily checked?
This is the most elementary method, which may serve in most modern books, but it can never be relied on with earlier examples.
Our printing forefathers were notoriously careless about their pagination.
To cite only one example, the collector following page numbers in the first edition of Walton's Compleat Angler will find that in one run of twelve pages the typesetter begins happily with 69, 80, 81, 72 and finishes with 77, 88, 89, 80.
However, the page numbers are usually not the only numbers in the text.
Look down at the foot of the page and you will probably find others, occurring not so frequently but with regularity and at fixed intervals.
If there are no numbers, there will almost certainly be letters instead; and often a combination of both.
These are ‘signatures’ and, if, in early books, the printer has set them out in sequence right at the end, perhaps with the colophon, he has supplied the ‘register of the signatures’.
Since they were provided to enable the binder to collect the various gatherings or sections in the right order before putting the covers round, much more   care was exercised with them than with the page numbering.
That is why they are a more reliable guide to completeness.
An unusual printer's note to the binder regarding signatures, from Richard Baxter's A Holy Commonwealth (1659).
In front of me is a Tudor Bible, ‘Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie’ in 1599.
It is a thick volume measuring approximately 8½ins. by 6½ins., squarish, and for everyday purposes might be described as a quarto.
Ignoring all the preliminary pages ('prelims') and reaching the ‘First Booke of Moses called GENESIS’, I find in the bottom right-hand margin the capital letter A. The next leaf is number A2.
Continuing on, the signatures run (I have put ‘ns’ where there are none): A A2 A3 A4 ns ns ns ns B B2 B3 B4 ns ns ns ns C C2 C3 C4 ns ns ns ns D D2 D3 D4 ns ns ns ns E E2 E3 E4
This numbering and lettering continues systematically till the alphabet runs out in the Book of Job and a new pattern begins with the Psalms: Aa Aa2 Aa3 Aa4 ns ns ns ns Bb Bb2 Bb3 Bb4 ns ns ns ns Cc Cc2 Cc3 Cc4 ns ns ns ns Dd Dd2 Dd3 Dd4 ns ns ns ns Ee Ee2 Ee3 Ee4
By the end of the Old Testament the printer had again reached the end of the alphabet and started all over again, this time with Aaa Aaa2 Aaa3, etc., till he finally ran out, at the end of the Book of Revelation and the ‘Table’, with the Rrr signatures.
It will be observed, in running through the complete signatures of a book, that there is no J, no U and no W — an indication of what sticklers for tradition we are.
In early manuscripts and books using the Latin alphabet J and U were written I and V as capitals and there was a good deal of indiscriminate use even in the lower case (e.g. Maiestie above).
There was no W, since it was not reckoned a proper letter in its own right, but only a double U, which is how we pronounce it.
There are exceptions to this practice.
American books often used the whole alphabet, but were not consistent, some printers being faithful to their origins, some insisting on independence.
Returning to our table of signatures, what do they teach us about this particular Bible?
It is apparent that they are running in groups of eight, the workman ‘signing’ the first four in each case.
He had folded his sheet three times, giving himself eight leaves (sixteen pages) in each section or gathering.
Thus, despite the temporary appraisal by eye, the book is an octavo, not a quarto — a fact established by checking the signatures.
By chance, this is a very tidy ‘signing’.
Often it will be found that a text starts with the B signatures, the preliminaries rarely being so obliging as to add up to a complete signature.
A signature at the foot of the dedication in a book from the press of Aldus Manutius, Venice, 1569.
Since this is part of the preliminaries, the page, as was frequently the custom, was signed with an asterisk instead of a letter, the letters beginning with the main text.
Page from Charles Evelyn's The Lady ‘s Recreation…the Art of Gardening Improv'd (1717), showing at the foot a typical catchword.
The syllables ‘nagement’ are repeated in the first line of the next page.
I open another book, this time William Camden's Remaines of a Greater Worke, concerning Britaine …(1605), where the printer had rather more trouble at the outset.
This time, following the free endpaper and title-page, we have: A3 ns B B2 B3 ns C C2 C3 ns D D2 D3 ns E E2 E3 ns and so on, till we eventually finish at Hh2.
This time, each sheet had been folded twice to give four leaves (eight pages) in a gathering, and the book is therefore a quarto (4to).
If further confirmation is needed, the chain lines are running horizontally and the watermark is hovering in the centre of the page on the inner margin.
As a matter of interest, the printer's pagination in one place runs 65, 66, 76, 68, 69, 70 — reinforcing the statement that signatures should be relied on rather than page numbers when it is important to be completely sure.
I have given here only a superficial account of the business of signatures but sufficient, I hope, to indicate something of their history, use and worth.
Those who delight in complexities and wish to pursue the matter further will find a number of adequate textbooks and sources of information which will be pointed out with fiendish delight by any qualified librarian, since he has had to run the whole gamut in preparing for his examinations.
There is one ancillary, but useful, method of checking completeness, which is by the ‘catchwords’, not often used today, but formerly courteously provided at the lower right-hand corner of each page of a book, below the last line.
This is the same as the first word on the next page.
If, therefore, the catchword and first word do not agree, there is likely to be something wrong.
Catchwords are particularly vulnerable when the pages are being trimmed and may have been removed by clumsy cropping.
Confusion sometimes arises over the use of the words ‘book’ and ‘volume’, normally regarded as almost interchangeable, but taking on a special meaning, often indicated by the title-page, when applied to the make-up of a complete work.
One which is too large to be housed conveniently between one pair of covers is often split into two, four, six, eight or ten volumes each separately bound.
If you have shelf room, there is a 1784–89 set of Voltaire in seventy volumes, and Bell issued an attractive edition of the Poets (usually called Johnson's) in seventy-five small volumes.
Sometimes the original number of volumes is found to be inconvenient and a work is compressed, and so that we can get ‘four volumes in two’, ‘eight volumes in four’, etc.
Both make-ups can be available at the same time and, so far as value goes, there is nothing to choose between them.
Thus, a great work such as William Daniell and Richard Ayton's Voyage Round Great Britain , mentioned in Chapter 4, is offered either in eight    volumes or in four ('eight volumes in four'), even though the title-page may still say ‘in eight volumes’.
One volume, but two books: title-page of Mathematical Magick (1680), which described four methods of flight:(1) by spirits or Angels;(2) by the help of fowls;(3) by wings fastened to the body;(4) by a flying chariot.
Books, in the special sense, are a different matter.
On the title-page ‘in five books’ or ‘libri V’means that the author has divided his work into five main sections, all of which can be contained in one volume.
Though each volume of a work will normally have a separate title-page, each book will almost certainly not.
Chapman's famous translation of Homer, which sent Keats into ecstasies, is in twenty-four books, but they are contained comfortably in one folio volume.
One very simple little point, surprisingly often overlooked: if you find ‘Finis’ or ‘The End’, you will know that the goal is reached.
If it says ‘End of Vol. 1’ or ‘End of Vol. 5’you will know there is more to come and the set is not complete.
Often the publisher will make all clear by putting ‘End of fourth and last volume’.
Though separate volumes sometimes have their own index, it is more usual to have a complete index at the end of the final volume, and the presence of this can sometimes be a useful guide.
Only in a very few cases can incompleteness be acceptable.
You will sometimes see in a catalogue, or noted by a bookseller inside the cover, ‘All published’.
This means that, although it was originally intended to publish a longer work, it was never completed and that the three volumes out of the planned six, or some other combination, are all that will ever be available, unless some other author is eventually commissioned to complete the job.
In such cases, the publication has status and will be priced accordingly.
H.S. Lecky got less than half way through his The King's Ships (1913–14), giving a history, in alphabetical order of name, of the ships of the Royal Navy.
But it is still a valuable work, and will be listed as ‘all published’.
We must, of course, go further than the signed pages when dealing with an illustrated work.
‘Plates’, that is, whole page illustrations printed separately from the main text, and often on different paper, are not part of the original gathering and are therefore not signed.
Sometimes, but not always, the author has supplied a list of plates and where they should appear in the book; sometimes, but not always, this can be relied upon, since plates apparently missing have an odd habit of turning up in some other spot; sometimes, but not always, the plates themselves are numbered, which makes life easier.
You will often find, usually at the end, the optimistic author's ‘Instructions to the Binder’ for placing the plates; and, as frequently, discover that the disobliging fellow, doubtless resenting such autocracy, has made up his own mind about it.
More crimes are committed with illustrated books, especially in certain categories, than with any others, owing to the operations of the ‘breaker’, the dealer (and sometimes, regrettably, the collector) who will ruthlessly      destroy a perfectly good book because the total value of the separate plates or maps, sold individually, is more than the intact volume would ordinarily be.
Take, for example, a good copy of Camden's Britannia , Gibson's 1695 edition with its fifty fine double-page maps by Robert Morden.
It regularly fetches £400-£600.
Its fifty maps, according to county (and especially when attractively coloured) will fetch anything from £30 to £200 each, there being a greater demand for the Home Counties and certain others.
If we take an average selling price of £50, the breaker stands to make £2,500, a tempting proposition.
This sort of book is regularly stolen, despite security precautions.
An example of ‘all published’, from Dantzig, 1678.
Note (1) the Emperor's licence to print, contained in the rectangular frame;(2) the unusual arrangement of Roman numerals (see Appendix I).
Another uncommon feature is that the author has signed the title.
Another example of ‘all published’, though ‘the first part’ on the title would normally lead one to expect more.
Even unfinished, since it is an important alchemical work, it is probably worth £5,000-£6,000.
The same treatment is accorded to fine hand-coloured and aquatint plate books containing noteworthy topographical views and military and sporting subjects.
Book-destroyers of this kind, especially when they blatantly advertise their wares as suitable for breaking and framing for an inn, a billiard room or boudoir, act only in the cause of financial gain and have no respect for the qualities to be found in a complete book.
I recall a fine falconry work where some plates had been extracted by the owner for this purpose, a Peter Pan Portfolio despoiled by a feminine hand, and a number of other examples.
I have just seen in a saleroom catalogue a single manuscript leaf from an early fourteenth century Bible, patiently and diligently written by a scribe in Southern France, illuminated, historiated and decorated' in gold, red and blue.
Its whole history is known and is a sad example of cupidity overriding respect for beauty and history.
For years it was in the library of a Spanish noble house, from whence it was acquired by Thomas Thorp (1791–1851), a baker who took to bookselling in Bedford Street, Piccadilly and Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.
He specialised in gathering historical, topographical and genealogical documents and manuscripts, so was a great source of supply for Sir Thomas Phillipps (see pp.29–30) who at one time owed him £3,000.
Phillipps bought the two-volume monastic Bible from him and it acquired the Mill Hill number MS 2506.
In January 1921 it was purchased privately from the Phillipps collection by Sir Alfred Chester Beatty (1875–1968), the mining magnate whose chief hobby was the collection of manuscripts conspicuous for their calligraphy and decoration.
In 1955 the Bible was exhibited at Trinity College, Dublin.
After the Chester Beatty sale of 1969 it passed into the hands of a well-known London bookseller, Alan G. Thomas (who in 1975 published a fine book,Great Books and Book Collectors ).
He sold it to an American bookseller, who broke up the historic volumes that had survived the hazards of more than six centuries.
Separate leaves have been appearing and reappearing since, the current value of good   specimens being £200-£400.
Even more recently a whole catalogue has been devoted to single leaves and cut-out miniatures from despoiled manuscripts.
In condemning such acts of desecration, I am of the opinion that the only exception that could be made is in the case of books already seriously incomplete and in bad condition, when the completion of its unhappy disintegration may be forgivable.
Such a book, along with the executioner himself, is called a ‘breaker’, and will normally be sold w.a.f. ('with all faults').
There is a small category of books where incompleteness, for one reason or another, is almost the rule, so that it is accepted as the norm.
Thus, a cataloguer can write with a reasonably happy heart, of Ackermann's History of the University of Cambridge (1814): ‘81 plates, including 15 of costume, but lacking the 32 supplementary portraits of the Founders’, knowing that he can still be comfortably sure of his £1,500-£2,000.
James Jenkins's The Naval Achievements of Great Britain (c. 1820) has a splendid array of coloured aquatints, but can almost never be found with the two portraits of Nelson and Howe.
Even without them, it is still worth in the region of £2,000.
The importance of general condition cannot be overstressed.
Completeness and condition are two different things; for a book can be complete but in very poor condition and, conversely, incomplete but otherwise in very good state.
The booksellers' and auctioneers' vocabulary concerning condition is a very extensive one and varies greatly from cataloguer to cataloguer.
I offer the following as a partial guide:
Sound: past its prime and beginning to show it.
Suitable for rebinding: very badly in need of it; alternatively,
wanting £40 spent on a £10 book.
Reading copy: fit for nothing else.
Working copy: not likely to withstand further toil.
Sophisticated: dressed-up, faked-up and with face lifted.
Honest copy: not attempting to hide its many imperfections.
The true collector should never allow himself to be beguiled into buying an unworthy copy of a book.
He should take a very good look at it and, even more important, handle it.
Is the binding loose?
Are the hinges beginning to weaken?
Has some moron tried to strengthen them with yellowing tape?
Are the spine and boards badly scuffed or rubbed?(the euphemistically-minded cataloguer may say ‘chafed’, the French, more elegantly, ‘tired’).
Are the bottom corners bruised and in need of building up?
Has the book been rebacked?(not a serious fault if the work has been expertly done.
It should be almost imperceptible).
When the book is opened, does it lie comfortably flat or is there marked constraint, indicating a plethora of new glue somewhere?
Even the great binders can occasionally be at fault.
The collector Frederick Locker Lampson once protested to the famous Bedford that one of his bindings was too tight.
Doubtless with his tongue in his cheek, Bedford replied: ‘But Mr. Lampson, you must have been opening the book.’
Chipped and hinges weakening: seventeenth century volumes feeling their years.
Rubbed and rebacked.
A bad attack of foxing.
Two volumes of Bohn's edition of Lowndes's Bibliographer's Manual, the headbands betraying rough handling.
The plates and text should be scanned to see if ‘foxing’ is unacceptably bad.
Foxing was a term first used in about the 1840s, probably because the brownish-yellow spots and blotches reminded some fox-hunting bibliophile of his quarry in the countryside.
They are caused by micro-organisms feeding on the size and cellulose fibres and seem to attack certain types of books more than others, perhaps because of the quality of the paper or some fault in its manufacture.
Certainly damp and bad ventilation foster it.
It will be an unusually dishonest catalogue that does not have to mention it somewhere.
‘Foxed as usual’, ‘margins foxed but plates clean’, ‘badly foxed in Vol.
I’, ‘light foxing only’, will be the sort of descriptions encountered.
The buyer has two courses open to him — he can live with the foxing or try to have it removed.
The pages can be immersed in a solution of hypochloride and bleached till the stains, if they are not too recalcitrant, have disappeared.
Then the paper will be washed clean with running water; and, if a proper job is to be made of it, resized and even retoned.
It should be clear that such a restoration is not to be undertaken lightly, and it should be entrusted only to a skilled professional.
There can be little doubt that the process tends to alter the original character and ‘feel’ of a book, and only the owner can decide whether this should be accepted as part of the price for turning a blighted copy into a reasonably healthy one.
Don't look too surprised if you see an experienced bookseller sniffing an old book of very good appearance.
He is not engaged in some new and unnatural vice.
If you have a sensitive nose, you yourself will be able to detect if some washing operation has been carried out, since the chemicals used tend to leave a lingering smell, especially along the inner margins.
Worm holes are another blemish which should be noted by cataloguers, even though their presence will not normally be taken as a good reason for returning a book.
They are almost in the category of honourable scars, and even some testimony to the quality of the text, since the larvae of the several types of beetle engaged in the battle seem to have thrived best on old and scholarly works, especially incunabula.
Report has it that they have now virtually committed racial suicide, declining to accept the deplorable standards of modern literature and paper.
The recommended treatment for infested books is to put them into a sealed tin with a jar of paradichlorobenzine for a week.
To sum all this up, if, on inspection, a book scores low marks and is a reasonably common item, have nothing more to do with it.
There is a  better copy round the corner or at the next sale.
There is nothing more depressing than a collection of so-called first editions and rare items displaying faded spines, mull bursting through cracked hinges, scarred leather inadequately treated with greasy polish, mending tape of various hues round the spine, head and tail bands hanging forlornly and, perhaps worst of all, a badly lettered brown paper cover holding the whole thing together.
Better ten books in good condition than a hundred cripples.
There are very occasional exceptions to this round condemnation.
There are certain books, in almost any field, that are so rare that the collector is very unlikely to find a copy in good condition and, perforce, will have to make do with second, third, or tenth best.
To take the most extreme case, the first English comedy is generally reckoned to be Nicholas Udall's Ralph Roister-Doister (date uncertain, but c.1560).
The only copy known in the world is the one at Eton College, where Udall was headmaster, and that has no title-page.
Clearly, if you or I should happen to chance on a second, battered and with a dozen pages adrift, we should be happy to buy it for a modest sum.
There are many other books, even if they are not in quite so exclusive a category, that are unlikely to be found in any form at all; to take a miscellaneous selection, Wordsworth's and Coleridge's Lyrical Ballads (1798); the suppressed first edition of Alice in Wonderland (1865); the first edition, first issue, of Fergus (Ferguson Wright) Hume's Mystery of a Hansom Cab (1886), John Bunyan's Book for Boys and Girls: or, Country Rhimes for Children (1686) and Edgar Allan Poe's Tamerlane (1827).
Of Tennyson's The Lover's Tale (1833) only six copies were printed.
Of some books which are known from records and letters to have existed, no copies at all are known to have survived.
So that, in assessing condition and completeness, the question of rarity must play an important part.
Rarity is caused by a number of factors — the passage of time, the small number printed, the obscurity of the publisher and printer, suppression by authority or the author himself, accident, or deliberate destruction.
Volumes I and II of the four-volume second edition of John Hutchins's History and Antiquities of the County of Dorset are very rare owing to a disastrous fire.
According to the Bronte sisters, Aylott and Jones, the publishers of their Poems (1846), sold only two copies.
According to another report, many of the sheets of Hume's Mystery of a Hansom Cab were blown away from a street barrow.
Some early Thomas Hardy was remaindered by the publisher.
You will come across many definitions of rarity and, judging from catalogues and the like, surprisingly many different standards in assessing it.
As John Carter has observed, such attempts at definition are a favourite game among bibliophiles.
My personal effort is: ‘A rare book is one I can't find, and can't afford when found.’
The Care of Books
…neither suffer them through negligence to mould and be moth-eaten or want their strings and covers.
H. Peacham, The Compleat Gentleman
Let no book perish, unless it be such an one as it is your duty to throw on the fire.
There is no such thing as a worthless book, though there are some far worse than worthless; no book which is not worth preserving, if its existence may be tolerated; as there are some men whom it may be proper to hang, but none who should be suffered to starve.
Hartley Coleridge, Biographia Borealis
It is a sad thing that so many so-called book lovers are book spoilers in some degree or other, through carelessness, neglect or indifference.
They have earned their special opprobrium in the word biblioclast (book destroyer).
The famous are not exempt from blame.
Johnson, in his periodic spring cleanings, had a habit of donning large gloves and lustily banging his books together amid clouds of dust before returning them to their shelves shaken and contused.
As I have noted elsewhere, Shelley was known to tear out fly leaves in order to make paper boats.
William Morris threw a fifteenth century quarto, so valuable that he would permit no one else to handle it, at the head of someone who annoyed him.
Charles Lamb, an inveterate reader at the table, confessed that his copy of Milton might be found ‘in certain parts dirtied and soiled with a crumb of right Gloucester blacked in the candle.’
As has already been noted, James Thomson opened his books with a candle-snuffer, and Wordsworth with a greasy butter-knife.
Edward Fitzgerald, who translated Omar Khayyam, tore out from his books pages that did not please him.
Charles Darwin would cut a heavy book in halves to make it more convenient to handle, and fix broken sections together with strong metal clips.
I take leave to assume that none of my readers belong to this scapegrace company, but wish to cherish their possessions.
A good deal of the care of them is common sense, but it is extraordinary what an uncommon quality that is when it comes to books.
When a book is opened, and either held in the hand or placed on a  table, the front cover and hinge are immediately subjected to strain, especially if the volume is a thick and heavy one.
Be merciful.
Whichever hand it is held in, ensure that the fingers are supporting the other cover.
If you have visitors who let the cover droop helplessly, like a child raised by one arm and dangling in mid-air, cross them off your visiting list so far as your books are concerned.
If the volume is laid on desk or table, place another book, or something of equivalent thickness beneath the upper cover.
Many bookcases and sets of shelves displayed in furniture shops were never designed by a book man or anyone well acquainted with books, especially where sizes are concerned.
If you are ordering, designing or making shelves, take the precaution of measuring a fair sample of your collection.
You will find that a large proportion of them need a good ten inches between shelves, not forgetting that there must be ample room for them to be gently eased out and not hooked by the headband.
A quarto is likely to need all of twelve inches, a folio correspondingly more, if you are not to be reduced to laying it on its side.
There are very few books that are comfortable with less than eight inches.
Remember that books are weighty things.
Shelves, if made of wood, will need to be at least three-quarters of an inch thick and preferably a little more; and they should be supported every three feet or so.
Nothing looks more lamentably depressing than shelves sagging wearily in the middle, with decent books struggling to maintain a dignified upright posture.
I have said nothing of metal, believing it to be offensive to any right-minded book lover, at least in his own home.
Remember that books need to breathe.
Give them room to be taken easily from their shelves, not wrenched and twisted from their tightly packed companions.
Desirable though they may be in special circumstances, I have always conducted a personal vendetta against glazed cabinets and patented bookcases with evil and malicious sliding and lifting glass panels.
Nothing can be finer for honest books than to stand unashamed and free to the air.
A soft feather duster need be their only guardian; and, anyway, a thin layer of dust keeps off other dust.
Damp is a formidable enemy and too much warmth as great a one, especially where leather bindings are concerned.
Central heating can be as serious a scourge to fine old books as it is to fine old furniture.
Vellum can become harsh, brittle and buckled.
Calf and morocco can dry out to become lifeless and lustreless, instead of sprightly and glowing.
Remember that they are made of the hide of good beasts and still appreciate feeding, even after three or four hundred years.
Toilet lanolin, obtainable from any chemist, with its base of an oily substance extracted from wool, is an adequate curative, rubbed well into the leather and polished off after several days.
Even better, after gentle cleaning, is a      preparation known as Boots C1590, compounded of lanolin, hexane, cedarwood oil and beeswax.
I have known a derelict country house collection rescued with it and have seen ancient college and cathedral libraries brought back to serene life after decades of neglect.
The British Museum formula (which is non-proprietary) using these ingredients is:
Frontispiece of Thomas Moule's Bibliotheca Heraldica Magnae Britanniae (1822) and, right, the title page of the same book showing the shadowy off-set of Moule's portrait.
If you attempt the brew yourself, the beeswax should first be dissolved in the hexane, then the lanolin added and, finally, the cedarwood oil.
The hexane is very inflammable and neither it, nor the resulting thin yellow cream, should be used near a flame.
The mixture should always be well shaken before use.
When life and substance have been restored, an occasional polish with a microcrystalline wax will keep a good sheen on calf bindings.
Parchment and vellum should be approached with great caution, since they are not likely to respond to ordinary cleaning methods; but the firm Archival Aids, of High Wycombe, Bucks, which specialises in the safe treatment of early records, has marketed a non-abrasive powdered rubber which may be applied with safety and will remove at least surface dust and dirt.
Tempting though they are, books should not be regarded as natural repositories or presses, especially for botanical specimens.
The book-collector becomes familiar with the ‘off-set’, which is the accidental transfer, in a rather tasteful brown shade, of ink from a printed page or illustration to the opposite page.
Vegetable juice is even less desirable, and the resulting plant print rarely has any relevance to the text Elizabeth Barrett Browning gave us a gentle reminder in Aurora Leigh :
Silly girls
Who plant their flowers in our philosophy
To make it fine, and only spoil the book!
No more of it, Aurora.
So far as actual repairs to defective books are concerned, I hope I have said enough in earlier pages to discourage collectors from attempting them, unless they submit themselves to attending one of the excellent courses arranged in some centres of education.
If a professional binder is employed, make very sure that he is what he sets out to be and has all the qualities of sensitive craftsmanship the work demands.
It is unfortunately all too common an experience to see so-called expert work resulting in a  garish meretriciousness quite unsuitable for, and unworthy of, the original book.
Hartley Coleridge, already quoted at the head of this chapter, had the rights of it:
The binding of a book should always suit its complexion.
Pages, venerably yellow, should not be cased in military morocco, but in sober brown russia…
How absurd to see the works of William Penn in flaming scarlet, and George Fox's Journal in Bishop's purple!
Ephemera
To sift the good from the bad in the daily onset taxes all our wits…no use battling against such a stream; all the shouting, the crying and the spluttering of all times have not arrested it, nor will they, for rubbish is necessary... thistledown blown hither and thither by the wind.
Holbrook Jackson, The Anatomy of Bibliomania
Literally speaking, ephemera are things that last only a day; in the more accepted sense, things destined to endure only a short time; but, by a curious paradox, in the most modern sense, things which have, in fact, long survived their predestined span.
Though, doubtless, man has always been a jackdaw, a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles, the recognition of ephemera as a legitimate and respectable sphere of collecting is a comparatively modern phenomenon, its devotees now having their own Society and special sales organised by reputable auctioneers who not long ago would have looked down their noses at the trivia they are now, in the name of Mammon, glad to catalogue.
I have hesitated about including a small section on this sort of material in a volume on book-collecting, since the ephemera umbrella seems to cover an extraordinary variety of objects; including music hall songs, palm prints, cigarette packets, orange wrappers, ‘peep’ eggs, bridge score cards, menus, embroidery patterns, watchmaker's labels, tram tickets and commemorative tins; to say nothing of posters proclaiming the merits of various soaps, female herbal pills, bilious and liver medicaments.
On the other hand, I note that sales include material which is the legitimate concern of the book-collector, such as official proclamations, periodicals, almanacks, children's exercise books and writing sheets, albums, Acts of Parliament and broadsides.
Although there is some laxity in the use of the term, ‘broadside’ or ‘broadsheet’should properly be applied only to a complete, undivided large sheet, printed on one side.
In fact, the description ‘single sheet’ is sometimes found.
Interestingly enough, broadside probably derives from the naval tactic of firing all the guns from one side of a ship of war at once, without giving the recipient the necessity of awaiting  installments Such    sheets are of historic importance, since they date back to the sixteenth century, when popular poems and ballads were issued in this form; and royal and official proclamations took to the streets in this guise almost from the first days of printing.
Through the centuries politicians, protestors and agitators of every sort found them invaluable for smiting the public eye; and, in their most debased form, they were used by such printers as James Catnach (1792–1841) of the Seven Dials, London, to convey to sensation seekers scaffold speeches by murderers and other criminals, often before the rogues had uttered a word or given any sign that they intended to.
A group of provincial ‘battledores’ from Gainsborough, Kettering, Castle Cary, etc.
Descendants of the earlier hornbooks for the instruction of children, they were usually printed on coloured card.
A point of typographical interest is that the printers of broadside notices and ballads continued to use the old ‘black letter’ or Gothic founts of type long after they had been discarded in favour of the Roman letter for printed books; so that many of them can take us back in spirit and atmosphere to the Gutenberg Bible and Caxton working at the Sign of the Red Pale in Westminster.
The term ‘black-letter’ ballad is sometimes found.
At the peak of their literary importance, broadside sheets were used for poems by men of such eminence as John Dryden (1631–1700), and publications of this nature could certainly find a fit home with any book-collector.
A single sheet printing of Dryden's The Epilogue…
Spoke before His Majesty at Oxford, March 19, 1680 has fetched nearly £1,000.
An attractive broadside group are the so-called Beadle and Bellman's Verses, addressed in the first half of the nineteenth century to such town and city dwellers as ‘the worthy inhabitants of the Parish of Barnes, Surrey’ or ‘the worthy masters and mistresses of the Holborn End Division of the Parish of St. Giles in the Fields’and designed to be proclaimed by the public crier or parish bellman.
With such decorations as Christmas scenes they often brought an additional touch of jollity at special festivities.
Other ‘collectables’ are the single sheet almanacks of the tradesman and workshop variety, and the products of the perennial ‘Old Moore’who, possessed of the secret of eternal youth, began prophesying in 1699 and is still going strong.
The original was Francis Moore, a versatile citizen of Lambeth who was at once schoolmaster, astrologer and physician.
He was probably the first ‘weather-man’, using the medium of the broadsheet instead of television and radio.
Their comparative accuracy has never, to my knowledge, been studied.
The broadsheet idea, or at least the name, was borrowed by The Times newspaper in the First World War, when it organised the printing and distribution of literary extracts, reminiscent of home, for the comfort of the troops.
Printed on thin single sheets, suitable for enclosing in an envelope, they were a considerable success.
They were truly ephemeral     and complete sets are now very rare.
Another venture which resurrected the broadside idea was the Flying Fame Press founded in 1912 by Holbrook Jackson, Claude Lovat Fraser and Ralph Hodgson.
It printed prose and verse in broadside and chapbook form till its activities were cut short by the War.
A 1624 broadside publication of Nicholas Breton's The Shepheard's Delight and Thomas Deloney's A pleasant new Ballad of Daphne; black letter on a single folio sheet.
An early nineteenth century broadside naval recruiting poster, original size approx. 24ins. by 14½ins.
A recent auction sale brought to my mind the fascinating subject of tally sticks, which could make a wonderfully interesting and historically interesting collection.
Unfortunately they make admirable firewood, and vast numbers have been destroyed deliberately or by accident.
In 1834 reforming zealots destroyed a vast collection of Exchequer tallies in the furnaces of the House of Lords, and through the centuries they have been thoughtlessly thrown out and destroyed in the same way that, after a period, we ourselves dump old bills and receipts.
Essentially, this is what tallies were, wooden sticks used in accounting and common all over Europe.
When, for example, money was paid into the Royal Exchequer, a stick was notched and split into two parts, payer and payee retaining one each.
In cases of dispute the two halves would be matched to see if the notches corresponded.
We still complain that accounts and statements do not ‘tally’.
One half of the stick was known as the ‘stock’, the origin of our modern word in ‘stocks and shares’.
Notches on tallies were an early way of scoring in cricket matches, and people are still said to ‘notch up’ a good score, just as one can still hear a commentator say that a free-scoring batsman is ‘in good nick’.
Surprisingly, the last official tally-making at Westminster was as late as 1826.
In 1909, almost by accident, the ‘stocks’ of about 1,300 medieval Exchequer tallies were discovered.
The old official tallies were about 9ins. long, though I believe the Bank of England treasures one majestic example of 8ft. 6ins.
At the auction sale mentioned above, a tally stick belonging to Sir Thomas Phillipps and recording the delivery of horses and  wagons of hay at Carlisle for Edward I's Scottish campaign of 1306, along with five relevant documents, fetched £2,400 against a pre-sale estimate of £400-£600.
A section of printed ephemera with its own special charm is that consisting of the small mementoes which a number of printing houses struck off to amuse and honour visitors.
The name and date were inserted in a decorative framework, this probably being kept standing for immediate use when sightseers arrived.
The visitor was often allowed to pull the press and, at least in some places, in return for watching the setting of the type and the privilege of carrying away the souvenir, was expected to buy beer for the workmen.
The Sheldonian Theatre in Oxford was one popular centre for this divertissement and Celia Fiennes, who chronicled her seventeenth century journeys, records that she was there in 1694 and printed her name several times.
Most surviving examples date from the eighteenth century, by which time the decoration became         increasingly elaborate and stylised.
In the next century the practice petered out, though it was still occasionally revived for particularly distinguished visitors, who might expect to have their names recorded on silk or satin rather than plebeian paper.
Perhaps the last feeble kick of this lust to print one's name was the station platform and amusement arcade machine where, on inserting a penny, one was able to punch one's name on a metal strip, which the contraption disgorged on the pull of a handle.
A group of nineteenth century greeting cards and valentines, types of ephemera now a popular field of collecting.
Nineteenth century ephemera, including table games, playing cards, a hieroglyphic card (one where small pictures are substituted for a number of letters or syllables) and (centre) a ‘zoetrope’ or ‘wheel of life’, an early motion-picture toy.
Souvenir of the great freeze of 1740 printed ‘on Ice upon the Thames at Queen-Hithe’.
The elaborate allegorical framework was left standing.
John Matcham's name was set by the printer and the ‘woollcomber’ pulled the press.
Of this ‘unheard of frost’ one chronicler recorded that ‘Men felt so oppressed that days passed by unheeded.
One…could hardly speak; one sat and thought, yet could not think…the trees split asunder.
Not only beer, but wine in cellars froze…
No bread was eatable, for it was as cold and hard as a stone.’
Note the 1739/40 dating.
For an explanation, see Appendix II.
Oxford, in fact, houses one of the best collections of printed ephemera assembled by Doctor John Johnson, printer to the University from 1925–46.
His profound scholarship is reflected in his catalogue of Greek and Roman papyri in the Rylands Library at Manchester; but he also found delight in small and simple things produced by more humble establishments than University Presses, such as cotton-reel labels, trade cards, valentines, playbills, almanacks, grocery bags and much else.
Among printers' mementoes, one should not forget the special examples, in the nature of things not easy to find because of the infrequency of the occasions, produced by presses set up on frozen rivers, such as the Thames and Severn.
In 1684 Croom, a printer of Bride Lane had such a press which was patronised by Charles II and his court mingling with the crowds on the ice.
John Evelyn records of the same occasion:
January 24th.
The frost continuing more and more severe, the Thames before London was still planted with booths in formal streets, all sorts of trades and shops furnished and full of commodities, even to a printing press, where the people and ladies took a fancy to have their names printed, and the day and year set down when printed on the Thames.
Since they have their own Society and Journal, collectors of bookplates may object to them being categorised as ephemera, but they are certainly among the periphera of interest to book-collectors.
Often known as ex libris('from the books of…‘), they are divided by experts into a number of well-defined categories, according to style and period.
A less elaborate version is the book-label or book-ticket, which is smaller and often carries only the owner's name.
Bookplates, attached to the front paste-down or, less frequently, to the free endpaper, are often readily detachable.
If they originate from some person of eminence they have, of course, additional prestige; but they are prized in their own right because many are beautiful in themselves and are representative of their time and place.
Since they can be removed, they can also be inserted, and any book that carries a distinguished plate should be scrutinised with care to see if there are signs of an earlier bookplate beneath or of recent addition.
Forgeries of coveted plates, such as George Washington's, William Penn's and Lord Nelson's are not unknown and, since a number of the original copper-plates have survived, later ‘strikes’ have been common.
There are also special plates printed by auctioneers when they are selling off the library of some eminent man, or put in by librarians to denote a special gift or legacy of books.
Sometimes a descendant has resurrected the bookplate of an ancestor and used it in later books, if necessary cutting off the original name.
Bookplates of Richard Towneley (an early dated example), Queen Victoria and Horace Walpole's Strawberry Hill.
Gordon Craig once said that ‘a bookplate is to the book what a collar is to the dog’— a wisecrack not wholly true, since the purpose of the plate is not to enable a book to be led round by its owner, or even for it to be returned by the police when lost.
True, some plates seem to have been designed as a reminder, sometimes polite, sometimes far from it, that the volume has strayed from its proper home.
Brian North Lee, in British
Bookplates quotes a label printed ‘From a bedroom in Arundel Castle’.
Such a book could conceivably be returned openly with only a modest blush; but another labelled ‘Stolen from…’ would necessitate a more surreptitious means of restoration to its owner.
Bookplates have an ancient and honourable history both in England and on the Continent.
Albrecht Dürer designed them as early as 1500 or before.
Cardinal Wolsey used one, 1515–34, as did Sir Nicholas Bacon, father of Sir Francis.
France, Holland and Italy can all claim early examples.
In America the first so far discovered dates from 1674, but the most prized plates, e.g. those of Washington and Paul Revere, occur a hundred years afterwards.
Their charm and variety are endless, depicting, as they do, alluring piles of books, scholars at their labours, proud armorial bearings, ancestral homes, gardens, landscapes, allegories, even the likeness of owners, as in the case of Samuel Pepys and James Gibbs, the architect.
You may see the location of Ellen Terry's cottage at Winchelsea, the billowing sail of Captain Locker's ship (see p.200–201), the Tower of London (as used on the Public Record Office plate), the crest of Charles Dickens, to which he was not entitled, having annexed it from a 1625 grant to William Dickens, and the forty quarterings of the arms of Sir Francis Fust.
Famous artists have contributed, Holbein, Hogarth, Bewick, Bartolozzi, Vertue, Kate Greenaway, Reynolds Stone.
The characteristic styles of great architects and designers may be seen clearly reflected — Chippendale, Sheraton, Adam and Hepplewhite.
One of the attractions of bookplate collecting is that it can be relatively inexpensive.
Leaving aside the famous names, which will inevitably be       more costly, great numbers of obscure and humble folk have chosen this friendly and attractive method of identifying their precious books and have thereby secured a small niche in the history of bibliophily.
Considerable collections can often be acquired in a single auction room lot.
Bookplates of Lord Rodney, Robert Harley of Brampton Castle and Mr. Cumberland (designed by William Blake).
An early Australian photograph, c. 1885, typical of topographical ephemera now much sought after.
Among book ephemera I must also spare a paragraph for the modest bookmark, much neglected and too little chronicled.2 I do not, of course, refer to improvised examples such as scraps of brown paper and bacon rinds, but to the commercially produced strips of silk, paper and card, some of them elaborately lettered and decorated, deckled, frilled, tassled and ribboned.
Some of the best were produced at Coventry in the last century.
The best collection I ever knew had cost its owner not a penny.
He was a Nottingham bookseller who, over the years, had abstracted from the volumes that came into his shop countless examples reflecting an extraordinary diversity of art, quotation and opinion, good and very bad.
He had unfortunately proceeded to mar them by fastening them to strips of card with paper clips, which had rusted and left their foul trail on the bookmarks.
As one who, to the detriment of temper, finger tips and nails, has removed them in their thousands from letters and archives, I implore mercy from any like-minded custodians.
A note on a field of collecting which shows every sign of becoming more than a passing fad — that of old cheques.
The book-collector can obviously fight his corner here with examples from well-known authors and historic figures who either drew the cheques or were at the receiving end.
£20-£40 is at present the going rate for good examples.
The value of early photographs has also risen sharply in recent years, especially those of topographical significance.
Handwritten ephemera have a special interest, bringing as they do a   sense of intimacy, of closeness to the people concerned, that does not belong to the printed word.
Tradesmen's bills, recipes, nurserymen's lists of plants, school prospectuses, old exercise books and writing sheets, programmes and invitations, all the domestic and commercial trivia from before the days of typewriters, are typical.
Bill presented by George Cruikshank, 1848 (see overleaf).
From my own collection I cherish a small bill presented by the artist George Cruikshank (1792–1878) in the form of a tiny letter which, when folded, measures only about 1 ½ ins. by 2ins. and is marked ‘wait’ on the outside.
Opened up, it contains only a rapid sketch of the artist's hand holding a supplicatory top hat, above the characteristic signature.
I was fortunate to find between the leaves of a large book an exquisitely penned transcription of the Commandments and the Lord's Prayer, all embraced in a delicate architectural framework, dating from the late eighteenth century.
It was by the celebrated Matthew Buchinger, born in Germany without legs and only short stumps of arms without hands.
He settled in London and astounded the country by the extent to which he was able to overcome his disastrous physical handicaps.
As well as becoming a superb calligrapher, he was an expert conjurer, performed on musical instruments, played a variety of games and could thread a needle with the best.
He also contrived to marry several times, on one occasion to a shrewish wench who so exasperated him that he leapt upon her and gave her such a beating that she held her peace thereafter.
Apart from originals from his pen, which are rare, printed broadsides illustrating his feats were popular.
I treasure a torn and spotted letter, valueless from the autograph point of view, dating from the late eighteenth century and endorsed on the back ‘This Letter was found by Lord Lewisham in a Haberdashers Shop.’
I quote it in full, in tribute to the whole glorious regiment of women shoppers, firm of purpose and knowing exactly what they want:
Sir, If you please to send me a scarlet Cardinal [a short red cloak], and let it be full yard long, and rather longer than a yard long, and let it be full, for it be for a large Woman, they tell me I may have a long one, and a handsome one, for 11s but I shou'd not be willing to give more than 12s, but if you have any as long as that, either duffil or cloth, if it is cheaper, I shou'd like it as well as, for I am not to give but 12s for it.
I shou'd like a cloth one best if you please — I beg of your Sir to be so good as not to fail me this Cardinal by Wednesday, without fail, but let it be full yard long I beg, or else it will not do fail not on Wednesday, and in so doing you will very much oblige me.
Hampton M. Vins  PS I hope you will charge your lowest price for it, and if you please not to send a duffil one, but a cloth one, full yard long, fail not on Wednesday, please to send it by Mr. Field the Waterman, who comes to the Beehive, at Queenhithe, pray don't send a duffil one but a cloth one.
I have altered my Mind; I should not like it cloth, but duffil, let it be cloth, and not to be more than 11s at most, and full yard long, and two if you please, both of a length, and both large ones, full yard long, both of a price, they both be for one Woman — they must be exactly alike for goodness and price — fail not on Wednesday — and full yard long.
Magazines — deriving their name from the word in several languages for ‘storehouses’— are increasingly becoming a recognised field for the collector.
‘Periodical’ may be regarded as almost synonymous, but seems to be increasingly reserved for the more literary types.
Though earlier examples may be found, those of the eighteenth century are more likely to come to hand fairly often, e.g.,The Tatler , begun in 1709, The Spectator (1711) and The Guardian (1712).
John Wilkes's North Briton has its own brand of excitements, and a complete run of the Gentleman's Magazine , from its inception in 1731, will occupy a good deal of shelf room and, probably, a decade or two of happy searching.
Long runs can, of course, be purchased at a price in the saleroom, but odd volumes picked up here and there should be inexpensive.
The next century saw the emergence of such revered names as the Edinburgh Magazine , the Quarterly and Blackwood's , and soon the presses engaged in a helter-skelter race to put a remarkable variety of magazines, at every educational level and from every popular viewpoint, on to bookstalls and into reading rooms.
It is a daunting task to compile an adequate list, but it has been successfully attempted in such publications as Crane and Kaye's Census of British Newspapers and Periodicals, 1620–1800 (1927), and the Library Association's Subject-Index to Periodicals .
The chief disadvantages for the collector are the vast amount of space needed to house anything like a representative collection, and its far from attractive appearance, except with bound runs.
Outhouses are usually the only answer.
Many will restrict themselves to such magazines and periodicals in which their chosen authors made significant appearances.
Conan Doyle, Thomas Hardy, Rider Haggard and Evelyn Waugh are among them.
Charles Lamb can be found sheltering modestly over the initials ‘C.L.’ in Hone's periodic publications.
The collectors of boys' and girls' magazines need neither justification nor encouragement.
Tom Merry, Bob Cherry, Billy Bunter and all their peers bid fair to join the immortals, only a little lower than Falstaff, Gulliver and Long John Silver.
I have left till last what may well be considered by book-collectors one of the most charming fields of ephemera collecting — that of the chapbook, so called from the chapman or pedlar in whose pack so many of these small publications found their way through the shires of England.
Had he not plodded his way to the fairs and markets, to the countless isolated communities in villages and hamlets, the English race would have been immeasurably poorer in its literature, its recreations and its memories of the past.
We must try to imagine these little worlds, with no public libraries or mobile vans, no bookshops or post offices, no magazines and even an old newspaper a rare event.
Periodically through the dust and the rutted mud came the laden pedlar, on his feet or the back of a donkey; and from his strapped load presently spilled the trifling, precious wares of his trade-the cheap gloves and laces, the toys, trinkets and gee-gaws, the lengths of material — and, most important of all for our purposes here, the ballad sheets, broadsides and booklets that brought news of the wider world and stories and verse to give pleasure round the hearth in the long winter evenings.
Curiously enough, since by definition a stationer ‘stays put’, they are variously described on their publications as the ‘walking’, ‘running’ and even ‘flying’stationers; and there is adequate testimony to their activities and to their influence.
Roger Ascham (1515–68), tutor to Queen Elizabeth, wrote in The Scholemaster :
In our forefathers' time…few books were read in our tongue, saving certain books of chivalry, as they said for pastime and pleasure…
As one, for example, ‘Morte Arthur’, the whole pleasure of which standeth in two special points, in open manslaughter and bold bawdry…
What toys the daily reading of such a book may work in the will of a young gentleman, or a young maid…wise men can judge and honest men do pity.
George Wither (1588–1667), poet and pamphlet-writer, complained in The Scholler's Purgatory :
They [the Stationers]have so pestered their printing-houses and shops with fruitless volumes that the ancient and renowned authors are almost buried among them as forgotten…so they who desire knowledge are still kept ignorant; their ignorance increaseth their affection to vain toys; their affection makes the stationer to increase his provision of such stuff, and at last you shall see nothing to be sold amongst us but…
Bevis of Southampton or such trumpery.
John Bunyan (1628–88) pictured himself in his unregenerate youth as saying: ‘Give me a ballad, a news-book, George on horseback, or Bevis of Southampton.‘
Richard Baxter (1615–91) warned his readers ‘of the writings of false teachers, which would corrupt your understandings: and of vain romances, play-books, and false stories, which may bewitch your fantasies and corrupt your hearts.’
Leaving aside the single sheet publications, which we have already discussed, the most desirable of the chapman's wares for the collector are the sheets folded to make a booklet of eight or twelve pages.
Often they carry crude woodcuts (which may have little or no relevance to the contents).
They perpetuate the great romances and adventure stories of the Middle Ages, setting down in simple and unadorned sentences the songs and tales formerly carried by minstrel and troubadour; tales of the Seven Champions of Christendom, the great Bevis of Southampton (twice quoted above), with his steed Arundel and his invincible sword Morglay, Arthur and his company of the Round Table.
Here, too, are the less lordly but much-loved Robin Hood, Tom Hickathrift, Lob-lie-by-the-Fire, the Wise Men of Gotham, Jack the Giant Killer, Puss-in-Boots, Dick Whittington, and a hundred more.
Fairy tales, fables, moral and religious stories, alphabets, songs and poems, all were grist for the stationers' presses.
Sir Thomas Malory's Noble Histories of King Arthur and of Certain of his Knights —‘open manslaughter and bold bawdry’— was printed by Caxton in 1485.
Malory was a thief, a cattle-rustler and a despoiler of sacred things, a knight who tarnished his vows and broke the code of chivalry.
But in prison he perhaps recaptured some of his lost knighthood in telling the heroic stories of the Round Table.
There was another edition of them in 1554, then they do not seem to have been reprinted for nearly three hundred years.
How then were they kept alive and fresh in the hearts and minds of English folk, if not through the chapman?
As we have seen, Queen Elizabeth's Roger Ascham, in many ways broadminded and tolerant, thought the stories immoral and mischievous; and other high-minded people pronounced them wanton and unworthy of reading.
But the people of England knew better and continued to read and delight in their chapbooks.
Even a later and more sophisticated age continued to enjoy them.
Leigh Hunt (1784–1859) wrote in My Books :
The oldest and most worn-out woodcut, representing King Pippin, Two Shoes, or the grim Soldan, sitting with three staring blots for his eyes and mouth, his sceptre in one hand, and his five fingers raised and spread in admiration at the feats of the Gallant London Apprentice, cannot excite in me a feeling of ingratitude.
A late eighteenth century chapbook type of publication, in this case bound.
Note the typical crude woodcut illustration, probably resurrected from an earlier publication.
Such men as Joseph Crawhall of Newcastle, Andrew Tuer and Claud Lovat Fraser have striven to revive them and imitate them, with their woodcuts, their simple stories and their irresistible humour.
Their predecessors are still to be found, sometimes cheaply with those who do not know their true significance and worth.
As Sawyer and Darton wrote so tellingly in English Books : ‘The Running Stationers, as they were at the last called, bore a light but precious fardel: just the Short History of the English People — no more.‘
Autograph Letters and Manuscripts
The best of the autograph collectors would not have accepted for one minute that their pursuit was the poor relation of manuscript collecting proper.
Indeed they would have argued — and perhaps with some justice — that theirs was a more refined branch of the art: for did it not demand to a quite exceptional degree a sense of the romance of the past and a feeling for an evocative relic?
A.N.L. Munby, The Cult of the Autograph Letter in England
This is a book about books; but some small space must be found for that art, and its products, which preceded printing by many thousands of years and without which there would have been no books at all— that of handwriting.
Books, letters, documents, manuscripts — in my mind they are all indissolubly linked, members of one great family; but it is far from the general feeling.
I know booksellers who regard the written word with the utmost suspicion, profess that they do not understand it, and will have nothing to do with it; dealers who specialise in autograph material, but will not touch books — unless, of course, they happen to be on the subject of autographs; and many who maintain an ambivalent attitude, preferring to keep their options open and, if they can afford it, employing some eccentric especially to deal with this awkward material.
I find all this difficult to understand, perceiving no dichotomy; though I must confess to some predilection for the original letter or manuscript.
For me, there is an immediacy about them, an intimacy, that can bring me closer to the writer than anything else.
The hasty note, the spluttering pen, the exasperated correction, the careful clerkly hand, the grandiloquent flourish, the obsequious subscription, the torn seal, the glint of sand still held in the writing from the hand that strewed it centuries ago — all these and much else bring me into close company with the past, more than the rooms in which men sat, the streets they walked, the clothes they wore or the trinkets that adorned them.
I make an exception, of course, of the books they owned.
As ever, we must begin by getting our terms clear, beginning with the much misused word ‘autograph’.
This is both noun and adjective.
As the man in the street normally understands it, the noun autograph means ‘autograph signature’.
This is the sense in which the mere autograph  .
collector uses it, the boy who triumphantly proclaims that he has secured the hastily scribbled signature of his favourite footballer.
Page of the visitors ' book to a famous, though short-lived London bookshop, the Bermondsey Bookshop (1921–30), founded ‘to bring books and the love of books into Bermondsey.
’ It was a fashionable haunt of the literary set, the above page showing the signatures of Laurence Binyon, Richard Church, A.E.
Coppard and Clemence Dane among others.
The ‘holograph’ manuscript, of Sir James Mackintosh's History of England.
The term holograph (from the Greek ‘whole’ and ‘I write ‘) is often used of literary MSS as distinct from autograph letters and documents.
More care should be exercised in the use of the adjective, as in ‘autograph manuscript’, than is sometimes the case.
Let us imagine that we are fortunate enough to find, written in Robert Browning's hand, a copy of his famous song from Pippa Passes , beginning ‘The year's at the spring, And day's at the morn…
’ This is the, or at least an, autograph manuscript of Pippa , meaning that it is genuinely in the poet's hand.
But supposing Browning for some reason has copied out some lines from his wife's almost equally well-known A Musical Instrument , beginning ‘What was he doing, the great god Pan, Down in the reeds by the river?’
This is not the autograph manuscript of the poem, but it is an autograph manuscript of Robert Browning's, since it is in his hand.
Unless it refers to something of antiquity, beauty of handwriting or decoration, as in ‘illuminated manuscript’, the term manuscript (literally ‘written by hand’) usually implies a literary composition of some sort.
Sometimes an early manuscript contains more than one hand, the additional words, marginalia or even whole paragraphs and columns, being explanations of, or comments on, the original.
These are known as ‘glosses’.
A document, as distinct from a manuscript, implies something official or designed to set out facts or points of view.
In a handwritten  document, the main body will normally have been written by a scribe or secretary, but signed by the person, or persons, issuing it.
Thus, ‘GEORGE III.
Document signed…’ means that only the signature itself is the hand of the king.
Similarly, ‘GEORGE III.
Letter signed’, as distinct from ‘Autograph letter signed’, means that the letter has been written by a clerk or secretary but that the king has added his signature.
Another important convention should be noted, as in: ‘[Henry II].
A collection of deeds…etc.’
The use of square brackets would normally mean that there is nothing in the hand of the king, not even a signature, but that the material is contemporary with him and belongs to his period.
A number of standard abbreviations are in common use in catalogues and should be interpreted in the light of some of the explanations give above:
AL Autograph Letter in the hand of the person to whom it is attributed, but unsigned.
ALS or ALs Autograph Letter signed.
DS or Ds Document signed.
Holograph An up-market word for a manuscript entirely in the author's handwriting.
LS or Ls Letter signed (i.e. the main text is in another hand).
MS A single manuscript, MSS more than one.
TLS or TLs As above, but typed.
The same type of abbreviations will be found for postcards.
Reverting to early manuscripts, especially those of monastic origins, there is a small group of words often encountered in their description.
If a book or manuscript is ‘illuminated’ it is lit up with hand-painted initial words, capital letters and borders in colours, gold and silver.
This is a general term covering the whole field of decoration.
Not all the work was done in religious houses.
From about the fourteenth century lay artists became more prominent, sometimes travelling and sometimes settled in urban workshops near wealthy patrons.
The term illuminated has, of course, been borrowed for books printed in colours in medieval style.
If a book or manuscript has headings or the first capitals of paragraphs painted or printed in red, the rest of the text being black, it is said to be ‘rubricated’.
The rubricator, usually a specialist in the work, put in his capitals when the rest of the manuscript or printed book had been completed.
It is not uncommon to find the spaces still blank in early books, the scribe not having arrived before the books were put on the market.
An early printed book which has escaped the attention of the illuminator or rubricator is often described as ‘untouched’.
If certain capital letters incorporate coloured drawings representing scenes in the text, they are said to be ‘historiated’.
In the world of manuscripts, ‘miniature’ has come to have a rather puzzling significance.
To ‘miniate’ originally meant to use minium or red lead (usually mixed with, e.g., egg white and water) for rubrication and illumination.
Thereafter confusion set in and, from scenes of events, groups of figures, etc., presented on a very small scale, the term has come to mean elaborate pictures, much more ambitious than the historiations and sometimes extending to the whole of a large page.
The value of illuminated manuscripts depends very much on the nature, quality and size of all these pictorial decorations, with the textual content and beauty of the calligraphy often playing a comparatively minor role.
This was, in fact, the same scale of values that initiated the work, since wealthy patrons were at liberty to specify the number of historiations and miniatures and paid accordingly.
An opening from the Hours of the Virgin written and illuminated c.1516–47 for Guillaume de Bracque, Abbot of the Benedictine Abbey of St. John the Baptist in Valenciennes, Flanders.
It contained, as well as the magnificent borders, twenty-five small miniatures, often up to half a page in height, and eleven full-page miniatures.
Noteworthy are the fine flower and fruit paintings, and the early pictures of children's games.
The left-hand miniature shows the Visitation against an architectural and landscape background.
Framed in the initial capital ‘D ‘on the right-hand page are the arms of de Bracque, surmounted by his abbot's crozier.
The handwriting in this case is of a type known as batarde, i.e. mongrel or mixed in style.
As an example, in about 1500 Nicolas von Firmian, member of a noble Tyrolese family, commissioned a Book of Hours from a Flanders scriptorium.
It contained twenty-two large initials with elaborate borders and a number historiated; fourteen fully historiated borders; forty-eight small miniatures; and fifteen full-page miniatures.
As was often the practice, the paintings included portraits of the noble and his family.
When this manuscript came up for sale in London in 1980, its estimated value was £40,000-£60,000.
Such splendour is not for most of us, either as patrons or purchasers; but, if he is content to appreciate the diligence of the scribe rather than luxuriate in the extravagancies of the illuminator, the collector can assemble single leaves from a wide variety of manuscripts at modest cost.
From time to time he may be able to supplement his hoard with pieces of fine scribal work culled from early printed books, where they were often used by printers to serve the menial office of strengthening hinges or even acting as a paste-down.
The majority of collectors of autograph and manuscript material will not concern themselves with these early periods or with anything much before the sixteenth century.
Official documents and those concerned with the lease, sale and transfer of land and other property, survive in considerable numbers from medieval times, but these are usually only of much interest to the topographer and county historian.
Many of them find their way, as they should, to local record offices which, staffed with trained archivists, now exist in every part of the British Isles.
Domestic and personal correspondence from the same period is extremely rare, which is fortunate for the collector, who will not have to bother himself with palaeography, the deciphering of ancient hands.
Apart from certain legal hands, the most difficult he will need to master will be the so-called ‘secretary’ hand used for much of the Tudor period.
This, as practised by ordinary mortals rather than professional scribes, can cover everything from neatness to wild illegibility — much as handwriting does today among our nearest and dearest.
Elizabeth I, it will be remembered, could use either a singularly beautiful humanistic style (common to all the carefully instructed Tudor children) or what she herself called a ‘vile skrating hand’.
Despite the initial shock of being confronted with a typical Elizabethan letter or manuscript, the collector may be assured that, once he has troubled to master the unfamiliar forms of a number of the letters, their consistency will ensure that he will have no more — and sometimes less — trouble than he has with some of the missives that find their way to his desk or doormat today.
Help may be found in a number of places, the most generally useful probably being in Appendix Eight to McKerrow's An Introduction to Bibliography where he analyses with admirable clarity, and with illustrations of all the  minuscules and capitals, a letter written by Thomas Kyd, the Elizabethan dramatist, to Sir John Puckering, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal.
By the beginning of the seventeenth century the secretary hand had been almost entirely superseded by the ‘Italian’ hand, introduced in Henry VII's reign by his Latin secretary.
Since this is the direct ancestor of modern handwriting, and is usually much superior to it in clarity, there should be no further difficulties.
The scope for the collector of autograph letters, manuscripts and historical documents is enormous and offers opportunities for even the most modest purse.
It is comforting that requirements of condition are not so exacting as in the printed book world.
If five hundred or five thousand copies of a book have been printed, we have a right to insist, among so many, on a high standard in the one we purchase.
But every letter is unique and even a retained copy, the equivalent of a modern carbon, does not detract from that essential quality: so that criteria are not so stern.
A fragile letter from Nelson with a tear in the fold is a letter from Nelson and nothing can detract from its lustre.
The gap in the paper where it has been torn away from the seal is a desirable human touch rather than a blemish.
Unevenness of style, poor quality ink and paper, erasures and alterations, these are all part of the writer and his circumstances, and we would not have it otherwise.
Tudor and Stuart manorial records, the open volume written in a ‘secretary’ hand.
There are, however, shortcomings the collector will wish to avoid.
A letter which has been ‘mounted’ or stuck down to another sheet is not as desirable as one that is free.
Less offensive is one that has been ‘inlaid’ or let into a stronger leaf so that both sides of the letter or document are visible by means of this window.
A particularly precious or tender example may have been ‘silked’ by an expert hand, that is placed between two sheets of fine entirely transparent gauze.
This is an asset rather than a defect, since its preservation is assured.
Collections can be built round an individual, a county, a town, a political party, a period in history, a social movement, a ship, a battle or campaign, a family, a building, a pet hobby, expeditions, law suits, theatres, royal houses, gardens — the list is endless, the opportunities plentiful.
Whatever men and women have been interested in, concerned about, preoccupied with, either in the line of duty or on the domestic and recreational fronts, they have communicated it in letters, notes, diaries, journals, files, log books and the like.
Despite this wealth, or perhaps because of it, enthusiasm should be tempered and caution exercised.
Avoid detached signatures, unless they are of extreme rarity and unimpeachable authenticity.
Old, even centuries old, pieces of paper are fairly easily come by, and the unrighteous find no great problem in copying an acceptable signature thereon.
Sometimes genuine letters are offered without the vital signature, some rabid autograph hunter having removed it at some period.
Unless the main text is of particular importance, these, too, are to be passed by.
The Victorians were fond of detached envelope ‘fronts’, written by celebrities or ‘franked’, that is signed by members of parliament, bishops and innumerable nonentities to ensure free passage through the post.
Hundreds of thousands of them were hunted, exchanged and mounted in large albums.
Whatever their attractions then, they are worthless now.
It cannot be too strongly stressed that the subject of letters is all-important and that, even though they may be complete with the signature, they are of little virtue or worth unless they say something of at least modest significance.
Tennyson turning down one of the countless invitations to tea with which he was plagued is one thing.
Tennyson explaining how he came to write the Idylls of the King is another.
Be wary of some people in high places whose duties involved them in prolific correspondence.
They sometimes had secretaries who could imitate their master's hand so perfectly that it is difficult to tell one from t'other.
The Duke of Wellington is a case in point.
A man who was Commander-in-Chief, First Lord of the Treasury, Chancellor of the  University of Oxford, Lord High Constable, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Constable of the Tower, Commissioner of the Royal Military College and Military Asylum, Chief Ranger and Keeper of Hyde Park and St. James's Park and, when he had a week or two free, Home Secretary, Foreign Secretary and Prime Minister, deserved a little respite when it came to correspondence.
At least one French monarch employed an official scribe with a special aptitude for imitating the royal hand.
In one way the collector of autograph and manuscript material is at a disadvantage compared with his bibliophile brother, in that it is much easier to forge a letter than a book.
Many famous writers and historical characters, from Julius Caesar to Bernard Shaw, have received this sort of unwelcome attention.
A certain Major Byron, who claimed to be the son of the poet, specialised in Keats, Shelley and his putative father.
The publisher Moxon went so far as to put out an edition of the Shelley forgeries, with an introduction by Robert Browning.
I The volume, which is now itself a rarity, was recalled shortly after publication, when Moxon discovered his blunder.
In 1893 a clerk named Alexander Howland Smith, more familiarly known as ‘Antique’ Smith because of his activities, received a sentence of twelve months' imprisonment for his forgeries of a wide range of letters, including some from Carlyle, Thackeray and Mary Queen of Scots.
I have no space to dilate on the rascality of these and other forgers through the centuries — or on the extreme gullibility of some purchasers.
One other possible area of danger is that of good facsimiles, which are more likely to be met with from time to time than competent forgeries.
Many have been produced in all honesty as book illustrations or in celebration of some interesting event or anniversary.
There is little to fear from them if they can be closely examined, though they can be rather more deceptive when framed and covered with glass.
The paper will nearly always be quite untypical of its period.
The handwriting will be much too smooth and even in appearance, showing none of the alterations of thickness, pressure and overall individuality of an ordinary letter.
Coming back to handwriting, the price of safety in autograph collecting, like that of freedom, is eternal vigilance.
There are superficial and obvious checks that can be made.
For instance, if the paper is water        marked, does it agree sufficiently with the supposed date of the letter and do the circumstances and events it deals with coincide with the known facts?
I was once offered a John Wesley letter which had the slight blemish of being written on paper watermarked some thirty years after the evangelist died, and on another occasion a letter from a supposed Trafalgar seaman, mentioning officers and members of the crew who were not on the muster roll of the ship concerned.
I remember a stately  home which proudly displayed a Nelson letter the original of which was in the National Maritime Museum.
An authentic Shelley manuscript poem.
Part of a forged Shelley letter.
Comparing this with the genuine example of the poet's handwriting above, some of the discrepancies in the forgery will be obvious — the over-flourished ‘d's, the tilted crossing of the ‘t's.
Note, too, less obvious but important details, such as the dotting of the ‘i's, in general much too high in the forgery; and the dissimilar form of the ampersand.
Menu of the historic dinner given to General Jan Christiaan Smuts in the Royal Gallery of the House of Lords, 15 May I 917.
The handwritten note is by his military secretary.
Smuts's own notes for the great speech he made on the occasion of the dinner in the Royal Gallery (see above) of which over 1, 000, 000 copies were sold in the English language alone.
It was conspicuous for his use of the historic phrase ‘British Commonwealth of Nations’.
But, quite apart from simple precautions, the answer in the end must lie in sensing the difference between a natural flowing hand and the stilted and lifeless exactitude of a painstaking copy.
Spontaneous handwriting has a life and character of its own, conveyed to it by a busy brain through easy fingers.
If the forger tries to write quickly and naturally he loses accuracy.
If he writes slowly and with extreme care, he forsakes natural rhythm and ease of style.
Then, too, the forger will not find it easy to come across the right paper.
Mistrust a single torn off sheet.
It may be genuine, but is likely to have come from a bifolium or double sheet.
Mistrust even more two leaves that have been joined together to fabricate a bifolium.
Old paper was usually sized to make it take ink smoothly.
Size will evaporate in the course of the years, and new writing will blur and spread at the edges.
Efforts to stain paper artificially to give an appearance of age have little hope of withstanding careful scrutiny.
Handle all the genuine letters and documents you possibly can and you will soon find that eyes and finger tips make very efficient detectives.
A reliable dealer will, of course, have taken all these precautions for you and you can safely rely on his judgement and experience.
The collector of signed letters by modern statesmen faces an additional hazard in the form of a machine which not only reproduces signatures exactly but holds a fountain pen or biro to accomplish them.
Let none of these warnings and precautions put you off the adventure and excitement of collecting in this field if you have an inclination that way.
There is far more genuine material about than there is false or suspect; and much is of such a nature that there is no temptation for anyone to forge it.
Only the most illustrious names hold out the lure of considerable profit; but many thousands of unknown men and women have left behind them a legacy of written material that will never be  illicitly copied and imitated yet will yield a rich store of history, and throw light on their place and period, life and labours, which are every bit as important, in the ultimate scale of things, as the antics and accomplishments of those who contrived to hit the headlines.
John Masefield began his collected poems with a consecration declaring that he was not concerned with the princes and prelates, the bemedalled commander, the ‘potentates goodly in girth’, but rather with the humble and unknown folk, the losers and rejected, the common sailor and soldier, the servant rather than the master.
G.K. Chesterton had the same message in The Secret People , who had never spoken yet.
There is some sort of lesson there for the autograph collector, who need not despair if the great names are beyond his aspirations and his purse.