

Five
Joan rode home, her heart heavy as lead.
She was beset by the realization that she desired nothing more than to go to the Hall as Anne Mowbray's companion.
At the same time, she felt a sense of guilt, of disloyalty, that she could even for an instant contemplate the idea of deserting her mother and turning her back on the place she called home.
She took no pleasure from the countryside as on the outward journey.
Then she had shown an avid interest in everything she saw: the horses themselves, the rabbits frolicking in the fields or running to escape the horses' hooves, in a landscape full of promise — cool, mellow and green.
Now the sun had disappeared behind a cloud and the countryside was shadowed and brooding — an unfriendly place filled with menace.
Her heart was still at Framlingham Hall, the house that stood in the shadow of the great castle with thirteen towers, built by Roger Bigod in the year 1177.
Briar Cottage looked of a sudden smaller, Joan thought as it came into sight.
It appeared deserted, a trifle sinister even amid the overhanging trees — and, though she had not before registered the fact, it lacked the sound of happy voices which had in times past always greeted her return.
Briar Cottage no longer seemed like home; like the cottage where eleven years earlier she had been born.
The groom helped her dismount and she thanked him politely and waited, unwilling to break the link with her new-found friend before she must, until groom and horses were out of sight.
She was surprised that her mother had not hurried out  to greet her.
She had pictured Bess Halidon, restless and anxious, looking eagerly for her return…
She lifted the latch and went indoors.
‘Mama?’ she called from the threshold.
‘Mama?
I am back — home again safe and sound.
Where are you?
Upstairs?
I'm coming up.
There's no need to worry — I'd not live there for all the gold in Christendom and I told the lady Anne as much!
Nay, I said — at Briar Cottage I live and there I mean to stay!’
She had reached the top of the narrow wooden stairs that led into the single upper-storey chamber she shared with her mother.
Little more than a boarded-over loft in a single storey cottage, the room was neat and clean as a newly-laundered pinny.
‘Mama —’ she said — and giving a little cry, ran towards the low wooden bed.
‘Mama, are you poorly?’
She put out a hand and touched the prostrate woman — and drew it away in distress.
Bess Halidon was dead — though not yet cold.
It must have been just after I left, thought Joan.
Mama must have felt poorly, dragged herself upstairs and…
Bess Halidon's eyes were half open, and Joan, to whom death was no new experience, gently closed them.
She straightened out the dead woman, folded her hands and tidied the bed.
‘I must go for the priest —’ she said to the empty room.
‘— and for Mother Neville who does the laying-out.
I must go right away.’
She shed no tears as she left the cottage and made her way along the lane to the priest's house.
Tears were for later — was not she Bess Halidon's daughter?
There were things to be done, important things.
She must keep busy — see to things.
It was not until night-time that Joan had time to think properly, to let the fact that her mother was dead, sink in.
Lying on a pallet in the downstairs chamber, the deceased woman laid out upstairs, the only sounds came from the cat cleaning itself by the hearth and an owl hooting raucously outside.
She was beset of a sudden by a great fear…
She was utterly alone now.
The realization came as a shock and she pressed her clenched fist to her heart as if to pacify it.
Alone, she thought…
First papa, then Alice, Margaret, Ann and Rose — and now poor mama.
I have none in the whole world to call my own.
‘But I am in my twelfth summer,’ she said aloud then, stifling a sob.
‘I could manage — of course I could!
The cottage is mine now, for mama told me — only a few days ago, it was — that it would be mine one day.
And I too could take in washing…’
Framlingham Hall sprang to mind at that point.
She thought of the dowager-duchess and the lady Anne…
It was then that the thought struck her.
It was then that the tears fell.
‘Alas, lady Anne!’ she said through her tears — the words echoing eerily around the darkened chamber.
‘So you've got your own way after all.
You prayed, just as you said you would — and, this time, God has answered your prayer!’
Six
Once Bess Halidon had been laid to rest in the small village churchyard, and the initial shock of her mother's death had abated, Joan decided to pay a second visit to Framlingham Hall.
Should the dowager-duchess not be in residence, she told herself, she would leave a message with the housekeeper.
Elizabeth Mowbray having been informed by a servant of Bess Halidon's demise, had sent Joan a formal but kindly letter of condolence.
She had made no reference to Joan's first visit to the Hall, considering it unsuitable to combine such a letter with practicalities.
Presenting herself at the servant's entrance, Joan asked nervously if she might speak to the housekeeper.
After a few minutes, she was shown into that estimable if forbidding woman's presence.
‘You wished to see me, I believe,’ Mistress Bubwith said coldly.
She was uncertain as to the position of this girl whom she knew to be daughter to a washerwoman but whom the dowager-duchess, a lady of formal demeanour and rigid etiquette, none the less treated as one of higher status.
There is more in this than meets the eye! thought the housekeeper.
The girl is polite enough, though somewhat raw in speech — yet her likeness to the lady Anne is quite uncanny.
It is plain that someone, sometime, bore an infant on the wrong side of the blanket!
The lady Anne is a Mowbray all right, so 'tis plain from which side of the family this lass comes.
That being so, I must watch my step and keep my ears pinned back.
‘I'm here to see Her Grace,’ explained Joan, having  rehearsed what she would say during the two-mile walk from Briar Cottage.
‘If now's not convenient, I can come back another day.’
‘What is the nature of your business with Her Grace?’ enquired the housekeeper coldly.
‘It has to do with what was said last time I was here.’
‘Her Grace is at home.
Wait here and I will enquire as to an appointment.’
Mistress Bubwith returned very quickly, seeming a mite breathless.
‘Her Grace will see you now, Joan Halidon.
She can spare you but a few minutes, she says —’ the dowager-duchess had in fact said no such thing ‘— but will see you at once.’
On entering the solar, Joan was reminded of that other visit and what had come after — and was all but overwhelmed by distress.
‘A good day to you, Joan,’ was Elizabeth Mowbray's greeting.
‘I rather hoped you would call on us.’
Joan hid her surprise.
‘Thank you for the letter, Your Grace — 'twas kind of you to write.
I can't read, but I took it to the priest and he read it to me.’
‘And how are you managing without your mother?’ enquired Elizabeth Mowbray.
‘You are, I believe, on your own — and you not twelve years of age!’
Perhaps it was something in the dowager-duchess's voice that caused it, but Joan to her own dismay burst into tears.
She fumbled for a handkerchief without success — and Elizabeth Mowbray handed her the capacious lace-edged one she wore for decoration at her girdle.
‘You must miss your mother greatly,’ observed Elizabeth Mowbray.
‘Life can be very cruel at times.
I know what it is to lose one dearly loved.’
’ 'TWAS that day, you see,’explained Joan, trying to stem her tears.
‘I left here, telling myself I couldn't be lady Anne's companion 'cos I couldn't leave mama on her own.
And when I got home, poor ma was dead and I was the one on me own!
I'm sorry, Your Grace…’
Elizabeth Mowbray poured a little wine into a silver cup and gave it to her.
‘Sip this,’ she said.
‘It will make you feel better.
‘I'm sorry for making such a fuss,’ Joan said apologetically, drying her eyes — before taking a few sips of the wine which she did not much like.
‘I also am sorry, Joan — for you and your loss.
But the offer of your coming here to us still stands.
The lady Anne has talked of little else since she met you and would be overjoyed, I know, were you able in due course to come and live with us.
What do you say?’
‘I'd like nothing better,’ Joan replied with feeling.
‘I'd be a good servant to the lady Anne.’
‘The lady Anne needs you.
She needs someone of her own age to talk with — maybe even to quarrel with at times,’ said Elizabeth Mowbray with a smile.
‘As her companion, you would receive many privileges — though only those not pertaining to rank, as you will understand.
Such is to a great extent your due.’
‘My due, you say?’
Joan was puzzled.
‘You speak as if such privileges were mine by right, Your Grace.’
‘One day, Joan, we shall speak of that again,’ came the intriguing reply.
‘I shall tell you a little more of your background — acquaint  you perchance with certain knowledge to which I am privy.
Here and now is not the time.
All that needs to be said here and now is — how soon may we expect you?’
‘There's Briar Cottage,’ Joan said uneasily after a moment's consideration.
‘That'll have to be sold and the inside scrubbed and made ready for them as buys it.
Once that's done…’
‘I have a suggestion to make, Joan.
Why not stay here tonight and on the morrow I will have someone take you over to Briar Cottage with a wagon?
Then you can collect up your belongings, all those things you would wish to have with you at the Hall — you will have your own bedchamber remember — and then, when you are ready, you can bolt the door and the windows and return here in the wagon.’
‘But the cottage itself,’ demurred Joan.
‘I know naught about selling things and…’
‘My steward shall take charge of the matter for you — if  you so wish,’ Elizabeth Mowbray interposed, as if she had already given thought to it.
‘Alternatively, you could retain Briar Cottage.
We could refurbish it and it would remain your property, a place of your own to go to whenever you so desired.
I doubt not it holds many happy memories for you.
‘It does indeed, Your Grace.’
Tears again filled Joan's eyes but she brushed them away.
‘Yea, I'd like to keep it — if it's possible.’
‘It is indeed, Joan — and keep it you shall,’ smiled Elizabeth Mowbray.
‘Whilst you remain here with us — and let me say here and now that there will be a place here for you for as long as you wish — you will share in the life of the household and have all provided.
Furthermore, it would please me to give you an allowance for your personal use.’
‘Your Grace, I don't understand — why are you doing all this for me?
Has it to do with what you said as you'd tell me one day?’
‘In some measure — but only in some measure,’ replied Elizabeth Mowbray.
She looked down at a letter on the table in front of her, collecting her thoughts.
Is not this lass sister, half-sister to my daughter? she asked herself.
What else, since she is of my lord's begetting?
‘I see you as a sister for my daughter — the sister she never had.
Might one then ask a favour of you?’
‘You can, Your Grace — ask anything.’
‘I ask that henceforth, whatsoever the provocation and difficulties, you will remain loyal and true to the lady Anne — as to a sister.’
Elizabeth Mowbray sighed.
‘Anne can at times be wilful, self-centred, headstrong — she is a true Mowbray!
But she has fine qualities also — as I trust you will discover for yourself.
Pray tell me, Joan Halidon, that I may depend on your loyalty to my daughter.’
‘I swear it,’ Joan said earnestly, her eyes bright with tears.
‘By the Holy Rood, I swear it!’
Her emotion this time was not prompted by grief for her mother — but by the seriousness of the moment.
Her heart was touched by what the duchess had offered her and by what had been asked of herself in return.
So many  benefits would she receive, not least the companionship of the vivacious and warm-hearted Anne Mowbray; and so little was being asked of herself.
The promise was readily given and gratefully received: so small a thing it seemed to the giver and so great to the receiver.
But the journey of life has many twists and turns.
Dark passageways and blind alleys obscure the light at the end of the tunnel.
Danger, intrigue and tragedy lurk unseen, unrecognized by the traveller — whilst evil, unimagined and terrible, lies in wait around the next bend.
Just as the end of the tunnel comes into view, giving promise of freedom and happiness, of radiance long awaited — the darkness and That-which-dwells-in-darkness bear down, overtaking those quickening footsteps…
Seven
Joan accordingly took up the post of companion to the lady Anne and thereafter had no great difficulty in adjusting to a new and privileged life-style.
At Elizabeth Mowbray's suggestion, she took the name de Warenne after one of her real father's earldoms — though she herself was still unaware of the connection.
Joan liked the name and, since it pleased the duchess, had no qualms about severing this last link with her former life.
She occupied a well-furnished chamber close to the lady Anne's apartments, and was given a wardrobe of new clothes which was an especial delight.
Prior to sharing her young mistress's lessons, she received instruction in deportment and etiquette.
She learned quickly and eagerly and soon acquired sufficient know-how to join Anne Mowbray in the small schoolroom.
Elizabeth Mowbray was delighted by the marked change in her daughter that followed Joan's arrival.
Moody and high-strung though Anne was by nature, the girls' brief quarrels were no more than might be expected between any siblings.
The duchess, recalling her own upbringing amidst a lively brood of brothers and sisters, recognized this, and was gratified by the devotion and closeness that had grown up between the girls.
The following year passed uneventfully at Framlingham Hall.
It was a year during which Joan came near to forgetting her humble origins — the fact that she was the orphaned daughter of a washerwoman.
All but adopted by Elizabeth Mowbray — though having no idea why — she was Joan de Warenne, friend and companion to Anne Duchess  of York.
The fact that she addressed the latter formally, as lady Anne, was the one concession to rank and status — and even that was frequently disregarded when the girls were alone…
Then came the day in the year 1482 when Elizabeth Mowbray received a letter from the king requiring her presence with her daughter at court.
Anne was approaching her thirteenth birthday and King Edward considered it time that she and his son Prince Richard, then ten years of age, became better acquainted.
The idea of being received at court for the first time since the childhood marriage, at first caused Anne much excitement.
Seamstresses were put to work to increase her already adequate wardrobe but, as the days passed and the day of departure from Framlingham loomed close, she became increasingly petulant.
‘Why, methought you were overjoyed at the prospect of going to court!’ remarked Joan, to whom the idea was akin to going as a mere mortal to fairyland.
‘For myself, I can scarce believe it is true — that I am to accompany you on so grand a venture.’
‘I was pleased — at first,’ admitted Anne gloomily.
‘If only one were going to court freely and looking to a bright future — 'tis different for you!’
‘But you are free — free as a bird!’ laughed Joan.
‘To hear you talk, anyone would think you were being sent to prison!’
‘And that is exactly it!’ complained Anne.
‘Shall not I be chained like a prisoner to a child for the rest of my life?
I may not so much as glance at all those handsome courtiers!’
‘Prince Richard is but three years your junior,’ said Joan cheerfully, refusing to take her complaints seriously.
‘The time will soon pass and then he will be of a suitable age to marry.’
‘But we are married,’ pointed out Anne.
‘And I have no wish for time to soon pass, as you express it — were time to pass that quickly, I should very soon be an old old woman.
Why, by the time Prince Richard is fifteen and considered of an age to really marry, I shall be eighteen.
Have you thought of that, Joan de Warenne?’
Joan had thought of it and could understand Anne's feelings.
But there was no point in admitting as much.
‘'TIS said the prince is a handsome boy,’ she said instead.
‘A handsome boy , as you say,’ pouted Anne.
‘But who wishes to find themselves married to a boy?
I am in my thirteenth summer and dream of a romantic match, of a handsome suitor — not a boy!’
‘Alas that you did not marry Prince Edward!’ sighed Joan.
‘He is but a little younger than you and is tall for his age, it is said.’
Anne looked pensive.
‘I know — and that is the trouble.
I was nine at the time of the wedding and you just could not imagine how foolish I felt, dressed as a bride in all her finery, standing beside a six-year-old and with hundreds of people looking on.
How sweet!said the guests.
How delightful they are together!
A fairytale match it is — makes one wish one were young again!
For all their fine words, I'd wager that not a damsel there would have changed places with me — who would willingly wed a pretty six-year-old!
I should have wed Edward, you say?
That would have been a very different matter.
Edward seemed quite grown up, quiet and interesting — and very good-looking instead of pretty like his baby brother!
I felt a rapport with Edward.’
‘Prince Edward is destined for greater things,’ Joan said with a tactlessness rare in her and which she was to regret.
‘He must marry a foreign princess — a French princess, I daresay, to bring greater amity between our peoples.
Master Peachey has told me of the succession and how important it is to unite nations through contracts of marriage.’
‘Important to whom — to Master Peachey?’ demanded Anne, thereby suggesting that she held the opinions of their tutor in contempt.
‘'TIS certainly of no importance to myself — and I'd wager 'tis of no importance to Prince Edward either.
Now —’
‘You should not say ‘I'd wager’! ' put in Joan.
‘Master Peachey reprimanded you only this morning for speaking thus — it is unladylike, he said!’
‘— if I were affianced to him,’ continued Anne without batting an eyelid, ‘instead of—’
‘To him, you say?’ enquired Joan mischievously.
‘To Master Peachey, do you mean?’
‘— that cherubic infant,’ continued Anne, ‘I should dance for joy from here to Westminster!’
‘We cannot have all that we desire in this life,’ pointed out Joan in a tone remarkably like that of their confessor, Father Powicke.
Such might endanger our immortal souls!’
‘Besides —’ said Anne who had not been listening, but pursuing her own line of thought ‘— if I were affianced to Prince Edward, the marriage could be completed in a year or so — instead of delayed for Heaven knows how long!’
‘Why are you in such a hurry to be really and truly wed?’ asked Joan curiously.
‘I confess I am not — most definitely not!’
‘I suppose 'tis because I am the elder and have a better knowledge of such things,’ Anne replied in a superior tone.
‘Because I am married, you see, mama had my governess explain to me about marriage — of what is expected of one in the marriage bed.’
‘Oh that!’ said Joan dismissively.
‘I asked if you also were to be told but mama said nay — you are younger than myself, she said, and are unlikely to wed for some time.
As I said to mama then, by the time I am bedded, I shall likely be too old — or have forgotten what it is I am supposed to do!’
‘Forgotten?’ asked Joan, her tinkling laughter deepening the frown on the other girl's face.
‘You are so droll, Anne.
Besides, what if you did forget — you would have someone at hand to remind you!’
Anne gave a good imitation of a shudder.
‘Pray do not remind me — if you only knew!
But of course you do not know — how could you — and I doubt you could imagine, however hard you tried!’
Having led a far less narrow life than Anne, Joan could imagine only too well.
Little more than a year earlier there had been that never-to-be-forgotten encounter at the inn.
Such encounters, be they lawful or unlawful, in wedlock or out of it, were — in common with the plague — to be avoided at all costs.
Imagine indeed! she thought to herself.
Why, all I want is to forget…
‘Anyway, Anne, the important thing is to go to court and accustom yourself to its ways,’ she said practically.
‘The princes have six sisters, I am told, of ages ranging from sixteen to two years.’
‘They had six sisters,’ corrected Anne.
‘Mary, the second from eldest, died only last month.
I expect they wished to marry her off to an infant — so she simply succumbed!’
‘Well, that leaves five sisters, and I feel sure you will enjoy their company and make many new friends.’
Anne gave thought to it.
‘Friends, you say?
But the princesses will be my sisters-in-law — and I can feel it in my bones that we shall just not take to each other at all!
You are my friend, Joan — my only friend.’
‘And you are being a bessie-brains today,’ laughed Joan, flattered but refusing to take her seriously.
‘Anyway, I am looking forward to going to court — so there!’
Elizabeth Mowbray, accompanied by her daughter and a large entourage, set forth from Framlingham a few weeks later.
Bound for Westminster Palace where she would remain as her daughter's  chaperon , the dowager-duchess, though well accustomed in her youth to court life, viewed the summons without enthusiasm.
Since her marriage, she had become accustomed to a less competitive and more rural way of life and therefore regarded her return to court as a duty, an onerous duty.
Her chief adviser since the death of her husband was Sir Thomas Vaughan, now appointed surveyor and demiser of the revenues of the Norfolk inheritance.
Formerly esquire of the body to Henry the Sixth, Vaughan had become treasurer of the chamber to Edward the Fourth, by whom he was so highly regarded that in 1471 he had been appointed chamberlain to the then one-year-old Prince Edward.
Thus Vaughan had a close connection with both the family of the deceased fourth Duke of Norfolk and with Anne Mowbray's young brother-in-law Edward.
He was a strong link between the royal family and the Mowbrays  and, highly regarded by both, was a man of influence and judgement.
Formerly a Yorkist soldier, Vaughan had recently acquired a house for Prince Edward at Stepney; and was joint lessee with the prince of another house he had built within the precincts of Westminster Abbey ‘for the pleasure of the king and his consort Elizabeth and their son.’
That he had a thumb in many pies was undeniable: he served as sheriff in both Surrey and Sussex and had been appointed to head a commission examining the revenues of the confiscated estates of George Duke of Clarence, the king's brother.
Clarence, by some curious quirk of fate that again linked the Mowbrays with the royal family, had been arrested on the day following Anne's wedding and subsequently judicially executed.
Vaughan accompanied Elizabeth Mowbray and her daughter to London and, on arrival, smoothed their path ably and tactfully.
Graciously received, first by the king and then the queen — the beautiful and vivacious Elizabeth Woodville — Anne was next presented to her young husband.
Richard Duke of York was not as Anne had recalled him.
Four years had elapsed since that splendid wedding but somehow although she herself had passed from childhood to early womanhood, Anne had still pictured Richard as he had been then.
Richard was tall for his age and personable, with impeccable manners and a strong sense of occasion.
Yet still there was a hint of mischievousness in his eyes as he met Anne's gaze, which gave the lie to his otherwise angelic appearance.
He kissed her hand with practised elegance as she made her curtsy and exchanged pleasantries with her, displaying a savoir-faire rare in one of his years.
Prince Edward too kissed Anne's hand, greeting her courteously as his much-esteemed sister-in-law — but his manner was detached, his expression carefully veiled.
This was one of the few occasions when Joan was unable to accompany her half-sister.
Officially described as the lady Anne's companion, Joan had no place in the royal  reunion and must remain behind in their apartments.
Whilst this was of some concern to Anne, who relied greatly on Joan, it was of no concern to Joan herself: enthralled by everything she saw, by fairytale glimpses of the capital, the palace and the royal family, she viewed everything and everyone with avid interest.
The fact that Anne now relied on her to the extent of being somewhat lost without her, gave Joan a curious but none the less pleasurable sense of power.
How, she asked herself in those early days, has it come about that I, daughter to a humble carpenter and a washerwoman, have become the companion and confidante of her who is close to the throne, who is sister-in-law to him who will one day be King of England?
Although she accompanied Anne to most of her subsequent meetings with the royal family, Joan did so as an adjunct, a  chaperon , to the elder girl.
She must remain discreetly in the background — in the wings as it were— being ever attentive to Anne's requirements and reputation, and acting with prudence and discretion whensoever the need arose.
Again this troubled Joan less than it did Anne, who wished her friend, as she insisted she was, to share everything.
Joan, though Anne's junior by a year and not yet fully accustomed to the ways of the nobility, was by far the more worldly-wise of the two.
She watched, listened, learned and assessed, speaking only when spoken to in general— whilst all the while making her plans and looking to the future…
Enchanted at first by her good fortune in becoming Anne Mowbray's companion, grateful for the benefits showered upon her, Joan rapidly became accustomed to her new role.
She had a curious feeling that greater good fortune would yet be hers, that she was destined for high places.
She could not have explained it but she no longer even thought of herself as Joan Halidon — but as Joan de Warenne, protégée of the dowager-duchess of Norfolk.
As the months passed and the court moved — and Anne and Joan with it — from Westminster to Greenwich, from Greenwich to Sheen and then back again to Westminster, and as Joan practised and adopted the ways of the nobility, the close resemblance between herself and Anne became more pronounced.
Each had long hair which flowed in a golden mane down her back; and despite the difference in age, they were of similar height.
Joan perhaps was of a rather sturdier build, her earlier maturity revealed by shapely breasts that rounded the bodice of her gowns to the open envy of Anne.
‘Anyone would think you were the elder,’ Anne complained one day.
‘Why, for pity's sake, am I still flat as a board!’
‘There is plenty of time,’ laughed Joan.
Anne made a face.
‘Till I am properly married, you mean?
If I have not achieved a shapely figure by then, I shall become a nun!’
‘But nuns have shapely figures, I am sure.’
‘How do you know that?’ demanded Anne.
‘You cannot see them, after all.’
‘You are right there,’ admitted Joan.
‘With those voluminous robes…’
‘You cannot tell,’ put in Anne triumphantly.
‘I expect some take the veil simply to hide a flat chest!’
‘What nonsense you do talk!’
‘Oh, 'tis all right for you to be superior…’
‘Besides, what does it matter?’
Joan asked sombrely.
She was reminded of her ravishment and how her lack then of a shapely figure had in no way inhibited the brutal hands of her assailant.
‘Time will take care of that.’
‘Time!’ exclaimed Anne scathingly.
‘Here am I, in my thirteenth summer and wedded to a boy of ten who will be unable to complete the marriage for at least five years — and with no sign of a bosom to show I am truly a damsel full grown!’
‘You must practise patience, my lady!’
‘If only I were married to Prince Edward!’ sighed Anne, by no means for the first time.
‘He already seems grown up.’
‘I suppose he does,’ said Joan vaguely, herself nurturing a secret fondness for that prince.
‘You do not sound over enthusiastic, I must say,’ remarked Anne.
‘Oh well, there is no accounting for tastes!
Edward is quiet and aloof — one cannot tell what he is thinking.
When he looks at me and kisses my hand, I go all shivery — would you believe that!’
Yea, Joan thought, I would believe it — and he has not even kissed my hand!
‘I believe Edward likes me,’ continued Anne.
‘Though needless to say he keeps his thoughts to himself.’
‘Prince Richard likes you.’
‘Naturally he does,’ Anne said complacently.
‘Is not he my husband?’
‘Sort of.’
Joan, have you any idea what is meant by completing a marriage?’
Joan was already in bed and Anne, who had herself ostensibly retired, had come to her chamber to talk to her.
Frequently the girls talked thus into the early hours — and usually in the comparatively small but cosy bedchamber allotted to Joan.
The question was sudden, unexpected, and Joan was not at all sure she wished to reply.
‘I suppose I have,’ she said on a note of reluctance not lost on the elder girl.
‘There is a bedding ceremony and once the bride and bridegroom have been put to bed and everything — but everything — sprinkled with holy water, then the marriage is completed.’
Anne looked relieved.
‘Oh, is that all!
From what my governess told me and the way our elders talk and exchange glances when speaking of completion or bedding , I imagined there must be a sort of initiation ceremony, something absolutely frightful!’
‘Methought you knew all about it,’ pointed out Joan.
‘Your governess, you said…’
Anne sighed.
‘Well, she did tell me in a way.
She told me, just as did you a moment ago, about being put to bed and the sprinkling of holy water — but I could still not see what all the fuss was about!
Is there something more, Joan?’
‘How should I know!’
‘But you do know, do you not?
You are simply afraid to tell me.’
There was a catch in Anne's voice and she seemed close to tears.
‘Is it something quite dreadful?’
Joan was recalling the day, not much more than a year ago, when she had found herself alone in a locked room with the innkeeper.
She remembered the moment when he had locked the door and she had known herself trapped — she could still hear the sound of Rose Trivet crying her heart out in another part of the house.
‘Dreadful,’ she nodded — but her reply had nothing to do with Anne's question.
‘Dreadful.’
‘Like being branded?’ persisted Anne.
‘So that ever afterwards you have a mark and can prove you are truly married?’
‘Something like that,’ Joan agreed absently.
‘But where do they do it?’ enquired Anne nervously.
But Joan was harking back to that awful day.
Still she could hear her own cries, as she had begged to be released — but nay, he had flung her down on the stone floor and leaned over her.
She had twisted and turned, struggling to free herself to no avail, until a well-aimed kick had won her a temporary respite.
With an obscene oath he had released her.
‘You little slut!’ he had said through clenched teeth, his face ugly with fury — and some other emotion she had not then recognized.
‘You'll pay for that, you trollop!’
He had turned her over then, his hands brutal, and removing his leather belt, had lashed her unmercifully across buttocks and thighs.
Then, as faint with pain and fear, she had whimpered, begging him to release her, he had turned her on to her back again and leapt on top of her…
When eventually she had arrived back at Briar Cottage, there had been no concealing her distress from Bess Halidon.
Violently used, she could scarcely walk — and without a word, had placed the shilling on the kitchen table.
No explanation had been necessary.
Her mother had bathed her in the tin bath in front of the kitchen fire, had dried her and sat her down before the fire with a bowl of steaming hot broth.
Then had come  the only question Bess Halidon was ever to ask about the incident.
‘Who was it?’
‘Innkeeper,’ had come the almost inaudible reply.
‘You are looking all secretive,’ complained Anne at that point, seeing her companion's far-away expression.
‘I believe you know something I do not.’
‘I am sorry, Anne.
What were you saying?’
Joan looked puzzled.
‘Something about being branded?’
‘I wondered where they did it.’
‘Where they did it?’
Joan asked vaguely, still haunted by the dreadful memory.
‘Why, in the forest — where else than the forest!’
‘Then my bridegroom and I must go to the forest to become really and truly wed?
Like the babes in the wood, I suppose — though in our case there will be only one babe, since I by then will be an old lady!’
‘Now you are being foolish, lady Anne,’ complained Joan, the formal mode of address seeming to better convey her displeasure.
‘You treat the matter lightly — whereas I myself was never more serious.’
‘I too was serious,’ insisted Anne in a hurt tone.
‘I wished to discover how it was done — and where.
And you said it was done in the forest.’
‘It must have been in the forest —’ Joan said dreamily ‘— because that is where they found him next day.
He was not dead, but not far off dead — and 'twas said he'd never be the same again.
He grew morose after that and growled at the customers, it seems — so most took themselves to the next village for their ale.
He died a while back, not long before I left Briar Cottage.’
‘I know not what you are talking about, Joan Halidon!’ complained Anne, having decided that she was making it all up.
‘De Warenne — if you do not mind, my lady.’
‘Methinks I prefer Halidon ,’ observed Anne slowly, seeming to give thought to it.
‘I must admit though that there is sometimes a temptation to call you Joan Harridan!’
‘Horrid child!’ said Joan mildly.
‘Call me not so!
Just because I have not as yet acquired a  figure…’
‘Horrid child!’
Joan said again.
My father was Lord de Warenne, you know — Warenne was one of his earldoms,’ Anne said haughtily.
‘Now it is mine.
Is not it curious that you have taken the name?’
‘I did so at the duchess your mother's suggestion.’
Anne gave thought to that.
‘Joan — dear Joan!’ she said then.
Her mood had changed, it seemed, and she was all lightness and joy.
‘Would not it be wonderful if we were in truth sisters!’
‘Wonderful indeed!’
Joan's tone was a little mocking.
‘A tale from the land of marvels!’
‘Tease all you will but we are alike — everyone says so!
Mama named you de Warenne — is not it possible that you are in some way connected with the duke my father's family?’
‘Perchance I am a princess in disguise.’
‘Yea, that is it!’ exclaimed Anne delightedly.
‘That is the answer.
Why did not I think of it before?
You are a princess and must therefore marry a prince — you can marry Prince Richard and then I shall marry his brother!’
‘Are not you forgetting something?’
‘How so?’
‘You are married,’ Joan pointed out.
‘You are already married — to Prince Richard.
If I were truly a princess — it would be Prince Edward for me!’
‘And then I should hate you for ever,’ complained Anne.
‘Seriously though, would you, Joan de Warenne, if you could — only if remember — take Prince Edward from me?’
‘What a foolish question!’
‘Answer me, Joan de Warenne — answer me!’
‘Would I take Prince Edward from you, you ask?’
Joan gave thought to it — gazing pensively and tantalisingly into space.
She was well aware of Anne's tenseness — that this was no casual question and that her reply, at least to Anne, was all-important.
‘Yea, lady Anne, I rather think I would.’
Anne watched her for a few moments in stunned silence, trying to decide if she meant what she had said.
Then she burst into tears and rushed from the chamber.
‘But you did ask, my lady,’ Joan said quietly, wonderingly, to the empty room.
‘You did ask.’
The alarming thing was that what had started as a lively discussion, had somehow gone sour on the two girls.
For Joan, though she had not recognized the fact until that instant when the words crossed her lips, had meant what she said.
And Anne had known she meant it.
Eight
Just prior to Twelfth Night in the January of 1483, Anne went down with a not too serious attack of the prevalent sweating sickness.
Low-spirited, disappointed that she must forgo the festivities which always marked the twelfth day of Christmas, she wept copiously and bewailed her ill-fortune to such an extent that it was feared she would increase the severity of the illness.
‘You must go in my stead, Joan,’ she said, placing a feverish hand on that of her companion.
‘You must go and then you can tell me of it afterwards.
You shall wear my gown.’
‘But your gown would not fit me,’ said Joan — a mite tactlessly in view of their recent conversation.
’ 'TWOULD be too tight in the bodice.’
‘You are just making excuses,’ complained Anne, recognizing Joan's reluctance to gate-crash on royal celebrations.
‘We are of the same height exactly and, if necessary, the bodice could be let out a trifle.’
‘How would I explain the presence of one who is known to the court as Joan de Warenne, the Duchess of York's companion — in other words her servant!’
‘You know quite well you are not a servant,’ Anne told her.
‘There is some mystery surrounding your birth — I just know there is!— and one of these days I mean to discover the truth.’
‘You are being fanciful,’ Joan said in the manner of one humouring an invalid.
‘Think you I know not who my parents and grandparents were?’
‘You imagine you do.
Either way, we are so alike, we could be taken for sisters — everyone says so.’
‘Everyone?
You mean the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Dauphin, the Pope, the Pied Piper of Hamelin…’
‘Prince Edward says so,’ interposed Anne in a cross voice.
Now Joan, having a fondness for the prince, was both flattered and heartened by this disclosure.
She had assumed that, relegated by protocol to the background at court functions, she was unnoticed by the nobility.
However, she had no intention of revealing her gratification to Anne.
‘Polite conversation, no more,’ she said airily, hoping thus to goad Anne into revealing a little more.
‘I doubt the prince has really noticed me.’
‘You are mistaken there, Joan.
‘Is that your cousin?’ the prince asked me.
‘She is so like you that she could be your twin!’’
‘Is that all!’ exclaimed Joan ungraciously.
‘Nay, there is more besides,’ Anne told her, warming to her theme.
She recalled that she had at the time been a little put out by the prince's interest in Joan — but now the important thing was to persuade Joan to join in the festivities and bring her a first-hand report.
‘I explained to the prince that you were my companion and he said — all the while gazing at you across the hall —‘But a relative none the less, I'll warrant!
Joan de Warenne is a beauty — a real beauty.’
I was a trifle vexed at that and said, ‘She is not yet thirteen years of age!’
‘Indeed?’ he said.
‘Then we are of like age — how interesting!
I too am frequently taken to be older than my years.
I would meet the beauteous child — pray contrive to present her to me, lady Anne.’’
‘Did he truly say that?’ asked Joan, unable to conceal her delight.
‘Really and truly?’
‘He did indeed.’
‘How did you answer about the last — about presenting me to him?’
‘Now, let me see…’ said Anne tantalisingly.
‘Next time I am taking the air in the palace gardens, I shall send word to you, brother-in-law,’ I said.
‘Joan de Warenne always accompanies me.’’
Joan flushed with pleasure but her words were guarded.
‘I am honoured by the prince's interest — but I doubt not it stems from mere curiosity as to my connection with her for whom he has a brotherly fondness.’
‘Brotherly?’
Anne looked vexed.
‘That is as maybe — but my feelings for him are not sisterly, I promise you.
Far from it.
Alas that today of all days, when there will be opportunity for further converse with him, I am laid low with this horrid malady!’
‘Alas indeed!’
‘I really do feel quite poorly, Joan.’
‘Naturally you do.
You must lie quiet and stop overtaxing your strength — then you will be better in no time.’
‘I trust you will not take the contagion,’ Anne said wearily, lying back pale and wan upon the pillows.
‘Otherwise you too will have to forgo the festivities — and I shall know naught of what goes on!’
‘There is no fear of my taking it,’ Joan assured her.
‘I suffered an attack two years before I came here — I shall not take it again, that is certain.
'TWAS that, mama reckoned, which preserved me from the pestilence!’
‘And you will go?’
‘Go — go where?’ asked Joan, well aware of Anne's meaning.
‘Why, to the Twelfth Night festivities — where else?’
‘Since my lady commands it,’ replied Joan with a small mocking curtsy.
‘Could I refuse her bidding?’
‘Yea, if it suited you,’ Anne said with truth.
‘Only mama shall know our secret — she has already expressed the intention of concealing the nature of my illness, for fear of arousing alarm.
Mama will agree, I am sure — you cannot put a foot wrong, it seems, where she is concerned!
I shall have someone alter the dress to fit you.
It is too tight for myself, I shall say — and since I am indisposed, my companion shall fit it on for me!’
‘There is little time,’ said Joan nervously.
‘There is plenty of time — hours and hours in fact in which to change your identity.
So go now, Joan, and start to make ready.
Dress your hair in the way I intended, put  on my pearl necklace and —’ Anne drew off her gold ring and carelessly dropped it on to the coverlet ‘— my wedding-ring.
Then, with you wearing my dress and your best smile, none will entertain the notion that you are other than Anne Duchess of York.’
Elizabeth Mowbray, though having reservations about the deception, could in truth see no harm in it.
Masques, revelry and outlandish costumes were part and parcel of Twelfth Night, when the more sombre festivities of Christmas were past and the new year could be celebrated with whole-hearted enthusiasm.
One young lady, disguised as another, would be unlikely therefore to provoke censure even if recognized.
What harm could there be on this night of all nights, the dowager-duchess asked herself, in Joan de Warenne representing her who is in fact her half-sister?
I myself shall be there, since it is clearly expected of me, and thus there will be no need of a chaperon.
And since Joan's taking her place would greatly please Anne…
Joan looked wholly enchanting as she entered the great hall that evening beside the duchess.
She was wearing a pale pink velvet gown trimmed with grey fur, over a cloth-of-silver undergown.
Her hair had been braided and was concealed under a heart-shaped silver head-dress with a transparent white veil.
Anne's pearl necklace adorned her throat, and her gold ring the third finger of Joan's left hand.
It seemed to Joan that the wedding-ring was burning her finger; it caught the light, glistering brightly as if wishing to draw attention to the fact that it was embellishing an alien hand.
But Joan's smile was all her own — and in no way feigned.
Indeed its brilliance suggested that Anne Duchess of York possessed some new-found and enviable secret.
Court etiquette was now familiar to Joan, since she had watched avidly all that went on during her chaperonage of her young mistress.
But she had qualms about  encountering the royal family, wondering if they would see her, not as Anne Mowbray, but as a stranger.
That, she thought, will be the moment of truth…
Received by the king and queen as she made her entrance, she curtsied deeply, and waited with bated breath for what would happen next.
‘Ah, our beauteous daughter-in-law!’ said the king with his usual bonhomie and turning to the queen.
‘Is not our little bride a sight for sore eyes!’
Elizabeth Woodville, well accustomed to her husband's appreciative eye for a pretty woman, smiled.
‘You look truly charming, my lady,’ she said generously.
‘The prince your husband methinks will be a proud fellow!’
Next she was greeted by Prince Richard himself.
Wearing tunic and hose of pale blue satin lavishly ornamented with silver, he looked more angelic than ever.
With his blond curls and vivid blue eyes, he was the prototype of a youthful Plantagenet.
He, as well as Anne and Joan herself, was of Plantagenet stock, being a descendant of Edward the Third's son Lionel, through the female line.
Prince Richard smiled and greeted her courteously.
‘How beautiful you are, my lady,’ he said ingenuously before turning mischievously to his brother.
‘The prince my brother can scarce take his eyes off you!’
‘You do me much honour, my lord,’ Joan said, overwhelmed by relief that her identity had not been challenged.
Indeed, she thought, I am beginning to see myself as Anne — beginning to believe I am Anne!
Next it was Prince Edward's turn to greet her.
For just an instant, glancing up from her curtsy, Joan registered a look of puzzlement in the prince's gaze.
But then, as if in that same instant he had solved the puzzle, he spoke.
‘Greetings, my lady, on this surely most blessed of all Twelfth Nights!’ he said quietly.
‘And to you also, my lord,’ Joan responded.
Richard came forward then to formally ask for her hand in a pavan but, observing that his brother was conversing  with his elected bride and catching the latter's meaningful glance, he cheerfully turned away and asked his sister Cecily instead.
‘And where is your companion this evening, my lady?’ enquired Prince Edward of Joan.
‘My companion?’
Joan frowned ever so slightly.
‘Why, she has a slight malady, alas!’
‘The lady Anne, I am told, is given to tantrums.’
The words were enigmatic and the expression cool — perfectly composed.
It was a test remark, as they were both aware.
Joan's expression was a study.
‘The lady Anne is —’ She paused, floundered and then looked at him uneasily ‘— myself.
You speak of myself, my lord.’
‘I am not deceived, my lady,’ came the confident reply.
‘Look not so dismayed, I pray you — or it will be construed that I have made some unwelcome proposal.’
‘But…’
‘Be at peace, my lady.
I warrant none but myself will have seen through the deception.
I am, after all, something of an expert on the subject!’
‘What mean you, my lord?’
‘As the lady Anne is aware — and to her chagrin — I have more than once expressed admiration of her companion.
That she has so kindly obliged me this evening, and on Twelfth Night of all nights causes me no small surprise.’
‘Then since you have seen through the deception, my lord —’ Joan saw Elizabeth Mowbray's gaze upon her and lowered her voice still further ‘— methinks I should leave forthwith.’
‘Leave?’
The aggrieved note in the prince's voice prompted several heads to turn in their direction — to Joan's discomfiture.
‘Nay, that is the last thing I desire.’
‘And the first thing, my lord?’ enquired Joan innocently — having lowered her voice now almost to a whisper.
The first thing?’
‘Ah!’
Prince Edward's gaze met hers and she flushed delicately.
‘There is a time and a place for everything, my lady, and this is neither, alas!
And yet…’
He paused and seemed to be considering his next words  with especial care.
‘And yet, my lord?’ prompted Joan.
A court equerry appeared at that point at the prince's elbow.
‘My lord prince,’ he said, ‘the king your father desires speech with you.’
‘I shall be with His Grace anon,’ the prince replied on a small note of displeasure, before again turning to Joan.
He spoke in a low voice.
‘Pray present a brother-in-law's felicitations to the lady Anne.
I trust we shall meet again, you and I — I shall contrive a meeting, a rather more private meeting, as soon as may be.
I trust you would find that agreeable.’
‘If it be agreeable also to my lady Anne in whose service I am,’ Joan replied dutifully.
‘I thank you, my lord, for your courtesy.’
‘My courtesy?’
The prince looked rueful.
‘Tell me, my lady — is it mere courtesy that makes the bells ring, that makes moonlight of a sudden more desirable than sunlight and makes one yearn for this Twelfth Night to be of the past?
Methinks not.
Even at this moment, I see that in your gaze which finds an echo in my own heart!’
‘Your heart?’
Joan spoke breathlessly, tremulously — like one who sees a childhood tale given substance, a fairytale come of a sudden to life.
‘My lord, I…’
‘I must away,’ Prince Edward put in gently.
‘The king awaits me and will soon be out of patience.
We shall meet again, Joan de Warenne — and very soon, if I have my way.’
Her cheeks flushed, her heart fluttering, Joan watched as he moved away.
Prince Richard approached then and invited her to dance with him, and she smilingly accepted, feeling like one in a dream.
Prince Richard was struck by her beauty — why, he asked himself, have not I noticed it before?
The lady Anne looks different tonight but 'tis a difference I cannot fathom.
Her face seems to glow with happiness as if a vision has of a sudden become reality.
Until then he had thought of her as sulky, even wilful, and had in truth been no more anxious for the match than she.
To him the childhood wedding had been something  of a charade during which each character had played a part, knowing that the coming together at the end — the whole story — was not to be taken seriously.
It had been a game to him, to her — to everybody.
He had played his part, had enjoyed the pomp and the dressing-up, and being with his bride the centre of attention, confident all the while that Fate, his father or the future — the three f's as he called them to himself — would eventually rearrange the matter to everyone's satisfaction.
Richard Duke of York meanwhile was an excellent dancer — as might be expected of a youthful extrovert with several fun-loving sisters.
In fact, he was a better dancer than his brother — and a worthy partner for a damsel with stars in her eyes.
Joan was aware that her life would never be quite the same again.
She had caught a glimpse of Heaven; had seen adoration and more in the gaze of a handsome prince who would one day be king of England.
Nay, she would never be the same again.
Once before, following another encounter, a brutal and terrifying encounter, she had recognized that.
But that had been a piercing of her body, a searing of her mind — but this encounter had been the captivation of her soul.
Nine
Anne made a good recovery from her illness and three weeks later was back in circulation.
Joan had regaled her with details of the Twelfth Night festivities — whilst remaining noticeably reticent on the subject of Prince Edward.
Thus when the prince outlined to Anne his plan for a secret rendezvous with Joan, she had been more than a little piqued.
She to play the part this time of chaperon to her own servant?
Such was unthinkable.
But when the prince reminded her — oh, so gently — of the deception practised upon his royal parents on Twelfth Night, Anne realized she had little choice.
She acquiesced, agreeing to his plan for a meeting with Joan in the palace rose-garden.
She had no real objection to the change of roles or to chaperoning her own servant — to her it would be another adventure.
Her disgruntlement arose from the now obvious fact that the prince was enamoured of Joan.
‘What pains me is that you took the opportunity when I was sick unto death to steal Prince Edward's heart from me,’ she said to Joan, having informed her of the plan.
‘That was despicable.’
‘You were not sick unto death,’ retorted Joan.
‘And since at no time have you possessed the prince's heart, how could I have stolen it from you?’
‘But you knew how I felt about him,’ pouted Anne.
‘How could you act so deceitfully, Joan?’
‘You are a married lady, remember — the prince is your brother-in-law’.
Would you expect him, the prince of Wales, to so far flout convention as to seek a liaison with  his brother's lady?’
‘Then you think that whilst he is in truth enamoured of myself, he sees you as second best.’
‘It may be so,’ said Joan lightly, more wounded by the suggestion than she would have admitted.
‘Would you have me ask him if that is indeed the case?’
‘You will do no such thing, Joan de Warenne!’
Anne said hastily.
‘If you do, I shall never ever speak to you again.’
‘Then you will carry out the prince's design?’
‘Since he himself asked me,’ Anne said sullenly, ‘how could I refuse?’
‘Easily,’ came the uncompromising answer.
‘Had you wished to refuse, you would have done so without a second thought!’
And so the meeting took place.
It was February and the weather was unseasonably mild.
The morning sky was blue as yet but storm clouds were gathering and the wind seemed on the change.
All three of the participants in that clandestine meeting, looking back a few months later, were to recall the weather on that day as an omen — a mirror of the tempestuous events which followed.
Edward was already there when Joan arrived.
She had left Anne, fur-clad and ostensibly reading a book of hours that Prince Richard had given her, on a stone seat near the entrance to the rose-garden.
He came to meet her, his hands extended in greeting.
His gaze, as it met hers, clearly expressed his pleasure.
‘Joan,’ he said, ‘this meeting is at once a joy and a sorrow.’
‘How so, my lord?’ she asked.
‘On the morrow I am to leave Westminster — I learned of the fact only this morning.’
Joan's smile disappeared and her face clouded.
‘Why so, my lord?’ she asked softly, and he heard the catch in her voice.
‘I am bound for Ludlow.’
‘For Ludlow!’ repeated Joan who had not before heard of that place.
‘I am Prince of Wales, after all.’
‘Ludlow is in Wales?’
It is on the Welsh border — and I am to reside there in my principality, pursuing my studies under the tutelage of my uncle Earl Rivers and the guardianship of him who has long been my chamberlain, Sir Thomas Vaughan.’
‘Sir Thomas Vaughan is known to me, being the administrator of the Norfolk estates,’ Joan told him.
’ 'TWAS he escorted the dowager-duchess and my lady Anne to court.’
‘Then he may be useful to us,’ Edward said thoughtfully.
‘I dare say he could be persuaded to convey letters from Ludlow to a certain damsel of my acquaintance.’
‘Then this is not farewell, my lord?’
‘A temporary farewell only — I doubt not I shall return to court in the summer, whether it be at Westminster, Eltham or Richmond.
But enough talk of farewells and reunions — let us speak of the present.’
Joan smiled.
‘If that be your desire, my lord.’
‘Joan de Warenne, I am deeply enamoured of you.’
‘But you scarcely know me,’ she said demurely.
‘I am but companion to the lady Anne.’
‘I have ofttimes wondered about you since you accompanied the lady Anne to court.’
‘Wondered about me, my lord — pray what did you wonder?’
‘I was drawn by the likeness between you.
I assumed you to be related to the lady Anne.’
‘Alas, my lord, I have no claim to such distinction!’
Yet the likeness is quite riveting.
Others too have remarked on it — the queen my mother made reference to it only yesternight…’
He paused, not wishing to repeat his mother's words.
John Mowbray had a hand in that lass's making, I'll be bound,she had said.
The spit of the lady Anne, she is !
‘Indeed, my lord?’ prompted Joan.
‘Joan, time is fleeting and I would tell you what is in my mind,’ he said gravely.
‘I am shortly to wed the daughter of the dauphin of France — thus to promote amity between  our two countries.
Should this be announced during my absence, as is not unlikely, I would you should know it as a marriage of convenience, no more.
I have a deep affection for you, a yearning that will be with me till the day I die.’
Joan shivered.
‘You, like myself, my lord, are in but your thirteenth year — pray let us not give thought to death!’
But death comes to us all,’ said the prince in surprise.
‘Why then should one ignore it?’
‘I lost my father and mother and four sisters prior to becoming the lady Anne's companion.
Thus death has been ever close to me — so close that it seemed to me at times that I could reach out and touch it.
I try therefore to think only of life and youth — I could not speak lightly of death as do you, my lord.’
The prince watched her, held by her expression.
She and Anne were dressed alike in the manner of twins.
Each wore a dark green velvet mantle, close-fastened against the weather with gold cords and tassels, while her unbound hair, entwined at the crown with ropes of pearls, was covered with a transparent white veil.
As they approached, the prince had found it almost impossible to tell the one from the other.
But now, talking to Joan, seeing her changing expressions, he asked himself how it had been so — apart from their dress, it seemed to him then that there was after all no strong likeness between them.
Joan's face at that moment was full of radiance.
A trick of the light perhaps — or the face of love looking upon that of the beloved?
‘You try , you say, to think only of life and youth,’ he said at length, watching her closely.
‘What then of love?’
‘Ah, but I have not tried to think of love,’ came the answer.
‘Love is something that just happens, I dare say.’
‘And has it happened?’
She nodded.
‘Then your feelings for me are as mine for you?’ he asked softly.
‘I fear so.’
‘Fear and love do not mix, it seems to me — one should be happy in one's love,’ he said soberly.
Joan, hearken to me — I know not what the future holds and I shall, if I may, elude the bonds of the French marriage — but remember always, I pray you, that you have an especial place in my heart.
I shall contrive to write to you during my absence, to tell you what is in my mind and heart — and when in the summer we meet again, there will be further clandestine meetings, many joyful hours and reunions, I promise you.
Say only that this of which I speak is pleasing to you.’
‘It is indeed, my lord — with all my heart I say it is.’
‘As a token of my regard for you, I have here a gift…’
He took from his jerkin a small velvet-wrapped package.
‘I would have you wear it on a ribbon inside your bodice.’
Joan undid the package and looked at its contents without speaking for a moment.
The gold ring was exquisitely ornamented with tiny pearls.
‘Thank you, my lord,’ she said, her eyes shining with tears.
‘It is the most beautiful thing I have had in my whole life.’
‘It was given to me by my grandmother, the lady Jacquetta, and has a curious history.
One day perchance I shall tell you of it.
But wear it, Joan, to remind you of me.’
‘I will,’ she said through her tears.
‘Always and for ever.’
‘Now it is time for us to part, alas, alas!
Nay, be not sorrowful — summer is not many moons away!’
‘But…’
He took her hand but this time, instead of the formal kiss, he turned her hand over and kissed the palm, sending little ripples of pleasure coursing through her body.
‘Farewell, Joan de Warenne,’ he said.
‘We shall meet again, never fear.’
‘Farewell, my lord,’ she said softly.
‘Go with God.’
Anne was stamping her feet to keep warm and showing every sign of impatience when Joan joined her.
‘I am stiff with cold,’ she complained.
‘You have been simply ages!’
Joan had turned round to take a last look at the prince.
But the garden was deserted and already he had disappeared from view.
‘I expect I shall die of exposure,’ went on Anne, piqued by Joan's lack of concern.
‘I am warm as toast,’ Joan said unsympathetically.
‘I am sorry I kept you waiting, lady Anne — the prince is going away, you see.’
‘So that is the end of that!’
‘Nay, on the contrary — it is but the beginning methinks.’
Joan spoke more from defiance than conviction.
‘Out of sight, out of mind, is the practice with youths of his age,’ said the voice of experience.
‘I know not why he troubled — keeping us both standing about catching our death of cold!’
‘He gave me this,’ Joan told her, holding out the ring for inspection.
‘Holy Mary!
I expect he robbed the crown jewels!’
‘He said it belonged to his grandmother — his maternal grandmother.’
‘Not Jacquetta?’ asked Anne, stopping in her tracks in apparent shock.
‘Surely not Jacquetta?’
‘So he said.’
‘Better have a care then!
Jacquetta, the queen's mother, is said to be a witch.
They say she procured her daughter's marriage to the king by sorcery and has committed all manner of other crimes.’
‘Must you tease so?’ asked Joan, not believing a word of it.
‘Must you spoil everything?’
‘Oh, come on, Joan — let us make haste,’ said Anne crossly.
‘I am frozen half to death — and all for a servant, if you please!
Mama would have a fit if she knew.’
The prince and I have a close affection one for the other.
Now he must go away and I dare say I shall never see him again,’ Joan said woefully, lagging behind despite Anne's grumbles and gazing down at the ring.
‘This is all I shall have to remember him by — you are cruel to treat it with such levity.’
Anne, who was heart-free despite her sometimes extravagant claims, was surprised to see tears coursing down Joan's face.
Her heart touched on the instant by her friend's distress, she put an arm through hers and led her back to the palace.
’ 'Twill be all right, Joan,’she assured her.
‘I was but teasing — I meant no harm.
Take heart!
The prince will not forget you — I just know he will not.
You will be together again before very long — and then who knows!’
‘Oh, Anne, do you really think so?’ asked Joan wistfully.
‘If only I could be certain of that.’
Anne looked at her, surprised at her depth of feeling.
She loved her dearly — as a sister, the best of sisters.
Her teasing was harmless for the most part, light-hearted and without malice.
‘Then simply take my word for it,’ she said consolingly.
‘You will see your prince again and be very close — I feel it in my bones!’
Despite outward appearances and her protected upbringing, it seemed after all as if Anne were the more worldly-wise of the two — or even the three of them.
She believed what she had said and yet those last words had a curious prophetic ring — as if somewhere in those uncharted seas which man calls Time, they were echoing and re-echoing into the future.
But this is not real, she thought.
The reality was long ago — oh so long ago!
Still there is that curious ringing in my ears, a noise as of metal spades on lead — unhappy sounds which seem to shake my very bones…
The sounds were plaintive, resonant, doom-laden as those of a passing-bell, and she recognized even then — though she could not have found words to express it — that it would turn out thus, just as she had said.
Joan would indeed see her prince again and be very close — and she herself had, as she said, felt it in her bones, God help them all!
Surreptitiously, her hand hidden within the furry confines of her muff, Anne made the sign of the cross.
In the name of the Father and the Son …
Ten
Joan received in all three letters from Prince Edward over the next weeks, cheerful letters telling her of his new abode and his favourable impressions of the Welsh Marches and its people.
He told her he missed her and his family, and that the prince his brother would shortly be paying him a visit.
He signed each letter simply as ‘Your own Edward.’
‘There are times,’ he said in the first letter, ‘that I wish myself not a prince, but a simple fellow.
As a prince, you understand, one does not enjoy freedom in the sense that one of more humble origin may enjoy freedom.
Sir Thomas Vaughan has consented, albeit reluctantly, to convey my letters under cover of official letters to the dowager-duchess regarding the Norfolk estate.
I know not how long he will do so.
‘Felicitations from him who must worship you from afar and longs to have you for his own.’
One week after the third letter arrived, Elizabeth Mowbray summoned Joan to her library.
Her expression was stern, a mite displeased.
Joan,’ she said without preamble, ‘I have today received a letter from Sir Thomas Vaughan which pertains, not to his Norfolk administrative undertakings, but to his duty in respect of Edward Prince of Wales.’
Joan said nothing, fearful of what she was about to hear.
‘I was aware needless to say that the prince had become infatuated with you.
Both Sir Thomas and I assumed that distance and the fickleness of youth would take care of the  matter,’ continued Elizabeth Mowbray.
‘Sir Thomas insisted on reading the prince's letters as a condition of his acting as go-between, and saw naught in them save the boyish fondness of a lad in his thirteenth year for a lass of similar age.
The prince, it seems, had not hitherto shown a particular interest in a damsel and Sir Thomas was therefore convinced that the attachment between yourself and the prince was simply a romantic interlude.’
‘Yea, my lady,’ Joan said in a small voice, still fearful of what was to follow.
‘I understand.’
‘I trust you do, Joan — I trust you do!’
Elizabeth Mowbray said with a sigh.
‘For now, it seems, the prince has revealed to Sir Thomas the depth of his regard for you — even going so far as to say that if in due course he may not marry yourself, he will remain unwed.
Sir Thomas remonstrated with him, as was his duty, reminding him of his high calling and how he will be required, in accordance with royal custom, to make a match advantageous to the realm — that is to say with a foreign princess.’
Joan felt a trifle faint and was grateful for the fact that she was sitting down.
But her hands were trembling uncontrollably, giving away to the duchess the measure of her anxiety.
‘And how did the prince make answer, my lady?’ she asked.
‘He refused to hearken to Sir Thomas's words of wisdom, disdaining to discuss the matter further.
As a result, Sir Thomas has resolved that he can no longer act as go-between in respect of the prince's letters to yourself.’
Elizabeth Mowbray gave a deep sigh as if the words that were to follow were unpleasing to her.
‘He further informed the prince that, should he find evidence of a continuing liaison between himself and yourself, he would consider it his duty to at once have recourse to the king his father.’
‘I understand, my lady,’ Joan said again, her heart feeling like lead.
‘Joan, you are a lass of intelligence,’ said Elizabeth Mowbray.
‘You must surely have realized therefore that there could be no future in this attachment.
Lose not your  heart to the prince, child — he will wreak havoc with many a feminine heart, I doubt not, ere he reaches his majority.
He must marry when and where the king his father dictates…’
She paused as if turning over in her mind her next words before giving them substance.
‘…
One cannot overlook the fact that you yourself are not of the nobility — let alone of royal blood!’
‘Nay, my lady, I am but the offspring of a carpenter and a washerwoman,’ Joan said bitterly, close to tears.
‘I recognize that there can be no future for us together and yet I know a great fondness for the prince — a fondness that time, I suspect, will not lessen.’
‘Dear child!’ smiled Elizabeth Mowbray.
‘There speaks the voice of youth!
I warrant you will in a twelve-month have forgotten about the prince, and be head-over-heels in love with another — one more suitable, please God!’
‘With a carpenter perchance?’
Joan asked resentfully.
‘Or an innkeeper maybe?’
‘Why say you an innkeeper?’ asked Elizabeth Mowbray curiously.
‘For the same reason as I say a carpenter, I dare say!’ shrugged Joan.
‘After all…’
‘You said a carpenter, one must suppose, because you believe yourself the daughter of a carpenter,’ interposed Elizabeth Mowbray firmly.
‘And that brings me to a further reason for my summoning you here today.
The one, I trust, will help to ease your pain over the other.’
‘If by the other, my lady, you refer to the regard the prince and I have for each other, pray be assured it is not pain I feel — but joy, deep joy.
Our fondness each for the other is pure and innocent, a union of two happy souls — it could be that a way will be found for us.’
‘Joan, hearken to me.’
Elizabeth Mowbray was baffled by the girl's refusal to see the matter in its true light and more than a little troubled by what she was beginning to see as something other than a passing infatuation.
‘You are not, as you believe, the offspring of Will Halidon — but of my late husband John Mowbray, fourth Duke of Norfolk.’
Joan's face paled and she gazed wide-eyed at the  duchess, as if suspecting that lady had taken leave of her senses.
‘Nay, it cannot be,’ she breathed.
‘Bess Halidon, your mother, gave me proof of it when she came here on the day prior to her death and asked that you be found employment.’
Then mama was not married to papa?
‘She was wife to Will Halidon —’ said Elizabeth Mowbray succinctly ‘— not to your father.’
‘Then mama was a…’
‘Hearken to me,’ hastily interposed Elizabeth Mowbray.
‘Your mother perchance felt for your father, much as you now feel for Prince Edward.
Think well on that, Joan de Warenne, ere you make harsh judgements!’
‘Then you are not angry about — about the duke?’
‘Persons in my position customarily wed, not according to their own choosing — but in accordance with the wishes or indeed the ambitions of their elders.
Sometimes there is love — indeed I loved my lord dearly.
Such is rare.
Should I then, blessed with love in an arranged marriage, be angered by another's brief joy!’
‘You are sure about this, my lady — that I am daughter to the duke your husband?’
‘There can be no doubt.
I spoke of the matter to Sir Thomas Vaughan, he being of like age to my lord and a close friend from boyhood,’ Elizabeth Mowbray told her.
‘Sir Thomas admitted — though with no small reluctance — that he had been aware of a liaison 'twixt my lord and Bess Halidon.
Your mother, he gave me to understand, came from a respectable if impecunious family.
Your grandfather, it seems, was a Yorkist partisan, like Sir Thomas himself — after he was slain in battle, the family fell on hard times.’
‘Mama never spoke of her family, insisting that she had been born an orphan,’ Joan said, still unable to fully comprehend that she was not whom she had thought she was.
’ 'TIS hard to imagine that she and the duke…’
‘My lord's family is ambitious,’ put in Elizabeth Mowbray, seeing Joan's hesitation.
‘I was considered a suitable bride and — well, that was that!
My lord purchased  Briar Cottage for his lady-love and offered a generous allowance for your maintenance — but your mother refused the latter.
She wed Will Halidon soon after.
He was many years her senior, as you will be aware — I doubt not you know the rest.’
There was silence in the library for several moments, whilst Joan digested the astonishing facts.
Elizabeth Mowbray watched her changing expressions, seeing the steadiness of her gaze as she gave thought to the revelation and its implications, the high smooth brow and long-fingered white hands.
By my faith, she thought with an inexplicable mixture of joy and resentment, she at this moment even more than the other closely resembles my dead lord!
Why then is she too not mine?
Were she so, perchance there would be a hope — faint but none the less reasonable — that she and the prince could in the fullness of time marry…
‘Thank you for telling me, my lady,’ Joan said.
‘I expect that was why you agreed to have me here when mama came to you.’
‘Not entirely.’
Elizabeth Mowbray smiled.
‘The lady Anne needed a companion — and who better than her half-sister?
It would please me, Joan, when the time comes and my daughter's marriage to Prince Richard is completed, to find you a suitable husband.
With your permission, I shall let it be known that you are in fact my lord's bastard — bastardy, whilst it precludes a royal marriage, is no impediment to a good match, more especially when the bride possesses a sizeable dowry.’
‘A dowry, my lady?
But I have no dowry.’
‘That could easily be remedied,’ Elizabeth Mowbray assured her.
‘In fact it shall be so very shortly — my lord would have wished it so!’
‘You are very good to me, my lady,’ Joan said with sincerity.
‘I know not how I may repay you.’
‘I hold you in some affection, child,’ came the reply.
‘That is why I ask you here and now to give serious thought to ending your innocent liaison with Prince Edward.
No lasting good could come of it and I fear to see you hurt.’
‘My lady, the prince and I share a great fondness…’
‘Think on it, Joan,’ firmly interposed Elizabeth Mowbray.
‘Give thought to it, is all I ask.
Sir Thomas will no longer be acting as go-between in the matter of correspondence, but the prince might well contrive some other means of communicating with you.
Either way, he will be returning to Westminster at the end of May, I am told.
Avoid his advances, is my advice to you, child.
Keep him at a distance — for your own sake.’
Eleven
King Edward died unexpectedly at Westminster Palace on the ninth day of April.
In his forty-second year at the time of his death, his latter years had been passed in luxury and rich living.
Prior to his death, he had been planning a full-scale war with Scotland, calling upon his subjects to raise the revenues for the undertaking.
In the midst of these preparations — Richard Duke of Gloucester, his brother, having already taken Berwick and occupied the fortress — the king had been seized with a virulent fever to which he had quickly succumbed.
So sudden had been his demise that, very soon afterwards, prior to robing, in order to avert any suspicion as to its cause, his body, with face, arms and chest uncovered, was laid out on a board for nine hours.
All the nobility, together with the lord mayor and aldermen of the City of London, were sent for, that they might identify the body and declare that the king was truly dead.
Anne had learned of the change in the royal fortunes from her mother.
Occupying their own apartments at the palace and giving little heed to the prevailing rumour that the king was unwell, neither she nor Joan was prepared for the tidings they received on that April afternoon.
But that cannot be, mama, Anne protested as if the duchess had somehow been misinformed.
‘It just cannot be.
Why, only yesterday the king was speaking with me, calling me his little daughter-in-law and patting my hand as was his wont.
He is neither ill nor old — not very old, that is.
You are surely mistaken.’
‘Believe me, daughter, I am not mistaken — I would it  were so!’
Elizabeth Mowbray was very much on her mettle.
‘Maybe 'tis a jest,’ persisted Anne, as if willing her mother to change her story.
‘Yea, that is the answer — a jest in very poor taste.’
‘Do I look as if I am jesting?’
Elizabeth Mowbray's face was pale and tense, her sorrowful mien reflecting the newly sombre mood of the court.
‘Would I jest about such a disaster!’
‘A disaster, you say?
Then it is true?’
‘May he rest in peace!’ said Joan piously, crossing herself and frowning at Anne to do likewise.
‘His Grace will be sorely missed, alas!’
‘He will so —’ agreed Anne gloomily, adding since it was clearly expected of her ‘— God rest his soul.’
‘Anne, I suggest that…’
‘Mama, this means that Prince Edward will now be king — and Richard, my Richard, will be Prince of Wales!’
The duchess registered the sudden brightening of her daughter's expression and the my Richard with some exasperation — but it was Joan's face that caught her attention.
‘What is it, child?’ she asked with concern.
‘What ails you?’
‘Edward is king now,’ Joan said in distress.
‘Already.
Ere he has even returned from Ludlow.
Nay, it must not be…’
And before anyone could reply, she had dissolved into tears and rushed from the chamber.
‘Alas, poor Joan!’ sighed Anne.
‘I expect she realizes now that Prince Edward is lost to her for ever!’
‘Poor Joan, you say?’ exclaimed Elizabeth Mowbray disapprovingly.
What of Queen Elizabeth and her daughters — and of Prince Edward most of all!’
‘Most of all?
Because he will be king, do you mean, mama?’ asked Anne.
‘Already he is king, my daughter.’
Anne looked at her, trying to take in the fact.
‘The king is dead — long live the king!’ she said.
‘That surely means that Edward will have to be married right away to a foreign princess — someone old and ugly whom he hates, I doubt not, instead of the one he loves.’
‘To whom do you refer, child?’
‘Why, Joan — whom else?’ asked Anne — as of a child.
‘She talks of little else and makes me quite vexed with her at times.
I wish I had shown more patience.
Alas, poor Joan!’
‘What of the prince himself?’ asked Elizabeth Mowbray, curious to know her daughter's views on the subject.
‘Think you his regard for her is genuine?’
‘Oh, he positively adores her, mama — he is quite enchanted with her.
You see, I was with her when they met one day in the rose-garden and I watched their faces as they talked together.’
Anne sighed.
‘Oh, mama, 'twas so romantic their meeting like that — and now it must all come to naught!’
‘He being who he is, and she who she is, it was a foregone conclusion that it would come to naught,’ said the duchess practically.
‘There was no future in the attachment — surely even you, my frivolous daughter, could see that!’
‘What will happen now, mama?’
‘The queen attended a meeting of the Privy Council soon after her lord's death was announced.
She proposed that the new king and his brother, who was on a brief visit to Ludlow, should be escorted to London by a substantial body of troops.’
‘Why a substantial body of troops?’
‘Desolated by the sudden loss of her husband, the queen feels anxious and vulnerable, I doubt not,’ replied the duchess with feeling.
‘She would naturally be concerned for the safe-keeping of her sons.’
‘But why a substantial body of troops,’ persisted Anne.
‘Is there to be a war?’
‘I trust not,’ came the answer.
‘As a mother, I am keenly aware of the queen's fears for her elder son at this time.
Alas that the Prince of Wales has not yet attained his majority!’
‘Mama, I must go to Joan and cheer her up,’ Anne said at that.
‘Perchance the outlook is not as bleak as she imagines.
As I shall say to her, it might all be for the best — now that he is king, I expect Edward will decide for himself whom to marry.’
‘You will say no such thing, my daughter,’ said Elizabeth Mowbray sternly.
‘To encourage Joan's hopes now would  be cruel in the extreme.
I utterly forbid it.
Disobey me in this and I shall pack you off to Framlingham and send Joan elsewhere — more quickly than you could say wedding-bells!’
‘Mama, you would not — surely you would not!’
‘Edward is king,’ the duchess told her uncompromisingly.
‘To think of him in any other role, to plot and connive for his affections — even to think of his putting his own desires and inclinations before his duty to God and the realm, is treason of the highest order.
I require your assurance that you will not meddle.’
‘You have it, mama,’ Anne responded meekly.
‘And mama?’
‘What is it, daughter?’ asked Elizabeth Mowbray warily.
‘Now that Edward is king, I suppose I shall very soon be Princess of Wales — is that not so?’
‘The honour is customarily reserved for the wife of the king's eldest son,’ observed the dowager-duchess.
‘I therefore suggest we wait and see as to that.’
‘But the king is not yet married, let alone having a son,’ objected Anne — but then her face brightened.
‘My prince meanwhile is heir presumptive, is he not?
Should aught happen to Edward — as God forbid — I would be queen of England!’
Again the my prince, thought Elizabeth Mowbray wearily.
So the marriage is no longer anathema to my daughter!
Ah me!
I would that Anne displayed the maturity of her half-sister — sometimes she is like a child of eight instead of a damsel of fourteen!
Joan is the younger by a year but, being of similar height and appearance, the girls are as twins.
Joan seems the more mature, perhaps due to her austere childhood.
Truth to tell, it is not difficult to see why Edward is enamoured of her…
Joan was lying on her bed, her face tear-stained, when Anne entered her chamber.
No longer weeping, she was in déshabillé and, Anne noticed, was wearing the prince's ring on the third finger of her left hand.
‘Joan, it will all turn out for the best — I know it will,’ Anne assured her, seating herself on the edge of the bed.
‘There are more fish in the sea than ever came out of it, as my nurse used to say!’
‘You understand not how I feel — how could you!’
Joan said, without removing her gaze from the ring.
‘You see, I was so looking forward to the prince's return from Ludlow.’
‘But as it is, he is returning sooner — not later,’ pointed out Anne.
‘That is surely something for which to be thankful.’
‘Since I am not to see him or speak with him alone ever again, in truth it matters little where he is.’
‘Oh, he will think of something,’ Anne assured her, with a confidence of which her mother would not have approved.
‘Edward will think of something.
Lovers always do.’
‘He is not my lover,’ protested Joan.
‘And never will be, alas, alas!
I hoped that when he returned in May…’
She fell silent, leaving the sentence uncompleted and Anne looked curiously at her.
‘You would not have, would you?’ asked Anne.
‘Why, that would be dreadfully wicked!’
‘Not when you love someone.’
‘Why would you, Joan?
Never would I wish to do whatever it is they do — nobody would!
One does it when one is married out of a sense of duty, as Father Powicke and my governess informed me.’
‘And what do they know about it?’
Joan asked scathingly.
‘He is a celibate priest and she is a spinster.’
‘Mama's neither a celibate priest nor a spinster — I shall ask her about it.’
‘I expect your mother wishes you to remain unenlightened, since you must wait another four years for your bedding!’
‘Joan, how is it that you know — about things like that?’
Anne asked interestedly.
’ 'TIS hard to say,’said Joan with truth.
‘I suppose it is just that I have led a more open life than you.
Sometimes, of course, it is quite awful!’
Anne heard her voice go heavy on the last word, as if it came from deep within her, influenced by some deep-felt experience.
‘Why so?’ she asked.
‘Why is it awful?’
‘If you hate someone.’
‘Surely none would marry someone they actually hated.
After all, I do not actually hate my Richard.
He has become more presentable of late — not quite the infant he was!
All the same, he is still the queen's ‘sweet babe’!'
‘She calls him her angel — so you should be all right!’
Joan said gloomily.
‘Why do you say that?’
‘You could not go far wrong being bedded by an angel!’
Anne gave thought to it.
Then she smiled.
‘Perchance Richard will be less of an angel by then — either way, I expect I shall manage,’ she said, determined to look on the bright side.
‘After all, until Edward marries and has an heir — as he will now have to do forthwith — Richard will remain heir presumptive.
And if as heir presumptive, he happens to be an angel as well— why should his bride complain!’
‘Oh, go away!’ cried Joan.
‘Go away!
You understand not — how could you?
I dare say you never will.
Go and play with your dolls!’
Twelve
Events moved swiftly following the death of King Edward.
So quickly that the commonalty experienced difficulty in keeping up with them and the nobility wondered where disaster would strike next in the realm.
At first it seemed that the Woodvilles, the members of the queen's ambitious and much-disliked family, held the vantage points.
Sir Edward Woodville, the queen's brother, was Admiral of the Fleet; and the Marquis of Dorset, the queen's elder son by her first marriage, was Constable of the Tower of London which housed the deceased king's treasure and the vast store of armaments held ready for an invasion of France.
It had long been believed that he who held the Tower, held London in the palm of his hand.
Richard Duke of Gloucester, the late king's soldierly youngest brother, was at his castle of Middleham in Yorkshire when he received news of Edward the Fourth's death.
Nominated by his dying brother as Lord High Protector of the realm during the boy king's minority, he had just returned from Scotland where, at the head of a powerful army, he had re-taken Berwick in his brother's name and thus nullified the Scottish King's threat of a full-scale invasion.
Richard of Gloucester acted swiftly.
He set forth at once for Northampton with a mere three hundred men, leaving Sir Richard Ratcliffe, his knight of the body, at York to raise more troops and follow him south with the reinforcements.
He next dismissed his nephew's two-thousand-strong Welsh escort and, having assured the bewildered youth of his affection and loyalty, set out with  him for London.
Edward the Fifth, as the prince was now, was as confused as his subjects by the rapid turn of events.
No sooner had he received the sorrowful news of his father's death, than he found himself surrounded by confusion, suspicion and intrigue.
Why, he asked himself, had his uncle, Earl Rivers, been placed under arrest?
And for what reason had Sir Thomas Vaughan, his chamberlain, a man he trusted and respected above most, been marched away and imprisoned like a common thief?
He was glad that Richard his brother was still with him — that he had not returned to the capital ere the calamitous news had arrived.
Richard, he could see, was as puzzled as himself.
They exchanged meaningful glances from time to time— and it was apparent that his brother was as troubled as he by the disturbing events.
Both princes drew strength from their uncle's quiet confidence.
Riding beside them, he explained that time was of the essence if their father's instructions in respect of the protectorship were to be carried out.
The commonalty, he told them, was on their side — any attempt to block the protectorship would but increase its already substantial resentment of the Woodvilles.
‘But what of my chamberlain, sir?’ asked Edward.
‘He presents no threat to the protectorship!’
‘Once the truth becomes apparent, nephew,’ explained Richard of Gloucester, and I judge there to be no further danger of a rising to place another on the throne or appoint another as Lord Protector, Vaughan and Rivers shall be released — and no harm done.’
It sounded logical enough, yet Edward had an uncanny sense of foreboding.
He yearned to reach London, was no less anxious than his uncle and his brother to reach the capital — and yet he had the curious feeling that time was not on his side.
He longed to be reunited with his bereaved family.
His mother and her advisers would allay his fears, he told himself.
He and his family would retire for a while from public gaze, so that they could privately give vent to their grief at the loss of that larger-than-life figure who  had seemed immortal…
Latterly, as the miles between themselves and the capital had lessened, Prince Richard had fallen uncustomarily silent.
During the first part of the journey, he had chattered incessantly, excited by all that he saw, his spirits elated.
But such a journey taken at speed was arduous in the extreme, something of an endurance test for an eleven-year-old.
‘Poor Uncle Rivers!’
Edward had remarked to him at one stage.
‘God grant he will soon regain his freedom — I know not which way to turn without him and Vaughan to advise me.’
His brother made no reply, seeming half asleep in his saddle and lagging behind.
Edward drew rein and waited for him to catch up — their uncle having ridden back along the line to urge the stragglers to greater effort.
‘I have heard much talk,’ Edward told his brother in a low tone.
‘They speak ill of our parents’ marriage — how then should I answer them?’
‘My lord of Gloucester says we shall reach London by the morrow,’ Richard reminded him.
‘Mama will know how to answer the lies and accusations — she will tell you what to say.
I doubt not she will command the release of Uncle Rivers and Sir Thomas Vaughan!’
‘You are right, my brother,’ Edward replied, more heartened than he would have admitted by the prince's words.
‘Am not I King of England?
I must stand firm before my lord of Gloucester — on the morrow, I shall myself command the release of my most loyal advisers.’
A few miles further on, the eleven-year-old fell asleep in his saddle and Gloucester, unwilling to call a halt at that stage and thus delay their entry into London, insisted that he be conveyed the rest of the way in a horse-drawn litter.
Thenceforth Edward rode with his uncle beside him.
Whilst he missed his brother's company, he welcomed the opportunity for being alone with his thoughts.
Gloucester, never one for words, spoke little for the remainder of the  journey, his mind and energies set on reaching London in time.
The royal cavalcade entered London in early May and received a tumultuous welcome from its citizens.
I told Joan de Warenne I would return in May, Edward thought — I little knew then that such calamity and change of fortune would summon me hither!
Joan de Warenne?
Nay, I must not dwell on that now — I must put her from my mind.
It is past before it has scarce begun.
I am older now — I most certainly feel older, weighed down methinks by sorrow and care.
I am King of England and henceforth must dedicate my life to my kingdom…
But it seemed that the longed-for reunion with his family was not to take place.
It soon became apparent to Edward that they were not en route for Westminster.
‘Whither are we bound, my lord?’ he asked Richard of Gloucester.
‘Ely Palace, nephew.’
‘Why Ely Palace rather than Westminster?’
‘Opposing factions are at work, alas, and I fear an uprising,’ came the daunting reply.
‘You, my lord, could well be in grave danger.’
‘I desire first to go to the palace of Westminster, my lord, there to greet the queen my mother and tender my condolences — and to share the grief of my family.’
‘Alas that it cannot be, nephew!’
Edward looked at his uncle in alarm.
‘Has ill befallen other members of my family also?’ he asked.
‘Also, you say?’
‘I but refer to Earl Rivers, my uncle — not forgetting Sir Thomas Vaughan, my chamberlain.
The latter has been my guardian and close confidant from infancy — he would not fail me now!’
Richard of Gloucester sighed.
‘Have patience, nephew, I pray you.
You are weary, I am weary and the horses are weary.
Let us leave such vexatious matters for the time being.’
‘Should you be referring to Vaughan, good uncle, I assure you that he is no vexatious matter,’ Edward said hotly.
‘Indeed, I would feel a deal more at ease, were that worthy gentleman by my side now.’
Richard of Gloucester gave another sigh and set his gaze on the narrow road ahead.
‘I had hoped to keep the information from you, at least till the morrow,’ he said.
‘But it seems it is not to be, alas!
The queen-dowager, your mother, having learned of the protector's decision to place Rivers and Vaughan under arrest — news travels fast, it seems, when the Woodvilles are on the warpath — went into sanctuary at Westminster, together with her family.’
‘But surely, my lord, there must be some mistake.’
‘Since your family has fled the palace,’ Richard of Gloucester continued evenly, ‘I deemed it wise to install Your Grace elsewhere.
The prince your brother however, being yet of tender years, will join the queen-dowager and her daughters forthwith.’
Edward made no reply.
His heart was beating agitatedly, as if sharing his sense of foreboding.
He had longed to be reunited with his family from the moment he had learned of his father's demise — but only now did he recognize the depth of his longing.
As it was, he must conceal his sorrow, his grief, his terrifying sense of aloneness…
Is it as my uncle says? he wondered.
Are mama and my sisters truly in sanctuary — or could it be that some grave misfortune has overtaken them also?
Nay, I must not think thus!
Richard of Gloucester has a difficult task — an unenviable task, some might say.
He has acted thus from the soundest of motives, being determined to ensure the safety of his sovereign and nephew — his brother's son.
Papa ever held Uncle Richard in high esteem — entrusting the protection of the realm to him, having him lead his armies in times of war.
That is why he appointed him Lord High Protector — he knew and trusted him implicitly.
Why then should I, who lack papa's experience of men and statecraft, question Uncle Richard's judgement now?
‘When will the prince my brother be joining the others in sanctuary?’ he asked.
‘Take a look behind, nephew,’ came the answer, ‘and you will see that already the litter carrying the prince has turned off for Westminster!’
Edward looked round, and the sight of the empty space where the horse-drawn litter had been, all but unmanned him.
He felt deprived, desolate, doubly-bereaved…
I must not mind, he told himself sternly.
Richard is but a child of eleven — 'tis fitting and right that he should join mama and our sisters.
It is foolish of me to be concerned.
Maybe it is for myself I mind, rather than for him! 'TIS not so much that Richard is bound for sanctuary — as that I am denied such privilege.
Privilege?
How foolish of me!
I am King of England — or so they tell me!
How then could I so much as contemplate joining my family in sanctuary?
Uncle Richard is right.
He must be right…
It was then that the thought occurred to him.
If his mother and sisters had gone into sanctuary, what of the lady Anne?
She will have accompanied them, I doubt not, being bride to Richard my brother, he told himself.
And if she is there, will not Joan de Warenne be there also…?
He turned to speak to Richard of Gloucester, and the latter was surprised by his expression.
It was as if his downcast spirits had lifted — and he were, after all, elated by thoughts of kingship.
‘My lord uncle,’ he said, ‘you are very good to me.
The king my father had complete confidence in your judgement and loyalty, I know.
Pray be assured that I have no less confidence in your qualities of governance.’
Richard of Gloucester met his gaze.
There could be no doubt of the youth's sincerity.
Emotion clearly showing in his eyes, the protector nodded briefly and, before replying, turned his gaze to the highway ahead.
It was as if he were in two minds about something and must select his words with care.
‘Our Lord have you in his keeping!’ he said quietly then.
The populace surged around them, noisy and enthusiastic at the sight of the young king.
As the cavalcade proceeded through the city, Edward smilingly acknowledged the acclamations and Richard of Gloucester — well aware that it was the very day, the fourth of May, appointed by Elizabeth Woodville for her son's coronation — addressed the citizens as he rode by.
‘Behold your prince and sovereign!’ he cried, indicating his nephew and receiving in response a tumultuous roar of approval.
‘Good citizens, behold your prince and sovereign!’
Thirteen
Elizabeth Woodville, informed of the arrest of her brother and of her son by a former marriage, as well as of the young king's faithful chamberlain, was beside herself with anger and anxiety.
Fearful of opposing Richard of Gloucester however until she had her sons in her charge, she resolved to take no precipitate action until she was reunited with them.
Word of the arrival in London of the new king was brought to her by Prince Richard.
She embraced her younger son warmly and with expressions of joy — whilst quite unable to restrain her tears.
‘How good it is to see you, my son,’ she told him.
‘But what of the king your brother?’
‘He will lodge tonight at Ely Palace,maman ,’ the prince told her.
On the morrow or soon after, as our uncle of Gloucester told me, he will take up residence in the Tower.’
‘The Tower, you say?’ asked Elizabeth Woodville in dismay, fear clutching at her throat.
‘Wherefore the Tower?’
‘Why, for his safe-keeping!’
‘His safe-keeping, you say?’ asked Elizabeth Woodville.
‘Would he be safer there than here with his own mother?
If only he were here with us, my son, how joyful would be this reunion!’
‘My brother is in good health, madam my mother — though he shed a tear or two, but secretly, when Sir Thomas Vaughan and Uncle Rivers were arrested!’
‘And so I should think!’ exclaimed Elizabeth Woodville approvingly, turning to address her daughters.
‘God be  praised that we had the foresight this morning to leave the palace and take refuge here!’
‘Did none try to persuade you to stay till the king arrived?’ asked the prince.
‘I gave no heed to them,’ came the answer.
‘My mind was made up.
We departed by the garden staircase, bringing with us only such articles of apparel and personal effects as could be worn or carried.
Truth to tell, all is not yet completed — even at this moment my servants are working secretly to bring my plan to fruition.’
‘What of myself,maman ?’ asked the prince, since his mother's attention had apparently veered to the completion of her move.
‘My lord of Gloucester wishes me to join Edward in the Tower — he made me promise.’
‘You, my pretty son, are staying with me!’ declared Elizabeth Woodville.
‘I gave my word,maman .’
‘A promise given under duress is a misnomer, my son,’ came the answer.
‘It is merely a password to freedom!’
‘But I cannot leave Edward on his own,’ protested the eleven-year-old.
‘He depends on me, you see.’
‘Depends on you?’
The queen-dowager laughed softly, her anxieties relegated to the background as she gazed at her best-loved child.
‘The conceit of the lad — and he only a second son!
I declare you are so much like your papa — whose soul God pardon — that it eases my sorrowing heart!
Edward is in his thirteenth year, two years your elder, and is King of England — why then would he depend on you?’
‘The king my brother is fearful — though none knows it save I,’ explained the prince.
‘Kings must hide their fears, he says.’
‘Alas my poor son!’ wept Elizabeth Woodville.
‘Whatever would his papa have said!’
‘You see,maman , I have to remind him to say ‘we’, ' Richard said importantly, pressing home what he saw as his advantage.
Although the journey from Ludlow, accomplished in record time, had been arduous in the extreme for one of his years, the yearned-for reunion with his family seemed now an anti-climax.
He was shut away in sanctuary with  the female members of his family, whilst the king his brother and, as he told himself, every other male of importance in the realm, would shortly be taking up residence in the Tower.
Wearying though the journey had been at the time — even humiliating in respect of his being drawn in a litter — in retrospect it seemed full of excitement, a time when one knew not what would happen next or what lay around the next corner.
Even the unease he had felt when from time to time he had registered his brother's anxiety, had somehow suggested an adventure.
To a lively eleven-year-old, albeit heir to the throne, danger was the spice of life.
‘Explain your meaning, my son,’ his mother was saying in the disapproving tone generally reserved for others.
‘The royal plural, my lord Rivers calls it,’ explained the prince.
‘Edward is wont to forget, you understand, being such a new sovereign — and 'tis my duty to remind him.’
‘Alas that a child of barely eleven summers must stand at the king's elbow to remind him of his duty!’ lamented Elizabeth Woodville.
‘Woe is me that Edward's kinsmen, plucked from his side during his first moments of kingship, lie now in the dungeons of Pontefract!’
‘Maman , what mean you?’
Richard's eyes were wide with shock.
‘Surely Uncle Rivers and Sir Thomas Vaughan are not held in a dungeon!’
‘They are indeed — and Richard Grey with them.
I was given the news last midnight and methought I would drown in the sorrow of my tears!’
Elizabeth Woodville told him woefully.
‘I fear greatly for their safety — God grant they will retain their lives if not their liberty!’
‘But Lord Richard Grey is your own son,maman —’ said Richard, as if such would ensure his safety ‘— and the king's half-brother.’
‘He is so,’ said the queen-dowager unhappily, ‘and Earl Rivers is my own brother.
So now you see, Richard, do you not, why your mama cannot let you out of her sight?’
‘Edward needs me,maman ,’ persisted the prince.
‘Really he does.’
‘Not another word, my son,’ said the queen-dowager firmly.
‘You are very precious to me — indeed to us all.
The  king your brother's life could well depend on your continuing safety.’
At the words to us all , the boy's attention had wandered somewhat.
He looked from one to another of those gathered around them — the thought having suddenly occurred to him.
‘What of the lady Anne?’ he enquired of his mother.
‘I see her not here with my sisters.’
‘She is to join us forthwith,’ explained Elizabeth Woodville.
‘The dowager-duchess, your lady's mother, is in frail health at present and was reluctant to be separated from her only child.’
‘Could not the dowager-duchess also have entered sanctuary?’
‘Such is unnecessary.’
There was a cold note in the queen-dowager's voice.
‘The Mowbrays are in no danger — of the old nobility, they are held in reverence throughout the land.’
‘But the lady Anne is my bride.’
‘She is indeed, my son, and that is why the dowager-duchess has agreed, if reluctantly, that her daughter too might be in danger.
Once the dowager-duchess is well enough to leave Westminster, she will make her abode at her residence in the Strand and Anne and her servant will join us here.’
‘Her servant, you say?
Joan de Warenne, do you mean,maman ?’
‘My son, I take no note of my relatives’ servants,’said Elizabeth Woodville impatiently.
‘The person in question is methinks the lady Anne's companion.’
‘I am glad the lady Anne is coming here,’ the prince said, feeling it was expected of him.
Well aware of his brother's infatuation with Joan and seeing no reason to discourage it, he regarded Anne's arrival at the sanctuary as a step in the right direction.
’ 'TIS proper that she should be with yourself and my sisters.’
‘I am glad you are seeing sense, my son!’
Elizabeth Woodville turned round, her attention diverted towards servants who had just entered the hall with some more of her possessions.
‘Now, let me see…’
‘Madam my mother, pray permit me to go to my brother,’ the prince pleaded, still at his mother's elbow as she moved away.
‘It is out of the question,’ came the reply.
‘Later we shall speak further of the matter — at present there is much to be done.’
‘The king my brother needs me.’
The prince was close to tears.
‘I know he does.’
Elizabeth Woodville turned and drew him to one side.
‘Hearken to me, my son,’ she said in a low voice.
‘This is for your ears only.
I suspect that the king's life could well be in danger.
Together, you would both be in danger — I doubt it not.
Separated, as long as you are alive and your brother's heir, there would be no point in our enemies destroying Edward.
Whilst you wait safely in the wings, your brother too is safe.
Think on that, my prince, ere you pester your mama further!’
‘Madam my mother, I would much much rather remain here with you.’
Convinced that in keeping him with her, she was merely indulging her maternal regard for him, Richard was playing his last card.
He wished for nothing more at that moment than to join his brother and be part of the scene during the heady days before and during the coronation.
‘Am not I your own angel boy?
But you, dearest maman , have my sisters to console and comfort you — whilst poor Edward will be alone, quite alone, if I desert him.’
But it seemed that only the one sentence had impinged on the queen-dowager's consciousness.
‘You are indeed my angel boy!’ she said, kissing him fondly.
‘Are not you heir to the House of York —maman's very own White Rose!’
Fourteen
The Grand Sanctuary was a vast building and stood only a short distance from the palace of Westminster.
Built by Edward the Confessor, of sufficient strength to withstand a siege, it housed an almonry where the alms of the abbey were distributed and an abbey church built above it in the form of a cross.
Shortly after Elizabeth Woodville and her family entered sanctuary, she received a visit from the chancellor, Thomas Rotherham Bishop of Lincoln.
The evening was well advanced when the chancellor arrived and he found the queen-dowager lying on cushions on the rush-strewn floor.
Prince Richard was asleep beside her, his head on his mother's lap, her arm protectively encircling him.
The prince's young bride lay a short distance away beside her sisters-in-law, all of them huddled together for warmth and sleeping fast, exhausted by the trials and tribulations of a distressing day.
‘Madam,’ said the servant who had conducted the chancellor to the queen-dowager, ‘the Bishop of Lincoln is here and begs audience of Your Grace.’
Elizabeth Woodville sat up and gently disengaged herself from her sleeping son.
She smoothed her hair and her gown, and indicated with a notable lack of enthusiasm that she would receive the visitor.
‘Madam, it grieves me deeply to see the straits to which your bereavement has brought you,’ observed the chancellor after a formal obeisance.
‘Being informed by Lord Hastings of your situation and assured by him that my lord of Gloucester intends no harm to the king your son — but, on the contrary, desires only to protect him  from those who would harm him — on learning of this an hour ago whilst in my bed at York House, I at once arose and came hither.’
‘I know you to be a compassionate man,’ the queen-dowager told him.
‘I know moreover that you speak with sincerity.
Tell me then, sir, if you yourself believe that no harm is intended to the king.’
‘Madam, I judge that my lord of Gloucester has the welfare of his nephews close to his heart,’ the chancellor told her.
‘Did not he ever show himself a loyal supporter of the late king your husband?’
‘By my troth, I derive small consolation from Lord Hastings’ assurances!’declared the queen-dowager.
‘I confess myself bewildered by it all — since my lord's death, you see, it has been difficult to determine one's friends from one's enemies!’
‘I feel certain you may count Lord Hastings your friend, madam.’
‘Ah, woe worth him!’ came the reply.
‘For it is he that goes about to destroy me and my blood.’
‘Madam, be of good comfort,’ the chancellor urged, disturbed by her outspokenness.
‘Be assured that if they crown anyone king than your elder son whom they have with them, we will on the day following crown his brother whom you have here with you.’
‘I thank you for that assurance, my lord,’ said the queen-dowager tremulously, drawing closer the still-sleeping prince.
‘This child is very precious to me — indeed to all who honour the House of York.
He is our hope for the future, a hostage for his brother's safety.
Fair and fragile though he be — they tell me his father looked so in his youth — yet he has great strength of will.
The joy of a sorrowing mother's heart he is — her one and only White Rose!’
‘May God protect him!’ said the chancellor piously, somewhat taken aback by so abundant a display of mother-love.
‘The Holy Spirit have charge of him for all our sakes!’
‘My lord, I shall endeavour to take heart from your assurances in regard to Lord Hastings — I derive much  comfort from your undertaking in respect of this my younger son.’
The chancellor who had long been an admirer of the queen, was affected not for the first time by her beauty and appeal — attributes which, it seemed to him, were in no way impaired by adversity.
He sought to convince her of — his good intentions.
‘As to that, madam, I shall go further,’ he said gallantly, whereupon he unfastened his leather pouch and carefully removed from it the Great Seal of England.
‘But surely, my lord…’
‘Madam, the Great Seal is as you know, on the sovereign's demise, temporarily entrusted to the lord chancellor,’ he said, beneficently placing it in her hands.
‘As a pledge of my sincerity in the matter of the crowning of Prince Richard, I leave it for the time being with you.
You see it likewise as your noble lord gave it to me on his deathbed.’
Edward had meanwhile left Ely Palace and was lodged instead in the royal apartments within the Tower.
The Tower served a number of purposes, not least as a public record office and a meeting place for the Council's chief administrators.
A council was called on the day following Edward's arrival at which, in accordance with the late King's wishes, Richard of Gloucester had been declared protector of the king and kingdom.
The protector had taken the Great Seal, returned by the queen-dowager that very morning, and given it again into the chancellor's care.
He next bestowed on his favourites all those offices that had hitherto been held by the Woodvilles, thus weakening their position and strengthening his own.
He then sent a deputation to the queen-dowager, requiring that Prince Richard be permitted to attend his brother and assist at his coronation.
Her concealment of the prince implied mistrust, he told the council, which  might invite jealousies and revive factions — to the great detriment of the realm.
Thomas Cardinal Bourchier, former Archbishop of Canterbury and chancellor, was appointed to head the deputation.
The cardinal himself demurred, this prompting a noisy debate between the temporal and ecclesiastical peers.
Impatient of this, Richard of Gloucester put forward a further suggestion — which made the first seem infinitely preferable!
‘Whilst there may be sanctuary men and sanctuary women —’ he pointed out, producing as it were his trump card, ‘— since children can commit no crime for which asylum would be needed, the privilege of sanctuary cannot be extended to them.
I could therefore possess myself of my nephew by force if —’ he paused for full effect and looked from one to another of the councillors ‘— if, as Lord High Protector, I elected so to do.’
‘And do you elect so to do?’ pertinently enquired the cardinal, voicing the curiosity of them all.
The protector appeared to hesitate.
‘Should the queen-dowager again refuse my petition — for the sake of the realm, it would be necessary to resolve the matter by having recourse to force,’ he replied then.
‘Such action needless to say would be both regretted and regrettable.
That being so, my lord cardinal, it is up to you!’
Cardinal Bourchier, venerable and well-respected, was a man of integrity and high moral standards — one who, throughout his seventy-nine years, had maintained his belief in the inherent goodness of Man.
Whilst the rest of the deputation waited uneasily, the cardinal, as spokesman, gently and courteously used every argument to persuade the queen-dowager to relinquish Prince Richard.
She was adamant.
‘My lord, by agreeing to the protector's demand, I would be placing the lives of both my sons in jeopardy,’ she  said.
‘As long as Richard Duke of York remains here, he is guaranteeing the security of the king his brother.’
The cardinal looked shocked.
‘Be assured, madam, that either way the king is not in danger,’ he said firmly.
‘Whilst one can needless to say appreciate your anxiety for one born to high estate and deprived over-soon of the protection of his sire, pray be assured that were King Edward of happy memory here with us now, he would urge you to relinquish your over-protectiveness of the prince.’
Elizabeth Woodville's eyes filled with tears.
‘How cruel you are in speaking thus, my lord!’ she said reproachfully, having no defence against such an argument.
‘We are both aware, I dare say, that were my royal lord with me now, I would not have been brought to such a pass.
My lord was a lion amongst men — but his sons are as yet mere cubs!’
‘I beseech you to have trust, madam,’ persisted the cardinal.
‘None wishes harm to the prince your son.
Deliver him into my hands now and I swear, as I hope for salvation, that you will never have cause to regret it.
The king is young and requires the company of his brother, being melancholy without a playfellow.’
‘Sayeth the protector — and pray God he may be a protector!— that the king doth lack a playfellow?’
The queen-dowager's voice was scornful in the extreme.
‘Can none be found to play with the king but only his brother which hath no wish to play because of sickness?’
She had reckoned without the prince.
‘But I am not sick, madam my mother!’ he protested, being with his sisters and overhearing only her last seven words.
‘Why say you I am sick?’
Elizabeth Woodville ignored the interruption.
‘Fie, my lord!’ she continued.
‘As though princes, so young as they be, could not play without their peers, or children without their kindred — with whom for the most part they agree worse than with strangers!’
‘But Edward does need me, madam my mother,’ again interposed the prince as she paused to collect her thoughts.
‘You know he does.’
‘Be silent, my son!’
The words were sharp but there was none the less warmth in the queen-dowager's voice.
‘Join not your persuasions to those of our enemies.’
The cardinal looked shocked — was shocked.
Never before in his seventy-nine years had sovereign or consort accused him of enmity.
‘Madam, I confess myself deeply grieved that you should judge one an enemy who has ever served you and yours faithfully and to the utmost of his ability,’ he said sorrowfully — and the prince, watching the scene with avid interest, expected to see tears well from his eyes.
‘Believe me, madam…’
‘Yea, my lord, I believe you,’ interposed the queen-dowager hastily — sharing her son's expectations but with less enthusiasm.
‘I believe you believe what you say.
I accept that what you say is well-meant but is not it possible that you yourself…’
‘Then since you accept what I say, madam —’ interposed the cardinal with a sense of timing that suggested the protector had not nominated him for the task solely on account of his venerability ‘— might I urge you to give the prince into my custody!’
‘Please,maman ,’ put in the prince in his most wheedling tone.
‘Please let me join Edward.’
Edward?
Elizabeth Woodville's voice was unusually stern — her defences were down and attack was the better part of defence.
‘To whom do you refer?’
‘The king my brother,’ the prince replied cheerfully.
‘Pray permit me to go to him, that I may be by his side at his coronation.
I could tell him when his crown's starting to fall off and remind him of the royal plural — and, well, lots of things!
Then after the coronation I could — should you still wish it — return to sanctuary.’
‘My precious White Rose!’ murmured the queen-dowager.
‘You are so young, so tender — you know not the wickedness of the world, of devious and ambitious rascals.
How could you know!
Think you if I permitted you to join your brother now, that you would be permitted to return?
Alas my innocent lamb!’
‘Maman , I have an idea,’ the prince said, having racked  his brains for further persuasions and clutching this time at straws.
‘Since you are concerned for my safety, would not it be well for the lady Anne to accompany me — she being my duchess and bride?’
Recognizing that in this instance her son would use any means to persuade her to change her mind, Elizabeth Woodville none the less gave thought to the suggestion.
The House of Mowbray was, after all, of the ancient nobility — unlike the Woodvilles themselves who, by virtue of her marriage and the late king's generosity, had only recently attained the highest appointments in the land.
Whatever Richard of Gloucester's intentions — and God knows I could be mistaken!— he would not provoke the enmity of the Mowbrays by causing harm to the lady Anne, she told herself.
She would be lodged in the royal palace within the Tower, with servants a-plenty to serve and chaperon her.
Indeed, her presence could well guarantee the safety of both princes.
‘Madam, I fear you are distracted by indecision and grief,’ observed the cardinal, wearied by what he privately termed her procrastination.
‘The matter is not as you imagine, God be thanked!
My lord of Gloucester displays the utmost affection for his nephews — his care is solely for their welfare and he judges that Prince Richard's place at this auspicious time is with the king his brother.
A boy needs male companionship and — pray forgive me, madam — one with a doting mother and five sisters is in my humble opinion in danger of becoming petticoat-ridden!’
‘I shall give thought to the matter, my lord,’ Elizabeth Woodville said icily, more than a little on her mettle.
‘Might I suggest that you wait with yonder deputation whilst I consider the matter further?
I shall acquaint you with my decision in due course!’
As the deputation withdrew tactfully to the further end of the great chamber, the queen-dowager conferred with her family, listening to their conflicting views and in the process becoming more undecided than ever.
‘What of yourself, lady Anne?’ she enquired.
‘Were your young lord permitted to join the king his brother — he being now at the royal palace within the Tower — would  you wish to accompany him?’
Anne and Joan had been sitting a little aside from the others and had till then taken no part in the discussion.
Gloom and despondency hung over the royal party and Anne was more than a little resentful of having been required to join them in sanctuary.
Given the choice, she would have returned with her mother to Suffolk, and Joan with her.
She hesitated.
None of this was her affair, she told herself not for the first time.
Apart from having to suffer, as she told herself, the royal family's woefully reduced circumstances, she missed her mother and was genuinely concerned for the latter's deteriorating health.
Elizabeth Mowbray, faced with the conflicts and uncertainties that had beleaguered the court during the weeks following Edward the Fourth's death, had made plans to return with Anne and Joan to Framlingham until the tumult had died down.
Like Anne, she saw the current situation as none of her business — and wished not to be seen as taking sides.
Partisanship at such a time could be unwise, she knew, and the sooner she and Anne were back at Framlingham, the better for them both.
Then in the event of a change of monarchy, Anne's marriage to Prince Richard could, since it was as yet incomplete, be annulled.
But even as Elizabeth Mowbray was finalising her plans for departure, Fate intervened.
A sudden and debilitating attack of the sweating sickness had rendered her unfit for travel, with the result that Anne had accompanied the royal family into sanctuary and her mother had been taken by litter to Norfolk House in London's Strand.
Anne had been dwelling on this, even as the queen-dowager, together with the prince, princesses and Joan, waited with a mixture of feelings — hope, doubt, impatience and irritation — for her reply.
Her reply seemed an anti-climax — even to herself.
‘I know not,’ she said.
‘I know not how to answer Your Grace.
And since there is much talk of danger and imprisonment, perchance I should remain here until mama has been consulted.’
None too happy with what she privately termed her  daughter-in-law's faint-hearted response, the queen-dowager sat lost in thought for a minute.
She gave a start as the prince, at her elbow, spoke.
‘Maman , please say I can go to the king, with or without the lady Anne,’ he said.
‘Edward needs me.’
‘Alas, fair son, you play upon your mama's heartstrings!’
‘Then I may go?’
Anne, having moved away from Elizabeth Woodville and her family, had meanwhile been conversing in low tones with Joan.
Joan, this is surely your opportunity!’ she said.
‘Opportunity — what mean you?’
‘To see the prince.’
‘I can see the prince very well, thank you.
He is at present looking more angelic than ever, trying to charm his mother into letting him have his own way!’
‘I was meaning the king his brother.’
‘Why did not you say so then!’
Joan's seeming ill-humour was a ploy to conceal even from herself her true feelings — the quickening of her pulses at mention of the beloved, told a different story.
‘Joan, hearken to me,’ Anne said urgently.
‘The queen is naturally loath to part with her ‘sweet babe’ and uses every argument against his joining his brother.
As a means of persuading her, the prince suggested to my chagrin that I should accompany him.
The queen broached the matter to me and ostensibly I am now giving thought to my answer — what would you say to going in my place?’
‘To the Tower of London?’
Joan asked without enthusiasm — but then her face brightened.
‘You mean I might see the prince!’
‘Not the prince,’ Anne corrected, getting her own back.
‘But there is a possibility — a faint possibility — that you might see the king.’
Joan's eyes sparkled.
‘You mean…?’
Anne nodded.
‘What do you say?’
‘I might actually see Edward?’
‘In truth, I think it is likely.’
‘How soon can I leave?’ asked Joan with a broad smile.
‘Now — at this very moment?’
‘Then you agree?’
‘Naturally I agree — I would agree to anything for a sight of Edward, be he prince or king!’
‘That is settled then,’ smiled Anne.
‘I shall inform the queen.’
‘But surely…’
‘Leave it to me.
Just leave it to Lady Anne.’
Thus it was that Prince Richard's latest appeal went unanswered.
His mother's attention had been diverted — fortuitously from her point of view — by his young duchess.
‘Maman —’ said Anne, using the mode of address favoured by the prince when in private and pleasing to the doting mother ‘— I would speak with you alone.’
Elizabeth Woodville drew her to one side.
‘What is it, child?’ she asked, grateful for the interruption.
‘Could not Joan de Warenne, my half-sister, go to the Tower in my stead?’ she asked.
‘Much as I myself desire to accompany my lord, being a minor and not fully wed, I would first need my mother's permission — such would take time, alas!
Joan has ofttimes been taken for myself.’
‘She would go as yourself, do you mean?’ asked Elizabeth Woodville doubtfully.
‘She would make pretence of being Anne Duchess of York?’
‘Only with Your Grace's permission, needless to say.
As my companion and half-sister, Joan is already acquainted with the king your son.
She would be a companion for both princes.
None would suspect if she and I changed places, as it were— she wearing my apparel and having her hair dressed in like manner.’
Joan de Warenne being not of royal blood and not linked as you yourself are, Lady Anne, by a bond of marriage, I can see no virtue in such an arrangement.’
‘Would not it give Your Grace a foot in both camps — in a manner of speaking?’
Anne suggested.
‘Disguised as Anne Duchess of York, would not Joan de Warenne have free passage 'twixt Tower and outside world — and thus be a carrier of messages and information?’
‘The plan has something to recommend it,’ agreed
Elizabeth Woodville.
‘Yea, such would give me, as you say, a foot in both camps.
What of the lass herself?’
‘Joan is willing to go,’ came the answer.
‘And since the royal apartments are well staffed, she would be adequately chaperoned.’
‘And presently, my lady?’ asked Elizabeth Woodville.
‘The situation could continue thus for weeks.
Whilst a new date has been named, I understand, for the coronation — again it could be postponed.
Alas, naught is certain in this troublous world!’
‘Having obtained mama's permission, I should forthwith change places with Joan — and none, I dare say, would notice the difference!’
The queen-dowager hesitated only for a moment.
Joan de Warenne is willing to go, you say?’ she enquired then.
‘For my sake,maman , she is willing to go,’ Anne replied — somehow implying that Joan herself had no great liking for the undertaking, but knew her place and her duty.
‘For my sake.’
‘Then I agree,’ said Elizabeth Woodville graciously.
‘To have a go-between, one who could move freely betwixt Tower and Westminster, betwixt my sons and myself, would greatly relieve my concern for their welfare.’
‘Then I may go,maman ?’ asked Prince Richard gleefully, having again overheard his mother's last words.
‘That is what you are talking about, is it not?’
‘Yea, fair son, you may go…’
The rest of the queen-dowager's words were drowned by the prince's whoops of joy — and the cardinal, kept waiting for over an hour, hearing the hullabaloo, exchanged relieved glances with his fellows.
‘Hearken to me, my prince,’ said the queen-dowager in a low voice, frowning at her son.
Joan de Warenne, the lady Anne's half-sister, rather than that young lady herself, will go with you to the Tower — thus will there be a means of communication between us.’
Joan de Warenne?’ asked the prince in surprise.
His mother nodded.
‘You will leave today with Cardinal  Bourchier.
Joan de Warenne will follow on, arriving on the morrow.’
‘By St. Crispin!
Edward will be overjoyed…’
The prince paused and collected himself — and changed horses in mid-stream ‘…to see his baby brother!’
‘That it is Joan de Warenne rather than the lady Anne who accompanies you to the Tower, must be a close-kept secret,’ Elizabeth Woodville told him, her mind working rapidly.
‘The knowledge will be shared by no more than six persons: Edward and yourself, the lady Anne and her mother, Joan de Warenne and myself — and another who shall as yet be nameless.’
‘My lord of Gloucester?’ enquired the prince mischievously.
‘Surely, madam my mother, you will inform my uncle!’
But Elizabeth Woodville, observing the cardinal advancing towards them, was turning to address him.
‘You will not regret it,’ the cardinal told her, observing the prince's elation and guessing its cause.
‘Your Grace has made the right decision, God be thanked!’
‘The prince will leave forthwith with yourself,’ the queen-dowager told him.
Her voice was cold — her heart even colder.
‘I trust you will care for him, my lord, as if he were your own.’
‘He is my own, madam,’ came the smooth response.
‘Are not we all one in Christ?’
Elizabeth Woodville, the prince at her side, next addressed the deputation.
‘My lord and all my lords here present, I will not be so suspicious as to mistrust your truths,’ she said, her voice charged with emotion.
Taking the prince by the hand, she continued, ‘Lo, here is this gentleman whom I doubt not would be safely kept by me, if I were permitted; and well as I know there be some deadly enemies to my blood, that if they knew where any lay in their own bodies, they would let it out if they could!’
‘Madam, I protest!’
Cardinal Bourchier was plainly shocked — but the queen-dowager, if she heard, paid no heed.
‘The desire of a kingdom knows no kindred,’ she told  the deputation.
‘Brothers have been brothers’ bane — and may the nephew be sure of the uncle?
Each of these princes is safe whilst they be asunder.
Notwithstanding, my lords, I here deliver my son — and his brother's life with him — into your hands, and of you shall I require them before God and man.
Faithful be ye, I know well, and power ye have if ye list to keep them safe; but if ye think I fear too much, yet beware ye fear not too little!’
A ripple of unease ran through the deputation at that, but the murmurings were indecipherable, as if even collectively its members were treading warily.
If any shared the queen-dowager's forebodings, none was prepared to admit it.
As she finished speaking, the queen-dowager called for the prince's cloak.
As this was fastened and he was made ready for departure, the prince for the first time seemed ill-at-ease — as if only then did he sense the poignancy of the moment and was after all loath to go.
‘Farewell, mine own sweet son,’ his mother said in a voice laden with tears.
‘God send you good keeping!’
‘Farewell, madam my mother,’ responded the prince sturdily, but then, ‘Nay,maman , pray do not weep…’
‘Let me kiss you once ere you go, my princeling — for God knoweth when we shall kiss together again!’
She kissed and blessed him and hugged him close, and it seemed to the uneasy watchers that she would after all change her mind.
‘God have pity!’ she said then.
‘Reason tells me I do right to let you go, yet my heart urges me to hold on to you…’
‘You are hurting me,maman ,’ the prince protested, a little frightened by his mother's anguish.
‘Forgive me, my son —’ she said softly and then, with a brave attempt at a smile, ‘Go now, with the cardinal…’
Weeping, she turned away as the prince, trying manfully to hold back his tears, was led away.
As he disappeared, the great chamber fell strangely silent.
It was as if , thought the queen-dowager fancifully, the world had stopped turning for a few moments, immobilised by the enormity of her action.
Quelling an urge to run from the sanctuary, to seize the prince and  bring him back before it was too late, she fell on her knees.
‘O Mary, mother of sorrows who knows so well a mother's anguish, intercede I pray you for this sorrowing mother and her innocent son…’
Fifteen
Joan had accepted without reservation her half-sister's suggestion that she go with Prince Richard and take up residence in the Tower.
Overjoyed at the prospect, she found it difficult to conceal her excitement from those around her.
Anne herself was well aware of Joan's motive in accepting the suggestion with such alacrity.
She realized that it stemmed, not from a noble desire to serve the royal family in general, but from a somewhat ignoble desire to see Edward in particular .
Joan, she had discovered, was single-minded in her approach to life.
To see Edward again, she would have dared the Devil himself!
Indeed, thought Anne wryly, to hear the queen-dowager talk, one would imagine Richard of Gloucester was the Devil incarnate — and he her deceased lord's brother!
She would miss Joan, of course.
But it would be only for a time and she had been thinking of asking the queen-dowager for permission to leave sanctuary and visit her mother.
Once at Norfolk House, she would consult her mother's wishes as to her future movements.
Perhaps her mother would agree to her returning for a while to Framlingham…
Yea, that is what I shall do, she thought.
One cannot in such circumstances as these, please everybody all of the time.
My plan will give joy to some and satisfaction to many: satisfaction to Prince Richard because he can now join the king his brother, to Cardinal Bourchier because his mission has been successfully accomplished, and to the protector because he will have his nephews where he wants them — wherever that may be!
Joy?
Joan's meeting with  her Edward will be, unless I am much mistaken, joy indeed!
I, Anne Mowbray, Duchess of York, can very shortly follow my own path with a clear conscience…
The Tower was, as it had always been, both fortress and residence.
Not greatly favoured by Edward the Fourth and his family, the royal palace was none the less fully maintained and adequately staffed — a number of privileged persons residing there permanently in grace-and-favour apartments.
On the morning after the prince's departure, carrying out a plan known as yet to only six persons, the queen-dowager bade farewell to the damsel everyone assumed to be the lady Anne.
The leave-taking this time was formal, bearing none of the displays of emotion that had marked Prince Richard's departure — the queen-dowager was but bidding farewell, it was thought, to her son's bride, a young lady who was going to the royal palace within the Tower to keep company for a time with her husband.
The arrangement seemed practical, unremarkable, to those around the queen-dowager who watched the young woman's departure.
As the queen-dowager had informed them, she was but paying a brief visit to the palace, out of respect for her young lord and would be returning to the sanctuary very shortly.
It was noted at the same time — though with rather less interest — that the lady Anne's companion was leaving sanctuary.
Joan de Warenne, it appeared, had not been required to go with her young mistress, since the latter was to be the guest of Lady Alianor Woodville, the queen-dowager's kinswoman — a lady who occupied apartments in the palace and kept an amplitude of servants.
Lady Alianor was the childless widow of one of the queen-dowager's Woodville cousins.
Highly regarded by Elizabeth Woodville, she had been lady of the bedchamber  until her retirement and was one of the queen-dowager's closest friends.
She was to have been among those entrusted with the secret of the girls' switched identities.
But before writing to her friend of the matter, the queen-dowager debated whether or not it was necessary to burden her with the knowledge.
Nay, she thought, I shall say nothing — at least for the time being…
Lady Alianor received her friend's letter on the evening of Prince Richard's departure.
Fearing her correspondence would otherwise be intercepted, the queen-dowager had entrusted it to the care of Cardinal Bourchier — sending it by a trusted servant to the cardinal's residence, requesting that it be forwarded to her cousin forthwith.
‘I ask that you will accommodate Anne Duchess of York, my daughter-in-law in your household,’ Elizabeth Woodville had written — after enquiring as to her friend's health, reminiscing about former days and passing on to the matter of her daughter-in-law as if it were of little consequence.
‘The damsel, now in her fourteenth summer, has understandably a great fondness for the prince her husband, and desires to be at his side during these troublous days.
I have given my consent, intending to gratify her wishes in this respect only for a short while.
The lady Anne, I doubt not, wishes to attend the king's coronation with her lord, as is to be commended.
‘I ask then that you, my dear cousin, will be the lady Anne's chaperon and friend whilst she is at the Tower — any letters from you or the lady Anne to myself, may be sent via the cardinal who has agreed to serve me, and with the utmost discretion, in this matter.
Should you see your way to granting this request, the cardinal's servant shall on the morrow escort the lady Anne from the sanctuary to your abode.
‘I pray that the commotion time will soon be past, that we may enjoy greater peace of mind and slumber of a night-time more soundly in our beds.
Our Lord have you in his keeping.
‘Your affectionate loving cousin ‘ELIZABETH WOODVILLE'
Thus it came about that Joan de Warenne, as closely resembling her young mistress as made no difference, was conducted to the Tower of London — and Alianor Woodville's apartments.
Lady Alianor received her graciously.
‘I am well acquainted with your family —’ she told Joan ‘— and recall most vividly the duke your father, whose soul God pardon!’
‘I can scarce remember him,’ said Joan sadly — and with truth.
‘Alas that the good are called so soon!’ sighed the lady Alianor.
‘A lovely gentleman, a charming gentleman — and you, my lady, are the living image of him!’
‘Thank you, my lady.’
‘The duke will never be dead whilst you are alive, child,’ smiled Lady Alianor, as soon as her guest was seated.
‘Methinks I am to be your chaperon — which means, I suppose, that I am to see that you conduct yourself properly and are accompanied suitably whenever you leave these apartments.
Well, I shall have no qualms as to that, it is certain!’
‘Qualms, my lady?’ asked Joan, the word being new to her.
‘I doubt you will get into bad company whilst in my care!’ said the lady Alianor with a smile — she being renowned for plain-speaking no less than loyalty.
‘And I doubt the princes, poor lads, have freedom enough to carry out any mischievous forays!
Still, we must wait and see.
You, my lady, will be here with us but for a short time, I understand — so pray be at ease, and treat this as your own abode.’
‘The prince my husband is lodged here in the palace?’ enquired Joan.
Alianor nodded.
‘Here in the palace — though since  none herein has seen hide or hair of him, one suspects that the king and his brother are under some form of house arrest.’
‘House arrest?’ asked Joan in surprise.
‘But I understood — that is to say the queen my mother-in-law understood — that the king moved here from Ely Palace in readiness for his coronation.
The sovereign, I understand, customarily resides at the Tower of London prior to his coronation.’
‘That is so — and yet…’
Joan's new guardian hesitated — but then she smiled.
Lady Alianor Woodville was tall, nearly sixty years of age, and always wore flowing gowns of unrelieved black out of deference to her deceased lord.
Her patrician features were wont to relax into a smile upon the slightest provocation — giving her an ageless quality, a charm that won many hearts.
‘My lady, I shall say not another word on the subject!’ she declared to Joan now.
‘On the morrow, you will see for yourself, I doubt not.
You are welcome at any time, as far as I myself am concerned, to have the prince your husband attend you here — equally, provided you are suitably chaperoned by either myself or one appointed by myself, and provided no obstacles are put in the way, you may visit the prince.’
‘Obstacles, you say, my lady?’
‘As to that, we must wait and see,’ sighed Alianor.
‘You yourself shall be the judge.’
Sixteen
Anne's hopes of returning to Framlingham had somehow gone awry.
Elizabeth Mowbray had herself already decided to return to Suffolk — her health, she told herself, would benefit from country air and rural seclusion.
On learning of her mother's decision, Anne pleaded to go with her.
It was necessary, she told her persuasively, that she leave sanctuary for the time being.
As Joan de Warenne, she had no place at court other than as a servant — should privileges such as befitted her true station be accorded her, unwelcome suspicion would be aroused.
One way or another, it was vital that she left sanctuary until after Joan's return…
Elizabeth Woodville, on learning of Anne's intentions, had other ideas on the subject.
She was adamant that her daughter-in-law must remain in the capital.
She had informed Elizabeth Mowbray of the girls' exchange of identities — information which the duchess had received thankfully, believing the exchange to have been necessary for Anne's safety.
The queen-dowager had her own reasons for wishing to keep her daughter-in-law close at hand — whilst accepting that her remaining in sanctuary in the circumstances was out of the question.
Should disaster overtake Edward her son, should he die or be declared unfit for rule, Prince Richard would likely take his place.
As the matter stood therefore, Anne Mowbray was in effect consort presumptive and, as such, if seized by one or other of the factions working against the Woodvilles, would herself become a pawn in the battle for the throne.
The Mowbray family was influential and ambitious, and would view the  queenship of one of their number with enthusiasm.
Should aught happen to Anne Mowbray, support for the Woodvilles would no longer be forthcoming.
Eventually it was agreed between Elizabeth Woodville and Anne's mother that Anne would remain in London, at least for the time being— but that for safety's sake, and lest her true identity be recognized, she should be sent secretly to the Abbey of the Minoresses which stood only a short distance from the Tower.
There she would remain in seclusion until the commotion had died down and she could live openly and in safety with her young lord.
Informed by the queen-dowager of their decision, resentful at being refused permission to return home, Anne made her displeasure plain.
She stamped her feet, wept and refused for two days to eat or — once her initial reaction had been volubly expressed — speak.
‘Leave her alone,’ the queen-dowager ordered her daughters who had no idea what all the fuss was about.
‘Leave the lass alone — she will come to her senses in time!’
‘But she is the lady Anne's half-sister!’ pointed out sixteen-year-old Cecily.
‘She is the lady Anne's companion and, as such, has no place here with us now.
A position of a temporary nature has, I understand, been found for her elsewhere!’
‘Mama, she is so like our sister-in-law — I do wish she could stay with us,’ said nine-year-old Anne who had a special affinity with her namesake.
‘Looking at her just then, I truly believed she was the lady Anne!’
‘Mama, let me go and talk to her, console her…’
‘Leave her, Elizabeth — leave her, I say!’ sternly interposed the queen-dowager.
‘We all of us have something better to do than concern ourselves with the tantrums of servants!’
Anne desired now above all else to leave sanctuary.
Whilst in going to the abbey, I should be exchanging one kind of prison for another, she told herself, I should no longer have to pass my days amongst the remnants of the court!
Queens and princesses, officials and servants, all lived together in the great sanctuary chamber.
Efforts had been  made to screen off the royal family from the rest by the strategic placing of hangings and drapes, but the overall effect was more suggestive of a market-place than a royal habitat — a fact which had caused Anne and Joan much secret merriment!
Living at such close quarters with them, Anne found herself at odds with the princesses.
Elizabeth of York — the eldest — was too prissy, she had decided, Cecily was a busybody, and Bridget, who was four, was prone to hiccups in the middle of the night!
Nay, all things considered, I shall welcome the move to the abbey, she thought — it could not be worse than here!
And if I should change my mind and find the abbey not to my liking, or if Joan returns and it becomes expedient to resume our true identities, then so be it.
Henceforth I shall take life as it comes, looking not to the future…
At the end of the two days, Anne found her appetite and her voice — and herself on the way to a nunnery.
Seventeen
Joan settled happily into her new and temporary abode.
Comfortably and expensively furnished, the apartments were staffed by servants many of whom had been with the lady Alianor from the time of her marriage.
Joan found the transition from sanctuary to Tower wholly satisfactory.
She had not before entered the Tower precincts, although its grim-visaged exterior as seen from the river, particularly during the dark days of winter, had frequently given her a sense of foreboding.
She had pictured its dungeons and torture-chambers, and recalled the tales of men racked and women held in chains, and of armies of plague-carrying rats.
Now she saw a different, more pleasing aspect of the fortress.
Within the Tower's walls stood its keep, the imposing White Tower which for the two hundred and fifty years since the reign of Henry the Third had been regularly whitewashed.
Rising through two floors of the White Tower, was the chapel of St. John where the lady Alianor and Joan attended Mass each morning: it was as they returned on the second morning that Joan voiced her enquiry.
‘I expected to see the prince my husband at Mass this morning, my lady, she said.
Could it be that he and the king his brother hear Mass at St. Peter ad Vincula, the chapel outside the White Tower?’
‘Both the king and his brother, I understand, hear Mass at a small private chapel close to their apartments,’ came the answer.
‘The protector desires that, prior to his coronation, the king should not be seen too frequently in public.’
More disappointed than she was prepared to admit, Joan could not entirely conceal her chagrin.
‘Regular attendance at the chapel of St. John hardly constitutes over-exposure to the public,’ Joan demurred.
‘Does not the king himself have a say in such matters?’
Alas, thought the lady Alianor, the lass is pining for her young lord! 'TWAS rumoured that Anne Mowbray was not over-pleased with her bridegroom, due to the disparity in their ages.
Clearly though she is disappointed at not seeing him — and is concerned for his welfare.
And in that she is not alone.
There is much uneasiness and speculation — all of it, please God, unfounded!
The king and his brother are seen from time to time, if infrequently — and appear lively and in good health.
Nay, one must give Richard of Gloucester the benefit of the doubt — he is taking no chances this side of the coronation.
Various factions are at work, each seeking to promote its own interests — I'd not give a fig for the young king's life if he fell in with one of them!
One cannot blame the protector for being zealous in his guardianship of his nephews.
He but does his duty — an onerous duty, it seems to me.
Some though, and among them my dear lady Elizabeth (always in her thoughts did Alianor refer thus to the queen-dowager) think differently.
‘Very soon now, I am sure, you and your lord will be reunited,’ she told Joan reassuringly.
‘Meanwhile, I shall enquire into the matter and see if aught can be done to hasten your reunion.’
‘Four days have passed since the prince left sanctuary,’ Joan said sadly — though it was in truth another for whom she pined.
‘Perchance he desires not to receive me — and 'tis by his wish I am denied a sight of him.’
‘Be at peace, child,’ said the lady Alianor consolingly.
‘Strange are the ways of princes!’
‘What mean you, my lady?’
‘Richard of Gloucester has never been one to allow his heart to rule his head.
Such as he cannot comprehend that which prompts others to give their heart free rein!
Have patience, lady Anne, I pray you — all will come right in the end.
Tomorrow or maybe the next day — I doubt you will  be kept waiting much longer.’
The lady Alianor's prognostications proved correct.
The date of Edward's coronation had not been announced, partly because the protector wished first to ascertain the reaction of the commonalty to the news that the three prisoners at Pontefract had been executed.
In fact the populace, bewildered by rumour and uncertain as to the truth, knew not which way to turn.
Edward, elder son of the late king, was the rightful sovereign, they told themselves, but until he attained his majority, Richard of Gloucester, his uncle, was exercising his proper authority in keeping his nephews in a place of safety.
Propaganda against the Woodvilles had led the commonalty to believe that Rivers, Vaughan and Grey had plotted to gain control of the as yet uncrowned king.
The princes were seen from time to time when, with a strong guard, they rode through the streets of the City.
Edward rode always a little ahead of his brother, acknowledging the acclamations of his subjects, and Prince Richard waved and smiled — to be greeted always with an especial cheer.
The protector, on such occasions, smiling and genial, rode behind his nephews: such excursions did much to enhance his image as a benevolent and conscientious guardian.
His popularity had increased and his ambition had increased proportionately — the time had come, he told himself, to put his carefully laid plan into action.
Whether or not the meeting was part of that carefully laid plan, none could have said.
But on an afternoon following one of the City excursions, Joan was at last permitted to see Prince Richard.
One excuse after another had been made.
The young king was ill, it was claimed, was nursing an inflammation of the lungs.
The prince her husband was undesirous of  seeing the lady Anne.
The king, troubled by the prince's displays of temperament and his unwillingness to follow the advice of those who had charge of him, mindful also of his own unrobust health, considered it would be unwise for himself and his brother to receive visitors at the present time.
These prevarications had been conveyed to Joan by the lady Alianor.
‘I can scarce believe it,’ Joan said, puzzled at the display of coldness.
‘If the king my brother-in-law is ill, then it behoves me to see him, judge what may be done to assist him and inform the queen-dowager.’
‘Be assured that everything possible is being done,’ Alianor had told her — though in truth as mystified as Joan by the negative response to her requests.
‘Be patient, child!
Perchance on the morrow we shall have better news.’
But several morrows went by before she received word that the lady Anne might visit the prince her husband in the company of her guardian.
On entering the well-guarded but comfortable apartments occupied by the princes, Joan and Alianor were greeted by Prince Richard who looked, Joan noticed with relief, much as usual.
Having exchanged courtesies with the prince, Alianor tactfully withdrew and, for propriety's sake leaving the door just a little ajar, waited outside the chamber.
‘How good it is to see you!’
Richard of York said enthusiastically to Joan, as soon as they were alone.
He kissed her hand with courtly grace, displaying an air of bonhomie reminiscent of his father.
It was at once apparent to Joan that, whatever changes of circumstance had taken place, he had changed not a jot.
But his uncustomary pallor puzzled her.
‘I trust you are in good health, my lord,’ she said.
‘In rude health,’ he assured her with a smile.
‘If I look pale as a lily, 'tis because fresh air is too rarely on the menu.
‘And the king your brother?’ she asked, trying to sound nonchalant.
‘I trust he is well.
There are rumours abroad…’
‘I have a message for you from Edward,’ the prince interposed — and lowered his voice.
‘I know 'tis my brother you really wish to see — just as I know I must call you my lady Anne!’
‘I would I might see you both,’ Joan admitted.
’ 'TIS bruited about that the king is unwell and that you are given to displays of temperament!
The queen your mother would learn the truth.’
‘Displays of temperament?’
The prince's eyes sparkled with merriment.
‘In musical terms, as my tutor explained more than once,temperament is a system of adjusting tones of an instrument to adapt the scale for all keys!
Why, yea, I suppose then one might rightly say that this prince is given to displays of temperament!’
Joan smiled, catching his mood — but then her thoughts turned to Edward.
‘And has the king too adapted to circumstance?’ she asked soberly.
‘Has he also adapted the scale for all keys?’
‘The only key which would interest Edward methinks is that which would open the gate to freedom!’
‘Freedom?’ frowned Joan.
‘But you and the king are not prisoners, my lord!’
‘Edward has become apprehensive of late,’ came the answer.
‘He sleeps little and is plagued by nightmares.
The Privy Council, it seems to us, consists solely of the protector's minions.
Only this morning we heard a rumour that an attempt is to be made to gain the approval of the commonalty to the protector being crowned king instead of Edward!’
‘But that cannot be!’ exclaimed Joan, white-faced.
‘One must be ever on guard against rumour — as the lady Alianor tells me!’
‘Joan, hearken to me…’
‘I am the lady Anne, my lord!
Fie, that you should imagine otherwise!’ she said lightly, adding on a more serious note, ‘During the past months, I learned to speak and act like the duchess your wife — but in these last days I have learned to think like her also; to believe that I am indeed the lady Anne!
Thus only will suspicion be averted — and I myself enabled to gather information about  yourself and the king and convey it to the queen your mother.’
‘How is maman ?’ the prince asked — and Joan registered the small catch in his voice.
‘Is she in good health?
We receive no news.’
‘In rude health —’ Joan said smilingly, echoing his own words ‘— though anxious needless to say for the welfare of her sons!’
‘Comfortable as are our surroundings, they ofttimes seem to us like a prison.’
‘After the coronation, all will be well,’ Joan assured him, ignoring her own misgivings.
‘You must have patience, my lord.’
‘But the coronation of whom, my lady?’ enquired the prince, as if he too had accepted that she was indeed the lady Anne.
‘Edward my brother or Richard of Gloucester?’
‘Surely you, my lord, reared to court life, have learned to disregard rumour and speculation!’
‘Edward seems more like a prisoner than a king awaiting his coronation,’ the prince told her.
‘We no longer ride in procession through the City — and of late, our servants, some of whom have served us since infancy, have all but one been replaced with surly rascals of another's choosing.’
‘Once Edward becomes truly king, he can change all that, my lord.’
‘If he becomes truly king,’ corrected the prince.
‘But…’
‘I recall how I refused to hearken to the queen my mother's fears for my brother's safety — yet now I myself fear greatly for him!’
‘Why so, my lord?’
‘I cannot explain fully, for this meeting must be brief — I suspect that even the walls have ears!
But this much I must tell you —’ He looked around the chamber, as if expecting to see a silent listener at every corner.
‘— A council meeting is called for the morrow, not in the council chamber within the Tower as is customary — but at the Guildhall.
Edward sees great significance in this.’
‘I fail to see…’
‘I know.
I have sought to reassure him but…’
Richard's gallic shrug was expressive and again reminiscent of his father.
‘Anyway, Joan, the protector will be elsewhere tomorrow night and Edward has therefore contrived a plan whereby you could meet.
I should be there — for appearance's sake, as Edward says — but out of earshot if 'tis any concern to you!’
Joan, you say?’ she asked with raised eyebrows.
In truth, she needed time to recover her composure — her sudden breathlessness at the realization that the long-yearned-for reunion was within her grasp.
‘Alas, my lord, that you should confuse your bride with another.
Fie, I say!’
The prince nodded.
‘You are right of course, my lady.
It is a mite confusing for some, I doubt not, since you so closely resemble the lady Anne — though you are more agreeable and much prettier!’
Joan blushed at the unexpected compliment and told herself that, despite first impressions, Richard of York had changed.
He seemed to have grown older, more mature — as if his brother's burden of kingship had fallen on his shoulders also.
‘Pray tell me of the king your brother's plan, my lord,’ she said softly.
‘Come you hence tomorrow evening,’ the prince told her.
‘The outer door will be unlocked and a servant, our remaining trusted servant, will await your arrival.
He will escort you to Edward.’
‘But I am close chaperoned, my lord,’ Joan pointed out unhappily.
‘I am not permitted to leave the lady Alianor's apartments unaccompanied.’
‘Then you must find a way, Joan de Warenne!’
The prince smiled as he spoke her true name — as if tempting fate, cocking a snook at danger.
His next words aided the impression.
‘A clandestine meeting, remember — a secret rendezvous.
Why, Edward and I have been planning it for days — it has done much to keep up his spirits!’
‘I shall be here,’ Joan said quietly — telling herself that wild horses, let alone Richard of Gloucester, would not keep her from Edward.
‘I shall be here, I promise you!’
Eighteen
Joan returned with the lady Alianor to the latter's apartments in uncustomary silence.
Alianor registered her preoccupation and wondered at it.
She appears spellbound, she thought — like one enchanted by love and romance…
But nay, it cannot be so.
Her lord is, after all, a lad of but eleven summers.
Joan retired early to her bedchamber that evening, wishing to be alone to give thought to how, without her chaperon's knowledge, she would reach the rendezvous on the following evening.
It at once became apparent that, much as she trusted and respected Alianor, she must on this one occasion slip the leash.
Should the plan be discovered and Alianor be seen as party to the clandestine meeting, she could well find herself in danger, accused of shelving her responsibility for the lady Anne's protection and honour…
On the following evening, her plan laid, Joan again found an excuse to retire early and put the first part of the scheme into action.
With the assistance of Martha, her maid, she removed her day-gown and donned déshabillé .
Then she dismissed Martha, telling her she would have no further need of her services that evening.
Once alone, she went to her closet and selected a gown of dark-blue brocade, its hem and wide neckline trimmed with white fur.
She put this on, emphasising the gown's high waist-line with a modish four-inch wide red girdle that fitted tightly just below the breasts.
The fashionable and becoming gown and girdle were her only concessions to style and conformity.
She brushed  her long hair into a shining mane and arranged it carefully around her shoulders.
Wearing neither head-dress, veil nor jewellery — save the two rings — she stepped into soft shoes of blue leather embroidered with gold.
She glanced in the long mirror and, apparently satisfied, opened an oak chest and took out a drab fustian cloak of the type customarily worn by maidservants of the lower order, the which she had borrowed earlier from the servants' quarters on a pretext.
She fastened the rough cords with practised hands which remembered that which their owner had all but forgotten — thus concealing the blue brocade gown — and pulled the hood over her head.
Critically surveying her reflection, she told herself she would pass muster.
She looked drab, ordinary, anonymous — a woman garbed like a host of others.
But then her face caught her attention — that was not ordinary.
Her cheeks were flushed with excitement, her blue eyes were sparkling — and her dream-like expression was suggestive of a bride going to meet her bridegroom…
She drew the hood more closely about her face, held somewhat by the radiance of her own expression.
You have changed, Joan de Warenne, she thought.
Like it or not, you are in truth of the commonalty — the orphaned daughter of a poor washerwoman.
You are wearing a cloak such as was worn every day by the likes of your mama, your grandmama and yourself.
From childhood to grave, come rain or shine, joy or sorrow, but for a miracle, you yourself would have worn such garb to keep out the cold, the heat and the rain.
‘Yet still you smile like a bride going to meet her bridegroom!’ she murmured.
‘But you are not a bride — oh dear me nay! 'TIS the other who is the bride, the one called Anne.
You are called Joan — Joan de Warenne — and you are not going to meet a bridegroom.
There will be no bedding for you…’
But even as the whispered words crossed her lips, her pulses were racing and her eyes were shining the more.
She recognized then that she desired it so — that she would, if she could, make it so.
Her life hitherto had been a preparation — she  recognized that now.
Her humble beginnings, the magical means by which she had come to share her half-sister's privileged life and had later by the queen-dowager's design taken her place, had been part of some pre-ordained plan.
Jack O'Dandy, the innkeeper, and that brutal encounter — even they of a sudden held meaning.
Her ravishment too had been part of the scheme of things.
She gave thought to it now, dwelling for the first time, without fear, without flinching, on what had taken place.
She vividly recalled every detail.
Yes, even that had prepared her.
It had been an enlightenment, given her a sense of her own power, her own worth…
Not that she had seen it so at the time.
Far from it.
Only now, curiously, did she view it thus.
It had prepared her for the coming meeting when she would be alone at last with the youth who was King of England; the youth she loved…
She, Joan de Warenne, was a rags-to-riches princess — the heroine of a myriad fairytales.
She loved the handsome prince who was soon to be crowned, and he loved her — or so she believed.
For tonight at least, she was Anne Mowbray, sister-in-law to the handsome prince who was soon to be crowned.
Anne Mowbray was bride, duchess, virgin, the richest heiress in the land.
Anne Mowbray was everything, had everything.
For the time being,she was Anne Mowbray —she was everything, had everything.
None could gainsay her.
None could prove otherwise…
She wanted to forget, had forgotten already, would go on forgetting, that she was the other one — the other one who, as some believed, was presently whiling away her days in a nunnery…
She was Anne Mowbray, she who was everything, had everything.
But this Anne Mowbray would stop at nothing — she would chance all to be alone with him she loved best in the world; on one throw of the dice…
Nineteen
Joan was ushered into the king's private chamber by a manservant who had been with him since infancy.
A serving-maid to all intents and purposes, she had presented herself at the door which gave access to the rear stairs, the garden stairs, which led to the royal apartments.
The manservant had appeared as if from nowhere and, on being shown Joan's ring, the agreed signal, had nodded and led the way to the king's chamber.
Following the soft-footed manservant, Joan was struck quite forcibly by the silence — only their footsteps, echoing in the otherwise empty corridor, broke the stillness.
Accustomed by then to the hustle and bustle of court life, she was puzzled.
She had expected the royal apartments to be brimming with activity.
She shivered involuntarily, a reaction prompted by something other than cold…
As the man withdrew as silently as he had arrived, Joan was surprised to find herself alone with the young king.
She had known not what to expect but she was certainly unprepared to find them alone together so soon.
‘Edward…’ she started to say.
She knew it was not the correct mode of address but she felt a little odd, outside reality, and was afraid she was about to dissolve into tears.
‘Edward…’
He came forward at once, his hands held out in greeting.
‘What joy to receive you thus!’ he told her warmly, taking and kissing her hand.
‘I feared even at the eleventh hour that it would not be possible — and I knew not when we could meet else.’
‘My lord, it is good to see you,’ she told him, and this  time there were tears in her eyes.
‘Being here with you like this seems like a dream, a dream realized!’
She unfastened her cloak and he took it from her, noticing as he did so the brocade gown that so exactly matched the colour of her eyes.
And he saw the ring, his ring, that she was wearing openly for the occasion, beside Anne Mowbray's wedding-ring on the third finger of her left hand.
‘Pray be seated, my lady,’ he said, using the courtesy title whilst not for an instant confusing her with her half-sister.
‘There is much to say and I know not where to begin.
But tell me first of yourself, I pray you.’
‘Of myself?’ she asked, as if there were nothing to say.
‘What should I tell you of myself?’
‘Of how it is to be Anne Duchess of York perchance?’
‘With you, my lord, methinks being Joan de Warenne is more to my liking.’
‘And to mine,’ he agreed whole-heartedly.
‘I would you could remain with me for ever!’
‘Within the Tower?’
Joan shook her head.
‘Nay, my lord.
I like not your being in the Tower — it troubles me more than I could say!’
He watched her for a moment in silence.
Then, seating himself beside her, he spoke quietly but with a curious sense of urgency.
‘Today's events suggest that my future movements could be uncertain,’ he told her.
‘Even that the very future is uncertain for some!’
‘Then the journey to the Guildhall was to some purpose, my lord?’
‘One could say that,’ Edward agreed grimly.
‘But first let us speak of ourselves.
I have long yearned for this meeting — even before the king my father's passing.
I planned and connived whilst at Ludlow but never, even in my wildest dreams, did I envisage that, when we did meet, it would be in such dire circumstances!’
‘Then the news is not good, my lord,’ Joan said, watching his expression.
He looked older, she thought — more mature, as if the events and uncertainties of recent weeks had given him a maturity beyond his years.
‘The  prince your brother spoke yesterday of the situation, expressing some concern.
Pray tell me what has transpired?’
‘Presently.
Presently,’ Edward said vaguely, as if to himself.
It seemed to Joan that he was torn betwixt unburdening himself and trying to ignore the issue.
‘For now, I would rather look at you, take in your beauty and your warmth, hear your voice and bask in your smile — see you in reality just as hitherto I have seen you only in my dreams!’
‘None knows I am here save your manservant — and, of course, my bridegroom!’
Joan smiled.
‘I have a key, borrowed from the lady Alianor's apartment, but I must return ere midnight, lest my absence be discovered.’
‘Denby, my manservant, is completely trustworthy — too much so for the likes of those who now have charge of me!’
Edward said ruefully.
By the protector's command, Denby must leave upon the morrow — he is the last of my own loyal retainers.
Uncouth, unmannerly fellows have taken their place — men who are accustomed not to service, I fear, but to rather more dubious pursuits!’
‘But surely, my lord…’
‘None knows you are here save my manservant — and your bridegroom, as you said,’ interposed Edward, as if he must reveal what was in his mind whilst there was yet time.
‘My brother alone is aware of your true identity.
He is also aware that I have a deep regard for Joan de Warenne — and in that I fear he is not alone!’
‘Others know also?’ asked Joan in alarm.
‘But how could that be, my lord?’
‘The king my father learned of my regard for yourself from Sir Thomas Vaughan who saw it as his duty to inform him,’ Edward told her with notable reluctance.
‘Vaughan himself, a gentleman of highest principles, warned me of his intentions, saying it was up to the king to decide what, if any, action should be taken.
It was after that I was forbidden to write to you.
'TIS unlikely that the king spoke of the matter to my mother or any other — save one!’
Joan hesitated, but only for a moment.
‘Richard of Gloucester?’ she asked, her face paling.
‘The same.
He and my father were very close, you see — he controlled my lord's armies, and supported him verbally and by arms in all things.
He had my lord's entire confidence — indeed it is hard to credit that anyone could change so radically as has my uncle.’
‘And what of today, my lord? 'TIS what took place at the Guildhall that causes you distress, is not it?’
Joan asked, watching him closely.
‘Later, we will talk of us, if that be your will — but I see that you have much on your mind.
Unburden yourself, tell me all that has passed — and later we will speak with a clear mind of matters close to our hearts.’
‘There were the customary acclamations from the populace as I rode in procession to the Guildhall this morning — indeed it seemed to me that my subjects had never before greeted me with such enthusiasm,’ Edward told her, gazing into the fire as if reliving the morning's events.
‘I was greatly heartened and told myself I must previously have misjudged the situation — that my subjects were after all behind me and would see that right was done.’
‘As it will be, my lord, I am certain!’
‘I was courteously received at the Guildhall, but found, to my chagrin, my lord of Gloucester already ensconced in the chair of state.
Having little option, I took my seat beside him.’
Joan looked troubled.
Such discourtesy could surely mean only the one thing, she thought to herself — but she said nothing, waiting for him to continue.
‘The Duke of Buckingham then stood to deliver an harangue,’ Edward went on.
‘First he extolled the virtues of the protector and then proceeded to read a petition which virtually declared myself illegitimate.’
‘Mother of Mercy!’ exclaimed Joan in dismay.
‘How could he speak thus?
Such was surely treasonable.’
Edward shrugged and still avoided meeting her gaze.
‘Buckingham, I doubt not, has his own axe to grind!’ he said sombrely.
‘The petition read,‘It is incumbent upon the council to prevent the crown falling to issue of the pretended  wedlock between his late Majesty and the lady Elizabeth Woodville, made without the consent of the lords of the land, and by the sorcery of the said Elizabeth and her mother Jacquetta — as the voice is throughout the land — privily and secretly in a chamber, without proclamation by banns according to the laudable custom of the English church; the said King Edward being married and troth-plight a long time before to one, Eleanor Butler, daughter to the old Earl of Shrewsbury’.’
‘God have pity!’
Joan exclaimed with feeling.
‘How could Buckingham make such treasonable utterances — without being hounded out of the chamber!’
‘Worse was yet to come!’
Edward said grimly.
‘Is it your will, gentlemen,’ asked Buckingham then, ‘to have this prince, Richard Duke of Gloucester, at present protector of the realm, for your king?’
Surprised murmurs ran through the assembly at that, and then there was silence.
The question having then been repeated to the same lack of response, the Lord Mayor rose to speak.
‘My lord, your question must be asked of the citizens of this realm,’ he told Buckingham, indicating the noisy crowd which had gathered outside the Guildhall.
‘I propose therefore that the Recorder be asked to address the people, he being considered as the mouth of the City’.'
‘And how did the council answer, my lord?’ asked Joan.
‘Did not many raise their voices against the proposal and for Your Grace?’
‘Gloucester and Buckingham methinks had done their work well,’ Edward said quietly.
‘If any were against the proposal, either they were too lily-livered to protest — or else they were impeded by the rush for the exits!’
‘And once outside — what then, my lord?’
‘Gloucester positioned himself on the Guildhall steps — in the forefront of the assembly.’
‘You are saying that you were again relegated to second place, my lord?’
Joan asked aghast.
She recalled with a sense of shock the queen-dowager's words, her uneasy reference to Richard of Gloucester, when commanded to relinquish her younger son.
Pray God he may prove a protector ! she had said.
‘To second place, you say?’
Edward shook his head.
‘To  the background would be nearer the truth.’
‘Alas that my lord of Gloucester had so far forgotten his duty!’
‘Indeed so great was the press of people around us, that I gripped my brother's arm lest he be trampled underfoot.
My right hand went instinctively to my sword, thus to force a way through the crowd and take my rightful place.
But caution prevailed.
Such action, I believed — and still believe — would have played into the hands of my enemies.
My being hemmed in by well-armed stalwarts, was part of the plan.
Well-bribed assassins — my uncle s creatures I doubt not — were marking my every move, ready to meet any show of force with greater force.
In the event, it would have been stated that, unrecognized in the confusion, the young king had met with an accident!’
‘God have pity!’
Joan was close to tears.
‘That you, your father's heir and rightful sovereign of the realm, should be treated thus!’
‘Everything happened so rapidly that it afterwards seemed part of an evil dream,’ Edward said slowly.
‘Indeed, but for my brother's tears, his reproaches that I had not drawn my sword, I would have dismissed the whole affair as a nightmare.’
‘Pray tell me the rest, my lord — I would hear all.’
’‘Citizens of London,’ the Recorder cried, ‘is it your will to have Richard Duke of Gloucester, brother of our late king Edward and present protector of this realm, as your king?’
A hubbub of noise greeted this.
Clearly the populace was taken by surprise and many voices were raised in dissent.
Some called for myself, demanding to know why I was not present.’
‘So I should hope!’ declared Joan roundly.
‘After further confusion, Buckingham conferred with Gloucester and the former took the stage.’
‘The stage, you say?
Was it then a play, my lord — a charade?’
‘It seemed so at the time to myself,’ admitted Edward ruefully.
‘A play well-rehearsed, in which the leading players carried the lesser players along with them!
‘Hearken to me, good people,’ Buckingham said.
‘Declare your sentiments one way or another.
I demand now in plain terms whether you will or not have the protector for your sovereign.’
At that, some apprentices, whom I judged to have been well-primed and well-paid for their services, set up a feeble shout.
‘Long live King Richard!’ they cried.
This was judged as a declaration of the sentiments of the nation!’
‘Alack-a-day!’ breathed Joan.
‘I can scarce believe it — why, none has spoken of it today in my hearing!
The lady Alianor makes it her business to discover all that goes on, and has many influential friends — yet she has made no mention of it.’
‘By the morrow, I dare say, the news will have reached all parts of the City — and within a week or two, the entire realm.
Buckingham will make sure of that.’
‘Buckingham is the protector's chief confederate?’
‘One gained the impression that he had master-minded the whole affair,’ Edward said bitterly.
‘If so, that is because it suited my uncle's purpose — he will use Buckingham just as long as it suits him and not a moment longer.’
‘And was it Buckingham who made the final announcement — at the Guildhall?’
Edward nodded.
‘Naturally.
‘My lord protector,’ he said, ‘you are called upon to assume the reins of government by the loyal citizens of London.
Indeed, my lord, it is plain that the people are as much determined to reject the posterity of our late king that, if Your Grace will not accept the crown, they must turn their eyes on some other person’.'
‘And my lord of Gloucester accepted?’
‘Not immediately.’
Edward's tone was ironic.
‘He appeared to hesitate, as if loath to take on so onerous a burden.
Then he said, ‘My lord, you do me great honour.
However, I cannot accept…’
’’Your Majesty ,’ Buckingham interposed with emphasis, ‘onerous as such a duty may be, it is the unanimously expressed will of your subjects’.'
‘And with that, Gloucester accepted?’ asked Joan.
‘Not quite,’ replied Edward, tight-lipped.
‘He demurred.
‘Nay, my lord, I am unworthy of so high a  calling,’ was what he said.’
‘Never was a truer word spoken!’ observed Joan.
‘My lord of Gloucester had the right of it there.’
‘Ah, but Buckingham had not finished — he had more to say!
‘There is none more worthy, sir,’ he said.
This was greeted by rowdy applause from the afore-mentioned apprentices — and someone in the crowd responded with, ‘I thank you both!’ to the general merriment!’
‘And then, my lord?’
’‘I beg you to reconsider, sir,’ Buckingham urged the protector.
A touching little scene ensued.’
Edward's tone was highly satirical.
‘The protector closed his eyes and bowed his head, as if seeking Divine guidance.
Then, straightening up as if already the burden of sovereignty weighed heavily on his shoulders, he made his reply.’
Edward paused, thought Joan, as if the memory of what had followed were too painful to be put into words.
In truth, he was recalling how, in a matter of seconds, his uncle had severed all ties of kinship, loyalty and affection.
His father's brother, Gloucester had hitherto been loyal to a fault.
Reserved, enigmatic, a soldier rather than a statesman — it appeared withal that ambition was the protector's guiding star.
‘And his reply?’ prompted Joan, recognizing his distress but needing to know.
‘His reply?’
Edward spoke vaguely, as if lost in thought.
‘Ah, yea — the protector's reply!
‘Alas, gentlemen, you leave me no choice,’ he said.
‘I must yield to your earnest persuasions, knowing the matter to be the will of the English people.
I comply with your plea and will accept the crown’.'
For a full half minute there was silence in the chamber.
Edward seemed of a sudden bereft of further speech and Joan was at a loss for the right words.
‘My lord —’ she said at length‘— I cannot believe that my lord of Gloucester, being your uncle and the acknowledged protector of the realm, intends aught else than to rule in your name until you are of age.
Perchance, as he sees it, such will make for a stronger monarchy.’
‘Your charity does you credit, my lady!’ observed  Edward.
‘If only the protector's stealing the crown were all…’
All? thought Joan.
Why does he say all , as if the crown were a toy, a plaything, a mere nothing — when both of us know it means everything to him!
‘…
Sir Robert Brackenbury, constable of the Tower, informed me this morning that my brother and I are to be moved.’
‘Moved whence, my lord?
To another royal palace — Eltham or Greenwich perchance?’
‘Gloucester intends, as Brackenbury informed me, himself to take possession of the royal apartments here in the Tower.
Richard and I will be moved to the Garden Tower and there lodged on the upper floor.’
There is surely some mistake, my lord!
Joan sounded perplexed — not for the first time that evening.
‘The Garden Tower is not part of the royal palace.’
‘The only mistake, as far as I can see, is in Brackenbury giving me intelligence of their plan today instead of tomorrow.
In so doing, he has enabled me to tell you of the matter — in the fervent hope that you will discover a means of informing the queen my mother of our case.’
‘As to that, my lord, be assured I shall send word to Her Grace as soon as I leave here.
please God she will find a way of coming to your aid!
Once I receive word from her, I shall contrive to visit you again.’
‘I suspect that may not be possible,’ Edward told her.
‘We are virtually prisoners here, my brother and I. Once we are confined in the Garden Tower and Denby is banished from our service, I fear we shall be denied all contact with the outside world.
What the end of it will be, Lord only knows!’
‘But I am not in the outside world, my lord,’ smiled Joan.
‘Am not I Anne Duchess of York, guest within the Tower to the lady Alianor Woodville, cousin by marriage to the queen-dowager?
That being so, my prince, it should not be too difficult to contrive a further meeting — if such be Your Grace's will.
‘Joan, when I departed for Ludlow, it was with a heavy heart — for it seemed to me we had only just found  each other,’ Edward told her.
‘But such heaviness of heart is bitter-sweet, in that it pines for the absence of the beloved whilst looking to the joy of reunion.
Now, all that has changed, alas!’
Seated together on a bench seat by a warm hearth, it seemed to Joan that they were isolated from the intrigue and controversy that were presently raging around the royal family.
They were together — happily and companionably together, separated for a time from the outside world and its evil influences.
‘Changed?’ she asked in pretended alarm.
‘The joys of reunion are no longer of consequence — is that your meaning, my lord?’
He shook his head.
‘Nay, such was not my meaning — as you know full well!
I fell in love with you several moons ago.
Before that, I was heart-free, a somewhat studious fellow, I suppose, who lacked the merry nature of his younger brother.
You are aware of my continuing regard for you — tell me, I pray you, that you yet return my regard.’
‘You need not the telling, my lord,’ she dimpled.
‘We both recognize methinks that, young though we be in years, we are all in all to each other.’
‘In truth, Joan, you are as far removed from myself as ever.
First my father's plans for my marrying a French princess, precluded my offering you anything more than a clandestine attachment — and now, with the future so uncertain, I fear that clandestine attachment and French princess are each as remote as the other.
Indeed, I strongly suspect that for Richard and myself there is no future!’
‘Surely the prince is not in danger,’ Joan protested.
‘He is but heir presumptive.’
‘He is heir to the rightful king of this land,’ Edward reminded her — a mite haughtily, Joan thought.
‘Should I die, Richard would under normal circumstances accede to the throne with the lady Anne as his consort.’
‘Myself.’
He smiled, reflecting her smile.
‘Yourself indeed, my lady.
In truth, 'tis Joan de Warenne concerns myself — she  who is closer to me in years and closer still to my heart.
Were it not fur her, I dare say Edward Plantagenet would long since have succumbed to ennui and despair.
The future…’
‘Dwell not on the future,’ Joan interposed lightly.
‘Who can tell what lies ahead?
Let us banish the future for a space — giving place only to here and now, to ourselves and our regard for each other.’
He put an arm around her then and drew her close.
He kissed her on the cheek and then, as she turned her mouth to his, on the lips.
‘I have ofttimes given thought to doing that —’ he told her wonderingly ‘— to that and other things.’
‘Giving thought is not for lovers, my lord,’ she said softly.
‘Giving thought is only for kings and princes, for innkeepers and washerwomen.’
‘Innkeepers?’ he frowned, not understanding.
‘Washerwomen?’
‘Lovers give not thought to actions and words, joy and sorrow, past and future.
Lovers seek all, take all, letting words, sorrow and the future — like the Devil — take the hindmost!’
She took one of his hands and pressed it to the bodice of her gown.
He ran his fingers lightly over the soft fabric, exploring the contours of her breasts…
She was reminded again of that other time — of hands, cruel and insistent, travelling over her body; of a man four times her age who in one brutal movement had stolen, as if by right, both her maidenhead and her innocence.
Shocking as the assault had been, it had prepared her for another encounter — an encounter with a youth of her own age, bewildered and uneasy, one called to high estate who found himself of a sudden alone on the edge of an abyss…
‘I have naught to offer you,’ the youth was saying and there was sorrow in his voice.
‘Love is all I ask,’ she said softly.
‘Yourself and love.’
‘But…’
‘You fear we shall be disturbed, my lord?’
‘Nay.
Denby has his orders.
He will not unfasten the outer door ere he has cried warning!’
‘And the prince?’
‘My brother has an understanding of the situation’ came the enigmatic reply.
‘Then let us think only of ourselves — and love.’
‘I have not before…’
‘I know.
I know you have not.’
‘And what of yourself?
Have you…?’
‘I love you — naught else matters,’ she said, moving away and seating herself demurely on the furskin rug in front of the fire.
‘Come, be seated here beside me!’
He needed no second bidding.
No longer was he a diffident youth.
Gazing up at him then, meeting those shining blue Plantagenet eyes, she knew there was no turning back.
He was, after all, his parents' child — the offspring of a joyous and passionate union.
His doubts were gone, banished.
She had kindled a flame within him…
‘Nay,’ she cried, seeing his expression — and remembering.
‘Nay…’
‘But I love you,’ he said ingenuously.
‘I love you.’
Again she met his gaze.
She held out her arms to him…
Twenty
The protector was crowned Richard the Third, King of England, at Westminster Abbey one week later, a document having been drawn up bastardizing Edward.
The offspring of Edward the Fourth and Elizabeth Woodville were declared bastards on the grounds that, before his marriage, Edward was affianced to Lady Eleanor Butler, since widowed daughter to the Earl of Shrewsbury — and sister to the Dowager Duchess of Norfolk, Anne Mowbray's mother.
Edward, installed by then with his brother in the Garden Tower, was informed of the turn of events by Brackenbury, the protector not having visited his nephews since the day he had accepted the crown at the Guildhall.
The change of abode and servants was not the princes' only misfortune.
Their days and nights were spent together in a large but gloomy chamber, reached by a winding staircase; and their requests to take the air in the gardens were for the most part ignored.
Edward, whose joyful encounter with Joan de Warenne had given him a further reason for wishing to gain his freedom, sought for some means of contacting his mother.
He mistrusted their new attendants, Dighton and Slaughter, believing them to be the tools of his enemies.
Will Slaughter had been employed formerly as a headsman.
A large man of ferocious appearance with thick black hair and beard, illiterate and unprepossessing, he went by the name of Black Will.
Despite his appearance, the erstwhile executioner treated the princes  with a rough kindliness that set him apart from the other attendants — taking it upon himself to ensure that the food was to their liking and the fire well-tended.
He showed a particular liking for Richard who took full advantage of the situation, though it caused Edward some uneasiness.
Brackenbury one morning, to their great joy, brought the princes a letter from the queen-dowager.
‘Be pleased to read it, my lord, and then destroy it,’ he urged Edward.
‘I am disobeying orders in conveying it to you — but there are some who regard Your Grace as their lawful monarch, though it would cost them their lives to declare as much openly!’
‘I am grateful, sir,’ Edward replied with a smile.
‘I had not till now received word from the queen my mother.’
‘Her Grace has ofttimes written to yourself and your brother,’ Brackenbury told him.
‘The letters somehow — er — miscarried, alas!’
‘Would it be possible, sir, to have a reply conveyed to Her Grace?’ asked Edward earnestly.
‘I dare say she is anxious for news of us.’
‘Let me have it on the morrow, my lord, and I shall see what can be done — needless to say I shall do my best.
I shall be off-duty on Thursday and intend then to seek audience with Her Grace at the sanctuary.
That will give me an opportunity of passing on any messages — of a verbal nature only, I regret to say!
I myself have information for the queen-dowager.’
‘Indeed, sir?’
‘I have knowledge of certain matters, my lord — God help us all!’
‘Certain matters?’ frowned Edward.
‘What mean you, sir?’
‘I mean to tell Her Grace what I know and pray to God that she will discover a means of remedying the situation,’ Brackenbury said obscurely — but then he paused, hesitated and, seeming to make up his mind, spoke boldly.
‘King Richard cannot keep you here for ever, my lord.
In truth, as I mean to tell Her Grace,he means very soon to put an end to your captivity .’
Despite his brother's joyous reception of this  confidence, Edward knew a sense of foreboding.
Was it a warning? he asked himself later.
If not, why should Brackenbury, that most circumspect of gentlemen, have placed emphasis on those last eleven words, giving them a sinister ring?
The letter from their mother was a joy and an inspiration to both princes.
But so graphically did her words convey her love and concern for them that, reading it aloud, both were reduced to tears.
‘Have faith in the future, my princes,’ she had concluded, ‘and be of good cheer — you are your father's sons, and he who laughed always at adversity would have been proud of you.
‘God send you good keeping.
‘Written this day at Westminster by the hand of your loving mother ‘ELIZABETH WOODVILLE'
Brackenbury failed to put in an appearance on the following day.
Disappointed at the constable's absence, since he and Richard had prepared a verbal message for their mother, Edward remarked on it to the servant, a stranger, who brought their supper.
‘He's gone,’ came the disquieting response.
‘Gone?’ frowned Edward.
‘Aye, gone — g-a-w-n!’
‘He has died, do you mean?’
Nay, not 'im — not old Blackberry!
He's hopped it — done a bunk, as they says!’
Edward concealed his dismay.
‘Your name, sirrah?’ he enquired evenly, by way of changing the subject.
‘Forest.’
‘Forest?’
‘Aye, that's it — Forest.
And no laughing, mind!
I don't care for being laughed at.
Them others, Dighton and the big fellow,they laughed fit to bust when I told 'em me name.
‘Forest?’ grinned Dighton, slapping 'is thigh.
‘Aptly named, me friend — plenty of undergrowth but a bit dim in the upper reaches!’
I landed 'im one for that and bowled him clean over — now he's grinning on t'other side of 'is face!
So watch it, me lord — no laughing!’
In fact Edward had never felt less like laughing.
‘Am I to understand, Forest, that a new constable has been appointed?’ he asked, hoping against hope that the answer would be in the negative — that Brackenbury's absence was only temporary.
‘Understand what ye please, me lord — it makes no odds to me!’
Gritting his teeth against this insolence, needing to know more, Edward decided to try a more direct approach.
‘And the new constable's name?’ he asked coldly.
‘Tyrell — Sir James Tyrell,’ came the gruff reply.
‘Tyrell, you say?’
Only Edward's eyes gave away the measure of his dismay — and Forest was avoiding his gaze.
‘Master o' the horse to King Richard —’ Forest grinned unpleasantly ‘— among other things!’
Richard, who had so far remained silent, was bitterly disappointed at being unable to send the message to their mother.
But registering the menace in Forest's voice, he too joined in.
‘Why has Brackenbury resigned his office?’ he asked curiously.
‘I dunno, me lord,’ shrugged Forest.
‘Didn't 'e tell ye he was off?.’
‘Nay.’
Richard was no less concerned than his brother by the constable's inexplicable disappearance.
Brackenbury was kindly, and had always shown them the courtesy due to their rank — and himself as their ally.
The need for his mother's support and guidance was still uppermost in Richard's mind.
Now, he thought, there is none to whom we may entrust a message.
‘He must have left suddenly or else he would have…’
Catching his brother's warning frown and on the point of saying ‘remembered,’ Richard smoothly changed course.
‘…forgotten.’
‘Forgotten?’
Forest scratched his head.
‘He would 'ave forgotten, you say?
Forgotten what?’
‘He must have forgotten to tell us,’ Richard said slowly, as to a simpleton, and deliberately confusing the issue.
‘It goes without saying, sirrah!’
‘Forgot a lot o' things, did old Blackberry!’ observed Forest, addressing Richard as if he were of a sudden a force to be reckoned with.
‘Forgot 'oo paid the piper, I dare say!
Even forgot 'oo was King of England at times — would ye credit that, me lord?’
‘Be assured, sirrah, that the constable was never guilty of that mistake in my hearing,’ Edward said quietly — before Richard could muster a retort.
‘Indeed I always considered him a loyal servant of the crown.’
’ 'TIS glad I am to 'ear it, me lord,’came the mocking response.
‘Now eat your supper, both o' ye, afore it takes cold.
The new constable has sent each of ye a mug o' wine — reckoned it'd make a change from ale.
You can thank 'im yourselves when 'e calls on ye later!’
‘I hardly think…’
Forest's last words had been accompanied by a guffaw, and Edward's half-formed comment was drowned by the slamming of the door as the grinning man left.
The princes ate their supper in silence, neither of them having much appetite.
Both were beset by a growing uneasiness, a feeling that all was not as it should be — that somewhere out there in the darkness, sinister forces were gathering against them…
Why, Edward wondered, did Brackenbury speak yesterday of being off-duty on Thursday when he must already have been on the point of resigning his post?
With Thursday only a day or so hence, why did not he inform us there and then that he would be unable to convey our message to the queen our mother?
Let me have the message on the morrow , was what he said…
It was at that point that Edward recalled the constable's  other words and how they had troubled him even then — seeming to carry a sinister note, a warning.
King Richard cannot keep you here for ever , Brackenbury had said.
In truth, as I mean to tell Her Grace, he means very soon to put an end to your captivity .
What was his meaning?
Edward asked himself.
I recall his emphasis on the last eleven words — and how they struck chill into me at the time.
Will Brackenbury in fact still visit our mother — or has something happened to prevent that also?
During the days that followed Brackenbury's hasty departure, Edward's despondency increased.
He developed a tiresome cough which disturbed his brother's rest, and became listless and depressed.
It was as if , the weeks of turmoil and uncertainty that followed his father's death having turned into months, the tumultuous turn of events had proved too much for a youth of his years.
He had suffered the destruction of his most trusted relatives and advisers, the declaration of bastardy with all it implied, the loss of his birthright and sovereignty — and latterly his freedom.
‘I would mine uncle would let me have my life, though he takes my crown,’ he had been heard to say on one occasion.
He and Richard, very different in temperament, inevitably quarrelled a good deal.
Richard had not lost his sense of fun — his ability to push aside the vexations of the moment and look to better things ahead.
It was he who after a particularly violent disagreement, suggested that Joan should be invited to pay them another visit — though he referred to her as the lady Anne, as had been agreed.
He was, it seemed, fully aware of his brother's attachment to Joan.
‘My lady Anne is as yet lodged with the lady Alianor within the Tower,’ he said.
‘Methinks I should contrive to send her a message, suggesting that she pays me another visit.’
‘Pays you another visit?’ asked Edward coldly.
‘I am, after all, her lord and husband.’
Edward was unjustifiably irritated.
Well aware that it was a game to Richard — a pretence with which to pass the empty hours — and that it was to Anne, rather than Joan, he was in this instance referring, such comments never failed to annoy Edward — as Richard was well aware.
‘I have no wish to see her,’ Edward said flatly.
‘She must not come here.’
Richard looked at him in surprise, not taking him seriously.
‘Why so?’ he asked.
‘Look at us, Dickon.’
Edward indicated their unkempt appearance.
‘Are we in a fit state to receive a visitor?’,
Richard looked at them.
Their clothes were dirty and their hair unwashed.
After Forest had taken over, all their fine apparel had been removed and replaced with ill-fitting second-hand garments.
They had no change of clothing and those they wore were never washed.
But Richard, who had always delighted in dressing for court functions, seemed unperturbed.
‘None sees us,’ he shrugged.
‘So what does it matter if we look like beggars?’
‘I see you — and you see myself,’ retorted Edward.
‘And they see us — and seeing us garbed thus, they grow ever more surly, refusing now to carry out all but the most basic tasks.
I suspect that were I to appear of a sudden in royal regalia, crown, sceptre and all, it would be a different story!’
‘I see not what that has to do with Joan,’ Richard said airily.
‘I expect she would laugh her socks off if she found you here in royal regalia!’
‘Foolish fellow!
Damsels wear not socks.’
‘Anyway, Joan would not be coming here to admire your regalia!’
Joan, you say?
Do not you mean the lady Anne, little brother?’
‘To admire your regalia,’ repeated Richard with emphasis.
‘She'd be coming to see how abysmally we are served, that she could inform the queen our mother of our situation.’
‘All the same, I have no wish to be seen like this,’ Edward  said as if that were the end of the matter — but Richard heard the catch in his voice.
‘Let us speak no more of it.’
‘I care not who sees me,’ said Richard on a note of defiance.
‘I am myself, after all — no matter what I am wearing.
If you like, Ned, I'll wash your clothes ere she arrives — there's still one jar of soap.
I would quite enjoy it, you know.’
‘I doubt not you would — but whence would we get sufficient water?
Use what we have on washing clothes and we ourselves would likely go unwashed for a week!’
‘But 'twould not show — not like our clothes!’
‘Besides, they would be certain to shrink — and then what would we do when our visitor arrived, little brother?’
‘Go to bed?’ suggested Richard helpfully — and with a mischievous gleam in his eye that prompted Edward to throw a pillow at him.
‘Anyway, she is my duchess — and I shall invite her if I wish to!
If you like it not, big brother, you have no need to speak with her.’
‘I could scarcely not speak with her, since we have but this one chamber.’
‘You could black your face and pretend to be a boot-boy,’ suggested Richard.
‘After all, 'tis myself, her lord and husband, she'd be coming to see.’
‘You believe that?’
‘Nay,’ smiled Richard.
‘Neither of us believes it.’
‘Anyway, how would you get a message to her?’ asked Edward curiously.
‘I should ask Black Will,’ Richard told him.
‘Black Will has taken a fancy to your little brother — what think you of that!
If I ask him nicely, he will take a message for me, I am sure.’
‘Nay, 'tis too risky,’ said Edward, making it clear none the less that he had set aside his former objections.
‘Risky?
For Black Will, you mean?’
‘Nay, for you and me.
What if Black Will should tell the others?’
‘He would not,’ Richard said confidently.
‘He speaks to the others as little as possible.
Methinks they are a trifle in awe of him — him being a headsman and all that!
He likes me though, as I said, and when I smile at him and beg for tales of executions, he laughs and laughs!’
‘Since when has Richard Duke of York taken to begging?’ asked Edward haughtily.
‘I confess the fellow's tales appal me — I would you would not encourage him!’
‘They are a mite blood-thirsty — but I expect he exaggerates.’
‘One has the impression of one truly dedicated to his calling,’ observed Edward.
‘Calling, you say?
I'd not dignify it thus,’ laughed Richard.
‘It makes Black Will sound like a monk!
Anyway, brother, I shall send word to my lady Anne and you shall do as you like.’
Twenty-One
‘I have received a letter from Prince Richard,’ Joan told the lady Alianor.
‘Addressed to myself, it was delivered at the back door this morning by a manservant.
The letter is brief and unsigned, saying only that my lord wishes me to call on him at the Garden Tower at my earliest convenience.
He asks that I go secretly and after dark — near the eleventh hour, he says — thus to evade the guards who are wont to fall asleep at that time!’
Alianor looked uneasy.
‘Can you be certain that the letter is indeed from the prince your husband?’ she asked doubtfully.
‘I am familiar with my lord's handwriting,’ Joan told her.
‘Viewing myself as a future messenger, the queen-dowager ensured that I was so, ere I left sanctuary.’
‘There could be danger,’ observed Alianor, looking troubled.
The letter, delivered covertly, was brief and unsigned.
Rumour and speculation about the princes was on everyone's tongue, it seemed, and in truth she knew not what to believe.
The lady Anne is duchess to the prince, she thought, but one cannot be too careful.
‘The princes are no longer seen in the gardens, child — none as far as I know has had sight or sound of them for several weeks.
As you know, I made every effort to gain permission for you to see your lord again — to no avail, alas!
Indeed, it has been lately feared…’
She paused, loath to voice the dreadful rumour.
Joan too had heard the current gossip and had lain awake for much of the previous night, persuading herself it was a fabrication and that she must give no heed to wagging tongues.
But then had come Richard's letter and  with it the realization that no ill had as yet befallen the princes.
‘As Richard of York's bride, my lady, I cannot ignore his wishes,’ she said now.
‘I can think of no good reason why I should shy from going openly and without having recourse to others.’
‘Danger,’ Alianor told her.
‘By so doing, you could place yourself in danger, my lady — that should be good reason enough.’
‘Since when does a lady place herself in danger by openly visiting her lord?’
Joan asked — a mite haughtily, the other thought.
Alianor hesitated.
‘Since the day this lady's lord was removed to the Garden Tower methinks,’ she responded plainly.
‘Is not it my duty then to obey my lord's wishes?’
Alianor evaded the question.
The lass is right, she thought — in her place, I would have given much the same answer.
Good for her!
‘If you are determined to go, my lady —’ she said ‘— and in your place, I dare say I should do likewise — I shall first seek permission on your behalf of Sir James Tyrell, the new constable.’
‘Nay, my lady, I fear that might be unwise.
Were permission refused…’
Joan paused, not wishing to put her thoughts into words.
‘You would go just the same?’ suggested Alianor.
‘Yea, I realize what you have in mind — it would be better to go without permission than to flout a refusal!’
Joan nodded.
‘The queen-dowager urges me in her letters to do my utmost to discover news of her sons.
She too has heard rumours and fears greatly for their safety.
Who has a better right to enquire as to the welfare of Richard of York than the lady Anne his wife?’
‘The queen-dowager fears greatly, you say?
She fears a mischief has been done, do you mean?’
Alianor wished the words unspoken as soon as uttered.
‘Nay, nay, there is always talk — one learns to disregard it!
One must not give way to despair.
The queen-dowager is naturally anxious for her sons — but we must have patience.
All is well, I am  sure — Richard of Gloucester is simply being overprotective of his nephews.
Richard of Gloucester?
The lady Alianor refers always to the new king thus, thought Joan.
It is not difficult to see whose side she is on!
But she recognizes the need to tread warily and I doubt not she is right.
‘Since there is speculation and King Richard must surely be aware of it, why does not he let the princes be seen?’ she asked uneasily.
‘No longer do they ride in procession through the streets of London.’
‘I know not the answer to your question, my lady,’ admitted Alianor.
‘Then I must discover the answer for myself,’ Joan told her.
‘Duty demands it.
Quietly, choosing my time, I shall make my way to the Garden Tower and try to gain access to the upper chamber.’
‘You believe the princes are held in the upper chamber, my lady?’
Joan nodded.
‘My lord's letter to me was headed simply:Upper Chamber, The Garden Tower .
I shall go garbed as a maidservant and, if seen and questioned, shall concoct a tale about having a message for one of the guards.
Assuming I am unrecognized, I shall bide my time until I can gain entrance to the tower and the winding stairs to the upper floor.’
‘I like it not,’ Alianor told her.
‘I like it not at all, lass.
But since I agree that it is your duty to enquire as to the welfare of your wedded lord, and as…’
She paused, seeming to hesitate.
‘And, my lady?’ prompted Joan.
‘As the queen-dowager, my cousin and dear friend, gave you into my keeping for the time of your sojourn here — then, dear child, if you promise to have a care for your own safety, to give no offence and behave discreetly, you shall have my permission.’
‘And your blessing?’
Joan asked with a winsome smile.
‘I would have your blessing also.’
Joan had taken a great liking to Alianor Woodville who, during the past restless weeks, had regaled her with colourful tales of the court in earlier days when Henry the  Sixth and Edward the Fourth had played turn-and-  turn about for the English crown.
The tales were lively, not without a strong hint of bawdiness, but they had brought vividly to life the glittering courts of former days — so different, as Alianor was wont to say with a sigh, from the subdued, uneasy court of the present king.
And my blessing child,’ smiled Alianor now.
‘Naturally my blessing — are not we all King Edward's men at heart!’
Twenty-Two
From Alianor's point of view, this was to be Anne Mowbray's second meeting with her young lord since their arrival at the Tower.
She noticed the girl's apparent excitement, her shining eyes and lightness of step as she made ready for the adventure; and again she wondered, surprised that her charge should give the appearance of a damsel in love, one shortly to be reunited with her bridegroom.
That she is fond of him is natural enough, she thought.
That she is concerned for him and wishes to assure herself as to his welfare is understandable, but that look of shining radiance is a trifle puzzling.
Could it be that 'tis not the younger prince who has stolen her heart?
Could it be that…?
Nay, I am surely thinking foolishly.
Mother of mercy, I must put such suspicions from my mind!
For Joan this would be no ordinary meeting with him to whom ostensibly she was affianced, an enterprise attempted solely to reassure the royal family as to the princes’ welfare.
It would be a reunion with her lover; with him she loved better than anyone else in the world.
Thoughts of Edward dominated her young life: it was for him that she yearned, breathed, existed.
Without him, life would mean nothing to her.
Should disaster overtake him and the dreadful rumours become reality, she Joan, alias Anne Mowbray, would not wish for longer life…
Again wearing a voluminous dark cloak and having wooden pattens on her feet, her charge looked, Alianor  decided, every inch a serving-maid.
She nodded approvingly.
‘You'll do, lass, though you had better keep that hood well down over your head.
You are pretty as a picture and we would not want you drawing attention to yourself, would we!’
Joan meekly obeyed.
What Alianor had failed to realize was that, under the sombre cloak, she was wearing a new and quite beautiful pale-pink gown trimmed with dark fur — a gown such as few maidservants would set eyes on in a lifetime, much less wear.
Her waist defined by a gold chain girdle, she was wearing Edward's ring on a gold chain around her neck.
Outwardly, as Alianor saw her, she gave the appearance of a servant — but inwardly, to Joan herself, she was a damsel going to meet her lover.
Letting herself out inconspicuously by way of the backstairs, Joan set out after dark for the Garden Tower, taking a circuitous route to avoid arousing suspicion.
Few people were about, owing to the lateness of the hour, and the guards around the entrance of each tower she passed, glanced briefly at her and turned away, seeing only a woman of indeterminate age, muffled in a hooded cloak such as was worn by serving-women everywhere.
She skirted the great hall of the palace and, passing the Wakefield Tower, approached the Garden Tower itself.
She then concealed herself in the shadows between the two towers, thus to survey the scene and decide on her best approach.
She had hoped and expected to find the Garden Tower all but deserted at such a late hour, with the two guards half asleep in the guardchamber on the ground floor.
She could hear a faint murmur of voices but they seemed to issue, not from the guardchamber, but from the middle chamber — that below the one occupied by the princes.
Uncertain what her next move should be, she waited and watched in the eerie light cast by the flambeaus, the flaming torches set in brackets at intervals along the walls.
She shivered of a sudden, and recalled Alianor's parting words.
‘Not exactly a time to go visiting, lass!’ that lady had said with a sigh.
Joan wrapped the sturdy cloak more closely around herself, concealing all but the lower part of her face.
She waited thus for what she judged to be half an hour, moving a few steps to and fro to keep warm whenever the coast was clear.
Still, there was a good deal of stealthy coming and going within the building — this being ignored apparently by the men on duty in the guardchamber.
She decided she could hear three different voices now, one of them cultured and the other two sounding a trifle over-awed, obsequious.
She judged the first to be that of some official and wondered what such a one would be doing there at an hour now close to midnight.
‘You have your orders,’ she heard the cultured voice say.
‘Obey them to the letter and you will be well rewarded — any bungling or playing the fool and I doubt you'll live to tell the tale!’
’ 'Twill be as ye says, constable,’said the obsequious voice.
‘All neat and tidy-like!’
‘Let's get to it then.’
That was the third voice.
‘We ain't got all night, Forest!’
‘Slaughter too has his instructions,’ Again the voice Joan had identified as that of the constable.
‘You'll have no trouble with him.’
Joan had met Sir James Tyrell — the constable who had replaced Brackenbury — and she had found him pleasant enough when Alianor had presented him to her.
Now he seemed rather less than pleasant…
‘So Black Will's waiting 'is turn, is 'e!’ chortled the second voice.
‘A task after 'is own heart I'll warrant!
He's to come up after we goes down — so's there'll be no bumping into each other on them there stairs.
That's it, sir, ain't it?’
‘That is indeed it,’ agreed the constable in a droll voice.
‘So I'll leave you rascals to it.
No need to trouble yourselves about the guards.
Their liquor has been nicely doctored — gave them an extra ration of ale to celebrate my arrival!
So you'll hear no more from them till morning.
I shall meanwhile betake myself to my lodgings.
Bring word to me there when your task is accomplished.
You are aware of the venue, are you not?’
‘The venue?
Oh, I sees what you mean, sir…
Under the stairs as leads up inside the White Tower, Black Will told  us.
Been got ready, 'e said — a wooden chest and all that!’
‘I shall be on my way then.’
Again the constable's voice.
‘Mind what I said.
Any bungling and I'll disclaim knowledge of the whole miserable business.
You're on your own from this moment till you bring word the job is done.
Is that clear?’
The constable apparently left the chamber at that, for half a minute later a cloaked figure came quickly out of the Garden Tower's entrance and disappeared into the darkness.
Joan took her opportunity…
She removed her wooden pattens and, concealing them in her cloak, slipped noiselessly into the tower, past the guardchamber and up the winding stairs to the middle floor where she concealed herself in an alcove outside the chamber door.
She knew not what to expect, or what would happen next.
The overheard conversation had conveyed nothing useful to her.
The princes had not been mentioned and she assumed it to have been instructions for some special task commissioned privately by the new constable.
Whatever it was, she told herself, had nothing to do with her.
Her one concern was to reach the upper chamber without being seen.
She would wait therefore.
Once the other two men came downstairs and disappeared, like the constable, into the darkness, she would make her ascent.
The return journey?
She had given not a thought to that.
But if she could elude constable, guards and attendants one way, she supposed she could likewise elude them the other.
The important thing, the only thing that really mattered to her in those tense and anxious moments, was to reach and be united with Edward…
The nearby door opened and two men came out on to the landing.
With bated breath and trying to make herself invisible, Joan waited for them to pass the alcove and make their way downstairs.
But instead, they turned and mounted the stairs, the one Joan decided was Forest carrying what looked like a large piece of sacking.
They paused halfway up and, straining her ears, she heard them conferring in low tones but was quite unable  to hear what was said.
But then all was silent.
She waited expectantly, willing both men to return and go their way into the night.
Where were they?
Where else, she asked herself, than in the upper chamber which houses the princes!
Even at night, she supposed, they had tasks to perform — making up the fire, taking up water ready for the morning ablutions…
But neither had been carrying coal or water jug — only sacking, an unlikely receptacle for either commodity…
She registered of a sudden that she was bitterly cold.
Her teeth were chattering and her unshod feet felt like blocks of ice.
But 'tis only October, she thought, and the weather as yet is mild.
It was then she recognized it was fear that had set her limbs a-tremble and turned her blood to ice.
She was assailed by apprehension; by a sense of foreboding, of doom, of indescribable evil…
She crossed herself.
‘Holy Michael, Archangel, defend us in the day of battle.
Be our safeguard against the wickedness and snares of the Devil…’ she said under her breath, reciting the age-old invocation.
She quelled an urge to race up the winding stairs and find out for herself what was going on.
Nothing, she told herself, could be worse than this uncertainty, this sense of impending disaster.
I desire only to know that all is well; that it is but my own foolishness, aided by my being here at so unholy an hour, which causes me such anguish…
She heard footsteps descending the stairs above, two sets of heavy-booted footsteps.
She waited breathlessly, pressed closely into a recess in the outer wall, straining her eyes to catch a glimpse of the men as they came within the orbit of the flambeau.
She must see what was going on; must find out who the men were and what it was they were carrying…
That they were carrying something she did not doubt, for they moved slowly, carefully, as if bearing some precious burden…
As the men came into view, she could see their shapes clearly enough, though their faces were blurred in the flickering light.
One walked ahead with the lantern, since the stairs were too narrow to give passage to two at once.
But it was the second man who riveted Joan's attention.
He, the one she had assumed to be Forest, was descending carefully, stealthily, carrying some heavy object…
As they reached the middle landing where Joan stood in the shadows, as if by tacit consent the men paused for a brief rest, placing lantern and sack-shrouded burden on the floor.
As they did so, part of the sacking fell away, exposing its contents to view…
A shrill scream rent the air then — and one of the men leapt forward whence the sound had come.
‘Nay, nay!’ cried the agonised voice.
‘Nay, it cannot be.
God have pity!
Christ have pity!
Not Edward, my beloved Edward…’
The dreadful cries ceased as a hand was clapped roughly over the young woman's mouth.
She struggled for a few moments until, overcome apparently by shock, she lost consciousness.
’ 'TIS a wench,’muttered the first man uneasily.
‘A serving-wench — fallen into a swoon, she 'as.
What'll we do?’
‘Well, we ain't letting 'er go, that's for sure,’ Forest told him, releasing his hold so that she crumpled to the floor.
‘The constable would 'ave our heads.
Nay, we'll take no chances — she saw 'oo it was, you know!’
‘See to it then, Forest.
I'll throw 'is Lordship over me shoulder and go on down — 'tis not much farther.
You'd best finish the job and follow on after.
Make it look like she's fallen and struck 'er head — no tell-tale marks, mind!
There's not space for more 'an two of 'em in that there chest.’
‘What about Black Will?’
‘Waiting down below for us, I shouldn't wonder — wanting us to get a move on so ‘s 'e can keep 'is hand in at 'is old trade!
Funny is old Will—know what I mean?’
‘Funny?
Queer, d'yer mean?’
‘Hm.’
‘Never knows what to make of 'im…’
‘For gawd's sake get on with it, mate!
Look, she's coming round…’
‘Not if I knows aught about it, she ain't!’
Twenty-Three
‘Had you no idea who she was?’ demanded Tyrell, the constable, of Forest on the following day.
‘No idea at all?’
‘Not when we found 'er, sir,’ Forest told him.
‘Gave us a start, I can tell ye, coming on 'er like that lurking in the shadows.
And that scream of 'ers — fair froze me blood, it did!’
‘Thought she was a spectre, did you?’ asked Tyrell facetiously.
‘An earlier victim come back to haunt you?’
Forest hesitated, loath to admit such a flight of fancy.
‘Not exactly, sir — though I'd wager Dighton did, for 'e turned pale as ashes.’
‘I'm surprised you had time to observe his reaction — you seem to have acted pretty quick-sharp!’
‘Methought 'twas a serving-wench on 'er way to a secret how-do-you-do!’
‘Are you in the habit then of despatching pleasurebound wenches?’
Forest's eyes narrowed.
‘Nay, not them — only prisoners and inconvenient princes!’ he said incisively.
‘Watch your tongue, Forest — I've sufficient information against you and the other rogue to hang you both twenty times over.
I'd not have given you the task otherwise!’
‘Beg pardon, sir, I'm sure,’ Forest said insolently.
‘When Slaughter told me what had transpired, I had the lass brought here to my lodgings, and had a physician take a look at her.’
‘Oh, the maid was dead right enough — dead as mutton.
I'd bet me boots on that!’
‘Dead she appeared to be —’ Tyrell agreed grimly ‘— a maid, in more ways than one, she was not!
That  maidservant you murdered so readily was none other than Anne Duchess of York — bride to the younger prince.’
‘How was I s'posed to know that — she didn't look like a duchess.
She looked like a maid, I tell ye.’
‘As it happens, she was a duchess but not a maid,’ Tyrell said sardonically.
‘What is more to the point, she was, as the physician informed me, not dead — not quite!’
‘God's eyeballs!
Then…?’
‘When the physician examined her, he found she was not a virgin!
Indeed, your latest victim seems to have been a veritable bundle of surprises — not a maidservant but a duchess, not dead but alive — and, to top all, affianced to an eleven-year-old and not a virgin!’
Tyrell sighed as if the magnitude of human folly never failed to appal him.
‘He judged, did our physician, that the duchess had likely lost her maidenhead some two years earlier — and had not had carnal relations since.
What think you of that!’
Were I to tell ye what I thinks o' that, mate, like as not you'd 'ave me guts for garters! thought Forest.
What's the old goat on about anyway?
Carnal relations indeed!
She might 'ave 'ad carnal relations and 'im too I shouldn't wonder — but I'll thank 'im to leave my relations out of it!
‘We could not take chances,’ continued Tyrell, whose question had apparently been rhetorical.
‘Whilst it was the physician's opinion that she had not had carnal relations for some two years, he could not say for certain.
And if he were mistaken, it was just possible that the lass was with child.
You understand my meaning, do you not?’
‘I dunno,’ said Forest, scratching his head.
It was all a bit beyond him — and what concern was it of his!
Why all the fuss? he thought.
As to whether the duchess was in pod —if she was a duchess as I 'ave me doubts — who cares a tinker's cuss anyway!
Certainly not 'er!
The wench is dead — or is she?
‘I dunno, sir.’
‘A discussion took place thereafter betwixt certain interested parties,’ Tyrell told him.
‘Me lord Buckingham?’ enquired Forest — but the constable seemed not to have heard the question.
‘Certain interested parties,’ he repeated sombrely.
‘It was decided, with reluctance needless to say,that steps must  be taken — of such a nature as would avoid suspicion — to complete your handiwork!’
Ah, thought Forest, I've got it at last!
I see now what 'tis all about — what the old josser is after!
He wants me to tell the same traveller's tales as 'im and 'is mates — the artful hound!
To complete your 'andiwork, he says — as if suggestin' as me and Dighton left the job half done.
‘I see ,’ he said with an emphasis that prompted the constable to glance suspiciously at him.
‘I see.’
‘The duchess's body was afterwards placed head-on against the rear wall of the royal apartments,’ continued Tyrell, in the manner of one detailing the arrangements for a state function.
‘It was discovered there this morning.’
‘And none suspects?’ asked Forest with a carelessness that in no measure deceived the constable.
‘So it would seem.’
‘None knew if she was in the family way?’
‘Personally, I doubt she was,’ admitted Tyrell.
‘Early days maybe, as the physician said — he could not rule out the possibility.
Anyway as I indicated, we could not take the chance.
Had she been so, then last night's work would have been for naught.
The duchess being bride to the heir presumptive, with the princes gone, any issue of hers would have been regarded by many as rightful sovereign of the realm.
As it is…’
‘As it is —’ put in Forest gleefully ‘— yours truly 'as not done such a bad job after all!’
‘As it happens,’ said Tyrell pointedly.
‘As it happens.
But had your bungling been discovered earlier and by someone else, all hell would have broken loose.’
‘Then you'll pay the piper?’
‘With certain provisos.’
‘Meaning?’
‘Utter so much as a word about last night's work and you will be clapped in irons,’ declared Tyrell.
‘I am not one for shilly-shallying, as well you know, Forest — in the event, I should make sure you were Will Slaughter's next victim.’
‘Slaughter, you say?
Now I comes to think on it, I've not set eyes on Black Will since afore we went to the Garden Tower last evening.’
‘No more has anyone else,’ came the rejoinder.
‘Oh, he is around — we may be sure of that!
It seems the fellow carried out his task well enough — there are two corpses in the burial chest this morning.
But who could say for certain?
Will Slaughter has gone and one might suppose another has gone with him.
However, there is no point in looking for trouble.
Let sleeping dogs — together with sleeping princes and duchesses — lie, say I!’