

CLIMBER & HILL WALKER AUGUST 1992
£1.80
SCRAMBLING In the Dark Peak
WALKING Some of Britain's finest skylines
ROCK CLIMBING In Cornwall, the Peak District, North Wales, the Lakes and Czechoslovakia 
COMPASS
COMPILED BY PETER BEAUMONT, ED DOUGLAS & DAVID ROSE
Venables breaks legs on descent from Himalayan peak
‘ALL I remember was the sudden transition from abseiling, to being battered and pummelled and thrown violently down the mountain.
There was this awful feeling of helplessness, waiting for the big bang.
But it didn't come.’
The speaker was Stephen Venables, the first Briton to climb Everest without oxygen, and now recovering in Bath hospital following an incredible rescue on Panch Chuli V, 6,349m, in the Indian Kumaon Himalayas.
Venables broke both legs in a 90m fall while descending the mountain after the first ascent.
Venables was lifted from a precarious 30-degree ice slope, by an Indian army helicopter pilot flying perilously close to his aircraft's maximum altitude limit.
He'd been stuck at the site for four days with Vic Saunders and Dick Renshaw, mostly without food.
The alarm was raised by team leader Chris Bonington — who also fell 150m on steep ice as he went to Venable's assistance, miraculously emerging with no more than a minor facial wound.
Venables and Bonington were part of an Anglo-Indian expedition to the Panch Chuli area.
Earlier Bonington and Graham Little had climbed Panch Chuli II, 6,904m and Venables, Renshaw, Saunders and Steve Sustad, Raj Ramba, 6,537m.
The expedition was the first to attempt Panch Chuli V, which is guarded by thick jungle, steep glacier icefalls and a summit headwall.
Having established a top camp on a col below the headwall, where Bonington stayed behind, the team began its summit bid at 3.30 am on 20 June.
‘The climbing was much more difficult than we expected,’ Venables said.
‘The last bit was very hard, crusty ice.
It was touch and go all the way.’
They reached the summit at 3pm and then started the long abseil descent.
By 2.30am next day, working by torchlight, they had descended 300m without incident.
Venables fixed an abseil peg, a bomber angle…or so it seemed.
The others went down, and he removed the back ups before following on himself.
He went on: ‘I'd gone about 20′ Then the piton just came out.
I suppose the average angle was 60 or 70 degrees, but there were big vertical steps and lots of big lobs and bounces.
‘It seemed to go on for an awfully long time.
I didn't lose consciousness, but pretty soon it dawned that I was in a lot of pain.’
‘At first,’ Saunders said, ‘we thought he must be dead.
Then we heard him shouting from the depths: Is anybody there? he was telling us he had broken both legs, and there was a lot of blood.
One of them was an ugly compound fracture.’
Saunders prusiked down the rope and made splints from pieces of sleeping mat, while the others summoned Bonington.
They decided to bypass the col and descend directly to the glacier, cutting bucket seats in the snow to brace themselves as they lowered Venables on the rope.
According to Saunders, on his way to help Bonington suddenly lost his footing.
He tried to brake with this ice-axe but started turning great cartwheels, bouncing all the way down.
He sat holding his head in his hands for half an hour, but after that he stood up and just got on with it.
Eventually camp was pitched on the glacier, 36 hours after the start of the summit bid.
Bonington set off alone for civilisation, reaching a village after descending the dangerous icefalls and cutting his way through the jungle for a day and a half.
At last, on 26 June, the helicopter arrived.
The angle of the glacier meant  that it could only hover, one ski touching the slope.
It was in incredible display of control, and it took an age to shove Venables in, said Saunders.
‘In the end I grabbed his crotch, he yelped in pain, but he was away.’
Steve Venables (photo Eric Whitehead).
Mountain magazine goes bust
SUBSCRIBERS to Mountain magazine — long regarded by many as Britain's definitive journal of international climbing and mountaineering — are likely to get a surprise when the postman delivers their next copy.
Landing on their doormat will be a copy of High , the official organ of the British Mountaineering Council and a different animal altogether.
This state of affairs follows the collapse of Mountain with a large level of debt an the receiver snapping at the door.
The magazine, which since its launch in January 1969, had dominated the ‘serious’ end of the climbing magazine market through the '70s and early '80s, had found its circulation in the USA considerably reduced with the steady growth of American magazines like Climbing and Rock and Ice .
For a while it looked as if founding editor Ken Wilson would buy the title back, but he was unable to find an editor and a valiant last ditch attempt to keep the title going, by Grey Rimmer of On The Edge , was destined to fall by the wayside.
Eventually,High , it's editor Geoff Birtles and publishers Greenshires stepped in to buy the title, not as a going concern, but for its subscription list and one presumes, its contacts in the world of international climbing.
The 3,000 or so subscribers to Mountain will help to bolster High's circulation figures with the added hope that when the ex- Mountain subscriptions expire, some will renew them with High .
As for those who already receive High and don't want another copy, or those ex- Mountain subscribers who just don't want High , then one can only hope that a refund will be available.
Speculation rife after discovery of Everest diary
A BODY in a yellow duvet jacket; the wreckage of a tent and personal possessions; a notebook in English found among then — these are the scattered and poignant relics of one of British mountaineering's worst tragedies, the disappearance of Peter Boardman and Joe Tasker on the then unclimbed North-East ridge of Everest.
It was sad and harrowing discovery for the Kazakh North-East ridge expedition — winding the clock back a decade to the tragic events of the morning of May 17, 1982 and two tiny figures climbing steadily up the North-East ridge of Everest.
At a lower camp expedition leader Chris Bonington — who had retreated exhausted after reaching 26,000 feet — monitored the progress of the two dark specs up on the ridge.
Boardman, 31, and Tasker, 34, were making steady progress as they approached the cloud covered pinnacles that form the ridges most formidable physical barrier.
They missed first their 3pm and then their 6pm radio call, but Bonington was not unduly alarmed.
Then, just before dusk a single figure was spotted again moving out of sight on the small col below the second pinnacle.
It was the last time that they were ever seen alive.
Like the disappearance of Mallory and Irvine over 50 years before, what happened in the next few hours or days has remained one of the mountain's unfathomable secrets.
The search for the two climbers had begun almost at once.
Even before Tasker and Boardman had set off on their last attempt Bonington and Adrian Gordon — the base camp manager — decided that they would go up the mountain to help with the descent from the North Col, concerned that if Tasker and Boardman reached the summit by the long ridge above the pinnacles, they would be close to collapse on their descent.
Climbing quickly, Bonington and Gordon reached the North Col on May 18 in fine weather and scoured the clearly visible North-East ridge.
It was deserted.
They waited at the North Col for three awful days, watching the deserted ridge for any signs of life.
Alarmed by their disappointed Bonington descended the mountain and, with an increasing sense of  foreboding , trekked the 45 miles over to the Kangshung glacier with expedition doctor Charlie Clarke in the slim hope that they had somehow descended the mountain by that side.
But the Kangshung glacier, too, was deserted.
On May 28, ten days after they had lost contact and close to complete despair Bonington gave up the search.
Now, ten years later, the discovery of a body among the pinnacles and much lower on the ridge, the battered remains of a tent contain a handwritten notebook, promise to throw new light on the deaths of two of Britain's most talented post-war mountaineers.
Already the tragic discovery of a yellow-suited body among the pinnacles has led to furious and immoderate speculation in the national press.
It was the body of Boardman said some — the body of Tasker, argued others.
The dairy was Joe's, Pete's or even Bonington's, and with Bonington himself out of contact in the Himalayas the speculation continued.
But the picture that emerged in a week of highly speculative stories was a misleading one: of a body outside a tent, and of a diary found on the body, of suggestions of who had died and why.
Among the mass of contradictory claims that have come out of the discovery,Climber has tried to piece together what is known and what is purely speculation in a mystery that is unlikely ever to be solved.
The story begins at Everest base camp, with Steve Berry of Himalayan Kingdoms who was leading a trekking party into the area.
Berry arrived with his party at base camp where he ran into the Kazakh climber Valeri Krishchaty by chance.
Berry explained: ‘We got into base camp with the group of trekkers on May 8 and one of the first people I ran into was Krishchaty, just by chance.
Valeri said he had found a tent and various items on the ridge, which they were attempting, so I made a list of them and he drew a sketch map of the location where the tent had been found.
‘They found two sleeping bags still in their stuff sacs, a pair of inner boots, an empty rucksack, some broken tent poles, and a couple of novels and a notebook.
But no body.
They found the stuff at about 7,180m.
‘The notebook had already gone back with another Kazakh climber who had returned early, but I gather that it was written in English.
They wanted to give the notebook to Chris Bonington who they thought was coming to Kazakhstan in July.
But that apparently is not the case.’
What is clear is that some — if not all — of the equipment found in the remains of the tent was probably left by Bonington who intended, during his retreat, to go back up to the highest camp.
Among the items in the wreckage of the tent were two novels including one of Bonington's.
The story is now taken up at  second hand.
After Berry returned home to England with his party, Valeri Krishchaty and his team made a second attempt on the North-East ridge from their camp five at around 7,900m. close to the beginning of the pinnacles.
Bob Anderson, an American climber and Everest veteran who was part of the successful Kangshung face team that put Steve Venables on the summit, was the second Western climber to speak to Krishchaty.
Passing through London o his way to McKinley in Alaska, Anderson said that Krishchaty had discovered a body amongst the pinnacles.
According to second-hand reports of the conversation Krishchaty said that the body was lying on the ground at about 8,250m and that they had passed it two or three times.
A number of things are clear.
The tent that was discovered had clearly been occupied by Bonington; it contained his possessions and therefore leaves the possibility that the notebook could have been his as well as Joe's or Pete's.
The description of the jacket on the body also confirms its tentative identification as one of the two climbers, although a question mark remains over its colour — yellow rather than the red suits Boardman and Tasker were pictured wearing.
According to Krishchaty the duvet jacket bore a label with the outline of a mountain and three English letters beneath it — almost certainly the logo of the International School of Mountaineering (ISM) in Leysin.
Boardman is shown wearing a duvet with the logo in one of the expedition photographs.
Beyond these conjectures, nothing is certain.
Photographs and a more detailed physical description of the body may finally identify it, but a diary found so much lower on the mountain is unlikely to throw new light on how the two men died.
However, the location of a body near the second pinnacle, suggests that whatever separated them — a fall, oedema , sheer exhaustion — probably happened within hours of their last sighting by Bonington.
When Bonington returns from his expedition to Panch Chuli, reads the contents of the notebook and sees the photographs he may be able to give a few more clues, but it is unlikely we will ever know what really happened.
Peter Beaumont 
Joe Tasker.
Pete Boardman (photos Chris Bonington).
Above: The last sighting of Boardman or Tasker on the North-East ridge.
A figure can be seen silhouetted on the shaded section of the ridge, between the first and second pinnacles and right of an obvious cornice.
Right: Boardman, Tasker and Dick Renshaw on the first pinnacle (photos Chris Bonington).
Simpson and the water people
‘WHAT worried me was that I might discover I couldn't write at all.’
This is not the sort of statement you'd expect from a man who won the Boardman-Tasker Award and the NCR (National Cash Registers) non-fiction prize with his first book.
But Touching the Void presented Joe Simpson with as many questions as it answered.
He confesses he found the book's success unreal and it's taken several years to find level ground again.
‘At the NCR award dinner I went to get pissed.
I really didn't think it would win.
When it did I thought it was a joke.’
Simpson's life changed irrevocably with this success.
A scramble for film rights and a whistle-stop tour of the US on a book-signing tour followed — 11 cities in 12 days and a $75,000 advance.
‘I was thinking I'm going to be picked up at JFK and they'll be expecting a black feminist and they'll realise they've got the wrong author.’
From drifting happily from mountain to mountain with equally impecunious friends, Joe was suddenly elevated to a position where his life was no longer his own.
Simpson's second book, a novel called The Water People , has restored the self-control he wanted.
‘With the second book I feel I deserve to make a living from writing — I'm not a fraud.’
He's also begun to more fully explore the reasons he keeps going back to the mountains despite the terrible cost they have inflicted.
Another appalling accident — on Parchamo when partner Mal Duff's crampon failed precipitating them both down the mountain — dented his psychological readjustment following the Andes accident described in Touching the Void , but hasn't destroyed it.
He continues to mix an off-hand sense of humour with a sharp insight.
Physically, however, Joe is running out of time and a planned trip to Everest this winter is now doubtful.
‘I'm pretty knackered.
I could do without it.
My knee is very bad.
I can still climb but it's destroying itself.’
He seems resigned to a shortened climbing career, but content that he's made it all.
‘I've had a good crack,’ he says with unconscious irony.
The Water People has already received a lot of good reviews, and Simpson is a long way into his next project, a sort of autobiography.
‘It's really about dead friends,’ he says.
He's lost a dozen in a decade and this goes some way towards explaining his surprisingly philosophical attitude to his own bad luck.
‘When you think about it in those terms, you realise climbers are very clever at building a rationale to avoid facing the truth.’
Joe Simpson (photo Ian Smith).
Mail On Sunday man dies in fall on An Teallach
IAIN Walker, executive editor of the Mail on Sunday , has died after a fall on An Teallach, while descending in mist from the mountain's notoriously treacherous rocky crest.
Walker, 52 who leaves widow and two children, had been out with his brother Graham when the pair got off route on steep, loose ground.
Graham watched in horror as Iain slid down a rocky buttress, and then waited on a ledge for 12 hours until rescued by the RAF.
Iain's body was found later the next day.
Iain Walker became well-known in climbing circles for accompanying the 1988 Bonington Menlungste expedition, which was dressed up for sponsorship purposes as a yeti hunt.
No such beast was found, but the late Andy Fanshawe and Al Hinkes climbed the west summit.
One of Walker's early dispatches, written as the team kicked their heels in some god-forsaken spot in Tibet waiting for bureaucracy, began memorably: ‘This is the worst place in the world.’
On the crest of An Teallach (photo Hamish Brown).
Scott's away
DOUG Scott, 50 this year, leaves for Nanga Parbat this month to attempt the eight mile Mazeno Ridge on the 8,125 peak.
With him go Sandy Allan, the renowned Russian climber Serge Efimov, who has traversed the five summits of Kangchenjunga without oxygen, Al Hinkes, Ang Phurba, photographer Sean Smith, Simon Yates and Nga Temba.
Like Roger Payne's trip to Broad Peak, the expedition has specific environmental aims as well.
They plan a comprehensive clean-up of the Rupal Base Camp and a clean water supply for Askoli.
This project will cost £10,000, with half of the money coming from Climb for the World .
Askoli suffers a 50 per cent child mortality rate, largely as a result of gastro-enteritis.
Thalay Sager South Face success
DESPITE consistently pool weather and a frightening episode in which they were avalanched in their tents, two members of a british expedition have made the first ascent of the South Face of Thalay Sagar, one of the most attempted and failed on mountains in the Indian Charwal Hamalayas.
Climber assistant editor Tom Prentice and leader Keith Milne reached the summit of the 6,904m mountain after 13 days.
The South Face had been attempted before by teams from Italy and Britain.
The avalanche happened one evening early on in the trip, close to Camp One.
‘It was a horrible experience,’ Tom recall, ‘a bit like sliding down a snow slope on a tin tray with a plastic bag over your head — but worse!’
Unfortunately consistent snowfall and heavy spindrift prevented Milne, Prentice, Charlie French and Julian Fisher from progressing on the 500m granite headwall that's the main feature of the South Face, so they turned their focus on an easier objective.
French and Fisher decided to descend while Milne and Prentice continued, skirting the headwall to the west and joining the American/British route on the West Ridge.
The summit was reached at 7pm four days later, the climbers descending in the dark.
The descent to Base Camp took a further two days.
As well as climbing Thalay Sagar, members of the expedition which included Gordon Scott, Sue Grimley and American Jordan Campbell, climbed Rudugaira, 5,364m, and attempted ascents of Ratangrian, 5,852m and two other impressive unclimbed rock spires in the area.
Celebrating at base camp
Nice one Geoff
GEOFF Hornby had a close shave while making the first ascent of Peak 9070 on the south side of Mount Hunter in Alaska.
He fell 30′ over a vertical serac wall in a whiteout.
Thankfully there were no injuries and he and Ave Barlow managed to make it down to the best of the mountain safely.
It was their third attempt on the peak, having been repulsed twice by storms.
The route was climbed from the north.
The climbers later recorded the route in the park headquarters, naming the peak Point Nora Batty, to the disdain of the Park Ranger who suggested the Americans didn't want their mountains named after British politicians!
Hornby and Barlow also climbed the South-East Ridge of Mount Crossons, making the second British ascent following Roy Ruddle's in 1991.
Round-the-clock classic rockers
A ROUND-the-clock charity climbing relay to climb all 81 routes in Classic Rock has ended in success and already raised more than £4,000 in aid of motor neurone disease, a crippling affliction of the nervous system.
The marathon relay, aided by excellent weather, was completed three hours inside the team's self-imposed limit of 12 days.
It involved over 37,000 feet of rock climbing at all times of the day and night, and 160 miles of ell running to transport a baton from one climbing team to another.
Event originator, Merseyside climber Chris Schiller, who took part himself, said: ‘The main problem for the climbers was lack of sleep.
Over the first six days we were lucky to get more than three consecutive hours.
Hallucinations were not uncommon!
‘Discipline, determination and endurance were the keys to success.’
Anyone wishing to make a donation to the team's effort should make cheques payable to MNDA (Merseyside) at the following address:.
Obituary — Graham Tiso
THE body of Scottish outdoor equipment retailer Graham Tiso was buried at sea in a Viking-style funeral in June, following his sudden death in the West Indies.
Graham had been working on his yacht, the Sea Eagle, during a break on a long sailing trip, when he suffered an electric shock.
He was taken to hospital in St Lucia but died three days later.
He was buried, according to his wishes, in a private ceremony far out in the Atlantic to the west of the Hebridean island of Barra.
He was 57.
Birmingham born, Graham Tiso left school to work for Cadbury's, the confectioners, who provided him with a sound overall business training.
The Tiso retail empire was born when he opened his first climbing shop in Edinburgh in 1962.
Graham began climbing with the Edinburgh JMCS and shared first ascents of significant Scottish routes like Parallel B Gully, Lochnager (1958), Smith's gully on Creag Meaghaidh (1959) and Vanishing Gully on Ben Nevis (1961).
In 1965 he achieved a personal ambition of several years by making the second winter traverse of Sky's Cuillin Ridge.
Graham turned to sailing after breaking a leg climbing.
As his sailing trips became longer, so his management team took over running the business, and it is now left in their capable hands, recently spawning a sibling company — Wild Rover, Graham is survived by his wife Maude and their three sons, Donald, Rory and Christopher.
BRITISH ROCK Peak Limestone
WILLERSLEY CASTLE CRAG
Willersley Castle Crag offers steep, sheltered limestone, with the possibility of all-weather climbing.
Chris Craggs climbs some of the classic routes on its walls and grooves
Willersley Rocks lie directly across the River Derwent from the rather grand mansion that gives the cliff its full Sunday name.
This ‘castle’ was built in the late 1700s for Richard Arkwright, whose highly mechanised spinning mill just to the north of the cliff made him his fortune, and is now regarded as one of the birthplaces of the Industrial Revolution.
Arkwright certainly picked a great spot for his country residence: south facing and above a lazy curve in the river, with the high cliff opposite guaranteeing more than a modicum of privacy, and only five minutes from work!
The house is now owned by a group of Methodists (as is the cliff), and doubtless they appreciated the seclusion of the place.
Secluded that is, until climbers began to explore the crag.
There have been a number of unfortunate and avoidable confrontations over the years, brought on by the profanities bellowed out by climbers having a hard time on the shady cliff.
These voluble oaths echoing across the river have burst upon the ears of the Castle's occupants, enjoying a little peace and quiet while sitting on the terrace in the afternoon sun, and sparks have flown.
I know climbers are not always the most  considerate of folks, but this is definitely a place to adopt a ‘softly softly’ approach, even if you are finding your chosen route a little hard going.
The crag contains a great selection of classic climbs; it would be a pity to lose access to it because of the thoughtless actions of a few loud-mouthed oafs.
Willersley faces north and in summer supports a healthy crop of greenery.
It can be a rather gloomy spot, though a series of large trees growing along the clifftop — allied to the cliff's aspect — means the place is sheltered from the prevailing winds.
In summer it is even possible to climb here when it's raining (and when it stops!)
The rock runs the whole gamut, from superb pocketed limestone right through to tottering black bulges, though fortunately all the best routes studiously avoid the latter.
Perhaps the most classic climb on the cliff is Garrotter, VS 4b, 4b.
This takes a disjointed groove system to the right of the centre of the crag.
The groove the climb follows is identified from below by a series of intimidating bulges and a rather spindly tree that sticks out horizontally from the cliff about 60′ up.
Despite the rather fearsome appearance of the route from below, it turns out to be pleasantly mild mannered, the slabby right wall of the groove allowing sneaky side-stepping of all major difficulties.
Passing the biggest bulge on the first pitch is probably the crux of the climb, more because of the glossy nature of the rock than any real technical difficulty.
Fortunately the protection is perfect, so if you do scoot off your flight should be a short one.
The stance is superb and the tree belay sprouts from solid rock in a most comforting fashion.
The second pitch continues the theme initiated by the first: good rock, great protection and sustained interest, before popping out onto the grassy clifftop, where there is a fine selection of arboreal belays.
Further to the right the cliff becomes rather nondescript until a shallow, right-facing corner offers access to a fine steep wall.
This is the start of another great two pitch climb which forges its way up impressive rock at a reasonable grade: Pothole Wall, VS 4c, 5a.
Getting started on the groove is tricky, then good but spaced holds lead up and left to more exposed rock.
An awkward bulge  must be overcome to reach an easier corner, and a little higher a tiny stance.
There are two ancient mild steel peg belays here, but they are best ignored in favour of something a touch more modern.
The second pitch traverses right to avoid the rather oppressive bulges that hang over the stance disconcertingly.
The pothole that gives the route its name is passed and a couple of thin moves are required to reach easier angled rock and the top.
These moves would not disgrace a HVS climb were it not for the fact that two sets of in situ threads protect them perfectly: a good testing ground to see if you are up to greater things.
VALUABLE ORES
Just right of the start of Pothole Wall is a section of steep, dark coloured rock split by a wriggly crackline. — Gangue (pronounced gang) Groove, HVS 5b.
Gangue is the miners' term for rock in which valuable ores are embedded.
The rock has to be mined and then thrown away, so is not held in very high esteem.
The black rock on the lower section of the route certainly looks a bit suspect, but fortunately looks can be deceptive.
A short wall leads up to a horizontal break where good runners can be placed.
Then a step left leads to the start of the crack line.
The rock is steep enough to require forceful climbing, but nuts drop in which a satisfying regularity.
A bulging section provides the crux and allows access to rock of a far more amendable angle in the form of a large slab — hidden from the foot of the cliff.
There are good nuts here and it used to be traditional to belay at this point.
Unfortunately, there's not really anything worthy of the title ‘stance’ hereabouts, so unless you are running very short of gear or are totally bushed, it's probably best to press on.
The slab is traversed rightwards and is quite straightforward if you stay low.
Some perfect and well scarred nut slots protect a tricky move into the final groove, which is bridged pleasantly to the top, always assuming your rope drag has not got out of control.
The grey rock on the upper section of the climb is smooth, solid and heavily pocketed, in contrast to the black stuff lower down.
It presents a good example of the geological phenomenon of dolomitisation.
The original limestone consisted of calcium carbonate, but sometime after it was formed, water rich in dissolved magnesium percolated through the rock.
Much of the calcium was replaced by magnesium and the original crystalline structure of the rock was destroyed, leaving well cemented dolomite.
The fact that magnesium atoms are smaller than the calcium atoms they replaced has let to a reduction in the volume of the rock.
Consequently it is riddled with superb finger pockets.
The diminutive but pleasant cliffs at nearby Brassington and Harborough were formed in the same way.
My final favourite on Willersley lie away towards the left side of the cliff.
Here there is a fine series of grooves that run virtually the full height of the cliff.
The steepest and smoothest of these just fails to reach both the clifftop and the ground.
This is the superb Lime Street Direct, E1 5b, 4b.
Although titled ‘direct’, there are in fact three ways of reaching the base of the groove, only one of which is truly direct.
The traditional approach is from the right, where an awkward traverse is made from the top of a crack in the side wall of Lone Tree Groove, around the arête to gain small ledges in the base of the main groove.
A shallow corner in the arête offers a more direct 5c start, and for the technically proficient the hairline crack running straight into the base of the corner can be climbed at 6a.
Once you have gained the groove line the climb unfolds in a quite compelling way: superb bridging, solid locking finger jams and perfect protection lead up the plum vertical line.
Savour it.
Eventually the rock steepens and turns blocky.
A pull out left gains easy rock and just a little higher there is a perfect eagle's eyrie of a stance, with good belays in a well pegged horizontal crack.
The final pitch is straightforward (although some of the rock is a little on the loose side, so a cautious approach is wise) until the final solid corner is reached and bridged to the cliff top.
The folks in the big house across the river might be able to sit in the afternoon sun, but after a dray cracking of routes like these you'll be the one left with the afterglow.
Perhaps there's a little justice in the world after all.
CRAG FACTS
Willersley Castle Crag:OS Grid Ref.
Summary:A long, north facing wall of variable quality limestone.
The cliff is very sheltered but can be slow to dry in winter.
The best routes follow strong, natural lines and are perfectly protected.
Access:The most convenient parking for the cliff is on Cromford Meadows.
These are situated a couple of kilometres south of Matlock and are reached by turning east off the A6 just south of the junction with the A5012.
Three hundred metres down this narrow road, opposite a red sandstone church, are the meadows.
From here cross the road and enter the church gate.
The cliff is to be found on the left after 200 metres level walking along the track.
Guidebook:Peak Limestone South , published by the British Mountaineering Council in 1987.
Left: Dave Gregory tiptoes past the pothole on the crux of Pothole Wall.
Right: Jim Rubery on Gangue Groove (photos Chris Craggs).
Lime Street Direct E1, 5b, 4b Garrotter VS 4b Pothole Wall VS 4c, 5a Gongue Groove HVS 5b Willersley Castle Crag.
(Trees in front of cliff omitted for clarity).
UP THE NOSE DIRECT (Without a teddy) By Richard Smithson
I'm a desperate man.
Most of the time I'm preoccupied with problems I can't begin to solve.
Today, as a change from all this I'm faced with a task I think I can tackle.
You've seen the picture of the nice, clean, sunbleached Nose of Dinas Mot.
Running down the middle of it is Kirkus's Direct route, and there at the foot of the groove is me.
It's a warm, sunny day, just like the picture.
This is not a difficult climb, but there is 80′ to go to the next stance and I'm all trembly.
The weight of gear hanging form my harness doesn't bother me, because all my worries have fallen away to spend the day sulking at the foot of the crag.
Now I'm merely frightened.
As I move up, grand runners slot into place and the fear abates.
Of course, I want to do the pitch in good style.
My idea of good style is to arrive at the stance with a minimum of runners.
And I do.
Now for the really enjoyable bit.
Nice solid belay, comfortable place to sit, nice view and most of all that warm, smug feeling.
I'm at the centre of a giant trapezoid monument to life: poised between dumb gravity and my senseless urge to struggle on.
Soon Denis arrives.
What a lot of gear he's carrying.
Now for the hand traverse, up round to the right.
After putting in all those runners the actual bold swing across turns out to be a very small step for mankind.
I want more, I'm hungry for rock.
I've forgotten my troubles; now I want to climb just for the good performance itself.
Just to be using brain and muscles and feelings all together at once, and not failing.
This is what life should be like; this is what I'm designed for.
I realise how dead I am most of the time; dead but desperate.
But I haven't finished yet.
I'm at the long ledge below the final wall of the Nose, where the Direct, Superdirect, and other routes not mentioned by Ron James converge.
Here are other people.
An instructor from Plas y Brenin and his student are being efficient and muscular on the Superdirect.
They are not like Denis and me.
They have cropped hair and clipped voices.
The instructor calls his student ‘mate’ with such obsessive frequency that the latter is almost stimulated to build a nest, but in the end no real intimacy results.
they are a tough pair.
They strive, they refuse to countenance fear and doubt, they simply don't recognise it.
They are climbing to deny human weakness.
There is another pair of climbers starting up from the same ledge.
They are altogether different from Denis and me and from PYB and his mate.
They are golden boys, about 17 or 18, and apparently weightless.
The one with the golden curly hair is handing from a little finger hold on an impending wall.
He places a tiny wire runner with effortless case, in comparison with my desperate finger-wrestling, rope-biting contortions.
Then he hangs from one hand while feeling about with the other in his chalk-bag.
That, I realise, is where he keeps his teddy.
No wonder he is so calm.
Suddenly he is up.
Well done Pier.’
‘Thanks Dominic.’
Yes, they are golden boys, because they do their E4s with little apparent effort.
They don't have to fight or be brave; they are right in tune with the rock and themselves.
That's good performance.
Meanwhile, on this VS which they probably haven't heard of and wouldn't bother to solo, Denis and I have one more pitch to climb.
It goes well, in a lurching, grasping, grabbing kind of way.
Then  we slump, sweaty, gibbering and exhausted at the top.
They occasional quack of ‘Alright mate?’ floats up from the down gully.
Dominic and Piers repose in unruffled calm nearby.
Late that night I ask myself the age-old question.
Why do I do it?
Why do I drink all that beer?
It must be because it gets me out of the tent in the middle of the night to stand and contemplate the untroubled majesty of The Plough.
Left: Laybacking up the final pitch of Direct route, Dinas Mot.
Below: The hand traverse, comfortingly protected by good runners (photos by Bill Birkett).
QUALITY CRAG BOSIGRAN by Bill Birkett
A granite crag for all seasons, Bosigran is located in a particularly beautiful part of Cornwall — the north coast of West Penwith.
Despite its ease of access this remains a wild place, and one of many moods.
In the sunshine it smiles and sparkles; when the sea fog rolls over, clinging to the rocks, it is a world of ghosts.
Even within the context of the unique Cornish climate, Bosigran is a law unto itself.
Rarely a day passes when, at some time, the rock isn't ripe for climbing.
Good news for climbers.
The cliff, excluding Bosigran Ridge beyond and Porthmoina Island below, is a little more complex and extensive than first appearances suggest.
To simplify matters I have divided it into three main areas.
The lowest, most northerly point is the slabby Seaward Cliff.
Next comes the easy descent of Sea Gully, followed by the face of Raven Wall.
The Main Face includes all the cliff stretching rightwards from here, with easy descent being made down Simon Gully.
First impressions, as you pass beyond the large tumbled blocks of Gendarme Ridge, is that you have stumbled into a quarry.
The rock has a clean, sparkling look, appearing freshly broken.
Rising directly from the path, the smooth wall holding Thin Wall Special will be eyed eagerly.
Then the scary concave wall and overhangs taken by Bow Wall can't fail to impress.
Left of this, the black, diamond-shaped Coal Face forms a useful halfway marker.
Beyond extends Raven Wall, then the Seaward Cliff.
There's masses of climbing, most of it excellent, and where you start will depend on what grade you want to climb.
The following may help.
The pioneers here were Arthur Westlake Andrews, father of sea cliff climbing, with his sister Ethel.
In 1902 they climbed the marvellous Bosigran Ridge.
With its direct start, it provides some 210m of varied climbing on perfect, blocky granite.
A fine position, constant exposure, and some tricky sections ensure it status as one of the greatest sea cliff classics.
The Andrews also climbed on Porthmoina Island but left the main cliff, its ravens, badgers and ledges of campion and sea thrift alone.
Another great Cornish explorer, D.G. Romanis, touched the flanks by climbing the delectable Alison Rib (Diff) in 1923.
Sited at the extreme right end of the crag and flanked by broken rock and hillside, it nevertheless provides an appealing climb.
A further decade passed before the great Colin Kirkus, staying in the Count House, newly acquired by the Climber's Club, made another flanking attempt, this time on the far end above the sea, the Seaward Face, climbing Black Slab (diff), and aesthetically pleasing line of some excitement — huge holds compensating for high exposure.
Kirkus also made a solo attempt on the line now known as Nameless, retreating from its final pitch.
Nameless was finally climbed in 1954 by Dennis Kemp and Nea Morin.
Now graded VS, the final pitch is notoriously slipper when wet and suffers the further hazard of nesting seagulls.
Don Roscoe had his arm torn open by the razor beak of one such bird.
A further decade passed before the true potential of this cliff began to be tapped.
Jim Simpson's Zig Zag (VS) in 1948 was a fine effort up the Raven Wall — a bold venture taking a route of considerable quality.
He followed it with the endearing Doorway (Severe) a year later.
Then came the lull before the storm.
From the mid-50s, things were never the same at Bosigran.
In early August 1955, Doorpost fell to the team of Pete and Barrie Biven and Trevor Peck.
The route is one of Britain's great Severes, giving exposure, position and move-for-move excellence.
The team was to change the face of Bosigran climbing, producing in that same month two further outstanding routes: Suicide Wall (E1) and Little Brown Jug (VS).
In September Rawdon Goodier and John (Zeke) Deacon joined the fray with Autumn Flakes (HS) and Raven Wall (E3).
The secret weapon of the  ascensionists , unlocking the door to Bosigran's hardest faces, were the hammer and piton.
Of course, Autumn Flakes and Little Brown Jug, two marvellous climbs, both hard for their grade, went free.
Today the very exposed 4b traverse on the former requires a cool head and skilful ropework and the top pitch of the latter will make many a leader sweat with mental and physical effort.
Now free, few will shun the remaining piton protection in Suicide Wall, a polished toughie providing strenuous finger moves that demand respect.
Raven Wall waited until 1977 before Pat Littlejohn climbed it free.
Another big year for the Bivens and Peck was 1956.
Ochre Slab (VS) captured the essence of the Seaward Cluff granite.
Anvil Chorus (HVS) gave a striking top itch.
(It should be noted that this grade is my own, justified by the fact that a number of serious accidents have occurred here.
Jam it if you can, but for those who choose to layback the corner crack — be strong).
Paragon (HVS) is an old-style eliminate, a little contrived perhaps, but nonetheless a very good climb.
Thin Wall Special (E1) is superb, giving two contrasting pitches: the first a steep, technical wall, the top an awkward and bold overhanging corner.
The Ghost, weaving through the roofs of the Main Face, now stands at E3 to give a remarkable route.
It is actually much easier than appearances would suggest — cold comfort when it looks impossible!
For my money, Joe Brown's ascent of Bow Wall (E2) in 1957 was one of the most impressive in the cliff's entire history.
So typically Brown — a great line up the overhanging heart of the Main Face, it struck a masterly note that couldn't be ignored.
Brown's second was unable to follow and stuck terrified in mid-face, leaving Joe to solo down the adjacent Doorpost to find out why the rope wasn't moving!
A lower-off and forced retreat left the top section still to climb.
Barrie Biven and Peck aided this a year later.
The 60s brought two further landmark climbs: Kafoozalem (E3) by Frank Cannings and Beowulf (E2) by Pete Biven and Trevor Peck.
Both were aided.
The latter was free climbed by P. Gordon shortly after, but Kafoozalem waited for Jim Moran in 1977.
Further free climbs of aided routes were made in the 70s, including that of The Ghost, by Ed Drummond and Tom Proctor.
The final route climbed of the selection made here, was the steep eliminate of Absolution (E5), fittingly pioneered in 1987 by sea cliff virtuoso Pat Littlejohn.
The line had been conceived and attempted in the 60s by Pete Biven, who retreated due to lack of protection.
One feels that his ghost may now rest in peace, happy in the knowledge that this exceptional cliff has now fully realised the potential he first saw back in the mid 1950s.
INFORMATION
Map Ref:SW 416369.
Guidebooks:Bosigran by Des Hannigan (Climber's Club).
South-West Climbs by Pat Littlejohn (Diadem).
Seasons:The crag faces west, is sited just above the sea and climbing is generally possible all year round.
The rock is extremely clean and dries fast.
Restrictions:None.
The Main Cliff is unaffected by tides.
However, routes on the Seaward Cliff and the bottom pitch (which can be avoided) of Bosigran Ridge are vulnerable when heavy seas are running — keep off in these conditions.
Camping/accommodation etc:The Count House Climber's Club Hut is ideally sited above the cliff and accommodation can be pre-booked by affiliated clubs.
The nearest centre with camping, chip shops, pubs etc is St Just, five miles south down the B3306.
Situation and access:Sited on the north coast of Cornwall, nearing the slim finger end of West Penwith, the crag is sited below the B3306, roughly equidistant from St Ives and St Just.
Immediately below the road a National Trust car park, placed between a distinctive tall chimney and ruined engine building of the long defunct Carn Galver mine, marks the starting point.
(The Count House Climber's Club Hut is located nearby in the direction of St Ives.)
A path leads from the car park through the brambles and over a rock slap stile to enter open fields and descent to a lesser ruined mine building.
The path right leads to the main face and left to Bosigran Ridge (allow five minutes).
Descent:Either Simon Gully or Sea Gully.
Character:This is one of the finest, most expensive and historically most important crags in Cornwall.
For the most part sited high above the sea, it is climbable at all times and offers easy access.
Even excluding Great Zawn (just along the coast) there are round 200 climbs, ranging in difficulty from Moderate to E5.
They offer quality climbing to suit most tastes, with the longest (excluding girdles) nudging 60m in length.
The crag lies outside the main tourist haunts and even in high summer, when the midday sun can make it too hot to climb, an air of secrecy prevails.
A mixed rack should be carried and any in-situ gear, particularly old pegs, should be treated with great caution.
Main photo: Joe Brown's classic Bow Wall (E2).
Climber Jan Rowe.
Above: Dave Ford climbs the second pitch of Doorpost — one of Britain's finest quality Severes.
Below: John Barry grits his teeth on the first pitch of Thin Wall Special (E1).
(All photos by Bill Birkett).
HIT LIST
SEAWARD FACE
GENERAL VIEW
RAVEN WALL — MAIN FACE
THE BIG CHILL
An account of an incident filled week of winter climbing in the Mont Blanc Massif.
Climbers: Mark Lowe and Pete Leeming
CHAMONIX WINTER CLIMBS
Chamonix-Mount Blanc, Easter 1987 .
I had never seen Chamonix so quiet.
The streets and bars were deserted, and for once the incessant noise and bustle had abated.
It seemed everyone was up in the mountains enjoying the glorious weather and the last few days skiing of the year.
Snell Sports, too, was deserted.
Down in the basement, Mark expertly kitted us out with mountaineering skis, boots, skins and harscheisen (crampons for skis)— we would be skiing in to our climbs.
The assistant eyed us coolly.
‘Which climbs do you want to make?’ he enquired.
‘Oh, perhaps the Walker Spur,’ I admitted reluctantly, knowing I could never even ski to the bottom of it.
‘But I think it may be too icy,’ I added, as a let-out clause.
‘It does not matter about the ice,’ the assistant replied, philosophically, ‘you just need a big spade.’
Presumably to smash the ice off, I guessed.
I imagined Mark and me high on the Walker, on our sixth day, smashing our way up the face.
O dear…
I also wished I could come up with an equally carefree stratagem for solving a more immediate problem — my skiing proficiency, which wasn't really up to the task ahead.
Two hours later we were being whisked by téléphérique out into the afternoon sunshine, and watched the other skiers disappear.
I stood transfixed as two of them shot down the Glacier des Grands Montets carving beautiful turns all the way down beneath the north face of the Drus.
‘Are you ready, Pete?’
Mark's voice brought me back to my own predicament.
As I stepped into my skis and shuffled to the edge of the steep snow slope, I remembered Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid, tailed to the edge of a very high cliff by the  posse .
‘There's just one thing I have to tell you Butch,’ said Sundance, looking down into the foaming white water below, ‘I can't swim.’
‘Oh, never mind that,’ Cassidy replied, ‘the fall will probably kill you.’
Whoosh.
Mark set off downhill towards the Refuge d'Argentiere, 500 metres below us.
Supper was very late that night.
The refuge was crowded with skiers following the Haute Route — the high level alpine traverse.
Eventually, as the night air became too icy, the last of them filed inside, leaving Mark and me to our more frugal but more spacious bivouac on the terrace.
Our plan for the next day was to attempt the Austrian route on the north face of les Courtes.
This is a beautiful 800 metres ice route, first climbed by Drachsler and Gstrein in 1961.
As usual I felt a little trepidation before the climb, but this was dwarfed by the thought of skiing down from the refuge, across the Argentiere glacier, and up to the bergshrund below the face.
All of this in the dark.
IN TURBO MODE
At five next morning, in the chill darkness before dawn, we  skied across the glacier toward les Courtes.
Behind us a long chain of tiny lights danced slowly away from the refuge towards the col du Chardonnet, as last night's occupants resumed the Haute Route.
Three hours later I came across Mark huddled underneath a small buttress about 50 metres below the summit of Les Courtes.
He had been in his usual ‘turbo mode’ as he stormed up the face following a line of huge steps.
I had kept him waiting for over an hour, though he wasn't too annoyed as he had been able to retrieve three brand new titanium ice screws and a rope, left, we presumed, after an incident the night before when we had a helicopter hovering above the face.
We roped up for one awkward pitch before reaching the summit, which was now cloaked in thick mist, the weather deteriorating rapidly.
That afternoon we made a laborious but uneventful descent down the north east face and retrieved our skis.
Later on, as we relaxed back at the refuge, our peace was shattered by the guardian informing us we were forbidden to eat, cook, or sleep on the terrace.
Next morning, a suitable distance away from the refuge, I woke to feel a tremendous pressure on my body.
It had snowed all night and the build-up was threatening to push us off down the hill.
Eventually, after a long time spent contemplating the inevitable, we had to get up.
Small children, watching the falling snowflakes from inside the hut, began to cry and reach for their parents as the snow-slope parted and two strange, spindly creatures clad only in red thermals and inner boots emerged like primordial reptilian embryos.
We skied down o the village of Argentiere in the rain.
In the evening we drove into Chamonix and parked in the main street.
I left Mark in crucifix position, spreadeagled across the boot and the back seat, attempting to push down the doorlocks from inside (the car had been broken into while we were climbing, and the locks broken).
As I walked away I heard Mark's voice, softly at first, then getting louder: ‘Get down.
Get OFF.
GET DOWN!’
I turned to see a large black dog on top of Mark, its tongue hanging out and a coy expression on its face.
Mark doesn't have much luck with dogs.
This one followed him trustingly, its interest only evaporating when it was turned away from the bar we entered.
I took my skis back to the shop next morning, realising that perhaps the marginal snowbridges and crevasses of the Argentiere glacier were not an ideal nursery.
The weather had improved so we turned our attention to our next project — a modern ice climb — the Supercouloir on the north east face of Mont Blanc du Tacul.
This steep, narrow, 800 metres couloir, hemmed in by the famous Gervasutti Pillar and the Three Points Pillar, and first climbed by Boivin and Gabarrou in 1975, had always held a tremendous mystique for me.
I had imagined long pitches of vertical ice and continuous difficulty, so I wasn't entirely sure how we were going to climb it.
Exceptional tactical planning brought us, via the Aiguille du Midi téléphérique, to the Simond shelter on the south shoulder of the Midi at 1 pm.
Not an ideal time to start a major ice climb.
We lazed around, drinking in the incredible views of the Vallée Blanche, the Tacul, the Dent due Géant and the Jorasses.
I find it impossible to comprehend the scale of this arena, and that afternoon provided a great opportunity to relax in the mountains and let them have their effect on us.
‘Fancy some coffee, Pet?’
‘Sure, I'll get the stove going.’
I could never fathom Mark's new gas stove, and it always resembled a Sputnik satellite when I'd assembled it.
Mark too over.
‘Have you got the lighter, Pete?’
Two hours later we were back at the Aiguille du Midi.
In the téléphérique restaurant to be precise, buying matches and a huge meal.
But we had just traversed the Cosmiques Arête to get there.
ALL SO SIMPLE
My watch alarm woke us to a finger cold pre-dawn, though I remained only half awake as we trudged through knee-deep snow to the bottom of the Supercouloir, both of us cursing that we had not brought our skis.
We spent the whole morning climbing the steep, hard ice in the couloir's depths, so were somewhat dismayed when two figures skiied up to the base of the couloir, raced up to and past us, virtually dispensing with runners and belays, and then abseiled down from the top of the hard climbing at one third height, passing us again.
They picked up their skis and disappeared down the Vallée Blanche.
It all seemed so simple.
We continued into the upper, easier couloir, not realising that most people abseil off to avoid the long haul to the summit.
The granite pillars and gendarmes kept the sun from warming us, but at the same time emphasised the tenuous nature of the couloir.
The ice was just too hard and steep for us to climb solo, so we swung leads and swopped axes — mine had developed a distinct floppy-headed rattle.
Apart form the Air Mont blanc Cessna that buzzed us in the late afternoon, if not the whole range, to ourselves.
In the early evening we climbed over large, loose granite blocks, unsure of the correct line to follow.
Mark finally led us to the summit of Mont Blonc du Tacul just as darkness fell.
We descended immediately down the zig-zags of the north west face.
Shadowy bergschrunds and dark crevasses loomed large, but didn't present any real problems.
We arrived tired, but safe, on the snowfields of the col du Midi.
The last lap was a one kilometre walk up the gently inclined slopes to the Simond Refuge.
After a 20 hour day, this soon became a real struggle.
On several occasions a rope between us went tight.
As I turned around each time I could see Mark crouching in the snow.
My mind began to play tricks, and I just assumed he was examining the snow structure for some reason.
He finally admitted that he was simply falling asleep as he walked along.
We were soon  ensconced in our sleeping bags outside the refuge.
It was a beautiful starry night, far from freezing.
Before sleep overtook us, we reflected on our last few days' climbing.
We had learnt a lot, used caution and prudence, and contended with the usual rigours of the mountains and the cold.
But most of all we realised that if skill, fitness and commitment are not enough, we would ‘just need a big spade’.
Left: The Cosmique Arête, a popular and easily accessible route.
Below: Skiing down the South Face of the Midi (photos by Pete Leeming).
Below: A delicate pink hue tinges the sky over the North Face of Les Courtes.
Far right: Mont Blanc du Tacul (Jim Dockery).
Right: Getting to grips with the steep ice of the Supercouloir.
THIN PEAKS
Czechoslovakia's sandstone pinnacles offer strenuous off-width climbing with the sort of protection Edward Whymper might have considered old-fashioned.
Tom Prentice visited the land of the rope-knot runner to sample these spectacular spires
Thursday, June 13, 7.15 pm; Sports Injury Clinic, Kelvin Hall Sports Centre, Glasgow.
The white coated physio seems impressed.
‘Never treated a climber before.
Take your jacket off and let's have a look.’
The feeling of self-importance quivers as she digs into my tendons.
A point deep inside the joint is skilfully selected and the pain grows so fast I have to tear my arm from her hands.
The left arm gives the same result.
Chronic tendonitis.
The prescription is expected: lay off the climbing and get stuck into physiotherapy.
If that doesn't work, cortisone injections.
My protests are met with a simple choice.
Rest now, or risk further damage and a longer lay-off in the future.
It's all too depressing.
Saturday, June 29, 8.30 am; Palenickova Cesta VIII (Palenickova Route, E2 5b), south face Lomnicky Stit (2632m), Czechoslovakian Tatra.
It appeared so well planned.
Lacking axes or crampons we'd kicked steps up the snowy approach gully the afternoon before and checked out the devious ladders and chains forming the descent from the summit.
And now, on a clear morning, Graham Little and I are sitting at the bottom of the wall, fit and ready to go, and the wall is plastered with verglas.
Furthermore, there's no tomorrow — it's our last day in the Tatra.
The sun-bathed wall which forms the south face of Lomnicky Stit winked at me early in the trip.
Our Czech hosts knew little about it, save that the approach was long and the descent intricate.
It looked like the cleanest, steepest bit of rock in the corrie surrounding our base at Teryho chata (hut).
The fact that it was the area's second highest summit added incentive.
To cap it all, cable-car access from the other side would guarantee tea at the top and a tourist audience — what more was needed?
It didn't take long to get Graham's eyes looking in the same direction.
As if the verglas wasn't enough, there's a concrete snowfield below the wall.
We wait for the sun.
When it's just a few minutes from the face, the thick cloud filling the valley gently wells up to lock in the cold.
Aimless minutes of hand wringing and expletives, followed by resignation.
Graham, with his superior winter ability and new mountain boots is pointed at the snow slope.
Sharp rock in hand he cuts steps, balanced unroped above the hideous bumslide to oblivion.
Rockboots and stone sliver axes give access to what turns into a classic mountain route.
Halfway up I'm bombarded by icicles falling from the overhangs above, while Graham is somewhere in the swirling mist, pulling off an impressive lead.
When I follow, the sack weighs me down and the small holds force the blood from my fingers, numbing them to hot pains.
Then I'm along again in the mist, weaving up compact, slabby walls of granite, peppered with small, positive holds, but devoid of protection.
On the final pitches the topo proves to be hopelessly inaccurate and routefinding difficult in the poor visibility.
Finally we locate the top pitch, a fine crack and poorly protected traverse.
Then we're on the summit, with the tourists who've cable-carred from the valley for a view of concrete and iron railings.
For a few moments the clouds open and we lie in the heat of a hazy sun, our efforts justly rewarded.
The following day a fleet of Skodas transports us west across Czechoslovakia to Adrspach.
Wednesday, July 3, 10 am; Milenecka VII (Lovers' Route HVS 5b), Milenci (Lovers' Tower), Adrspach.
The sandstone pinnacles of Adrspach abound with chimneys: dark, dank, protectionless clefts, which concentrate the mind and brand the memory through an intensity of effort, encompassing technical challenge, marginal moves with minimal skin loss, and zero protection.
Some climbers like chimneys because they appear safe — fools.
Foul up in a chimney and you'll batter yourself on the walls.
Of course, this should induce anaesthesia and a reduced impact when the ground finally arrives.
Between then, the cheap beer, hospitality and subconscious warnings of the physio almost kept me off the sandstone.
But any climbing area where they take away your chalk bag, place bolts 25m apart, ban all other protection and give you a pile of grotty lengths of tat to knot and jam in cracks is too wild to be ignored.
Mostly I hate chimneys, but I knew they'd rest my finger tendons and Sue Grimley needed a partner from Milenecka.
That's how I came to be stuck and sweating, 60 ′ above the boulders; feet flapping, nose snorting, musty sandstone, fingernails smearing lichen and a jammed knot placed blindly in the dark, keeping it all together.
Alas, all good things come to an end and with a mixture of breast stroke and doggy paddle I managed to beach myself onto the belay.
Three pitches later, nine Czechs, some Scots and a couple of English pseudo-Scots posed for summit pictures below the Czech flag on the highest tower in Adrspach.
A great route, but strictly for lovers of full body contact and a bit of the rough stuff.
Friday July 5, 11 am: Previsla Vlllb (Over-hanging Crack E2/3 5c), Vez Pralelsliví (Tower of Friends), Teplice and Metuji.
Down the road from Adrspach is Teplice and Metuji, home of some gobsmacking cracklines.
On our first drizzly-day visit we stood open-mouthed under Previsla on the Tower of Friends — the Czechs have a great sense of humour.
Any 50m hand and off-width crack with no Friends or chalk and just two ring bolts, 20m apart was begging to be climbed.
George, our guide for the day, was unwilling to be drawn: ‘It's a good climb, but you see from the rings — it's dangerous.
Perhaps there are a few rope knots, I don't know.’
Standing below the route in the sun a couple of days later.
Graham spurred me into the lead and we decided to split the route into three pitches, belaying on the rings with a Czech friend taking the middle pitch.
A few days in the wild world of rope knot protection, a chaotic grading system and unfamiliar rock had made us cautious.
The crack proved to be a stunning exercise in jamming and bridging, topped by an overhanging, unprotected, layback off-width.
Typically, the summit was only to be gained by desperately thin and unprotected slab climbing.
Committed halfway up I twigged the mass of tat on the belay above the crack — the smart money abseiled off.
But missing the summit of a tower means you can't leave your name and a message to the future in the route book, usually found in a flag-like tin box on the top.
Like most of us, it took me half the trip to work out what they were!
Friday, July 5, 2pm; Bic Vlla (Whip or Whiplash, E2/3 5c), Vez Jardy Berana (Jardy Berana Tower), Teplice nad Metuji .
On our drizzly recce day another stunning ‘climb-me’ crackline had got a few hearts fluttering — a beautiful, curving hand crack as a main course, a direct finish for dessert and a few spaced rings for spice.
No one could call Graham Little, our Bergführer and former Mountaineering Council of Scotland president, in the first flush of youth, but the man's well over six feet and built like the proverbial…house, which does help.
After two weeks in Czechoslovakia he was climbing in a style usually reserved for winter.
So first crack of the whip went to Graham.
Still buzzing from the morning, I was more than delighted to sunbathe in the sand and pine-needles.
Unfortunately, Graham has a minor shortcoming when it comes to cracks — he can't jam; but he can layback!
We waited for a while as he shovelled coal and filled his boilers.
When the signal dropped there was some initial wheelspin (on the green rock), but a good head of steam came in no time.
Alas, just when the iron horse appeared unstoppable, a minor derailment gave a short delay before normal service was restored.
But no one really cared — it's that sort of place.
So long as you accept the local climbing ethics nad enjoy adventurous climbing there's little about Czech sandstone or the Czechs that's likely to wind you up.
Monday, September 9, 8.30 pm; Sports Injury Clinic, Kelvin Hall Sports Centre, Glasgow.
As far as the orthopaedic consultant's concerned, the layoff's done me good.
A bit more rest and I can think about some gentle training.
Amazing what a positive attitude can do for you!
CZECH LIST
INFORMATION
Transport:BA and Czechoslovakian Airways run regular return flights to Prague at abut £220 return.
General:No visas required.
Cash can only be changed in the country.
Food, drink and transport are cheap, but accommodation can be expensive.
The city has a good underground and tram system.
Most people speak a little English.
TATRA
We were based at Teryho chata on the south side of the Tatras, above the town of Poprad.
Various walls in the corrie were climbed on and the rock was generally found to be reasonable, but quite loose in places.
A full rack should be taken and ice axes and crampons may be needed up to about August.
Internal flight to Poprad, the nearest town, then transport to point of access into the mountains.
Huts can be booked from any Czech travel agent; no wild camping allowed.
Guidebook:High Tatra for Climbers Vols 2 & 3 , but Grantisek Kroutil, 1976/77 (out of print).
SANDSTONE
No nuts, camming devices or chalk are allowed, although the latter is now acceptable on the hardest routes.
A variety of one to one and a half metre lengths of rope from about 6mm to 12mm should be taken, plus some tape lengths and a rack of tie-offs.
All the towers we climbed had abseil rings.
Taping the hands is worth considering.
For Adrspach and Teplice nad Metuji areas, a train can be taken from Prague to Teplice nad Metuji (destination Mezimesti) for about 70kcs (1190).
Camping at Teplice; the Adrspach area's a couple of kms walk, although a local train may be available.
A small climbing shop exists at Adrspach.
GUIDES
Our guide for the trip, Jiri Schmied, runs climbing holidays to the sandstone in summer and the Tatras in summer and winter.
He can be contacted at: 120 00 Praha 2, Francouzska 2, Czechoslovakia.
A climbing, paragliding and mountain biking package during the summer in the sandstone areas can be organised through  at .
SELECTED ROUTES TATRA — TERYHO CHATA:
Ita Stena (Yellow Wall)Chroustova Cesta (Chroustova Route), 250m (E1 5b), pleasant climbing.
Petrikova Cesta (Petrikova Route) 250m (E1 5b), an excellent route with exciting and exposed finishing pitches.
South Face Lomnicy Stit
Palenickova Cesta (Palenickova Route), 300m (E2 5b), a good mountain route with a long approach and descent.
ADRSPACH:
Krizovy Hreben (Cross Hill).
Rokoko (Rococo Tower) has steep, pocketed and frequently to — roped routes on its front face.
Renesancni (Renaissance), Vlla (E2/3 5c), gives superb, strenuous and delicate climbing up the impressive groove on the left side of the tower — two rings, knots and threads.
Pevnost (Castle tower).
The delicate Etelin zlabek , V (E1 5b), with one ring, contrasts nicely with the steep but short crackline of Cernobil (Chernobil), Vll (E1 5b).
Kvetnova (tower) contains the excellent Bohemians , Vlla (E1 5b), with one ring and threads.
Penteon (tower) has the extremely well protected Zebrik (Ladder), V11 (E1 5b)— a good route on which to learn knot technique.
Adrspach Main Area
Afrodite (tower) gives a steep, fingery and very British wall climb in Pianovka , Vllla (E2/3, 5c), three rings.
The superb slab close to the swimming lake is well worth seeking out.
Milenci (Lovers' Tower),Milenecka (Lovers' Route), V11 (HVS 5b), for the deranged only.
TEPLICE NAN METUJI;
Kanec (Wild Boar tower).
Diretissima , Vlla (E2 5c), two rings and knots — a wild handjam roof is the culmination of a fine line.
Sokolik (tower) gives a pleasant, short crack,Jihozapadni spara (SW crack), V1 (HVS 5b),— two rings — bellow a stunning curving wall.
Vez POralelslivi (The Tower of Friends);Previsla (Overhanging crack), Vlllb (E2/3 5c), two rings and knots — stunning.
Vez Jardy Berana (Jardy Berana tower);Bic (Whip or Whiplash), Vlla (E2/3 5c), two rings, superb jamming crack.
Note: sandstone grades are for on-sight ascents using rope knots for the first time.
Many of these routes would get a lower E grade if Friends, nuts and chalk were used.
Left: A delighted Graham Little on the summit of a sandstone pinnacle in Adrspach (photo Tom Prentice).
Right: Sue Grimley making an exposed traverse in the upper section of Petrikova Cesta (E1 5b) on the Yellow Wall (photo Graham Little).
Left: With psychological jammed knots in place, the author goes for the first ring on Renaissance (E2/3 5c), Cross Hill, Adrspatch (photo Graeme Ettle).
Right: Superb pocketed climbing on Bohemians (E1 5b) at Cross Hill (photo Graham Little).
OFFWIDTH
Following on from Chris Bonington's recent book The Climbers — A History of Mountaineering , it's clear that mountaineering is intrinsically a little dull.
There's just no glamour in it; no serious money; very few groupies, and scarcely any hard drug abuse these days.
What it needs is an historian who isn't afraid to jazz things up a bit— sidestep the facts and move the goalposts.
With this in mind, we searched out one of Britain's leading  exponents of the Gothic  bodice-ripper and asked her to inject some life into the first ascent of the Eiger's north face.
Offwidth is proud to reproduce it here, as a model for future historians of our sport.
Herman Kartoffel stared at the grim, dripping wall of over-hanging rock and grunted to himself.
Bitter struggles brought sweet memories of lust.
Back down in the valley waited Frau Von Diesel, raven-haired, exotic wife of the inn-keeper.
The frau was drop-dead gorgeous, a seething Valkyrie of sex.
It had not taken her long to discover the team's skills ran to more than mere mountaineering.
When she and Kartoffel climaxed in the hotel's reindeer shed, she had visions of the Old Man of Hoy, proudly jutting skywards from the creamy foamstorms of the Pentland Firth.
One woman, four men.
At the snowbound alpine inn of Kleine Scheidegg, Kartoffel had not been the only climber to get a taste of the good frau's favours.
Ausfahrt was pulled roughly into a cowshed.
Würstchen quenched his lust in the hotel's Emmental storeroom.
Sheisshaus took his pleasures in the midst of Herr Von Diesel's cuckoo-clock collection.
Four men, one mountain: the mighty Eiger.
For days Kartoffel stood below it as storms flashed across the vertiginous face of  ice and rubble.
He knew they would succeed, or die in the attempt.
But they were climbers.
And Kartoffel knew they'd be the first to tread the Eiger's virgin summit.
They would succeed where others had failed.
It would be hard, but they would survive.
Clint Schneider was climber number five.
Kartoffel had felt the team needed a touch of glamour — someone to pull in the big bucks and wow the cameras across the Reich.
Someone young, dynamic, famous.
Someone who gave good face on film.
Someone like Clint.
No two ways about it, Clint Schneider was dynamite.
At 25 he'd found his way into the hearts — and often the beds — of every foxy fraulein in the fatherland.
Clint had it all: a top filmstar, successful grand-prix driver, gold medal winner at the Munich Olympics.
Men claimed he was a shameless womaniser, but to women he was perfect, as if Wotan had dropped a bucket of pure sex from Valhalla and it had come to rest inside the muscled, blond Adonis.
Clint Schneider had style, there was no denying that and Adolf Hitler was his dad.
They were high on the second icefield; or was it the third?
Ausfahrt had never won any prizes for maths at Bremen High.
Rocks rained down from the White Spider above as he belayed Kartoffel across the ice.
He played a game in his head, trying to count the boulders that fell within five metres:
‘One, two, err…’
‘Some lousy friggin' bivouac this is!
Jesus H. Christ!
I wouldn't make a friggin' Frenchman spend the night here’
Würstchen did not find peaceful slumber easy to attain at Death Bivouac.
All night long his companions cursed him as he whined and complained.
‘There's a rock sticking up my arse!
My feet are cold!
I'm frightened, can I put a light on?
Won't someone tell me a story?
Please?’
Kartoffel muttered to himself.
Some mountaineer Würstie had turned out to be.
If the going got tough, this fraulein's boy would have to be dealt with; given a flying lesson.
Yeah, and without a parachute.
Five weeks into the climb, it was a tired and tattered team which reached the haven of the Exit Cracks.
The end might now be in sight, but the Eiger had exacted a grim toll for the right of passage.
Kartoffel lost eight fingers and three toes to the gangrene of frostbite.
Ausfahrt suffered badly.
The cold cost him an arm and a leg, badly amputated by Würstchen, who had employed a rough-hewn rock to sever nerve, sinew and bone.
Sheisshaus was now a quadruple amputee, victim of Würstchen's over-enthusiasm in trying to apply a Band-Aid.
And Clint Schneider had become doubly incontinent.
Yes, they were ragged and worn.
But they were climbers, and they had made it.
Hadn't they?
‘Well, you might have told me you were a quintuple amputee before getting me all excited.’
The luscious frau pulled her negligee tighter and stared sternly at Sheisshaus.
She had dreamed of this night of lust for seven weeks.
Seven long weeks.
And now this.
Was any mountain worth it?
Eva Braun was dressed for action: zipped PVC jackboots and Chanel no. 5.
She spun on here leather swivel-seat, switched off Luther Vandross from her Walkman and turned to face her lover.
‘Any news of Clint?’
She knew Adolf had been worried.
For almost two months he'd been worried for his son.
So worried he'd invaded five friendly countries by mistake.
‘Yes, Eva.
No we haff news.
Zere is good news, and zere is bad news.’
Eva knew better than to interrupt one of Adolf's laboured jokes.
She didn't want to find herself with a one-way Goldenrail Supersaver to Belsen.
‘First, ze good news.
Clint is back from ze Eiger.
He iz safe.
He iz national hero.’
She could feel the relief welling inside her.
‘Hey! zat's great, Dolphie!
So vot's ze bad news?’
Adolf seemed on the verge of tears.
‘He will haf to vear Pampers for ze rest of hiz life!’
EAGLE'S NEST DIRECT
To mark its centenary, Tony Greenbank describes the history of one of Lakeland's most famous climbs
Eagle's Nest Direct was the first Very Severe rock climb in the British Isles and a route so serious then that to contemplate leading it at that time of primitive rope technique meant you also contemplated death.
The great  Fred Botterill — he of Botterill's Slab — gave up serious climbing when his leader fell from Eagle's Nest Direct and was killed.
Its first ascent in 1882 saw the start of the escalation of climbing standards in no uncertain manner.
Until then, nothing half-way as bold on rock had ever been attempted.
Haskett Smith had climbed the Needle and elsewhere at a respectable enough standard, but it was Godfrey Solly — a Go-fearing solicitor who became both mayor and a freeman of Birkenhead — who really started injecting iron into the soul of climbing that cold spring day on May 15, 1882.
He had already shown his mettle on February 13 that year by leading what the Gable guide calls ‘The archetypal Hard Severe’, namely the hand traverse variant on Pillar Rock's North Climb .
We get a flavour of this pitch — and those times — from an account of a subsequent ascent by Professor Norman Collie:
‘The day was bitterly cold, and Robinson was a short way along the traverse.
His hands, however, were so frozen he could not hold on or get back.
He called out: ‘I can't hold on any longer,’ then fell straight on the ledge below, bounded out into the air, turning a somersault backwards, and pitching on to a grass projection some 30′ lower down…
At the exact moment that he hit the grass the strain came on the rope.
If this had not happened nothing could have stopped him and the whole party would have been dragged down after him.
Sheer luck had saved us.’
With strategies like these for saving the day, it had to be a hardy individual indeed to do what Solly tried.
Think about it as you uncoil your ropes on the little apron of slab below Eagle's Nest Direct , the polished holds stained running-track crimson from the countless pairs of boots that have deposited reddish mud from Great Hell Gate Scree and Needle Gully onto the rock.
Overhead is the splendid architraved knife-edge about which the guidebook says: ‘Delightful open and delicate climbing…‘and: ‘Small wires have made a difference to this once very bold lead.’
Solly was prepared to try it in the days when Napes Needles was still ‘a rattling good ‘un’ and you took photos of your mates with plates in a Thornton-Pickard Folding ruby camera.
Up went Solly, up the steep rock above which a proliferation of good holds give a misleading impression as to what is yet to come.
Up he went to the ledge overlooking the Dress Circle, on which he was able to take a stance — although today it is usually ignored in the thrust of a runout towards the top.
It is from here the arête shows its teeth, though not immediately.
First, two parallel cracks must be climbed with an awkward move in between.
And then, via the exigencies of first the Eagle's Nest itself and then, 15′ higher, the Crow's Nest, the crux at the very top is reached — and a lovely move it is.
If vacating the somewhat restricted nook of the Eagle's Nest is achieved by a semi-layback movement on good holds (and it is), the very last move on the ever-sharpening blade is quite different.
It is simply a high step-up with scarcely a hold for the left hand.
And for the right?
Perhaps I should say no more.
But the rock is not quite devoid.
Solly's account of the crucial pitch on that cold April day says it all:
‘I found the first steps of the next pitch were very difficult, and the rock rather pushed one out.
The others got out of the rope, and Slingsby, climbing up as far as possible, stood on a little step just below, with his hands on the platform.
I put one foot on his shoulder and as I climbed up, making room for him, he raised himself and finally stood on the platform, helping me as far as possible.
‘I went on and climbed the second step.
Then when I came to the third I did not like it.
Retreat was even less inviting, and consultation with the others impracticable.
After looking round, something of a hold for each hand and foot was discovered, and I went on, with the knowledge, that even if one hand or foot slipped, all would be over.
Just above this the difficult part ended.’
Solly's climb was to perplex and stretch the best climbers for decades.
O.G.
Jones top-roped it first.
On leading it he wrote:
‘…the first 10′ above the nest are remarkable for the steepness and smallness of the holds.
If the rocks are cold and the fingers benumbed, the holds cannot be appreciated at all, and the place becomes horribly dangerous…
No man should lead up it who has not already explored the ground from above.’
The fatality which happened during Fred Botterill's subsequent attempt underlines the seriousness of the climb.
Thomas Rennison had been keen to try it and Botterill had agreed to hold his rope.
However, Rennison came off, and as Botterill tried to hold him, ‘the rope broke with a loud snap.’
On April 15 this year, a small group of Barrow climbers — Ed Cleasby, Al Phizacklea, John Holden and David Winstanley — arrived at the Dress Circle to commemorate the centenary of Eagle's Nest Direct .
Here they found Ray McHaffie and Leeds solicitor Keith Spencer, also keen on re-enacting Solly's great ascent.
So they climbed it together — a touch of combined tactics here and a few serious moments there.
The day was cold and snow was down to 1500′.
As always with Eagle's Nest Direct , nothing had changed.
EAGLE'S NEXT RIDGE DIRECT: 37m on THE NAPES 
(The FRCC guidebook says: ‘A route years ahead of its time.
Requiring combined tactics in an incredible situation with ho protection.’)
Grey Cornforth tackles Eagle's Nest Direct (photo Tony Greenbank).
DARK PEAK SCRAMBLES
Impressive rock scenery, deep pools and silvery cascades; the ravines of the Peak District have a lot going for them as interesting ways of reaching the high moorland, suggests Jerry Rawson
Scrambling in the Peak District?
Why not?
At first sight, apart from a couple of interesting narrow limestone ridges in the Winnats Pass, the reef hills of the upper Dove and some broken buttresses on Mam tor and around Kinder downfall, the area may seem to offer little to whet the appetite of competent scramblers.
But don't be deceived.
Like Ghyll climbing in the Lake District, which provides memorable classics such as Piers Ghyll on Scafell, the Dark Peak can also furnish a few esoteric delights — albeit on a smaller scale — with fine outings such as Wildboar Clough on Bleaklow or the challenging Blackden Clough on Kinder Scout's northern slopes.
These deeply cut ravines might not seem too demanding, but some of them give unusual approaches to the high moorland plateaux, passing through impressive rock scenery which can offer the simple joys of scrambling, often above deep pools linked by cascades and waterfalls.
I recommend you pick reasonably dry conditions for scrambling up these cloughs, unless you have a penchant for floundering through dark, peat-stained raging torrents or swimming up thundering waterfalls.
In that case, wait until it rains — a common occurrence in the Dark Peak!
When frozen, some of these waterfalls can offer ice-climbing practice, but in a hard winter the cloughs often fill with deep snow and their ascents can vary in difficulty from Grade I to impossible.
A few years ago one writer described a particularly difficult winter ascent of Wildboar Clough as ‘The second worst journey in the world.’
You have been warned!
These dark, dank places do improve with acquaintance, and optimistic devotees can often convince sceptics of their virtues, usually by resorting to cryptic descriptions such as‘amusing, atmospheric, characterful, unusual’ and so on .
But despite some crumbling rock and loose vegetation, they genuinely can be great fun.
BOULDER-STREWN RAVINE
There are numerous cloughs worth exploring in the Dark Peak, but some of the most impressive can be linked by a demanding outing starting from Greenfield on the west of Black Hill, taking in major cloughs on Bleaklow and Kinder before finally scrambling down the head of the Grindsbrook above Edale.
This excursion offers an interesting alternative to the ever-popular classic testpiece of the Pennines — the Marsden to Edale bogtrot.
And if you're so inclined, there's potential for ticking off a few classic rock climbs along the way.
The first scrambling to be found is in Birchin Clough, which rises at the head of the trio of reservoirs above the village of Greenfield.
Cutting deeply into Saddleworth Moor, this delightful boulder-strewn ravine with its series of cascades, provides a pleasant approach up to the craggy belvedere and the start of one of the best edges traverses in the northern Peak.
From the pronounced rocky prow above the clough you can look across to the impressive, deeply-cut Holme Clough, that drains water from Black Hill into a chain of reservoirs.
Above them sit the bold, craggy edges — the first of which is Raven Stones on the very lip of the plateau.
The obvious isolated pillar of rock is the Trinnacle, its tantalising prongs acting like a magnet for scramblers — and persuasive photographers!
You can now stride out purposefully along the edge path, across Ashway Rocks; past the blackened cross in memory of James Platt, MP for Oldham, who was accidentally killed during a grouse shoot last century; above the mighty Dove Stone Rocks, eventually contouring along the moorland lip high above Chew Brook, which tumbles down one of the deepest and most dramatic valleys in the area.
Wimberry Rocks, on the opposite site of the valley, provide some of the best climbs in the Saddleworth area.
The scenery now changes as the craggy landscape is replaced by the impounding wall of Chew Reservoir, blocking the head of the valley.
This shallow, saucer-like dam, which at 1,600 feet is one fringed with cotton grass in mid-summer.
The bubbling cry of the curlew often keeps you company across the moorland to Laddow Rocks, from where splendid views into Crowden Great Brook suddenly appear.
A sneaky scramble or climb on Laddow Rocks and you are heading down the eroded Pennine Way track to Crowden and the Longdendale Reservoirs, with the sombre northern slopes of Bleaklow frowning over them.
The depressing view of the unsightly pylons marching across the valley floor, heavy traffic thundering along the Woodhead Pass road, five reservoirs and a disused railway line, is soon left behind as you negotiate the tussocky grass slops below Long Gutter Edge towards the entrance to Wildboar Clough.
STAIRCASES AND CASCADES
The gentle ascending traverse belies the true nature of the clough, and it is only beyond a stile on the western bank of the steam bed that the deeply-cut nature of the ravine is revealed.
The drainage channel has cut into the millstone grit to form a series of pools, boulder-chokes, staircases and several cascades and rocky steps — one of which is particularly steep and offers excellent scrambling on rough, textured gritstone; a damp cleft on the left offers a let-out.
In winter it can often provide a pleasant ice-pitch, but in very wet weather the Rollick Stones ridge on the eastern side of the clough is preferable — from where you get fine views down to the cascades.
From the head of the ravine you have splendid visits across Longdendale to Crowden Great Brook, with Laddow Rocks perched on its rim and the dome of Black Hill in the far distance.
All too soon, the finest rocky clough in the Dark Peak levels out at around the 1500 feet contour and falls back at an easy angle towards Shining Clough Moss and Bleaklow Head.
I often use this route as an approach to Shining Clough Rocks by contouring eastwards from the top of the ravine across open moorland, eventually traversing around the headwall of Shining Clough to the impressive crags themselves.
This is Bleaklow's premier outcrop and its detached east buttress, soaring up from a carpet of purple heather in summer, is a magnificent sight.
If time permits, a detour is well worth the effort to sample, or just look at, some of the finest gritstone routes in the area.
Given the rate at which parts of the crag seem to tumble down the hillside, including some famous classic routes, you ought to make the effort sooner rather than later, before any more lines disappear.
The crossing of Bleaklow, albeit a short one, now beckons.
This vast, sepia-toned tableland of peat hags, weather-worn boulders, groughs, heather, cottongrass and exposed bedrock, which is sandy in places, can be a wild and unforgiving place in bad weather.
But in good conditions, once you reach the summit cairn of Bleaklow Head, the highpoint on the western end of the Bleaklow ridge, the section across the drab peaty wilderness towards Alport Low can be quite enjoyable — if you pick a good line.
If you don't, be prepared for a black, squelchy, energy-sapping struggle, especially in wet conditions.
After such experiences, first-time visitors usually vow never to return!
Time dulls the memory, though, and we keep going back for more.
From near Alport Low, Hern Clough leads down to the tranquil hollow of Grains in the Water, a magical spot in a wide bowl of surrounding hills.
Below Grains, the River Alport threads a sinuous trail through Alport Dale and offers a fascinating mixture of rockpools, waterslides, exposed bedrock and two fine waterfalls.
The meandering river can be followed all the way down the valley.
In the wet, the broad ridge high up to the left is preferable, leading along to the conspicuous profile of Alport Castles — a huge landslip where millions of tons of shales and grits slid forward to create a spectacular feature above the hamlet of Alport.
A little distance from the entrance of Alport Dale, up the Snake Pass road, is the start of the last steep section of our route — Blackden Clough.
Etched into Kinder Scout's northern flanks, the clough provides pleasant rock-hopping as it twists and turns upwards until you enter a fine, hidden amphitheatre which gives good scrambling up rocky steps.
Above, huge boulders choking the stream bed are negotiated, following by a short, steep section which leads abruptly onto the vast emptiness of Kinder's summit plateau.
A short crossing over the peat groughs to the south and you are soon peering from one of the eroded rocky buttresses down into Grindsbrook, whose eastern fork provides entertaining scrambling over rocky steps followed by a gentle amble, perhaps in the gathering gloom, down the widening track and fields to the twinkling lights of Edale.
Pick a spell of dry weather and travel light: you could be pleasantly surprised.
Left: In the confines of Birchin Clough on Saddleworth Moor.
Above: The distinctive rock formation of the Trinnacle, at Ravenstones.
Below: Dry conditions make crossing the peaty wastes of Bleaklow a lot easier (all photos by Jerry Rawson).
Above: Sun and rockpools in Wildboar Clough:
Below: Scrambling the ‘staircase’ in Wildboar Clough.
Sky High
Walking Britain's classic ridges for a book, to be published later this month, provided Tony Greenbank with a series of memorable experiences, including a lucky escape from a fall on the Snowdon Horseshoe
Ladhar Bheinn, the Snowdon Horseshoe, Blaven and Clach Glass, the Nant Gwynant Horseshoe, the south Cluanie Ridge and Riggindale, oh, Riggindale — how could you!
It was thanks to you all that I humiliated myself at the Harrogate Trade Show.
Drunk: and in broad, sordid daylight.
No, I tell a lie.
Taking you all to task is unjust.
I apologise; just using you as an excuse.
My behaviour was surely prompted by flaws in my character — flaws that had allowed me to be connected so incestuously with Ladhar Bheinn, Riggindale and the rest in the first place.
Flaws that had led me to sign a contract for yet another coffee table book on the British hills.
The book, you see, is about walking.
Walking Britain's Skyline , in fact.
Yet my life on the hills has been as a rock climber and someone who enjoys winter climbs on ice-covered crags.
For the purposes of completing this project and covering some grand skylines in Snowdonia, the Lakes and Scotland — I had to take time out from my more usual pastime to actually walk those mountain crests.
My visit to Harrogate had been to gee me on.
Because I had insisted on taking the photographs myself I had not finished the book by its deadline.
In Harrogate I was to meet my editor for a pep talk.
But then I had become overly enthusiastic.
Not every walking book of this kind means that the authors(s) have necessarily ventured along the walks depicted.
A writer can do wonders with a word processor and a few guidebooks.
But there is no escaping authenticity when the author has taken the photos himself.
For the record, then, here are six skylines which for me crystallise the quality of the whole 50 I completed (though in the end there was only room for 45).
So if my reprehensible behaviour at Harrogate (getting drunk at night is OK in the 90s, but not in the afternoon) was my own fault, and Ladhar Bheinn, Riggindale and Snowdon are blameless in this respect, at least they are left a lasting impression compounding fear, terror and loathing with delight.
And they still induce a tingle within me whenever I hear them mentioned.
LADHAR BHEINN
‘Go by boat to Ladhar Bheinn’ they said.
‘Charlie McTavish at Arnisdale will take you over.
A bottle of good whisky, that's all he'll need.’
So I drove to Arnisdale and discovered that Mr McTavish would indeed ferry me over for a bottle of malt: but he wanted another bottle to bring me back.
With my finances stretched to the limit because I had committed myself to spending all of that May in the Highlands, I drove back to the pub in Glenelg to consider it.
Like my young daughter Hannah's name, Glenelg is a palindrome.
‘Everything we do forwards in Glenelg we can do backwards,’ said the woman behind the bar.
I thought about this with regard to Mr McTavish's offer and his requiring another bottle for the return and, being a Yorkshireman, decided to walk into the mountain after all.
But I did let Mr McTavish know.
And Ladhar Bheinn?
It was peerless.
A matchless peak overlooking a superb cirque and with a steep buttress of Stob a'Chearcaill a very committing moment along the skyline indeed.
BLA BHEINN AND CLACH GLAS
The ridge cresting Bla Bheinn and Clach Glas is one of the Sky's finest mountain walks — thrilling to execute and suspenseful to the end.
Armour-plated like giant turtles, humped and unruly and gashed with ferocious battle scars, yet in other places so biscuit-thin that it is possible to look at distant landscapes or clouds through the pierced form of a perforation in the ridge (rather like one of Henry Moore's outdoor sculptures).
There were moments when I wondered about getting out from its clutches alive.
So gripped did I become with my inability to proceed at one point, that I almost became benighted through ignoring what was literally a keyhole through the rock.
The twist to this story is that it was only when the gods lost patience and threatened to draw a veil of darkness across the proceedings, leaving me stranded high and wet (and rather chilled) on one of the most rugged landscapes in the land, that I at last took the chance and accepted the offer that had been  proffered .
Hardly able to believe it and almost shaking with relief, I climbed through this ‘window’ and stepped out on the shaly slopes of Bla Bheinn, quite near the normal path on the east ridge and an easy walk from the top.
THE SOUTH CLUANIE RIDGE
On the ridge I encountered the most incandescent mountain I have ever seen.
The vision was in fact the peak of Sgurr an Lochain, the penultimate top along a ridge traversing the crest of the southern wall of  Kintail in a westerly direction, and incorporating the wonderful heights of .
Sgurr an Lochain is the next peak on and there is one more beyond it, Creag nan Damh.
But it was the glory of Sgurr an Lochain, faceted and sculpted in ice and snow and with golden light gleaming from its snowfields and cornices that entranced me.
And the ridge itself was no less perfect than that single peak.
RIGGINDALE HORSESHOE
I have always regretted the fact that the unhappiest part of my life was spent a few miles away from Riggindale, and I never visited it.
Perhaps it was just as well.
The recriminations and angst of an unhappy marriage that reverberated through my head could well have had a self-destructive influence in that lonely, haunting valley and finished me off for good, no doubt .
Riggindale is that kind of place.
The kind of place where dark deeds in the name of history have been committed in the past and where a mysterious brooding quality remains.
In the hit movie Withnall and I , the two visit Riggindale and it drives them almost to the brink of distraction.
Just do its impeccable cirque at the head of Haweswater and see for yourself.
SNOWDON HORSESHOE
I was being dragged from a double bed, a dog lead lassoed around my neck, its thong being pulled by a hand with scarlet-painted fingernails.
As I slid to the floor I was kicked hard in the face with a slippered foot.
Then I woke up.
I remembered setting out over the Crib Goch to do the Snowdon Horseshoe and reaching Lliwedd.
I then retraced my steps all the way back round to Crib Goch because the position of the sun allowed me renewed photo opportunities from its rim — a rim now 40 feet above me as I lay on a ledge.
Taking a photograph, I had stepped forward onto nothing and found myself flying through the air, cartwheeling like a rag doll, striking sharp edges and corners and buffeted by hard objects.
My flight path ended on a small ledge, my hands still grasping Olympus camera which I had been cradling for all my worth, regardless of the blows striking my body from every angle.
Snowdon I found to be a Scottish mountain transposed to North Wales.
It also made me realise the risk of skyline walking.
Rock climbers fall onto runners, but one misplaced step on a ridge like Snowdon's and you are likely to be hurt or even killed.
I know I was lucky, my head and body having sustained a beating I felt was within an inch of my life.
NANT GWYNANT HORSESHOE
The Nant Gwynant Horseshoe on Snowdon is like the Dark Side of the Moon to those hillwalkers who think only of popular ridges like Tryfan or the Glyders.
As the lorry braked ferociously in the lonely country road with a hiss of air brakes, and began to career backwards towards my Mini, its reversing lights two angry eyes beaming at me, I began to see that same skyline as the place I most wanted to be.
Two fingers I had waved at that driver as he thundered past me, cursing me through the open cab window and fighting the wheel, and those two fingers I now regretted having on my hand.
And now, what had previously been the focus of my attention — the Nant Gwynant Horseshoe from Pont Bethania by the main road at Nant Gwynant — seemed to be lightyears away from my reached as I stayed rooted to the spot, hypnotised by the lights of the pantechnicon backpedalling menacingly towards me.
Would I live to reach those heights?
And was that sublime trip I made around the celestial skyline embracing the deep recesses of Cwm Llan just a dream?
I hate to leave you hanging, but I sometimes wonder myself.
Walking Britain's Skyline, published by Crowood Press at £18.95, is due out on July 27.
Left: Lliwedd soars skyward across the radiant blue of Glaslyn.
Above: Blaven and Clach Glas (all photos by Tony Greenbank).
The Riggindale Horseshoe and Haweswater from the Old Copse Road.
BILLY'S ASHES OFF BELAY
Jim Perrin reflects on the life of an old friend, and some unwelcome changes in the complexion of climbing writing
We scattered Billy's ashes on Snowdon last Monday.
There were seven of us — his widow, his daughter, the priest and the rest.
It was from one of those tuffaceous outcrops on the side of the Bwlch Main ridge, away from the crowds.
Afterwards we climbed back up the path towards the summit.
Except that Ray and I held back, watching the rain wet the while ash, carry it down in trickling grey rills.
And because he was sad, I put my hand on his shoulder, told him that I'd known Billy to be a good little man; funny, brave.
In response, he'd said this:
‘I don't think any of us knew how good he was a t the time, or know yet how much we'll miss him now.’
Billy was the most boastful little sod I ever met in my life.
Here's what I wrote in the obituary I did for him in The Guardian :
‘Bill Curtin, as he would tell you within minutes of making your acquaintance, was founder and head of the largest British firm of consulting engineers outside London.
From that initial claim on your attention, he would proceed rapidly to inform you of his achievement in preserving the Albert Dock complex in Liverpool — now the largest tourist attraction in the north of England — from wanton, council-approved destruction; of his professional status as author of the standard textbook on Concise Practical Surveying and the Structural Masonry Designers’ Manuals ; of his intellectual attainment in completing a doctoral thesis in ten months; of his physical prowess as a pensionable leader of Very Severe rockclimbs and skier down the most precipitous slopes.
‘If you remained a friend of Bills's — and it was difficult not to — you were forced to admit that modesty did not rate highly in his scheme of the virtues.
‘And you simply did not mind, for all this boasting was conducted with such energy and hyperbolical humour, such a wry, sardonic, self-mocking edge, that you would soon be involved in a positive orgy of mockery and badinage against institutions, received opinions, each other 's supposed abilities.
This short, slight, bearded little fellow with his thick spectacles, boxer's nose and mane of grey hair was the most fun, was the gamest strutting little cockerel that I ever met.’
I wish he could read that.
He'd roar with laughter, I suppose, and then ask me what was all this about ‘little’, and we'd get into some absurd argument about whether he was five feet two or five feet four, end up reviling and swearing at and abusing each other in utter good humour as we used to do often several times a week on the ‘phone.
What can I tell you about Bill as a climber?
Mostly he was pretty damned tense, and incompetent in consequence, and he used to put the fear of God into me constantly.
But none of this mattered a jot.
We had great days, on Cader or Craig yr Ysfa, at Tremadog or in the Moelwyns.
Performance-wise, I suppose the best Bill ever managed was on a sunny spring weekday in the early 80s, when he'd already passed his 60th birthday and I coaxed him up a few 5c slab routes at about E3 on Froggatt: Long John's Slab, Great Slab, Armageddon.
He could be quite relaxed and technically adept when he chose.
And he was ever so pleased — puffed and strutted like Joe Brown had a serious rival.
But you see, for all the boasting, he didn't have ego problems.
You called him down, he chaffed back.
Instinctively he knew the rules of this savage little game of ours.
If he'd ever met them, he'd have held his own — and for the joy of it, too, not the reflected glory of association — in the banter with Joe, or Don, or Mo.
There was a clue to his approach in his cars.
He was, I suppose, considerably well off, and he had a succession of Jensens, Jaguars and Porches.
They arrived gleaming but they were soon, as they say in the antiques trade, ‘distressed’.
It was Bill's driving, fast and erratic, like his climbing.
I taxed him about it once when he'd just dinged the rear corner of a new Porsche.
His reply is just about repeatable in this magazine: ‘Look,’ he said, ‘big cars are for men with little dicks, and if I were to spend all my time polishing it, what would that make me?’
UNCONNECTED WITH EGO
Bill was completely subversive and that, I suppose, is why he liked climbing and why he endeared himself to climbers.
I doubt if it's fashionable, and it's probably not politically correct to espouse or approve of this kind of attitude these days.
Which is a shame, because in its proper place — and of course it has to coexist with the need for supportiveness and respect — it is just a game.
Both the barracking and this ridiculous little sport of ours — they're just games, they're there to take joy from.
You can see that in the faces of those who do it for positive reasons unconnected with ego.
I remember it in Billy's face — the gleam, the gleeful mobility.
By their expressions shall you know them!
And there's an inverse respect within the barracking.
You only do it with those whom you know can take it, as Bill could take it, and as all the climbers with whom I grew up could take it, and hand it out.
It had a necessary place, provided a perspective, reminded you that if you go hubristic and conceited to the rocks you won't last long.
You, the climber, are not important, was what the mocking dialogue with your peers stressed.
That mockery, that lighthearted grasp on the real perspectives within the sport, found its way into print, too.
, all did their best work within that tradition.
But for various reasons that strand within our sporting literature — and we had one of the three great literatures of sport, along with cricket and boxing — is now seriously threatened.
There are commercial pressures, the changing face of the sport itself, its vulnerability to uninformed judgement from without.
All these have conspired to produce a climate wherein the utmost care must be taken with our every comment or flight of humour.
A magazine which printed any of Mo Anthoine's or Don Whillans' more pointed deflations could now all too easily find itself the object of a libel writ.
What modern publisher would accept Patey's One Man's Mountains without insisting on changes — in those debunking songs, for example?
Why has John Barry written so little in recent years?
Could the Games Climbers Play or Mirrors in the Cliffs be published in the same form now?
We scattered Billy's ashes from an outcrop on the Bwlch Main ridge, which for me now will always be Billy's rock, and I remembered what he had been — the irreverence, the energy, the humour and essential contradictory humility of the man.
There was cloud flaking thin and delicate off the back of Lliwedd, drifting down into Cwn Tregalan where it hung, bright and dissolving, before the heaviness and the rain.
Ray and I exchanged those few words, then climbed on towards the concrete parody of a summit.
After a little way I halted and looked back.
Billy's bright ashes were almost subsumed into the dull greens and the grey.
I went on further, and their lightness and gleam had gone when I looked back for the last time.
We are all looking over our shoulders now.
Right: Looking back along the Bwlch Main ridge on the day Billy's ashes were scattered.
EQUIPMENT
LIGHT WEIGHT BOOTS: 10 Years On
Gore-Tex liners have transformed the image of fabric boots.
Gladys Sellers considers their position in today's competitive market
It's about a decade since the launch of the Karrimor K-SB3, which brought about the so called lightweight boot revolution, and the last ten years have been the ideas evolve in a very effective manner.
The boot that initially led the way, Karrimor's K-SB3, was the product of a completely fresh approach to boot making by a team led by an electronic engineer who had no preconceived ideas.
The use of fabric for uppers was then unheard of; the use of an injection-moulded rubber monoblock unit for the entire sole unit, borrowed from ski boot technology, was a brilliant cost and weight-saving innovation.
Upper and sole unit were then bonded together, not stitched and pegged, as in traditional boot construction.
The team's brainchild required no breaking in and was incredibly comfortable — utterly different from the stiff, heavyweight boots that took weeks to break in.
Not surprisingly, despite poor resistance to water penetration and poor durability, 30,000 pairs of the new boots were sold in the first 12 months.
Fabric boots then multiplied, and for a time they looked like sleeping the market, but their disadvantages in poor conditions did not offset their greater comfort in good ones, and some substantial improvement in waterproofing was needed before this could take place.
This improvement became available only a couple of years ago in the shape of Gore-Tex booties.
Fabric boots had already made a comeback in quantity, encouraged by several years of hot, dry summers and a wider market.
The new booties are surprisingly substantial but non-stretch — nothing like their predecessors, Gore-Text socks.
Every bootie is tested for freedom from leaks by inflating with compressed air while being stood in a bath of water, but damage by nipping or cutting can occur when the booties are being fitted into the boot.
The booties are glued at the toe and heel boxes and fitted into the outer shell, glued down the sides of the tongue then stitched round the boot mouth.
At present, boots with a Gore-Text bootie tend to cost about £20 more and have a one-year guarantee of waterproofness.
Is this enough to justify the total expenditure of £85 or more — especially as you'd better keep your toenails well trimmed to reduce the risk of piercing the end of the bootie?
Lightweight boots with this construction are claimed to be cooler and less sweaty in hot weather, since they breathe so much more freely than leather boots.
Leather, especially when well waxed, does not breathe particularly well, whereas the suede used to reinforce fabric shells does.
THINNER LEATHER
though the K-SB3 was a breakthrough in manufacturing technology, its low weight was not quite so novel.
Lightweight leather boots had been creeping into the market since the 1970s or even earlier, but were not made using the new technology.
The reduction in weight was partly achieved by using 1.5 to 2mm thickness leathers for the uppers, compared with the traditional 3mm.
Naturally the water resistance was less, but modern tanning processes have improved leathers considerably.
A good deal more is now known about the structure of leather and the way it functions.
It is a three-dimensional, fibrous structure, built up of protein blocks which the tanning process makes resistant to putrefaction and softens to a degree that suits the end use.
Leather is strong, abrasion resistant and will conform to the shape of the foot.
Its pores are non-aligned so it is windproof, it will breath and transmit sweat.
That said, it is not so waterproof unless made so by the tanning process and subsequent treatment.
Boot leathers are usually chrome tanned then impregnated with a mixture of paraffin wax and paraffin oil.
Sweat and acidic peat bog will de-tan the leather, while warmth from the foot, the sun, and drying after use, slowly remove the oil and wax leaving the leather prone to cracking.
Waxing lubricates the fibrous structure of the leather and helps to prevent this, but fills the pores, reducing its breathability, and has a limited durability.
Some of the newer boots achieve a much higher resistance to water penetration by altering the surface chemistry of the leather, making it hydrophobic (water hating).
These new leathers absorb much less water and can withstand a hydrostatic head of 150cm (the acceptable lower limit for a waterproof fabric), yet still breathe.
Despite all these advances in tanning technology, the seams and stitches of a boot may still allow water to penetrate, though some manufacturers now use non-wicking thread.
The outer leather is not the only component of the upper.
It has to be supported and stiffened, sometimes by fabric, sometimes by another, thinner leather.
Stiffened toe and heel boxes usually have to be provided.
These are now made of fabric impregnated with a thermoplastic resin which is cut to size and shape, then heat-formed on the correct last for the upper.
Foam plastic is still used around the cuff, but  Cambrelle is now almost always used as the lining material in preference to leather.
Cambrelle absorbs sweat so is comfortable, dries quickly, is hard wearing, holds the foot in place and does not stretch.
What more could anybody want?
HEART OF PERFORMANCE
Even more important than the nature of the upper is the midsole, for that is at the very heart of the boot's performance.
The stiffness of the monoblock boot depends entirely upon it, and injection-moulded plastic midsoles of a thickness suited to the size of boot are now commonplace.
In the early years, a midsole of just one stiffness for all models was universal, but now boots of different, and well-defined levels of stiffness have been developed to suit different walking terrain and the ability of the walker — a very important development.
Outsole patterns have multiplied without much user benefit, except that of weight reduction.
Some give excellent adhesion, others are indifferent, especially in descent.
Some clog easily on sticky ground, others are so shallow that the loss of a couple of millimetres due to fair wear and tear produces considerable loss of adhesion.
The all-over sole pattern has been found to be short of downhill adhesion and has disappeared from the market.
A sole unit that blended good adhesion both uphill and down with the shock-absorbing characteristics of the chamfered heel of the K-SB3 was Berghaus's Trionic, which appeared in late 1983.
That's so long ago, hillwalkers now take it for granted!
Five years later it was modified as the Trionic Attak, and some boots were given a ‘sprung’, or slightly curved sole — a simple device that makes for far easier walking, first used in Brasher Boots.
Brasher Boots arrived about the same time as the K-SB3, but were developed from the running shoe.
They were novel for their extreme lightness (0.9kg), and the use of a shock-absorbing EVA wedge in their sole construction: now quite widely used.
Shock-absorbing devices of many types have been given a hard look.
The first major variant was Zamberland's Bimescol dual-density outsoles, launched in 1987.
The rubber of the tread is a hard rubber, but is backed by a softer, shock absorbing one, and the two are injected into the mould simultaneously.
Merrell use a hollow chamber topped with an EVA plug under the heel to give some shock absorbency and enhance foot stability.
The chamfered heel, the shock-absorbing device of the first K-SB3s and used on many other early boots, has now been rejected by many hillwalkers.
Most recent and most welcome is the availability of many boots, particularly fabric models, in both men's and women's fittings.
The humble footbed has seen more changes than anyone would have thought possible in 1981, when it was first used in the K-SB3s.
At the time they were quite thin, and their main function was to fill the gaps between boot and sock, so stabilising the foot position.
But they had little cushioning effect.
Now there is a trend to thicker, softer footbeds that have an appreciable cushioning effect.
Merrell even use footbeds to adjust the fit of the boot.
The concept of assessing foot volume instead of width to achieve a good fit is another idea borrowed from ski boot technology.
Hillwalkers really do owe the competitive and innovative ski market quite a debt — and it isn't ended yet.
Salomon's radically different Adventure 7 boots, using even more ski boot technology, are still eagerly awaited for test.
They may be as bit a leap forward as the original K-SB3.
Acknowledgements Our thanks to Mr. R. Flatman of W. L. Gore & Associates for supplying the information about the Gore-Text bootie and Mr. M. Redwood of Pittard Garnard for the information about the newer leathers.
Tackling patches of snow in modern, lightweight footwear doesn't have to mean wet feet.
The use of Gore-Tex (see inset above) has seen to that.
(Main photo Tony Greenbank).
REVIEWS
The first three of the boots I tested are all fabric (Cordura), reinforced with varying amounts of suede and fitted with a Gore-Tex bootie.
When new they are all highly water repellent and dry quickly — provided you haven't gone over the top in a bog hold and got them saturated.
Then they are very slow to dry out properly.
KARRRIMORE K-SB3 L GTX
Weight: 1.3kg (size 8) Approx price: £95
A chip off the old block without a doubt, but updated and designed as a fellwalking boot (the ‘L’ stands for Lady).
It is as stiff as many a leather boot, yet required but half an hour's breaking in.
The Vibram dual-density sole has a bold profile and gave excellent adhesion on surfaces as varied as smooth, hard frozen snow and soft wet clay, both uphill and down.
I had just one weekend of the melting snow and slush on the fells — very wet indeed — during testing, with no possibility of drying the boots after the first day.
My feet were still bone dry at the end of the second day.
This impressed me, for there is nothing more penetrating than snow and slush.
An interesting question is whether the boots would have withstood another day of similar conditions.
They don't make three-day weekends, so I can't comment.
However, laboratory tests show that Gore-Text can be penetrated by prolonged exposure to rain.
In the May heatwave my feet were considerably cooler and less sweaty than they would have been in leather boots.
I thought the KSBs were first-rate fellwalking boots and their overall comfort an improvement on any leather boot I've used.
Available in men's and women's fittings (moss/navy and burgundy/slate respectively).
SANMARCO WALKING GTX
Weight: 1.3kg (size 8) Approx price: £86
This boot is slightly more flexible than the K-SB3 L GTX, is more generously sized and has a distinct curve to its sole.
It required absolutely no breaking in and I wore it for the first time on a nine hour Scottish hill day during the May heatwave in complete comfort.
It's water-resistance had a fair testing in long wet grass and stream wading.
I didn't bother hopping from slippery stone to slippery stone, just waded, almost ankle deep, and emerged completely dry.
The dual-density Skywalk sole has an ingenious two-way pattern, and adhesion both uphill and down seems good.
As a fellwalking boot, I thought the Sanmarco was perfectly adequate on the roughest of paths, but not quite so good on tussocky, heathery, trackless ground, where something a bit stiffer would have been better.
A unisex model in slate grey and green, distributed by  
LINE 7 LADY GT Approx price: £85
This boot is something of a rarity, a women only model, specially designed for the female of the species.
My wide feet found them a bit tight, but I swapped the footbeds for the Sanmarco ones, which are much thinner, and both pairs then fitted me better — a leaf taken from Merrell's book.
The French made Line 7s are not as high cut as the other two models and are especially low at the back of the heel to avoid pressure on the Achilles tendon and the subsequent risk of tendonitis.
As I'm not prone to that complaint I can't comment, but you need to watch it in boggy places and crossing streams.
Though this model has the same excellent Vibram sole as the S-SB3 L GTX, this does not confer the same walking characteristics as the boot is much more flexible and has much less lateral foot support.
It is, however, marvellously cool, having a large fabric area.
On the day when I was wilting with heat my feet were not in the least sweaty, but I would have liked more support — I thought it barely adequate except for lowland walking.
Marginally lighter than the other two fabric boots reviewed, the Lady GT comes in a very attractive blue and purple with a pink collar.
There is also a green/brown version.
Distributed by Line 7 International, Wolverhampton.
HANWAG CROSS N
Weight: 1.4kg (size 8) Approx price: £230
This boot is the 1991 update of an earlier model.
It is now made of a black Nubuk leather trimmed with purple and yellow, and is highly water repellent and quick drying.
It retains the Sympatex lining of the earlier model — belt and braces if you like.
The sole unit is Hanwag's new Supergrip SAS 13, especially designed for comfort and safety.
It is dual density, but quite different from either the Skywalk or Vibram ones used in the other boots reviewed, the shock absorbing layer being very much thicker and softer.
The tread is most unusual, having slightly raised areas to correct any tendency to pronation or supination (going over on the inside of your heel or the outside of your toes.)
On first acquaintance this felt a little odd, but the feeling quickly wore off and has never returned.
The boot is also claimed to be designed to have a special ‘braking tread’.
I can't say I found adhesion up or down any better than with other boots.
The Cross Ns are wide fitting and fairly stiff, though built on a nicely curved last.
They needed a certain amount of breaking in, but once this was done, they were comfortable, and excellent for the roughest of hill walking.
Though never used in wet snow (in short supply last winter) a wet day on Pennine peat is a fair substitute and I stayed bone dry, as expected
No use pretending the Cross Ns are as cool as fabric boots, but I bet they will be a good deal more durable.
A unisex boot distributed by  .
(Readers should note that distribution from this source has now ceased, along with the supply of Hanwag boots to retailers.
It is still possible, however, to obtain boots already supplied).
BERGHAUS ODYSSEY
Weight: about 1kg (size 8) Approx price: £89
A leather boot built on the same principles as the original Brasher Boot, but updated.
It is extremely light, low cut, very wide fitting — the widest I've ever found for a long time — and together with an EVA insert into the sole unit, gave me very comfortable walking.
The leather, Weather Tuff, is one of the new breed; remarkably water resistant, highly water repellent, and quick drying.
On a long, lowland walk on a pouring wet day my feet were no more than damp — a pleasant surprise.
Berghaus's Softflex midsole gives very easy walking, but I thought it too flexible for use on rough ground; nor did it have quite enough ankle support.
That said, for path walking in the hills this boot is first rate.
Gladys Sellers 
LINE 7 GT 35
Approx retail £80
Though I haven't been testing these boots for long before writing this review, initial impressions are very favourable.
I've managed to subject the boots to most conditions except a thorough soaking over several days — for once we've been basking in sunshine for weeks in Scotland, along with the sun-drenched south east!
Test conditions have included a scramble along Glencoe's Aonach Eagach ridge and a two-day back pack in sweltering heat.
The GT 35s were immediately comfortable and even on the backpack, with one very long day in the heat, I suffered no blisters and little foot discomfort.
Intermittent re-tightening of the lacing certainly helps in this respect.
The Gore-Tex bootie incorporated into the boot enhances breathability, helping to keep the feet cool.
The boots have a solid feel to them, and the descent from the Aonach Eagach down the side of Clachaig Gully, which must be one of the worst anywhere in Britain, was accomplished without problems.
Having broken my ankle a year previously on a climb, there was potential for difficulty here, but I experienced none and my ankle was fine next day.
The Virbram sole unit could do with a little more rigidity for scrambling, but provides good adhesion for walking on all surfaces.
I've been very impressed by this boot, and at a price which, by present standards, has to be regarded as favourably competitive, I'd recommend giving it a serious consideration.
Peter Evans 
Boots illustrated, from left to right: Line 7 Lady GT: Hanwag Cross N; Line 7 GT 35; Sanmarco Walking GTX
REPORTS
PEAK By Graeme Alderson
At the last the weather has been descent enough for some of the crags to dry out long enough for the new routers to get busy.
Horseshoe Quarry, that well known hole in the ground, is still getting attention from its favourite son, Jim Kelly.
This month, aided by Lucien Cottle, we have Colostomy Finish, E4 6a/b which steps left and then up from the top flake of Raindance.
Also on the limestone, I Should Coco, E5 6b, the line of four bolts right of Snails Ate My Lampshade at Bent Tor — first ascent by Pete Cresswell and Cathy Duffill.
The only other offering on the white stuff is at Lover's Leap, Ashwood Dale.
On the opposite side of the creek to Down in the Sewer is Up the Creek, HVS 5a which climbs the centre of the steep wall and the grooves above, ascended by A. Thornton & M. Evans.
Gritstone is showing a bit of a renaissance these days — there have already been two new E8s this year — and it's continuing to see plenty of action.
At Hen Cloud, Neil Travers' new line A Flabby Crack, E6 6c climbs the obvious crackline left of Stone Loach.
Baslow has a rare new addition on the ‘impressive unclimbed side wall’ of the Flying Crag.
This has now been climbed by Mark Smith and Ben Wise to give Slanted and Enchanted, E5 6a.
Robin Hood Quarry No 3 has seen Upping the Ante given a direct finish, traversing left at the second pair of pegs, and given the grade E5 6b b by Ian Parsons and Jim Ballard.
Finally, Hobson Moor Quarry has had a few more of its gaps filled.
Sunshine Super Glue E3, 6a takes the blankish wall just left of Epitaph Corner, past two pegs and a post-first ascent chipped starting hold.
Finger Control, E5 6b climbs between Crocks Climb and Garble, The Heat Is On, E4 6b takes Fingertip Control's start and climbs direct to the ledge on Crocks Climb.
On the extreme left-hand end of the back wall is Eastern Touch, E4 6a.
All these routes are the work of Nadmi Siddiqui, aided and abetted by Don Campbell, Jim Burton, Shaun Kelly and Andy Stewart.
Repeat news comes mainly from Down Under.
In the June issue I incorrectly corrected credited Mr. Moffatt with the FA of Punks in the Gym, in fact a Mr Edlinger redpointed the route a couple of years ago.
The route has now taken a bit of hammering with a Yugoslav bagging the third ascent and Sean Myles and Andy Pollitt steaming in for the fourth and fifth ascents soon afterwards.
Sean was reportedly less chuffed about doing this than doing an ‘ollie shove-it’, a very hard skateboarding manoeuvre — however, he did go on to break his leg in two places soon afterwards when he fell off said contraption.
Mark ‘Zippy’ Pretty has finally got over his mid-life crisis by red-pointing Mecca at Raven Tor, and has been celebrating continuously for the last six weeks.
Round five of the Foundry Bouldering Competition was again poorly attended.
Category one was won by Airlie Anderson with a storming 144, second place was taken by a nearly fit Neil Cooper with D. Jones coming in third.
Category two saw Hugh Harris win again with 100 points, followed by Nick Hayes on 88 and M. Smith on 65.
Category three saw Jasper Sharpe outreach everyone to gain 127 points and he looks favourite for an overall winner; Gareth Parry came second and Simon Scully was third.
Colin Binks and Chris Craggs on the first ascent of Prominent Tory Reverse, E2 5c, 5c at Black Rocks (photo his Chris Craggs).
YORKSHIRE By Dave Pegg
With the summer upon us, the shaded walls of Kilnsey and Gordale seepage free and several major new lines close to completion, activity and controversy on Yorkshire Limestone has spluttered into life.
The first major success of the year went to Ian Horrox who succeeded on the Kilnsey route he came so close to finishing last year.
They Brush Me,(F8a+) is now a three year start anagram linking the start of The Thumb with the finish of Hersey.
Tony Mitchell made a rapid second ascent to keep his reputation as the man who has done everything.
A parallel line crossing the Thumb to the left of They Brush Me had also been equipped by Mick Lovatt who was close to success.
However, before he could redpoint the route it was stole by Peak District raider John Arran.
To be fair to John he may have thought he was on an already completed route, but the absence of the first bolt, a well established sign of a ‘projet’, should have been respected.
Actions like this only lead to bad feeling, especially when there are a number of established classics like Showtime, Urgent Action and The Ripper that he could have done instead.
The route, as yet unnamed, looks a superb,(F8a+).
Other additions to Kilnsey are Tony Burnell's Side Kick,(F7a+) and left hand start and direct finish to Side Show and a good looking (F7a+) to the right of Dodger Direct by Andy Moss.
Elsewhere there's been little new activity but some notable flashes including Tragedy (F7c+) by John Arran, Defcon 3 (F7c) by Richard Davis and New Dawn (F7c) by Ian Vickers.
SCOTLAND by Rick Campbell
Brilliant weather from the end of May through into June, particularly on the west coast, saw hordes of climbers up on the big mountain routes, particularly on Ben Nevis.
On one Saturday in June, 30-odd climbers could be found on Carn Dearg (almost as many people as were on the summit of Everest one day in May), with half a dozen helmeted lemmings waiting to leap into the void down the titan's Wall abseil.
There was three-lane traffic up Titan's Wall, Agrippa and King Kong — but buttress's three Extreme Rock routes — with Agrippa getting a hammering, with three ascents in one day!
In terms of new routes, few have been a prolific as Rab Anderson: On Church Door Buttress in Glen Coe he climbed the line right of the existing routes to give The Last Crusade, E3, 5a, 5c, 5c, which like the other lines here, is on superb (though in most summers dripping) rock.
On Creag a'Bhancair, Rab spent four hours cleaning and 40 seconds climbing (it was starting to rain) a line left of the start to Carnivore; Vaguely Vegan, E2 5b was the score.
Out west on Garbh Bheinn, Ardgour, Rab had a good day with his wife Chris, climbing the crack in the headwall left of Kelpie (one of Murray Hamilton's two unreported E6's in Scotland), gained by traversing along the half height ledge from the left.
The result was Sabre, a superb, long, E5 6b pitch.
Later the same afternoon he claimed cutlass, E4 6b which follows the grooved arête left of Sgian Dubh before finishing up the crackline right of The Peeler.
At Buzzard Crag in Glen Nevis, and accompanied by Duncan McCallum and Johnny May (good to see these boys back on the adventure trail), Rab climbed Virtual Reality, E5 6b left of Liminality.
Jodicus Direct was repeated by both Paul (The Stork) Thorburn and myself — about E4 6a I think —(only joking Mark!).
Also in the Glen, Gary Latter climbed Gaza Strip, the crackline left of Wall Games on Double Buttress at E4 6a/b, while back on Buzzard, Paul soloed Titter Ye Not, E2 5c up the knocking flake on the wall underneath The Handran Effect.
George ‘F’ Scuza climbed SNP, HVS on Sheep Fank Buttress and Pay No Poll Tax, E2 5b, 5b, a line through Spauchle on Repton Buttress.
Chances are it will appear as Pay No Community Charge in the forthcoming SMC journal, as obscene words are unacceptable for route names!
Upper Cave Crag, Dunkeld now has a new (F7a) bolt line up the spectacular arête above the start of the Marlina crack — the creation of Duncan, Rab and Johnny again.
Rumour has it it's called Hamish Teddy's Excellent Adventure, and why not!
Taking advantage of the good weather and the amazing lack of activity since his last blitz, Andy Nisbet returned to the quartzite and sandstone cliffs of Coire Mhic Fhearchair on Beinn Eighe adding another ten routes with various partners (more details next mont).
Also active in the North-West was previously retired Geordie, Kevin Howett.
On Lock Maree Crag he climbed the heavenly line of Arial, E3 5c with George Ridge, which blasts straight up the central crackline in the massive 50-metre pitch.
He then climbed the parallel crackline to the left to give Pagan Lovesong, E4 5b, 6a (try to imagine a lovesong in a Geordie accent!).
Between this crag and Tollie Crag lies The White Wall, on which Kev claimed the central line of Shimmer, E4 6a.
Lastly on Glen Ogle's Creag nan Cuileann Kevin climbed Merlyn's Flight, E3 6a, through the cracked roof and wall on the left-hand side.
LAKES By Bill Birkett
The run of good weather brought the high mountain crags into condition early this year, allowing Martin Berzins to tidy up one of his previous efforts on Scafell.
He managed to eliminate his own aid point from the brown wall right of Zeya to produce an E6 6b with the fitting name Siege Perilous.
The route takes an impressive line on the over-handing lower section of the East Buttress and is a worthy addition to Berzins' growing collection of hard routes on Lakeland mountain crags over the past 18 months.
Berzins was also active on Flat Crags, climbing Redundancy of Courage, E5 6b with Craig Smith.
Also in Langdale the ever active Steve Reid joined Steve Martin for an ascent of Gimmer Crag's sunny south-east face.
Their route Sleeping Soldiers, E2 5b, 5b takes the walls left of the SE Gully.
Steve Reid was also active on Kern Knotts, this time with another Steve, Steve Frame, adding Caterwaul, E1 5b on the left side of the crag.
No doubt spurred on by the new Pillar and Gable guide Steve Reid teamed up with John Campbell and visited Pillar, adding Gorre, E1 5b, 5b, 4c, which takes a direct line between Charybdis and Goth on the Low Man West Face.
The same pair made an alternative and easier second pitch to Megaton, taking a crack in the slab 10 feet right of the normal line.
Starting and finishing at the same belay points, this gives pitch more in keeping with the overall HVS grade of the route — many feel that the original and serious second pitch should elevate the route to E1.
In Borrowdale surprisingly little seems to have been reported (perhaps the regular new routers have found another secret crag?).
However, on Woden's Face, Bev Johnson and Pam Andrews climbed Soxon, HVS 5a which climbs to the right of Tantalus.
Up on Bowderstone Crag, Dave Birkett climbed the arête of Inferno directly to give Bleed In Hell, E7 6c a desperate and fingery problem.
Up at Reecastle, Dave also added The Whipping Post, E6 7a which climbs direct to the peg on Remission.
Activity in the slate quarries continues with a mightily impressive new route at Hodge Close from Paul Cornforth.
Pigs Against The Wall, E7 6b gives powerful climbing on the large, wildly overhanging wall above The Diving Board/Indoor Gym area.
Unfortunately the route starts from a hanging stance with no ground connection as yet!
Meanwhile, Keith Phizacklea continues to add new routes at Hodge and Parrock, climbing Timeless Flight, E5 6b with Stuart Wood.
The route takes the slab below Through The Looking Glass with three bolt runners.
To the left of this; Steve Whitall and Dave Rolls added three bolts and claimed Easy Rider, HVS 5a. also added Chestnut Mare, E4 6b up the buttress left of Plunger.
On the steep, previously unclimbed face opposite the Behind The Lines area of the main face, two diagonal weaknesses were climbed by John Adams and Bill Birkett.
On the left is Face The Times,(F6c/7a) with five bolt runners to a pig's tail lower off and on the right, Face The Music,(F7a) with ten bolt runners to the same lower off.
In Black Hole Quarry, Birkett and Adams also added No Face For Dwarfs,(F7b) with four bolt runners.
The climb lies on a wall just above the east descent route in the back corner of the quarry.
Finally on the limestone of Chapel Head Scar, now open for traffic, John Gaskins placed four bolt runners in the shallow groove right of Phantom Zone to give the extremely hard surfing With The Alien,(F7c/8a).
WALES By Andy Newton
With a wet spring giving way to brilliant dry weather many of the mountain crags have been receiving attention, both in terms of new routes and repeats of less frequented or unrepeated lines.
Mike (Twid) Turner had added a long (65m) pitch on The Pinnacle, Cloggy.
Taking a line between Margins Of The Mind and Psyco Killer, it climbs directly to finish up the vertical section of The Hand Traverse.
As yet un-named, although with tentative grading of around E7 6b, the first ascent included an exiting finish in the dark — hence the rather long pitch length.
It should be possible on subsequent ascents to belay on Aries.
Over on the Far West Buttresses, Ian Lloyd-Jones and Clive Stephenson added Clog Dancing, E2 5a/b, 5c which takes a line left of Farfallino, and A Fistful Of Pockets, E3 5c, which  follows the obvious weakness on the left-hand side of the buttress.
Anyone fancying a repeat of Hazy Days on the Far East Buttress might be interested to know that current opinion gives it a serious E5 6b grading.
In the Llanberis Pass, Steve Mayers has been busy with a couple of projects on the Cromlech.
His first completed effort was The Domen Arête, E7 6c, which takes the striking arête immediately above Cenotaph Corner.
Mayers then went on to add a first pitch (!) to the line by climbing the left hand section of Right Wall between Cenotaph Corner and Lord of the Flies.
Again un-named as yet, it has a provisional grading of E8 6c, and supersedes a pitch climbed by Grant Farquhar a few weeks previously, which finished up the top section of Lord of the Flies.
This concludes attempts on the line, started by Paul Pritchard a couple of years ago, which at one time featured a glued-in peg in a pocket, although this was pretty short lived.
Even Craig Cwm Trwsgl in Cwm Pennant, home of the classic Exterminating Angel, has received some attention with Lloyd-Jones and Clive Stephenson adding Blinded By The Light, E4 5b, 6a, to the crag; this route being a counter-diagonal to Day Of Reckoning.
With the publication of Slate a guide to the Llanberis area slate quarries, Snowdonia is now only missing two volumes in order to be relatively up to date in guidebook coverage terms.
Ogwen and the Carneddau is on course for an early autumn publication, after some totally unavoidable delays, and the Llanbers volume hinges predominantly on Paul Williams' update of the text, so don't distract him!
Down in Pembroke, where the Range West arrangements are proceeding smoothly, thanks to Bill Wright, the BMC and various local activists, there have been a couple of temporary bans on the Triple Overhang Buttress and part of Mewsford Point, due to nesting choughs.
In future it is hoped that information will be posted at the nearest car parks, as well as at the crag, allowing for a change of plan before walking to the climbs!
Finally, the voluntary mountain bike restriction for Snowdon mentioned a couple of issues ago has been agreed between the interested parties.
So, between 10.00 and 17.00 hours from the 23rd of May to the 30th of September inclusive, bikes should not be ridden on the Llanberis Bridleway, the Snowdon Ranger Bridleway and the Rhyd Ddu Bridleway.
The agreement is supported by the British Mountain Bike Association and the Welsh Cycling Union, among others.
It would seem that just like climbers, mountain bikers will have to learn to live with the odd restriction where their activity clashes with other recreation or conservation interests, otherwise they risk losing certain routes permanently.
A colourful explanatory leaflet is available from all national park outlets and most responsible mountain bike shops in the area.
MOUNTAINEERING COUNCIL OF SCOTLAND
MCOFS POLICY STATEMENT REGARDING THE USE OF BOLTS ON SCOTTISH ROCK
SENSIBLE BOLTING
Over the past 18 months the MCofS have attempted to arrive at the compromise statement on the contentious issue of bolting in Scotland.
The initial draft received many letters of comment from both camps and was followed up with a public debate in Glasgow.
More comments followed the amended drafts which were circulated and discussed at open meetings in Edinburgh and Glasgow.
As a result a policy has been arrived at that appears to be acceptable to the majority.
Pro and anti-bolters must now show less fanaticism in their activities and this policy will only work if everyone makes an effort to operate within the guidelines.
THE POLICY
After considering the views of many of Scotland's active climbers on the sue of bolts in Scottish rock climbing, the MCofS offers the following policy which it is hoped will act as a guideline to all climbers (present, future and visiting), on bolt use in Scotland.
The MCofS and Scottish climbers acknowledge that there is a place for bolts in the future development of Scottish climbing.
However, to ensure that the highly regarded ethos of, and future development of, traditional climbing (involving the use of leader-placed/second removed protection) is not threatened, it is felt that the use of bolts should be limited to the production of SPORT climbs,(there should be no retrospective bolting on established climbs for protection or belays, and there should be no minimalist bolting).
The production of sport climbs with bolts is acceptable on NATURAL ROCK only when ALL the following circumstances are satisfied:
1)
On low-lying cliffs, provided that such development is not against the wishes of the landowner;(bolts are inappropriate on mountain cliffs and sea cliffs where a spirit of adventure should remain).
2)
On routes where natural protection is absent or is inadequate for the repeated falls that sport routes necessitate.
3)
Where the rock is steep and provides climbs of a high order or difficulty, at the forefront of developments of the day.
4)
Where there is no local or historical anti-bolt ethic.
Concerning QUARRIED ROCK it is felt that any future development should be constrained only by points 2 and 4 above.
Finally, it is felt that bolts should be located to ensure minimum visual impact and should be placed using current best practices.
It is intended that these principles are not seen purely as constrictive rules, but as a guide to promote the positive development of Scottish rock climbing to ensure that sports climbing, rather than becoming a substitute for the traditional climbing, grows alongside it.
Numerous new bolt routes have recently been put up at all grades in the Dundee quarries which is acceptable within the policy, while the bolts on Lower Cave Creg, Dunkeld, are clearly not.
They have been removed and should remain out.
On the other hand, the sport climbs on Polney's Myopics buttress at Dunkeld, are acceptable within the policy (and with most anti bolters), but have recently been removed!
Hopefully when they are replaced they will remain there.
ON THE ROCK by Ed Douglas
The True Path
The British tradition of climber-placed protection was the theme underlying an international meet in Wales, organised by the BMC.
Ed Douglas joined the queue for bacon and eggs at Plas-y-Brenin
To anyone who has been in the Army or detained at Her Majesty's pleasure, or even attended a public school (and there are a disturbing number who have managed all three), the dining room at Plas y Benenin is a familiar place.
The smell triggers your memory first.
Olfactory synapses are popping off throughout the brain as you stand on the parquet floor, observing the chipped varnish of the tables.
And the smells are of cooling snorkers, soggy fried bread and rubbery eggs.
It is a quintessentially British scene.
In no other European country is breakfast presented thus.
Early one morning, in the merry month of May, I stood in this dining room watching a group of climbers from all over the world being introduced to The Great Tradition.
Reactions varied.
Some, mainly the eastern Europeans, tucked in with gusto: solid people.
Others chased rashers round the plate with a vague air of disenchantment.
Our Gallic neighbours sipped disdainfully at orange juice.
The BMC does have some good ideas.
Having flicked through a few foreign magazines, the boys at Crawford House had made a shocking discovery that the rest of the world no longer climbed on soggy crags in the rain, but wore skimpy clothing, looked beautiful and climbed at Buoux instead.
Why not, the mandarins decided, invite a few of our foreign friends over to reintroduce them to The True path.
This, as any British climbers knows, involved quaffing gallons of warm beer the night before, eating half a pig and the produce of a hen house the next morning, then spraying the countryside with this heady mixture while approaching the crag.
The next step — and this is the one the BMC wanted to impress most forcefully on our visitors — is to terrify yourself on some dripping mass of rock devoid of adequate protection.
In order to make things run smoothly, the BMC asked some notable British climbers to come along and help out.
These included .
Since the average leading grade was E2/3 amongst our friends from abroad, you begin to see the scale of what they were facing.
I imagined myself travelling to France and being asked to climb without Tribout, Raboutou and Edlinger.
All of which explained that when I arrived at the BMC's International Meet halfway through the week, the climbers that drifted into breakfast that morning looked like they'd been on the receiving end of a very nasty artillery barrage.
Pale and shaking, they sat down to a muted conversation about where the day's campaign would be fought.
A whisper went up that Gogarth was a possibility and panicky looks were cast around the room.
‘Gogarth?
Is it true?’
I had a sudden mental picture of a struggling and reluctant group of climbers being herded into a minibus bound for Anglesey by Dunne, Littlejohn et al.
I sat down near the representative from Belgium.
Bernard looked ill.
Pale and drawn, his mouth was crease-downward in a Gallic facial representation of ‘Say nothing, I have a headache and I'm fed up with bacon and eggs.’
We sat companionably enough, each ruminating on the nature of existence so early in the morning and contemplating the day's activity, although Bernard obviously had opinions on that as well, judging by his expression.
Suddenly Ms. Kiss, one of the Hungarian contingent, slipped neatly onto the bench directly opposite Bernard.
She smiled warmly.
Bernard's face travelled through a range of impressions in the space of a moment.
‘Is she smiling at me?’ was quickly followed by ‘Who else could she be smiling at?’
His face took on a more pleasing expression, the immense frown being jacked upwards into an insouciant grin.
He went from looking 45 to 25 and sprang into flirt mode.
I could only sit and marvel that some things are the same the world over.
BIT OF A FLYER
Out of the Cromlech my partner was thugging his way up Grond when Pat appeared with Niklaus Bjornerstedt from Stockholm.
Pat was showing him The True Path in stylish fashion.
Clipped onto his harness were a couple of screw-gate crabs, some RPs and a small camming-device — just the rack required for an overhanging fist jam crack.
Niklaus had just swarmed up Resurrection, taking a bit of a flyer in the process, being into the British way of things, and was obviously having a great day out.
Waiting while my partner continued grappling with Whillans' finest, we chatted about the nature of climbing and discovered the stunning truth that climbers are pretty much the same in Sweden as they are in Britain or anywhere else.
Niklaus is 32, although he looks no more than 20, and so talked with gentle mockery about the influence of French climbing on his younger compatriots before announcing with some pride that there will be 1200 routes in the forthcoming Stockholm guide.
Soon after our conversation was interrupted by my flailing attempts to follow Grond while Pat scampered after me on what appeared to be a completely different route.
Under Left Wall was a gaggle of climbers zooming up the classics.
Mike Cartwright from South Africa was belaying his partner on Cenotaph.
Mike runs a climbing magazine from his home in Johannesburg.
I did a similar thing once, although from the less salubrious surroundings of Manchester, so felt an instant rapport.
Mike is one of those shiny people who carry a square of bright blue sky above their heads while it rains on the rest of us.
It's worth pointing out that the spell of good weather we enjoyed in the early summer ended with his return to South Africa.
He gave a fascinating slide show on climbing in his home country that had the Britishers gasping as each idyllic situation appeared on the screen.
He showed scores of slides and then announced at the end of his presentation that each was from a different crag.
He showed me the journal of the Mountain Club of South Africa, which included an article detailing the attractions of climbing in the UK.
The article focused on Running Hill Pits, the Ackers Tower in Birmingham and Harrison's which should teach us something, though I'm not sure what.
At breakfast next day, after another night on The True Path with bottles of Moosehead beer, I chatted with Michael Hjorth from Copenhagen.
The highest hill in Denmark is about 12 feet tall, which is a bit of a downer for budding climbers.
Michael came to mountaineering through its literature and found someone of a like mind who was also keen to start.
Their nearest crag is in Sweden, which is reached in only two hours by ferry.
The BMC did a good job in showing our visitors The True Path.
National officer Roger Payne observed that he disliked the notion of traditional climbing.
He thinks it makes placing your own gear sound like an activity practised by people with one foot in the grave — although climbing at Gogarth has always made me feel like that anyway.
It turns out that, contrary to popular opinion, many climbers abroad agree.
Dedication to The True Path is impressive.
Jan Wolf, husband of Dobroslawa Miodowicz-Wolf, who was Al Rouse's partner on K2 in 1986 and who, like him, so tragically died, managed an ascent of Lubyanka in conditions that could only be described as green.
Sadly the original Romanian representative had to return after his mother was taken ill.
His replacement travelled for four days by train for half a day's climbing on the slate.
Johnny Dawes had a whipround in the pub as a sort of True Path benefit gig to give him a few days more.
The prize, however, was taken by the Lithuanian who decided to liven up Roger Payne's ascent of Comes The Dervish by trying to pull him off the crux.
The BMC are hoping to organise another international meet, though I imagine Roger hopes to avoid  any more Lithuanian belaying.
Main photo: Gogarth's Main Wall dwarfs the climbers scaling its fine, traditional lines.
Inset top: Mike Cartwright from South Africa makes the most of a sunny stance.
Inset bottom: Niklaus Bjornerstedt, a visitor from Stockholm.
(Photos by Ed Douglas).
BOOKS
HARD WORK AND TIGHT WRITING MAKE SAUVY'S SLIMEBALLS A WINNER, BUT BONINGTON'S THE CLIMBERS TAKES A PANNING
FLAMMES DE PIERRE
Anne Sauvy, Diadem Books, £12.99 HB/£8.99 PB.
Anne Sauvy has a descriptive knack with her characters.
‘…a pulpy magma, fluffy, puffy and dripping, within which alternatively gaped and closed air holes, pustules, pimples, alveoli, cankers and ventricles…’
The short of mountaineer that invariably takes the empty berth next to you on an alpine refuge matrazenlager .
Sauvy's slimeball, however, is a beast of more exotic pedigree, an oozing being from outer space which has the ill fortune to meet a pair of climbers as its first encounter with human civilisation.
Translated from the original French, the 16 takes of fantasy and fable in Flammes de Pierre are set around the Mont Blanc range which the author knows well.
These are fantasies of considerable charm, carefully crafted examples of story-telling.
A climbing geek, shunned by his peers, shares a bivvy and his soul with the Devil.
A solo climber abseils into infinity.
The world's least sympathetic mountaineer is forced to continue his schadenfreude from beyond the grave.
With less care and attention these fantastic plots might breed disaster or amateurism.
But Sauvy avoids the self-seeking quagmire of the ‘creative’ writers and opts for craft.
Flammes de Pierre is a triumph for a traditional approach, proof that there's no substitute for tight writing, hard work, and a damn good tale to tell.
The book, Sauvy's first, brings with and intelligence to climbing fiction.
The stories are rich in detail and authenticity, too: the author spends as much time as possible climbing in the Alps.
Diadem deserve thanks for publishing this translation and bringing Sauvy's excellent work to a wider audience; we can only hope the decide to give us more.
THE CLIMBERS, A HISTORY OF MOUNTAINEERING.
Chris Bonington, Hodder & Stoughton, £16.95
In this day and age when we are bombarded with books on climbing, it is strange to relate that there is no modern comprehensive history of mountaineering.
No work that properly considers developments in different countries and continents and pieces them together in a satisfying, narrative whole.
Buyer beware: this dismal volume does little to fill the gap.
The question What is History?beloved of university examiners, has no definitive answer.
But there is, I think it is fair to say, general agreement about scholars about what history is not.
High on this list is the kind of writing found in this book: the relation, through tortuous analogy, of almost everything discussed in the past to events not merely in the present, but in the author's own life.
One of many jarring examples is Bonington's account of Hartley's first ascent of the Drug.
Relating an interlude of bad weather in 1873, Bonington suddenly whisks us to the (almost) contemporary Chamonix campsite: ‘Sitting out bad weather is another familiar experience.
When I was laying siege to the south wet pillar of the Dru our accommodation was a leaky tent on the campsite behind Biollay, our recreation table football in the Bar National.’
Lesson one: history is not memoir.
The emphasis of The Climbers , like Bonington's career, is on the Himalaya.
But first he takes us on a brisk trot through lesser ranges, principally the Alps, from Balmat on Mont Blanc to the many feats of Mummery and beyond.
The episodes related at any length, alas, are mostly very familiar, and available, dare one say it, in a number of other easily accessible books: the terrible saga of the first ascent of Eigerwand (liberally intercut with Bonington's reminiscences of his own exploits on this wall), or the carnage exacted by the Matterhorn on Whymper and party.
Bonington also takes repeated swipes at the 19th century climbing establishment as represented by the Alpine Club, glossing over in the process the AC's extraordinary and valuable role in the exploration not only of the Alps but the greater ranges.
Probably the most successful pat of the book is its account of pre-war attempts on the 8,000-metre peaks: the pioneering heroism of Wiessner, Merkl et al is described well.
But the narrative soon degenerates once more.
Bonington's adventures on Everest an Annapurna are interlarded with other events; Fowler and Saunders on Spantik, and even a passing nod to Moffat and Edlinger.
But towards the end, the book starts to read like a list, with the structure and prose all over the place.
The Climbers is linked to a TV series of the same name and has all the hallmarks of a rush job; grating, uncorrected mistakes of grammar; indigestible multi-clause sentences; and an overall lack of purpose or identity.
ALPINE PASS ROUTE THE BERNESE ALPS — A WALKING GUIDE
Kev Reynolds, Cicerone Press, £6.95 & £9.95
These two guide books are succinct, well arranged, nicely presented, decently substantial and well-illustrated.
And coming from the pen of Kev Reynolds — that doyen of guide-book writers — they are interesting and eminently readable into the bargain.
The Alpine Pass Route details a walking route that stretches the length of Switzerland from east to west.
Starting on the Liechtenstein frontier at Sargens it follows a fine natural line through valley and mountain before descending to the shores of Lake Geneva at Montreux.
In effect it travels 230 miles (370 kms) also the entire northern flank of the Swiss High Alps, crossing 16 passes and passing below some spectacular peaks including those celebrated giants of the Bernese Oberland — the Wellerhorn, Eiger, Monch and Jungfrau.
Logistically the route breaks into 15 convenient ‘day-stages’ averaging around eight hours walking, but being Switzerland with its excellent public transport system, there are often less-strenuous options by cable car or post-bus.
A somewhat thicker book,The Bernese Alps details the important region skirted by the previous book.
And what a region!
Although the compact Mont Blanc range and the long frontier chain of the Pennine Alps boast higher summits, the Bernese Alps contain the largest area of glacier in the Alps and a concentration of great peaks.
However, the Bernese Alps ‘range’ is generally understood to refer to the entire mountain range lying between the so-called Interlaken Valley to the north and the Rhône Valley to the south.
This guide deals only with the northern fringe of high country lying to the north of the watershed and thus within Canton Berne, so confusingly the book title is more administrative than topographical.
Having said that, the book deals with the ten roughly parallel valleys that cut deep into the range from the north, with details of no less than 115 hiking routes.
Graded on a scale of one to three, some routes are suitable for gentle family outings while others cross high passes, reach mountain huts and occasionally venture onto easy glaciers.
My only quibble is that all measurements are given in metric form only.
This is all very well for the youngest generation of mountain lovers, but there are surely many grown-up readers, to whom metric measurements will convey only inaccuracy and confusion.
Surely it's easy enough to print both metric and imperial measures for another decade or two?
MAIL
NO ‘VICTORY’ CELEBRATIONS YET OVER RANGE WEST COMPROMISE BETWEEN ARMY AND BMC
Jibé Tribout replies to Ben Moon's jibe
I was astonished to read Ben Moon saying in the July issue of Climber that I had never climbed an 8c.
I didn't know that Ben had been following me around for the last five years!
I would remind Ben that I put up To Bolt or Not To Be, a widely recognised 8b/c, in November 1986; that I have since climbed more than 20 routes of this level or more; that I repeated the roof at Volx fairly easily in 1990; and that I have since put up two more 8cs — Huevos in 1991 and Macoumba Club recently at Orgon — in addition to Just Do It.
Ben seems to forget that he is not the only one in the world to be making progress, that it is not just the routes he puts up which are the difficult ones, and that he isn't the best climber there is.
Wake up, Ben: there are at least 15 climbers in the world who have done 8cs!
Comparing the performance of a 100-metre sprinter to that of a  1,5000-metre runner is a mistake; they're not running in the same category, but they're both admirable.
Hubble and Just Do It are both fantastic in their own way, but they cannot be compared.
I have never said that Just Do It was the hardest route in the world — it's one of the most difficult, and certainly the hardest of its type — that's all.
After 10 years at top level, it's a pity that Ben still hasn't understood that you can never be the best climber sin the world, because there is always someone who will do something better in a given area of the sport.
It's tough being a hero!
In conclusion, I'd like to warn Ben that the Plage route at Buoux isn't his project, but one which was undertaken and tried for the first time by Le Menestrel, and that he has no particular rights over it.
Having stolen the roof at Volx from Duboc and Agincourt from menestrel, is he now going to do the same with the Plage route?
I thought stealing routes was something only the French did!
Ciao, Ben.
Good luck with Aktion Direkt — and don't forget that you're not the only climber!
Passes and disclaimers should gain access to Range West
Further to your report in the June issue entitled Deal struck over Range West , I must draw to readers attention that the position regarding access remains in the balance, and the final outcome is yet to be determined.
The BMC will not be claiming any ‘victories’ until climbers are actually visiting the Range legitimately to the mutual satisfaction of climbers, naturalist organisation and the Army authorities alike.
To have a successful outcome to this issue all parties concerned must feel there are benefits to them.
The Army have not dropped their controversial access conditions as was reported, but have amended them following the representations they have received from the BMC and the views that were expressed at the Castlemartin meeting in March.
Climbers under the proposed system will be required to sign disclaimers and check in and out of the gate at Castlemartin each time they wish to visit.
At least one member of a party of four must be on a list of persons who have attended a formal safety briefing which will be held at the beginning of each year.
Any climbers wishing to gain passes to enter the Range up until the end of 1992 should attend safety briefings at Castlemartin on Saturday August 15th or Saturday September 26th at 10.30am.
The BMC, therefore, urges all climbers interested in Range West to note that there are still matters to be cleared up and if they wish to obtain a pass to climb legitimately within the Range, then they will have to attend the safety briefings which have been organised for their benefit.
Should any further information be required then please contact the BMC office.
Broad Peak success — but what about the clients?
Himalayan Kingdoms are to be congratulated on organising the first commercial British expedition to an 8000m peak, but Alan Hinkes does not tell us enough in his article Broad Peak in the June issue.
For example, there were three guides and 15 clients on the trip, but Hinkes does not tell us that the summit party consisted of three guides…plus one client.
This fact is not necessarily discreditable; HK's publicity material did contain the warning:
‘It is impossible to guarantee that the summit will be reached, as so many factors, such as bad weather, snow conditions and illness, can prevent this.’
Indeed, Hinkes makes it clear that the weather and snow conditions were pretty awful.
Still, three guides out of three made it to the col between the two summits, and two out of three to the summit itself, while only one client out of 15 was present.
I think this does call for explanation.
Nor does Hinkes tell us another curious fact.
In the words of expedition leader nad HK director Stephen Bell: ‘In 1991 only one of the guides was paid more than his basic expenses.’
Prospective expedition members were not told this (it comes from a letter written in December 1991).
yet it introduces an obvious conflict of interest.
If guides are not being paid, why should they look after the interests of their ‘clients’?
Do they even have ‘clients’?
And what, after all, are clients paying for, if not the services of professional guides?
as I say, these facts are not necessarily discreditable to HK.
But they do call for explanation.
CLUB NOTES
EQUIPMENT DIRECTORY