

PERSPECTIVES: LABOURISM AND WEST HAM
There is a place called Canning Town and further out, Silvertown, where the pleasant meadows are at their  pleasantist ; doubtless they were once slums and wretched enough.
(William Morris News from nowhere , 1890.)
Some seventeen years ago I moved with my young family to West Ham from Ealing.
Considerable though the distance was across the metropolis, I sensed that the cultural and historical boundaries we traversed were of far greater significance.
Not that the destination was a familiar one.
At the time West Ham was little more to me than a name, most directly associated with a football team that had a reputation for style and steadfast support in spite of limited success on the field.
As a borough, it no longer existed.
A rather strained merger with adjacent East Ham in 1965 had created the London Borough of Newham.
But cultures and histories are not defined by administrative boundaries, and I soon recognised that in quite tangible ways something of West Ham survived in the indigenous population — now rapidly declining and ageing — and in the language.
Any romanticised impressions I may have had of the East End were quickly tempered if not dispelled by the striking images of endemic poverty and a sclerotic political culture.
Protracted industrial decline since the 1920s, accelerated in the postwar period by the closure of the docks, had produced all the symptoms of a depressed inner-city area which, according to a government survey using a range of socioeconomic indicators, was the second most deprived urban borough in the country (Department of the Environment 1983).
The south in particular was enveloped in a pall of neglect.
Streets which once throbbed with dock and factory workers and their families were now deserted.
To walk through Silvertown and Custom House was to walk through ghost towns.
Politically, the area was dominated by the Labour Party.
For as long as anyone could remember the council had been overwhelmingly Labour, and all the MPs came from the ranks of the party.
So secure was this control, I was told, that if a monkey in a red jacket was put up as a candidate it would  be elected.
Yet popular political interest was low, and the council was rarely perceived to represent adequately the interests of local people.
A study of political participation in four London boroughs over the years 1968–74 revealed that in Newham decisions were taken at informal caucus meetings of the Labour group (Chamberlayne 1978).
There was little discussion of policy either within the majority or with community representatives.
Councillors, most of whom had strong local roots and had been in power for many years, came to believe they had a permanent mandate and readily resisted any challenge to their authority.
Demands from local groups for increased participation in the processes of decision making concerning housing and welfare were seen as politically inspired and met with hostility.
Democratic councillors, it was argued, should not be usurped by pressure groups.
The prevailing ethos was one of ‘benevolent neglect’.
This political landscape stood in some contrast to what I understood to be the quite exceptional role played by West Ham in the historical development of the Labour Party and the trade union and cooperative movements.
Around the Stratford locomotive works a powerful cooperative movement had grown in the last third of the nineteenth century, and from the Beckton gasworks in 1889 new unionism had sprung.
Both movements were to retain a considerable presence in West Ham, and influence pioneering efforts to develop labour representation.
The first independent labour MP, Keir Hardie, was elected from West Ham South in 1892, and the first labour council assumed control of municipal affairs in 1898.
It was a contrast that I found intriguing, and when given the opportunity embarked on research to explore further its nature and consequences.
As is so often the case with such ventures the programme was overambitious; by the time I completed the initial research I had reached no further than 1910 (Marriott 1984).
At least I had a firmer grasp of the industrial development of West Ham and the distinct political culture it had witnessed, particularly during the 1890s.
Now I felt in a position to explore the fate of this culture, and thereby the roots of the contemporary political landscape.
The single most significant feature in this landscape was the Labour Party.
Formed nationally in 1900 it had played no role in pioneering local labour representation; not until the early interwar years did it emerge with quite remarkable rapidity as the dominant political force in West Ham.
It was to these crucial years, therefore, that I turned attention in an endeavour to understand not the triumphal march of the party as such, but rather the broader cultural structures that laid the foundations for its success.
This study is concerned ostensibly with the political development of West Ham in the early interwar years but, I hope, not merely that.
Rather I wish to use the experience of West Ham as a means to examine the nature of working-class political intervention.
The success of the Labour Party in West Ham was part of a national movement that culminated in the assumption of parliamentary power in 1924 and the emergence of the party in a recognisably modern form.
And West Ham was not the only  predominantly working-class area that gave rise to a political authority seemingly remote from popular allegiance.
Indeed, at a national level the party has never been able to command active and continued support from a large majority of the working-class electorate.
The triumphs and failures of the party cannot be seen solely in terms of its own policy, strategy and organisational forms.
It was nurtured by a tradition of working-class involvement in politics which exhibited strong continuities well into this century.
I choose to define this tradition as labourism, and attempt to locate the Labour Party within it.
In so doing I depart somewhat from studies of working-class involvement in the formal political sphere during the twentieth century.
To justify such an approach it is necessary to take a theoretical detour.
Those readers who have an aversion to such are advised to pass quickly by the next two sections, and move to the discussion of West Ham which provides the historical context for what is to follow.
The boundaries of labourism
To begin by defining the object of inquiry is good practice, not least because it can serve to resolve ambiguities in common use and provide a snapshot of the landscape to be charted.
Had I access to a neat and sound definition of labourism I would use it; sadly I do not.
Instead I have to start by describing something of the unease I feel about its use and study within the literature, and gradually move toward a position from which I can either offer a definition of labourism or construct boundaries within which it exists and operates.
There is a tendency, especially since the publication of Miliband's Parliamentary socialism (1961), to equate labourism with the history and practice of Labour within the parliamentary sphere.
At no place in this influential tradition is labourism defined, but it is evident that the term refers almost exclusively to the political orthodoxy dictating the course of labour representation in parliament.
And for good reason; the Labour Party, after all, has for most of this century been the most obvious and visible manifestation of working-class political activity.
The consequence is, however, that much of the subsequent work on labourism has directed attention to the nature of the party, as if the two were coterminous.
Indeed, it is often difficult to imagine the existence of labourism beyond the boundaries of the party.
In a characteristically elegant analysis, Nairn (1965) traces the origins of the party in Victorian trades unionism.
Profoundly subordinate, and remote from the few voices of intellectual protest, trade unions could provide no effective challenge to bourgeois hegemony; rather they were firmly embedded in the mystical pragmatism, rationalism, evolutionism and nationalism of the Victorian epoch.
This trade unionism came eventually to believe in the need for parliamentary representation to safeguard its interests, and from the start determined the course of political intervention.
Thus the mental horizons of labourism (by which Nairn refers to the tradition of independent working-class representation) were severely circumscribed.
Even those currents that attached themselves to the drift of labourism, and with which they often had an uneasy relationship, were pathologically infected by the same bourgeois traditions.
It was utilitarianism that provided the administrative rationality of Fabianism, and an impotent protestantism the spirituality of the Independent Labour Party.
Both denied struggle for power as an agent of social change, but accepted the necessity of evolution, the logical consequence of which was belief in the centrality of parliamentarianism.
Similar arguments appear in Forester (1976), Haseler (1980) and Panitch (1986).
Here there is a shared concern to distance the history of the Labour Party from that of socialism.
Because of the wholesale integration of the theory and practice of the party into the national cultural formation, at no time did it promote its working-class constituency as an agent of social change.
Instinctive acceptance of a corporate identity for this constituency forced the party into an integrative role on two distinct but related fronts.
The working class represented by the party was encouraged to assume separate but non-antagonistic relations with other social classes, while the party itself became increasingly enmeshed in the parliamentary system, denying the worth or validity of extra-parliamentary struggle.
It is in the light of such that we can begin to understand the inception and growth of the Labour Party.
The party was not the product of a distinct working-class movement informed by a corpus of political theory, but emerged as a pragmatic response to new challenges, and subsequently developed through political expedience.
From the outset its commitment to Labour representation was characterised by an incipient logic of empiricism, evolutionism, compromise and defence.
In the period between its formation and the outbreak of the first world war the party made limited progress.
Membership remained low, constituency organisation was primitive, its parliamentary presence was small, and much of the intellectual leadership was disillusioned.
Sharing a common cultural and spiritual heritage with a section of the older and more firmly entrenched Liberal Party, Labour simply had not been able to capture sufficient support from the working-class electorate.
The precise nature of the impact of the first world war on the fortunes of the Labour Party remains open to debate.
In the standard account of the party's growth into a modern political organisation over the period 1910–24, McKibbin (1974) concludes that the war was not of first importance to its ultimate rise to power:
Everything points to Labour's enduring ante-bellum character: continuity of leadership and personnel, effective continuity of policy, and, above all, continuity of organization.
The Labour Party…remained as it had been before 1914 — propagandist and evangelical.
(p 240.)
The rise of Labour was intrinsically related to the eclipse of the Liberal  Party.
Whatever the reasons for the latter, Labour was able to fill the political vacuum created, not as an automatic or natural beneficiary, but because of the electoral advances gained from growth of the trade unions.
Other writers prompt us to question aspects of McKibbin's thesis, in particular, its extraordinary neglect of the war.
For Nairn (1965) the war made the modern Labour Party.
Experience of wartime administration persuaded Labour leaders that they had a responsible role to play in a new economic system which had successfully revealed the inadequacies of laissez faire capitalism, while among the working-class electorate a sense of the potential of a new social order in the postwar period took root.
These arguments tend to be supported by a detailed study of the impact of the war on East London (Bush 1978), and the more recent work of Waites (1987) in which he demonstrates that during the war the working class was able temporarily to reappropriate nationalist sentiment, articulating it with an assertive, class-conscious resistance to perceived excesses of capitalist exploitation.
In the immediate postwar period the Labour Party, strengthened by more efficient constituency organisation, a new constitution and programme, and a confident trade union movement, was able to mobilise this heightened working-class consciousness among an enlarged electorate.
By 1924 the party was recognisably the party of today (McKibbin 1974 p 236), and in a position to take power for the first time.
This body of work is familiar enough.
Although disputes continue over detail, there remains a persuasive logic to its arguments, paralleling that which it accords to the growth of the party.
However, as explanations of the nature of political intervention or development of the party they are at best partial, not least because problems over the boundaries of labourism and its location within working-class culture are not addressed.
The putative identity of labourism and the Labour Party is questionable, and, given a powerfully argued case for seeing the party as an integral part of the national culture, rather surprising.
In fact, the party emerged out of working-class experience; more specifically, it was itself part of a political response to that experience.
This political response is what I refer to as labourism.
In this conception labourism predated the party, for it was during the second half of the nineteenth century that it emerged as an identifiable political culture within the working class (Saville 1973).
The moment was significant.
By this time chartism had been dismantled; with it went the first, and arguably last voice of mass working-class opposition to the state, and Britain entered into a relatively stable period of economic progress within a successfully reconstructed hegemony.
Given these conditions it was virtually inevitable that nascent labourism would be inflected and conditioned by bourgeois thought, and subsequently remain impervious, even hostile, to other traditions, most notably Marxism.
Furthermore, labourism has a universe wider than labour representation, although at this stage in the discussion its boundaries remain  ill-defined.
Labourism influenced working-class intervention in the formal political sphere through the Labour Party, but it also reached into trade unionism and determined attitudes to alternative bodies of political thought such as toryism, Marxism and fascism.
Perhaps of greater significance, labourism influenced abstinence from the formal political sphere.
To provide clarification I wish to return to Nairn, for whom labourism is the ‘second best socialism’ inherited and subsequently cultivated by the party.
Diverse elements of middle-class Fabianism and left-wing protestant militancy were encompassed in a way that subordinated those socialist currents capable of expressing the most dynamic working-class interests.
Now it is perfectly legitimate to draw the boundaries of labourism in this way, but the matter becomes troublesome when these are located within wider structures.
Labourism emerged as the ‘natural, effective instrument of adaptation of a working-class movement to a society which itself…leaned instinctively and wholeheartedly toward the past’(Nairn p 160).
The movement was in essence moderate trade unionism, which became the nucleus of labourism and from the start exerted total authority over the Labour Party: the party was ‘trade unionism translated onto the political plane’(ibid. p 169).
The shift toward formal politics was qualitatively novel, and presented to the working class a potentially valuable opportunity of engaging in new forms of hegemonic struggle to remodel society.
But the relation of labourism to the working class was passive; it accepted as given the position of the class and its organisations in an historically-evolved bourgeois society.
This is the ‘central defect’ of labourism:
The political potential of the working class is not realized when the political movement founded on it accepts as determinant the structures and outlook already created by the workers in their struggle as a subordinate class.
These structures cannot really determine the form and content of a political movement — hence, as the entire story of Labourism so clearly demonstrates, when political parties embrace this basis they finish by being determined by quite different factors.
That is, by the pressures of bourgeois society outside the proletariat by paralysing conventions and myths.
(ibid. p 172–3.)
Thus labourism, now representative of working-class rather than trade-union struggle, is actually determined by forces outside that class.
The model constructed by Nairn resembles a series of concentric circles.
At its centre stands labourism coterminous with the Labour Party, from which we move out successively to trade unionism, the working class and finally bourgeois society.
Within this model forces of determination are centripetal and linear; all forms can be dismissed ultimately as the products of bourgeois ideology.
The historical record suggests, however, that at every interface the relationship between levels cannot be seen in this way; rather the potential for each level to exercise autonomy has to be recognised.
Take, for example, the relationship between trade unions and the Labour Party.
The party was established by the 1900 delegate conference dominated numerically by trade unionists, but the initiative and motive force behind the resolution was a socialist one accepted only hesitatingly by the tradition of radical Liberalism belatedly recognising the need for state action to preserve and promote trade union advances.
It was, characteristically, a compromise.
And although trade unions continued to dominate membership of the party, provide most of its funds and in many areas the nuclei of constituency organisation, the relationship between the two was often a troubled one.
Trade unions never had total authority.
Most of the leadership and active workers of the party, for example, were schooled in the ILP or Fabianism, quite outside the union movement — a point Nairn concedes in his discussion of the specific nature of hegemonic control exercised by the unions.
Because they lacked the capacity for complete cultural and political hegemony, he argues, not all elements in the movement were assimilated.
Active hegemony in effect operated only on the moderate right wing of Labour, that ‘intellectual group most congenial to the majority of Trade Union leaders’(ibid. p 181).
Tensions in the relationship between trade unions and the Labour Party arise from their different locations within bourgeois society.
Neither are totally assimilated; in practice there is a process of constant negotiation.
Within this trade unions, because of their location at the point of production, have a greater potential for oppositional action than an integrative Labour Party:
Although the party's ideological history facilitates its ability to act as an integrative party, it faces an inhibiting structural constraint in its association with trade unions.
While the party ideology does not see capital and labour as permanently antagonistic forces and therefore promotes policies which integrate the demands of both these classes, the trade unions, by virtue of their very functions in industry, cannot accept this position without strain.
(Panitch 1986 p 74.)
Without accepting the necessarily and inevitably more integrative role of the party, I believe the argument is a valid one; we cannot assume an easy identity between labourism and trade unionism.
The boundaries of labourism and its location within the working class need to be re examined.
Rather than seeing labourism within the narrow confines of a trade union dominated political intervention at the level of the state, I wish to consider it as a political culture within working-class experience at all levels, which cannot be reduced to a bourgeois ethos, and which has as a major component (but only a component) the Labour Party.
A degree of refinement is offered by Forester (1976 p 36) in distinguishing between the typologies of labourism and socialism:
LABOURIST
passive
reflexive
empirical
pragmatic
evolutionary
practical
‘ethic of responsibility’
SOCIALIST
active
educative
ideological 
principled
revolutionary
intellectual
‘ethic of ultimate ends’
Such a conception of labourism incorporates all non-marxist elements, including those within the Labour Party that had specifically middle-class origins and allegiances.
Given the working-class location of labourism, further refinement is necessary.
The opposition between Marxism and ‘labour socialism’ is one of the central concerns of Macintyre's useful study of Marxism in Britain (1980).
He defines labour socialism as the ‘political perspective of Labour activists of the period’(p 47).
It was that of an articulate minority within the party which had a complex relationship with the class upon which it depended and which it claimed to represent.
As an ideology, labour socialism shared many of the features of labourism.
It was empirical, evolutionary and pragmatic.
At the same time, however, labour socialism was more coherent and critical than labourism.
MacDonald, Glasier and others did attempt to develop an organic view of society which denied justice to its working class, and provide guidance on how it might be transformed in order better to integrate the class into a corporate whole.
This is crucial in distinguishing labourism, for while the thrust of labour socialism was toward integration of the working class as a means of overcoming genuine grievances, labourism accepted instinctively a separate working-class identity (ibid. p 57).
This identity was rarely seen in terms of antagonistic class relationships, but could provide an untheorised sense of other oppositional social groups and an unsympathetic state.
This delineation of labourism is ideal-typical; in practice it could exhibit contradictory tendencies.
But its emphasis on working-class culture, and distinction from labour socialism and the tradition of parliamentary representation, is a potentially productive one.
Given this, two questions arise: at what level does labourism operate? and what elements of working-class experience impinge on it?
The culture of labourism
As long as historical studies of labourism were concerned with formal political involvement of the working class in the Labour Party, it was likely that the national level would dominate.
Thus most effort has been devoted to exploration of the party's national figures, its role in the parliamentary sphere, the evolution of constitutional, policy and organisational forms, relationships with trade union and cooperative leaders, and parliamentary elections (see, for example, the contents pages of Cole 1948 b, Miliband 1961 and McKibbin 1974).
Implicit in these works is the belief that national developments were unproblematically reflected at the local level, that the national was simply an aggregate of the local: ‘There is a sense in which the achievements and failings of Labourism at the national level are mirrored at the local level, a  sense in which constituency Labour parties are a microcosm of the national Labour Party’(Forester 1976 p 71).
Theoretically and empirically this emphasis is misplaced.
Working-class politics is located in a wider material, cultural and social universe, and has no meaning outside that universe.
Moreover, for the vast majority of the working class, certainly for the period with which this study is concerned, the universe was strongly bounded by local factors.
The growing literature on local labour parties is a belated recognition of this; nowhere is the point made more forcibly than in Savage's (1987) study of labour politics in Preston from 1880 to 1940.
In the elaborate theoretical edifice constructed by Savage, it is accepted that development of the Labour Party was related to changes in the ‘national polity’(p 10), and that over time ‘nationalization’ of politics produced more uniform patterns of working-class political activity (p 187).
These do not provide evidence, however, of the efficacy of the national, rather of the convergence of the local in different parts of the country.
It is in the locality (defined in physical terms) and not at the national or regional level that practical working-class politics are developed (p 40).
Politics have their bases in perceived interests of the working class, but their form and direction are mediated by capacities for action, and these are determined by local social structures (p 62).
More specifically, the rise of the Labour Party in Preston was based to a large extent on the ways in which forms of skill structured certain capacities for political action, in which gender solidarity affected political forms, and in which the social structure determined class alliances (pp 40–1).
Empirically, the advance of the Labour Party was very uneven.
Overall, gains of the war and the immediate postwar period were not consolidated.
Raised expectations of an inevitable triumph as the party continued to expand were never fully realised, even in areas with a strong industrial base (Howard 1983 p 73).
Statistical aggregates suggesting an inexorable logic to Labour's advance in the 1920s disguise considerable reversals in certain localities and unexpected increases in others (Savage 1987 Ch 8).
A complex interplay of industrial structure, patterns of social relations, efficacy of constituency organisation, trade union strength and national development determined the achievement of local parties, and hence an understanding of the political dimensions of working-class action over this period has in large measure to incorporate the locality.
Even similar patterns of advance belie major variations in local circumstances.
In both East London and the adjacent West Ham, the Labour Party made rapid and considerable gains at local and national elections.
The temptation is to see this as part of a general dynamic conditioned by similar wartime experiences, party organisations and social structures; but historically the areas contrasted strongly, and West Ham lay outside the influence of Morrison's London Labour Party (p 29 below).
To focus discussion on the culture of labourism I wish to examine in a little more detail Savage's (1987) study of working-class politics in Preston.
Situated within a tradition of sociological inquiry into working-class attitudes and behaviour, it is a theoretically sophisticated attempt to account for the dynamics of political change in a particular locality.
Drawing on the work of Lockwood and Goldthorpe, he conceptualises the relationship between the political strategies and working-class interests and capacities in a potentially productive manner.
Underlying the analysis is a belief that particular forms of strategy arise out of a recognition by working-class members of a need to reduce the material insecurity immanent in the forced commodification of labour —‘people engage in various forms of action because it is in their interests to do so’(ibid. p 7).
The potentially damaging essentialism and determinism of this approach is deflected by an argument that there is no inevitability in these forms.
Class location in itself guarantees nothing; politics are ‘undetermined’ by interests.
Rather, practical forms are conditioned by local social structures through the provision of specific capacities for action.
Thus structures facilitate ‘mutualist’ struggle in which workers aim to establish alternative and independent markets for production and distribution, ‘economistic’struggle to increase job security within extant relations of production, and ‘statist’struggle to promote interests through enlisting the aid of the state principally through legislative enactment.
As examples of these Savage cites friendly societies (mutualist), trade unions and collective bargaining (economistic), and schemes of direct labour (statist).
Local social structures are characterised by particular configurations of skill, by gender relations and by communal bonding.
As these change, so do capacities for different forms of political action, with profound consequences for the Labour Party.
In 1920s Preston, for example, electoral support for the party increased, not out of sympathy with the defeat of the general strike, but rather because, with a loosening of the hold of trade unions and mobilisation of female and neighbourhood support, the party turned to ‘consumer-oriented statist policies’(ibid. p 179).
To be theoretically consistent, increases in electoral support for the party need to be related to changes in the local social structure.
And so they are, but not linearly and unproblematically.
Parties, it is argued, are ‘forced to latch on to various capacities in order to generate support’.
They have, therefore,
to operate among the capacities and struggles which exist outside themselves: while they are crucially important in forming these into a programme they cannot create practical policies themselves for these arise from people's practical negotiation of their immediate environment.
(ibid. p 190.)
Sadly, the crucial insight into the ability of parties to articulate political programmes is not explored in the main body of Savage's work.
Intimately linked to this question is that of ‘practical negotiation’.
People do not negotiate in a direct and immediate way with material conditions; the negotiation is structured through consciousness.
At an individual or party  level discourses not only mediate between material conditions and their interpretation but can organise experience itself.
It follows that in order to understand the efficacy of political parties or the ways in which political forms relate to everyday experience, account must be taken of the appropriate political discourses.
This takes us into the realm of language.
Advances in structuralism have had a belated impact on British historiography.
Where its influence has been felt, productive new lines of inquiry have been opened.
Stedman Jones' (1982) re-examination of chartism, for example, argues that its political form cannot be understood as a simplistic response to the putative material experience of a class, nor can its political language be seen as an expression of that experience.
Chartism articulated experience within a complex rhetoric that interpellated radical working-class support at a national level.
Recognition of the way in which this rhetoric drew upon previous discourses and defined the nature of authority relationships provides a more secure interpretation of the chronology of chartism's rise and subsequent demise than can accounts describing it as merely an expression of acute social and economic deprivation.
If this approach tends to proximate to idealism in seeing linguistic forms as closed, self-referential systems without any manifest acknowledgement that they are located in distinct socio-economic structures, this is not to deny its potential in interpreting political forms.
The collection of essays edited by Joyce (1987) is an important contribution to the history of work, not only for the satisfying ways in which it challenges orthodoxy about the social and political role of work, but also for its advocacy of the need to rethink work as a social construct.
The labour process, it is argued, cannot be seen merely as an economic process attendant upon capitalist rationality and imposed on the workforce; it is embedded in social and cultural practices, and without an understanding of this apparatus, particularly the meanings attached to work, it is difficult to account for the specific form of change, for the relationships between ‘work’ and ‘leisure’, and for the significance of skill and social relations at the point of production.
Individual essays demonstrate the extent to which the constituent discourses of work have to be located beyond the economic sphere.
Gray's (1987) study demonstrates that around factory reform from 1830 inherent contradictions of liberal ideology were renegotiated.
As a consequence the moral and legal boundaries of liberal economics, at first fluid, became more settled from the 1840 s when a discourse of reform and moral improvement framed economic and Benthamite languages with a moralised and rationalised social commitment.
McClelland (1987), on the other hand, shows how discourses upon the nature of work were condensed from a range of social commentators, and incorporated not only arguments about the underlying system of economic relations, but also those about individuality and morality.
How workers understood work, therefore, was not based on a simple perception of its demands, but was refracted through available discourses on the nature of the wider society.
Savage stands outside this tradition.
He denies the salience of language, indeed of culture, to an understanding of political change.
It is, he argues, almost impossible to gain access to the nature of working-class consciousness in the past; secondly, political practice is more strongly related to strategy and tactics than to views of society; and thirdly overarching concepts such as culture presuppose internal coherence.
This reasoning is suspect.
It is possible to investigate working-class consciousness through those records that survive (admittedly relatively few) and oral testimony.
In any case, methodological difficulties should not dictate epistemology.
Without an understanding of consciousness, of the linguistic appropriation of experience, the link between structure and action tends to be conceived in mechanistic terms.
As an alternative, therefore, I devote considerable attention to the discourses of labourism, and their role in securing hegemony over working-class political activity.
This is not to evade questions of strategy and tactics, merely to place them in an appropriate context.
Too much emphasis in previous work has been directed to the role of strategy in explaining the fortunes of the Labour Party.
Organisation was important to the success of the party in the interwar years, but efficient constituency organisation in itself did not guarantee popular support, or poor organisation forfeit it.
Furthermore, such administrative histories tend to adhere to whig interpretations in which the ascent of the party is seen unproblematically as a concomitant of the rise of labour and the evolution of more efficient organisational forms.
The dramatic advance of Labour in the interwar years, for example, is attributed to Morrison's success in organising the London Labour Party (p 28 below).
It is a neat and convenient equation, but one which fails to appreciate that both electoral gains and the growing strength of the London Labour Party were due to more fundamental structural and cultural shifts in the metropolitan working class.
Labourism is not to be understood merely in its institutions and strategies; it emerged from and is rooted within lived social and material relationships.
Because these relationships rarely form a coherent totality, political cultures themselves, including labourism, are replete with internal contradictions and inconsistencies.
The articulation of elements within an ideology, however, is a dynamic process; contradictions may be resolved, but also new ones created.
As a consequence, even if cultures do not form unified wholes, they adapt to change and have the power to effect it.
These are some of the issues that inform my approach to labourism.
I use as a vehicle the experience of West Ham in the interwar period.
West Ham was an area adjacent to East London where formal politics during the 1920s came to be dominated by the Labour Party to an extent experienced in few other areas of the country.
The historical legacy of this hegemony continues to have a profound influence on the contemporary political landscape.
Chapter 2 attempts to demonstrate the specific appeal of formal labourism by examining the construction of political discourses around the working class.
Against this, the principal opposition in the form of the Municipal  Alliance espoused narrow sectional interests, and gradually lost support as Labour consolidated electoral power.
Chapter 3 explores the position of trade unions within labourism, questioning the nature of the relationship between unions and the party.
Shifts in activity are identified, and the consequences for labour representation examined.
It was within this sphere that militant challenges to labourism arose and were subsequently dismantled.
But the most concerted challenge was manifest in struggles waged by the unemployed around the poor law.
The politics of these struggles are analysed in Chapter 4.
Their effectiveness in forcing the guardians to sustain ‘liberal’ scales of relief is not in doubt, for the state was eventually forced to intervene and supersede the guardians in an unprecedented assault on local representational democracy.
But the inherent political weaknesses of the struggles, the chronic inability to attract support from other sections of labour, and the social composition of the unemployed led directly to a collapse of militancy after state intervention.
Finally, despite the strength of the Labour Party and its eventual domination of local politics in West Ham, its ability to mobilise the electorate was limited.
Polls (as one surrogate of political activity) were consistently low, and at no time was there popular representation amongst the leadership.
The political machinery was controlled by a relatively small number of members of the South West Ham branch of the National Socialist Party, an organisation occupying an increasingly right-wing presence within the party.
To explore this, Chapter 5 attempts to locate formal labourism within wider aspects of popular culture, work and the home, and speculates on the relevance of alternative political traditions to an understanding of the contemporary basis of Labour Party support.
As a preliminary to this, it is necessary to describe something of the historical background to interwar West Ham.
The development of West Ham
The industrialisation of West Ham was remarkable (Marriott 1984,1988, 1989).
Within fifty years West Ham was transformed from an essentially agricultural economy with a few nucleated settlements to the industrial heartland of south-east England.
It is unlikely that such vigour was ever witnessed elsewhere, certainly not in the British experience of industrialisation.
Population change (Table 1.1) suggests something of its scale and chronology.
Situated as it was in the corner of rural Essex, immediately adjacent to the sprawling East End of London, West Ham was subject to diverse influences; in the final analysis, however, its growth cannot be seen as integral to either of its neighbours.
From the start and in the course of its development, industrial development was distinctive, not least because its rapid phase from 1870 onwards coincided with a prolonged agricultural depression in the eastern counties and a collapse of staple industries in East London.
A concentration of so-called noxious and offensive trades in West Ham has led to speculation that industrialisation was promoted by weak legislative control.
Manufacturers, it is argued, sought refuge in West Ham from East London vestries determined to sanitise their parishes.
Evidence for this, however, is scant.
Few vestries had the will to enforce legislation, especially when economic interests were jeopardised.
We need rather to consider its industrial transformation in the context of the development of a communications infrastructure.
The River Lea forming the eastern boundary of the metropolis provided good communication, ample supplies of water, and motive power for the mills, distilleries and calico industries that had settled in West Ham previously, and was to continue in that role.
Of greater lasting significance, however, was the construction in 1839 of the Eastern Counties railway line from London to Norwich via Stratford, Colchester and Ipswich.
Soon after this was complete a spur line from Stratford to wharves at Bow Creek, extended to North Woolwich, was added.
This line effectively opened up the southern reaches of West Ham which until then had been deserted marshland, and focused attention on Stratford as a centre of railway activity.
Within five years the same railway contractors responsible for the spur line were actively pursuing plans to build a new dock system in the area.
Alternative accommodation in the metropolitan area for a new breed of large steamships had become a matter of some urgency.
The natural projection of the land along the Thames conferred distinct advantages on West Ham as a site for the new docks.
By 1855 the Victoria Dock was complete.
A cost of £900,000, generally recognised to be remarkably low, was made possible by cheap labour, innovatory techniques and a favourable terrain.
Despite the establishment of a communications infrastructure (Figure 1.1) it was another fifteen years before West Ham embarked on the phase of rapid growth.
Excess land acquired for construction of the docks was not released, and the area remained remote in the minds of manufacturers.
The docks themselves did not promote local industrial growth until William Cory installed a battery of hydraulic cranes to unload seaborne coal, thereby guaranteeing abundant, relatively cheap supplies for local industries.
By 1875, 55 per cent of all coal shipped to London was unloaded at the Victoria Dock.
This was instrumental in the siting of the giant Gas Light & Coke Company works at Beckton and the expansion of the Thames Ironworks and Shipbuilding Co.
Together these firms gave birth to Canning Town, where the vast majority of their workforces resided, and spawned numerous subsidiary industries (Figure 1.2).
New firms relying on the import of seaborne raw materials and export of heavy finished goods were attracted to locationally advantaged sites on the Thames waterfront.
The Albert Dock was constructed in 1881; extending from the Victoria Dock it completed a water channel across the whole of the southern promontory.
Industrial expansion also occurred in the north.
Soon after completion of the network of lines around Stratford, work started on a massive locomotive plant.
By the end of the century the Stratford locomotive works occupied a site of twenty-two acres and employed 7000 people.
The Leathercloth works and the numerous smaller scale chemical firms around the Lea also continued to expand, although size and density of settlement never quite matched that of the south.
The considerable locational advantages possessed by West Ham which gave rise to its extraordinary growth were to become fetters on the ability of its industry to adapt to a transformed economic environment in the twentieth century.
So rapid had been the settlement and subsequent expansion that by the outbreak of the first world war few suitable sites remained to attract new industry.
Furthermore, established firms continued to benefit from their location (Figure 1.2).
The communications infrastructure was extended and, following pioneering development of the electricity supply by West Ham corporation, motive power became available at rates cheaper than in any other metropolitan area.
Under these circumstances firms were content to remain.
By 1924 industry and population reached a peak; at that time the population of West Ham was exceeded only by those of London, Birmingham, Liverpool, Manchester, Sheffield, Leeds and Bristol.
But the barriers to new industry and a reluctance or inability of established firms to adapt laid the foundations of stagnation and protracted decline which has continued to the present.
Empirical evidence on the mature economy of the interwar years demonstrates the abiding legacy of its nineteenth-century development.
Proportionately high levels of employment were to be found in chemicals, shipbuilding, food and drink, transport and the docks, retail distribution, and the public services of gas, water and electricity.
Low levels existed in vehicles, banking and insurance, and public administration (Table 1.2).
It was an industrial structure weighted heavily toward the use of semiskilled and unskilled labour.
From the early stages of industrialisation the demand for unskilled labour was exceeded only by the supply; as an occupational category it remained dominant.
Labourers were found in the docks, railways, factories and domestic spheres, many of them employed on a casual basis.
Attracted by the prospect of work during industrial expansion they migrated in their tens of thousands from the environs of East London and the eastern counties, both of which were suffering the  effects of economic recession.
Large-scale migration from East End boroughs began in the 1870 s.
Forced by a combination of decline in staple industries and a crisis in housing, the exodus across the River Lea to an urban environment not altogether dissimilar to the one the migrants had inhabited, particularly around the docks, reached a climax in the 1880s.
It was during this period that the boroughs of Bethnal Green, Stepney, Mile End and Poplar witnessed a net loss of population for the first time.
Migration from the eastern counties, while on a smaller scale, was forced by no less desperate circumstances.
Dominated by an economy based on cereal crops, the region had been plunged into recession by a series of poor harvests in the 1830 s.
Pressure to migrate, however, was mitigated by the restricted physical and mental universe occupied by rural labour; cognitively, the move to a distant urban environment was enormous.
But the widespread adoption of agricultural technology and scientific farm management — Essex was in the forefront — increased the body of displaced labour and the compulsion to migrate.
Completion of the eastern counties railway network removed the last barrier; now labour was prepared to move rather than tolerate chronic want.
Patterns of social and political settlement
The settlement pattern of this migrant population in West Ham was determined by its industrial topography.
Given that the vast majority of workers — labourers in particular— had to live close to their actual or potential place of employment, the social composition of the locality reflected its industry.
And in spite of considerable growth the composition of residential settlement was remarkably stable over time.
Localities adjacent to industrial concentrations such as Canning Town, Silvertown, and the Lea complex at Stratford had the highest proportions of unskilled labour, and, as a concomitant, the deepest social distress.
Numbers of semiskilled and skilled workers were also high, especially around the Stratford locomotive works, Thames Ironworks and chemical factories in the south.
Not surprisingly an inverse relationship existed between the proportion of labourers and that of lower professionals.
The latter were concentrated quite markedly in Stratford and Forest Gate within easy reach of the main railway line into the city.
As industrialisation reached maturity the previously isolated settlements expanded and merged, and communications improved, but the social topography of the nineteenth century remained.
A template had been forged which was subject to only minor modifications over time.
We can gain some idea of this from data included in the household survey cards compiled in 1929–30 for the New survey of London life and labour (see Appendix 1).
Such is the wealth of information that analysis could easily become a complex statistical exercise.
I am concerned here merely to reconstruct a broad outline of the borough's socio-economic character.
Table 1.3 shows the class composition of the four areas of West Ham.
This tends to confirm the persistence of unskilled labour in the workforce; had unemployed been included (see Chapter 4) the dominance would be even more evident.
In every area it remained the largest category, although distribution was heavily skewed toward Canning Town.
Here over half the total workforce was unskilled, and here resided nearly half the borough's pool of unskilled labour.
Levels of skilled and semiskilled labour were relatively low; together they exceeded those in retail and clerical occupations, but not by much.
Most unskilled labourers were part of the indigenous working-class culture inherited from the nineteenth century.
62.2 per cent of male and 68.4 per cent of female unskilled workers were born in West Ham, only 12.3 per cent and 7.5 per cent respectively originated from outside the metropolitan area (Table 1.4).
As with most occupational groups males were dominant, although the degree of domination tended to increase with skill level and with the incidence of unskilled labour (Table 1.5).
Such figures say much about  ways in which female employment was determined by economic and cultural constraints.
In a population of working age where females out-numbered males, only 29,000 women compared with 65,815 men were employed in the above groups.
Female work was heavily weighted, as we might expect, toward unskilled manual, shop and office work, traditional areas of female employment.
Ages of female workers were consistently below their male counterparts (Table 1.6).
Marriage remained an effective barrier to further work for women largely through the operation of domestic ideologies enshrined in employment practice and male culture.
In general, married women could find paid employment only when the family income was insufficient or in a family business such as a shop.
This may explain their slightly higher ages in unskilled manual and retail occupations.
Strong historical continuities in residence were certainly due the persistence of local patterns of employment.
Table 1.7 shows recorded workplaces of West Ham residents.
A large majority of residents in all areas of the borough worked locally or within easy reach of East London.
There was a distinct occupational dimension to this.
Approximately 58 per cent of manual workers were employed in West Ham, compared with 74 per cent in local shops and only 33 per cent in clerical jobs.
The strong tendency for manual workers to live close to their workplace is further demonstrated by data on some of the larger local firms.
Of the 6111 recorded as working in the Royal docks, 5093 (83.3 per cent) lived in Canning Town or Plaistow.
Similarly, 4414 West Ham residents worked at Tate & Lyle's sugar refineries, 4171 (94.5 per cent) of whom lived in Canning Town or Plaistow, while of the 3880 employed at the LNER locomotive works, 3444 (88.8 per cent ) lived in Stratford or Forest Gate.
Occupational structures of these firms also conform to the social topography of the areas in which they were located.
Thus the workforces of Tate & Lyle and the docks had respectively 71.9 per cent and 59.8 per cent unskilled labour, compared to 31.1 per cent at the LNER.
There was also a broad uniformity in the hours worked by those in manual occupations both across gender and geographical area.
Unskilled labour averaged forty-six hours per week, semiskilled and skilled forty-seven.
These figures do not take into account irregular employment, and so those for unskilled labour in particular have to be treated with caution.
Many labourers were employed on a casual basis, having only intermittent work; these, if included, would reduce the average.
Clerical workers averaged forty-five hours per week, while retail workers averaged fifty-five reflecting the extremely long working week of many shop assistants.
Finally, let us consider wages.
There were no significant differences in wage levels across the borough, but across occupational group and gender the contrasts were striking (Table 1.8).
Wages for unskilled labour were the lowest, being significantly below even shop workers who are generally recognised to be among the most intensely exploited (except that their hours were much longer).
In all groups, female wage rates were a fraction of the corresponding male rates — except in clerical work, where women could expect to receive less than half that of men.
Estimates of the scale and depth of poverty in a population are fraught with methodological difficulties (see the discussion in New survey, III, Ch.V).
The New survey took as its poverty line an income of 38–40 shillings per week for a family of two adults and two children aged ten and four.
On this basis we can say that the vast majority of families with an unskilled manual worker as sole earner were at best only marginally above that line.
That is, where unskilled labour prevailed there was chronic want and deprivation.
The picture of the working population of West Ham emerging from these data is one dominated by unskilled male manual workers.
Wage rates were consistently low; these, associated with the devastating consequences of endemic casualism, plunged the majority into a life of want and destitution.
In part because of the geographic isolation of the borough, in part because of the necessity of living near the workplace, this population was rooted in the locality, producing a fierce sense of self identity and exclusion.
The relatively small number of women employed were concentrated on unskilled manual, shop and office work, and could command rates less than half those of men in the same occupational groups.
This socioeconomic profile was not distributed uniformly.
Unskilled labour was concentrated in Canning Town next to the industrial concerns sited by the Thames, although large numbers were found also in Plaistow and Stratford, finding employment in the locomotive works and the numerous medium-sized chemical and manufacturing firms in the Lea industrial complex.
Proportionately and absolutely more retail and clerical workers lived in the north of the borough, making use of the good transport facilities to the shops and offices of the metropolis.
Forest Gate in particular had a high population of clerical and professional workers.
Industrial expansion had brought no prosperity to the majority of the population.
The occupational structure of West Ham in the interwar years was still dominated by unskilled labour, amongst which the ravages of casualism had persisted, even intensified (see Chapter 4).
And as long as casualism persisted there was little that local agencies could do to break the downward spiral of underemployment, overcrowding and deprivation.
As the New survey was forced to conclude:
The southern area (Canning Town) is the abode of workers at the docks, gas works and sugar refineries, marmalade and rubber factories: there is also a fleeting population of seafaring men of various races who help to provide a livelihood for the keepers of numerous common lodging houses…
Poverty and overcrowding are characteristic of the greater part of the Canning Town and Silvertown areas, which make up what is perhaps the largest part of unbroken depression in East London.
(New survey , 1932 p III, p 409.)
During the phase of rapid growth this impoverished and entrenched population gave birth to a distinct political culture.
Details of this are described at appropriate stages in this book, so here a brief outline will suffice.
The transformation effected by industrialisation undermined the basis of the rural economy in West Ham and so established new contours of class  relationships.
The landed gentry abandoned the parish, selling off their land to speculative developers.
They were replaced by a local bourgeoisie and petit bourgeoisie associated with the ascendant manufacturing and commercial sectors, while rural labour gave way to industrial labour.
Over the ensuing twenty years the last vestiges of a rural economy were erased, while the considerable physical presence of an industrial proletariat, much of it working in large plants, became increasingly apparent.
And yet until the outbreak of widescale industrial unrest in the late 1880s, this class remained passive.
The numerically dominant stratum of unskilled labour encompassed and eventually unified two distinct traditions which were related to the origins of their members, namely, rural labour from the depressed eastern counties and the casual poor from East London.
Rural labour had internalised deferential attitudes toward authority and a fatalistic acceptance of its conditions during a protracted history of custom and dependence, but at times in the nineteenth century had demonstrated radical resistance to the imposition of capitalist rationalisation.
Reductions in wages and employment had provoked acts ranging from isolated arson and cattle maiming to collective wage riots.
Later, as capitalist work relations and practices were successfully implemented, rural labour organised a national union; but it was built upon unsure foundations and, significantly, Essex witnessed its crushing defeat in 1874 at the hands of local farmers.
Thus the rural culture brought by migrant labour to West Ham during rapid growth was fatalistic and ideologically subordinate.
Casual labour from East London had shown little evidence of an ability to construct and maintain stable forms of resistance (this is taken up in Chapter 5).
The exigencies of survival in a shifting and precarious labour market, containing its own ideological practices, undermined any sense of loyalty to and tradition of organisation.
Resistance was volatile, at times anarchist in nature; spontaneous riots against bread prices or unemployment were short lived, providing the poor with a temporary release of tension and an opportunity to express hostility to respectability and the law.
Attempts to harness the numerical strength of the casual poor had foundered on the rocks of seeming apathy.
Neither of these cultures could have provided an effective basis to challenge hegemonic authority in West Ham; both were effectively foreclosed within dominant ideological discourses.
Most significant were those around the operation of the poor law.
Earlier m the century the select vestry in West Ham had implemented measures to deal with a perceived crisis in relief which were singularly effective in reducing relief and reasserting authoritarian values.
Administration was placed on a sounder financial footing, its distribution made visible and public.
Protests were countered by claims of the objective necessity of maintaining financial security.
Thus the discourse of relief was transformed by the select vestry.
By exercising the articulating principle of rationalisation it constructed a unified discourse, deeply embedded in social practice, that reconstituted  the poor as subordinate, shamed and obligated.
Administrative reforms brought about by the 1834 Poor Law Amendment Act merely consolidated the already established authority in West Ham.
The seeming unconscious and ‘objective’ basis of poor relief preempted challenges to the poor law from the only section of the population likely to do so, namely, the poor.
So effective was hegemony around the poor law that it continued throughout the preindustrial period and the period of rapid growth.
Not until the 1920s was struggle again witnessed on the terrain of poor relief, this time with dramatic consequences (Chapter 4).
Unlike casual labour, skilled workers were heir to a tradition of militancy.
They had displayed a radical, organised resistance to both industrial capital and the state in the first half of the nineteenth century.
But with the defeat of chartism and a period of stabilisation during which skilled labour consolidated its privileged economic position, the ideology of skilled workers unified increasingly around a discourse of possessive individualism, self help and respectability inscribed within extant relations of production.
The structural basis of skilled labour had been effectively dismantled by the collapse of staple industries in East London, particularly after the downfall of the Overend Gurney financial empire m 1866.
Within West Ham, on the other hand, the large workforces of the Stratford locomotive works, the Thames Ironworks, Beckton gasworks and others provided skilled workers with an opportunity to rebuild.
Reconstituted, however, within new ideological discourses, skilled labour proved unwilling or unable to acknowledge its radical lineage and act accordingly.
Friendly societies and the cooperative movement testified to the accommodation.
It was during this period of political passivity that the middle class and petit bourgeoisie, with the tacit approval of the local industrial bourgeoisie, cemented an alliance in the movement toward incorporation of West Ham.
The attendant promotion of civic identity secured the alliance around a complex discourse articulating notions of localism, utilitarianism, paternalism and individualism into a unified whole that came subsequently to lead working-class opinion when it mounted its most concerted opposition.
This opposition was initiated and had its structural base in the industrial sphere, more specifically, in the gas industry where a growing number of semiskilled workers suffered from intensification of work during the 1880s.
It drew upon a general concern to reduce the working day; then, with renewed confidence, attempts were made to extend the struggle by forcing a closed shop.
The counteroffensive launched by the industrial bourgeoisie with the aid of the state, however, exposed the fragility of the position of semiskilled workers; despite their strategic position in the production process, without support of skilled sections they could not halt production.
Defeated on the industrial terrain, they turned their attention to local politics; in particular, labour representation and municipal activity.
In its conception the development was novel in seeking to transcend  barriers between industrial and political struggles.
Moves toward incorporation had demonstrated that the local state possessed a degree of autonomy and power, which could be mobilised to provide sorely needed basic amenities for the local population and to intervene in the labour market.
This shift led to the return in 1892 of Keir Hardie as the first independent labour MP, and in 1898 of the first labour council in British electoral history.
Although the victory of Keir Hardie owed much to historical contingency and of the labour council to traditional Liberal support, the assertion of working-class identity was instrumental.
On assumption of power labour attempted to implement a programme of progressive reform but in pursuit of this adopted methods that were seen by opponents to be an open challenge to representative democracy.
Fearing the introduction of caucus politics as the first stage toward installation of a socialist regime, disaffected Liberals were drawn into the camp of the Tories; together they formed the Municipal Alliance, and by skilful reassertion of discourses of municipal activity embodied in incorporation assimilated the challenge of labour and took power in 1900.
From then until the suspension of elections during the first world war the Labour Party (as it now was) and Municipal Alliance fought with roughly equal strength for municipal control, and indirectly for parliamentary seats, although for most of the time the Alliance retained power.
In the immediate postwar period the Labour Party experienced rapid ascent to a position of unchallenged authority which has to the present never been relinquished.
The nature, lineages and reasons for this success — and its ultimate failure — are the concerns of this study.
THE ASCENT OF THE LABOUR PARTY
When socialists in the north grew dispirited I would say to them ‘When you die you shall go to West Ham’.
(Philip Snowden at an ILP meeting in West Ham, 1902.)
Class war and self-interest are taking the place of Cooperation and the Common Good.
Words are taking on new meanings.
(West Ham Municipal Alliance.
1923.)
The metropolitan experience
In November 1919, West Ham held its first municipal election for six years.
Labour Party candidates won in seven of the nine wards contested, thus gaining four seats and a comfortable majority on the council.
This majority was increased in subsequent elections, and the Labour Party came to command a seemingly unassailable authority over local politics that lasted until 1965, when the borough amalgamated with East Ham into Newham, and thereafter.
The ascent of the Labour Party in West Ham during the early interwar years can be thought coterminous with its emergence from political obscurity to power in the metropolis as a whole, but there are considerable theoretical and empirical problems in the equation that challenge any such identification.
The significance of Labour's advance has long been recognised.
As early as 1924 Herbert Morrison (who else?) pointed to the four-fold increase in the Labour vote over six years, and offered an explanation of the previous poor record:
Ten years ago London was the despair of the Labour movement.
The provincials regarded us as a gassy, protesting, quarrelsome, cantankerous crowd, very good at cursing the enemy and cursing ourselves, but no good at effective fighting against the well organised political parties.
Even the propaganda of the London Labour and Socialist movement, said the provincials, served to provide votes for the Liberal Party machine for the simple reason that London Labour had no organisation that could reap the result of its own propaganda.
(London News , December 1924.)
But now things were different:
This change — approaching a political revolution — has been achieved by hard work, constructive education methods and sound organisation from the polling districts upwards.
Had we followed the advice of our so-called revolutionary counsellors, this substantial move toward a political revolution would not have taken place to anything like the extent shown by the figures.
This is further indication of the fact that the so-called revolutionary tactician has in general a reactionary effect.
(ibid.)
The ten years that had witnessed this transformation were precisely those occupied by Morrison as secretary of the newly-formed London Labour Party (LLP).
The calculus on which he based his explanation was, therefore, a neat and self-fulfilling testimony to the record of the LLP; and yet it is one that has survived intact.
Paul Thompson (1967) sees the triumph of Labour as a constructive coalescence of the mature proletarian class consciousness which emerged with the displacement of small-scale production and an effective LLP, while Julia Bush (1978), concentrating on the experience of East London, argues that during the first world war socialist activity and the growing confidence and strength of the trades unions enabled the LLP to establish a solid base which it exploited to the full when hostilities ceased.
More recently, and critically, Jim Gillespie (1984), while not denying the significance of the LLP, points to the need to break with the implicit teleology of these explanations.
The equation linking trades unionism with Labour's advance cannot be applied to London; not only were unions weak, but in the interwar period suffered setbacks as the depression deepened.
The success of Morrison's project derived not from the cementing of working-class allegiance to Labour through the unions, but in filling the political vacuum created by the downturn of political and industrial militancy in the immediate postwar period.
This he effected by intervention in the local state on ground cleared by the trades boards, the attempted decasualisation of dock labour, and the use of local authority workforces to promote more radical demands on the national state for solutions to crises experienced in local economies.
Thus Gillespie proceeds carefully to examine structural conditions underpinning changes in East London industry and the interventionist strategy of the LLP.
While acknowledging the importance of contemporary political debates, however, little is said on how these local crises were perceived and demands articulated.
The contention that ‘unemployment dominated every municipal election at least until 1937, and lay at the heart of discussions within the LLP’ is difficult to reconcile with the detailed programmes promoted by the LLP in London County Council (LCC) or local elections (see, for example,Labour News , February and April 1925).
The work on political discourses around welfare, housing, unemployment and other issues of local concern articulated by Labour as well as its opponents remains to be done.
Empirically, the problem of seeing Labour's rise in West Ham as part of the metropolitan experience is that the borough was administratively separate.
The direct influence of the LLP extended only as far as the metropolitan boundary at Bethnal Green; the West Ham Labour Party was autonomous.
Furthermore, the industrial and political history of the borough was distinct (p 13–26 above).
Rapid industrial growth in the latter half of the nineteenth century promoted a political culture that can only with caution be described as radical.
The election of Keir Hardie in 1892 owed more to historical contingency than to a heightened class consciousness among the electorate.
And the labour council — in reality a fragile and temporary alliance of Social Democratic Federation (SDF), Independent Labour Party (ILP), christian socialist, Irish nationalist and independent members — elected on a platform little different from that of progressives on the LCC, was never able to challenge effectively the accepted boundaries of municipal activity.
Morrison's epitaph on London Labour before the war, therefore, is not one that can be applied to West Ham.
Labour may not have been able to maintain control of the municipal sphere for a prolonged period, but it had built a strong tradition of formal political activity which was to form the basis of hegemonic power in the interwar years.
War and the 1918 election
The Labour Party emerged from the war with renewed strength and confidence.
Its leaders had retained a distance from the perceived excesses of militancy that began to surface and gain momentum after 1917 when opposition to the war mounted and hopeful eyes turned to Russia (for good accounts of this period see Cole 1969 and Miliband 1973).
The 1918 constitution rebuilt the party machine, creating a centralised, national body out of a loose federation of affiliated organisations, so laying the foundation for an effective election machine, while its political commitment was enshrined in Labour and the new social order , a manifesto that was sufficiently ambiguous to attract people with quite different conceptions of the role of the party in heralding socialism, and yet seemed to many to offer a new beginning.
But the road to 1918 had been a troubled one.
Attitudes toward active participation in the war opened deep fissures in the movement which, at the extreme, were never healed.
Common action on issues at a local level seemed threatened, but at no time did the war seriously compromise the determination of labour leaders to defend living conditions; in many instances the struggle was intensified, although not to the point of sabotaging the war effort.
Patriotism was pervasive in West Ham.
Deeply embedded in the local population and the majority of the labour leadership, it influenced political strategy on all important issues (see Bush 1984 for most of the next two paragraphs).
A campaign led by the War Emergency Workers National Committee to secure increased labour representation on poor law and  distress committees attracted support from pro- and antiwar factions.
Will Thorne — MP, trade unionist and patriot — declared that the patriotism of West Ham socialists would not prevent them from taking a strong political stance on relief questions (SE 15 August 14).
As part of the same struggle against destitution, meetings were organised to protest at increasing food prices and profiteering; a large attendance at Canning Town Public Hall heard Sylvia Pankhurst and resolved to campaign for government price controls and votes for women (SE 27 February 15).
Occasionally, such campaigns took more militant forms.
A wave of brief, unofficial strikes for higher wages was organised by large workforces at the Victoria and Albert Docks and West Ham council (pp 81–2).
But there was a limit beyond which the furtherance of working-class interests conflicted with the national interest; few were prepared to advance there in the first two years of the war.
Although a mass antiwar movement failed to materialise, significant bodies of socialist thought within the British Socialist Party (BSP), Independent Labour Party (ILP) and Herald League were mobilised against conscription.
The West Ham Trades Council resolved that conscription was a serious threat to the labour movement, and summoned Thorne to explain his support for it at the 1916 Labour Party conference (East Ham Echo 12 February 16).
Even Thorne's branch of the BSP expressed disquiet (BSP, South West Ham branch,Minutes 28 January 16).
Such incidents were symptomatic of tensions within the socialist movement that were to have long-term consequences.
The experience of the BSP was particularly significant.
West Ham had two branches.
Even before the outbreak of war relations between them were strained.
A visit to the North branch to discuss political tactics reported that the
position was serious, and that any chance of arriving at an agreement had been alienated by bad management.
Comrade Stokes said that if we took no action the Progressive Party would.
Comrade Shreeve also said that if the North West Ham branch was impossible to work with, we as citizens living under present conditions were bound to take action.
(ibid. 12 March 14.)
A complete split was also threatened when the North branch voted to withdraw from the BSP if it affiliated to the Labour Party (ibid. 4 August 14).
But this merely delayed for a while the inevitable.
At the 1915 BSP National Conference, the branch moved that the conference:
calls upon the working class to concentrate upon the greater war at hand, namely, the class war.
The relentless struggle of the workers against unemployment and hunger in times of peace as in times of war makes it vital for them to organise for the overthrow of the capitalist system and for the establishment of the Socialist Commonwealth.
(Justice 4 March 15.)
South West Ham branch, on the other hand, was the only East London branch to support prowar resolutions of the Central branch.
A majority of the 1916 conference called for action to end the war, immediately provoking  Hyndman and his supporters, including Jack Jones (soon to become Labour MP for Silvertown) and Thorne to depart and set up the National Socialist Party (NSP).
The South branch subsequently voted to affiliate, and for the remainder of the war continued to campaign on a platform of ‘Victory abroad; Welfare at home’ for adequate pensions, food supplies and relief, especially for families of servicemen.
The North branch, small and isolated in comparison, concentrated on propaganda and education work, helped at one meeting by John MacLean who spoke on the organisation of economic classes (BSP, NWH branch,Minutes 12 August 17).
In cooperation with local branches of the ILP, the trades council and Plebs League, a series of weekly classes on Marxism was held at Stratford at which average attendance was over 80 (Bush 1978 p 128).
The Russian revolution gave renewed confidence to socialist organisations, but did little to ease tensions between pro- and antiwar factions.
While Thorne hoped that Russia would now turn to the war with increased resolve, the North branch moved to the 1918 BSP conference
that this conference congratulates our Bolshevik comrades of Russia on their splendid efforts to bring about a general peace, and their unflinching opposition to the brigands of international capital, though we deplore the fact that their efforts to stir the workers of all the belligerents to revolutionary action has not so far met with success, yet we promise to do all in our power to awaken the proletariat of this country to class consciousness so that a speedy end may overtake the tyranny of capital.
(BSP, NWH branch,Minutes 20 January 18.)
Just over a year later head office of the NSP called on branches for special propaganda ‘To kill bolshevism’(NSP, SWH branch,Minutes 14 March 19).
But the tide was temporarily turning against the prowar lobby.
The combined efforts of ILP and BSP members at a West Ham Trades Council and Central Labour Party conference on the selection of parliamentary candidates defeated Will Thorne; D J Davis (ILP), B Gardner (ILP), J Edwards (SSP) and J Jones (NSR) were nominated (ibid.13 January 18).
It was a notable victory for the pacifists, particularly since Thorne was established as the senior labour figure through a continuous involvement in local politics over nearly thirty years, and had represented West Ham South since 1906.
Following pressure from the NSP and Lansbury, the National Labour Party urged West Ham Trades Council not to run a candidate against Thorne at Plaistow.
More significant, however, was the very real threat to, Labour unity posed by the determination of Thorne and Jones to stand as NSP candidates, and the resignation from the Labour group on West Ham council of eight key figures, including Thorne, Jones, Godbold and Thomas Kirk (SE 9 February 18).
Kirk complained of the
perpetual insults that every decent labour man has endured through standing up for his country in the hour of her crisis from men who have foisted themselves on the Labour movement by wirepulling tactics.
These men have no industrial history and owe their presence  there to men like Will Thorne, Jack Jones, etc., who in the past gave labour the footing that it has attained…
To be associated with them you must be either a square-headed German or a bearded Bolshevik.
I have resigned membership of the West Ham Town Council Labour Group and in future will answer to the West Ham Branch of the National Union of Railwaymen.
(SE 19 January 18.)
Thorne also turned to his union in a decisive move (p 78).
The trades council acceded, and left him with a clear run.
Jones, however, would have to stand against Davis.
In the ensuing campaign, Thorne, Jones and their supporters exploited populist rhetoric on the war.
Mansfield claimed that Thorne had consistently acted in accord with the
sentiments of the majority of people in the borough…
He was prepared to stand out and fight on their own, and let the people of West Ham say who should represent them.
He knew what those pacifists were: they were partly, if not absolutely, pro-German.
He was sure this was not the general view.
He knew what the boys were fighting for, and was sure that the public would give a right judgement when the proper time came.
(SE 26 January 18.)
Pacifists in the ILP and BSP, Jones argued, had done more harm to the working-class movement than could have been inflicted by the Municipal Alliance.
If democratic unity inside the movement was impossible, the only course was to appeal to the democracy of the borough (SE 19 January 18).
The trump card, however, was union support.
Thorne and Jones were senior officers of the National Union of General Workers (NUGW), which declared its commitment to overthrowing German aggression and to the candidature of Thorne (SE 26 January 18); meanwhile the massive Stratford branch of the NUR congratulated Kirk on his ‘loyal support for our valued representative Alderman Will Thorne M.P.’
(SE 2 February 18).
Thorne appeared in khaki as Hon.
Colonel of the 1st Essex Volunteers, spoke at large pro-ally demonstrations of no peace until the defeat of the Habsburgs, and refused cooperation with German socialists, while the dockers' leader Ben Tillett railed against German atrocities and pacifist black legs (SE 20 July 18).
At a NSP rally in Stratford, Thorne claimed that ‘90 per cent of the organised workers were behind them’.
Jones referred to ‘cranks — long-haired men and short-haired women’ who formed the (British) Socialist Party, and explained that the title of NSP better represented the time and circumstances than SDI' because ‘social democrat was associated with Germany and Germanic thought, and during the present war the action of most of the social democrats of Germany had made the term stink in the nostrils of most people’(SE 1 June 18).
This populist, anti-intellectual hostility was also extended to the new constitution of the Labour Party.
In a letter to the local press Kirk expressed criticism of the party's stance on peace by negotiation, and the disastrous consequences of adopting the new constitution:
Carpetbagger political adventurers have joined.
Railwaymen were going to object to funds being used to further the political careers of  such men.
Socialism was not pacifism, neither was it Fabianism with its ‘superior person’ bureaucratic tyranny and government by experts policy.
The bolsheviks they had with them, trying to nobble the Labour Party, were men without a country — mere cosmopolitans, half-baked visionaries without a mission…
The workers' control of industry would follow naturally upon the realisation of their industrial and political power.
Let them see to it that their power is used effectively in the coming elections for the establishment of a bona-fide working-class party, and above all let them beware of the intriguing politics and hypocritical middle class friends of Germany.
(ibid.)
Here are the principal themes of the populist discourse wielded by the labour leadership of West Ham in the dying hours of the war that was to inform much of the course of politics in the ensuing years.
It was an aggressive assertion of a predominantly male, working-class integrity against incursions from middle-class intellectuals and foreign influence.
It was nationalist and virulently anticommunist.
On the relationship between industrial and political power, however, it was less clear, reflecting general unease between the two spheres of working-class activity (Chapter 3 below).
Political power was to be secured through the commonsensical and practical consolidation of union power at the workplace, and the use of the ballot, not through pursuit of transient revolutionary ideals imported from other countries.
But precisely how this power was to be used to reach what appears to be the ultimate goal of workers' control is not conceptualised.
There was little that was new.
Indeed, its constituent elements characterised and were inherited from the tradition of labourism that emerged in the second half of the nineteenth century (Saville 1973).
This tradition drew on diverse influences.
Chartism, although defeated, endowed sections of the working class with a sense of class identity that may have lacked a vision of the totality of class relationships, but was sufficiently powerful to define broad boundaries of interest.
Thus a class consciousness perceiving class relationships as antagonistic, to be dismantled through political struggle, informed few working-class activities; rather a sense of an undefined ‘us’ against an unknown ‘them’pervaded.
This identity was overwhelmingly defensive, for it was asserted, particularly in the industrial sphere, only when threatened by attempts to abolish traditional rights, customs and practices.
And even if the defence took militant forms, its boundaries were defined by extant relations of production.
Working-class consciousness was also moulded by attempts of the Conservative Party after extension of the franchise in 1867 to construct working-class interests as their own (p 57).
The identity was forged as by articulating ‘the people’ as ‘the nation’, the delineation of which excluded all non-English.
At the height of imperial power, exclusivity was rigidly applied.
So, themes of nationalism, self-identity, industrial power, anti-intellectualism and xenophobia had all featured in working-class rhetoric, but in the postwar period they derived particular effectivity by being reworked into a unified discourse of labourism.
Against it, socialist currents within the ILP and BSP seemed defenceless.
W Ward, ILP and NUR, attempted to counter the charges made by labourists at a meeting of the newly-formed West Ham Labour Party:
A lot of misapprehension was abroad among a large section of the people as to the aims and objects of the National Labour Party.
A lot of people ran away with the idea that they were Pacifists, but so far as he was concerned that was not true.
What they had said was at the end of the war they aimed at a safe and lasting peace, and to obtain that they demanded a setting up of a League of Nations.
(SE 28 September 18.)
D J Davis, ILP and councillor, shifted attention to the more positive aspects of the party's programme:
The Labour Party were leaving no stone unturned and had published ‘The New Social Order’.
There it was laid down clearly and definitely not only what they aimed at, but how they were going to secure it…
The Labour Party had an ideal, and it was the only party which had one and told the people how to achieve it…
He prophesied that there was no man or woman big enough to stand forever in the way of the Labour Party achieving their aims.
The war was apparently in the way, but that was more as a result of misunderstanding than anything else.
(ibid.)
There was a small attendance.
At an election meeting B Gardner, ILP and councillor, argued for a redistribution of wealth in the period of reconstruction and warned of the dangers of placing trust in Lloyd George (SE 30 November 18)
Meanwhile the BSP was being driven into obscurity.
It faced hostility from Labour leaders, and never succeeded in gaining an electoral or industrial base.
The majority of its relatively small membership was in retail or professional occupations, and included a confectioner, draper, dentist, Socialist Sunday School worker and a transport manager.
Two had been imprisoned for espionage for the duration of the war (Enever, tape).
Following a ballot in favour of affiliation to the Labour Party, Edwards withdrew his candidature at Stratford, and later resigned from the BSP (BSP, NWH branch, Minutes 1 September 18).
More resignations followed.
On 22 December a vote of 6–2 favoured dissolution of the branch (ibid.
December 18).
All members were to join the local Communist Party, which in ensuing years became a rather more effective instrument of political influence, particularly on the West Ham Trades Council (p 106) and amongst the unemployed (p 142).
Coalition candidates at Stratford, Upton and Silvertown fought on the war record of Lloyd George and the necessity of reparations, often in language that echoed the sentiments of the NSP.
Lt Col Carthew in Silvertown spoke of the 
cheap talk about this League of Nations…
They would be in favour of it if it could be worked out in a practical form: but it did not mean they were going to give up the freedom of the seas.
Nor did it mean that Germany and the countries associated with her would be let in until they had purged their crimes.
(SE 23 November 18.)
The subsequent election witnessed easy victories for coalition candidates in the north of the borough.
Lyle defeated Masterman at Stratford; Wild defeated Gardner at Upton, gaining nearly three times as many votes.
At Silvertown, Jones, the unofficial Labour candidate, beat Carthew, Davis coming a poor third, while at Plaistow Thorne inflicted a crushing defeat on Lupton.
At a victory rally Thorne stated that all four seats could have been won for Labour if they had fought as pro-ally candidates (SE 1 January 19).
Mansfield saw this as the foundation for a
solid Labour Party in the House of Commons — not the faddists or theorists, but practical, hard-headed industrial workers who understand the workers' aims and desires.
Electors in various parts of the country had cleared out some of the cranks who were prostitutes in the Labour movement in order to get into the House of Commons.
(ibid.)
Labour's populism
But the war was over, and the Labour Party nationally entered into one of the most critical and confused periods of its history.
Within the next two years resolutions would be sought and reached on fundamental political issues such as the legitimacy of constitutional action, a programme of social and parliamentary advance, and the relationship of the party to both trade unions and socialist organisations (Cole 1969).
These resolutions, for the most part the outcome of pragmatic adaptation of a moderate collectivism enshrined in Labour and the new social order , and the implementation of constitutional change, were to lay the foundations of a mass party able to command the loyalty of large sections of the enfranchised working class.
And it was around the locality that loyalty was built.
Something of the complexity of this process is evident from the experience of West Ham.
Most striking in the immediate postwar period was the alacrity with which official Labour leaders discarded the patriotic card.
Cessation of hostilities reduced its political weight, but so effective had it been in the 1918 election and so important was the ex-servicemen's vote, that it could have been played a while longer.
Some local Labour figures, notably Herbert Rumsey (MM, DCM), used their service record against opponents, but the central drive was toward Labour unity and social reform.
Early in 1919 Thorne reported back from a meeting between local ILP and NSP branches:
He met Alderman Davis and discussed the advisability of the members on the council coming together again in order that they would be unanimous in open council, especially now that Labour is in the majority.
(NSP, SWH branch,Minutes 30 March 19.)
The South West Ham branch subsequently decided to affiliate to the Central Labour Party in West Ham ‘to work amicably in the coming election’(ibid. 10 August 19).
This new mood of reconciliation was prompted by a recognition that Labour had an unprecedented opportunity to recover from damage inflicted by divisions during the war and strengthen its position in the struggle against socialist currents:
The need for sound social democratic education was never greater than it was today and there was never a better opportunity for the building up of a strong National Socialist Party.
In the war period Anarchists of all shades and colours were allowed free hold, with the results they saw before them.
An educated democracy would never for a moment be influenced by the ill-balanced ideas of the direct actionists.
(SE 23 August 19.)
The programme cementing this unity was taken piecemeal from the Labour manifesto.
At this stage it lacked coherence, but was made directly relevant to local conditions.
Housing, public health and education featured strongly.
In his maiden speech in parliament, Jones referred to the consequences of living in ‘one of the poorest districts of East London, where the housing problem was of a very intense character’(SE 15 March 19).
Thorne later spoke of the potential of concerted action around such issues:
In days gone by there had been little differences between the members of the party on the war policy, but the war was now over and they wanted to unite all their forces…
One of the most important questions they had to consider was that of public health, including housing.
Education was also a big question and a lot of money would have to be spent on it.
(SE 25 October 19.)
Simultaneously, Jack Wood, soon to be returned unopposed in the forthcoming municipal election, told the West Ham Trades Council that ‘he was more delighted to have a place on (the) united Labour Party platform than to have a seat on the council’(ibid).
Other candidates spoke of the need to rid West Ham of its slums and provide its children with the opportunity to reach university.
A by-election in March 1919 gave Labour a clear majority of two on the council; but this was overshadowed by the election in November, the first for six years, when Labour won eight of the nine wards contested, so gaining four seats.
It was a sweeping victory, giving Labour effective control of thirty of the forty-eight seats on the council (SE 8 November 19)
Election material published by different candidates demonstrates the diversity of Labour's appeal.
J T Scoulding in Hudsons Ward spoke of housing, ‘the immediate necessity of which is only too apparent and has been continually kept in the front of the Labour Party's demands on the West Ham Council’, education ‘free from the elementary school to the university thus give our class equality of opportunity’, and municipal employment, ‘the local authority being model employers and setting the standard for the rest of the community in respect to wages and conditions of employment’(Election leaflets, 1919).
He added that he, unlike his  opponents, did not apply for exemption from military service — actions speak louder than words'.
Rumsey in West Ham Ward used the same programme, but also issued a leaflet giving details of how he won the DCM, concluding ‘Do your bit by voting for the man who has done his bit for you’.
J Wood in the Custom House and Silvertown Ward expressed the need to administer effectively the 1918 Education Act, 1918 Maternity Act, and the 1919 Housing and Town Planning Act: ‘In a period of reconstruction only a majority of conscious Socialist and labour men and women on the council will have the determination to make West Ham a healthier, cleaner, more sanitary town to live in’.
This went to the very heart of an ideal that, although lacking cohesion, was encapsulated in Labour's programme and no other.
W R Hughes, an Oxford settlement worker and independent councillor, sensed this:
It is difficult at any time to represent a large body of one's fellows; in these critical days of reconstruction it is harder than ever.
We want big changes and we want them quickly, but we cannot see clearly enough how to set to work.
We hold, at the bottom of our hearts, the same ideals of justice and brotherhood, and it is this common aspiration that I should like to express and represent.
It is because I feel that the impulse that is behind the work of the Labour Party is mainly the same longing for the time when man [sic]will be able to live in free and equal comradeship that I find myself in line with that party.
(ibid.)
Such an ideal, shorn here of a class dimension, resonated with the belief of a majority of the working-class voters in West Ham after the war that the Labour Party was the only party able to represent their interests, overcome their frustrations and grievances, and provide the means through which their hopes could be realised.
In some respects the platform of the ratepayer-based, antisocialist Municipal Alliance resembled that of Labour.
A Symes in High Street Ward, for example, pointed to the ‘vast problems to be faced by the Borough — houses for the working classes, road improvements, removal of slums, tram system improved’, but then went to the heart of the matter:
I view with alarm the increase in rates.
I am a strong advocate of the strictest economy, and feel that spending money extravagantly means still higher rates and higher rents, which manufacturers, shopkeepers and the whole of the electors are unable to bear.
(ibid.)
Claims to represent the legitimate interests of the community as a whole in a non-political, non-party mandate were integral elements of the Alliance programme.
As a counter to the determinedly working-class basis of Labour's populism, it sought to unite ‘forces working for good government of the borough, and to combat the policy of the extremists who seek to create a privileged section of the community at the expense of the rest’(Municipal Alliance, nd).
In practice, it was the Alliance that represented privilege, and was generally recognised to do so (p 65–7).
Its strength lay in the relatively wealthy wards north of the borough — Forest Gate, Upton and  Park — where the local bourgeoisie and petit bourgeoisie were concentrated.
The different class basis of Alliance and Labour is suggested by occupations of their candidates:
Too much should not be made of this.
Names of occupations are notoriously ambiguous.
More important, the relation between class location and political allegiance is not linear and unproblematical.
The surprise is not that an accountant stands for Labour while an iron and steel worker is an Alliance candidate, but rather that the class basis of the two sets of candidates is so distinct.
Were the backgrounds of candidates examined, the contrast would be even more striking.
Edith Kerrison, for example, described as a spinster on the election notice, was a former nurse, member of the ILP, and had devoted years to the improvement of maternity welfare in the poorest parts of the borough (p 50).
Almost all the other Labour candidates had long and notable records in the union movement.
Scoulding, for example, had been a member of the Amalgamated Society of Watermen, Lightermen, and Bargemen since 1895, London organiser since 1911, and district secretary of the Transport Workers Federation since 1912.
The same argument applies with even greater force to the parliamentary candidates — Jones, Thorne, Davis and Gardner.
Labour activists were rooted in particular localities and political traditions, and these were to provide the basis for labourist hegemony in the formal political arena of West Ham throughout the interwar period.
Far from seeing the ascent of Labour in the immediate postwar period as a spontaneous response to frustrated hopes and deteriorating social conditions, it was rather a resolution or convergence of deeper currents at a  specific historical conjuncture.
And it was this convergence that engendered a tradition among the working-class electorate of voting Labour; Labour came to be identified with working-class interests as it had never been before.
Of these currents, by far the most important were trade unionism and cooperation: trade unionism demands separate treatment (Chapter 3 below), here I wish to turn to the cooperative movement.
Cooperation enters politics
By the end of the nineteenth century an important cooperative movement was established in West Ham.
Founded in 1860 by a group of railwaymen at the Eastern Counties Railway works at Stratford, it had progressed steadily, in part through amalgamation with smaller societies at Canning Town in 1882, Plaistow in 1883 and Beckton in 1892, all of which centred on colonies of skilled and semiskilled labour (Marriott 1984).
By 1903 Stratford Cooperative Society (SCS) had a membership of 12,914: the Royal Arsenal Cooperative Society (21,788) apart, it was the only one in the metropolitan area that could rival the strength of traditional strongholds of cooperation in the north.
This expansion, however, was to be overtaken dramatically in the next decades.
At the outbreak of war, membership was 34,209, in 1918 it was 44,068; soon after the formation of the London Cooperative Society (LCS) in 1920 by amalgamation with Edmonton there were 100,020 members, and at the end of the interior period after further amalgamations, notably with the West London Society, there were 794,637.
With sales of over £16 m and 18,840 employees, it was the largest society in the world (LCS 1941), and Alf Barnes, president of the LCS since its inception, had achieved his dream of a unified London cooperative movement.
Exceptional though such growth was, cooperation expanded in most other areas of the country.
It had been recognised for some time that only through rationalisation into larger productive and distributive units could the movement overcome the damaging rivalries among societies in the same neighbourhood, and through economies of scale promote further growth.
But it was not until the twentieth century that these policies proved effective.
The interwar years witnessed an increase in national membership from 4,131,000 in 1919 to 8,716,000 in 1940, while the number of societies fell from 1357 to 1065.
In 1920, only London and Leeds had societies with average memberships of over 90,000.
By 1940, London had 817,053, Arsenal had 332,567, and six others in the north and midlands had over 90,000 (Bonner 1970).
From the outset cooperation was a political movement.
Having intellectual origins in Owenite socialism, pioneer cooperators saw control of distribution as a means toward the abolition of capitalism, or in minimal terms, a major shift in the balance of power and wealth.
Although objectives came to be redefined, compromising the original radicalism, attitudes toward representational politics remained firm.
Formal political involvement was considered unnecessary, even harmful, since cooperation  successfully embraced a wide range of political opinion (Greening 1914).
Evidence that Liberals had used the movement to pursue policies favourable to their party had confirmed to many that cooperation should be neutral (Bailey 1948).
As the nineteenth century closed significant sections of cooperative thought turned to representation, largely as a response to the experience of local government and particularly the trade unions:
The trade unionists have learnt the lesson; they have taken it to heart.
They know that only through the legislature of the nation can the battle for common justice be effectively fought and permanent well-being for the people obtained.
Hence their determined entrance into the political arena.
Having done this…what was more natural than for them to invite the sister institution, with its professedly similar aims, to join them?
It is a pity, therefore, that some cooperators have attributed motives for this invitation.
(Hines 1911.)
A resolution was passed at the 1897 Congress that ‘the time has arrived for the direct representation of the cooperative movement in Parliament’.
This enthusiasm, inspired by Scottish sections, was short lived, and nothing came of the move, but it did signal a phase of agitation over representation that was to culminate in formal acceptance of the principle at the 1917 Congress.
Experience of cooperation during the war set the final seal.
The movement had grown in a climate of free enterprise, and while it remained relatively small it did not appear to threaten the capitalist market or private business.
But in the years preceding the outbreak of war it had become by far the largest single retailer.
War exacerbated the tensions (Maguire 1987).
The state was forced to assume some measure of control over distribution of food and levels of profits, and thus intervene in the market.
This was in part a response to an upsurge in militant opposition to food shortages and profiteering which was simultaneously driving many trade unionists into cooperation.
But it was also apparent that by taking control of the food supply the government had a powerful weapon against the movement — one that it used without hesitation.
Between 1914 and 1916 the government discriminated blatantly against cooperation.
Inadequate army contract work was given; societies were treated unfairly by military tribunals, on many of which sat rival local shopkeepers; the Cooperative Union was deliberately ignored in government discussions on imports and rationing; and the restricted distribution of goods, based on prewar levels, took no account of increasing membership of the societies (Webb and Webb 1922).
Such action created bitter resentment.
A meeting of the SCS early in 1917 called for the dismissal of Lord Devonport, the first Food Controller, who had made his fortune in wholesale grocery and was vehemently opposed to cooperation:
This meeting strongly condemns the regulations of the Food Controller, which favour the rich who are not in danger of being without food, make it possible for the wealthy to provide unscrupulous  profiteers to defraud the nation by government sanction i.e. the fixing of prices for potatoes and other edibles, and therefore calls for Lord Devonport's removal from office.
(SCS 1917.)
Potentially more damaging to cooperation, however, were proposals to impose a profits tax on cooperative revenue.
The Excess Profits Duty was widely regarded as a concession to mounting concern over profiteering (Maguire 1987), but the decision to levy it on societies posed fundamental questions about the nature of the cooperative enterprise.
Since cooperation was mutual trading — a genuine alternative to traditional retailing which existed to generate profit — the act of levying a profits tax challenged the integrity and identity of the movement, endowing it with the same status as private trading.
Following as it did two years of bitterness caused by the government's political intervention in food distribution, the tax provoked an immediate and direct response from large sections of the movement.
The SCS submitted a resolution to the cooperative congress:
That in view of the many matters of vital interest to the Cooperative Movement, such as the excess profits duty, the threatened income tax on dividends, the state control of wheat, sugar, coal, etc., which must come before Parliament in the immediate future, this Congress hereby instructs the Central Board to consider ways and means of ensuring the adequate representation of cooperative knowledge and opinion in Parliament.
(SCS Magazine 1917.)
In the period leading up to congress the campaign for political representation gathered momentum.
None put the case more forcibly than the Parliamentary Correspondent of Cooperative News:
Cooperators cannot expect to protect themselves against the threatened attack of the opposing forces without carefully preparing a united plan of campaign, in the same way that the Labour Party has mobilised its battalions…
The Labour Party has become a power in the land owing to its having at its back a large mass of the voting strength of the country.
Until the cooperative electorate is similarly organised we shall remain in a state of political impotency.
Our political weakness is our opponents' strength.
(Cooperative News 6 January 17.)
By the eve of congress the vote seemed a foregone conclusion:
The voices of the old guard will be raised against this striking new departure, but they will be raised in vain.
The old fulminations against political alliances will be heard, and the old predictions of financial disaster will be trotted out; the old yarns about schemes of interested but impecunious politicians who desire to insert their capacious hands into our money chests will be ventilated; we shall, in fact, be inundated by all the old bosh which has so long confused the issues and blocked the way to advance in the direction of cooperative representation.
But this time they will be of no avail.
(ibid. 28 April 17.)
And so it was.
Congress voted 1979 to 201 for a resolution calling on the  cooperative movement to secure direct representation in parliament and on local administrative bodies.
The Cooperative Party was thus established.
Stratford cooperators lost little time in implementing the decision.
At a special meeting of the SCS a rule change empowered the society to use 1 per cent of net profits for ‘any contingency that may arise in connection with the business of the Society’ including political representation.
1 per cent was also allocated to the education fund (SCS 10 November 17).
A Parliamentary and Local Government Advisory Committee was also set up with a brief to ‘consider and recommend to the General Committee what, in their opinion, is necessary for the purpose of effectively carrying into effect the resolution passed at the Swansea Congress’.
Some had a clear idea of what was required and successfully moved that
in so far as Cooperation is fundamentally opposed to the existing economic basis of society, this meeting of Stratford Cooperators consider it desirable, in order to fully organise and obtain the best results from their political acts, that the advisory committee be instructed to enter into negotiations and act in conjunction with the Trades Council and Labour  Representation Committees in the area covered by this Society's operations.
(ibid.)
Coincident with unprecedented growth in local cooperation, then, was a move toward overt political involvement along lines of interest broadly similar to those of Labour.
But before the alliance could be cemented a number of problems had to be resolved, not least of which was residual opposition within the society to its recent shift in direction.
This opposition — a minority, but a significant one — cohered around disaffected Liberal cooperators, some of whom occupied influential positions in the society and were active in the Municipal Alliance.
One such member, J C Carroll, convened the Cooperative Reform Committee.
At its first public meeting, attended by over 100 members, anger was voiced at the action of the socialist majority on the management committee in rushing the society into all the dangers of party politics (SE 5 January 18).
A Flocks, elected chair, explained that
he had for sometime been anxious as to where the society was drifting.
He referred in indignant terms to the action of less than 50 members (largely socialist) in voting that the society should be represented in Parliament and on local bodies only by those who choose to go through the Labour party, whilst all members were called upon to pay the cost.
(ibid.)
And in language identical to that used in the Municipal Alliance critique of the Labour council declared that their object was to
see that the society returned to sane management, and elected only business men who would look after the society's interests first, and seeing that the present majority favoured representation by socialists only, they should be fought one by one as they appeared for re-election, until the confidence of the membership, at present abused and outraged, was restored, and the society stood for co-operation pure and simple.
(ibid.)
The Reform Committee set its sights on the quarterly meeting later that month.
Large advertisements were placed in the local press appealing to members to ‘roll up in your thousands…and vote ‘Cooperation for Cooperators’.
No cooperation money for party politics.
No doubtful experiments with other people's savings' (SE 5 January 18).
The committee had considerable success in elections at the meeting, securing all three contested seats on the General Committee and, more importantly, ousting Alf Barnes from the presidency in a close vote.
But it lost the crucial vote.
Flocks moved that the resolution authorising the Advisory Committee to negotiate with local Labour councils be rescinded.
Replying for the General Committee, Barnes argued that this would alienate the movement from organised labour.
In the subsequent vote, the motion was defeated 314–243 (SE 2 February 18).
The other major problem faced by political cooperation was the establishment of a practical working relationship with the Labour Party and trade unions.
The pressures to affiliate to the Labour Party were obvious.
Affiliation would secure the alliance, provide the means to a united front during elections, and, as far as the party was concerned, increase much needed revenue.
Some attempts were made by political parties to annexe the cooperative representation movement, acts that were exploited by J C Carroll in a circular stating that resolutions in support of the Labour Party were being forwarded, together with proposals to finance political work by increasing contributions (see interviews with S F Perry, Secretary of the Cooperative Representation Committee in Cooperative News 29 March 19, 5 April 19).
However committed the cooperative movement was to political involvement, there remained a powerful independence, and this proved decisive.
The first national conference of the Cooperative Party set the agenda.
Barnes spoke for the majority:
the movement had to discuss the ultimate and logical outcome of political action or it would be adding to confusion.
He would never have supported cooperative politics had he thought that it would develop a Cooperative Party, pure and simple, antagonistic to the main democratic Labour movement.
He supported the alliance because to take the cooperative movement into the Labour Party wholly would not help the Labour Party: and it was necessary to build up a political consciousness in the movement so that cooperative ideals could be translated by political machinery.
(ibid. 25 September 20.)
The conference resolved to support an alliance, within which local committees would be free to draft municipal programmes and choose candidates.
This formed the basis of an informal but generally close working relationship between the cooperative movement and the Labour Party (and via this with the trade unions) until a national agreement in 1927 formalised it.
A programme for the Cooperative Party was formulated at the  conference soon after its formation.
The programme declared a commitment to safeguarding the interests of cooperation, to ensuring that ‘process of production, distribution and exchange, including the land,…be directed by the state in the interests of the whole community’, to the elimination of profiteering, and the provision of adequate housing and education for the people (SCS 10 November 17).
So close was it to Labour and the new social order in terms of its content and timing, a certain duplicity is suspected.
But whatever the mechanism of its conception, it meant that Labour and cooperation would enter future elections on a mutually beneficial and supportive programme of social and political reform.
Ten cooperative candidates ran at the 1918 general election, only one of whom was successful.
S. F Perry saw the exercise not as a disappointment but as an heartening indicator of future progress:
In the last general election it was encouraging to find where contest had taken place that enthusiasm for cooperative representation had been considerably increased, and in addition the opportunity of bringing before the general public the benefits of cooperation has resulted in a very material addition to the cooperative forces in the district.
All round the feeling has been that by developing political representation, cooperation has increased its hold on the general public and is daily attracting new adherents to its principles.
(Cooperative News 29 March 19.)
Here was the desired nexus between popular politics and popular culture, between politics and trade.
Political consciousness of the public would be enhanced by recognition of the benefits of cooperation, then of the need for cooperative representation.
As the cooperative movement expanded, so would widen the net of an electorate committed to cooperation or, in the absence of cooperative candidates, to Labour.
No candidates were proposed by the advisory committee of the SCS for the forthcoming election.
A decision to contest a parliamentary seat ‘if a favourable opportunity should occur’ and to grant £250 as expenses was taken in October, but it came too late (SCS Quarterly report 28 October 18).
Speaking against the movement C Hughes argued that by passing this they would ‘be voting for pacifism, and there would be no patriotic Stratford society after that’(SE 3 August 18).
In the following local elections, however, the committee — now the Stratford and District Local Cooperative Representation Council — selected six candidates for urban councils and boards of guardians.
Five were successful, three being elected unopposed (ibid. 8 April 19).
Later in the year the committee sponsored four candidates in council elections.
In spite of local cooperative strength there was none in West Ham because of potential conflict with the West Ham Trades Council and Labour Representation Committee, which at the time controlled selection of Labour candidates.
Instead two were put forward in East Ham and two in Southend.
They worked closely with local Labour parties, and hopes were high.
Election addresses proposed reform in housing, education, public health, direct labour, and municipal milk and coal supplies (SCS Magazine November 19); they were indistinguishable from those of Labour candidates.
But the elections, in areas less propitious than West Ham, returned only McGiff, in East Ham.
Active steps were also taken to strengthen links with local trade unions.
Joint advisory committees of cooperators and unionists were established under the slogan ‘Every cooperator a trades unionist: every trades unionist a cooperator’.
By October 1919, the Stratford Cooperative Magazine could report that:
Many trades unions are banking their new funds with the C.W.S. bank and cooperative societies are uniting with trades councils in trial propaganda campaigns.
Special efforts should be made to distribute literature among the members of local trades union branches.
Several pamphlets issued recently by the Publications Department of the Cooperative Union are eminently suitable for this purpose (1)‘United action: Trades unionists and cooperators combine to meet the capitalist menace’,(2)‘Cooperation and Labour unrest’,(3)‘Cooperators and reconstruction’.
These discussions were given a sense of urgency by the bitter railway strike of October 1919.
Anticipating industrial action the West Ham Trades Council established a committee to confer with the SCS on the best means of guaranteeing adequate supplies of food in the Stratford stores for the families of strikers (SE 4 October 19).
The SCS was to play a crucial role in this and future strike action.
Barnes considered it as integral to cooperative politics:
The capitalist class are concentrated and centred in the government of this country today to an extent they never were before; they are using the House of Commons for the purpose of defeating the working class organisations of this country, and the cooperative movement realised when the government set out to challenge the N.U.R.
it was their duty as a cooperative organisation to go to the aid of the N.U.R.
I am pleased to say that Stratford gave the lead to other societies…
There was a general recognition that throughout the cooperative movement and the trades union movement they had got to become more closely welded together to safeguard their common interests.
(SCS Magazine December 19.)
The initial decision at congress to enter the formal political arena was taken to defend the trading interests of cooperation against incursions by the state, and when sponsored candidates were elected to parliament they tended to work within the brief by monitoring legislation.
At a local level, particular societies identified these interests unambiguously with those of organised labour within both the Labour Party and the trade union movement.
Figures like Barnes used a language of class politics unacceptable to substantial bodies of cooperative opinion, but it accorded precisely with that of Labour in the interwar period and engendered powerful alliances in spite of cooperation's formal independence.
These alliances  consolidated the identification of Labour with the working-class electorate.
Within the cooperative movement consumers were reconstituted as political subjects, for members were encouraged to view cooperation not merely as ‘grocers shops and savings banks’, but as a viable political movement acting in the interests of the working class against capitalism.
It is in this context that the dramatic growth of cooperation assumes its full import.
It was largely under the influence of Barnes that the SCS entered into discussions with the Edmonton Society on amalgamation soon after he was re-elected as president of the SCS in January 1919.
Amalgamations were part of cooperative rationalisation in a drive to improve trading, but for Barnes this one had a distinct political dimension.
On 3 March 1919 he presented a paper to a conference of management committees of London societies, on the basis of which it agreed to the principles of amalgamation (Barnes nd, 1940).
Fearing the loss of democratic control, however, two groups were recommended — south London, and east, north and west London.
Amalgamation between Stratford and Edmonton, therefore, was the first step in a protracted and complex process.
Barnes subsequently presented the case to a meeting convened by the Education Committee of the SCS.
In response to criticism that SCS would be damaged by amalgamation with the smaller and less successful Edmonton Society, he argued that the SCS
did not belong to Stratford, but to the cooperative movement as a whole…
He was firmly convinced that it was only by consolidating working class effort to meet capitalist effort that they would win through to salvation…
People had been forced to combine for their own salvation.
The cooperative movement had been going through the same process, and every week was being confronted by the same forces which had compelled trade unionists to consolidate their forces.
(SE 30 August 19.)
The subsequent general meeting voted 397–227 for amalgamation, below the necessary two-thirds majority (SE 6 September 19).
Undeterred, Barnes launched an extensive publicity campaign amongst members.
He had the full support of the general committee which, after a rout of reform candidates, was now dominated by socialists, many of whom, like Barnes, were in the ILP.
Early in 1920 another special meeting voted 705–170 in favour of amalgamation, and the London Cooperative Society (LCS) was established (SE 17 April 20).
The West London Society was later incorporated in September 1921.
The Women's Cooperative Guild and the female vote
Within the broad cooperative movement existed the Women's Cooperative Guild, an organisation that was to exert an influence over the political alignment of working-class women in the interwar period quite disproportionate to its numerical size.
Founded in 1883, its relationship to the cooperative movement was from the start problematic.
Male hostility to  the notion that women could assume active roles within the social and political spheres of the movement in part prompted the guild, but it also endowed a jealously-guarded independence that enabled the guild to work outside the political boundaries of accepted cooperative practice.
Apart from a nominal annual grant from the Cooperative Union the guild remained self-governing and self-financing (for good general accounts see Llewellyn Davies 1904, Sharp 1933, and Gaffin and Thoms 1983).
The guild shared a common intellectual heritage with the main cooperative movement in Owenite and Christian socialisms, articulated around a particular conception of consumer power.
The image of ‘basket power’ possessed by women cooperators was a formidable and persistent one, and the guild applied itself to the task of arousing women to a sense of this leverage.
In realising such power, it was argued, cooperators as consumers pursued the same general objectives as trade unionists in their role as producers.
The path to radicalisation, therefore, progressed from an initial attraction to the ‘divvy’ to an appreciation of wider cooperative ideals.
The guild, untrammelled by the weight of conservatism, was in the vanguard of cooperative thought and action.
Its platform comprised issues of direct interest and concern to women, and which were of deep political significance, as Eleanor Barton, General Secretary 1925–37, recognised:
There has never been a time when women were not interested in politics…
Are not politics bound up with all that a woman is most concerned with — housing, food prices, the education of her children, the health of her family?
Cooperative Guild women, however, have been more than interested in politics.
They have made it their business to gain real knowledge in the political sphere, because they belong to a great consumers' organisation with the definite purpose in view of production for use rather than for profit, and of the development of a higher and nobler system of society.
Cooperative women have realised that if the principle ‘Each for all and all for each’ is good in their shopping, it is equally good in production, in education, and in the affairs of the nation and of the world.
(Barton nd, 1931.)
Few recognised the importance of campaigning on issues relevant to the quotidian experience of women better than Margaret Llewellyn Davies.
It was during her time as General Secretary from 1889 to 1921 that the guild emerged as a national force.
When she took office the guild had 1800 members in 51 branches; when she retired there were over 51,000 in 1077 branches.
With this transformation came administrative change and consolidation of a coherent political agenda.
There were times when her preoccupation with ‘basket power’, with the sovereignty of the consumer seemed part of a conception of political change that was both reformist and restricted, not least because it failed to challenge domestic discourses of women's roles; but such attention has to be seen in the context of a commitment to conceptions of political radicalisation based on personal development.
After thirty years of active involvement, her vision of  cooperation remained undimmed:
the abolition of profit making and democratic control mark out cooperation as nothing less than a revolution, so fundamental, vital, and transforming is the change it is effecting in the economic structure of society…
We are working for no patchwork modifications, for no ‘reconciliation of capital and labour’, for no ‘infusion of a better spirit’ into old industrial forms.
We are laying the foundation of a new industrial civilization.
(Llewellyn Davies 1922.)
The guild provided working-class women with an opportunity not only to escape domestic confines and meet informally in local branches, but to engage with social and political issues far removed from traditional religious and philanthropic pursuits.
Thus, in addition to the teas and social evenings organised to promote ‘friendliness and a sense of brotherhood [sic]so much part of the cooperative creed’(ibid 1904 p 34), branches began to campaign actively on ‘conditions of women workers, public health, cooperation and the poor, housing, land and free trade’.
On being granted freedom of the guild in 1922 Llewellyn Davies singled out three campaigns, all of which came in the second half of her term of office when the guild was emerging as an influential body and could build upon the experience of the earlier struggles — the attempt to bring cooperation within the reach of the poorest, minimum wages for women employees in cooperative societies, and reforms in married women's lives, in particular the inclusion of maternity benefit in the 1911 National Insurance Act (Gaffin and Thoms 1983).
The guild could not have achieved this in isolation.
In the 1890s it embarked on a series of campaigns to promote closer relationships with trade unions.
Joint meetings were held in East London to publicise the benefits of cooperative shopping.
Important labour figures such as Tom McCarthy, Sidney Webb and Clementina Black spoke of the use of buyer power to improve working conditions, and handbills were distributed exposing the damage inflicted by sweated trades (Llewellyn Davies 1904).
During the 1894 coal strike more practical forms of work were undertaken.
Guild members took in children from strikers' families, gave clothing, helped on relief committees and distributed flour tickets.
Simultaneously, close links were formed with the Women's Trade Union League to promote trade unionism, and launch inquiries under the auspices of the Women's Industrial Council into conditions of female employment.
Both the guild and the league were later represented on the wartime Standing Joint Committee of Women's Industrial Organisations (Gaffin and Thoms 1983 p 60).
The guild also contributed regularly to investigations undertaken by the Labour Department of the Board of Trade into female labour.
This work intensified in the course of the war, as a result of which the guild formed a close working relationship with the Women's Labour League, laying the foundation for greatly increased involvement of women in local Labour parties (Cole 1948 b p 141).
Of equal importance in its long-term consequences was the promotion  of female representation on public bodies.
The so-called citizenship campaign was launched in 1894 when members were urged to work for the return of women as poor law guardians.
Not coincidentally, the number of women guardians increased in that year from 169 to 877 (Clifford 1895).
Such successes gave the guild confidence to pursue representation in other areas:
Guild women have fully recognized what useful and important citizens' work can and should be done by working women.
However much ignorant opposition there may have been at first to women taking part in public life, there are comparatively few cooperative men or women who would now oppose women being poor law guardians or members of educational communities.
The Guild is now advocating that further steps should be taken, namely, that women should be made eligible for seats on town councils.
(WCG 1904.)
From there it was but a small step to parliamentary representation:
Some of our members may not have got beyond the idea that women should only exercise the rights and duties of citizens locally…
They should be amongst the easiest to convert to more enlightened views.
Guild members are not content with the position in the cooperative world which may be summed up in the saying of the man ‘My wife and I are one, and I am that one’.
(ibid.)
In 1907 local cooperative branches were petitioned to forward a resolution to congress in support of the women's franchise.
Ten did, but the resolution was rejected on the grounds that it was ‘political’.
In the first decade of this century membership of the guild more than doubled.
There were nearly 26,000 women in 521 branches, and the guild was a considerable force in cooperative, local and national politics.
Its success in securing provision in the 1911 National Insurance Act for maternity benefits to be paid directly to the mother was both the culmination of work in maternity and infant welfare, and the springboard for new campaigns.
Margaret Bondfield joined the guild in 1911 and with Llewellyn Davies assumed a critical role in reform of health and maternity policy.
A circular from Llewellyn Davies dated 15 August 1914 urged branches to approach public health committees with demands for:
1
Medical advice for the mother before and after childbirth.
2
Doctor or midwife at confinement.
3
Dinners for expectant or nursing mothers.
4
Milk for mothers and young children.
5
Dinners for children under school age where provision cannot satisfactorily be made at home.
(Llewellyn Davies 1914, published by WCG.)
Such demands were given urgency by the publication in 1915 of Maternity: letters from working women which described experiences of motherhood in harrowing terms; they were also to set the agenda for the 1918 Maternity and Child Welfare Act and interwar policy.
Locally, the guild was actively building support.
Within the SCS area  branches existed at Stratford, Canning Town, East Ham, Walthamstow, Ilford, Barking and Southend.
But it was during the war that real expansion occurred as branches turned with renewed vigour to improve child and maternity welfare.
The outbreak of war, far from diverting energy into other areas of social concern, seemed to increase the momentum of work started prior to 1911.
In a speech to the 1915 Congress, the president, Mrs Barton, pointed to the example that could be followed by guildswomen:
While men have been destroying life, women have been building up a system that will diminish suffering and save life.
We pay the first cost on all human life.
We shall not rest satisfied until every mother can take advantage of all that medical science can offer, which means that every town and village must have its maternity centre.
We welcome the wider scope now open to married women of serving on town councils, and hope in the near future that many of our women will have the opportunity of doing useful work on our local health committees.
(Cooperative News 19 June 15.)
Such work was of very real and direct relevance to impoverished areas which suffered chronically high infant and maternal death rates, in large part because of inadequate provision of medical help and uncontaminated milk.
Efforts in West Ham were directed to extending existing meagre facilities, most of which were charitable and voluntary, by enlisting the active support of the Public Health Committee.
Understandably, the south of the borough, where areas such as Tidal Basin had death rates nearly seven times higher than wealthy wards in the north such as Park and Upton (see, for example, West Ham Medical Officer of Health 1918) received prior claim.
By far the largest provider of maternity welfare in the south was the Plaistow Maternity Hospital.
Originally established in 1889 to ‘provide for the poor of the neighbourhood…nursing in their own homes in maternity and other cases’(Plaistow Maternity Hospital 1903), it charged no fee for the attendance of a midwife where the husband's wage was less than 21 shillings.
In 1910, 4793 cases were attended (ibid. 1936).
Of less significance as a provider, but in the long term a more powerful agent of change, was the Canning Town Health Society.
It was established by the Canning Town Women's Settlement in 1906, with a wide brief to improve local health by giving advice and information, investigating sanitary conditions and promoting improvements.
A baby visiting committee was immediately set up and in 1909, with cooperation from the Public Health Committee, an anti-TB exhibition was organised in Canning Town Public Hall attended by over 30,000 people (Canning Town Health Society 1911).
Work was handicapped, however, by low funds.
A budget of £7.17.10 in 1910 meant that only twenty-five babies per week could be seen at the clinic; but the work continued, and expanded.
Under the forceful guidance of Rebecca Cheetham and Edith Kerrison, both guildswomen, the society sought to strengthen links with the Public Health Committee as part of a longer-term aim to secure local authority and state responsibility for  maternity services (for the context see Rowan 1985).
A milk depot was opened in 1912, home visits increased and health lectures were given regularly at women's meetings.
This work was intensified after the outbreak of war, financed by grants from the Local Government Board and the Board of Education.
By 1915 expenditure was £263, by 1916 £420: ‘nothing shows more clearly the growth of our work than the way in which this help from the government has doubled, trebled, even quadrupled since the school started four years ago’(South West Ham Health Society 1916–17).
By 1917 the main energy of the society was devoted to infant welfare.
Following a ‘very vigorous conference’ at the initiative of the guild and the society on the need for day nurseries, a campaign was launched.
In the last year of the war 2706 infant consultations took place, regular classes on cooking, sewing and infant care were held, and 2.5 tons of dried milk supplied to necessitous mothers (ibid. 1918–19).
Such initiatives intensified the pressure exerted by the guild for the state to take responsibility for public health.
The 1918 Maternity and Child Welfare Act may have been designed both to satisfy the lobby and assuage opposition from powerful vested interests to a Ministry of Health, and it may have lacked prescriptive power (Rowan 1985), but it did provide a more formal institutional framework for health provision and an extension of state funding.
It required local authorities to establish maternity and child welfare committees, to include at least two women, and specified services for which grants would now be made available including home helps, food for expectant and nursing mothers and children under five, creches and day nurseries.
Much of this bore the unmistakable stamp of guild thought and policy.
West Ham Council initially decided that the Maternity and Child Welfare Committee should comprise the Public Health Committee, plus the matron of Plaistow Maternity Hospital.
Edith Kerrison, the other woman member, however, successfully moved that two married women also be appointed and later that a member from the South West Ham Health Society be co-opted (West Ham Council Minutes 23 November 18).
Pressure was immediately brought to bear.
The first meeting of the committee received a resolution from a conference held under the auspices of the society and the Canning Town branch of the guild which rejoiced in the wider powers given under the act, and urged the council to ‘take steps to exercise any, or all of the powers given, and especially that steps be taken as soon as possible to establish a creche or day nursery in the southern part of the borough’(Maternity and Child Welfare Committee Minutes 20 November 18).
The committee responded by increasing grants to voluntary agencies, entering into an agreement with Queen Mary's Hospital and the Women's Settlement Hospital to set aside beds for maternity cases, and producing monthly statistics on the work of health visiting staff (ibid. 16 January, 12 June and 11 September 19).
The supply of milk also increased.
Under the 1918 Milk (Mothers and Children) Order, the council was empowered to supply milk to expectant  and nursing mothers, and children under five at cost price or less.
In January 1920 a conference with milk retailers agreed on a voucher scheme through which 76,764 gallons were supplied until it was decided in August, because of the continued difficulty of guaranteeing uncontaminated milk, to substitute dried milk powder.
The supply of powdered milk increased from 8 tons in 1920, and 33 in 1921 to 106 in 1924 (Medical Officer of Health 1925).
This pattern of activity in child and maternity welfare lasted throughout the 1920s.
The council, in the absence of state schemes, continued to rely heavily on the voluntary sector for essential services.
In the third quarter of 1920, council health workers were responsible for only 512 of the 4424 visits to expectant mothers, and 11,329 of the 27,062 visits to children (Maternity and Child Welfare Committee Minutes 12 October 20).
By 1924 the proportion had fallen.
In the last quarter, council workers accounted for 468 Of the 5004 visits to mothers, 13, 796 Of the 44,169 visits to children (ibid. 12 March 25).
In both spheres the influence of the guild remained powerful.
New branches were established in Forest Gate in 1919, Upton in 1919, Plaistow in 1920, West Ham in 1921, and Custom House in 1928, making a total of eight in the borough.
By 1939 (the only year for which figures are available) the borough had ten branches with a total membership of 788 (WCG Annual Report 1939).
Three branch officers — Kerrison, Parsons and Bock — all of whom were to become key political figures, were included among the eight women serving on the Maternity and Child Welfare Committee by 1922 (MCWC Minutes 11 May 22).
Kerrison was elected chair in 1926.
In 1928 the Medical Officer reported that maternity and child welfare had developed remarkably over the last two years.
There was now an Assistant Medical Officer with special responsibility for this work, systematic visiting of all expectant mothers, careful supervision of the work of midwives, cooperation between the service and ancillary health services, in particular the school medical service, municipal antenatal clinics, and health advice and information.
He concluded:
There is now a firm grip on the conditions affecting the health of the populace of the borough and it is certain, given time, the innovations put into practice during the past few years will prove to be of enormous benefit, particularly to the health of infants and mothers of West Ham.
(Medical Officer of Health 1928.)
The effect of the service on infant and maternity mortality rates was striking (Table 2.1).
Data suggest that reductions in infant mortality rates outpaced those at a national level; it was in the early postwar period that levels in West Ham fell below the national average for the first time.
Maternity mortality rates, on the other hand, followed closely movements at the national level, although local levels remained consistently lower.
Given the extent of economic deprivation, it was an impressive record.
And it was a record that came to be seen and recognised by the local electorate, in particular the newly enfranchised women, not least through  the efforts of Labour candidates to exploit it to political advantage.
In the 1921 election a leaflet in support of the candidature of Kerrison argued that the Labour Party had been responsible for implementing the 1918 Act, providing home helps for poor mothers and supplying free milk in necessitous cases.
It concluded, ‘On all questions relating to health, housing and education, the Labour Party can be trusted to attend to the interests of the women and the children’.
In 1922, Collins promised on behalf of the Labour Party that ‘all that can be done under the Maternity and Child Welfare Acts in the way of helping necessitous, and expectant and nursing mothers, and caring for young children would have our support’(Election leaflet 1922).
Irrespective of the damaging consequences that child welfare reforms may have had on gender relations within working-class families by promoting ideologies of motherhood inscribed within bourgeois conceptions of domesticity (Rowan 1985), they served to strengthen the identity of Labour amongst the female electorate.
It was by actively promoting such reforms that the Labour Party in West Ham succeeded in capturing the female vote when it was first exercised.
In this process, the Women's Cooperative Guild played a key role.
It spread the cooperative gospel amongst women as consumers and purchasers.
But also the whole agenda of maternity and child welfare and its subsequent implementation was promoted by the guild.
Thus it spread the Labour gospel of women as mothers.
Opposition from the Municipal Alliance
Labourism successfully established hegemony in West Ham during the immediate postwar period.
Drawing on an earlier record of municipal activity and labour representation, it was able to consolidate its position at a time of hope for a new future by an active fusion of Labour Party, trade union and cooperative effort.
Sufficient common ground existed for a programme of reform to be formulated and presented to an electorate, so constituted as aggressively independent working class — males as producers, females as consumers and reproducers.
But what was the nature of the opposition, in particular from the Municipal Alliance, which had in 1900 brought down the first labour council in West Ham?
What alternative was offered, and how can we account for its lack of success and ultimate demise  in the interwar period?
Formed in 1899, the Alliance brought together antisocialist Liberal and Tory members, whose interests had until the ascent of the labour group in the 18908 dominated local politics (Marriott 1984).
This intervention reconstituted the boundaries of political allegiance.
Strong party ties were forged, and a polarisation forced between Labour and Tory/Liberal.
Within the antisocialist camp Liberalism occupied a subordinate position, forfeiting a tradition of Radical progressivism that had informed much of the alternative municipal discourse during the 1890s, and leading to its extinction as a force in local politics.
Within the Alliance interests of local petit bourgeoisie and industrial bourgeoisie converged.
Although small local employers were the initial moving force and tended to dominate the committees, prestigious offices were held by manufacturers, providing them with a platform in local politics.
Arnold Hills of the Thames Ironworks was the first president, followed by R Broodbank of the St Katharine Dock Co.
Among the vice presidents were S Boulton, D Howard, W Knight, C Lyle, H Marten and Dr Messel, all of whom headed large local industries.
Indirect support was given by others.
Hill reported at the first general meeting that Lord Hamilton and Sir William Birt of the GER Co. had promised to help the Alliance in ‘every way they could’(SE 14 October 1899).
Membership of the Alliance suggests just how successful its appeal was.
Local ratepayer organisations, trade associations, the Church of England Lay Council, the West Ham Chamber of Commerce and several craft unions were involved.
Thus within the new boundaries old hostilities between anglican and nonconformist, publican and temperance reformer, and even manufacturer and sections of skilled labour were buried by an overriding concern to forge unity against the municipal politics of the labour group.
This unity enabled the Alliance to intervene into the discourse of municipal politics in a skilful and decisive manner.
Claiming to be ‘Non-Political, Non-Partisan and Non-Sectarian’, it asked the support of every intelligent Burgess for its candidates not because of their political or sectarian views, but because they will work and vote without fear or favour:
Herein are contained significant elements of the dominant nineteenth-century ideology of local government-depoliticisation, economy and utilitarianism — around a limited conception of municipal enterprise that bore few traces of the brand of municipal socialism forced onto the political agenda by the labour group.
But centre-stage were the issues of rates and expenditure.
Deep concern was expressed at the recklessness of the labour group, and the inevitable effect that such expenditure would have upon assessments and rates.
The problematic was a false one.
Expenditure was relatively high not because of extravagant socialist schemes, but because the labour group attempted to overcome years of neglect by providing basic needs for a rapidly increasing population.
But the issues of rates and economy served to unite antisocialist forces in a persistent attack on every aspect of the labour programme.
The labour group, unable to free itself entirely from structural constraints during its period of office, effectively capitulated, losing power in the 1900 election.
The record of the Alliance in power was one of pragmatism, perhaps not very different from that of labour had it retained control.
Pledges to check expenditure were not kept; indeed, it continued to rise, as did the district rate, a fact that was conveniently blamed on the unfortunate legacy of labour's investment programme, but was due rather to the desire of the Alliance to extend municipal enterprise and trading, particularly in tram-ways and electricity.
During 1902–12 expenditure increased by 60 per cent.
At no time, however, were the economy and rates resurrected in local elections.
As electioneering resumed in 1919, and the Alliance recognised the strengths of Labour's renewed challenge, so much of the old political rhetoric was recycled.
Rates again featured centrally.
Symes, the Alliance candidate in the High Street Ward campaigned for social reform with strict economy (p 37 below).
Wybrew in Plaistow spoke in similar terms:
No elector will wish to deny responsibility in respect of, and no elector will wish to avoid payment for, necessary and enlightened progress in Housing, Education and Recreation and especially with regard to the welfare of the large army of children committed to our care…
I do ask that plans are conceived and carried out, after due deliberation, in a practical manner to ensure the best value for the expenditure involved.
(Election leaflet 1919.)
And there was even tacit recognition of the existence of the female electorate:
Ladies, you must be keenly interested in the rental of your home, especial! y now that you have to pay the increased rate.
The children are your constant care, and their education is something to you.
Prove this by using your vote.
In terms of specific details of necessary improvements in health and welfare it is difficult to distinguish between the programmes of the Alliance and Labour.
But it was through linking reform to the rates issue and a particular conception of the ‘people’ that political specificity was  conferred and revealed in the programmes.
The Alliance was committed to economy in local government, and the rates issue had been an effective ideological weapon in the past.
Underpinning this commitment, however, were powerful structural factors.
The Alliance was indissolubly linked to local ratepayers' organisations — most notably the Forest Gate Ratepayers' Association (FGRA)— which functioned as an effective lobby for those who felt most threatened by rate increases, namely, the manufacturers and petit bourgeoisie.
There was a wide overlap of membership especially among the officers.
The associations professed political neutrality and because of this could not become involved directly in local elections; the Alliance, on the other hand, could — indeed this was the principal rationale for its existence — but even then claimed the same neutrality, helping to cloak manifest sectionalism.
It was inevitable that both would act in the same interests, and command support against putative extravagance and recklessness.
Now the climate was different.
Reconstruction meant for many a potential realisation of hopes for better housing, education and health.
Those erecting barriers on the grounds of economy courted political disfavour.
Mann, Labour candidate in Forest Gate, presented the alternatives:
The town council does not make laws, it only administers them.
This can be either broad, with the full expression of human feeling common only to the Labour movement, or it may be narrow, niggardly and mean with only the objective of shirking responsibility, and never carrying out in the spirit of those laws work which could be applied to make the conditions of the working people easier, and the lives of their children brighter and better.
(Election leaflet 1919.)
Furthermore, charges of extravagance were difficult to sustain.
Before regaining power in 1919, Labour's last term of office was in 1911–12.
Since then the district rate had risen steadily; so too had rents, responsibility for which was laid firmly at the door of landlords and hence the Alliance: –Tote Labour and keep out Alliance landlords', concluded E Reed after a brief analysis of increases in rents (Election leaflet 1920).
Such responses, however, were isolated.
Labour clearly recognised the fragility of the rate issue compared with the desire for progressive reform amongst an enlarged electorate.
The Alliance attempted to mask the narrow sectional basis of ‘economy’ by popular appeals to the whole electorate; in this it contrasted sharply with Labour, and so the nature of the appeal is worth closer scrutiny.
In a leaflet entitled What is the West Ham Municipal Alliance?,
Lt Colonel Luscombe explained that the Alliance had originally been formed ‘to oppose the Socialists and save West Ham’:
Men and women of all schools of thought joined; all parties were welcomed if they were against socialism…
In West Ham we have a special brand of socialists.
They can be ‘Labour’ or ‘Cooperative’or  conscientious objectors when it suits, but whatever they disguise themselves as, their object is the same — to bring about a ‘class war’…
The Alliance again appeals to all unselfish men and women — and to the electors who desire to see West Ham governed in the interests of all classes, for all to receive just and fair consideration — to take their part in bringing this about.
This they can do by rallying under the Alliance motto of ‘The Common Good’.
(Election leaflet 1920.)
The necessity of constructing popular consent among the electorate was an important component of Conservative thought, and had been since extension of the franchise to sections of the urban working classes in 1867.
Without demonstrable concern for their welfare and the active promotion of an identity of interests it would have been difficult for a party of landed and industrial power to retain authority (for an historical survey of this see McKenzie and Silver 1968 pp 42–73).
Guided by an apparent recognition of the obligations of power toward the people, Conservatives could show evidence after 1867 of a consistent record of legislative reform to improve working-class conditions.
Increasingly, as Britain expanded its imperial rule, this pragmatic concern for the people was articulated with a distinct sense of the British (English) nation (Schwarz 1986).
Within this discourse nation and people converged under the natural leadership of a Conservative Party which appointed itself as guardian, committed to the defence of their integrity against attack from hostile or alien forces.
Furthermore, the Conservative Party was, it argued, the only party fit to assume this role.
Liberal policy was unpatriotic because it recognised other national interests and threatened dissolution of the empire.
In the immediate postwar period as the franchise was again extended, and as Labour emerged as the principal opposition, so Conservatives retrained their guns.
Some of the older imperialist rhetoric remained, but it appeared obsolete in a new world order in which Britain occupied a subordinate position.
Now nation and people were linked in a nationalism constructed from a common inheritance rather than from opposition to potentially antagonistic nationalisms (ibid. p 169).
This inheritance, because it was available to every loyal English man and woman, effectively displaced political specificity.
The ‘people’, the ‘common good’, ‘all men’(sic), the ‘community’ were mobilised against a putative self interest, in particular that of class, whose divisive influence threatened national traditions and institutions.
Thus the Alliance in West Ham could claim to be ‘non-political and non-sectarian’ and
to combine the forces working for good government of the borough, and to combat the policy of the extremists who seek to create a privileged section of the community at the expense of the rest.
(WHMA 1920.)
Extremists, therefore, were responsible for diverting the working class from allegiance to common interest, to the path of class conflict:
Already we have had a taste of [socialism]in West Ham.
No one but a Socialist stands a chance of promotion or employment under the  Council today.
Shopkeepers are afraid to express their political views and free speech is denied to others than Socialists.
Class war and self-interest are taking the place of Cooperation and the Common Good.
Words are taking on new meanings: ‘workers’ are those who talk the loudest, and the honest worker who shows the slightest independence is a ‘traitor to his class’.
(WHMA 1923.)
The political rhetoric of the Alliance constructed the working-class electorate in quite specific ways.
Subsumed within the people, it argued, the working class had no needs distinct from those of the population as a whole.
At times, its organisations, in particular the unions and cooperative societies, were persuaded by socialists acting out of self interest to take unpropitious courses of action; against such leaders, genuine, common-sensical (English) workers must assert their authority, restore equilibrium and so provide conditions under which production would increase to the benefit of all.
Within Labour rhetoric, on the other hand, working-class identity and exclusivity was asserted against class enemies.
The Alliance, it was argued, in spite of popular appeals, represented the interests of landlords and employers who had committed working-class families to a life-long struggle against poverty and distress.
Extremists, defined here as intellectuals imbued with (foreign) revolutionary thought, preach violence and terrorism, against which the steadfastness of labour must prevail.
I have described the appeal of the Alliance as popular, that of Labour as populist.
This is no semantic nicety; rather, it is arguable that the distinction reveals something of their political specificities.
The work of Laclau (1982) is of interest.
In a careful study, he distinguished between popular and populist.
Both can be seen as popular traditions in that they appeal to ‘the people’, but while popular interpellations tend to absorb and neutralise potentially antagonistic elements, populism tends to develop them:
What transforms an ideological discourse into a populist one is a peculiar form of articulation of the popular-democratic interpellations in it.
Our thesis is that populism consists in the presentation of popular-democratic interpellations as a synthetic-antagonistic complex with respect to the dominant ideology …
Populism starts at the point where popular democratic elements are presented as an antagonistic option against the ideology of the dominant bloc.
(Laclau 1982 pp 172–73.)
The popular appeal of the Alliance, attempted as part of a hegemonic strategy to mobilise support by neutralising antagonistic class relations, exploiting discontent with,inter alia , the intrusion of ‘extreme’ political forms, and incorporating working-class demands for social reform.
The project failed because the Alliance could not disguise the class basis of its appeal in the eyes of working-class electorate, numerically stronger, with powerful industrial base, and tradition of independent, at times aggressive, action.
The poor law struggles up to 1926 sealed its fate (Chapter 4 below).
Instead, this constituency turned to the populism of Labour.
The perspective may not have developed antagonistic elements to the extent to  which, at a generalised level, it could have been a genuine challenge to extant political power, but the populism did articulate working-class interests and demands assertively and independently.
In this, it accorded with the consciousness of sufficient of the electorate to consolidate power.
Electoral consolidation of Labour
Independent working-class activity in West Ham, most notably through trade unions, cooperation and political representation, coupled with an ineffective Tory/Liberal opposition, laid the foundations for Labour's accession to power in the immediate postwar years.
By 1920, it had secured a comfortable majority on the council and had two of Greater London's four Labour MPS.
This authority was consolidated through the 1920s to the point that Labour possessed an unassailable majority on the council and MPS in all four constituencies (Tables 2.2 and 2.3).
This process of consolidation, influenced as it was by a variety of local and national factors, was uneven but real enough.
In large part, Labour was successful because it responded more effectively to political and structural  change.
Consider, for example, 1920, which in some respects was the most critical year for Labour.
1920 witnessed a downturn in postwar militancy as the boom lost momentum and the economy plunged into recession.
And yet Labour in West Ham lost little ground.
The recession had no discernible consequences for the ability of Labour and its supporters to maintain political work.
Activities of the local cooperative movement were facilitated by a strong trading position.
Early in the year, SCS could report a record quarter for increases in sales, capital and membership, reflecting a picture of growth over the year that did not dispel fears of the adverse influence of political involvement on trade.
Opposition remained but it was muted.
C Hughes spoke against the parliamentary candidature of Barnes on the grounds that he was a member of the ILP, and ‘for him to force the members to support him was downright tyranny’(SE 31 January 20); he could muster little support.
By the end of the year, on the eve of amalgamation into the LCS, Barnes could report:
The work that had been put in in the past year was now showing results and he was absolutely confident that the spirit that had animated the society, the progressive feeling and the strong loyalty would continue throughout London.
He felt that they had an opportunity of spreading to a greater extent than ever before.
(SE 30 November 20.)
This animated spirit, however, was less evident in Labour's programme as the immediate postwar idealism and optimism began to be replaced by more pragmatic demands.
At a meeting organised by the South West Ham branch of the ILP, councillor Wood thought it necessary to remind some of the people that a war had taken place:
There was a danger of people having short memories, and forgetting even that they had taken part in the war…
He was still looking for the end of the war and the land fit for heroes to live in.
(SE 5 June 20.)
Temporary upsurges in militancy during the year, in particular around the question of British intervention in Russia and Ireland, provoked principled stands at national and local levels, not least because it deflected anti-Bolshevik propaganda that had been used consistently against Labour.
Wood continued:
The Russians who went to war on their side were now regarded as their enemies, and he contended that the reason why the British government was trying to prevent the Russian Government trading with this country and was using Polish forces to fight the Russian people was because the people of Russia had set up a form of Government which was antagonistic to a capitalist Government like theirs.
(SE 5 June 20.)
A local Council of Action was established.
It held a series of well attended meetings, bringing together diverse elements within the labour movement on a unified platform.
At one such meeting, Davis (ILP) appeared with Pollitt (CP) and Groves (ILP).
The message was a militant assertion of class hostility.
Davis said:
Ever since he could think at all he had realised that the class which exploited the worker in every country would fight to the last ditch for the sake of keeping the worker where he was and where he had been all his life.
They were afraid that if the Russian workers proved by demonstration that they were quite capable of managing their own affairs the workers of other countries would ask why their countries were not being governed in the same way…
What they wanted was not to deal with individuals, but with principles.
(SE 4 September 20.)
But this was a rare moment of unity in the expression of oppositional definitions of the ‘national interest’.
By this time Lloyd George, in response to generalised militancy against the government's policy on Russia, had conceded that no British troops would be sent, and so defused a potentially dangerous situation (Miliband 1973 pp 79–82).
Labour's campaign in the weeks leading to municipal elections bore all the traces of populist pragmatism.
In support of Mansfield, A E Killip challenged the Alliance to demonstrate how rates could be reduced without disadvantage to the community.
Since it had been in power Labour had improved conditions, particularly through provision of milk to mothers and children (SE 16 October 20).
Thorne asked the people to vote for Mansfield
not because he was Mansfield, but because he was a man of their own party and had done a great deal of work in connection with municipal, industrial and trade union affairs generally…
They claimed the people's votes because they had worked in the people's interest and not their own…
Nobody could represent the interests of the workers as well as the Labour party had done.
(SE 16 October 20.)
Andrew Allison in Hudsons Ward felt it unnecessary to argue the merits of Labour's programme: ‘Our principles and policy are well known…
We stand for people before property’(Election leaflet 1920).
The Alliance and its supporters busied themselves in rates and exposes of socialist malpractice.
In an analysis of council expenditure, E W Wordley told the FGRA that the majority intended to spend as much as they could on labour; as a result, bankruptcy was imminent (SE 27 September 20).
Meanwhile, Walter Sanders expressed indignation at Labour's scheme to provide nursery schools, not merely because of the cost but because he thought mothers should look after children at that age.
J H Rooff claimed that the socialist regime was committed to revolution, the first step in which was enforcement of a closed shop among council employees (SE 16 October 20).
Immediately prior to polling day the Alliance played the extremist card.
In a large advertisement in the local press it pointed out
the grave danger to the people as a whole from the extreme section of the Socialists, who are now beginning to openly admit they are out for REVOLUTION and CONFISCATION.
In the council chamber quite recently one of the Socialists supported the position taken up by the  Soviet Government in Russia in a way that showed what would happen here if they got the power in their hands.
DON T BE MISLED, whether Socialists run in their true colours, or in an underhand way as ‘Labour’ or ‘Cooperative’, they are out for the same end, and your only remedy is to VOTE THEM DOWN.
(SE 23 October 20.)
In an increased poll the Alliance nearly doubled its vote, while that of Labour fell slightly.
Labour gained one seat but lost two in the by-election following appointment of aldermen.
Much of the Alliance advance occurred in its traditional heartlands of the north, where it successfully exploited economic and political insecurities of the local bourgeoisie.
The Labour vote suffered from increasing local distress caused by the strike which was still in progress.
At the subsequent AGM of the Alliance, Charles Ward argued that following the electoral truce of the war years conscientiously observed by the Alliance but not its opponents, the organisation had made up lost ground through steady educative work, and was now able ‘to get in closer touch with the people’(SE 12 February 21).
With increases in rates paid by the tenant, the people were ‘awakening to the fact that the Alliance stood for a saner and wiser administration of public affairs’.
In the course of 1921 the programmes of Labour and the Alliance contained nothing that was new.
The conditions underlying the integrity and confidence of the working-class electorate, however, deteriorated.
From the record levels of 1920, LCS trade fell sharply with the inevitable revival of opposition to political involvement.
By July, the committee reported that in spite of an increase in the number of members over the last quarter, there had been a loss of trade and a decline in share capital.
Unemployment was to blame.
Large numbers of cooperators were unemployed; they had been forced to withdraw savings and buy less (SE 30 July 21).
Progressive cooperators disagreed.
King declared that
they were suffering throughout the ramifications of their Society because of their political action.
Any man [sic]who had opposed political action had simply been insulted at quarterly meetings, and they could not keep on doing that without feeling the effects.
Members became tired and withdrew their money and their trade.
(SE 8 October 21.)
Efforts to abolish the political fund were unsuccessful, but in the event were unnecessary anyway.
Net trading surpluses, from which funds were allocated, evaporated; for most of 1921 and 1922 the LCS Political Committee was forced to carry on without a grant.
All propaganda was seriously affected, not least the publication of its newspaper Citizen which had been launched throughout London early in 1921.
At a national level the Triple Alliance collapsed in April; with it went socialist hope that a united union movement could challenge the government.
Members of the newly-formed Communist Party saw an opportunity to expose the complicity of trade union and Labour leaders, but their appeals met with little success (Miliband 1973 p 89).
In response to the  charge in a leaflet by Tom Mann and the Red International of Labour Unions that the NUGW had refused to support the miners on Black Friday, Thorne adroitly deflected criticism by declaring that this was malicious propaganda designed to ‘disrupt everyone of the workmen's organisations’(SE 20 August 21).
It was easily done.
Communist influence, although disproportionate to the number of party members, remained small and, because of persistent failures to affiliate to the Labour Party and vehement hostility from labourism, quite outside the main spheres of formal political activity.
Communist influence was strongest in the trade unions and amongst unemployed, and in the period of union militancy around the miners' strike many of the anxieties about extremism were aired.
‘Under the shadow of the very great crisis’, Lyle argued at the North West Ham Conservative Club, ‘nobody knew what the result might have been’:
the object of certain people was very different, was very definite.
It was not and never had been a question of wages.
Certain people were out for other and more sinister designs.
(SE 30 April 21.)
Cooper, chair of the club's political committee, while welcoming defeat of the Triple Alliance, pointed to the consequences for the future:
They were all thankful that the moderate influence in the trade unions had beaten the Communist element.
The Socialists had captured a large number of the Councils and Boards of Guardians throughout the country, and there was only one thing left for them to take charge of — the British Empire.
(SE 30 April 21.)
In a lecture to the FGRA on ‘The undercurrent in trades unionism,’ Pike combined such anticommunist rhetoric with popular appeals to commonsense:
Wherever a general strike had threatened the community the community had organised and beaten it…
The great mass of the people did not want revolution, or else they would have elected a Labour Government.
Trades unionism, functioning in its proper field, was an asset to the whole community, but when it was used by ambitious men for their own ends it was a danger.
(SE 7 May 21.)
The dominant tone of formal labourism was asserted at the annual conference of the SDP in Stratford.
Most of the key Labour councillors attended, including Thorne, Jones, Davis, Godbold, Rumsey, Killip and Husband.
Thorne opened with a characteristic attack on extremism.
After reference to the unfortunate existence of the BSP, he stated that it had been completely destroyed by amalgamation into the Communist Party ‘pledged to follow the Bolshevist dictatorship of Lenin'.
Because of this and the high levels of unemployment
never was Socialist propaganda on sane and sound lines so needed as it was today…
The greater grew the size and strength of the Labour Party, and it was growing steadily, the more was Socialist propaganda and organisation required to educate and influence the workers inside and outside the Labour Party.
He declared that the  sane and sound advocacy of social democracy by the SDP would outlast all the various actionist ‘will o’ the wisps' which, while apparently indicating easy roads to the promised land of social and economic emancipation, finally led to anarchical swamps and morasses (SE 6 August 21.).
A resolution was passed condemning direct action as a means of bringing about the Social Democratic Commonwealth, while the importance of support for the cooperative movement was recognised in spite of doubts on the advisability of its political involvement.
Such complacency allowed the Alliance to take the initiative temporarily.
In a heavier poll, the rates issue and antisocialism seemed decisive.
Carroll in Forest Gate argued that ‘class legislation’ was impossible, ‘especially at a time like the present when the nation is stirred to its very vitals by unemployment and general stagnation of trade’(Election leaflet 1921).
Labour candidates looked to the record of reform.
Kerrison, for example, claimed that ‘On all questions relating to health, housing and education, the Labour Party can be trusted to attend to the interests of the women and children’.
It was not enough.
The Alliance polled a total of 18,276 in winning five seats; Labour polled 17,657 in winning seven.
Overall the Alliance gained one (SE 5 November 21).
Portentous signs had been seen, however, of an issue that was to dominate the political landscape of West Ham beyond the boundaries of local representation over the next five years.
In the face of unprecedented levels of unemployment, the unemployed themselves were pressing demands on the West Ham Board of Guardians for adequate levels of relief — demands that the guardians could not meet without heavy borrowing from the government.
The ensuing struggle brought the unemployed into direct conflict with the state, at the culmination of which in 1926 the government superseded the guardians.
The act was widely seen as a direct challenge to local representational democracy, and revealed much about the capacity of labourism to respond to perceived threats to its authority.
(The episode is examined in Chapter 4.)
Although the struggle took place outside the formal boundaries of local politics and the council was involved only at the margins, it forced unemployment onto the agenda, much to the advantage of Labour.
1921 had witnessed the launch of the Poplar Council's bitter struggle for equalisation of the rates; by September 5000 unemployed men and women were marching to the West Ham guardians threatening trouble if demands for increased scales of relief were not met.
Allison described unemployment as ‘the problem of the most pressing importance’, and declared that the Labour Party had a duty to ‘do all that is humanly possible to find work locally for our unemployed fellow citizens’(Election leaflet 1921).
Such commitments, in spite of their essential unfeasibility, were to be restated time and again in future elections.
The Alliance response was characteristic.
Hickford in High Street Ward argued that females employed by the council should make way for unemployed ex-servicemen.
The unemployed continued to press demands through 1922, simultaneously asserting the political significance of unemployment.
No party, ratepayer, church or trade union meeting took place without some discussion of the issue.
At a musical evening of the Upton Liberal and Radical Association, Nicholson attributed unemployment to the lack of confidence people had in the men who were directing the destiny of the world (SE 1 February 22).
Later that month at a Liberal Party rally in Stratford Capt. Wedgewood Benn blamed the loss of foreign markets (SE 25 February 22) Local ratepayer associations, on the other hand, took a pragmatic view.
Cooper, at the inaugural meeting of the Stratford Ratepayers' Association argued that high rates were forcing manufacturers to leave the district, necessarily increasing levels of unemployment (SE 25 March 22).
Labour took the offensive.
Beginning the campaign, Killip, councillor and guardian, welcomed the new political dimension of unemployment:
The FGRA were continually talking about the apathy of the working classes.
The apathy of the people towards unemployment was one of the things that caused so little notice to be taken of it.
They should let the people who were responsible for it see that they were beginning to take an active interest in what was the most important issue of the time.
(SE 2 September 22.)
Rumsey denied Alliance charges that Labour had failed to make full use of opportunities provided by the government for provision of relief works.
On the contrary, West Ham had been in the forefront of relief, but had been obstructed by a government enjoying full support of the Alliance (SE 28 September 22).
What proved decisive, however, was part of the hidden agenda of unemployment.
Outside the formal political discourses of Alliance and Labour there emerged a genuine popular resentment against Alliance candidates based on a simple identification of them with threats to relief.
The charge was not made openly by Labour candidates, but there is little doubt that the belief was fostered that a vote for the Alliance was a vote for cessation of relief.
Some Alliance supporters made statements that did little to allay such fears.
At a meeting of the FGRA shortly before the election, Ward stated:
The Socialists were trading on the giving of relief…
At the last election he heard someone ask ‘Who's Killip?’ and the reply was ‘The man who gives you relief at Cumberland Road’.
The Municipal Alliance does not believe in doles, and if their candidates were returned they would do their best to stop this out-going of public funds and try to see to it that schemes of relief were brought forward under the plans which the Minister of Labour had outlined.
(SE 7 October 22.)
The 1922 election was an important one since the number of wards had been increased by four to sixteen (Table 2.3).
In a relatively heavy poll Labour won eighteen seats, the Alliance six.
Prior to the election Labour had twenty-eight seats and the Alliance twenty, now it stood at thirty-six  and twenty-four respectively, and after the by-elections subsequent to the election of aldermen, forty and twenty-four.
Fears expressed by an Alliance member on the eve of the election that they were ‘to go into the wilderness for seven or eight years’ were to prove rather optimistic (SE 4 November 22).
At the postmortem conducted by the FGRA, Alliance candidates analysed the reasons for their disastrous performance.
Cresswell believed that the ‘dole business’ in the south was responsible; Cooper claimed that on election day ‘when children went to get free dinners they were told to tell their parents that if Cooper was returned no more free dinners would be given’; Coath said that electors had been told that if they voted for him ‘they would get no more doles’; and Clare had been accused of voting against the guardians' grant of coal to the unemployed (SE 11 November 22).
It was a position from which the Alliance never recovered.
Unemployment exposed more effectively than Labour's pragmatic programme the sectional basis of the Alliance appeal, and the potentially harsh realities of ‘efficiency and economy’ in public expenditure.
As the struggle over levels of relief intensified, so the Alliance lost further ground.
1926 was a particularly bad year.
Defeat of the general strike during which Alliance members served on the Emergency Committee, and supersession of the guardians leading to drastic cuts in relief revived charges that the Alliance and its supporters were ‘baby starvers’.
Its vote fell by more than half.
By the end of the decade it could claim only eight seats out of sixty-four on the council, and was a negligible influence in municipal affairs.
This loss of power was reflected at the parliamentary level (Table 2.2).
Less than three weeks after substantial Labour gains in the 1922 municipal election, Groves won Stratford from the Tories, while Thorne and Jones were re-elected on a platform of working-class advocacy.
At the election Labour in Greater London quadrupled its members to sixteen.
In 1923, Labour won all four seats in West Ham, but lost Upton the following year as Labour members in outer London fell from fifteen to seven.
The franchise for the 1929 election nearly doubled the number of women voters; Labour again captured four seats with hugely increased majorities.
In the early postwar years potentially damaging splits within the ranks of the Labour Party in West Ham forced by the war were healed, and the party embarked on a campaign to consolidate power around a unified populist programme of reform.
At a time of political instability militant opposition proved ineffective against the commonsensical assertion of working-class identity and a vehement nationalism at the heart of labourist discourse.
The political involvement of a powerful tradition of cooperation contributed to Labour's success.
Tens of thousands of local cooperators were urged to recognise the identity of their cause and that of Labour.
The  Women's Cooperative Guild played a decisive role in helping to secure for Labour the newly-enfranchised female vote.
Guildswomen had pioneered child and maternity welfare, and given working-class women a  sense of political obligation.
They successfully politicised lived experiences of women in such a way that their concerns came to be seen as the concerns of Labour.
Against Labour, antisocialist interests cohered around the Municipal Alliance.
It too articulated social reform, but in spite of popular appeals to the people and to the common good, its narrow sectional base was sharply exposed by discourses around the struggles of the unemployed, The Alliance advocacy of cuts in relief undermined its support so drastically that the ground it lost on the council was never recovered.
By the end of the 1920's Labour dominated the formal political terrain.