

THE POLITICAL CONTEXT
In the late 1980s the British Conservative government set up two powerful committees to advise on the teaching of English.
Their two Reports, popularly called Kingman and Cox, were not welcomed by leading right-wing Conservatives.
The Kingman Report was not liked by the Prime Minister.
When Professor Kingman discovered that his Report's recommendations might be rejected, he used the Robert Robinson factor to cajole the civil servants.
Robert Robinson, the popular and skilful host of the TV language game,Call My Bluff , was a member of the Kingman Committee and signed its recommendations.
Would the Prime Minister really find it advisable to appear in public in opposition to the famous Mr Robinson?
When my Report was submitted to Mr Kenneth Baker, Secretary of State for Education and Science, he so much disliked it that he insisted that it should be printed back to front, starting with chapters 15 to 17, which included our recommendations for attainment targets and programmes of study, and relegating the explanatory chapters 1 to 14, which he thought unnecessary, to a kind of appendix.
The creation of a National Curriculum in English was influenced by several bizarre incidents of this kind.
How did it come about that the Conservatives chose committees whose Reports disappointed their hopes?
Why did both Kingman and Cox so offend the Conservative establishment?
What arguments and manoeuvres went on behind the scenes?
THE CHOICE OF COMMITTEES
The Kingman Committee, of which I was a member, was appointed by Mr Baker at the beginning of 1987.
We were asked to recommend a model of the English language as a basis for teacher training and professional discussion, and to consider how far and in what ways that model should be made explicit to pupils at various stages of education.
The Committee's Chairman, Sir John Kingman, Vice-Chancellor of Bristol University and a mathematician by training, submitted his Report on 17 March 1988, and it was published on 29 April.
On  26 April I was summoned by Mr Baker to his office at the Department of Education and Science, and asked if I would chair a Working Group to prepare proposals for English in the National Curriculum.
We were asked to ‘build on’ the work of the Kingman Committee.
I was not consulted about membership of the Group, and with the exception of Dr Charles Suckling, a member of the Kingman Committee, I met the members for the first time when we assembled in London for our opening working session.
The National Curriculum English Working Group was formally set up on 29 April 1988 by the Secretaries of State for Education and Science and for Wales to advise on attainment targets, programmes of study and associated assessment arrangements for English in the National Curriculum for the period of compulsory schooling.
English was defined as including both language and literature and we were to take into account relevant aspects of drama, media studies, information technology and information handling.
The framework for the National Curriculum was set out in the Education Reform Act 1988.
The Kingman Report was not well received by right-wing Conservatives because they wanted a return to the traditional teaching of Latinate grammar, and the Report came out firmly against this.
Many politicians and journalists were ignorant about problems in the teaching of grammar and about the status of Standard English, and simply desired to reinstate the disciplines of study typical of schoolrooms in the 1930s.
In chapter 2 I discuss the Kingman recommendations on the teaching of grammar, and describe their influence on my own Report.
Because Kingman was deemed unsatisfactory, my Working Group was chosen carefully by Mr Baker, with the assistance of Mrs Angela Rumbold, Minister of State at the DES, to reflect a more conservative stance to the teaching of English.
I was well known as the chief editor of the Black Papers on Education (1969–77), supposedly traditional and right wing in their views of education.
I presume neither Mr Baker nor Mrs Rumbold was aware that for over ten years I had been conducting a campaign to make creative writing a central feature of the English curriculum, and that in October 1983 I helped to organise a manifesto on this subject which was published in the Times Higher Education Supplement .
THE WORKING GROUP
When I first met my Working Group I was astonished to discover that they were far more progressive in outlook than the members of the Kingman Committee.
The Kingman Committee included traditionalists of an older generation such as Peter Levi, Professor of Poetry at Oxford, and Patrick Kavanagh, a poet whose conservative views were well known from his regular column in the Spectator .
They were with difficulty persuaded by the linguists on the Committee, particularly the  Secretary, Peter Gannon (an HMI), and Professor Gillian Brown, at that time Professor of Applied Linguistics at the University of Essex, to accept a model of language in tune with modern ideas and the needs of the contemporary school.
The only linguist on my Working Group, Professor Michael Stubbs (Professor of Education at the University of London Institute of Education), proved more radical than Professor Brown in his ideas about the teaching of language, and was deeply concerned about the problems of British ethnic communities and of multi-cultural education.
Mr Baker appointed him without interview because he had been impressed by Professor Stubbs's publications on the importance of knowledge about language.
My Working Group was small, only nine in number, including myself.
Dr Charles Suckling, formerly General Manager (Research and Technology) at ICI, provided a sharp mind and clarity of thought invaluable both when we discussed our assumptions about values and in the final drafting stages.
Professor David Skilton, Head of English at the New University of Wales College of Cardiff, took over responsibility for our chapter on the teaching of English language and literature in the schools of Wales, and proved usefully at home with structuralist and post-structuralist approaches to literature.
Roald Dahl, the children's writer, attended the first meeting, admitted he hated committees, and never reappeared.
Apparently Mr Baker had met him on a social occasion, and had been impressed by his traditionalist views.
Our four teachers represented the best in modern ideas about teaching English, the new consensus between the traditional and the progressive which had become increasingly dominant in Britain during the 1980s.
Mrs Di Billups was head of Broughton Junior School, South Humberside, which I visited with great pleasure and profit in the summer of 1988.
Linda Cookson, short story writer and Senior Tutor at the London Central School of Speech and Drama, proved a strong advocate for drama in the curriculum.
Brian Slough, Deputy Head of Kettering Boys' School, admitted to voting Conservative, but in his classroom practice adopted a wide range of progressive and non-traditional techniques.
He brought to the Group a list of such activities which was published as an appendix to the Report.
Roger Samways, Adviser for English and Drama in Dorset, was very progressive in outlook, holding views about children's learning which were anathema to most right-wing Conservatives.
Roger recounted with delight what happened when he was interviewed by Mr Baker.
They spent the first ten minutes talking about Thomas Hardy, because Roger came from Dorset, and then Mr Baker read passages from the Kingman Report, which was still unpublished, and asked if Roger agreed.
Unsure about what Kingman really advocated, Roger could only mutter polite words of assent.
When the Working Group's names were announced the left-wing press accused Mr Baker and Mrs Rumbold of choosing political  appointees to reflect the Prime Minister's Conservative ideology.
My own view is that neither Mr Baker nor Mrs Rumbold knew very much about the complex debate that has been going on at least since Rousseau about progressive education, and that they did not realise that my Group would be strongly opposed to Mrs Thatcher's views about grammar and rote-learning.
The politicians were amateurs, instinctively confident that common sense was sufficient to guide them in making judgments about the professional standing of the interviewees.
I suspect they did not realise that words such as‘grammar’ or ‘progressive’reflect very different meanings according to context, or that the language of educational discussion had changed radically since they were at school.
My Working Group co-operated very well together, and we enjoyed our weekly meetings.
On several occasions we spent weekends working furiously hard in small groups at drafts of attainment targets and programmes of study.
I had been allocated an efficient back-up team from the Civil Service: Jane Benham (promoted near the end and replaced by Martin Howarth), Michael Phipps and Jenny Bacon, all of whom impressed me with their loyalty to me and their diplomatic skills.
After the stories that circulate about Civil Service chicanery, I can attest to the professionalism of my team.
They were joined by Graham Frater, the chief HMI for English, more progressive in inclination than I am, but invaluable for his intimate understanding of the teaching profession.
It was essential that our recommendations should arouse enthusiasm among the best teachers; if they disliked our plans, the National Curriculum would never be properly implemented in the classroom.
Roald Dahl received our committee papers, and sent comments to me.
Very soon I realised that he was not in tune with the rest of the Group.
For example, he seemed to be advocating no advice from the teacher in a child's selection of books.
I knew that, when we reported in September, if he expressed his adverse opinions to journalists he would dominate the headlines, and the Report might be irretrievably damaged.
I wrote to Mr Baker to propose that he should tactfully suggest to Mr Dahl that, as he was not attending the Working Group's meeting, he should resign.
I explained the danger of a September confrontation.
A few days later Mr Baker was hosting a dinner to thank the members of the Kingman Committee for their work.
After coffee he drew me aside, quietly admitted I was right, and agreed that Roald Dahl must withdraw.
‘Would you handle it?’ he asked.
Amused by Mr Baker's diplomatic skills, I composed a letter to Roald Dahl, and luckily by the end of July he had sent us a sensible letter of resignation.
After this letter was received I managed, with some difficulty, to persuade Mrs Rumbold and Mr Baker to invite Mrs Katharine Perera, Senior Lecturer in Linguistics at Manchester University, to act as a replacement.
They were worried that a new member might delay our work, and cause divisions.
I had known Katharine for many years, and, in common with other members of the Kingman Committee, I had been impressed by her presentation when she appeared before us to answer questions.
She combined considerable teaching experience with class-room research on the teaching of English.
She provided exactly the kind of professional expertise we required, particularly as I had no training in linguistics.
The Working Group's terms of reference defined attainment targets as ‘clear objectives for the knowledge, skills, understanding and aptitudes which pupils of different abilities and maturity should be expected to have acquired at or near certain ages’.
Programmes of study were defined as ‘describing the essential content which needs to be covered to enable pupils to reach or surpass the attainment targets’.
We were asked to submit recommendations on the primary school stages with attainment targets for ages 7 and 11 by 30 September 1988, and to extend our work to cover the secondary stages with attainment targets for ages 14 and 16 by 30 April 1989.
This meant we had to complete our first Report in five months and our second only seven months later.
I am proud that we succeeded in submitting our Reports on time.
In the first few months we received a considerable amount of written advice from individuals and professional organisations, and so in making our decisions we could draw on a range of expertise.
THE REPORT ON THE PRIMARY STAGES
When our first Report on the primary stages was submitted to Mr Baker at the end of September 1988, he felt that we had given insufficient emphasis to the teaching of grammar.
In his proposals, printed at the front of the Report, he asked that ‘the programmes of study for writing should be strengthened to give greater emphasis to the place of grammatical structure and terminology within the matters, skills and processes otherwise covered.’
This was seized upon by the press, who in headlines proclaimed that the Report was weak on grammar.
The misunderstandings were legion.
The leader in the Daily Mail (16 November 1988) read ‘Baker in row over basic English’, and the article began: ‘Bad grammar is acceptable for schoolchildren, an official report recommended yesterday.’
The London Standard 's headline read ‘Baker's hard man ‘soft’ on grammar.’
The Mail on Sunday 's headlines (13 November 1988) were: ‘Thatcher furious with ‘trendy’ Experts’and ‘English report fails the test.’
The article began: ‘A Report telling schools to ignore English teaching in favour of trendy methods has infuriated Mrs Thatcher’, and continued by saying that the lengthy report ‘dismisses grammar in a few paragraphs’.
It is difficult to believe these comments refer to the same Report as that evaluated in a balanced leader in the Independent (16 November 1988) under the headline ‘A blow for literacy’.
After describing the controversies about the teaching of grammar in the past, the article continues: ‘Common sense has since  begun to prevail.
Professor Cox and his team compromise by stressing the value of knowledge and grammatical discipline, while recommending that these should be achieved through experience with words rather than through the study of grammatical terms in isolation.’
Since my appointment to chair the Working Group I had seen Mr Baker only on one occasion.
I had never been given the opportunity to explain to him the difficulties in making recommendations about the teaching of language.
Firm statements about the importance of grammar would be taken by many teachers and members of the general public to mean a return to Latinate grammar, and we did not wish to give this false impression.
Many people did not realise that there are different kinds of grammar, and that conventions in the use of language keep changing.
We explained all this in detail in the Report (see chapters 2 to 5 this book), and in fact our Report demanded far more teaching about language than had been customary in most classrooms during previous decades.
Mr Baker's demands for more emphasis on grammar began a ridiculous debate in the newspapers, during which most participants revealed their misunderstanding of language by taking for granted that the rules of grammar are fixed and permanent throughout time.
I was not invited to the press conference at which our Report was presented to the media.
Throughout my time as Chairman I was anxious to co-operate with Mr Baker as far as possible, for I feared I might be asked to resign.
I might be replaced by an old-fashioned advocate of Latinate grammar, and that would be a disaster for the schools.
Mr Baker was determined to control the presentation of the Report so that he and the Prime Minister would be rewarded with good publicity.
Unfortunately at the press conference our careful recommendations about the importance of Standard English were presented in such a way that many journalists came away with the false impression that we did not mind if children spoke dialect rather than Standard English.
The headline in the London Standard read ‘The professor what don't know nothing’, and the subheading expressed the exact opposite of the truth: ‘Is correct English just a dialect or could it possibly be a useful tool for a youngster in search of a job?
An education report that appears to support the former theory is a pussyfooting piece of dangerous nonsense, says John Rae.’
(17 November 1988) During subsequent weeks I gave many interviews to journalists to correct their inaccurate accounts.
Most of the discussion in the media was trivial, with much attention given to the list of authors for children's reading, which excluded Enid Blyton and Captain W. E. Johns (see chapter 6 on literature).
FRAMEWORK FOR THE REPORT
Throughout our discussions my Working Group was very anxious to compose chapters which would make clear our rationale to teachers and politicians of good will.
We worked at a hectic pace.
In formulating attainment targets we were required to follow the recommendations of the National Curriculum Task Group on Assessment and Testing (TGAT 1987).
This assessment framework, adopted by the government, required that:
a)
attainment targets are set for the knowledge, skills and understanding normally expected at the ages of 7, 11, 14 and 16;
b)
the pupils' performance in relation to attainment targets should be assessed and reported on at ages 7, 11, 14 and 16.
Attainment targets should be grouped for this purpose into profile components to make assessment and reporting manageable;
c)
ten different levels of attainment should be identified within each target covering all the years of compulsory schooling.
Pupils' progress should be registered against these levels: level 2 should be assumed to represent the performance of the median 7 year old; level 4 that of the median 11 year old; the boundary between levels 5 and 6 that of the median 14 year old; and the boundary between levels 6 and 7 that of the median 16 year old;
d)
assessment should be by a combination of national externally set Standard Assessment Tasks (SATs) and assessment by teachers.
In order to safeguard standards, the latter should be compared with the results of the SATs and with the judgement of other teachers.
At age 16 the General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE) should be the main form of assessment, especially in the core subjects;
e)
the results of assessment should be used both formatively to help better teaching and to inform decisions about next steps for a pupil, and summatively at ages 7, 11, 14 and 16 to inform parents in simple and clear terms about their child's progress.
Aggregated results should be published to enable informed judgements about attainment in a school or local education authority (LEA) to be made.
When my Group first met in the summer of 1988 we soon decided to divide the English curriculum into three profile components:
a)
speaking and listening — with one attainment target; the development of pupils' understanding of the spoken word and the capacity to express themselves effectively in a variety of speaking and listening activities, matching style and response to audience and purpose;
b)
reading — with one attainment target: the development of the ability to read, understand and respond to all types of writing, as well as the development of information-retrieval strategies for the purposes of study;
c)
writing — with three attainment targets in the primary stages: a growing ability to construct and convey meaning in written language, matching style to audience and purpose; spelling; and handwriting; but two in the secondary stages, with spelling and handwriting merged into an attainment target called presentation.
We chose these three profile components because this division of the English curriculum would be familiar to English teachers and in accord with good practice.
THE REPORT ON THE SECONDARY STAGES
When we began our work on the secondary stages we considered whether to add a fourth profile component, knowledge about language, but we rejected this plan for two reasons.
Many teachers were ill prepared to teach language, and so might present the subject in an unenthusiastic manner, so repressing the pupils' natural interest in language.
And secondly, language should be mainly studied in use, as it appears in texts, not in isolation.
During our last seven months, as we prepared our recommendations for the secondary stages, the officials of the National Curriculum Council under their Chairman, Duncan Graham, were rewriting the attainment targets for the primary stages, supposedly in accord with the consultation exercise and Mr Baker's own proposals about grammar.
In February we were shown their drafts, and we did not like what we saw.
The word ‘grammar’, for example, had been inserted seven times without any indication of exactly what it implied.
Some weeks later there were headlines in the newspapers saying that I threatened to resign.
What actually happened is that my Group said simply that our proposals for 11 to 16 year olds were built on our work for the primary stages, and that it would be absurd for us to bring out our second Report if its proposals were out of tune with the earlier attainment targets.
Unless there were radical changes in the NCC drafts, we could not proceed with our work.
Informed of this impasse, Mr Baker instructed the civil servants to go away and sort it out, which they did with admirable diplomacy.
On Friday 24 February 1989, my Group was meeting for the weekend at Oxford.
We spent all our time rewriting the NCC drafts, keeping their improvements, which we accepted were valuable, but mainly restoring our original wording.
The civil servants ensured that our drafts were the ones that eventually went into the Statutes, so we were able to return to our second Report.
This hiccup was time-consuming, and put us behind schedule.
We were forced to arrange an extra weekend in Birmingham from 12 to 14 May.
On this occasion, so late in the proceedings, we continued to make major alterations.
We decided that our programmes of study for knowledge about language were too difficult, too close to a first-year undergraduate course, and so we cut these drastically.
We also realised that there was insufficient classroom time for the testing of children individually in dramatic performance.
At least thirty minutes would have to be allocated to each child, if they were to do justice to their abilities, and this meant about fifteen hours for a class of thirty.
This was out of the question.
We were in danger of creating a system which would involve testing over far too long a period of time.
Until the last minute I was revising our document, often making significant alterations, and ringing up members of the Group for their assent.
I finished the final draft with Mrs Perera in an intensive session of eight hours one hot June Sunday, starting in her garden in Cheshire and ending towards midnight with the dispatch of the document by express courier for delivery to Mr Baker in London on the Monday.
REACTIONS TO THE REPORT
Mr Baker very much disliked the Report.
He had wanted a short Report, with strong emphasis on grammar, spelling and punctuation, which would have been easy for parents to read.
In contrast, as I have already said, I was most anxious to persuade the teaching profession to implement our recommendations with good will, and so I felt it essential to explain our assumptions in detail.
I understand that Mrs Rumbold also found our Report distasteful.
I was never asked to discuss the final Report with her or with Mr Baker, so I cannot be sure about her reasons, but from her radio and television appearances it seemed she found repugnant our insistence that a child's dialect is not inaccurate in its use of grammar and should be respected.
The Report was submitted to Mr Baker and Mrs Rumbold by the civil servants, and again I was not invited.
There was some question about whether the Report should be published in its entirety, for Mr Baker and Mrs Rumbold were worried that there were sections which the Prime Minister would not like.
On the other hand, if they refused to publish the whole Report this would anger the teaching profession and provide the journalists with a sensational story.
A compromise was agreed.
They were reasonably satisfied with chapters 15 to 17, which included the attainment targets and programmes of study, and so, as I have already explained, it was decided to print these first.
I decided not to protest, because at least the whole Report would be published, and teachers would be able to read the total rationale.
It was agreed that chapters 15 to 17 should be printed on yellow-tinted paper, with the following explanation at the top of the contents page: ‘For ease of reference, chapters 15 to 17 have been placed at the front of the report, adjacent to the proposals, and are printed on tinted paper.’
At least I was able at future lectures to raise a laugh by pointing out that by printing chapter 15 first the Report provided an example of the pervasive influence of post-structuralism.
When the Report was sent to Mrs Thatcher's office with summaries and references prepared by the civil servants at the DES, they naturally drew attention to our firm proposals for the teaching of spelling, punctuation, grammar and written and spoken Standard English.
Mrs Thatcher agreed to allow the Report to be sent out for consultation, but asked for one alteration.
In the attainment targets for Writing we had put: ‘Use Standard English, where appropriate.’
The Prime Minister asked for ‘where appropriate’ to be deleted.
I presume she feared — rightly, I suspect — that in some schools where children spoke in dialect the teachers might decide it was never appropriate.
I rewrote the sentence as follows: ‘Use Standard English (except in contexts where non-standard forms are needed for literary purposes, e.g. in dialogue, in a story or a play-script.)’
This was accepted, and printed in the final version.
The programmes of study were introduced in the classroom for 5 year olds in the autumn of 1989 and for 11 year olds in 1990.
Some changes were made by NCC as a result of the consultation process, but these were never substantial.
When we submitted our first Report on the primary stages we recommended that the three profile components, speaking and listening, reading and writing, should be weighted equally in the assessment process.
In his comments (published with the Report) Mr Baker agreed that this was appropriate for 7 year olds, but proposed that for 11 year olds greater emphasis should be given to the key skills of reading and writing.
When the document was sent out for consultation, teachers, advisers and inspectors came down almost unanimously on our side.
As the Working Group continued its deliberations on the secondary school curriculum, I was informed privately that Mr Baker would give way on this issue as long as the weighting for 16 year olds gave more emphasis to reading and writing.
I was happy to agree with this because it seemed to me that teachers were not ready for all the problems of assessment of speaking and listening for pupils aged 14 to 16, and for the profile component to be given a 20 per cent weighting would be a considerable step forward.
To my surprise my Working Group insisted after a lively debate that we kept the weighting at 33⅓ per cent for 14 year olds.
After the Report was sent off for consultation, there was large support, particularly from the business community, for one-third weighting for assessment of speaking and listening throughout the curriculum, even for 16 year olds, and this was the final decision.
CONTROLLING THE CURRICULUM
During the period when I was preparing my Report, three groups of people were involved in manoeuvres to control the National Curriculum in English: journalists, politicians and professional teachers.
The journalists were mainly concerned to please their readers, and although there were good factual accounts in the Independent and the Times Educational Supplement there was little serious discussion of ways in which a curriculum in English affects our ideas of national identity.
Even The Times gave the kind of distorted account of our treatment of grammar which would please retired head teachers of an old-fashioned cast of mind.
Such falsities are quickly forgotten, and I was not too worried by the press response as long as the actual details of the National Curriculum remained in my control.
Conservative politicians were over-confident that they knew the right policies, and to a large extent they were contemptuous towards the professional teacher.
This contempt derives from the 1950s and 1960s, when some senior educationalists committed themselves to fashionable ideas about teaching English: that children would learn to read naturally without the help of formal instruction, or that their writing should be the product not of craft but of free expression.
By the late 1980s such excesses had been banished from the best classrooms; the teachers in my Group all acknowledged the need for a sensible balance in the class-room between the formal and the informal.
An urgent need in the 1990s is for this professionalism to gain control of all classrooms, in order for the National Curriculum in English to be properly implemented.
Assumptions
The Kingman Report proved to be of great value to my Working Group.
On 29 April 1988, when both the Kingman Report was published and the membership of my Working Group announced, the press presumed that I was to lead a Group which would make firm recommendations on grammar, in contrast to the equivocations of Kingman.
They conveniently forgot that I was a member of the Kingman Committee.
I fully endorsed the Kingman approaches to the teaching of grammar, which were not ‘equivocations’, but carefully balanced descriptions of the place of English language in the curriculum.
During the time he was chairing his Committee, Sir John and I got on well together.
The only time we sharply disagreed occurred when near the end of our deliberations I argued that we should say far more about classroom practice.
Our ‘model’ of the English language was prepared for teachers; in what ways would it be implemented in the classroom?
Sir John, perhaps rightly, thought that this was not our brief, and that the complexities of this problem would prevent us from submitting our Report on time.
As Chairman of the National Curriculum English Working Group I was given the responsibility of deciding on programmes of study for all children from 5 to 16, of putting right what I regarded as a major omission in the Kingman Report.
It was to prove a daunting task.
APPROACHES TO TEACHING ENGLISH
The problems we faced had been at the centre of passionate argument for many decades.
In the 1950s many teachers found that exercises in grammatical analysis did not help children to raise their standards in the use of English.
At primary school, children would learn definitions off by heart (‘a verb is a doing word’), without regular practice in using verbs in real communications to real audiences.
Similarly at secondary school level lessons in English language were often nothing more than pedantic exercises.
In many schools in the 1960s a revulsion against decontextualised exercises brought about a complete abandonment of the teaching of grammar.
Also many teachers of English succumbed to a  kind of vitalism, a muddled belief that children's acquisition of language skills depends not on craft and knowledge, but upon a living, spontaneous response to their reading and to their own experiences.
Self-expression, of course, is a most important element in child development, but often in the 1960s it was espoused with pseudo-religious fervour.
The Kingman Report said this about these extremes:
Widely divergent views are now held on the value of the formal elements of knowledge about language.
Many people believe that standards in our use of English would rise dramatically if we returned to the formal teaching of grammar which was normal practice in most classrooms before 1960.
Others believe that explicit teaching or learning of language structure is unnecessary.
We believe that both these extreme viewpoints are misguided.
Research evidence suggests that old-fashioned formal teaching of grammar had a negligible, or, because it replaced some instruction and practice in composition, even a harmful, effect on the development of original writing.
We do not recommend a return to that kind of grammar teaching.
It was based on a model of language derived from Latin rather than English.
However, we believe that for children not to be taught anything about language is seriously to their disadvantage.
(paragraph 2.27)
My problem was to persuade the teaching profession that this approach could generate lively teaching in the classroom.
The difficulties were described at length in the Bullock Report of 1975.
In its 609 pages, which included 333 recommendations, one of the most important concerns was the competence of both teachers and pupils in respect of their knowledge of the English language.
This Report had great influence, but many of its recommendations were never implemented.
In the words of the Kingman Report, ‘their implications have not been followed through with sufficient rigour or in detail.’
In the late 1970s, notably after the Ruskin College lecture given by Mr James Callaghan, the Prime Minister, there was growing concern about standards of pupils in their use of English.
As a result HMIs published English from 5 to 16 (1984), which proposed four aims for English teachers.
After describing the first three, involving speech, reading and writing, the fourth aim was described as being: ‘to teach pupils about language, so that they achieve a working knowledge of its structure and of the variety of ways in which meaning is made, so that they have a vocabulary for discussing it, so that they can use it with greater awareness, and because it is interesting.’
(p. 3) This aim, which seems to me an obvious piece of common sense, caused uproar among many teachers of English, who feared a return to the rote-learning of the 1950s.
Because they had been told that research shows that the teaching  of grammar restricts the imagination, imposing a strait-jacket of conventions, they did not realise that it all depends on what kind of grammar is taught and in what contexts.
The Kingman model of language was greeted with anger by some teachers who looked back nostalgically to the 1960s, but it paved the way for a more judicious approach to the teaching of English.
After Kingman there was a growing consensus that some kind of explicit knowledge about language was necessary for both teachers and pupils.
This helped my Group when we set about persuading the teaching profession, represented mainly by the National Association of Teachers of English, to accept our recommendations.
Teachers had begun to realise there was a strong case for the teaching of knowledge about language in ways very different from those that had been fashionable thirty years earlier.
Our task was to devise classroom practices which would maintain the imaginative developments of the 1960s while introducing more emphasis on craft and on the structures of language.
If we failed to get the balance right, teachers would lack the necessary motivation to implement our programmes of study.
The kind of balance we had to achieve is well summarised in the first chapter of the Kingman Report:
Nor do we see it as part of our task to plead for a return to old-fashioned grammar teaching and learning by rote.
We have been impressed by the evidence we have received that this gave an inadequate account of the English language by treating it virtually as a branch of Latin, and constructing a rigid prescriptive code rather than a dynamic description of language in use.
It was also ineffective as a means of developing a command of English in all its manifestations.
Equally, at the other extreme, we reject the belief that any notion of correct or incorrect use of language is an affront to personal liberty.
We also reject the belief that knowing how to use terminology in which to speak of language is undesirable.
Language is, as a matter of observable fact, plainly governed by a series of conventions related to the varying audiences, contexts and purposes of its use.
Successful communication depends upon a recognition and accurate use of the rules and conventions.
Command of these rules and conventions is more likely to increase the freedom of the individual than diminish it.
(paragraph 1.11)
These points are taken up again in the second chapter of Kingman, where it is argued that language ‘expresses identity, enables co-operation, and confers freedom’, and that an understanding of language is vital to children's intellectual, social, personal and aesthetic development.
OUR RATIONALE
After the fierce arguments of the previous decade it was necessary for my Group to explain its own rationale, and we did this in the second chapter of our Report.
We needed to be clear about the nature and purpose of English as a school subject.
These explanations are crucial for parents and teachers who are trying to understand the thinking which underlies the attainment targets and programmes of study; a main reason why I have written this book is to give our rationale a wider audience.
The arguments in chapter 2 of the Report have brought teachers together in a common purpose, and many old divisions have been overcome.
If we look at the range of statements about English teaching in books written before our Report we see how broad the subject is.
It includes, for example, language use, language study, literature, drama and media education; it ranges from the teaching of a skill like handwriting, through the development of the imagination and of competence in reading, writing, speaking and listening, to the academic study of the greatest literature in English.
Such broadness poses problems, both for the identity of English as a distinctive school subject, and for its relations with other subjects on the school curriculum.
Another consideration is that English can seem at first glance rather different in primary and in secondary schools.
Primary teachers normally teach English as part of an integrated curriculum, whereas in secondary schools it is more usually taught in timetabled slots by subject specialists.
This makes it doubly important to identify clear aims in order to secure continuity and progression within the English curriculum from 5 to 16.
In his Introduction to Modern Criticism and Theory (1988), a collection of major critical essays of recent years, David Lodge writes: ‘Literary criticism can no longer be taught and practised as if its methods, aims and institutional forms were innocent of theoretical assumptions and ideological implications.’
The revolution of thought which took place in France in the 1960s, with the work of Barthes, Foucault, Kristeva, Derrida and Lacan, has transformed our perception of the subject, the teaching of both language and literature, and we realise that the varieties of English teaching reflect a variety of ideological assumptions.
The Kingman Report explained:
The recent structuralist and post-structuralist revolutions in literary theory have caused people to think very energetically and critically about the relationship between the structures of language and the structures of culture.
Today many graduates in English are excited by and well-informed about these ideas.
Some of them may become teachers in schools, and may, as a result of those interests, welcome a greater emphasis on the  teaching of knowledge about language.
for the central ideas of structuralism and post-structuralism do indeed spring from the study of language as the human way of ordering experience.
(paragraph 2.25)
Kingman concluded: ‘It is not necessary to specialise in such studies to be aware that our ways of structuring sentences and thoughts, and, by extension, our ways of structuring our cultural values and beliefs, affect the whole of our individual and social lives.’
So a national curriculum in English must reflect our values and beliefs, and we need to be as explicit about these as possible.
My Group was anxious that all teachers should understand and think about the ideological assumptions implied by their approach to the teaching of English, for this is one way to overcome dogmatism.
We hoped our approach to the curriculum would be seen as enabling rather than restricting, a starting point for teachers in their discussions with their colleagues, not a strait-jacket.
From the 1950s to the 1990s radical changes in teaching styles reflect major changes in social and cultural values.
We can only protect a national curriculum from the political dogmas of either the right or the left if we understand the reasons for these changes.
We were also conscious that many English teachers are non-specialists: the Kingman Report points out that 28 per cent of teachers in secondary schools have no formal qualifications in English beyond 0-level and that they are responsible for 15 per cent of English teaching (paragraph 6.4).
Many primary teachers too are not English specialists.
Such teachers are easily swayed by forceful expression of dogmas about English teaching, and need to be aware of the false polarisation of views typical of debate in the 1960s and 1970s.
For example, people set in opposition individual and social aims, or utilitarian and imaginative aims, or language and literature, or reading for meaning and decoding, or craft and creativity in writing, and so on .
We believed that the best practice reflects a consensus rather than such extreme positions, and we did not see this as some timid compromise.
Our task would be to explain the relations between these different views within the large framework of the National Curriculum.
ENGLISH AND OTHER LANGUAGES
Passionate debate is provoked by the problems of children whose first language is not English.
We decided that all children must be able to speak and write Standard English, when appropriate (see next chapter).
But we wanted from the start to dissociate ourselves from the arrogant and ignorant belief that in some mysterious way English is superior to other languages, and that children who speak Bengali or Hindi at home should abandon these languages as soon as possible.
The Bullock  Report clearly stated in 1975: ‘No child should be expected to cast off the language and culture of the home as he (or she) crosses the school threshold…
The curriculum should reflect many elements of that part of his (or her) life which a child lives outside school’(paragraph 20.5).
A major assumption of the Cox Report is that the curriculum for all pupils should include informed discussion of the multi-cultural nature of British society, whether or not the school is culturally mixed.
It is essential that the development of competence in spoken and written Standard English is sensitive to the knowledge of other languages which many children have.
The resolution of difficult issues of language in an increasingly multi-cultural society requires informed citizens, and this may be the strongest rationale for knowledge about language in schools.
The presence of large numbers of bilingual and biliterate children in the community should be seen as an enormous resource which ought to become more, not less, important to the British economy in the next few years.
The curriculum should also have in mind education in a European context, with reference both to the position of English as an international language, and to increasing labour mobility and inter-cultural contact within the European community, especially after 1992.
It is not possible to predict what new language demands will arise.
But, whatever form they make take, language demands will almost certainly be greater than in the past; more pupils will be studying foreign languages for longer periods of time, and children's perceptions of foreign languages are likely to change.
This will affect English teaching, since English will exist in a still richer linguistic and cultural context.
All this is likely to have implications for children's knowledge about language.
Teachers should accordingly be encouraged to develop whole-school policies on language, which are sensitive to their local circumstances.
These policies should bear in mind principles such as that when children leave school they should have acquired as far as possible:
a)
a firmly based, but flexible and developing, linguistic and cultural identity,;
b)
an awareness of some of the basic properties of human languages and their role in societies;
c)
a respect for other languages and cultures, and an understanding of the increasing interaction of cultures in society;
d)
a willingness and capability to overcome communication barriers.
These principles are just as important for children in schools in country areas which are not culturally mixed as for children in the inner cities.
We are advocating a new cultural awareness for pupils in all schools from all neighbourhoods.
It is to be hoped that schools in the independent sector will recognise how vital these principles are if we are to promote true peace and co-operation in British society.
THE AIMS OF THE ENGLISH CURRICULUM
But all children, whatever their background, must be able to speak and write Standard English, when appropriate.
What are the main principles teachers and parents should hold in mind as they try to help children to develop to the full their ability to use and understand English?
First, English contributes to the personal development of the individual child because of the cognitive functions of both spoken and written language in exploratory learning and in organising and making sense of experiences.
Secondly, English contributes to preparation for the adult world: people need to be able to communicate effectively and appropriately in all the widely different social situations in which they find themselves.
In pursuit of these two complementary purposes, teachers should aim to extend the range of varieties of English in which children are competent.
From a developmental point of view this will mean adding to the local varieties used within the family and peer group those varieties used for wider communication (in school and higher education, in adult work and society); it means adding written language to spoken language, Standard English to non-Standard English, literary language to non-literary language and, for children who have a different mother tongue, it means adding English to their first language.
For example, they can do more when they can produce written language because they can write to people who are far away, or to institutions, government departments, newspapers etc.; they can keep written records; they can write down ideas in order to reflect on them and reformulate them; they can elaborate complex arguments which require written support; they can create and keep artistic artefacts — poems, plays, stories; and so on .
They can do more when they have a mastery of Standard English because they can communicate in a wider circle both socially and geographically.
A closely related objective is to develop children's understanding of the different ways in which meanings are conveyed.
A traditional concern of the English teacher has always been to develop the ways in which children interpret texts, spoken or written, literary or non-literary, and to increase children's understanding of how texts convey multiple layers of meaning and meanings expressed from different points of view.
How texts achieve their effects has been of particular significance in the teaching of literature, including drama.
Children should be able to make sense of how messages are conveyed in a variety of forms and contexts: in the heritage of literature written in English, but also in the mass media, in film and television, and in the newer technologies.
Children should be enabled to understand the codes and conventions by which meanings are represented in documentary and fictional accounts, narrative and argumentative texts, and so on.
The Kingman Report emphasised the need for such abilities when it stated: ‘A democratic society needs people who have the linguistic abilities which will enable them to discuss, evaluate and make sense of what they are told, as well as to take effective action on the basis of their understanding…
Otherwise there can be no genuine participation, but only the imposition of the ideas of those who are linguistically capable’(chapter 2, paragraph 2).
The understanding of the different ways in which meanings are conveyed is one area in which a vocabulary for the description and analysis of language is essential.
Our attainment targets and programmes of study reflect our conviction that the personal and social development of the child are inextricably linked.
Interactive spoken language is widely recognised as a powerful means of learning; it is also obviously essential in the world outside school.
Reading has essentially personal value as a source of enjoyment, as a stimulus to the imagination, as a means of gaining vicarious experience, and as an agent in language development; but it also allows warnings, instructions, information and so on to be absorbed.
Writing serves cognitive functions in enabling the child to redraft and refine thoughts and ideas, but it also serves social functions in transmitting messages in the wider world.
Both aspects of language development, the personal and the social, contribute to giving pupils power over their own lives.
In our Report we listed five different views of the purpose of teaching English.
They were not to be seen as sharply distinguishable, and certainly not mutually exclusive.
This list is of vital importance, for it gives a broad approach to the curriculum which can unite the profession.
The five views are as follows:
a)
a ‘personal growth’ view focuses on the child: it emphasises the relationship between language and learning in the individual child, and the role of literature in developing children's imaginative and aesthetic lives;
b)
a ‘cross-curricular’ view focuses on the school: it emphasises that all teachers (of English and of other subjects) have a responsibility to help children with the language demands of different subjects on the school curriculum: otherwise areas of the curriculum may be closed to them.
In England, English is different from other school subjects, in that it is both a subject and a medium of instruction for other subjects;
c)
an ‘adult needs’ view focuses on communication outside the school: it emphasises the responsibility of English teachers to prepare children for the language demands of adult life, including the workplace, in a fast-changing world.
Children need to learn to deal with the day-to-day demands of spoken language and of print; they also need to be able to write clearly, appropriately and effectively;
d)
a ‘cultural heritage’ view emphasises the responsibility of schools to lead children to an appreciation of those works of literature that have been widely regarded as amongst the finest in the language;
e)
a ‘cultural analysis’ view emphasises the role of English in helping children towards a critical understanding of the world and cultural environment in which they live.
Children should know about the processes by which meanings are conveyed, and about the ways in which print and other media carry values.
Some of these views look inwards: either in the sense of developing the individual child or in the sense of developing English as a separate school subject.
Other views look outwards: they are concerned with helping the child with the needs of language elsewhere in the curriculum, or in the outside world of work.
Alternatively, they are concerned with passing on the culture from one generation to the next, and with critically understanding what that culture consists of.
Another distinction is that some of the approaches concern essentially the children's developing use of language, whereas others concern the knowledge about language and literature required of an informed and educated citizen in a democratic society.
Teachers of English will differ in the weight they give to each of these views of the subject.
Indeed, some  differentiation will derive directly from the stage children have reached at school: for example, the ‘adult needs’ view is more relevant to the later years of compulsory schooling than to the primary years.
Some aspects of ‘cultural analysis’ are also more relevant to older children.
However, aspects of media education are important for children in the primary phase too, because these children can be influenced by the conventions and assumptions of mass media, and should learn to recognise this.
In my talks to teachers I often repeat these five views.
They acknowledge the utilitarian functions of English teaching, and yet place these in a wider cultural and imaginative framework.
When we were discussing these issues in our Working Group the teachers often reminded me that we were not preparing a thesis for university dons.
Mr Baker was not entirely wrong in wanting a simple, forceful document for parents, though he failed to understand that some difficult issues — the teaching of grammar or Standard English, for example— need careful and detailed explanation.
In our first Report on the primary stages we included an early chapter which tried to summarise our views with simple eloquence.
As an epigraph to this chapter we included a quotation from the Plowden Report of 1967 (Children and their Primary Schools — the Report of the Central Advisory Council for England ): ‘At the heart of the educational process lies the child.
No advances in policy, no acquisitions of new equipment have their desired  effect unless they are in harmony with the nature of the child.’
The inclusion of this quotation attracted considerable good will.
Before the Report was published teachers were prey to the wildest fantasies about its contents — we would insist on rote-learning, daily exercises in grammar, no more creative writing.
When they discovered this famous Plowden sentence about the importance of the child at the top of this chapter, they welcomed it with a great sigh of relief.
GOOD TEACHING PRACTICE
We also included a statement from a 1988 publication of the National Association of Advisers in English,English, Whose English ?, by David Allen.
This repeated general principles well known to a (l good teachers, but I wanted them in the Report so there could be no doubt about the kind of teaching we admired.
I feared that many readers, prejudiced by the supposed right-wing commitment of the Group, would misread the Report, and take for granted that we were opposed to all the innovations of recent years.
Our recommendations on the teaching of knowledge about language had to be accompanied by an insistence that our policies did not necessitate any change in good teaching practice.
David Allen lists the following characteristics of successful teaching and learning in language:
a)
a very high expectation of success for the learner;
b)
an ‘apprenticeship’ approach to acquiring written and oral language, in which the adult represents the ‘success’the child seeks and yet offers endless help;
c)
maximum encouragement and support whilst errors are mastered;
d)
motivation for the learner to make sense of and acquire control over language and the power it can have;
e)
a constant respect for the child's language.
Allen continues by defining the needs of learner and teacher:
the learner needs,
expectation of success,
the confidence to take risks and make mistakes,
the willingness to share and to engage,
the confidence to ask for help,
an acceptance of the need to readjust,
and the teacher needs,
respect for and interest in the learner's language, thought and intentions,
the ability to recognise growth points, strengths and potential,
the appreciation that mistakes are necessary to learning,
the confidence to maintain breadth, richness and variety, and to match these to the learner's interests and direction (i.e. to stimulate and challenge),
a sensitive awareness of when to intervene and when to leave alone.
We argued that such statements reflect the growing consensus nationally about what constitutes good practice in the teaching of English.
Recent initiatives such as the National Writing Project and the National Oracy Project have done much to foster such developments and to disseminate good practice.
At the same time the emergence of GCSE English has come to mean more than mere changes of emphasis at the upper end of secondary schools.
Increasingly we are seeing the influence of the positive developments and changes brought about by GCSE on work done in the earlier secondary years.
We tried to identify the main features of current best practice in English by describing classrooms where, individually and collaboratively, pupils are seen:
a)
using language to make, receive and communicate meaning, in purposeful contexts;
b)
employing a variety of forms with a clear awareness of audience;
c)
working on tasks which they have chosen and which they direct for themselves;
d)
working with teachers who are themselves involved in the processes — albeit with special expertise — as talkers, listeners, readers and writers;
e)
reading literature for enjoyment, responding to it critically and using that reading for learning.
We concluded this short chapter (chapter 3 in the final Report) by summarising the best teaching practice for our three profile components: speaking and listening, reading and writing.
Primary schools must respect children's talk, as pupils put into words their thoughts and feelings, explore new ideas and deepen understanding.
This process continues in secondary school, where oral communication remains an essential part in the learning process across the whole curriculum.
Reading for pleasure is an essential part of a child's development of language skills.
Children should be encouraged to behave like real writers, suiting their written work to audience and purpose.
These ideas, familiar to all good teachers of English, are so important they bear constant repetition.
Teaching Standard English
Many highly educated people, including a substantial number of teachers, do not understand the difference between Received Pronunciation (RP) and Standard English.
This ignorance among the general public is one good reason for including knowledge about language in the English curriculum.
It is also true that many older people, who were trained rigorously in the disciplines of study fashionable before 1960, think that they know a great deal about language, but in fact imbibed many false notions from their schooling.
I provide a notable example in my next chapter on grammar and linguistic terminology.
I was told that one reason why many Conservative politicians were sympathetic towards our Report was because they did not at first realise that our insistence that all children should speak and write Standard English did not involve any recommendation about RP.
RECEIVED PRONUNCIATION
Received Pronunciation is the accent, used by a minority of speakers in Britain, that developed in the nineteenth century in the public schools and universities, and was associated in the 1930s and 1940s with BBC newsreaders.
The Kingman Report explained that although this accent must be the standard for foreign students of English in Britain, it is not used as the model of English pronunciation in British schools, since speakers may be rightly proud of their regional pronunciation, which identifies where they come from.
The Kingman Report recommended that all children at the age of 16 should speak in Standard English, ‘using their own accents (provided that these accents do not impair comprehension by other speakers of English)’(chapter 5, p. 52).
As we all know, there is still great prejudice among speakers of RP against other accents such as Cockney, and in England the correct accent is a mark of social acceptability.
The English curriculum ought to help to overcome such snobbery by encouraging children to discuss their accents and to be proud of regional differences, but the task of overcoming arrogance about accents is formidable.
As John Honey shows in his Does Accent Matter?(1989) Received Pronunciation itself is gradually changing, and there are marked differences between what is socially acceptable in 1991 and the fashionable accents of the 1930s.
All these considerations persuaded my Group to follow Kingman, and to argue forcibly, in a passage we underlined, that although children should speak Standard English, we ‘do not, however, see it as the school's place to enforce the accent known as Received Pronunciation,.
STANDARD ENGLISH AND DIALECT
Standard English caused us enormous problems.
When I submitted our first Report to Mr Baker he asked me how he should explain what was meant by Standard English to the education journalists.
It was not an easy question to answer.
This first Report was read by Professor Brian Griffiths, whose duty as Prime Minister's adviser was to present it to Mrs Thatcher with his comments.
He protested that we had made no recommendation that children should use Standard English.
I read to him sentences from the Report such as: ‘Schools have the clear responsibility to ensure that all children have full access to Standard English, given its role as an international language used throughout the world and essential for many purposes.’
He reread the appropriate chapter, and acknowledged that I was right.
This incident made me realise that our careful descriptions of the relationship between dialect and Standard English might be misread, and so in the final Report I insisted that we should reiterate many times that all pupils should learn, and if necessary be explicitly taught, Standard English.
Unfortunately I had shut the stable door after the horse had fled.
After our first Report the tabloid journalists enjoyed themselves by writing provocative articles about how I was the professor for whom correct English did not matter.
The journalists found especially useful a passage about Standard English where we explained that dialects obey their own grammatical rules.
We said that non-standard forms are rarely more than a social irritant to some people, and that there are few situations where such forms could cause real communication problems.
They include a small set such as: ‘we was; he ain't done it; she come here yesterday; they never saw nobody; he writes really quick; theirselves etc.’
These examples gave the journalists the story for which they were looking, and they used them in headlines to show that our Report was against the teaching of grammar and ‘correct’ English, and that we favoured a policy of ‘anything goes’.
At a conference at Oxford in December 1989, Professor Randolph Quirk, the famous linguist, attacked me fiercely for including material like this, which could be easily misrepresented by the press.
After the furore which greeted our first Report I felt — perhaps pusillanimously — that we should excise this  explanatory passage.
Professor Michael Stubbs felt strongly that it should be retained, partly because journalists would draw attention to its omission, and partly because our readers needed to understand the truth about dialects.
A majority of the Group agreed with Professor Stubbs, and so we retained the examples, though with additional explanatory material.
On Professor Stubbs's behalf it can be said that the Report reflects a total view of society, of co-operation and tolerance between cultural and social groups, and that to achieve this aim all teachers and pupils need to understand clearly why contempt for other people's dialects is wrong.
After our Report was published we were criticised by both left-wing and right-wing educationalists.
The left argued that children who speak dialect at home could not be expected to speak Standard English, which they regarded as middle class, and that it was improper to make this an essential attainment target in a national curriculum.
The right thought we were too soft on primary school children, who should be expected to speak and write Standard English as soon as they arrive in the classroom.
In the rest of this chapter I will explain our thinking as clearly as I can, for there has been much misunderstanding.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF STANDARD ENGLISH
The Kingman Report explains that Standard English
developed from one of the Middle English dialects (East Midlands — the dialect first printed by Caxton) to become the written form used by all writers of English, no matter which dialect area they came from.
It is the fact of being the written form which establishes it as the standard.
And it is the fact of being the written form which means that it is used not only in Britain but by all writers of English throughout the world, with remarkably little variation.
Since it holds this important role in the written form, it is also used to communicate across local areas and between regions in a spoken form.
(paragraphs 2.32 and 2.34)
As we have seen, this spoken form may be in a variety of accents, from Devon to East Anglia, from the United States to Australia.
Speakers of Standard English in different parts of the British Isles and elsewhere in the world may use the same grammar and vocabulary, but different pronunciation.
For example, many speakers from the United States, Scotland or south-west England pronounce the r sound after the vowel in words such as car and farm ; most speakers in south-east England do not.
Accent refers to pronunciation.
Dialect refers to vocabulary and grammar.
Most people know some dialect words: for example,bairn for child in Scottish English.
And dialects differ in their grammar: for example, Standard English has I was, you were, he was, we were, they were .
Many non-standard dialects have (more regularly, as it happens)I was, you was, he was, we was, they was .
Standard English itself is usually analysed by linguists as a dialect of English which clearly has social prestige.
This is partly because of the purposes which it now serves; it is the expected language in the education system, in other social institutions (such as the courts and business) and in almost all published writing, and it has also spread far beyond its historical base in Britain and is used as an international language in many parts of the world.
Non-standard dialects of English are regional dialects: that is, they are relatively restricted in their geographical spread.
Standard English used to be restricted in this way: if we look at Standard English as an historical dialect, then we find that 200 years ago it had a much smaller number of speakers in England, and had nothing like the geographical spread it has nowadays.
Standard English is also a social dialect: its use is a marker of social group membership, and the relationship between standard and non-standard dialects and social class in Britain is particularly strong.
Because of its long use, especially in writing for academic and administrative purposes, the vocabulary and to some extent the sentence syntax of Standard English have been greatly elaborated.
Non-standard dialects have the potential to be so developed, but for social and historical reasons they have not been.
The words ‘greatly elaborated’ are of considerable significance.
Linguists do not like to say that Standard English is ‘superior’ to other dialects, because all dialects have their own richness, their own specific identity.
And left-wing educationalists do not like to say that the Standard English spoken by the middle classes is superior to working-class speech.
But Standard English serves particular functions: for example, in the education system and in professional life, in public and formal uses, in writing and particularly in print.
It is precisely because Standard English serves as a wider language of wider communication for such an extensive and important range of purposes that children must learn to use it competently.
In an article on the Cox Report published in Critical Quarterly (Winter 1990), Gillian Brown writes:
Standard English today differs from local dialects not only in permitting the expression of complex relationships in familiar written forms, but also in the astonishing wealth of vocabulary which has accrued to it through its intellectual and imperial history.
Dialects, we should remember, are essentially local to particular parts of a particular country, and specialized for talking about local and domestic life….
Many would argue that learning a school subject — geography, chemistry or English literature — entails learning the language in which that subject is expressed.
Since subjects learnt at school have been  codified and developed through written texts, and written texts are written in Standard English, it follows that children, to have any hope of mastering these subjects, must learn to read and write Standard English.
(pp. 35–36)
If pupils do not have access to Standard English then many important opportunities are closed to them, in cultural activities, in further and higher education, and in industry, commerce and the professions.
Those educationalists who deny children these opportunities are confining them to the ghetto, to a restricted discourse which will close to them access not only to the professions but also to leadership in national politics.
In our democracy, Standard English confers power on its users, power to explain political issues and to persuade on a national and international stage.
This right should not be denied to any child.
Standard English should not be regarded as fixed.
It changes over time, just as any language does: no one nowadays speaks in the same way as the contemporaries of Chaucer or Shakespeare or even Dickens.
Moreover, it varies according to style, purpose and audience: no one speaks or writes in the same way on all occasions.
Nor should Standard English be confused with ‘good’ English.
Speakers of Standard English can use English just as ‘badly’ as anyone else: they can write unclear prose, use words ambiguously, and so on.
Standard English and non-standard dialects have much in common.
Where there are differences, it is important to understand that dialect forms are grammatical and rule-governed in non-standard dialects, but the rules are different from those of Standard English.
For example, Standard English does not distinguish between do as a main verb and as an auxiliary verb:He did it, did he ?
Many non-standard dialects do make this distinction, which is not available in Standard English:He done it, did he ?
The non-standard dialect is not a haphazard variant, since no speakers of non-standard dialects would say He done it, done he ?
Or He did it, done he ?
Much more difficult problems of definition arise with creole varieties of English, including creoles of Caribbean origin.
These language varieties are known by various names, such as West Indian Creole, Black British English and Patois.
The main points are:
such language varieties are not random and simplified deviations from Standard English: they are highly complex and rule-governed varieties of English;
their linguistic variation is typically greater than with other dialects of English.
Speakers' use of creole varieties lie along a continuum, from varieties of creole which may well be incomprehensible to a speaker of Standard English, to varieties much closer to Standard English;
the term ‘dialects of English’ is itself problematic.
Whether  creole varieties are termed ‘dialects of’ English or are regarded as languages in their own right is a Political and ideological question, which concerns the social identity of groups of speakers.
It is not a matter which has a simple linguistic definition.
Given this variation in language forms and use, the danger may be that teachers do not realise the extent of the variation, or that they regard the creole language forms as haphazard.
They may therefore not realise those cases where there is genuine dialect interference between the pupil's home language and the language expected in the school.
OUR RATIONALE
All pupils, therefore, must be able by the age of 16 to use spoken and written Standard English; but schools have the responsibility to develop their own policies on the detail of how this should be done.
Across England and Wales, schools differ greatly in their linguistic profiles.
In some schools, most pupils use spoken Standard English as their native dialect; in others, most have to learn it as an additional language.
Therefore it was not possible for my Working Group to prescribe a single policy which would suit all circumstances.
We did, however, attempt to outline the principles which should inform school policies on the teaching of Standard English.
A coherent school policy on Standard English can be based on the different views of the main aims of English teaching which I listed in the previous chapter.:
a)
a personal growth view;
b)
a cross-curricular view;
c)
an adult needs view;
d)
a cultural heritage view;
e)
a cultural analysis view.
The first view is related to the need for the pupil's own native language or dialect to be respected: Standard English has to be treated very sensitively in schools, since dialect is so closely related to pupils' individual identity.
The second and third views emphasise the importance of using Standard English for wider communication, inside and outside school.
The fourth and fifth views relate to the fact that Standard English is a topic which pupils should reflect on, understand and analyse.
A coherent school policy on Standard English is possible if it is recognised that all these views are legitimate.
To be effective in their teaching of Standard English, schools should teach it in ways which do not denigrate the non-standard dialects spoken by many pupils.
It should not be introduced at too early a stage; teaching pupils a new dialect may be confusing when they are learning many other aspects of language use.
The profound  implications for pupils' relationships with their families and communities should be recognised.
There is considerable debate over when to expect pupils to use Standard English in writing.
Schools should develop their own coherent policies, which are sensitive to their local circumstances, on exactly how and when Standard English should be taught.
In general terms, we advocated that there should be explicit teaching about the nature and functions of Standard English in the top years of the primary school; that there should be the beginnings of the expectation of Standard English in written work when appropriate by the age of 11; that there should be the provision of opportunities for oral work where spoken Standard English would be a realistic expectation in the secondary school; and that all pupils should be in a position to choose to use Standard English in speech when appropriate by the age of 16.
The teaching of Standard English should be related to the teaching of public, formal, written varieties of English.
A main focus should be on the differences between written and spoken English.
For example, written language typically has to express things more explicitly, because it has to stand on its own.
If the teaching concentrates on the relationship between language forms and use, then it need not reject the language of the home.
These written forms must, in any case, be taught even to those children whose native dialect is Standard English, since spoken and written Standard English differ considerably in some respects.
No one uses written Standard English as his or her native dialect.
This is consistent with a general policy of widening the linguistic repertoire of pupils.
It does assume, however, that teachers themselves have an accurate understanding of the differences between written Standard English, spoken Standard English and spoken local varieties of English.
The uses of Standard English should be discussed explicitly with pupils.
This has considerable implications for knowledge about language.
Pupils need to be able to discuss the contexts in which Standard English is obligatory and those where its use is preferable for social reasons.
By and large, the pressures in favour of Standard English will be greater when the language is written, formal and public.
Non-standard forms may be much more widely tolerated — and, in some cases, preferred — when the language is spoken, informal and private.
Standard English should form an important part of the teaching of knowledge about language: its historical, geographical and social distribution and the uses to which it is put (in different countries, in different areas of society, in print and in the mass media, etc.).
Teachers should encourage an interest in both rural (traditional) and urban dialects of English, by contrasting local non-standard dialects with Standard English, often using pupils as the linguistic experts on the former.
The grammar of both should be discussed and contrasted.
Non-standard usages should be treated as objects of interest and value, and  not ridiculed.
Sometimes, with older pupils, it will be possible to discover the antecedents of a regional form in historical usage.
For pupils who do not have Standard English as their native dialect, teaching Standard English should draw on their knowledge of other dialects or languages.
The aim is to add Standard English to the repertoire, not to replace other dialects or languages.
It should also be recognised that non-standard forms are systematic and not haphazard.
Teachers should differentiate clearly between different kinds of correction, and avoid indiscriminate correction.
It can only be confusing to a pupil if features of dialect are ‘corrected’ at the same time and in the same way as, for example, spelling errors.
The latter may be due to carelessness, or to a principle which has not been grasped.
But dialect features are not errors in this sense at all, but are characteristics of a pupil's native language.
It is advisable to concentrate on (a) frequently occurring non-standard forms and (b) highly stigmatised forms.
These will include forms of the verb to be , past tenses of a few highly frequent irregular verbs (e.g. do,see ), personal pronouns and negatives.
CONCLUSION
To sum up, teachers need to remember that:
all languages and dialects change over time;
spoken and written language differ significantly.
Standard English varies stylistically according to audience, purpose and situation.
The aim is the competent use of Standard English.
This aim is best attained by helping pupils to understand fully the linguistic and social nature of Standard English.
Pupils need to be able to produce spoken Standard English if they are to have access to many public areas of life.
However, although correcting written English is relatively unproblematic, the alteration of spoken English is more difficult.
Several of the principles which apply to written Standard English, such as the clear expression of meaning, apply equally to spoken English.
But the main problem is that it is far more difficult to teach a new spoken dialect because so many aspects of spoken production are automatic and below the level of conscious control.
It is therefore important to set out some principles for the learning process:
there is little point in correcting the spoken language of pupils in any general way and as part of their routine language use because it is unlikely to have a beneficial effect: against the pressure of home and the peer group, teachers can have little hope of changing how pupils speak.
Moreover, criticism of pupils' spoken language will be interpreted as criticism of their families and friends;
if teachers concentrate on pupils' competence in written  Standard English, pupils will gain sufficient knowledge of Standard English to be able to convert this into competence in spoken Standard English when appropriate.
Research shows that secondary pupils do use fewer non-standard forms in talk with the teacher than they do in the playground;
it is helpful to set up situations in which it is natural to use Standard English.
Role-play may often be appropriate: in drama, or in media work (for example in producing news programmes), but also in class panel discussions, debates, etc.
Standard English is the language of wider communications.
It is therefore desirable to enable pupils to widen the circle of their audience: small groups within the classroom, larger groups in the class or in the school, and, for more public presentation of ideas, with pupils from other schools or with adult strangers.
Pupils should be able to take the roles in which spoken Standard English is conventional: radio presenter, interviewer, expert in front of lay audience, etc.;,
if people need to learn a language for some real purpose, then they learn it.
Furthermore, the desire to join a group is often very strong indeed.
If pupils are motivated to learn to use spoken Standard English because they wish to adopt a social role, they will learn it if they are given the appropriate educational experiences and opportunities.
As we have seen, teaching Standard English demands great sensitivity from the teacher.
It is dangerous to tell a 5 year old boy or girl that his or her mother uses language incorrectly.
Adolescents are going to be embarrassed and ashamed if a teacher suggests that their dialect, which is part of their identity, must be radically changed.
How to teach spoken Standard English needs continual discussion among teachers.
I would not want anyone to think we had provided the final word.
Grammar in the Classroom
Grammar, perfectly understood, enables us, not only to express our meaning fully and clearly, but so to express it as to defy the ingenuity of man to give to our words any other meaning than that which we ourselves intend them to express.
(William Cobbett,A Grammar of the English Language , 1818)
My Group faced great difficulties when we tried to formulate our recommendations for the teaching of grammar.
As I have already explained, the word attracts conflicting prejudices.
If we said we were in favour of the teaching of grammar, some teachers would think we were advocating a return to old-fashioned exercises in parsing and clause analysis.
On the other hand, for right-wing pressure groups the word had become a shibboleth: if only ‘grammar’ was taught in a formal manner, standards in the writing of English would improve dramatically.
Speaking on Radio 4 in November 1985, Norman Tebbit, later to become Chairman of the Conservative Party, claimed that the decline in the teaching of grammar had led directly to the rise in football hooliganism.
Correct grammar was seen by him as part of the structures of authority (such as respect for elders, for standards of cleanliness, for discipline in schools) which in recent decades had fallen into decline.
In our first Report we tried as far as possible to avoid the word ‘grammar’, and to explain how important it was for children to use linguistic terminology.
But this ruse failed, for the education journalists were not interested in the nice distinctions I offered them when they interviewed me on the phone.
We ended up with a rash of headlines, some announcing that we were in favour of the teaching of grammar, some that we were against.
The journalists who worked for the popular newspapers were only concerned to please their readers, and the truth was irrelevant.
THE MEANING OF ‘GRAMMAR'
In our final Report we defined carefully and at length what we meant by ‘grammar’ and by knowledge about language, and what kinds of programmes of study we thought appropriate.
We said that secondary school pupils might themselves begin to discuss explicitly the different meanings of ‘grammar’, and become conversant with the controversies  aroused by this word.
In everyday usage, for example, in the conversation of people such as Mr Baker, Mr Tebbit and the journalists, ‘grammar’ is associated with the correct use of the standard language.
But linguists use the term very differently.
They use it, first, to refer to ways in which words are combined to make sentences (in any dialect), and second, to label the body of statements they write about the language as they attempt to make explicit the implicit knowledge possessed by all native speakers of English.
Linguists distinguish between prescriptive and descriptive views of language, and teachers need to understand when they need to insist on rules, to prescribe, and when it is more appropriate to describe the differences between dialects and Standard English, or between spoken and written usage.
Prescriptivism is, in essence, the view that it is possible to lay down rules for the correct use of language.
There are two problems with the way this view can be implemented.
The first is that sometimes the rules do not relate to the actual language use of native speakers.
(An example is the suggestion that It is I is the only correct form whereas, in fact, most educated speakers of English generally say It's me .)
The second is that the rules may be those that apply to formal, written language but they may then be prescribed for all circumstances.
Descriptivism is the name given to the view that the way people actually use language should be accurately described, without prescription of how they ought to use it.
Careful descriptions of speech are necessary because people's beliefs about their actual linguistic behaviour are often very inaccurate; many people think they speak in the same way as they write but, in fact, no one does.
Soon after our Report was published, Mr Baker took part in a radio discussion.
A letter appeared in the Independent pointing out that he made a number of grammatical errors.
But the conventions of speech are very different from those appropriate for writing.
In a conversation we can explore meanings, often changing tense as our thought jumps from idea to idea, and we can enforce our reasoning with gesture and facial expression.
In lively talk with friends we all continually break the rules appropriate for the written form, and Mr Baker on the radio was no exception.
Both prescriptive and descriptive linguisticians are sometimes parodied.
Prescriptivists are seen as blind adherents to outdated norms of formal usage.
Descriptivists are seen as advocating ‘anything goes’, and as condemning all forms of linguistic correction.
We must recognise that we need both accurate descriptions of language that are related to situation, purpose and mode (i.e. whether the language is spoken or written), and prescriptions that take account of context, appropriateness and the expression of meaning.
Because we know that the rules keep changing slightly during the course of time, it does not follow that there should be no rules.
If we are to communicate clearly and precisely with each other over a wide geographical and social range, we must  obey the rules of Standard English as they are current at the time we are speaking or writing.
Many people still believe that English grammar is a fixed form, stable and unchanging, which obeys logical rules.
An example of such mistaken ideas appeared in the Evening Standard in a scathing review of our Report written by John Rae, ex-head of Westminster School.
That a man so well known in educational circles should be so ill-informed demonstrates the problems we had in helping our readers to understand our proposals.
He wrote:
I thought it was correct to write we were and incorrect to write we was.
I did not realise it was just a question of dialect; I thought it was a question of grammar or, if you do not like that word, of logic.
You cannot use a singular form of the verb with a plural pronoun. (17 November 1988)
His appeal to logic is mistaken:you were is both singular and plural in Standard English.
Logic, however, is a feature not of the grammar of a language or dialect, but of arguments in sentences and in texts.
It is people in their use of language who are logical or illogical, not languages or dialects themselves.
Similarly, references to accuracy, precision, clarity or lack of ambiguity cannot be conflated with grammar .
There is no ambiguity about the meaning of we was .
There are, however, other features of grammar (ways of relating clauses in complex sentences, for example) which pupils do have difficulty with and which affect the logic and clarity of written and spoken language.
Accuracy, clarity and precision are obviously important, and we need to identify correctly those parts of the grammar of English which are relevant to constructing accurate, clear and precise arguments.
When grammar teaching fell into decline much of value was lost: a certain analytic competence, and with it the valuable ability to talk and write explicitly about linguistic patterns, relations and organisation.
The reintroduction of the teaching of grammar does not mean that teachers need to neglect the subjective, creative, personal and expressive, for our ability to express ourselves depends on craft, and craft involves understanding of the forms of language.
Most successful creative writers take this for granted.
Some form of analysis (which may be more or less explicit) is necessarily a part of the interpretation of texts, of understanding how a poet or novelist achieves his or her effects, and consequently must figure in the production of accurate writing.
For grammar to be of relevance to English teaching, it should be:
a)
a form which can describe language in use;
b)
relevant to all levels from the syntax of sentences through to the organisation of substantial texts;
c)
able to describe the considerable differences between written and spoken English;
d)
part of a wider syllabus of language study (this is outlined in chapter 5).
The ways in which meaning is expressed must always be central to any language study; how language uses grammatical patterns to create both predictable and new meanings.
Everyone has an implicit knowledge of the grammar of his or her native language(s).
The problem for the teacher is how and in what contexts it should be made explicit to pupils.
HOW TO TEACH GRAMMAR
On my visits to schools as a member of the Kingman Committee, I discovered that often the English department's description of its syllabus would explicitly state that children should not be taught the definition of grammatical terms.
But in the classroom teachers constantly used technical terms such as noun, verb, adjective, metaphor, simile, paragraph and sentence, and took for granted that children would know what they meant.
I also saw many examples of good practice where a teacher introduced children to terminology to discuss their own writings.
At a primary school a class of 5 and 6 year olds was making entries in a folder entitled ‘My own sentences’.
The teacher had discussed a topic with the children, and then encouraged them to write down sentences constructed from words used in their own speech.
The teacher had helped them with the capital letter to begin the sentence and the full stop at the end.
She had not made them learn a definition of a sentence, which would be entirely inappropriate for this age group, nor did she ask them to complete meaningless exercises.
The children were being encouraged to learn about sentences by using them in real contexts.
Professor Stubbs provided a much lengthier example of class-room discussion to illustrate good practice in the teaching of linguistic terminology.
The civil servants (not often wrong, but this time they gave bad advice) wanted to remove this long example from the body of the Report, and relegate it to an appendix, or, better still, cut it out completely.
I was determined to give it maximum prominence.
Our task was to persuade teachers that classroom discussion of linguistic terms could be stimulating and creative, even if a long account of children's talk looked a little strange in an official Report directed to the Secretary of State.
The extracts are from transcripts of an audio-recorded classroom discussion with five first-year juniors, in a north London primary school.
K is the teacher; L is another teacher, but not the regular class  teacher; A, B, H, N and p are the children.
The comments after each extract are the teacher's own.
The extracts illustrate several things:
children's natural instinct to play with language and their metalinguistic awareness;
the teacher's role in developing such awareness;
the large number of terms which can arise in such discussions:palindrome, word, spell, sentence, name, alphabetical order, story, rule, vowel, letter, rhyme, dot/full stop .
OUR RATIONALE
Teachers of all subjects require technical terms for important concepts.
English teachers require technical terms to be able to make conceptual distinctions which are important to their subject.
It would be inefficient and uneconomical to avoid such terminology when it can be used to crystallise a concept.
Words are aids to thinking, tools for learning: they can consolidate implicit awareness.
This is a cognitive rationale for using linguistic terms.
In addition, our use of our mother tongue is often so automatic and habitual, and so much a part of our individual and social identity, that help is needed to stand back and reflect on aspects of language with some degree of objectivity.
It also points to a social rationale: this reflective stance, helped by the use of appropriate terms, can encourage a tolerance of linguistic diversity through the recognition that all languages are rule-governed and systematic.
Linguistic terms are required in order to allow teachers and pupils to discuss children's own written and spoken work, language diversity and aspects of literature.
Many terms have traditionally been used in literary criticism.
To illustrate good practice we also included a passage from Jerome Bruner's The Relevance of Education (1974).
We quoted this to show that Bruner, the doyen of discovery learning, thought the teaching of grammar an essential part of the learning process.
Bruner starts by leading children to discover what is in their own heads, and describes a lesson on sentence structure.
This involved writing a sentence on the board, and getting the children to form similar sentences.
Usually, he says, the children use their intuitive knowledge of the language to form sentences with the same structure.
It is then possible to ask how different combinations of the words are possible, such as:
Other questions can also be introduced: how is it possible to go on forming such sentences for ever?
What columns are emerging in the sentences?
Can other columns be added?
Bruner writes:
[The children]talked about the family of words which would fit [in the various columns]…
Only then did we introduce  some terminology.
We talked about type and order …
We were soon building up the idea of productivity…
Once the children break into an idea in language, once they get a sense of a distinction, they quickly ‘turn around’ on their own usage and make remarkable strides towards linguistic understanding.
The only point I would make is that you must wait until they are willing reflectively to turn around before you start operating with the abstractions.
Terms are needed to allow teachers and pupils to discuss many aspects of language.
But it is important that the terms are introduced as they are needed, in order to focus attention on important distinctions or similarities.
Their meaning will be apparent because they relate to an immediate context.
They should be introduced to initiate linguistic understanding, serving as a focus for wider discussion, when the teacher judges that an intervention to make something explicit will help the pupil.
Indeed they must be introduced on occasions, if discussion is not to remain unformed, vague and inexplicit.
However, terms should not be introduced through drills.
In a typical situation, a teacher might introduce terms such as paragraph, sentence, topic sentence, phrase, cohesion or reference , if a pupil is having difficulty with some aspects of the textual organisation of his or her writing.
Terms such as accent, Received Pronunciation, dialect, slang or style might be introduced to make more precise distinctions which are required for an understanding of linguistic diversity.
Although the old grammatical drills and exercises do not seem to have raised standards of composition, it appears that new ways of teaching language can be of help.
Performance does seem to be helped by the systematic discussion of language in use: e.g. the match between language, situation and purpose; and elements larger than individual sentences.
These aspects of language performance are more under conscious control than are aspects of sentence structure and morphology.
The same arguments apply to children's spoken language.
Again, it seems to help performance to reflect consciously about the higher levels of linguistic organisation — how spoken language can be organised to suit audience, topic and purpose.
In addition, quite apart from the debate over the relation between grammar teaching and writing development, there are several other valid justifications for teaching explicitly about language.
The simplest one is that the world would be a better place if people were better able to talk coherently about the many language problems which arise in contemporary society.
Language is an essential part of our cultural environment, and the diffusion of coherent knowledge about language is an important aim of the English curriculum.
CURRICULUM CONTENT AND TEACHING SEQUENCE
The Kingman Report (chapter 3 and appendix 8) presents a model of language in four parts:
forms;
communication;
comprehension;
acquisition; variation.
These are logical components of the model.
There is no priority amongst them: all four parts are necessary.
And there is no implication that children start by learning about language forms, and then eventually progress to learning about, say, dialects.
Nevertheless, these implications have been taken by many readers, who feared a return to learning definitions off by heart.
For the purpose of formulating a curriculum, it is more helpful to present things in the following order:
a)
starting from statements about what it is important for children to know about language: e.g. its uses in literature, language variation, bilingualism, language change, ambiguities and problems in communication, the writing system, etc.;
b)
then showing that some terminology is required to discuss such things: terms are taught in context for a purpose.
Two problems are thus solved at once: it becomes clear that terminology does not refer only to grammar, and the reasons for the terminology come before the terminology itself.
Terms are used as a way of encouraging active thinking about language and its uses.
When talking about grammar, many people tend to limit discussion to parts of speech and to simple structures at sentence level.
When talking about terminology there is a tendency to focus on terms such as noun, verb , etc., and on isolated features of surface structure (punctuation, the apostrophe, spelling of individual words, etc.).
Terms for grammatical surface structure are certainly necessary.
However, as the Kingman Report makes clear, the structure of language means not only grammar (in the sense of sentence syntax) but also phonology, graphology, vocabulary and discourse organisation, and terms are needed for:.
the sounds of English (pronunciation or accent);
the spelling and writing system of English;
the grammar of English (i.e. sentence syntax);
the semantic relations between words in English vocabulary as a whole and in texts;
the textual or discourse structure of English.
In addition to all this, terms are also needed to discuss the functions and varieties of language.
The above points refer to English; but the grammar of different languages requires different terms.
This is precisely why a Latinate grammar cannot simply be transferred to English.
This is not necessarily a central problem, but the Kingman Report does recommend that pupils should understand something of the systematic nature of languages other than English.
It is essential to avoid discussing one language variety in terms appropriate only to another.
It is, however, unfortunately very common for people to discuss spoken language as though it was a deviation from written English, and to discuss non-standard varieties of English as deviations from Standard English.
We did not specify lists of terms and concepts which should be taught.
This could have a very restricting effect on teaching and assessment.
It is the responsibility of teachers themselves to decide on and introduce terms as they become necessary at different stages in teaching.
However, we stressed that the set of terms should not be restricted to those for parts of speech.
Terms should be introduced, as appropriate, to allow teachers and pupils to discuss the topics set out below.
Some will be needed from the early years of the primary school (e.g. letter, full stop, sentence , etc.); others are not likely to be introduced before the secondary school (e.g. presupposition, genre, creole , etc.).
Topics which should be discussed, and examples of terms likely to be necessary, are as follows:
the sounds of English:pronunciation, accent, consonant, vowel, syllable, elision, assimilation, intonation, stress, rhythm , etc.;
the spelling and writing system of English:letter, capital letter, alphabet, punctuation, full stop, question mark, exclamation mark, quotation (speech) marks, apostrophe , etc.;
words:loan word, prefix, word ending, word structure, Latinate word, pun, lexical and grammatical words , etc.;,
the sentence grammar of English:adjective, adverb, noun, proper noun, verb, main verb, auxiliary verb, preposition, conjunction , etc.,singular, plural, possessive, tense , etc.,negative, comparative, superlative , etc.,subject, object , etc.;
the semantic relations in the vocabulary of English:ambiguity, appropriateness, collocation, synonymy, antonymy, paraphrase, dictionary, thesaurus , etc.;
the structure of (written) texts:paragraph, sentence, phrase, topic sentence, cohesion, reference, heading, sub-heading , etc.
A range of terms is also likely to be needed to help teachers and pupils to discuss aspects of spoken and written language, in which pupils are required to do a range of things with their language: engage in small group collaborative discussions, present mini-lectures, explain and persuade, write narratives, descriptions and arguments, etc.
Terms of the following kinds are likely to be needed:
for speech acts: e.g. describe, report, summarise, explain, request, instruct, argue , etc.
(There may be a difference between such terms in everyday and descriptive use: to argue for a point of view is not at all the same as having an argument, though this is a common confusion.)
for different speech events: e.g. conversation, lecture, discussion, narrative, report , etc.
One fear of many English teachers is that a terminology for language forms takes attention away from the meaning of language.
This is not necessarily true at all.
On the contrary, it is essential sometimes to focus on language forms, in order to discuss cases where there is a difference between form and meaning, between what is said and what is meant.
Terms of the following kinds are likely to be needed:
for different kinds of meaning, direct or indirect:inference, presupposition, connotation, referential v. emotive meaning, irony , etc.
Knowledge about the way children acquire language is obviously important to teachers.
It can also be very interesting to pupils, and important, for example, in preparation for parenthood.
For these reasons, it is a common topic on many language awareness courses.
It may not, however, require any particular terminology that is not dealt with elsewhere.
Variety in language arises because language changes according to topic, addressee, the formality of the setting, the nature of the task.
It also changes over historical time, in different geographical regions, and in different social groups, defined by ethnicity, class, gender, occupation and so on.
The main concept, which goes against much traditional thinking about language, is that such change is a natural and inevitable process.
One of the most important topics for pupils to be able to discuss explicitly is the difference between spoken and written English.
Terminology is required in particular here to allow distinctions to be made between prescriptive and descriptive approaches to language, and to show that the grammar of spoken English is different from that of written English, and not just a haphazard deviation from it.
Terms of the following kinds are likely to be needed: for aspects of language variation: e.g. formal language, casual or colloquial language, slang; first language, second language, foreign language; accent, dialect, creole, international  language, lingua franca; historical, geographical and social dialects.
The terminology used in discussing literary texts has been left till last because it is the one which has traditionally been most familiar to English teachers.
Many of the terms proposed above are relevant to discussing the features of poems and prose from a literary point of view, and English teachers have many other terms at their disposal for discussing genre, stylistic effects, etc.
Terms of the following kinds are likely to be needed, but English teachers will be able to add many other examples:
for aspects of literary texts:genre, point of view, irony, metaphor, simile , etc.;plot, character, setting, denouement , etc.;alliteration, rhyme, stress, rhythm, metre , etc.
Some readers expected us to specify sets of standard terminology about language.
We made the following comments on such expectations.
USING TERMINOLOGY ABOUT LANGUAGE
There is no problem with many traditional terms as such.
There is no reason why any description of grammar should avoid terms such as:noun, verb, adjective , etc.;word, sentence, paragraph, text , etc.
The problem comes in how these terms are defined: it is, for example, only at best very approximately true that nouns are ‘the names of persons, places or things’, or that verbs are ‘doing words’; and in some instances it is not true at all .
Although definitions cannot be complete, teachers will have to explain terms in language pupils can understand, just as they must explain any other unfamiliar words in books that pupils read.
As pupils begin systematic work on explicit knowledge about language in the secondary school they will learn through experience that some simple working definitions have to be refined to take account of the complexity of language structure and use.
There are some terms where alternatives mean almost exactly the same.
There is little reason therefore to prefer one to the others, e.g.:.
speech marks, quotation marks, inverted commas; borrowing, loan word .
It is, however, desirable to choose a set of terms that are widely recognised, internally consistent and as simple as possible, not introducing complex concepts unnecessarily.
There are cases where technical terms are conventionally used, but add nothing to what could be said in simpler ways: e.g. etymology simply means ‘the history of a word’, and morphology simply means ‘word structure,.
More interestingly, there are terms which are used in everyday English, but which have more precise meanings or quite different connotations in technical discussion, e.g.:language, accent, dialect, pidgin, creole, non-standard .
Muddles can easily arise in discussion of the relation between spoken and written English.
For example, if distinctions are not clearly maintained between sounds (phonemes) and letters, it becomes impossible to say things such as :
English has five vowel letters, but (depending on the accent) spoken British English has around twenty-four significant vowel sounds.
The word thin begins with a single consonant phoneme represented by two consonant letters.
The word  box ends with a single consonant letter which represents two consonant sounds /ks/.
The word  locks ends in three letters which represent the same two sounds.
There are terms which have no equivalent in everyday English, but without which certain generalisations about English just cannot be made.
For example:
In English spelling, if a grammatical word and a lexical word sound the same, the grammatical word tends to have the shorter spelling.: e.g. for, four; by, buy; in, inn; to, two; I, eye; etc.
For us to have proposed a standard terminology would serve no useful purpose.
Textbook writers and teachers might attempt to teach this terminology irrespective of its value to pupils' learning.
In any case, such a standardisation exercise would be an enormous project and could not be imposed in practice, and many decisions would remain essentially arbitrary.
However, as part of a whole-school policy on language, teachers of English and of other languages (and possibly of other subjects) should meet and discuss what framework of description and which terms they propose to use in the school.
This might, for example, be in the context of a marking policy for children's writing.
This could be organised by the language co-ordinator in the primary school, and by the head of English in the secondary school.
The LEA English adviser should have a co-ordinating role to ensure liaison between feeder primary schools and their secondary schools.
If terms should not be taught through drills, or out of context, it follows that terms should not be tested out of context.
Appropriate use of terminology will be one aspect of language use which teachers will take into account when they are assessing children's spoken and written language.
Learning linguistic terminology is enabling, because it forms one part of children's growing vocabulary and thinking.
Use of technical terms is one aspect, for example, of how cogently pupils can talk or write about a topic, how explicitly they can express themselves, and  how well they can suit their language to their audience and purpose.
Linguistic terminology will therefore be implicitly assessed as part of how well children can use language.
It should be assessed as part of the whole, not as something separate.
Teachers themselves will need to know enough about language to use this knowledge confidently.
This had implications for teacher training, which the Kingman Report spells out in detail.
Throughout our Report we stressed that the success of the National Curriculum depends on the professional abilities of teachers.
Graham Frater, our HMI Observer, continually reminded us of the hordes of textbook publishers who might reduce our recommendations to a series of useless exercises if we did not make our rationale abundantly clear.
This was particularly true of our proposals about knowledge about language, for some teachers might be ill at ease with this new material and might welcome programmes of study based on drills and rote-learning.
We were initiating a major change in the teaching of English which would need great good will and understanding from all teachers.
To show what we meant by grammatical description we included two examples of how meaning is constructed in different kinds of language, both spoken and written.
We could not provide a grammatical description of the English language, for that was beyond our scope, but we wanted everyone to realise what kind of grammar is appropriate for both teachers and pupils to understand.
Here are the two examples:
Connectives
In spontaneous speech and personal writing, clauses are frequently connected by the words and ,then and but .
Then usually links actions or events in a chronological sequence, while but signals a contrast between two clauses, e.g.:
They played well but they lost.
Sometimes, as in this example, the contrast is obvious in the language itself (play well v. lose ); on other occasions, the contrast may be only in the speaker's mind, e.g.:
Their house is small but it's very clean.
Here the use of but suggests that the speaker thinks small houses are likely to be dirty.
So looking at clauses joined by but is one way of revealing a speaker's or writer's underlying, unstated assumptions.
By far the commonest of these three connectives is and .
It is popular with both children and adults because it has a range of different meanings.
Therefore, it provides a multi-purpose connective which is particularly useful when we are producing speech without pause for  planning or time for selecting a precise alternative.
The following edited transcript of spontaneous speech by an 8 year old boy shows and being used extensively to hold the narrative together:
there was this witch doctor and Scooby Doo was — he was standing by the witch doctor and the witch doctor went in and he went — he went chasing him Scooby Doo went in the cupboard with Shaggy and got some clothes on and they were acting on and then the witch doctor pressed the button and they turned on again then and then Scooby was acting and then they just take him and he keeped on switching it until they all came round and the all clothes fell off him.
And frequently signals a chronologically ordered sequence, e.g.:
Scooby Doo went in the cupboard with Shaggy and got some clothes on.
Another kind of ordering is where and suggests a cause and effect relationship, e.g.:
the witch doctor pressed the button and they turned on again.
In these ordered relationships it is not possible to alter the order of the clauses.
When and links two simultaneous actions there is no intrinsic ordering, e.g.:
Roger mowed the lawn and Linda weeded the flower beds.
It is also possible for two actions to be conjoined in a simple additive way without any suggestion of temporal or causal relationship, e.g.:.
On holiday last year I lost my purse and Di lost her passport.
Since and expresses so many connective meanings and as it is so frequent in speech it is not surprising that young children sometimes overuse it in their writing, as in this piece by an 8 year old boy:
When I played with the Lego I built a bridge.
It was a long bridge.
And it had slats on it.
And it had a slope for the cars to go up.
And we made two cars one big and one small.
And I made a garage.
With a fence all the way round the garage.
And we made a road.
It wasn't a long road.
And I like Lego because you can make things with it.
[spellings corrected]
One important function of and in a piece of writing like this is to signal to the reader that the sentences are meant to be=read together as an integrated whole.
Older and more skilful writers do not merely signal that succeeding ideas are linked; they use a number of different connectives, not only to introduce variety but also in order to make the meaning relationship as precise as possible.
The common connectives and, then and  but will sometimes be exactly right.
But with time for planning and reflection, writers can choose from a wider range.
So chronological sequence may be marked by next, after, that, subsequently , etc.; cause-and-effect relationships can be expressed by so,therefore, accordingly, consequently , etc.; simultaneous actions can be joined by while or as ; additive relationships can be indicated by also, in addition, furthermore, moreover , etc.; and contrastive relationships can be expressed by although, however, nevertheless, even so , and so on .
Some of these connectives would seem stilted and inappropriately formal in conversation or personal writing such as a friendly letter, but they occur frequently in formal expository writing.
The reason for their use is that they make the task of interpretation easier for the reader.
Particularly when the subject matter is demanding or unfamiliar (as in much academic writing), it is important that the relationship between ideas is signalled as clearly as possible.
So the use of varied connectives is not just a matter of stylistic preference; it is also a mark of consideration for the reader.
Schoolchildren are often told, ‘Never begin a sentence with and .’
It is important to recognise that this should not be an absolute proscription: some fine writers of English use and at the beginning of a sentence when it suits their purposes, e.g.:
And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.
(Genesis 1:3,Authorised Version )
(Lest it be thought that that example does not count because it is seventeenth-century English, it is worth noting that modern translations retain the and at the beginning of that verse.)
However, an overuse of and is both irritating and unhelpful.
Pupils need to learn by reading a wide variety of well-written texts some of the other ways in which sentences and clauses can be joined.
They will need to take account of meaning, of appropriateness to audience and purpose, and of structure — since, unlike and , some of the alternative connectives are not tied to the beginning of the sentence, e.g.:
He said,moreover , that he was not prepared to tolerate further delay.
Passive sentences
In an active sentence the subject of the sentence generally performs the action of the verb, e.g.:
The policeman arrested the burglar.
Here, the subject, the policeman, is doing the arresting and the burglar (the grammatical object) is affected by this action.
In a passive sentence the person or thing affected by the action of the verb occurs as subject of the sentence:
The burglar was arrested by the policeman.
Now the former active subject (the policeman) occurs after the verb.
It is not only the order of words that has changed, however, but also the form of the verb itself, since the active verb arrested becomes was arrested in the passive.
As both the active and the passive sentence mean the same thing, it is reasonable to ask why we need both.
In fact, the passive has two particular advantages and these provide the reasons for its most characteristic uses.
First it enables us to omit the word (or phrase) that is the subject in the active sentence.
This is important because — apart from commands and elliptical colloquial exchanges — it is not possible to omit the subject in English, even when the meaning is completely obvious; for example, we have to say,It is raining , not Is raining .
By turning an active sentence into the passive we get a new subject and are able to omit the old one, e.g.:
The burglar was arrested.
There are a number of reasons why we might want to omit the subject.
It may be uninteresting, or even unknown, e.g.:
The kitchen window bas been broken.
The active version of this would have to be something like:
Someone tor something) has broken the kitchen window.
On the other hand, we may know the subject but not want to reveal it to our listener, e.g.:
I have been told that your work is unsatisfactory.
Here the passive enables the speaker to conceal the identity of the informant.
In academic writing (particularly in science), the convention has grown up that the writer or experimenter do’ es not feature in the text: it is the passive that makes this possible, e.g.:
In the course of the survey, 50 old-age pensioners were interviewed and their housing preferences noted.
An active sentence would have to refer to the interviewer(s).
Another reason why the passive is used in writing is that it can reduce repetition.
If several actions have been performed by the same people then, if the sentences describing the events are active, the same subject will have to be repeated, e.g.:
Members of the community association worked very hard preparing for the annual village show.
They redecorated the village hall.
They sanded and polished the floor.
They replaced the lights and they mended all the broken furniture.
The passive version can get rid of all the theys and introduce more variety in subject position:
The village was redecorated.
The floor was sanded and polished.
The lights were replaced and all the broken furniture was mended.
The second advantage of passive sentences is that they have a different word order from active sentences.
Both speakers and writers find this useful when they are referring to two things, one animate, one inanimate.
That is because there is a stylistic preference in English for putting animates before inanimates.
For example, the passive sentence:
The cyclist was knocked down by a van.
is more likely than its active counterpart:
A van knocked down the cyclist.
The fact that the passive brings about alterations of word order gives it a special function in writing, because it provides one means by which a writer can link sentences smoothly together and achieve the desired emphasis.
There is a preference in written English for sentences within one paragraph to begin with an idea that has already been mentioned.
(When a sentence begins with something completely new this usually signals the beginning of a new paragraph.)
The corollary of this is that  new information tends to occur towards the end of the sentence.
Accordingly, a typical sequence of sentences in writing is:
Yesterday at the Royal Albert Hall there was music-making on a grand scale by young people from all over the United Kingdom, with a prize for the best overall performance.
It was won by the Cheshire Youth Orchestra, who were in jubilant mood as they left for the journey home.
Here,a prize is mentioned in the first sentence.
The use of the passive It was won allows the prize to reappear at the beginning of the second sentence, and delays the introduction of the new information about the winners.
A speaker might well use an active sentence and say, ‘The Cheshire Youth Orchestra won it’, but this would seem rather awkward and disjointed in writing.
Although there are several reasons why passive sentences can be useful for the writer, then, it is worth noticing that if passives are overused they can produce writing that is unappealingly arid.
These examples demonstrate that it is absurd to say that the Cox Report does not advocate the teaching of grammar.
Journalists who repeated this accusation either had not read the Report, or were simply being malicious.
Knowledge about language
Primary teachers and secondary English teachers regularly impart a great deal of knowledge about language to their pupils and encourage them to make explicit, and to share with others, the implicit knowledge they have already acquired as language users.
For example, in many classrooms pupils can be found discussing the differences in vocabulary there would be between an on-the-spot oral account of a road accident and a newspaper report of it the following day; or considering the ways in which conventional spellings can be violated in advertisements and brand names; or listing some of the differences between their grandparents' use of language and their own; or talking about the way a poet's choice of metaphor yokes together two dissimilar things so that something familiar is suddenly perceived in a new way; and so on .
Teaching about language is then, in broad terms, not a new departure for most English teachers.
However, treating knowledge about language systematically and giving it explicit mention in the syllabus is not universal in our schools.
INTEGRATING KNOWLEDGE ABOUT LANGUAGE
My Working Group recommended that knowledge about language should be an integral part of work in English, not a separate body of knowledge to be added on to the traditional English curriculum.
As pupils extend their skills, abilities, understanding and responsiveness in speaking, listening, reading and writing, the teacher's role is to highlight those aspects that will lead to a greater awareness of the nature and functions of language.
This awareness should, in turn, contribute to the pupils' own sensitivity as language users.
For this reason, we did not propose that knowledge about language should have its own profile component.
To treat it separately would be to risk giving rise to the misconception that it should be separately timetabled, taught and assessed, rather than integrated in the speaking, listening, reading and writing activities of any English lesson.
Accordingly, the content we saw  as essential to knowledge about language was incorporated in the three profile components, speaking and listening, reading, and writing, both in the statements of attainment and in the programmes of study.
There are two further reasons why our recommendations took this form.
First, many teachers are worried about the curriculum being overloaded.
There are constant pressures from relatively new areas of study, such as information technology, film, television and so on.
If we had proposed a separate profile component for knowledge about language, it might have been seen as having a weight (in terms of content, teaching time and assessment) which was disproportionate in relation to the English curriculum as a whole.
The other reason is the extent of teachers' own knowledge about language.
As is argued at length in the Kingman Report, substantial programmes of teacher training are required if teachers are themselves to know enough to enable them to design with confidence programmes of study about language.
Such training is now under way.
In the meanwhile, we did not feel it right to make aspects of knowledge about language in the programmes of study (which will be legally obligatory for every pupil working at levels 5 to 10) too extensive or demanding.
Even so, we learnt from our visits to schools that, in some places, richer and broader work than we outline is already being done very successfully.
For example, in some multilingual classrooms pupils carry out activities that make them aware of some of the similarities and differences among their languages; in other classrooms pupils write play-scripts in regional dialect or study the language of Chaucer.
There is no need for such work to be abandoned because it does not feature explicitly in our programmes of study and, indeed, it would be the opposite of our intention if this were to happen.
However, our approach of presenting the subject matter within three profile components has the disadvantages that knowledge about language can appear fragmented and that teachers and pupils might not see the possibilities for coherent and cumulative work.
In the Cox Report we therefore set out our rationale for explicit knowledge about language in a separate section, and printed as part of it the statements of attainment about knowledge about language from the three profile components, bringing them together in order to show their coherence.
I shall do the same in this book.
OUR RATIONALE
Two justifications for teaching pupils explicitly about language are, first, the positive effect on aspects of their use of language and, secondly, the general value of such knowledge as an important part of their understanding of their social and cultural environment, since language has vital functions in the life of the individual and of society.
Language is central to individual human development; human society is  inconceivable without it.
Therefore it is intrinsically interesting and worthy of study in its own right.
There are important social implications of such knowledge.
Language is not merely a neutral medium for the conveying of information; it can trigger emotional responses which may spring from prejudice, stereotyping or misunderstanding.
Such attitudes need to be laid open to examination and discussion.
Moreover people need an informed understanding if they are to evaluate claims about language use which are widely made (in the correspondence columns of newspapers, for example).
As far as the effect of knowledge about language on pupils' own language skill is concerned, it is true that it has been difficult or impossible to show any direct cause-and-effect relation between teaching formal grammar and improved writing performance.
However, most of the research has relied upon a narrow and traditional form of grammar teaching.
The broader approach that we advocated covers not only sentence structure but also larger patterns of organisation, not only the forms of written academic English but also a range of stylistic and dialectal varieties, not only language structure but also meaning and use.
My Working Group felt that there is evidence that such an approach should help to improve pupils' sensitivity to their own use of language.
It is also undoubtedly useful for teachers to be able to refer to features of pupils' work when they are correcting it or trying to help pupils in some way.
For example, pupils who speak (and therefore possibly write) in a non-standard dialect of English may need help to see that their dialect is regular and patterned, and to recognise the systematic differences between it and formal, academic Standard English.
Moreover, terminology is essential in understanding many standard reference books about language, such as dictionaries.
(Such a terminology is also of use in foreign language teaching.)
Technical terms are not ends in themselves, but because they facilitate discussion, they do need to be explicitly taught.
PRINCIPLES UNDERLYING PROGRAMMES OF STUDY
Teachers and textbook writers need a framework of understanding which ensures that they avoid underestimating the complex competence which all native speakers have in their mother tongue.
Helpful distinctions can be made between different kinds of knowledge about language, e.g.:.
implicit and explicit knowledge;
monolingual and bilingual competence;
prescriptive and descriptive approaches;
knowledge appropriate to teachers and to pupils;
what all pupils need to know contrasted with what some choose to learn.
Some of these distinctions can be discussed with pupils.
Work should start from the pupils' own linguistic competence.
Many pupils in schools are bilingual and sometimes biliterate, and quite literally know more about language than their teachers, at least in some respects.
All pupils are able, to some extent, to change their style of language according to their audience.
This competence is a huge resource which should not be ignored but made explicit.
A problem in studying language is that it is often too close to individual speakers to be observed dispassionately: it is either taken for granted and not seen at all, or is too intimately involved in individual and social identity to be discussed objectively.
Work on knowledge about language can be based on pupils' own fieldwork, collecting and classifying their own data, learning about the methodology of observation, classification, description, hypothesis making and explanation.
The teacher's task will often be to help pupils to systematise knowledge which they already have or evidence which they collect, and to keep the focus clear.
Courses should not be watered-down linguistics.
They should, however, be informed by principles and insights drawn from linguistics — for example, the idea that language in all its diversity can be approached in a non-prescriptive, non-judgmental way and that it is possible to treat systematically and objectively an aspect of human life which is often the focus of emotive and prejudiced reactions.
Materials should bring out the social significance of knowledge about language.
It should lead to more understanding of language diversity, including multilingualism, and be closely related to pupils' experience in their own communities, and therefore be treated with great sensitivity to pupils' home backgrounds.
The preceding points imply certain desirable features in the programmes of study in knowledge about language.
They should be based primarily on resource materials, which might include samples of language data (spoken, written, literary, non-literary, standard, non-standard, English and other languages) and facts and figures about languages in Britain and around the world, and associated activities which are essentially concrete and problem-based, so that the pupils can make their own enquiries, and so that the teacher can learn alongside the pupils.
The data are all around, once teachers and pupils know what to look for.
It is therefore possible for teachers to develop their own materials.
Comparative study (of different languages, dialects, styles, etc.) can make explicit what is usually taken for granted about language.
KNOWLEDGE ABOUT LANGUAGE IN THE SCHOOL CURRICULUM
The steady and purposeful development of pupils' language and of their skill in its use should be a constant aim of education at all stages and levels.
The form in which knowledge about language is communicated will vary with the age and ability of the pupil, from play activities in pre-school to explicit systematic knowledge in upper secondary education.
Some play activities, suitable for primary age children, were illustrated in my last chapter; more explicit knowledge about language, appropriate to the secondary curriculum, is discussed here.
Language topics can be studied from a number of points of view.
A systematic approach to language study can be developed by considering any aspect of language in terms of its form and meanings, its social uses and effects, and how it varies.
Language is a system of sounds, meanings and structures with which we make sense of the world around us.
It functions as a tool of thought; as a means of social organisation; as the repository and means of transmission of knowledge; as the raw material of literature, and as the creator and sustainer — or destroyer — of human relationships.
It changes inevitably over time and, as change is not uniform, from place to place.
Because language is a fundamental part of being human, it is an important aspect of a person's sense of self; because it is a fundamental feature of any community, it is an important aspect of a person's sense of social identity.
To take account of the nature and functions of language a syllabus for knowledge about language should cover the following material:
(a) Language variation according to situation, purpose, language mode, regional or social group, etc.
Nobody speaks — or writes — in the same way on all occasions.
We alter our language according to whom we are talking to, what we are writing about, whether it is for social, transactional or literary purposes, and so on.
The most obvious variations are the contrasts between speech and writing and between the formal and informal in both modes.
An understanding of such variations should help pupils to select the appropriate vocabulary and grammar for a given purpose and to recognise why communication sometimes breaks down when inappropriate choices are made.
Even though no two people speak or write in just the same way, groups of people share sufficient language characteristics (of accent, vocabulary and grammar) to bind them together and to distinguish them from other groups.
So language alone often allows us to tell whether someone is from Liverpool or London, from England or Scotland, or from Britain, Australia or the United States.
 Moreover , the specialised language of certain occupational groups (for example, builders, doctors, lawyers, mechanics and scientists) is often distinctive.
A sensitivity to this type of variation should contribute towards pupils becoming more tolerant of linguistic diversity, more aware of the richness it can provide and more able to cope with problems of communication.
Accordingly, in the speaking and listening profile component, the statements of attainment relate to children's growing ability to talk explicitly about:
regional and social variations in English accents and dialects; and attitudes to such variations; the range of purposes which spoken language serves; and the forms and functions of spoken Standard English.
In the writing profile component, the statements of attainment relate to children's growing ability to talk and write explicitly about:
some of the main differences between speech and writing; the range of purposes that written language serves.
(b) Language in literature
Although there can be no clear-cut division between the use of language in literature and in everyday life (and it would not be fruitful to attempt to make such a division), we can recognise that some of the most arresting, innovative and enriching uses of language come from the poets, novelists and dramatists who practise the craft of writing.
Awareness of these uses should help pupils to respond to texts with greater understanding, to recognise when language is being used manipulatively, and to strive for a creative vigour of expression in their own writing.
(c) Language variation across time
English is changing all the time.
There have been considerable changes in vocabulary and slight changes in pronunciation over the last fifty years.
Grammatical change is slower but readily discernible if we take a time span of four hundred years.
Knowledge about language change makes it possible for pupils to understand more fully the nature of Standard English and how it relates to other varieties.
Accordingly in the reading profile component, the statements of attainment relate to pupils' growing ability to talk and write explicitly about:
some of the main characteristics of literary language; and how it conveys meanings; some of the ways in which English is constantly changing between generations and over the centuries; and people's attitudes to such change.
All of these aspects of knowledge about language interlock — just as speaking, listening, reading and writing themselves are interrelated — and it is not possible or desirable to keep them apart.
So the reading of a poem by Wordsworth, for example, could raise questions concerning the differences between poetic and everyday language, the nature of Cumbrian place names and topographical terms, the effect of word order alterations, changes in vocabulary during the past hundred and fifty years, and so on .
Pupils' developing understanding is marked in several ways:
it is usually easier to give examples from local varieties of English (in the family or local community) than to discuss a wider range of varieties, which are more distant, geographically, socially or historically;
it is usually easier to talk about language, than to write about it;
it is usually easier to give examples of individual words (which distinguish dialects, styles, etc.), than to give examples of pronunciation, grammar and textual organisation;
it is easier to give relevant, but isolated, examples than to give more systematic and sustained descriptions and analyses; and description is easier than discussing the principles underlying the examples.
The ordering of the statements of attainment in knowledge about language takes account of this pattern of development.
THE STATEMENTS OF ATTAINMENT
After the Cox Report was published, the NCC made some revisions of our statements of attainment and programmes of study.
These did not involve substantial changes, and often introduced useful clarifications and examples.
In this chapter I print the statements of attainment as they are defined in the final Statutory Orders,English in the National Curriculum , published by HMSO.
The following descriptions are those now enshrined in law.
In the speaking and listening profile component pupils should be able to:
The programmes of study for knowledge about language are printed in appendix I. 
Literature
It is occasionally possible, just for brief moments, to find the words that will unlock the doors of all those many mansions inside the head and express something — perhaps not much, just something — of the crush of the information that presses in on us from the way a crow flies over and the way a man walks and the look of a street and from what we did one day a dozen years ago.
Words that will express something of the deep complexity that makes us precisely the way we are, from the momentary effect of the barometer to the force that created men distinct from trees.
Something of the inaudible music that moves us along in our bodies from moment to moment like water in a river.
Something of the duplicity and the relativity and the merely fleeting quality of all this.
Something of the almighty importance of it and something of the utter meaninglessness.
And when words can manage something of this, and manage it in a moment in time, and in that same moment make out of it all the vital signature of a human being —not of an atom, or of a geometrical diagram, or a heap of lenses — but a human being, we call it poetry.
(Ted Hughes , Poetry in the Making, 1967)
Our recommendations for the teaching of literature aroused a great deal of controversy.
The dangers which threaten those who make pronouncements about essential books in a National Curriculum had already been revealed when Mr Baker in a speech in 1988 said he thought all children aged 16 should have read George Orwell's Animal Farm .
This is the kind of remark on which the media thrive, and for weeks afterwards the newspapers, radio and television were filled with arguments and counter-arguments about essential books in a core curriculum.
If Animal Farm , why not 1984 ?
And what about Dickens's Oliver Twist and  David Copperfield , Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland , Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice and Emma , Lawrence's Sons and Lovers and The Rainbow , Defoe's Robinson Crusoe , Forster's A Passage to India , Shakespeare's plays and sonnets, Wordsworth's Lyrical Ballads , Tennyson's The Lady of Shalott , the Authorised Version of the Bible, and so on and on.
It is easy to compile a list of books for a national curriculum which are essential reading for 16 year olds, and which is so long no average 16 year old will have time to read them all.
OUR LIST OF AUTHORS
As we prepared our first Report, to be published in November 1988, we wanted our document to be lively, to avoid bureaucratic jargon, and to impart enthusiasm for literature, so we included references to specific authors.
We printed a list of writers who might figure in the library of a good primary school.
We made it clear that the list of authors was not intended to be comprehensive: ‘We stress again that we are not recommending as set texts the books of the authors listed…
While we believe that their books do meet the criteria outlined above [in the preceding paragraphs]we have no doubt that so too do those of many authors who are favourites with children and teachers.’
We left freedom for teachers to choose.
In our list of authors we did not include Enid Blyton or Captain W. E. Johns, author of the Biggles stories.
Many teachers consider these two authors racist, and some find Enid Blyton's use of language narrow and undemanding.
The media commentary on this first Report concentrated on this exclusion, and I was pilloried in the Sunday Times for blacklisting Enid Blyton's Noddy.
In the tabloid press I became the villain who put his knife into Noddy and his boot into Biggles.
Mr Baker told me he thought the decision to exclude Enid Blyton had proved a brilliant ploy to attract attention away from our more serious and controversial proposals.
In our final Report we decided to excise this list of authors because, as we explained, it had attracted so much unfortunate attention.
We recommended that Shakespeare must figure in all syllabuses for a National Curriculum, but that teachers must be free to choose which play or plays are studied.
In the crucial programmes of study for reading for key stages 3 and 4 (ages 11/12 to 14 and 14 to 16) we included this vital paragraph about the importance of the English cultural heritage:
Pupils need to be aware of the richness of contemporary writing, but they should also be introduced to pre-20th century literature.
Teachers should introduce pupils to some of the works which have been most influential in shaping and refining the English language and its literature — for example, the Authorised Version of the Bible, Wordsworth's poems, or Dickens's novels.
In particular, they should give pupils the opportunity to gain some experience of the works of Shakespeare.
We deliberately kept these examples to the minimum to avoid controversy, and to leave teachers free to use their professional judgment in selecting texts suitable for the needs of their own pupils.
On this occasion there were objections that we should have included more names.
What about Jane Austen, Dr Sheila Lawlor  demanded, in the response to our Report sent in to the NCC by the right-wing Centre for Policy Studies.
When the final programmes of study for key stages 3 and 4 were submitted to the House of Commons, the NCC added the novels of Jane Austen and the Brontës to our examples.
I have been told that this decision was partly in response to lobbying by feminist groups.
I am happy to see these names included.
My Working Group was solely concerned to allow teachers the freedom to choose, and to prevent another media extravaganza about essential books in the canon.
Some of our critics obviously forgot that our recommendations apply to children of all abilities.
Should a teacher in an inner-city comprehensive school be forced to teach Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice to children under the age of 16 from different cultural backgrounds?
The teacher must decide, taking into account his or her own personal enthusiasms.
We insisted strongly on the principle that children must be introduced to pre-twentieth-century literature, but we were determined to have no truck with lists of prescribed books.
We were also aware that if we published a list of set texts their names would be engraved in stone, and the canon would be unchangeable, reflecting out-of-date literary and social opinions.
When I was at school in the 1930s and 1940s the canon would have included King-lake's Eothen , Thomas Hughes's Tom Brown's Schooldays,Charles Kingsley's The Water Babies and the essays of Charles Lamb, all little read by the young today.
If a list of modern poets suitable for children under 16 was prepared today it would probably include the popular animal and bird poems of Ted Hughes.
Will his reputation survive into the twenty-first century?
Will children of the future enjoy his rhetorical language?
I think they will, but I cannot be sure, and I would not want the National Curriculum to force him on unwilling teachers.
If a list of set books had been included in the Statutory Orders, it is easy to imagine how after ten or so years teachers would be desperately trying to change it, with old-fashioned Members of Parliament resisting in lively debates.
In a collection of essays on a National Curriculum in the United States, published in the American journal Salmagundi in 1986, Robert Scholes insists that the establishment of a canon, a list of great masterpieces, works of genius, removes the chosen texts from history and from human actualities, placing them forever behind a veil of pieties; it fosters a reverential rather than a critical approach.
This explains the bardolatry which has dominated so much writing about Shakespeare.
These arguments against a prescribed list seem to me of great weight, just as applicable to Britain as to the United States.
TEACHER'S REACTIONS
The media excitement about Enid Blyton and Captain W. E. Johns soon died away.
Teachers of English offered more substantial criticisms of the literature chapter, and I have to admit that on occasions they had  justification for their worries.
We had allocated three chapters to the teaching of language and only one to the teaching of literature.
Did that imply that literature was less important?
My answer to this criticism was that teachers of English are virtually unanimous in their  enthusiasm for literature, but need persuasion if they are to accept our recommendations for the teaching of grammar, Standard English and knowledge about language.
But I cannot deny that the literature chapter takes for granted major assumptions about the value of great literature in the curriculum, and does not engage with the many recent books which have challenged this belief (for example, Brian Doyle's English and Englishness [1989]).
We explained how the enjoyment of reading helps to develop children's imaginative and aesthetic lives, enriches their use of language, introduces them to our cultural heritage and gives them opportunities for cultural analysis.
This material, which I include later in this chapter, reflects the Working Group's basic assumptions, as I have described them in chapter 2.
Perhaps we should have written a chapter explaining our reactions to critics such as Brian Doyle or to books such as Terry Eagleton's Criticism and Ideology (1976), but I doubt whether the Working Group would have easily reached agreement.
My own attempts in the following paragraphs may well demonstrate the difficulties facing us if we had tried to write a short response to all the great present-day debates in polytechnics and universities about the status of literature.
There are so many essays and books about the so-called ‘crisis’ in English studies that I can do little more than simply explain my own beliefs and show how these underlie the Cox Report's recommendations for a National Curriculum.
I will deal with three central issues: the desire for an English national tradition, the belief of Dr F. R. Leavis and his followers that the study of literature promotes moral sensitivity, and the claim by some post-structuralists that the privileged status accorded to ‘great’ literature reflects an unacceptable ideology.
AN ENGLISH TRADITION?
A number of university teachers, particularly from Oxbridge, have written to me to complain that our National Curriculum is ‘pluralist’, and that we should have placed an ‘English’ tradition at the centre of the syllabus.
In France or Germany, they say, teachers would be amazed if their own great writers were not compulsory reading for all students.
We should be proud of the English qualities to be found in writers from Chaucer to Dickens, from Shakespeare to Jane Austen, from Milton to Pope.
This emphasis on an ‘English’ tradition has come under continuous attack during the last twenty years or so; during their undergraduate training many young teachers of English will have discussed the assumptions that underlie such concern for our cultural heritage.
The desire for a national culture is seen as damagingly conservative, often ‘racist’ and almost inevitably unsympathetic to the rights of women.
This may surprise many people who read English literature for pleasure, and who would angrily reject any suggestion that they are conservative or racist.
Is not this a piece of jargon?
The argument rests no so much on the supposed responses of individual readers, but on the effects of institutionalising an exclusive teaching of the great works of English literature.
Only so much time is available in the classroom.
Should we insist that children spend all their time with a literature whose main non-white representatives are Othello, Man Friday in Robinson Crusoe and the savages in Conrad's Heart of Darkness ?
In his essay in Salmagundi , Robert Scholes argues that conservatives desire a common curriculum — any common curriculum — because this would have a unifying effect upon a society that suffers from an excess of pluralism, and this unifying effect, an achieved cultural consensus, would in itself be a good thing for the country socially and politically.
In England the desire for an ‘English’ tradition is said to hide a deep fear of our present multi-cultural society, a determination to maintain our present class structure, the hierarchies of power which give Oxbridge dons their privileged and cushioned existence.
In English and Englishness Brian Doyle describes a contemporary tendency of English teachers to retreat into a museum-like or ‘monumental, role as professional curators of a residual ‘national cultural heritage’.
For Doyle, such an attitude leads to a posture of cultural submissiveness, a fear of radical political change.
In my Working Group's recommendations for the teaching of literature we tried to balance the arguments for national unity with the need for a curriculum which respected the present cultural diversity of our society (the same desire for unity and diversity underpins our recommendations on Standard English and dialects).
This concept of balance is of crucial importance to an understanding of our Report.
A National Curriculum must not enforce one rigid, prescriptive role on teachers, but allow them freedom to develop their own initiatives.
At the same time they need to give due attention to this kind of balance between different aims and purposes, in this case between the claims of an English tradition and of multi-cultural education.
Knowledge of English literature is also of value in providing us with a common range of reference, and is of great importance in developing linguistic skills in Standard English.
In Salmagundi , E. D. Hirsch argued that literacy depends on a common background knowledge, a core of information, not of texts.
He writes: ‘No knowledgeable reading researcher disputes the fact that a higher level of national literacy will come only through a higher level of nationally shared information.’
Hirsch believes this information, about Romeo and Juliet, for example, can be acquired by reading brief guides; there is no need to read all the original texts.
In reply to Hirsch, Scholes argues that  knowledge and information are not the same: ‘literacy is very much a matter of actual experience in the production and reception of texts.’
He emphasises the ability to interpret and criticise what is presented under the guise of information, the need to evaluate what purports to be information.
Both the Kingman and Cox Reports agree with Hirsch that literacy depends on shared cultural information, but also agree, with Scholes, that there is a difference between information and knowledge.
In our response to the English language, both as readers and writers, we depend on an intimate feeling for words and rhythms and innuendoes and images and ironies which can only be achieved by exposure to great English literature.
The Kingman Report says:
Wide reading, and as great an experience as possible of the best imaginative literature, are essential to the full development of an ear for language, and to a full knowledge of the range of possible patterns of thought and feeling made accessible by the power and range of language.
Matching book to the pupil is an aspect of the English teacher's work which requires fine judgement and sensitivity to the needs of the child.
It is good for children to respond to good contemporary works, written both for children and for adults.
It is equally important for them to read and hear and speak the great literature of the past.
Our modern language and our modern writing have grown out of the language and literature of the past.
The rhythms of our daily speech and writing are haunted not only by the rhythms of nursery rhymes, but also by the rhythms of Shakespeare, Blake, Edward Lear, Lewis Carroll, the Authorised Version of the Bible.
We do not completely know what modern writing is unless we know what lies behind it.
Hemingway's short sentences derive their power from their revolt against earlier, more discursive styles.
The Diary of Adrian Mole is a descendant of Dickens's urgent, knowingly innocent style.
The apparently ‘free’ verse of D. H. Lawrence is imbued with the rhythms of the Book of Common Prayer.
(Chapter 2, 21)
And Kingman continues in the next paragraph:
It is possible that a generation of children may grow up deprived of their entitlement — an introduction to the powerful and splendid history of the best that has been thought and said in our language.
Too rigid a concern with what is ‘relevant’ to the lives of young people seems to us to pose the danger of impoverishing not only the young people, but the culture itself, which has to be revitalized by each generation.
(Chapter 2, 22)
In the Cox Report we repeated the first sentence quoted above from Kingman and went on to make the following recommendation:
Pupils should be alerted, for instance, to literary associations such as names, quotations, and other references as part of the cultural inheritance of people in the English speaking world.
Some of these literary elements are part of the language and have their place in standard dictionaries: others are quasi-proverbial and often used without an awareness of their origin.
The effect is not confined to works composed in English, as consideration of Aesop's Fables or H. C. Andersen's stories will show: relevant translated works, including classical stories from Greece and Rome, may find a place in English lessons.
The value of such study is clearly not only to be found in an increased familiarity with literary references.
It provides a basis of fuller understanding of allusion, implication and inference.
It also involves an introduction to forms of discourse which were powerful in the past and from which our own culture has developed.
The last two sentences are important.
We are not just talking about information; we are talking about the ability to respond to the living language.
These are some of the reasons why we recommend that all children should be given the opportunity to gain pleasure and critical awareness from the study of pre-twentieth-century English literature.
At the same time we recommended that pupils should ‘encounter and find pleasure in literary works written in English — particularly new works — from different parts of the world’.
It is widely recognised that the most dynamic English today is often found outside England: from Saul Bellow, Alice Walker and Toni Morrison from the United States, Anita Desai from India, Nadine Gordimer from South Africa, V. S. Naipaul from Trinidad, Chinua Achebe from Nigeria, for example.
All pupils need to be aware of the richness of experience offered by writing in English from different countries, so that they may be introduced to the ideas and feelings of countries different from their own, and so we shall help the cause of racial tolerance.
In Britain today our multi-cultural society must be taken into account by anyone establishing texts for a national curriculum.
Not only will children be introduced to a broader range of thought and feeling, but — through looking at literature from different points of view — pupils should also be in a position to gain a better understanding of the cultural heritage of English literature itself.
In ‘The Empire Strikes Back’, the Collins Dictionary lecture of 1986, Robert McCrum talked optimistically and enthusiastically about how through its history ‘the English language has found some of its  most vigorous expression on the lips and in the writings of people whose contribution is often barely recorded in the anthologies or the archives.’
He says that ‘when the dictionary, the grammar and the style book seem to rule okay, we find the language of the street, of the bar, of the market-place, of the many rather than the few, striking back and changing our own, educated perceptions of what English really is.’
He contends that today the dynamism which is bringing new life to the English language is coming from the periphery, not the centre.
He extends this argument from spoken forms on radio and film and television to the new vitality to be found in the use of English in countries all over the world.
Similar themes were taken up in the Collins lecture of 1988 by Richard Francis, Director General of the British Council.
In Britain today there are over one hundred minority languages in everyday use.
Francis sees this as a source of enrichment, and notes how in recent decades many new authors, such as Timothy Mo or Salman Rushdie, demonstrate the stimulative effect of other cultures and languages on English literature written in Britain: ‘Creativity in English today is increasingly multicultural.’
The true danger to English today, according to Mr Francis, is not a decline in standards from some mythical golden age in the 1930s or the eighteenth century, but that the National Curriculum will stifle imagination, and mark a return to over-emphasis on rigid expository forms.
In the attainment targets for reading we included the following for levels 8, 9 and 10: ‘Read a range of poetry, fiction, literary non-fiction and drama, including works written before the twentieth century and works from different cultures.’
At the last minute, after the consultation exercise was completed, Mrs Rumbold changed this to read: ‘read a range of fiction, poetry, literary non-fiction and drama, including pre-twentieth century literature.’
When challenged in the Times Educational Supplement on this revision, she replied in a crucial letter which should be given maximum publicity.
She pointed out that the programmes of study, which have statutory force, now say that for all stages reading materials should ‘include works written in English from other cultures’.
She insists: ‘There was no decision to ‘downgrade the study of literature from other cultures in the English curriculum,,.
On the contrary, the changes made in the final Order have had the effect of strengthening and extending the requirement that pupils should read works written in English from other countries and cultures’(15 June 1990).
This reassurance is welcome, but it has to be said that the change gives less prominence to this requirement, and we shall need to watch with care that it is properly covered in the assessment arrangements.
THE LEAVIS TRADITION
In the 1950s and 1960s some of the most imaginative and enthusiastic teachers of English were followers of Leavis.
In recent years his ideas have been heavily criticised, and I would guess that his writings do not have great influence on young teachers of English.
The idea of a great tradition, based on writers such as Jane Austen, George Eliot, Henry James, Joseph Conrad and D. H. Lawrence, has largely been rejected.
The days when teachers discouraged their pupils from reading Shelley and Tennyson, because these poets were anathema to Leavis, are now long gone.
For Leavis the study of literature led to a growth of intelligence and sensibility.
These qualities were reserved for a small minority of disinterested intellectuals whose insights into the great tradition of literature were said to develop in them a maturity of vision.
Followers of Leavis thought themselves superior in sensibility to the debased majority who were deemed to have been corrupted by democratic industrial society.
In the 1970s this ‘elitist’ stance was criticised because it implied that ‘culture’and ‘art’were inherently undemocratic.
The Leavis programme for cultural renewal through the study of the great tradition seemed irrelevant to the real social and political problems of the 1970s.
Confidence in the civilising effect of the study of literature waned during this period.
Since the 1939–45 war, many doubts have been expressed about the civilising effects of the arts.
George Steiner's pessimistic assessment in Language and Silence (1967) has been quoted on numerous occasions.
He asks, ‘Has our civilisation by virtue of the inhumanity it has carried out and condoned…forfeited its claims to that indispensable luxury which we call literature?’(pp. 72–73).
How can we accept Matthew Arnold's faith in the civilising influence of art, Steiner asks, now that we know that a ‘man can read Goethe or Rilke in the evening, that he can play Bach and Schubert, and go to his day's work at Auschwitz in the morning’(p. 15).
Is there any evidence that the ability to respond intelligently to the fiction of Henry James, for example, makes the reader less likely to embezzle funds or indulge in marital cruelty?
In the Cox Report we repeated the belief of many teachers of English that the study of literature does foster intelligence and sensibility, as Leavis so passionately argued.
We were not convinced by the arguments to the contrary.
In our literature chapter we wrote:
We do not wish to underestimate the straightforward pleasure that reading can afford.
An identification of books with enjoyment and a positive readiness to devote leisure time to reading seem to us wholly desirable outcomes of primary and secondary school experience.
But we would nevertheless hope  that by the end of their school careers as many pupils as possible will have been able to ‘grow’ through literature — both emotionally and aesthetically, both morally and socially — by virtue of coming into contact with the ‘range of possible thought and feeling’identified above [in the quotation from the Kingman Report printed on p. 72].
An active involvement with literature enables pupils to share the experience of others. 
They will encounter and come to understand a wide range of feelings and relationships by entering vicariously the worlds of others, and in consequence are likely to understand more of themselves. 
That civilised human beings can be responsible for acts of enormous wickedness does not necessarily invalidate our arguments for placing the study of literature at the centre of the National Curriculum.
The pleasure of reading offers children an extension of their being, an enrichment of life.
To deny this is to abandon all hope for liberal education, and to condemn the schools to a narrow policy based on vocational training.
Frank Kermode deals with these issues with lucidity and insight in his chapter on ‘The Common Reader’ in An Appetite for Poetry (1989).
He is sceptical about the moral value of teaching the classics or serious contemporary fiction and poetry: ‘Indeed, it is immodest to propose that by making people read these things we are improving them, ethically or civically.
All we dare claim is that we are making them better readers’(p. 56).
But his following definitions of the value of reading are close to my own convictions: ‘reading, as we ought to teach it, can make not a good person, but a subtle, questioning one, always with the possibility of corruption yet richer and more enriching.’
Kermode is concerned mainly with the teaching of literature in higher education.
There are other very strong arguments for the importance of reading for pupils under the age of 16.
To foster in pupils a love of literature, to encourage their awareness of its unique relationship to human experience and to promote in them a sense of excitement in the power and potential of language can be one of the greatest joys of the English teacher.
It is also one of the greatest challenges.
Young people have many calls on their time and inclinations.
Children in primary school playgrounds clearly demonstrate an instinctive pleasure in rhythm, pattern and rhyme.
But this will need constant nurturing if it is to develop into an appreciation of the richness of poetry, where words are ‘alive with a plurality of meanings from their contexts, their associations and their sensory qualities; they are alive with what Ted Hughes calls ‘the goblin in a word''’(this quotation is from Michael Benton's essay on ‘The Importance of Poetry in Children's Learning’, from the NATE book Lessons in English Teaching and Learning [1988])(p. 148).
Similarly, immense  skill and sensitivity are required on the part of the teacher, if very young children's natural enthusiasms for story structures and role-play are to be developed into a full and active engagement with a constantly expanding range of texts or literary genres.
Narrative has been described as a primary act of mind; children construct the world through story.
It is the teacher's role to recognise this, to encourage it, and to seek to develop interest in the act of reading which flows from it.
CULTURAL ANALYSIS
In the 1970s and 1980s, as faith among British teachers in our English national heritage or in Leavis's great tradition became less influential, there was a growing fascination with problems thrown up by new methods of cultural analysis.
In chapter 2 I included this as one of the five ‘views’ of our subject: ‘A ‘cultural analysis'’view emphasises the role of English in helping children towards a critical understanding of the world and cultural environment in which they live.
Children should know about the processes by which meanings are conveyed, and about the ways in which print and other media carry values.’
This means that older children must be encouraged to discuss famous texts critically, must be aware of the reasons why the traditional English canon, from Chaucer to George Eliot, has been so much under attack in recent years.
There are four well-known criticisms of the established canon of the pre-1960 period:
a)
feminists argue that the canon was male-dominated.
Important female writers were neglected;
b)
those concerned about multi-cultural education argue that the canon was dominated by white people, and was ‘racist’(I have already mentioned the treatment of black people in English literature);
c)
writers such as Colin MacCabe have stressed the importance of the spoken language.
In his Collins lecture of 1984 he described the cultural authoritarianism of Samuel Johnson's Dictionary of the English Language , whose acuity and precision of definition should not blind us to the fact that ‘it accomplished the reduction of the language to the written and the written to the literary.’
Until the 1950s written language dominated the curriculum of our schools, but in recent years teachers have increasingly recognised the importance of spoken as well as written language.
The development of radio and television, of new technologies to record speech, create new emphases whose significance it is as yet difficult to grasp.
But we can be certain that in the future teachers of English will regard exclusive concern with the written form as a cultural phenomenon of the past, now outdated.
Many teachers are now persuaded that English lessons should not be solely  confined to ‘great’ literature, but should include all kinds of ‘texts’, spoken and written, together with popular forms such as television commercials, bestsellers and comics;
d)
today many people's imaginations are dominated by film and television and video.
Teachers of media studies criticise the exclusiveness of the traditional literature canon to which students are often forced to pay lip-service in examinations but which does not engage their imagination as films do.
I have to admit that in my own university tutorials references to Dennis Potter's television series The Singing Detective or to the film Dead Poets Society arouse enthusiasm from students who have little to say about writers such as Spenser, Milton and Pope.
I have already quoted the Kingman Report's description of ‘the range of possible patterns of thought and feeling made accessible by the power and range of language’.
This concept of ‘range’ extends also — and very importantly — to social and cultural diversity.
Pupils should gain increasing understanding that texts may be related to the interests of different groups — such as women or men, adolescents or minorities of different kinds — and that critical thinking about existing stereotypes and values can be stimulated by studying literature which expresses alternative points of view: for example, on the family, nature and industrialisation, the nation or literature itself.
The recognition that there are authors who have not traditionally formed part of the literary ‘canon’ in the past may also lead to discussion about present-day social inequalities.
For example, authors writing in dialect and authors from certain social groups have been under-represented.
Traditional teaching of English literature has been attacked because it creates in the pupil a mood of passivity, an instinctive submission to authority.
Throughout their secondary school careers, pupils are often persuaded to repeat their teachers' opinions rather than to develop their own points of view.
In the classroom, cultural analysis encourages students to examine for themselves the underlying assumptions in the texts they are studying.
There has also been a strong movement to introduce the craft of writing into the curriculum, so pupils can create their own meanings in a variety of forms.
CREATIVE WRITING
My own ideas about creativity were summed up in the Verbal Arts Manifesto which I wrote with Anne Cluysenaar and Alan Young in 1982.
In this Manifesto, signed by Malcolm Bradbury, Richard Hoggart, Ted Hughes and Raymond Williams, among a list of forty-three, and published in the Times Higher Educational Supplement , we said that ‘Students of English at polytechnics and universities often write dull, secondhand discursive prose and are taught to do nothing else.’
The same applies to many pupils in secondary schools.
We argued that for such students practice in the craft of writing would not only be valuable for its own sake but would help them appreciate the achievements of writers of the past and take an informed interest in contemporary writing:
Many teachers in Britain regard verbal arts, under the guise of ‘creative writing’, with suspicion because often there has been too much emphasis on free expression.
True creativity in any art can best be developed within the framework of a thorough understanding of the nature and history of that art.
The notion that verbal creation is somehow more self-indulgent, undisciplined or easy than other forms of creation is false.
Responsible teaching is that which develops purposeful artistry in the handling of the medium.
Verbal skill must be taught and practised in the curriculum, not left to chance, for it is one of the most important requirements for membership of a modern community.
The emphasis on the craft of writing is of central importance in the recommendations of my National Curriculum Working Group.
We argue strongly that practice in writing should not be confined to the literary essay.
Pupils should be given the opportunity to write in a wide range of forms: diaries, formal letters, chronological accounts, reports, pamphlets, reviews (of books, television programmes, films or plays), essays, newspaper articles, biography, autobiography, poems, stories, play-scripts, TV or film-scripts.
An essential element in our proposals for the secondary school is that pupils should increasingly make their own decisions about their writing: what it is about, what form it should take, and to whom it is addressed.
We oppose excessive use of decontextualised exercises written only for perusal and marking by a teacher.
We want young people to write for a much wider range of purposes and audiences.
For many years the essay has dominated the syllabus, from school certificate for 16 year olds to university degree examinations.
I am not denying its great importance, as a means of evaluating evidence, developing critical arguments, and organising ideas in rational form.
But the essay is usually a closed form, not allowing students to admit to uncertainty in their thinking, not allowing them to explore their ideas in imaginative and open-ended ways.
The essay form has been dominated by scientific models of objectivity, and, as I have already said, students have relied heavily on the repetition of the views of their teachers or the critics, views often not in accord with their own personal response to the texts being studied.
Images, ambiguity, dramatic tensions, all central features of twentieth-century modern literature, are not usually allowed as the student is marked for coherence, order and objectivity.
Teaching of the craft of writing releases pupils from imprisonment in the essay form, and from passive repetition of other people's ideas.
Our recommendations for the National Curriculum emphasise the importance of drafting, the process of writing as well as the final product.
Pupils, we say, must revise and redraft their writing in response to their own or other people's reading of their texts.
This collaboration should involve both their teachers and their peers.
In the past the normal essay was handed in complete in final draft, and marked with a grade and a few sentences of comment from the teacher.
This is not the way professional writers engage in their task, for almost invariably drafts are discussed and heavily revised after consultation.
Language comes alive when our creative writings are intended for real readers, genuinely interested in what we have to say, responding in speech or writing to our failures and successes, and this is just as important for young children as for students in higher education.
Literature and language are inseparably intertwined.
The ‘full development of an ear for language’ encompasses a wide range of related skills, understandings and competences, underlining our belief that the language and literature facets of the English curriculum should be seen as mutually supportive rather than exclusive.
Just as particularly skilful uses of language can be illustrated from literature, so deeper insights into literature can be afforded by a close examination of the language of a text.
In this way, classroom discussion of — for example— the characters, themes, and moral, social or emotional issues in a work can be related to the writer's technique and craft and to the boundless potential of language for the creation of new meanings.
This vital interaction of language and literature study relates to all three of our profile components.
Literature has an important role to play — in a variety of ways — in improving abilities in speaking and listening and in writing, as well as in reading.
Children should experiment, for example, with dramatic improvisations of the stories they read and write; they should experience and take part in the performance of poetry; they should listen critically to radio plays.
They should also be encouraged to write fiction, poetry, plays, diaries, book reviews and so on, in response to the literature they have enjoyed and shared and discussed with their teacher and classmates.
Learning to read and learning to write are intimately related.
By reading a wide range of literature, children become aware of new forms of discourse and modes of expression with which they may experiment in their own writing.
The Kingman Report points out rightly: ‘As children read more, write more, discuss what they have read and move through the range of writing in English, they amass a store of images from half-remembered poems, of lines from plays, of phrases, rhythms and ideas.
Such a reception of language allows the individual greater possibilities of production of language.’
(Chapter 2, paragraph 23.)
The ‘creative’ response to literature described above is two-fold  in its effect.
Pupils are able, through reading and responding to literature, to develop an understanding of and control over an ever-widening range of written forms.
But the experience of writing creatively — of using the sonnet form, for example, or of imitating the characteristics of a particular writer's style — leads also to an increased critical awareness of literary technique in the writing of others.
In Teaching Through Poetry (1988) George Marsh writes:
Learning about the construction of an effective text is much better done…through writing than through critical analysis.
It has the further advantage that writing is a skill whose usefulness [pupils]can appreciate, whereas literary criticism is not.
The understanding of craft and construction that develops through writing leads to a more realistic appreciation of the achievements of literary authors (p. 23).
This approach need not replace traditional literary criticism: rather, it should be viewed as a step that may lead naturally, where appropriate, into the development of objective analytical skills as pupils learn to reflect on their own writing — and on the creative process itself — in relation to the text that inspired it.
This approach is a central means of enriching the curriculum by introducing new ways of helping pupils of all abilities to enjoy literature.
CHOICE OF BOOKS
There is an enormous variety of good material available for primary children: this was demonstrated by the length of the list of authors published in our first Report.
I have already explained why this was not repeated in our final Report.
We also assumed that from the age of 14 able pupils could and should be reading from a range of books written for adults, so the number of suitable authors would make any list quite impracticable.
Children need to have access to well-chosen and appropriate books in school and class libraries.
We therefore set out briefly the criteria which should be used in selecting children's books.
When choosing books teachers may like to be reminded of the various published book guides, for example those published by the Federation of Children's Book Groups, the Signal Book Guides, the Penguin Book Guides and Exploring Poetry 5 to 8 (NATE).
Primary aged children
The following criteria are useful in selecting books for primary aged children:
the language used should be accessible to children but should also make demands and extend their language capabilities;
in fiction, the story should be capable of interpretation at a number of different levels, so that children can return to the book time and time again with renewed enjoyment in finding something new;
print should be bold and easy to read;
illustrations should be clear and attractive and, as well as being well-matched and giving helpful cues to the text, should enhance it by providing additional information, for example about the characters or setting;
most important, the books selected must be those which children enjoy.
Secondary aged children
During the years 11 to 16 pupils will be exposed increasingly to works not written specifically or exclusively for their age group.
There is such a variety of good literature available for inclusion in syllabuses that we want teachers to have the freedom to make their own choice of suitable books within our broad guidelines.
I have already indicated some of the principles which should guide teachers in their choice of books, and shown why both pre-1900 literature and texts from different parts of the world must be included.
Too many pupils only read contemporary novels.
Programmes of study should be so constructed as to give all pupils the opportunity to enjoy work in a wide range of literary forms.
They should read a selection of material that includes short stories, novels, plays and poems.
They should also be given the opportunity to encounter types of writing drawn from a variety of other genres — such as letters, biographies, autobiographies, diaries, film or TV scripts, travel books and other non-fictional literature.
In particular, every pupil should be given at least some experience of the plays or poetry of Shakespeare.
Whether this is through the study, viewing or performance of whole plays or of selected poems or scenes should be entirely at the discretion of the teacher.
Many teachers believe that Shakespeare's work conveys universal values, and that his language expresses rich and subtle meanings beyond that of any other English writer.
Other teachers point out that evaluations of Shakespeare have varied from one historical point to the next, and they argue that pupils should be encouraged to think critically about his status in the canon.
But almost everyone agrees that his work should be represented in a National Curriculum.
Shakespeare's plays are so rich that in every age they can produce fresh meanings and even those who deny his universality agree on his cultural importance.
The ‘Shakespeare and Schools’ project, at the Cambridge Institute of Education, has shown that secondary pupils of a wide range of abilities can find Shakespeare accessible, meaningful and enjoyable.
The project has demonstrated that the once-traditional method where desk-bound  pupils read the text has been advantageously replaced by exciting enjoyable approaches that are social, imaginative and physical.
This can also be achieved by: use of film and video recordings, visits to live theatre performances, participation in songs and dances, dramatic improvisations, activities in which Shakespeare's language is used by pupils interacting with each other.
Pupils exposed to this type of participatory, exploratory approach to literature can acquire a firm foundation from which to proceed to more formal literary responses, should they subsequently choose to do so.
In selecting texts teachers should take every opportunity to ensure that pupils are able to make progress as readers and to master increasingly demanding written material.
However, textual difficulty is not uni-dimensional.
It may lie in the subject matter, in the structure and organisation of the text, in the language, in the way meaning is presented, and in the length of the work.
So, a story set in contemporary Britain is likely to be easier (for British pupils) than one set in a different period of history or in a different culture or environment.
A novel with a straightforward chronological organisation is likely to be less demanding than one which makes use of flashbacks (this is one reason why young readers generally find Jane Eyre easier than Wuthering Heights , for example).
A text that uses familiar everyday language is usually more accessible than one which has an archaic or literary or highly formal style.
A work in which the meaning is fully apparent at a literal level is normally easier than one which depends on the interpretation of extended metaphor, analogy, symbolism, and so on.
And shorter texts make fewer demands on readers' stamina, concentration and perseverance than longer ones.
These different dimensions of difficulty are essentially independent.
Therefore, a work may be easy in one respect and hard in others; for example, Silkin's short poem ‘The Worm’ is straightforward as far as the vocabulary and sentence structure are concerned but, even so , the meaning of the poem is by no means transparent.
It is clear that not all pupils will, by the age of 16, be able to cope with texts which combine all such dimensions of difficulty.
But if, throughout the secondary school, literature in the classroom consists chiefly of modern, chronologically organised novels, written in familiar language that is interpretable at a literal level, then not only are pupils being offered a narrowed range of literary experience, they are also being denied an important means of extending their own language and thinking.
Accordingly, teachers need to choose books in such a way that all pupils have the opportunity to learn how to understand and enjoy works that make manageable but increasing demands upon them.
To summarise our position: we endorsed the statements in the National Criteria for GCSE about the choice of texts for the syllabus in English Literature.
The content of the examination syllabus must consist of the detailed study of individual texts by both male and female  writers as well as wider reading in all of the three main literary genres of prose, poetry and drama.
Examining Groups are encouraged to extend the scope of what is traditionally regarded as the ‘canon’ of English Literature in recognition that awareness of the richness of cultural diversity is one of the rewards of the study of literature: ‘The majority of texts studied must be literary texts originally written in English which may, for example, include American and Commonwealth writing, but works in translation may also be included.
'i A wide personal choice may be offered in recommended reading of authors, themes, periods or genres, but works for detailed study must be of sufficient substance and quality to merit serious consideration and must be selected from at least two literary genres.
APPROACHES TO THE TEACHING OF LITERATURE
Just as initial reading in the early years of the primary school thrives on interest and personal commitment, so the further study of literature calls for involvement and a love of reading for its own sake.
As with the early stages of reading, the teaching of literature must set itself the objective of stimulating pupils’ enjoyment.
Pupils should be encouraged to respond to all forms of literature in ways which they find pleasurable, and hence which are likely to promote understanding.
Their response should be stimulated through a range of active strategies.
For example, imitation of a writer's use of language involves an active response that requires the pupil to make meaning yet to show a grasp of the original author's craft at the same time.
Most pupils will also enjoy an active presentation of plays and poetry, treated sensitively, and we include the enjoyment from reciting favourite poems aloud, whether individually or in the very successful choral speaking groups established in many schools.
It is often said that many young people lose interest in poetry, and even stories, as they go through secondary school.
If this is true, it is the more important that active approaches and positive attitudes prevail, if enjoyment in books is to be kept alive in the face of more passive forms of entertainment.
In poetry, pupils should experience a range of ‘voices’.
Many teachers exploit the possibility of comic, ‘fun’ poetry, or the lyrics of popular music as a way into the appreciation of a wider range of contemporary writing, beginning with writers who are easily accessible.
As Michael Benton puts it in The Importance of Poetry in Children's Learning : ‘The development of a methodology that is based upon informed concepts of reading and response rather than upon conventional, narrowly-conceived ideas of comprehension and criticism is now the priority’(p. 150).
It is good news that the introduction of GCSE has endorsed this kind of methodology and response.
A ‘response’ such as the genre transformation of a short story into a poem  or one-act play may also lead some pupils towards written analysis of the more traditional kind.
The exploration of literary texts is not an elitist activity, distinct from the study of other means of communication.
To take but one example of overlap, the kinds of question that are routinely asked in media education can fruitfully be applied to literature: who is communicating with whom and why; how the text has been produced and transmitted; how it conveys its meaning.
And, as is often the case in the media, literary texts have the habit of not turning out to mean what might be expected at first sight.
With both, it is important to keep an open mind and to be alert to the various clues and pointers to meaning that appear as the communication unfolds.
We included in an appendix a selection of teaching strategies which provide ‘ways into texts’ of whatever genre, period or level of difficulty.
Other examples of this kind can be found in books by Michael Benton and Geoff Fox (see select bibliography).
They are based on good teaching practice, and many teachers are already aware of their value as methods which neither pre-empt pupils' responses nor suggest that there is one orthodox, accepted interpretation.
Drama
I was very determined that drama activities would play a central role in the English curriculum, and I found my Working Group were unanimous in supporting this approach.
In the primary school, drama is most successful when it emerges as a natural development from children's play.
Successful learning often takes place when young children enjoy themselves in role-playing, which can make an important contribution to their oral and aural experience.
Drama activity should continue to play a vital role in all pupils' secondary school experience.
OUR RATIONALE
Drama deals with fundamental questions of language, interpretation and meaning.
These are central to the traditional aims and concerns of English teaching, and our recommended programmes of study therefore include exploration of drama.
We acknowledged, of course, that drama also has its own academic integrity and that it exists as a separate GCSE subject in many secondary schools and colleges, outside the National Curriculum.
By using drama as a part of the learning process, English teachers will be providing experiences for pupils which will help them make an informed choice when considering drama as a subject option, whether for GCSE or as part of a non-examined course in combined or expressive arts.
We stressed, however, that the inclusion of drama methods in English should not in any way replace drama as a subject for specialist study.
Drama makes an important contribution towards realising the overall aims of English as set out in chapter 2.
For example, drama contributes to personal growth, by enabling pupils to express their emotions and by helping them to make sense of the world, and to prepare for adult life through such activities as the simulation of meetings.
Role-play activities can inform other areas of the curriculum, for example history, through pupils' pretending to be living in another age, or science, through their acting out some aspects of scientific discovery.
DRAMA IN THE PRIMARY SCHOOL
Drama — including role-play — is central in developing all major aspects of English in the primary school because:
it gives children the chance to practise varieties of language in different situations and to use a variety of functions of language which it is otherwise more difficult to practise: questioning, challenging, complaining etc.;
it helps children to make sense of different situations and different points of view in role-play and simulations, by allowing them to act out situations and formulate things in their own words;
it helps children to evaluate choices or dilemmas, to develop the logic of different situations, to make decisions that can be put into practice, tested and reflected upon;
it accustoms children to take account of audience and purpose in undertaking an activity.
Drama is of crucial importance as a learning medium, for example, in promoting collaborative talk, extending language skills and awareness of language in use, in assisting the development of voice skills in relation to reading aloud, and in extending both the form and the content of children's own writing.
Drama is not simply a subject, but also — more importantly — a method; it is both a creative art form in its own right and also a learning tool.
Furthermore, drama is one of the key ways in which children can gain an understanding of themselves and of others, can gain confidence in themselves as decision-makers and problem-solvers, can learn to function collaboratively, and can explore — within a supportive framework — not only a range of human feelings, but also a whole spectrum of social situations and/or moral dilemmas.
In this respect, there is a very special value to be found in drama activity for pupils for whom English is a second language.
The drama process can accommodate the expression of ideas in many ways: even with limited language pupils may participate in interpreting events and emotions through visual representation.
Moreover, drama activity is also a particularly powerful facilitator for pupils with special educational needs.
Through drama, individuals are provided with the opportunity to perceive the world from another's position: with sensitive direction, for example, a pupil with physical handicaps can interact and learn with others on an equal level.
For pupils for whom writing is difficult, drama offers a great freedom.
Opportunities for problem-solving and self-expression become as open and readily accessible to them as to any other pupils.
For those with emotional difficulties, drama provides an invaluable vehicle which allows the effect of behaviour to be explored.
It also demonstrates that alternative behaviour patterns may well be more desirable and effective, and these can be  tested out within the safety of drama.
For those with severe learning difficulties drama offers a secure situation in Which to examine the world.
Situations can be developed that offer individuals heightened responsibility, which gives them a chance to help or encourage others.
Not only does this facilitate learning of social skills from factors within the drama, but it also allows those involved to develop their self-esteem.
There is still a place within drama activity for performance to a wide range of audiences, both within the school and in the wider community.
However, most drama activity should not be seen as leading to a polished end product; even where this is the result, the most significant educational value of the activity will often have been found in the process that led to that end product.
Our terms of reference suggested that we should consider drama in the context of the great dramatic works of literature.
We believe that plays should be approached through the dramatic medium; children should often see or participate in the play being acted, and not just read the text.
This approach will not only result in an appreciation of the literary merits, but also foster an understanding of stagecraft.
There is still an important place within drama activity for the exploration and study of scripted plays, and we addressed this aspect in our statements of attainment and programmes of study.
At primary level, the range of material for exploration needs to be more diverse: myth, legend, fairy stories, poems.
At secondary level, such work can expand naturally into the exploration of dramatic texts.
Children's own writing can also be explored — at both levels — through the medium of drama.
DRAMA IN THE SECONDARY SCHOOL
The continued appropriateness of drama activity in the secondary school as a means of developing and broadening pupils' verbal communication skills is clear.
Communicating orally involves more than reading or talking: gesture, posture, movements may all be intrinsic to it.
Drawing on the fundamental drive to imitate and delving deeply into the pupil's personal experience and imaginative resources, drama may embrace all these elements of communication.
Moreover, given that the social interaction involved in drama inspires spoken language, drama activities can be structured to focus pupils' energies on experimenting with and developing control of a wide variety of language styles.
Drama quickly reveals to children the effectiveness of language, building up their language resources and allowing them to develop an awareness of a whole range of linguistic choices and registers.
Different situations demand different emotional and linguistic responses.
In presenting pupils with a variety of different challenges and situations, drama can, for example, provide opportunities for them to:
provide information, give instructions and explanations;
predict and plan;
narrate, recount, report on a past or present experience, real or imagined;
argue, discuss, defend and justify a point of view;
persuade, negotiate, mediate;
come to conclusions, sum up.
As a method of developing pupils' skills in speaking and listening, drama is as important within secondary school learning as it is at primary level.
Role-play, in particular, affords opportunities to practise many more varieties of language and to experience a far wider range of situations than could typically be achieved within normal classroom experience.
In our speaking and listening programmes of study it is therefore recommended specifically as a learning medium.
Drama provides a discipline for the development of co-ordination, concentration, commitment, organisation and decision-making that depends upon self and group awareness, observation, imagination and co-operation.
It helps pupils express emotions and explore personal feelings: it encourages them to make sense of different situations and different points of view, to practise negotiating successfully with others, and to cope with — and resolve — new situations.
The importance of such skills in enabling school-leavers to present themselves with confidence and to function effectively within the world of work and as responsible citizens is clear.
The process described above is one outcome (the personal — social aspect) of the process of learning through drama.
Drama is both a creative art form in its own right and an instrument of learning.
Teachers who use drama are working in partnership with pupils.
They are not the possessors of the ‘right’ answers or of a collection of facts to be imparted.
Skilled teachers of drama give pupils the tools of the trade, encouraging them to become more autonomous in their handling of the dramatic medium and so to take greater responsibility for their own learning.
There is a significant parallel with the set of values inherent in the study and experience of literature.
Many English teachers testify enthusiastically to the importance they attach to improvisation and role-play in exploring texts in the secondary school.
Pupils use drama to gain insights into moral and social issues in works of literature.
They can also use the medium to explore character or linguistic or structural features of texts.
Shadow and body puppets, for example, can prove an effective way of dramatising poetry and lead to a thoughtful analysis of rhythm, form and movement.
It is obvious that drama in the English secondary curriculum is content-based, as well as process-based.
At secondary school level, pupils will be involved in the study of plays and dramatic texts.
As actors, audience or directors (all three, I hope) they will be the  interpreters of plays written by others.
As I said above, pupils should approach plays through the dramatic medium.
This exploratory and performance-based approach will not only lead to a deeper understanding of the text in question (a dramatic exploration of a speech in Shakespeare, for instance, will show how the placing of different emphases can alter fundamentally one's interpretation of character or meaning), but will also lead to an understanding of the play as theatre.
Performance-based activity may, of course, take place at classroom level, in small-scale improvisational sessions or in text work.
Where practical, however, pupils should be encouraged to take every opportunity to widen their experience of audiences and/or co-actors.
The mounting of school productions and active involvement in community or touring theatre initiatives are thus of immense value.
CONCLUSION
The success of Theatre in Education — which brings professional actors to work with children in schools — is a particularly valuable demonstration of the ways in which pupils can learn through experience in their approach to plays.
The approach that is encouraged and engendered is active and investigative, rather than passive and prescribed.
This principle is at the very heart of all the recommendations relating to drama within the English curriculum that are put forward in this chapter.
I have already written in the last chapter about the danger of passive repetition of the teacher's opinions, and the need to sponsor the craft of writing.
Drama provides another major resource in overcoming passivity, in stimulating children to become actively involved in thinking about language, and in helping them to enjoy literature at school so that they will continue to read and to act and to attend theatrical performances for the rest of their lives.
Media Information and Information Technology
Round the city of Caxton, the electronic suburbs are rising.
To the language of books is added the language of television and radio,…the processed codes of the computer.
As the shapes of literacy multiply, so our dependence on language increases.
(Kingman Report, Chapter 2, paragraph 7)
In my visits to schools as a member of the Kingman Committee, I was impressed on a number of occasions by the imaginative use of word processing in the classroom.
In a school in Birmingham, for example, children who were recent arrivals in this country and whose English was poor were using word processors to learn how to cope with the demands of organising a holiday through a travel agent, particularly how to write letters asking for information.
They were using real brochures, choosing their holidays and working out what questions they must ask.
With a word processor they enjoyed discussing their drafts with each other and with the teacher, and collaborated together on corrections and revisions.
I was pleased that the supplementary guidance for the terms of reference for my Working Group mentioned both information technology (IT) and media studies: ‘English teaching will provide one appropriate context…for developing information handling skills,…and for media studies…
The practical use of word processors in developing writing provides an introduction to information technology.,
OUR RATIONALE
Media education and information technology alike enlarge pupils’ critical understanding of how messages are generated, conveyed and interpreted in different media.
First-hand use of media equipment (e.g. in making videos) and other technologies (such as desk top publishing) can contribute to children's practical understanding of how meanings are created.
We already have television, video tapes and discs, word processors, desk top publishing, electronic databases, electronic mail, and experimentation in areas such as hypertext, natural language processing and so on.
Their use will become more widespread.
New technologies and products will develop.
For schools this also implies:
an increase in data collections of all kinds and in the use of authentic language materials for teaching about the uses of language;
an increase in accessibility to such collections via CD-ROM, video disc, satellite links, etc.;
an increase in the diversity of learning materials geared to the needs of different learners;
a proliferation of self-access teaching materials and study packages, including interactive materials;
the development of new study skills to access and to make best use of such materials, and the reinforcement of existing skills in new contexts.
The Working Party included in its proposals for programmes of study those aspects of media education and IT which contribute most directly to the central aim of English: to widen the range of children's understanding and use of language, and to develop their skills in it.
Assessment of achievements in English should therefore be primarily concerned with such understanding and skills, rather than with pupils' knowledge about and competence in using IT and media facilities as such.
Indeed, media education and IT also have their own academic integrity, particularly in the secondary school as specialised timetabled subjects outside the National Curriculum.
The English curriculum should prepare pupils for possible study of these subjects as separate options, and not seek to supplant them.
Many aspects of media education and IT involve the use of machines: still cameras, video, computer terminals, etc.
Our culture often regards machines as a male preserve, and girls may need opportunities and encouragement to show that they can be expert in such areas.
It may sometimes be necessary, for example, to arrange for girls to have access to the technology in single-sex groups if they are to develop a confident and active understanding of the media.
We wanted all pupils to be able to benefit from the opportunities that the new media and technologies offer, and we framed our proposals accordingly.
MEDIA EDUCATION
Our terms of reference used the title ‘media studies’, which may be best reserved for specialist study.
We interpreted our remit broadly in accordance with the following description of ‘media education,:.
Media education…seeks to increase children's critical understanding of the media — namely, television, film, video, photography, popular music, printed materials, and computer software.
How they work, how they produce meaning, how they are organised and how audiences make sense of them, are the issues that media education addresses.
[It]aims to develop systematically children's critical and creative powers through analysis and production of media artefacts.
This also deepens their understanding of the pleasure and enjoyment provided by the media.
Media education aims to create more active and critical media users who will demand, and could contribute to, a greater range and diversity of media products.
Media education should be concerned not only with modern mass media such as television, cinema and radio, but also with all public forms of communication including printed materials (books as well as newspapers) and computerised sources of information such as databases.
We considered media education largely as part of the exploration of contemporary culture, alongside more traditional literary texts.
Television and film form substantial parts of pupils’ experience out of school and teachers need to take this into account.
Pupils should have the opportunity to apply their critical faculties to these major parts of contemporary culture.
Media education, like drama, deals with fundamental aspects of language, interpretation and meaning.
It is therefore consonant with the aims of English teaching.
In fact, media education has often developed in a very explicit way concepts which are of general importance in English.
These include selection (of information, viewpoint, etc.), editing, author, audience, medium, genre, stereotype, etc.
We drew on these aspects in developing our recommendations for attainment targets and programmes of study.
In particular, we included the treatment of non-literary and media texts in the reading profile component.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
The English class should be one setting where pupils learn to use IT to:
help in the production and reception of written language for different audiences (e.g. by using desk top publishing, spelling checkers, thesaurus, etc.);
send and receive messages: electronic mail can, for example, link classes elsewhere in the country or in other countries, and can provide very powerful ways of creating real audiences for children's writing;
give and respond to precise and accurate instructions, upon which successful use of the technology depends, as does language competence more generally;
comprehend systems of filing and classification, including alphabetic ordering, lists of contents, indexes, symbols, etc.: the organisation, storage and retrieval of information is, again, an important language skill generally;
gain an understanding of some of the ways in which information can be manipulated (e.g. in databases, mail merge programs), and therefore show increasing discrimination in their interpretation of such information.
The word processor extends opportunities for development and reflection on ideas and meanings, for example in designing, outlining and restructuring, and through the ability of writers to engage in dialogue with their own thoughts in the form of clean hard copy (printed text).
The possibilities are analogous to those in graphics that are offered to the designer by computer aided design (CAD).
Since the information on a word processor or computer screen is visible to several children at once, it can be a vehicle for group discussion and exploration of the language.
In these ways English teachers have much to contribute to children's familiarity with this technology and its uses, alongside the major aim of exploiting it to promote language knowledge and skills in themselves.
This is reflected in our recommendations for programmes of study in both the reading and the writing profile components.
This will not, however, be achieved as long as IT is regarded as the province of mathematics, science and technology in the curriculum, and English — or other language — teachers are seen as having little part to play.
IT equipment and facilities are becoming increasingly common in schools.
They can and should be made readily accessible to teachers and pupils in English as in other subjects.
Our recommendations presupposed this.
Bilingual children
Our terms of reference made it clear that we were to concern ourselves with the English curriculum for all pupils, whatever their mother tongue.
In particular they stressed that ‘The framework [for English]should ensure, at the minimum, that all school-leavers are competent in the use of English — written and spoken — whether or not it is their first language.’
The supplementary guidance said too: ‘The group should also take account of the ethnic diversity of the school population and society at large, bearing in mind the cardinal point that English should be the first language and medium of instruction for all pupils in England.’
In chapter 2 I discussed one of the central aims of the English curriculum, which is to extend the range of language in which children are competent.
Many children in our schools speak languages other than English.
For these children, therefore, this means adding competence in Standard English to their competence in other languages.
English is clearly the ‘first language’ of the education system.
But it would be a great loss if pupils' knowledge of a range of other languages was to decline.
The distribution of bilingual children varies widely across the country, but the total numbers and diversity are certainly significant.
The 1987 Language Survey conducted by ILEA found 23 per cent of the Authority's school population using a language other than or in addition to English at home, with 170 different languages spoken by its pupils.
On the basis of the limited evidence available some 5 per cent of all schools in England are likely to have a significant population of children for whom English is not their mother tongue.
This represents a very great pool of linguistic competence.
ENTITLEMENT TO ENGLISH
All children should be enabled to attain a full command of the English language, both spoken and written.
Otherwise they will be disadvantaged, not only in their study of other subjects, but also in their working  life.
In this respect my Working Group were following the path already trodden by the Swann Committee.
They stated firmly: ‘the key to equality of opportunity, to academic success and, more broadly, to participation on equal terms as a full member of society, is good command of English and the emphasis must therefore we feel be on the learning of English.’
The Swann Committee had also noted ‘the views expressed very clearly to us at our various meetings with parents from the whole range of ethnic minority groups that they want and indeed expect the education system to give their children above all a good command of English as rapidly as possible’.
Our initial reaction to our brief in respect of bilingual pupils was that all pupils must have access to the same attainment targets and programmes of study for English.
We consulted many of those actively concerned with teaching English to bilingual pupils, who firmly endorsed this view.
We recognised that the bald statement in the preceding paragraph requires amplification.
The TGAT Report suggests that headteachers might exempt children with language difficulties in English from tests where the problem is so severe as to render the assessment unworkable.
For example, there will be some pupils who may have arrived in this country only shortly before the assessment time at one of the key ages.
In such cases, we suggested that regulations made under section 19 of the 1988 Act, which allow disapplication of the provisions of the National Curriculum, should enable headteachers to exempt such pupils from the assessment requirements for English.
We were also aware of the problem that assessment in English, particularly that at age 7, could result in bilingual children reaching only a comparatively low level of achievement.
If the results of assessment are used in the ways intended and if the evidence of research and HMI findings of good practice are heeded, these children should in fact benefit, because their problems with the English language will have been identified and appropriate action can be taken to help at an early stage.
As the TGAT Report said: ‘it should be recognised that to record a low level of performance for this reason [English as a second language (E2L)]would be no reflection on a pupil's general ability but merely an indication that the pupil needed special help in English language skills.’
The results of assessment should be part of a continuing process of recording a pupil's stages of language development, and this record should be available to all his or her teachers.
It may be suggested that we were inconsistent, or even guilty of unreasonable discrimination, in that we insisted on assessment in English in England for pupils whose mother tongue is not English, whereas in Wales we recommended that pupils being taught through the medium of Welsh be exempted from the key stage 1 attainment targets, programmes of study and assessment.
The positions are not comparable.
In Wales, Welsh is an official language and a core subject of the National Curriculum for pupils in Welsh-medium schools or  classes — the only pupils for whom English is to be disapplied at key stage 1; no such language other than English is in such a position in England.
These pupils in Wales do not start formally to be taught English until the age of 7 or 8; all pupils in England will be required to be taught English from age 5.
IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHING
There is much evidence of the ways in which bilingual children can best be helped to attain competence in English.
It would be inadvisable to try to lay down too specific a strategy, because of the immense variety of English language knowledge and experience within the group loosely categorised as bilingual children.
However, there are some themes which recur in the evidence of those we consulted and which were first sounded in the Bullock and Swann Reports.
The latter said ‘We are wholly in favour of a move away from E2L provision being made on a withdrawal basis, whether in language centres or separate units within schools.
The HMI survey of English as a second language in six LEAs (published 1988) found that, on balance, the children in the survey made most progress where the programme to provide help with their English was designed to support the mainstream curriculum but with the oral component heightened.
It was stressed to us that pupils having difficulty with English because it was their second language should not be equated with pupils with other special educational needs.
In particular, such pupils should not be offered materials with a reduced cognitive demand.
This point was made also in the reports of the mathematics and science working groups.
The implications are therefore that, where bilingual pupils need extra help, this should be given in the classroom as part of normal lessons and that there may be a need for bilingual teaching support and for books and other written material to be available in the pupils’ mother tongues until such time as they are competent in English.
Bilingual pupils at secondary school should be helped to extend their range of English so that they can undertake high-level tasks alongside their peers.
E2L teachers can contribute greatly here if they work closely with subject teachers in developing an appropriate curriculum and content.
The E2L teacher has a great deal to offer subject specialists about the language approaches and assessment of the subject.
Expectations need to be appropriately set and as high for bilingual pupils as for all others.
Bilingual children should be considered an advantage in the classroom rather than a problem.
The evidence shows that such children will make greater progress in English if they know that their knowledge of their mother tongue is valued, if it is recognised that their experience of language is likely to be greater than that of their monoglot peers and, indeed, if their knowledge and experience can be put to good  use in the classroom to the benefit of all pupils to provide examples of the structure and syntax of different languages, to provide a focus for discussion about language forms and for contrast and comparison with the structure of the English language.
We endorse the view of the Kingman Committee:
It should be the duty of all teachers to instil in their pupils a civilised respect for other languages and an understanding of the relations between other languages and English.
It should be made clear to English-speaking pupils that classmates whose first language is Bengali or Cantonese, or any other of the scores of languages spoken by the school population…have languages quite as systematic and rule-governed as their own.
To illustrate what can be done, here is the statement of policy of the English department of a multi-racial inner-city school: ‘Pupils needs to develop full control of their language use.
They therefore need to gain insight into what language is and what it can do, insights which bilingual children intuitively possess’, and ‘Whilst we recognise that they [bilingual pupils]need to gain access to standard forms of English — used widely as a vehicle for implementing the school curriculum, we recognise the value and importance of their own dialects and languages.
Language competence is regarded as the ability to adapt language to different roles and situations.’
As I point out in chapter 12, there are exciting possibilities for initiatives in knowledge about language, particularly in the areas of social and developmental linguistics.
Bilingual children offer opportunities to explore language in a novel context, and a study of the different ways in which different languages convey and produce meanings should feature as an element of teachers' schemes of work, wherever this is practicable.
LITERATURE
As I said in chapter 6, children should read literature from all parts of the English-speaking world.
Children whose families come, for example, from the Caribbean, from countries in Africa or from the Indian subcontinent can greatly enrich discussion about English as a world language and about literature and drama as world concepts.
Teachers need to be alive to cultural differences which may particularly affect bilingual pupils' handling of literature.
Many secondary pupils are likely to be more aware than younger children of their cultural and religious frames of reference.
In some cultures, critical analysis of texts is relatively unknown and may, indeed, be thought offensive.
Teachers need to be sensitive to this possibility.
I have referred in chapter 2 to the need for a language policy across the curriculum; a recommendation to this effect appeared in both the Bullock and the Swann Reports.
Such a policy would be of especial benefit to bilingual or multilingual children.
Equal Opportunities
The supplementary guidance to our terms of reference notes that ‘the curriculum should provide equal opportunities for boys and girls.’
It further notes that the curriculum should take account of ‘the ethnic diversity of the school population and society at large’, and draws attention to the principle that as wide a range of children as possible should have access to the whole curriculum.
Issues of equal opportunity may arise in a number of contexts; for example, those of gender, race, disability and religion.
Such issues must be a concern of those devising the National Curriculum because the attainment targets and programmes of study must not be biased, deliberately or unwittingly, towards or against any such group.
In particular, the National Curriculum assessment methods must enable all pupils to demonstrate what they can do, without the assessment of their performance being unfairly affected by the context of the task or the preconceptions of the assessor.
All pupils should pursue the programmes of study and attainment targets if they are to be able to participate fully in adult life and employment.
This is their entitlement.
But not all pupils enter school at age 5 with the same experience and competence: some will be further advanced than others by virtue of their family background.
Schools need to ensure that all pupils, irrespective of their backgrounds, have an equal opportunity to achieve the attainment targets.
Pupils with special educational needs may require particular help to pursue the programmes and targets, or in some cases modifications to those, and this problem is addressed in chapter 11.
But the aim is that, wherever possible, all pupils should have access to the full range of the English curriculum.
Such principles are also advocated in the general criteria for GCSE syllabuses.
Under ‘Avoidance of bias’ they state: ‘Every possible effort must be made to ensure that syllabuses and examinations are free of political, ethnic, gender and other forms of bias.’
And under ‘Recognition of cultural diversity’ they state: ‘In devising syllabuses and setting question papers Examining Groups should bear in mind the linguistic and cultural diversity of society.,
It was beyond our brief to attempt a general statement about equal opportunities in education.
There are, however, certain aspects which have particular importance in English teaching.
THE CONTENT OF THE CURRICULUM
English teachers need to be ready to give careful introductions and support when using texts which might otherwise cause offence to some groups; for example, if a character with racist attitudes is portrayed, even though the author may not be supporting such attitudes.
The choice of subjects for imaginative writing may also require care.
I discuss in chapter 6 the criteria for a balanced selection of literature in the classroom: it should include both British and non-British, both female and male authors, etc.
The books chosen for study should also encompass a balanced range of presentations of other societies, and of ethnic and social groupings and life-styles within our own society.
It is well known that girls and boys tend to choose different books, and indeed that teenage boys tend to drop voluntary reading altogether.
If this difference is simply accepted, it will only serve to strengthen stereotypes.
All teachers should therefore enable and encourage both girls and boys to read a variety of genres by a variety of authors, including those which challenge stereotypes of the roles of the sexes and of different cultural groups.
In literature and in media education, pupils should explore, for example, ways in which different groups in society are stereotyped or their viewpoints represented, and in which stories can be recast to reflect different authorial attitudes or characterisations of participants.
Work on knowledge about language should involve discussion of matters such as sexist language; styles of interaction in social groups (see below); how hidden messages about social groups (such as teenagers or older people) which are conveyed by advertising etc. can be decoded for the values they contain and for the differences between what is said and what is implied.
TASKS AND ASSESSMENT
Children should be judged on what they can do and on what they know, not on who they are.
But to ignore the evidence of differences in performance between gender or ethnic groups can lead to unjust treatment of individuals.
Substantial research has shown that different ethnic groups (e.g. children of Caribbean or Asian origin) display different ranges of attainment in the British education system.
There are also documented differences between the average test performances of girls and boys in different curricular subjects.
(See TGAT Report, appendix F.) And a strong association between social background and educational attainment is one of the best-demonstrated findings of educational research.
(See TGAT Report, appendix J.) The causes of  such differences are not well understood.
But curricular and assessment arrangements should aim to raise expectations and to help to narrow the gap wherever possible.
As well as such differences in educational attainment, there are differences in the characteristic linguistic behaviour of various groups.
Here also English teachers have particular responsibilities.
The possibility of bias arises especially in the assessment of oracy, because of the difficulty of separating pupils’ spoken language from perceptions of their personality and background.
Oracy involves teaching and assessing children's language behaviour with other people.
Such behaviour may depend at least partly on the teacher's skill in setting up situations which will elicit the best from each child: most people are shy in some situations and confident in others, and different people's responses to the same situation may vary sharply.
Language behaviour is influenced not only by personality but also by convention and culture.
Speakers of different languages and cultural backgrounds, and from different social groups, vary quite significantly in their preferred language norms.
There is a growing body of research which shows that cultures differ in the way conversations and other forms of spoken discourse are conducted.
Features of interaction such as body posture, gesture, preferred distance between speakers, discursive styles, the ways in which politeness is marked or attention to other speakers is signalled, differ widely across cultures.
Other research illustrates the kinds of cross-cultural communication problem which can arise in interviews and other institutional settings.
There are also considerable differences between the sexes in typical speech styles, which carry implications for assessment.
For example, boys are more likely than girls from the same social background to:
speak with a broader regional accent and use more non-standard grammatical forms;
talk about their interests and experiences with less overt enthusiasm, using a narrower pitch range, less variation in speed and volume, and fewer intensifying words and phrases;
express beliefs and opinions more confidently,;
give direct instructions rather than negotiate, in group activities;
use ritual insults, jokes, verbal bantering and aggressive argument;
interrupt girls rather than boys in conversation.
Differences in speech styles may also be observed between other social groups.
Whether these characteristic differences are judged positively or negatively will depend on the context and purpose of the task.
For example, in some tasks, the more direct way of speaking that is more common to boys will be advantageous; in others, the more tentative approach more frequently found in girls will be more appropriate.
CONCLUSION
Throughout the English curriculum and in the assessment process, teachers should enable all pupils, regardless of gender, ethnic or social group, first to reflect on their performance, and then actively to seek to adapt their language characteristics to situation and purpose.
For example, in some situations girls may need to strive to be more assertive, while in others boys may need to develop greater sensitivity in their use of language.
The differences in language behaviour between the sexes should be specifically drawn to pupils' attention; in group work in mixed schools teachers could assist reflection, comparison and adaptation by ensuring a balance between mixed and single-sex work wherever appropriate.
Similar principles should apply to the treatment of differences in language behaviour between other groups.
It is not suggested that the results of assessment should be adjusted to take account of characteristic differences between groups in performance.
But those preparing standard assessment tasks and other assessment instruments should consider them so as to minimise bias in the task or context and guard against any preconceptions of assessors; and any comparison of results between single-sex schools or between those with different ethnic or social class populations should be made in the light of the evidence referred to above.
Special Educational Needs
Our supplementary guidance said, in relation to special needs:
The Government proposes that where a pupil has a statement of special [educational]needs under the 1981 Education Act, the statement should specify any National Curriculum requirements which should not apply or should be modified for that individual pupil.
In addition, orders may define circumstances in which the application of the National Curriculum provisions to individual pupils might be modified or lifted for any foundation subject….
I should be grateful if you would consider whether exceptions of this kind for categories of pupils can be justified in the case of English.
As TGAT pointed out, pupils with special educational needs make up a very diverse group.
Their difficulties stem from a number of different causes and may be temporary or permanent; and they may be receiving their education, either outside the mainstream (whether in special classes or units in ordinary schools, or in special schools) or in ordinary classes in ordinary schools.
ACCESS THROUGH ENGLISH
The Working Party believed, and those we consulted concurred whole-heartedly, that competence in English is important, both in its own right and to enable pupils to gain access to and benefit from the other subjects of the National Curriculum.
Pupils with special educational needs, like all other pupils, should have the opportunity to experience as far as possible the full range of the English curriculum.
For example, pupils with reading problems (including dyslexic pupils) should not be deprived of literature, but should have the opportunity of experiencing it through listening to others reading aloud, whether live or recorded, and through seeing plays and films, as well as through reading suitably simplified versions.
It is assumed therefore that virtually all children will travel along broadly the same curricular path in English, but that some will move more quickly, and further, than others; and some may be around the level 1 attainments for the whole of their school careers.
Pupils will also move at different speeds for different activities.
Some pupils of secondary school age who have special educational needs may continue to display some literacy skills within the lower levels associated with key stages 1 and 2, so the teaching they receive in English will need to cater for this whilst incorporating material with a range and degree of interest, and in some cases intellectual demand, more appropriate to their chronological age.
In other subjects too they may need written and other materials with simplified language demands but perhaps higher demands in other respects.
All of the attainment targets can be assessed at various levels, with corresponding programmes of study leading towards them.
Pupils with special educational needs should therefore be able to participate in the attainment targets, programmes of study and assessment arrangements, subject where appropriate to the modifications we recommend below.
ASSESSMENT AT LEVEL 1
Level 1 is intended to encompass a wide range of attainment, from those pupils who have barely begun to learn, to those who are very close to achieving level 2.
There will be a small minority for whom achieving level 1 alone will present longer-term goals, which they work towards through a series of preliminary programmes.
When such pupils attain level 1, the fact that, despite their difficulties, they have started down the curricular path should be acknowledged as a real achievement.
A level 1 assessment at age 7 is intended to signal that the child may need special help.
In the majority of cases this will merely confirm what teachers already knew, and will strengthen their hands in taking appropriate action; for example, seeking assessment under the 1981 Act with a possible view to securing a statement of special educational needs.
In others, it will come as something of a surprise, and there may then be a need for the child to undergo further diagnostic tests to establish the extent of the problem.
A level 1 performance should always prompt further investigation.
This might, for example, reveal that a child who appeared to be inattentive or a slow learner was in fact showing symptoms of specific learning difficulties (e.g. dyslexia) or a hearing impairment — possibly an intermittent one such as is associated with otitis media.
MODIFYING THE CURRICULUM
Pupils with 1981 Act statements
A small proportion of pupils with special educational needs will have statements made under the Education Act 1981 to specify the educational and other provisions necessary to meet these.
The procedures of the 1981 Act ensure that statements are drawn up on the basis of the pupil's individual needs, but with the general aim of ensuring, as far as possible, an education comparable with that of the pupil's age group in the mainstream.
The proportion of pupils with statements varies widely across the country, partly because of the LEAs' differing policies on ‘statementing’, but overall stands at some 1.7 per cent of the total population of statutory school age, with just over a fifth of these in ordinary rather than special schools.
It is impossible to recommend blanket modifications to our proposals for pupils with statements which are, by definition, individually tailored to their needs.
However, later in this chapter there are some general suggestions which may be of assistance to those who will be responsible for incorporating into statements modifications to the National Curriculum requirements.
Pupils without statements
But most pupils with special educational needs will not be the subject of statements.
Amongst the general population of children in ordinary schools, about a sixth have special educational needs of one kind or another.
The Working Group's suggestions will also be relevant to some of the pupils with special educational needs but without statements, whose particular requirements could be met by statutory modifications (which the 1988 Act allows in respect of children falling within certain cases and circumstances) to or within Orders for attainment targets, programmes of study and assessment arrangements for English.
Pupils with learning difficulties
Pupils with learning difficulties, with or without statements, are likely to make only slow progress with reading and writing.
For such pupils oral work should be given greater emphasis initially, though the skills of reading and writing must not be neglected.
Where such pupils also have speech impairments, there may be a case for exempting them altogether from — or modifying — some of the assessment arrangements, even if they continue to pursue the attainment targets and programmes of study.
Pupils with specific learning difficulties (e.g. dyslexia) should, given appropriate help, achieve as well as pupils without special educational needs.
Dyslexic pupils may, however, have particular difficulty with the attainment target concerned with ‘secretarial’ skills, and in this respect they may benefit particularly from using word  processors, including spelling checkers.
They will benefit especially, too, from explicit teaching about language, which is already included in the recommended programmes of study and which may need adaptation and reinforcement for such pupils.
The reading attainment target contains statements of attainment for the earlier levels which relate to information retrieval.
Explicit teaching of this skill should also be of special value to pupils with specific learning difficulties, who generally find it difficult to master.
Pupils with physical disabilities
Pupils with physical disabilities should in general have the same attainment targets and programmes of study as their peers.
But where their particular disability impairs their access to the curriculum, this access should be facilitated by alternative means, and it should be recognised that the problem of access may hinder their initial progress, though they may be expected to catch up later.
Some pupils with physical disabilities may require the writing attainment targets to be modified.
For example, the handwriting target, which applies up to level 4, and the presentation target, which applies from levels 5 to 7, might be inappropriate.
Such pupils should be enabled to produce their written work on a word processor or concept keyboard.
Pupils with impaired vision
Pupils with impaired vision will obviously experience difficulty with reading.
Depending on the degree of impairment, they may need special large-print books or optical or electronic devices for enlarging and enhancing print, or to be taught braille.
Even so they may also have difficulty in covering the full range of literature suggested, though not in understanding or enjoying it.
They may therefore need to be read to or to listen to ‘talking book’ cassettes.
Where the reading skill required is that of interpreting such things as labels and road signs, they should pursue the normal targets and programmes as far as possible for their own safety, though they may need help where practicable to interpret these things through other than ordinary visual means.
Such pupils may also have difficulty with writing.
They might therefore be exempted from — or given modified — handwriting and presentation targets and, depending on the degree of impairment, undertake the writing tasks through alternative means of communication, using technological aids.
Pupils with impaired hearing
Profoundly deaf pupils will almost certainly need modification of the speaking and listening component, especially if they were born deaf or lost their hearing before acquiring language.
They might be allowed to  use signing, or speech with signing support.
It should also be recognised that their progress with reading and writing is likely to be handicapped initially if they come to school with a restricted knowledge and experience of language.
Moreover, since their condition limits their ability to pick up and assimilate new words and to understand the subtleties of language, the problem becomes greater as more specialised vocabulary and abstract terms are introduced.
The achievements of pupils with a hearing impairment will undoubtedly be affected by these factors, and this will need to be taken into account, for example, in the assessment of the first attainment target in writing.
Pupils with less severe hearing impairments may also need modifications to the requirements, but of a less far-reaching nature.
Pupils with temporary problems
For pupils with temporary problems, it will be for headteachers to decide whether the National Curriculum provisions should be modified temporarily.
These temporary problems might include medical problems, family crises and other similar major difficulties; they might apply to pupils with special educational needs as to any other pupil.
Pupils with temporary Problems might also include Traveller children affected by discontinuity of schooling.
In all these cases headteachers will need to consider what action is most appropriate in the circumstances.
EXTERNAL ASSISTANCE
Some pupils with special educational needs, with or without statements, may need assistance to enable them to communicate their achievements.
Such assistance may come from, for example, speech therapists, occupational therapists, medical specialists or psychologists.
There may be resource implications, but the involvement of such experts is essential if the pupils concerned are to be enabled to perform in English to their full potential.
For most pupils, however, assistance can be expected to be found from within the school's own resources.
It should come through day-to-day teacher contact, and through language specialists' involvement in support teaching and in helping their colleagues to use appropriate language consistently across the curriculum.