

ARCHES
Round-up of arches
An arch makes an elegant feature out of an opening between two rooms.
If you've got rid of a doorway, or turned two rooms into one, round it off with an arch kit which you plaster over; add stylish fibrous plaster arch mouldings and corbels; or frame it in wood.
As the requirements of our living spaces alter, and more efficient central heating and draught-proofing keep our homes warm throughout, it's tempting to get rid of a few doors or even eyeless to give our homes a more spacious feel.
If you've taken down a door leading from hall to living room, or kitchen to dining room, you may be lucky and be left with interesting architrave mouldings around doorways, but if they're plain modern ones, you'll probably rip them out with the door.
When turning two small rooms into one, and removing a load-bearing wall, however, you're inevitably stuck with an ugly boxed-in rolled steel joist, supported by sections of the old wall which act as pillars for it.
And however you decorate your spacious new room, it still tends to have that feel of two rooms made into one.
Build an arch into that opening, however, and things look completely different.
It spans the room, looking purposeful — after all, arches were originally self-supporting structures, forming domes or vaults within buildings if several were used together, or making impressive bridges across rivers.
Built into a doorway, they make it into a gateway — an impressive entrance, leading into the space beyond.
ARCH DESIGNS & KITS
The style of arch you choose will be dictated partly by the height of your doorway, or the rsj or lintel if spanning a room.
As the arch will lower the height of the opening at the sides, you'll be limited to a style which allows you to walk under it freely if that height is quite low.
A semicircular arch will encroach on headroom at the sides of a doorway, whereas an Oriental pointed-top arch will give more height in the middle.
As a room divider, the shallower curves of a Tudor or Spanish-style arch need less height, and are suited to modern homes where storey heights tend to be 2.2m.
For properties with higher ceilings, classic pointed-top styles such as Gothic or Oriental can be used to effect.
For really low conditions, you may only be able to fit quadrant curves, or slightly more elaborate variations, into both corners, leaving the centre almost flat, giving you a semi-elliptical shape.
Kits are available for the simpler profiles in the form of expanded metal mesh sections, which you nail to the wall, join with metal angle bead, then plaster over.
You'll find a limited selection in d-i-y stores: for a wider choice, try builders merchants.
D-i-y kits tend to come in separate sections, forming two sides of each arch, one on each side of the wall, sometimes with a separate soffit section which can be used for wider walls.
One piece mesh frames are usually only suitable for walls 4½in (112mm) thick.
The mesh kits give a plain arch, with no added mouldings, but are simple for an amateur to fit and plaster over.
The metal angle bead which forms the curve of the arch provides a guide for the plastering trowel, to make application of plaster easier.
More elaborate, moulded fibrous plaster arches have to be bought from specialist suppliers: some do mail order, others may have showrooms in larger cities.
The prefabricated arches come in sections, and are screwed and glued to wooden battens, fixed to the sides and top of the opening, and joints and screw-holes are filled with plaster later.
Matching corbels (which look like ‘supporting’ projections) and pilasters (side ‘columns’) are available to add to the sides for an even fancier archway.
Above: A grand opening for a kitchen/dining room.
Making a perfect frame for both sides of the room, this elliptical shaped arch has been painted in Lady Mantle vinyl matt emulsion from the Dulux Definitions range
Above left: Create a niche for books and favourite objects, with Oakhill's timber niche set.
Solid pine external architraves overcome the problem of papering neatly around arch curves
WAYS WITH WOOD
Expanded metal arch kits, once they have been plastered over, present a smooth wall face, and can be wallpapered around fairly easily, but they don't quite have the character of the moulded fibrous plaster.
If you have a router, you can cut your own mouldings to the shape of the arch, but you'll need fairly wide boards.
The straight side sections are easier: you can make up mock pilasters with straight sections of bought mouldings, or again make your own if you have a router.
Make a projecting plinth for the bottom for a more realistic effect.
The mouldings can be stained to contrast with surrounding walls, or painted to co-ordinate.
If you're using wooden or fibrous plaster mouldings without pilaster for the arch, it tends to look better with corbels fitted to its ‘springing points’(where the arch starts on the side walls).
These can be bought with the preformed arch, or you can make your own, either by plastering over metal mesh nailed to battens, which are screwed to the wall, or by forming a shape with timber blocks and mouldings.
For a less elaborate look, a simple projecting timber moulding can look equally effective.
You can also make your own arch using plasterboard, plywood or hardboard.
The material is cut to shape and fixed to a timber framework, itself fixed to the opening.
The curved soffit is finished with a strip of expanded metal mesh, which is plastered over; or you can use hardboard bent to shape and tacked into place.
Plasterboard is easiest for giving a neat finish, as a skim coat will mask the join between board and existing plaster.
With plywood and  hardboard , it's no so easy to hide the joins, and the best you can do is to use a thick textures paper such as woodchip or a heavy blown vinyl.
Above: The curved lintel of an old doorway gives an impressive archway feature, while the brick arch, left, makes the most of natural materials to give a sense of timeless elegance.
Handmade French Pommet floor tiles, from Fired Earth, complete the effect
Above: An unusual ‘porthole’ feature window is included in the selection of archway kits from Oakhill.
Made up of solid pine architrave sections, inner plywood lengths which form the soffit, and supporting cross-members (left), they can be varnished to match existing skirting boards etc,(below)
Open up your home and let in the light: archways help to create a spacious feel.
Walls are Dulux Forget-me-Not matt emulsion
WOODBENDERS
A recently patented process by the company Woodbenders has made it possible to make a made-to-measure arch with preformed wood or mdf.
The process involves plasticising the wood or mdf, so it can be bent to a consistent shape.
The resulting arch has a neat lipped edge, and can be papered right up to.
One version is shaped with grooves just inside the lips, into which plasterboard fits neatly to complete the arch shape.
The resulting arch can be stained, painted, or left natural.
Contact the company for details or mail order service.
BUILDING WITH BRICK
If you have a cottage-style home, with bare brick on show, a brick arch could look very attractive, especially a wide one where two rooms have been joined into one.
This isn't a job for the bricklaying novice, however.
You'll need pretty good bricklaying skills, otherwise leave the job to a professional.
The secret of a good arch is in the former, around which the bricks are laid.
The easiest shape to make a semi-circle.
Cut two semi-circles from ¾in plywood.
Space apart by the thickness of the wall, and nail 3x1in timber offcuts which form the base.
Finish the semi-circle with a strip of hardboard nailed to the outer edges of the plywood arch.
The piers and the arch itself should be at least two bricks wide, to give the structure  rigidity, and the piers must rest on a solid concrete floor with foundations below — not on floorboards.
Once the piers are built up (use the arch former to get the spacing between them exactly right), the former is supported on vertical planks wedged against the piers with struts.
Wedges are used under the former to get the vertical position exactly right.
Spacing of the bricks is marked on to the former on the inner and outer circumference, always starting form the centre brick so that it's exactly symmetrical.
You can buy specially shaped bricks for an arch, but it's much cheaper to use ordinary bricks, and shape the mortar joints instead.
Lay the bricks starting from one side almost up to the centre, checking each one for position against a string line attached to the centre of the arch former, and against the marks on the circumference.
They lay from the other side.
The three central bricks at the top of the arch are laid last.
Once the mortar is completely dry, the former can be removed, and the arch will support itself.
Fill in the gaps around the arch top with expanded metal mesh nailed to timber battens, screwed down to the sides of the remaining opening.
Plaster up to the arch, being careful to avoid staining the brick.
If your brickworking skills aren't up to it, you can also cheat by using brick slips, stuck directly to the plaster with special adhesive.
Be careful with spacing, and mark out on to the wall as you would for the arch former, starting with the top centre brick, to achieve a realistic effect.
OPENING OUT
Fixing a metal mesh kit into an existing opening entails cutting away the plaster so that the expanded metal mesh can be nailed to the brickwork using masonry nails.
Even if the middle of the opening will have to remain flat, it is essential to find the exact centre and work from it, so that the arch won't be lop-sided.
It's also important that the corbels at the springing of the arch are level.
The mesh can be cut to suit the arch, and flat or bridging sections can be used to join the curved ends where the arch is fitted into a wide opening.
These arches are purely decorative, so no cutting of brickwork is needed.
Making two rooms into one by knocking down a wall is a structural alteration which must have the approval of the local Building Control department.
It's unlikely that they will allow you to use an arch to carry the load: the abutments aren't likely to be strong enough to resist the thrust.
In cutting through a loadbearing wall to make two rooms into one, you must provide a lintel or rsj of sufficient size to carry the weight above.
The Building Control office will probably ask to see the calculations.
It's best to leave the cutting of the opening to a professional builder unless you are skilled, because you will need to know the number and size of needles (the temporary horizontal supporting timbers that past through the wall, carried on adjustable vertical props), and you will have to provide a firm base on which to stand the upright props, which have to be supported on the ground, and not by a wooden floor.
A NICE NICHE
Arches aren't only for doorways or through-rooms; they also make ornamental niches, and can improve the appearance of alcove shelving.
The alcove at the side of a chimneybreast is an ideal place for a decorative arch.
One or two pieces of hardboard can be used, or two pieces of thicker board, joined with timber battens, and a curved strip of hardboard nailed round the shape to form the soffit.
For best effect, set the board back from the face of the chimney plaster by about 12 to 25mm, so there's no problem with cracking at the joint where plaster and hardboard or timber meet.
If you are using brick slips to cover a large arch in the same room, the soffit can be nailed below the arch, but set back about 25mm higher, or made flush with the arch, so that brick slips can be stuck around the face, or both face and soffit, to match the main arch.
Use slips with a ‘mortar’ effect compound between them to look more realistic.
Or paint the arch instead, and stencil a design around it for a pretty effect.
Where you have a wide fascia board, you can produce fancier shapes, such as horseshoe, lancet or three-centred designs.
For a subtle effect with lighting in the evenings, install low-voltage lights in your alcove, and use perforated hardboard to cut out the arch shape.
Fancy designs are available from larger timber merchants, and give a lovely effect when lit from behind.
Niches, such as you see in grander houses, are available in fibrous plaster, ready moulded in one piece.
They can be installed by taking out one layer of bricks (so you'll have to cut through a wall — make sure it's suitable!); or they can be installed in a corner, or in an alcove, with a surrounded flat fascia, in which case you'll need to build a timber framework to support the niche and hold the fascia.
Many are designed to take a concealed light in the base (not usually supplied by the company).
With low levels of lighting around the room in the evening, they make a spectacular display for your favourite dried flower arrangement or special ornament.
GALVANISED STEEL ARCH FORMERS
Part of the range of galvanised steel arch formers available from Expamet.
Corners are available in four radius sizes, semicircles in six, the bullseye only as 230mm radius.
Other shapes include elliptical and spandrel, as well as extra soffit strips for wider walls, and rectangular make-up pieces, which can be used between arch corners, or to lengthen the centre of a semi-circular arch.
TRANSFORM A DOORWAY
Fitting a prefabricated mesh arch into a plain rectangular doorway opening is fairly straightforward.
Here we show how one of Truline's Archmaster kits is fitted: there's a choice of seven arch styles, and 25 standard sizes to choose from, as well as an optional steel open-mesh bead for external work.
Wear protective gloves and safety specs, as handling steel mesh is tough on the hands, and masonry nails can shatter.
1.
Remove architraves, door frame and plaster from around existing opening, and measure opening width (A), and wall thickness (B)
2.
Choose a suitably sized arch kit.
Fix front and back sections to wall with masonry nails
3.
Use connecting dowels to join beads of each section together
4.
Where mesh overlaps, fasten with self-tapping screws.
At least 10mm overlap is recommended for soffits.
5.
For thicker walls, a special soffit extension strip can be used between the two sections
6.
Standard mesh can be covered with lightweight plaster.
Hole trowel at an angle, using bead as a guide, and trowel upwards, pushing plaster against wall and frame
7.
Use a straight piece of wood to remove surplus plaster while it's still wet.
Work upwards, using zig-zag motion
8.
Fill hollows, and level again.
When hardened, smooth down with abrasive paper, then seal with plaster primer.
UP date
ECONOMICAL KITCHEN TRANSFORMATION
A new kitchen could cost thousands of pounds, but in many cases you can transform your old one into a dream kitchen at very modest cost by re-using the carcasses, and simply replacing the doors, drawer fronts and worktops with new ones from Distinctive Doors.
At the same time optional accessories, such as cornices, light pelmets and plinths, could also be changed.
Doors can be solid wood, such as oak, pine, cherry, or maple, for example, or they can be white ash or limed oak veneer, or even a hard-wearing laminate finish.
Doors are made to measure, delivered in four weeks, for d-i-y fitting or professional installation.,,.
FLUSH WITH SUCCESS
Not all the latest water-saving reduced-flush toiler cisterns will flush the pan effectively, but the Ifö Aqua is claimed to do so.
The Ifö Aqua wc is Swedish made, but meets all UK water byelaws and is approved by the British Board of Agrément.
It owes its effectiveness to a patented twin-nozzle diverter and clever bowl design.
The maximum flush permitted on new wcs in the UK was reduced from 9 litres to 7.5 litres from 1989, and this is likely to be further reduced to 6 litres.
The water-conserving Ifö Aqua already has a 6 litre flush, and is claimed to create enough swirl in the bowl to flush efficiently.,,.
MODULAR MINI SHED
A multi-purpose mini-shed, ideal for the smaller garden, is being introduced by Storewall.
It can house dustbins, or be used to store tools and garden equipment.
Called the Morestore, it has a front-opening door and sturdy liftup lid for ease of access.
Supplied in flat-pack form, it can be quickly and easily assembled following the comprehensive instructions.
The Morestore can be expanded by the simple addition of a module unit, which doubles the storage capacity.
The Morestore and Morestore Module are both 35in high x 25in deep x 36in wide, and each unit provides 18cu ft of storage space.
The Morestore costs £49.95 plus p&p; and the Add On Module £39.95 plus p&p.,,.
TAPES GALORE
Sellotape has launched a range of self-adhesive tapes for many fixing jobs around the house, garden and garage.
For gardeners, the range includes Sellotape All Weather, designed for repairing plastic greenhouses and cloches; Sellotape insulating tape for fixing plants to stakes; and Sellotape Outdoor Sticky Fixers for fixing hooks, and similar greenhouse items.
For d-i-y jobs, there is Sellotape Aluminium Tape, an aluminium foil tape for repair work, which can be painted over, costing £2.59 for a 5m roll; and Sellotape Carpet to Floor tape, a double-sided cloth tape for fixing mats and rugs to the floor to prevent slipping; a 5m roll costs £2.49.
Sellotape Cloth Tape is for binding tool handles and general repair work, and costs £1.35 for a 3m roll.,,.
JOBBING NOTEBOOK
FIXING A FENCE TRELLIS
A trellis panel can provide privacy and a framework for climbing plants without being too obtrusive.
However, the extra wind resistance created by the panels means that the construction must be fairly robust.
Larch-Lap produces various infill panels and post extenders which can be fitted to existing fences with 3in square timber posts.
The result is as strong as the original fence.
1
Cut a treated 3in square fence post into the required number of sections to support the new trellis.
The curved sections shown here are 18in high at each end.
Ensure the cut is square or the panels will lean
2
Treat the newly-cut end grain with an exterior preservative at this stage
3
Larch-Lap's Extender Posts cost around £5.
They are fixed to the top of the existing uprights.
Screw holes are provided on two sides of the metal fixing
4
Slot the new post sections into the metalwork and hammer fully home if required.
Check the posts are upright, it not add thin timber wedges and re-tighten screws
5
Offer up the decorative trellis panels (concave and convex arches are available, as well as rectangular sections) and use a spirit level to ensure they are horizontal and approximately 2in above the top of the fence.
Galvanised nails hold the panels to the posts
6
Add square timber cappings to the new post sections and the work is complete, ready for climbing plants to soften the outline of the trellis.,,.
FITTING A MIRROR WARDROBE
One way of making a smallish bedroom look larger is to build in a wardrobe with mirrored doors.
To make the best use of space, use sliding doors.
The wardrobe illustrated here is from the Acme range.
Despite the weight of the doors, access to the wardrobe interiors needs only the lightest push.
1
The chosen interior frames go on the wall first, including any required end panel.
Check that upright panels are truly vertical
2
Plastic cups are provided to hold clothes hanging bars.
Cut the bars to length
3
With the interior complete, cut the top and bottom tracks to the correct length with a hacksaw
4
For ceilings over 7ft 6in, Acme produces height reducers.
In this case, a timber batten was used
5
The bottom running track can be screwed directly through the floorcovering.
Ensure there are no pipes or cables below
6
A decorative fascia strip is used to cover the top of the ceiling rail
7
Rest the top edge of the door just behind the top rail, tilting until you feel the guides catch the track.
An extra pair of hands makes the job easier
8
A close-up of a guide and its adjuster screw
9
Engage the wheels and make any adjustments with screw driver and spanner.
Anti-jump clips are provided to keep the doors on track
10
The finished wardrobe.
The one illustrated has three doors ,,.
MAKING A PICTURE FRAME
Picture frames are an attractive feature in their own right, and making your own can be a satisfying hobby.
Few special tools are needed, but it pays to invest in the best mitre box you can afford.
Get the mitres right and the rest is plain sailing.
Relate your frame size to the picture and mount area.
You'll find finished mouldings in art and framing shops, and unfinished ones in timber merchants and d-i-y stores.
Mitre cutting selection: 1: Aluminium allow box with replaceable wood insert; 2: Nobex 303 with saw and preset angles for 4, 5, 6 and 8-sided frames; 3: Nobex 505 handy mitre guide can be set between 45 and 90°, holds saw (not included) with magnets; 4: Record Marples mitre cutting guide clamps mouldings for sawing, gluing and pinning
1
Mark the moulding to the required length, indicating which way the cut is to be made.
Place the moulding face-up in the box and cut with a fine tooth tenon saw
2
Mark the length of the second piece using the first as your guide.
Check the size before making the second cut.
Cut the two remaining sides using the same procedure
3
Never sand mitres after cutting.
You will find they mesh better when rough.
Check for fit, then stain at this stage, or paint.
Alternatively, all moulding sections can be stained, finished, etc, before cutting
4
Mark the positions for the pins.
They are best on top and bottom edges as they're less noticeable.
Drill the holes to avoid splitting.
Hold the longer undrilled moulding in a vice; apply glue to the cut edge, then hold the shorter drilled piece in place
5
Now locate the drilled side just a shade higher so that as you hammer the pin in place it moves down just far enough to produce a perfect joint.
Use a nail punch for final hammer blows to avoid bruising the frame
6
An alternative method is to glue all mitred edges then enclose in a frame clamp.
Tighten and leave joints to set overnight, then drive in your pins (don't forget starter holes, especially in hardwood or very thin mouldings, which may split)
7
Check the inside rebate side very carefully before cutting your mount.
Cut the mount with straight-edge and sharp craft knife.
The mount should be an easy fit, about 3mm smaller than the frame
8
Use card off-cuts made into two L-shaped pieces to help you decide on the picture area.
Then transfer your measurements to the face of the card using a soft pencil.
Make sure your hands are clean and grease-free
9
Mark only the outer edges of the card which will be hidden by the frame, and mark the corners of the picture area.
Make sure ruler and set-square are clean so that card is not marked
10
Using a metal straight-edge (clamp in place if you have a large frame) hold your knife at an angle of 60° and score the card in easy strokes until you've cut through.
Ease out the corners with the knife tip
11
Mount your picture with stamp hinges or pieces of masking tape on corners or top edge.
Clean glass thoroughly, then place it, followed by picture with mount, backing card and a piece of hardboard into frame
12
Screw on two turn clips per side.
These allow for easy removal later.
Occasionally you may need an extra thickness of card to bring the contents up flush with the frame
13
Use masking tape to seal the joint between backing and frame to keep out dust.
For more permanent fixing use glued paper tape which needs moistening with water before application
14
Drill small smart holes and insert screw-eyes about a third of the way down from the picture top.
Thread picture wire through twice and wind it back on itself.
Hang from a picture hook or a picture rail hook
CURING A DRIPPING TAP
If a tap drips persistently, it may be caused by a damaged tap seating which is chewing up the surface of any washer fitted.
It is possible to regrind the seating, but an alternative which most will find easier is to buy a reseating set.
One freely advisable is the Drip Cure by Oracstar, suitable for ¼in hot or cold taps manufactured to BS 1010.
To make fitting easier to follow, we show you how with a cut-away tap.
1
Turn off the water supply to the tap fully, then remove the top section of the tap and discard the old washer
2
The white seat is designed to fit over the old seating, and the green insertion tool seen here is used to push it firmly into place
3
Apply Vaseline liberally to the green insertion tool, fit it into the top section of the tap, then place the white seat on the end of the insertion tool.
Lightly screw the top of the tap back in place, then turn the tap handle fully off.
This will force the new seating down
4
Unscrew the tap and remove the green insertion tool.
Place the red washer into the upper section of the tap and re-assemble so the red washer comes down firmly on to the white seat, ensuring a perfect seal ,,.
FITTING A LOFT LADDER
If you plan to use the loft space for storage, the only safe way to gain access is by means of a properly fitted loft ladder.
The first essential is to check the clearance in the actual loft space to ensure that the ladder will fold away correctly when not in use.
The ladder we have fitted here is a Youngman Easiway three-section, providing safe access where loft clearance is limited.
It is suitable for floor to heights of up to 3m, and it fits loft openings down to 508x356mm (20in x 17in).
Constructed from lightweight aluminium, it has extra wide treads and a handrail for safety.
It is provided with full fitting instructions plus a template to help correct positioning.
1
Remove packing and check that you have all the components listed on the instruction sheet before you start any assembly work
2
Mark out the trapdoor by placing the new trapdoor over the opening and drawing around it
3
Cut out the trapdoor either by hand or power saw.
We used a jig saw
4
Check the new trapdoor for fit and trim if necessary
5
Measure and fit the hinges to the trapdoor
6
Then fit the door steps
7
Measure for the position of the trapdoor twist catch
8
Drill a hole and fit the twist catch
9
Check the floor-to-floor height and mark on the template.
Position the red stops according to the mark on the template
10
Tighten the screws on the red top stops
11
Screw the holding brackets to the loft hatch edge
12
Then extend the ladder fully and fit the pivot arms
13
Fit the hand rail to complete the assembly ,,.
ADDING A NEW DOUBLE SOCKET
You can never have too many socket outlets.
In most rooms you can add to what you have by the addition of a spur, connected to the existing ring circuit.
Each spur can feed one new outlet, and this can be a single, double or triple socket outlet.
Before hacking away at walls, it is always wise to check with a detector to ensure there are no cables or pipes in the immediate vicinity.
1
Mark the perimeter of the socket on the wall then drill around, keeping just inside you pencil lines.
Extend down for the line of the cable run
2
Use a steel chisel or bolster to cut away the plaster and brick to a depth of about 35mm
3
The simplest way or wiring is to link in to an existing socket, but the alternative is to connect direct into the ring circuit cable using a three-dimensional junction box.
The cable is cut and wired into the box, then the spur taken from the three terminals
4
Drill and plug the wall so you can anchor the mounting box in place, ensuring it lies just below the plaster surface.
Then connect the new socket to the spur cable
5
Fold any excess cable neatly back into the mounting box; tighten the holding screws, then fill in the cable channel with cellulose filler.
Smooth when set
REPAIRING A WINDOW FRAME
As long as damage is not too severe, a modern repair system such as that offered by Sterling Roncraft can restore wood prior to redecorating, and protect it against any further attack.
1
A typical window frame with rotten areas.
It is best to remove existing old paint first, so that you can see the extent of the damage
2
Mix Peel-off Ronstrip with water, carefully following the pack instructions.
Wear rubber gloves and protect the floor.
Spread a 3mm thick layer of Ronstrip over the painted wood and leave it to dissolve the paint.
The more layers of paint, the longer it will take.
To remove, score the past with a knife and peel back in one layer.
Scrub away any residue with water and a stiff brush.
Wash off and leave to dry naturally
3
When the wood is dry, use chisel and mallet to cut away the rotten, crumbling material until sound wood is encountered.
Brush clean using an old paintbrush
4
Wearing rubber gloves, pour a little Ronseal Wood Hardener into the lid.
Brush liberally on to the exposed wood until the soft wood fibres are saturated.
Leave to dry for at least six hours
5
To protect wood against any future attack, use Ronseal Wood Preserving tablets at all vulnerable spots.
Follow instructions on pack for hole size and spacing.
The tablets should be pressed to just below surface and the hole filled later
6
Now mix Ronseal Wood Filler and apply the past immediately, coating deep areas thinly before filling holes slightly proud to allow for sanding smooth.
When set, rub smooth, and sand surrounding woodwork at the same time.
Wipe the wood with a cloth moistened with white spirit to remove any traces of grease or dust.
The filler is receptive to dye, so the repair can be coloured to match the surrounding wood
7
With the filler smooth, apply Colron Wood Dye in an appropriate shade.
We used English Light Oak.
Leave to dry for about six hours before varnishing
8
Stir the varnish.
Ronseal Colored Satin Varnish in walnut was used sparingly in an even coat.
Leave to dry for about six hours.
Rub lightly with medium grade steel wool; dust off and apply a final coat of varnish, finishing in the direction of the wood grain
9
The repaired window frame, finished to enhance the natural colour of the original wood
MENDING A CHAIR ARM
Chair arms are vulnerable to the warmth of central heating.
Shrinkage plus a little too much pressure can cause a joint to shear.
1
Carefully ease the arm loose, tapping lightly with a soft-face hammer where necessary
2
Here, a broken tenon needed drilling out.
Use a bit no larger than the original hole
3
Also drill out broken material from the underside of the chair arm.
Take care not to go too far!
4
Prepare a piece of dowel so it will be a tight fit in both leg top and arm.
Cut to length and smooth edges
5
Coat one end of the dowel with a pva woodworking adhesive and tap firmly into the arm.
Clean off surplus adhesive
6
Now coat the other end of the dowel with glue…
7
…and the rim of the hole into which it will fit.
This ensures that adhesive is carried down into the hole
8
Glue was also needed where the arm fitted into the chair back
9
The arm was then pushed into the chair back…
10
…and then aligned with the chair leg and tapped into place.
The block of softwood can be used to spread the load when using the hammer.
Wipe away surplus adhesive as work progresses.
Check that the arm aligns with its opposite number before the adhesive sets
11
The chair back in service
SEALING A WASHBASIN SERVICE
So often, the fitting of a waste outlet to a basin or vanity bowl is associated with sticky sealants or tapes.
But there is a clean alternative which involves the use of special washers, available in kit form.
The kit consists of a special white foam washer, a cone-shaped insert and a poly washer.
1
Pus the white foam washer on to the waste outlet so that it sits flush against the underside of the outlet rim
2
Insert the waste outlet into the hole in the bowl
3
Slip the black cone on to the threaded section of the waste outlet, narrow end uppermost
4
Then add the poly washer
5
Hold the washer in place while you connect the bottle trap and waste pipe
6
The basin is now operational, with no risk of drips ,,.
VARNISHING PARQUET
After laying new parquet flooring, apply a coat of clear varnish with a wad of lint-free rag, such as a piece of old cotton sheet.
Rub the varnish well into the grain of the wood and allow to dry.
Then sand lightly with fine steel wool, and dust off thoroughly, finishing with a tacky rag.
This primes and seals the floor prior to applying a coat of varnish by brush.
Cuprinol's Clear Varnish used here provides a tough skin, ideal for wood floors.
REPAIRING A LEAKING GUTTER
If you find water dripping from a plastic gutter joint and the clip is firmly in place, the neoprene or rubber gasket may have perished.
If you can't get a replacement, lift the gutter away and apply a bed of weatherproof sealant such as Bostic 6.
Press the gutter section firmly on to the sealant, and replace the holding clip.
HEATING
Warming up for winter
Installing a new heating system, or updating an existing one?
Trying to get the best out of a collection of individual heating appliances, or save money by installing new controls on a central heating system?
We look at the options available, and solve some common heating problems.
Over a quarter of the UK's energy consumption is used in the home, for heating, lighting, and powered appliances.
Whether we use this energy directly, as with gas, or indirectly, as electricity, it involves burning fuel, which emits carbon dioxide, which in turn destroys the ozone layer and contributes to global warming.
If we use energy efficiently, we help preserve our environment, and save money, too.
The week of 17–24 October has been designated Helping the Earth Week.
Look out for the logo, above, in supermarkets, banks, libraries, etc, on leaflets describing how you can cut energy consumption, and on products which can help.
Top 10 energy and money-saving tips:
Only use heat and light you really need.
Turn off lights and appliances when you leave a room, and draw curtains at night to stop heat escaping.
Turn down thermostats by 1°C.
You won't notice the difference, but will save 10% on fuel bill.
Lag your hot water tank and pipes.
Replace light bulbs with low-energy ones.
They cost more to start with, but last up to eight times as long, and use only a quarter of the energy.
Add room thermostats, a timer, and thermostatic radiator valves.
Draught-proof doors and windows.
Ensure loft insulation is 6in thick.
Install secondary double glazing.
If you have cavity walls, insulate them.
If installing new central heating, fit an energy-efficient gas-condensing boiler.
Whether you have central heating or individual heating appliances, you are likely to be using one of the four main fuel types — gas (mains or liquified), solid fuel, electricity or oil.
Mains gas is supplied to around 85% of British homes: it's available ‘on tap’(there's no need to store it ready for use); it's clean; it's easy to control; and the equipment that uses it needs very little maintenance.
It can also be used to fire a wide range of appliances — boilers, radiant and convector heaters — which burn at between 70 and 85% efficiency.
Some need a flue to carry away exhaust gases, but balanced-flue appliances can be easily installed on or close to any exterior wall.
Liquified petroleum gas (lpg) is a viable alternative for homes without mains gas supplies.
It can fire room heaters (using butane), or a full central heating system (using propane), but has two main disadvantages when compared with mains gas.
It needs a spacial storage tank, which has to be refilled by tanker, and it costs almost twice as much as mains gas.
Solid fuel is the heating fuel we have been using the longest.
It can be burnt in open fires, central heating boilers, and room heaters (with or without boilers attached).
It has to be stored somewhere, and is fairly dirty to handle; a flue or chimney is essential, and both appliances and flues need regular cleaning.
Open fires usually waste a lot of heat — up to 70% — but modern room heaters and gravity-feed boilers burn at efficiencies of up to 75%, so waste only 25%.
Electricity , like gas, is readily available, and reaches almost every home.
It is used to generate heat in radiant and convector appliances (where it is 100% efficient), and can provide whole-house heating using storage radiators (only 95% efficient due to storage losses).
It's clean to use, very simple to control, appliances need virtually no maintenance, and are simple to install, with no need for flues.
Disadvantages are that it is very expensive.
Oil is now the least popular for central heating after the 1970's oil crisis; it's not used for room heaters except in the form of paraffin.
Like solid fuel and lpg, you need to store it — in a tank accessible for refuelling by tanker — and the boilers that burn it must have a flue.
They can be fairly noisy in operation, so you may not want one in your kitchen, but they are comparatively efficient: 65%, similar to most gas boilers, and easy to control.
Oil is available throughout the country, so it may be a viable alternative to gas if this is unavailable; it's certainly cheaper to use than lpg; and installation costs are similar.
CENTRAL OR LOCAL HEATING?
Around two-thirds of British homes now have central heating.
A well-designed and efficiently controlled system offers the best combination of comfort, convenience and economy, but it's not essential.
There's no reason why you shouldn't use individual heating appliances if it suits you better, especially if you live in a flat, or if there is no one at home in the day.
Individual heating appliances such as gas convectors can be controlled by thermostats and time switches just as effectively as a central heating system, and will obviously cost less to install.
Water heating can also be taken care of using immersion heaters or gas multi-point heaters, with or without a timing system.
Above: Give a room a warm glow with La Baigue's Magiglo Maestro fuel-effect gas fire, with realistic dancing flames
Right: The La Fontaine mobile heater from Verine is based on a traditional French stove design
Above: Create a country feel with the Intrepid stove from Vermont Castings
Above: The Worcester 240 gas-fired combination boiler offers mains-fed hot water and central heating
A typical ‘wet’ central heating system (which heats the house via hot water)— the only viable option in most existing homes — consists of two separate parts.
The core of the system is the boiler and the hot water storage cylinder, linked by flow and return pipework known as the primary circuit.
Hot water from the boiler passes through the hot cylinder, and heats up stored water that is then fed to the hot taps.
In addition, hot water is pumped around a second circuit to the radiators in each room, either through 15mm (small-bore) or 8–10mm (microbore) pipes.
Both circuits are usually controlled by thermostats and timers to give the desired combination of space and water heating — see IN CONTROL .
Most systems of this type are ‘open’, which means they're topped up with water as necessary from a small tank in the loft, which also accepts any overflow; it's called the feed-and-expansion tank.
However, recent changes in the water bye-laws and the Building Regulations now permit the installation of continental-type sealed systems (which need no feed-and-expansion tank) as an alternative.
Systems using electric storage radiators have a separate set of circuits housed in their own fusebox or consumer unit, which are linked to the mains via a timeswitch that controls the use of night-rate electricity, and a meter that monitors how much is consumed.
Water heated with an immersion heater also uses night-rate electricity (Economy 7) during the on period, but full-rate electricity during the day.
Modern heating appliances of all types are generally well-designed, unobtrusive, and as efficient as current technology allows.
Boilers, especially the new low-water-content gas types, area a lot smaller than they used to be, and the latest gas-fired condensing boilers can run at efficiencies as high as 90%.
CURING PROBLEMS
Modern central heating systems are generally trouble-fee, especially if they are serviced every year, but unexpected problems can occur.
You can often save yourself a lot of money by tackling the simpler problems yourself.
Here's how to cure some of the most common problems.
Above: Parkway Chevin inset roomheater, which burns solid fuel, has a unique de-ashing system which can be operated from a standing position (Hepworth Heating)
Left: A range of striking Swiss Arbonia radiators, from Bisque, is available in 1,500 colours
Below: Practical but attractive — traditionally-styled Dauphin gas-fired stove, from Frampton's Fireplace Centre
Leaks
If you heating systems springs a leak, first turn off the boiler.
Then shut off the water supply to the feed-and-expansion tank, fit a hose to the lowest draincock on the system, and lead it to a drain outside.
Open the valve to empty the system.
If the leak has been caused by a puncture in the middle of a pipe run, cut through it and remove about 20mm (8in) of pipe so you can reconnect the cut ends with a special repair compression fitting.
If you don't have any appropriate fittings available, use a pipe repair putty or a special repair tape.
Or use a section of garden hose slit lengthwise and secured with either strong wire or Jubilee clips to make a temporary repair.
Try curing leaky compression fittings either by tightening up the capnuts, or by opening the fitting and winding ptfe tape over the olive before re-assembling it.
With capillary fittings you can't resolder a leaking joint because the pipe will contain some water, so remove the fitting using a blowtorch to melt the solder, and replace it with a compression joint.
If the leak is from a radiator (usually along a seam and caused by internal corrosion), try adding a special chemical radiator sealant at the feed-and-expansion tank.
This is pumped around the system and is quite effective at sealing pinhole leaks.
If this fails to work, turn off the radiator's isolating valves, and undo the valve couplings so you can drain it completely; remove and replace it.
Noisy pipework
To cure ticking or creaking noises in the heating pipework, check points where pipes pass through holes in floors, joists and walls, and pack pipe insulation around them.
Do this too where pipe runs are held rigidly by pipe clips, and remove any clips close to right-angled bends, to allow the pipe to expand without constraint.
Humming noises in pipework are often the result of the pump speed being set too high.
Try reducing this slightly, and call an expert in if the noise persists.
Banging sounds emanating from the boiler may be caused by a build-up of scale, especially in hard water areas (see under Corrosion) or to air being drawn into the system — usually a design fault which a heating expert will have to trace for you.
Cold radiators
If just one radiator is cold, check that the radiator valves are turned on.
Next, check whether there is a build-up within the radiator air or the gaseous by-products of corrosion.
If this has occurred, the radiator will feel hot at the bottom and cool at the top.
Open the air vent with a radiator key to see if air or gas is forced out.
If it is, hot water will flow into the radiator from the pipework and displace the trapped air.
Close the vent as soon as water starts to emerge, and check that the feed-and-expansion tank still has water in it after the radiator has been topped up.
Sludge — another corrosion by-product — can block the inlet or outlet to the radiator and prevent it from heating up.
It can also cause cold spots along the bottom of the radiator, without completely blocking the flow.
To get rid of it you usually need to remove the radiator so you can flush it out.
If more than one radiator is cold and they are all upstairs, the heating system may be starved of water, caused by losses not being replaced via the feed-and-expansion tank.
If this tank contains no water (it should be about one-third full when the system is on), first check the operation of its ballvalve.
The problem could also be caused by a blockage in the circulating pipes, caused again by sludge.
Try increasing the pump speed for a short time to shift the blockage, or drain down the system so it can be flushed through, and refill with clean water (and a corrosion inhibitor).
If the system has zone control and all the radiators in one part of the house are cold, the problem may be caused by a faulty motorised valve, which is isolating part of the system.
If this is the case, leave valve servicing and replacement to a professional plumber or heating engineer.
Lastly, if every radiator in the house is cold, there are several possible causes.
The pump may have jammed (see below) or failed; the room thermostat may have packed up; or a faulty motorised valve may be preventing water from circulating around the heating system.
Warm up with a cast iron stove from Aarrow's range: The Stratford (above) and the Evolution (right) feature a new multi-fuel grate
Pump problems
The system's circulating pump can sometimes jam, especially after a period when the pump has not been used, or sludge in the system may clog the impeller.
Fortunately, many types of pump can be restarted without have to be disconnected and dismantled; they have a slot on the end of the drive shaft, and by turning this with a screwdriver you can generally free the impeller inside.
Turn off the pump's power supply before attempting this.
If you are unable to turn the impeller, then remove the pump for cleaning.
Turn off its isolating valves, disconnect the power supply and undo the couplings so you can lift the pump out.
Take it to the sink and run water through it, while trying to rotate the impeller.
When it is free, replace the pump, open the isolating valves, and bleed screw before restring the power supply.
Corrosion and scale
Corrosion within heating systems gradually eats away at the insides of steel radiators to form iron oxides — the brown or black sludge that is so familiar to any d-i-y plumber.
It causes leaks and blockages in the system, and is a contributor to pump failure, but it can be prevented by the addition of special chemicals.
The build-up of scale within heating systems is also a problem, especially in hard water areas.
The system takes in small amounts of fresh water from time to time, and these introduce a fresh supply of mineral salts, which build up as scale deposits in the boiler and within the pipework.
It also takes in fresh oxygen, which aids further corrosion.
The scale build-up causes boiler noise and a gradual loss of boiler efficiency, but special chemicals can be added to remove it.
If corrosion and scale in your heating system are causing problems, you need to descale it thoroughly, then drain it down, flush it through with clean water, and refill it with fresh water, to which a corrosion inhibitor has been added.
Both products come with detailed instructions for use.
Note that if your system is more than 12 years old, you must use the correct descaling chemical, since leaks can occur as the scale is dissolved.
You also need to use the right corrosion proofer.
There are different types for systems with cast iron or steel boilers, and for copper tubular types, and another type for use on systems with aluminium radiators.
If you are unsure, get expert advice from the chemical manufacturer.
MORE ADVICE
This short feature can only outline the various heating options available.
For more advice on fuels and equipment, contact organisations such as:,
You'll also find lots of leaflets available from main showrooms which tell you how much appliances cost to run, how to cut down on costs, and helpful methods of payment if you have to economise drastically.
IN CONTROL
Any home heating installation is only as efficient as its controls.
It sounds obvious, but many people waste heat and money by leaving individual appliances or central heating systems going at full blast for hours, achieving temperatures way beyond what is necessary.
Good controls allow you to get the best of both comfort and economy at the same time.
For a full wet central heating system , the controls you need are:
A room thermostat for overall temperature control, plus thermostatic radiator valves on each radiator for individual room temperature control (except on systems with condensing boilers).
A timer or programmer to control the heating periods and the choice of water heating, space heating or both.
A cylinder thermostat to monitor the temperature of stored water.
A motorised valve to switch hot water between the primary circuit and the heating circuit, as demanded by the other controls.
Many individual heating appliances have their own built-in thermostats .
Left: Combine heating and cooking with traditional cast iron stove style.
The Stanley Super Star, from Calfire, is an efficient central heating cooker, fired by natural gas, lpg, oil, coal or wood
Above: Choose one of Wickes' new bright white rolled-top radiators for increased output.
Their Good Idea Leaflet No 49 gives advice on choosing and installing
Below: The Camray 3 range of oil-fired central heating from Boulter includes models which can be installed under worktops
BATHROOMS
Plugging bathrooms
Whether you'd like to improve your existing bathroom or install a completely new one, careful planning is the key to creating an attractive and comfortable room.
The average adult spends up to 300 hours a year in the bathroom, yet surprisingly, it's often the room that receives the least attention.
There are now literally hundreds of companies that specialise in bathroom suites and furniture, ranging from expensive, intricate designs to the cheaper, but still attractive suites.
So, if you're still lying in the tub, staring at that cracked sink, why not think about transforming your smallest room?
Opposite top left: If you have a large enough bathroom, you may be able to keep the sink separate from the bath, so that two or more members of the family can use the bathroom at once.
This new Camargue is from a wide range of bathroom suites by Qualcast
Opposite left: Give your bathroom the nautical look with Croydex's smart, striped Regency shower curtain and distinctive solid brass bathroom accessories, in chrome-plated finish, from the classic Winchester Collection
Top right: Add a dramatic splash of colour with brightly coloured towels and accessories.
These towels from Christy, available from department stores nationwide, are from a range of 18 colours
A wall mounted bath shower mixer from AquaWare
MAKING PLANS
Before rushing out to buy a new bathroom suite, you need to think carefully about how the room is used.
If your teenagers are always queuing up outside the bathroom, it might be a good idea to think about installing washbasins in their bedrooms.
If you want to install a shower cabinet, but your bathroom isn't big enough, think about where else in your house you cold fit one: in a utility room, perhaps?
If you like a good soak in the bath, but the only loo in the house is in the bathroom, you may want to think about installing another, separate toilet.
If your bathroom is small, but you have a separate toilet and a downstairs cloakroom, you could create a larger room by combining the two.
Or, if you have room, you could make the bathroom much larger by extending it into the landing or a bedroom, and building a new partition wall.
Make sure though that any wall you are going to knock down is not load-bearing.
SIZING UP
An easy way of planning a new bathroom is to draw a 1:20 scale plan of the room on graph paper.
It's easier to work in metric, as that is how most bathroom furniture is specified.
Make sure your plan includes windows and doors (and the way the doors open), as well as radiators and fixed towel rails, bearing in mind that, if space is really short, a door can be moved, rehung to open the other way, or replaced with one that slides.
Next cut out scale rectangles from a piece of card to represent the bath, shower cabinet, bidet, washbasin and loo, and using your plan, move them around to see how best to fit everything in.
To make the job even easier, some manufacturers provide booklets with press-out drawings of all their bathroom suites, with a matching graph paper grid on the back page.
Allow an ‘activity space’ around each piece, which can overlap with the next if you are not likely to use both at the same time.
Of course an overriding factor in determining the layout of your bathroom will be the plumbing arrangements — especially the running of waste pipes.
You can usually route hot and cold supply pipes to wherever you want by running them underneath the floorboards, the bath or around the perimeter of the room, hiding them with a low box plinth, which could also be an ideal place to store bathroom bottles.
However, it's best to keep water pipes as short as possible, which will probably mean having the loo and bath either against an outside wall, or near the  main soil pipe if this is run inside.
Note that baths and shower trays have a low waste trap, so there will be problems getting sufficient fall on the waste pipe if it has to run all the way across a room under floorboards.
This will only be possible if waste pipes run parallel to the floorboard joists, and at right angles to the floorboards.
Toilet soil pipes are very obtrusive, and should be kept as short as possible, so it may be best to keep the toilet roughly where it is.
However, if it creates a lot of problems, for a little extra cost, you could install a special toilet system with a macerator and pump, which pumps out waster through small-diameter pipes.
It's especially useful in lofts or cellars, and will also dispose of bath and/or shower waste through the same pipes.
Right: Create a rustic and warm look with a Cottage suite from the Armitage Shanks range
BATHING SUITES
As the bath is the largest piece of furniture in the room, it makes sense to think about this first.
The standard size of a bath is 1700 x 700mm, which is about the same as the old 5ft 7in x 2ft 4in bath, which you might be replacing.
Shorter and narrower versions are also available, including ‘sit-up’ or shower baths, which might be worth considering if you want to fit in a shower or a bidet as well.
Or, if you like to spend a long time in the tub, you might like a wider one, which may well fit into the existing space.
As well as standard rectangular baths, you can get baths in all sorts of shapes, such as round, petal and heart-shaped.
A popular choice is the corner bath, because although it takes up more floor area than a rectangular bath and runs along two walls, it actually requires less wall length (typically 1300 or 1400mm), allowing more flexibility when planning a moderately sized, squarish bathroom.
Most modern baths are made from acrylic plastic or glass fibre reinforced plastic (grp), which is relatively inexpensive, and can be moulded easily into different shapes.
These baths are light in weight, so can be carried into the bathroom easily, and retain warmth as well.
However, they sometimes flex with use and can be damaged by abrasive cleaners.
Traditionally, baths were made from cast iron covered in porcelain enamel, which is strong and durable, but more expensive than acrylic.
These are now fashionable again, and look very effective in a traditional bathroom.
The main disadvantages, apart from cost, is their considerable weight and the fact that they can chip.
Alternatively, you might like to choose a bath made from vitreous-enamelled, pressed steel, which looks like cast iron, but isn't so heavy, and is much cheaper.
If you really enjoy relaxing in the bath, you might like to think about treating yourself to a relaxing whirlpool or spa bath (of which Jacuzzi is the best known brand).
When buying a bath, there are several features to check:
The position of the tap holes: is there a choice?
Can the taps be easily reached?
Does the bath have handles?
Is the base slip-resistant?
Does the bath have a reclining back?
The waste outlet, overflow and taps will all come as extras.
TIME TO DRY OFF
If you want bathtime to be the height of luxury, you will be inspired by the very latest in shower accessories: the Cozydry.
This is a shower/dryer — all you do is to stand in the shower and let yourself be bathed in jets of warm air — it's a more hygienic, effortless and invigorating way of drying off.
The Cozydry from Primacare Marketing, fits into any shower area, and can be installed by reasonably competent d-i-yers or professional electrician.
Right: Cast iron roll top baths are making a comeback.
They are simple and functional, yet their appeal is classical and timeless.
This London suite from AquaWare creates a dramatic effect in a spacious bathroom
Left: The contoured Virgo bath uses less water than the average bath.
The Andromeda model, with matching pedestal, basin and toilet is from the range sold by Graham
Above: The rounded contours of the AquaWare Richmond suite make it perfect for period or adventurous homes
Left: For awkward spaces, Triton's flexible shower track
SHOWER POWER
If you want to put a shower in your bathroom, there are a number of choices:
If there is no room to fit a separate shower cubicle, the simplest answer it so fit a bath/shower mixer in place of normal bath taps.
These mixers, which send water to the bath or up a flexible hose to a shower head, take their supply from the bathroom hot and cold pipes.
Shower mixers take their supply from the bathroom hot and cold pipes (thermostatic shower mixers do not run hot when cold water is drawn off elsewhere in the house).
Electric instantaneous showers , which are connected only to the mains cold water, are ideal for homes with direct cold water systems.
Power showers , which are connected via a pump to the hot and cold supplies (but not mains-fed supplies) provide a much greater water flow and, usually, a choice of spray patterns.
As well as over a bath, a shower can be fitted into a purpose-made cubicle (which sometimes comes with the shower valve already fitted), or into a combination of side screens, shower doors and partition walls.
All these can be based around a shower tray, which is typically between 750 and 900mm square.
A good place for a separate cubicle is in a corner, because two of the necessary walls already exist, and only have to tiled.
TEN TIPS
1
Most bathroom equipment comes in a range of standard sizes, but there are smaller and larger versions, particularly for the bath.
2
If you are thinking of having one of the larger, shaped baths, make sure it will fit through your bathroom door!
3
The range of prices for bathroom furniture is enormous, starting at under £250 for standard suites, and going up to over £1,500, for better quality, more intricately designed suites, which often include taps and bidets.
You pay for the design, and slightly better quality, but standard designs are just as serviceable!
4
If you have a small bathroom, look for manufacturers that make fitted bathroom furniture, with the washbasin, toilet (and sometimes bidet) set into storage cupboards.
5
Nothing dates faster than bathroom colours, so bear in mind that the colour you choose for the bathroom may make your house difficult to sell in the future.
6
Choose a predominantly white or pastel-coloured suite, and liven up the room with colourful wall coverings, curtains or blinds and accessories, which are easier and cheaper to change than a bathroom suite.
7
When planning a bathroom, remember to allow for enough storage space to take towels, toilet rolls and toiletries.
8
When you choose your bathroom flooring, and especially if you have children, make sure that surfaces are non-slip.
9
If you're always queuing up to use the washbasin, and have the space, why not think about installing more than one in the bathroom.
Many manufacturers make double units.
10
Since most people spend a lot of time in the bathroom, make it fun to be in.
Design a colour-coordinated room, grow plants in it, or put up a bookshelf to help those 300 hours pass more quickly!
As you soak in the bath, you might fall under the spell of the sheep in the Insomnia blind from Faber
Bathrooms don't have to be purely functional, so why don't you put up a shelf, and fill it with plants.
Suite from Homecare's range
Above: You can almost hear the roar of the sea in the aptly named Shell bathroom suite from Texas Homecare's imaginative range
Left: Vanity units mean extra storage space.
This is from The Imperial Bathroom Company
BASIN BASICS
Most washbasins are made from vitreous china, which is easy to keep clean, but can chip and crack.
Some basins, usually the vanity style, are made from vitreous enamelled steel, acrylic plastic, or even Corian or cultured marble.
The type of   basin you choose will depend on the size of your bathroom and the look you are trying to achieve.
A wall-hung basin, which is held in place by secure wall brackets, can be fixed at exactly the height you want, although the supply and waste pipes will be exposed.
If your bathroom wall is a hollow plasterboard or lath-and-plaster partition wall, the surface should be cut back and timber battens secured to the wall timbers to take the basin securing screws.
As well as the standard size of wall-hung basin, you can also get smaller sizes and corner designs which are useful where space is limited as in a cloakroom.
A pedestal basin generally has a slightly larger washing area than a wall-hung basin; it doesn't need such a secure fixing, and the supporting pedestal hides the plumbing, but it can only be installed at one height.
Vanity basins have been popular for some years now, especially in larger bathrooms.
They are fitted into a ‘worktop’ counter or the top of a vanity unit, with a cupboard below.
These basins can usually be installed at any height, and hide the plumbing, as well as providing storage space for bathroom bottles or towels.
The latest type of basin is the semi-recessed countertop basin, which is often designed to be installed as part of a run of fitted bathroom units.
It has the storage advantages of a vanity basin, but does not take up nearly as much space.
As with baths, you have to buy taps and the waste outlet separately, although a basin overflow is built in.
You may need to specify the number of tap holes it has: two for pillar taps, one for a ‘monobloc’.
EUROPEAN EXTRA
Bidets, which are usually made from vitreous china, can be bought to match the washbasin and toilet.
The over-rim supply bidet has pillar taps or a mixer tap mounted on the rim, and the through-rim supply bidet has a stream of hot water, which heats the rim before filling the bowl, and may have a douching spray in the base of the bowl as well.
Check with your local water company — there are strict rules about how they should be fitted.
Bidets also come in two shapes: free-standing or back-to-the-wall.
The first type has a clear space all around it; a back-to-the-wall bidet is installed against a false wall, which conceals the plumbing.
Some back-to-the-wall bidets are also wall-hung.
SITTING PRETTY
All toilet pans are made from vitreous china, and if the cistern is exposed, this will often be vitreous china as well.
If a narrow back-to-wall pan is installed, a plastic cistern can be placed behind a false wall, with just the handle showing, and some back-to-wall toilets are wall-hung.
With most toilets, there is a choice between a conventional wash-down and a close-coupled design.
The cistern of the washdown design is mounted on the wall, and connected tot he floor-mounted pan by a short length of curved pipe called the flush bend.
Most modern toilets are low-level, but high-level cisterns are making a comeback for traditional looking bathrooms.
The cistern of the close-coupled design sits on top of the pan and is connected directly to it.
When the toilet is flushed, air is sucked out of the waste pipe, creating a vacuum, which is then filled with water from the cistern.
With the wash-down type, the water in the cistern is simply poured into the pan.
WARM AND AIRY
Once you've decided on a bathroom suite, the next thing to consider is heating, lighting and ventilation.
If you have a small bathroom, why not consider a radiator with a built-in towel rail?
The alternative to this is a separate, electrically heated towel rail.
Good choices for bathroom lighting are enclosed ceiling-mounted lights or swivelling recessed eyeball spotlights; pendant lighting should only be used if the lampholder is fitted with a long protective skirt.
All bathroom light switches should be the ceiling-mounted, pullcord kind — as should double-pole switches fitted to control an electric shower or a shower pump.
When you come to considering ventilation, bear in mind that it is a legal requirement that rooms containing a toilet have either a window that opens, or an extractor fan.
A fan is a good idea in any bathroom, especially one with a shower, as it reduces condensation.
A fan can be fitted in a window, in the wall, or ceiling with ducting to extract the air.
BATHROOM RULES
Planning a new bathroom?
We offer some essential tips:
If you are installing a new bathroom, it has to meet the requirements of the Building Regulations.
Talk to the Building Control department at your local council to check whether you need to make a formal application for approval.
If you are replacing an old bathroom suite with a new one,and plan changes to the layout, which will require alterations to the water pipework, you will again need to meet Building Regulations' requirements.
If you want to extend your bathroom into a hallway or bedroom, and plan to put up a partition wall, you will need Building Regulations' approval if this involves the demolition of a load-bearing wall.
Electrical socket outlets are not allowed in a bathroom, with the exception of a shaver point, which should be fitted with an isolating transformer.
These pine effect accessories will complete a bathroom.
These also come in a mahogany effect; from Graham
LETTERS
If you have a tale to tell, and idea to share, or a d-i-y tip to pass on, why not let us know?
If we publish your letter, you'll receive £5.
Write to:,.
STAR LETTER PRIZE
This month's Star Letter prize winner will receive £50 worth of JB Weld adhesives.
JB Weld is a complete adhesive range which can fix all your d-i-y requirements.
Its innovative Coldweld compound actually etches the materials together: the secret combination of liquid steel and non-toxic chemical hardener results in a product which fixes, fills and bonds any surface to any surface.
JB Weld works on iron, steel, aluminium, bronze, brass, copper, pewter, all woods, ceramics and plastics, and its applications are endless — mechanical, automotive, plumbing, around the home, and around the garden.
It is odourless, resistant to very high temperatures, and does not shrink.
Call  for more information.
OUT OF PRINT
A surprising supply of d-i-y bits and pieces can be obtained from your local printers.
Paper is often delivered on wooden pallets, which are sometimes not collected.
Using these, I've built a neat 40ft long palisade fence in my garden, and two fences in my front garden.
Most printers use metal litho plates, which are thin gauge aluminium.
Strips of this make ideal flashings for brickwork, whilst whole plates can be used to make weatherproof roofs for sheds.
Decorating and don't have any sheets?
A printer might let you have a bundle of waterproof paper wrappers from his reams of paper.
Most printers would be only too pleased to oblige — for perhaps a modest donation to the tea tin.
Try not to make a pest of yourself though, they're busy people.
I should know, I am one!,
ON THE LEDGE
Nothing is more frustrating than scuffing a newly-painted window sill or just-fitted upvc windows with electric cables or hoses, when they are passed through the window into the garden.
So how do I avoid it?
Simply take a length of split foam pipe insulation, and slip it over the offending cable where it passes over the sill.
The partially closed window holds the foam in place, allowing the cable or hose free movement.,
Ed: Have you solved an infuriating problem?
Write and tell us
PLUMB CRAZY
My wife was the first to notice it: running a bath wasn't what it used to be; no more gush of water, just a diminishing trickle.
I tried to ignore the problem, but my wife wouldn't.
‘We must get a man in,’ she declared.
I shied at such a thinly veiled challenge, but succumbed to her persuasion, which had become more vociferous as the water diminished.
I found a plumber, but when he saw the solid fuel monster in the kitchen, he paled visibly.
I explained it was a ducted air system, with a hot water boiler incorporated, and it was the lack of hot water which was the problem.
He tried the tap.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘It should deliver a better stream than it does.
Perhaps the tap is blocked.’
He went up into the roof space and replaced the ball valve in the tank.
‘I'll come back tomorrow,’ he said.
I never saw him again.
So I decided to try and resolve it myself.
The fire had to be extinguished, and the system allowed to cool.
If every drop of water was drained off after closing the main stop cock, three could be no dreaded flood.
I unscrewed every section of copper pipe, from the roof tank to the hot water cylinder, blowing through each one to find the blockage.
In accordance with Sod's law, I found resistance in the final section.
I took a length of wire, fixed one end in my electric drill, and poked the other through the pipe into the obstruction, piercing the lime scale and almost polishing the inside surface.
Triumphantly, I replaced the cleaned pipe, turned on the water, and relit the boiler.
Flushed with success, I went on to change a wash basin, a sink, and fitted a washing machine!,
ON THE SHELF
When you have books stored in tea chests, and can't afford enough bookcases to house them, the answer is to cover an empty alcove wall with shelves.
Wood is expensive, so my solution was cheap chipboard, resting on battens nailed to the wall.
The shelves looked good, and I piled on all the books, heavy ones at floor level, lighter ones at the top.
My parents came to stay, and while I was out, my father, a great reader, browsed for a while, and then selected a book from the top shelf.
I came home seconds later to find a scene of unbelievable devastation — a chaotic heap of shelves, books and nails, with may parents have-buried under the mess, trying guiltily to repair the damage.
The shelves ended up on the tip, and the new ones were made of wood and fixed to the wall with screws and wall plugs.
That's a d-i-y lesson I certainly won't forget in a hurry.,
SANDVIK TOP TIP PRIZE…
CLEAN JOB…
The prize for the Top Tip this month is a selection of Sandvik hand tools worth £50.
Sandvik chisels (shown below) are made from high quality tool steel, with bevel-edged blades and a cutting angle of 25°, so they're easy to use in tight corners.
The set comprises three chisels of ½, ¾ and 1in sizes.
The 2400XT handsaw features Sandvik's revolutionary XT tooth geometry, and lasts 10 times larger than conventional resharpenable saws.
With a robust plastic handle and a high-quality blade, it gives a fast and clean cut when cutting both along and across the grain.
The head of the Warrington hammer is made from tool steel and is protected against rust.
The hickory shaft is matt lacquered for protection.
Like many other d-i-y enthusiasts, I occasionally have to mix mortar for covering small areas where it is important to achieve a good finished surface.
I have found when mixing cement, sand and water, that they need the help of a softening agent to make the mortar much more malleable.
By adding a small amount of liquid soap to the water as you mix, it acquires a better texture, allowing it to be manipulation more easily.,
Send us your top tip, and if it's the best of the batch, you'll win a great prize!
READER'S STORY
SHED REFORMATION
I needed a new garden shed, but was in the middle of what economists call a ‘negative cash flow situation’, with the big family summer holiday looming.
I already owned two sheds, but one was on the point of collapse, and the other was far too small for the amount of rubbish it held.
Both measured around 6 x 8ft, and stood one propping up the other.
Obviously, I could make better use of the space by replacing them with an 8 x 12ft monster, but that was too expensive £500, or more…and I certainly didn't have that much going spare.
Could I buy one second-hand?
I advertised in the local rag, but to no avail.
Could I build one from scratch?
Still too expensive.
Could I build one with second-hand materials?
That depended on finding a suitable source of materials.
An opportunity occurred soon after; nearby, two houses had been demolished, leaving a heap of assorted wood.
Tracing the original owner, I found that the wood was from a timber outbuilding, and has been left to the tender mercies of the council or the local pyromaniac.
I could salvage whatever I fancied, so I transported 60 lengths of shiplap to my neighbour's vegetable patch.
Then, a major find  occurred in a local village.
The scout hut had succumbed to age, woodworm and the fire officer.
The bulk of it has been removed, but the 50-year-old wooded floor remained.
After a short deliberation, the powers-that-be decided that if I cleared the site, I could have whatever I could use.
Two and a half days of hard crowbar work revealed what looked like half an acre of tongue and groove floorboarding, supported on hefty joists.
Moving this took 15 trips in my ancient Renault, which struggled under loads that threatened to dent its roof bars.
The heap of lumber on my neighbour's veg patch grew to monstrous proportions.
I started clearing the site: the leaning shed became firewood, and the other was dismantled into panels and sold to a friend.
A new base was concreted, and the woodwork began.
I had no  previous experience of building anything like this, but by studying the old sheds and some leaflets from a company that made stables, I'd knocked up a working drawing.
Each panel would have a chunk of joist at the base to give it weight, and the rest of the studwork would be of timber.
The back was built first.
I assembled the studwork by laying all the sections flat on the lawn, and nailing them together, then added extra bracing at the ends — once the diagonals had been checked, and the panels pronounced square.
Then the two frames were clamped together, and holes drilled for bolts before the cladding was put on.
I wanted to use only the most solid timber on the sides to keep things watertight.
Luckily, I found some good solid 6ft lengths, so very few butt joints were needed in the cladding.
The end panels were constructed as single units, with an 8in difference in height front to back for the roof.
The front, like the back, was made as two 6ft sections through a few adjustments were made in order to incorporate a door and windows.
A suitable window frame came off a skip behind a local double glazing merchant, and was incorporated into the studwork.
The front panels were clad with shiplap, and because only fairly short pieces were needed, I was able to cut away the ends where the shiplap had previously been nailed.
Because of the weight of the finished panels, I had to assemble the sides and build the roof in situ , so I enlisted some help.
With much grunting, the panels were inched into place on top of strips of roofing felt.
A few coach bolts, and it stood upright, if a bit wobbly.
It came as a relief at this stage to find that I had got my sums right, and everything met where it ought!
Now for the roof: the remainder of the two-by-twos were laid across front to back, each resting on a stud at either end.
To make the shed easy to dismantle in case we moved house, the timbers were fixed with right-angled brackets, screwed between the roof timbers and the studs on the inside.
This done, the structure felt far more secure.
I started to fix the tongue and groove boarding, and with a few boards in place, felt confident enough to work on the roof.
The roofing felt was eventually fixed with a gallon of disgusting adhesive and half a pound of nails, which just about completed the major work, everything else could be classified as ‘off jobs’ to finish off.
The result, now thoroughly creosoted, looks very pleasing.
As the house and garage are circa 1930s it blends in nicely, looking ‘old’ from the start.
I was initially concerned about weatherproofing, as tongue and groove timber has no overlap (unlike shiplap or featheredge), and being secondhand had a good few nail holes, but apart from a few boards showing a bit of damp, it has proved satisfactory.
The overall cost is difficult to work out: the main purchases were sundries — roofing felt, bolts, brackets, nails — plus the hire of a circular saw.
The only factor that can't really be accounted for is time.
The preparation, transport and scrounging took longer than the construction, and I was working almost entirely on my own.
I was very lucky in having both the time to spare, and all the storage space I needed, courtesy of an understanding neighbour.
But for anyone contemplating a similar project, it was no more difficult than many domestic-type woodworking exercises, and well worth the trouble.,
COME ON!
If you've got a story that will interest other readers, don't just sit there, get scribbling!
Whether you've built a dream palace or a bird bath, we'd like to hear about it.
Send your letter to the Editor at the address on the opposite page, and if we publish it, we'll pay you £25 too!
TESTING
BOSCH DUOTAC PKT 14E TACKER
Bosch distributes two d-i-y electric tackers in this country.
The more powerful is the TK 28E, which fires pins, nails and staples.
As an example of its striking power, 28mm nails may be used, even into hardwood.
With a list price of over £100, this is really for the upholsterer, picture framer or other professional who needs to use a tacker daily.
However, there is also the smaller PKT 14E, which has many uses for the home improver or hobbyist.
The numerals refer to the maximum stapling capacity of the tool: ie 10mm wide staples up to 14mm in length can be used.
We put the tacker through its paces on a loft conversion.
Looking rather like a small jigsaw, the green-bodied machine weighs only 1.1kg, not significantly more than manual tackers.
This is important if you plan to use the tacker overhead, as we did.
Overall dimensions are approximately 170x170mm.
Ergonomics play an important part in the success of such a tacker.
We had to staple a polythene vapour barrier to the rafters of a pitched roof.
With staples every 300m on each rafter, over 500 staples had to be pushed home.
This would be an enormous task for a manual tool, requiring a strong grip and concentration to position the staples on the woodwork.
Using the Bosch PKT 14E, the large trigger and body shape took the strain out of the task.
The extra long trigger (50mm) means that two or three fingers can be used, rather than the conventional single-finger action, thus spreading the load.
A second and more important ergonomic feature is the indentation directly above the tacker nose.
This allows the hand to grip the tacker and transmit force directly to the impact point, the operator's hand needs to ‘feel’ the nose of a tacker if it is to be used accurately.
Incidentally, the body shape also means the hand is in the optimum position for absorbing the recoil impact.
Hand tackers and some electric versions force the operator to use the tool with a grip that results in a lot of strain.
Bosch's wraparound handle also makes the tool easy to carry and use single-handed.
Having been satisfied with the tool's performance on the rafters, we used it to tack down sheets of fibreboard on to chipboard.
The magazine accepts nails or staples without modification; it is withdrawn from the rear, and nails or staples without modification; it is withdrawn from the rear, and mails placed along one side of the magazine channel.
Up to 100 staples and 44 nails may be held.
A yellow dial above the magazine allows stepless impact strength adjustment, depending on the length of the staple/nail and the hardness of the material.
The dial is marked 1 to 6 (6 being the strongest force).
The tool easily drove 14mm nails into the fibreboard, and we managed around 20 per minute without undue warming of the tool.
Bosch suggests that the maximum should be around 15 per minute.
The only other control on the tacker is a slide control on the front plate.
This is pushed down when firing nails or single staples.
If tacking thin material such as foil, the slide is pushed up to fire two staples side by side.
A couple of clever features have been built in.
The most useful is the automatic mode: by keeping the trigger gently depressed, the tool will fire a staple every time the nose is pushed on to a surface.
From the safety angle, the Bosch tacker will not fire if picked up by the trigger — the nose must be pressed on to a surface for firing.
Accessories include a spacing guide, and a clamping guide for work with documents.
Ergonomically, it is difficult to find fault with the PKR 14E.
Weight and simplicity of loading are also strong points (the machine didn't jam once during testing).
For professionals and d-i-yers who wish to regularly use a tacker, the Bosch would be hard to beat.
WHAT IT COSTS
The Bosch PKT 14E is listed at £74, but should be available for less.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION ,
In the ‘double staple’ mode, the Bosch tacker will place staples side by side — useful for delicate material
Underbelly staple and nail magazine slides backwards to allow refilling in the conventional way
Comfortable forward grip for repetitive tasks allows gentle pressure to be exerted over the striker plate
Nails can be left proud by adjusting dial to alter force of striker.
A maximum of 44 nails are held in magazine
B&D 75E BELT SANDER
More power tool companies seem eager to produce ‘random’ orbital disc sanders recently.
These have a combined vibrating and rotating action, and come as close as is currently possible to the scratch-free appearance of hand sanding.
At the other end of the scale are the belt sanders.
These consist of a motor-driven continuous sanding belt, held against the work by a metal plate under the body.
They remove wood or paint very quickly and aggressively.
They are ideal for quickly taking off old paint from large flat areas or wood or metal.
We tested the BD75E belt sander.
Black & Decker also produced the same model, but with a constant speed, the BD75.
The 75E is a 600 watt, variable-speed model weighing 3kg.
It falls into the middle range of portable belt sanders.
Most d-i-y power tool manufacturers produce the smaller 60mm wide belt models, but Black & Decker's BD75E has a larger, 75mm belt width (belt length is 533mm).
This gives a sanding surface of 75 x 135mm.
It does seem odd that this fairly sophisticated sander should be under the d-i-y Black & Decker brand, and not the company's professional Proline flag.
Such a large sanding area and variable speed are luxuries that many hone improvers may find unnecessary.
Even before use, several good features were obvious.
We liked the positive action and shape of the best changing lever.
The moulded plastic capping prevents the broken nails which occur when changing belts on some sanders.
Secondly, the trigger and belt tracking dial are large enough to adjust quickly, even when wearing gloves.
The latter alters the angle of the front roller, to prevent the best running off centre.
When using a best sander, ‘let the tool do the work’.
Little downward pressure is needed.
This 600 watt machined removed three layers of old paint from a veneered cabinet in minutes.
Variable speed allowed the most aggressive setting — 7 on the control dial — to be used for the first stages, and a gentler 3 or 4 cleaned up the veneer surface.
The sanding action on all the surfaces we tested was excellent.
If you are used to the low rectangular shape of most best sanders, the bizarre profile of the BD75E take some getting used to.
The squat shape means the front and back handles are close together.
We found the machine was fairly comfortable to use for long periods, but the high body did make it slightly awkward to control in tight corners.
There are a number of accessories for the sander, including a sanding frame to allow even sanding of large areas, and a frame to hold the tool upside down for stationary use.
Unusually, there is even a side and mitre guide, to assist in abrading mitres and rebates.
Overall, the BD75E scores highly on price, sanding area and controls.
Variable speed is also a bonus for those wishing to sand plaster, veneers or even plastics.
The only disadvantage is the high centre of gravity, making the tool wobble in some situations.
WHAT IT COSTS
The Black & Decker BD75E is listed at £123.38, but you should find it for less.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION ,
Belt sanders are ideal for stripping away painted surfaces quickly and without effort
We liked the printed speed guide, referring to the numbered dial on right-hand side of handle
A large plastic control lever slackens the belt prior to replacement.
A pack of three belts costs around £5
The sander may be clamped upside down(clamping frame is optional) to form a small bench sander
HITACHI FP 20SA PLANER
Power-planers take the hard work out of planing.
Whilst hand planes require careful honing, setting and adjustment of blade, the electric version can shave off excess wood quickly and easily.
This month, we tested Hitachi's model.
Like the majority of d-i-y models, it has an 82mm planing width, and a maximum cutting depth of 0.5mm. larger capacity machines which take off as much as 3mm per pass are more expensive, and are only really worth the money if you are a professional.
Hitachi produces a vast range of trade orientated equipment for the professional, but has a relatively, small line-up of d-i-y tools.
This is the company's only power planer in this market.
This is a very compact plane, not much bigger than a smoothing plane, weighing in at 1.6kg.
The shape is similar to most power planers, but there is no secondary handle on the front of the machine.
Instead, one hand guides the main trigger handle, and the other grips the cutter depth control knob of the front.
We found this a comfortable enough grip, and the control is tight enough not to move out of position when planing.
Hitachi has used a 320 watt motor in the FP 20SA, smaller than some of the competition.
Keeping the maximum depth of cut down to 0.5mm means the motor is not strained, however.
We were very impressed with the noise suppression on this planer, as most planers tend to be as noisy as routers.
This model gave off a steady hum that allowed it to be used indoors without disturbance to neighbours.
Hitachi's trade roots are immediately apparent when opening the instruction booklet.
This is the only planer we have tested so far that gives instructions on grinding cutter blades and overall user-servicing (including the replacement of carbon brushes).
The tradesman expects heavy use from his machinery, and will replace brushes himself to save on ‘down time’.
Whilst it is always advisable to have a power tool regularly serviced, including safety checks, we did like this practical information to save the d-i-yer unnecessary costs.
We tried the machine on hard and softwood.
The 320 watt motor turns the double-bladed cutter block at 15,000rpm, meaning the wood is shaved 30,000 times a minute.
A smooth finish was produced on timber narrower than the planing width.
The tool may be used with care on wider boards, but the setting must be as fine as possible to avoid noticeable ‘steps’ between each pass of the blade.
This also happens with hand planes: it can be sanded away at the finishing stage.
Hitachi doesn't pack its tools with accessories — there was no dust bag provided — but some sort of collection bag is really essential with planers.
Just as importantly, the shape of the FP20 SA means that the planer can't be used for making rebates.
Most other planers are capable of forming a rebate, such as used for window or door frame construction.
However, a right-angle guide can be bought as an accessory to keep edges and faces of timber at 90°C, which is really useful, as it is easy to take off too much wood from one side or the other.
Overall the planer falls into line with Hitachi's other ‘d-i-y’ models.
You buy the basic tool for its motor quality and professional pedigree, and accessories are optional rather than standard.
This is a good buy if you want a light planer that will do basic planing and bevelling tasks.
Although the list price is too high for a machine of this specification, it can be bought for around £55 from Texas and other sheds.
The dislikes were a lack of dustbag and no rebating facility.
WHAT IT COSTS
The list price of the Hitachi FP 20SA is around £75.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION ,,.
Freehand bevelling needs a light touch and even pressure to work successfully
No dust collection bag is supplied, but it's available as an optional extra
Instructions are a plus point, including the replacement of carbon brushes
Wrench and blade adjustment guide are supplied with the planer
EARLEX STEAMA PLUS STRIPPER/CLEANER
Stripping wallpaper can be a messy, time-consuming job, made worse by several layers, or overpainted papers.
A wallpaper stream stripper won't get rid of the mess, but is makes the job much quicker and easier.
The Earlex Steama Plus goes one step further.
Its accessories enable the basic unit to use the cleaning and sterilising power of steam for cleaning, too.
And as you don't need chemicals, it's environmentally friendly, and saves you money.
We tried it on carpets, upholstery, wall tiles, windows, wood and vinyl floors, inside an oven, on a lawnmower, a motorbike, and for defrosting a freezer.
Other uses include removing Artex, lifting vinyl floor tiles, killing weeds and sterilising soil, etc.
The Steama Plus includes the boiler unit, a large and small plate for wallpaper stripping, a carpet/floor cleaner head, and a jet nozzle with scraper and brush attachments.
A three-section handle can be fitted tot he last three heads, enabling you to reach high up on walls.
A separate heat shield is used with the small plate, which is also useful for cleaning walls and upholstery when used with an insert sponge pad and cleaning bonnet.
Two cleaning bonnets are provided: one for the carpet cleaner, and one for the small plate.
The cleaning bonnets can be washed in a washing machine.
The boiler unit takes seven pints of water.
Min/max levels marked on the side made filling easier.
Using hot water from a kettle, it took just over five minutes to heat up to operating temperature.
A full seven pints gave about an hour of steam.
A fitted plug meant that the unit was immediately ready for use.
A 10ft long mains lead and a 12ft steam hose made it easy to reach high up to ceiling level and far away from the socket outlet.
Diagrams and instructions on the top of the unit were a useful reminder on how to use the boiler.
Should you inadvertently allow the unit to boil dry, there's a thermal cut-out.
A pressure-relief calve comes into play if the steam hose is accidentally blocked.
The large 11x18in steam plate made wallpaper stripping fast and easy, even on painted paper, once it was scored to help the steam penetrate.
The small 6x3in plate was handy around corners and doorways, and used with sponge and bonnet, made light work of cleaning down silk emulsioned bathroom walls prior to repainting.
We were instantly impressed when just two passes with the squeegee tile/window head cut through soap deposits on tiles, leaving them gleaming — no polishing or scrubbing needed!
Windows were equally easy to clean.
Using the jet nozzle head, unsightly black marks in tile grouting just dissolved away, and the oily deposits on the back wheel of a motorbike, which usually took hours to shift, disappeared in no time.
Defrosting a fridge also took a fraction of the time.
We were impressed with this cleaner.
If you've bought the basic Steama as a wallpaper stripper, an attachment kit costs around £26.
The Steama, with two steam plates, costs around £32; and the Steama Plus, with attachments, around £50 if you shop around (RRP is £62.95).
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION ,,.
Scraper attachment on jet nozzle quickly shifted dried-on grass under mower.
Heat shield protects hands
Small steam plate, with clip-on black heat shield, can be used for paper stripping, or with bonnet for cleaning
Large steam plate made wallpaper stripping much faster and easier; 12ft long steam hose reached up to ceiling
Carpet cleaning needs no chemicals; handle fits on to heat shield, and steam hose clips on to this
OFFERS
SPECIAL OFFERS
Looking for that special Christmas or birthday present for a friend or relative who's a d-i-y enthusiast?
Then look no further!
We've got something for you, whether you want to spend a lot, or just a little.
Order now, and that useful gift will be with you in plenty of time for Christmas, ready to delight your special d-i-y devotee
65-PIECE EMERGENCY TOOL KIT ONLY £36.95
So often the right tool for the job is hanging in the tool shed at home when you are helping a friend in his house, or have broken down in the car away from home.
Our Emergency Tool Kit is ideal for the motorist and d-i-y person alike.
Housed in a strong plastic carry-case to keep everything neat, it contains almost everything you will ever need to carry out emergency roadside repairs, or work at home on your car, as well as tools suitable for general d-i-y.
It has the following contents: a wire brush, wire stripper; combination tool/crimper; pliers/ wire snips/ adjustable large-angled jaw pliers; set of feeler gauges; tyre pressure gauge; set of six small BA spinners; cross-head screwdriver; ball-end hammer; tommy bar, extension bar, universal joint and ratchet bar for sockets; set of eight metric Allen keys; set of eight imperial Allen keys; set of eight imperial Allen keys; set of six metric ring/open-ended spanners, ⅜ to  set of six metric ring/open-ended spanners, 8 to 17mm; set of 10 imperial sockets, ⅜ to  set of eight metric sockets, 10 to 22mm; and a set of five straight-head screwdrivers.
The whole kit is neatly housed in a semi-circular, strong plastic, self-locking carry-case, which can be strapped next to the spare wheel in many cars, and is both convenient and light enough to carry around.
Only £36.95.
Use code MTK .
LEATHER TOOL POUCH ONLY £9.95
You can pay three times as much for this useful tool pouch!
It is made from genuine suede leather, and incorporates four double-stitched pockets, reinforced with plated-cap rivets at all stress points.
You can conveniently carry around relatively large tools like hammers, screwdrivers and chisels, and there is also a steel tape-measure clip, two leather loops, a nail pouch and three smaller pouches.
It's an extremely useful accessory if you're working on more than one job at the same time in different places, so that the tools you need are always with you — and it's invaluable for working from ladders or scaffolding.
The pouches are sewn on to 2in wide webbing, which is fully adjustable to fit from 30in to 46in girth.
At only £9.95, including postage and packing, it's a bargain.
Use code LTP 
6-PIECE MULTI-RASP SET ONLY £14.95
The super-sharp, non-clogging blades of this Draper Rasp Set are designed for fast cutting and shaping for all sorts of materials.
The set consists of one each of a Handy Rasp, a Round File, a Block Plane, a File Plane, and a Half Round Blade, and a Flat Blade, which are replacement blades for the Block Plane.
The teeth on these tools are formed individually to slice off slivers of wood quickly and easily.
The different shapes and sizes in this set will cover most applications on hard/soft woods, chipboard, blockboard and hardboard, as well as plastics, laminates, plaster, ceramics, body fillers and even soft metals like aluminium and copper.
The rasps are useful for preliminary shaping prior to fine-finishing, and will cut across the grain of timber without tearing it.
All for only £14.95, including p+p.
What a great gift!
Use order code DRS .
60-PIECE DRILL & DRIVER SET £29.95
If your drill and driver bits manage to hide in every nook and cranny of your tool box, and you can never find just the size you want, when you want it, perhaps it's time you got organised, with a set of drill and driver bits in their very own case.
No more hunting for the size and type you need: everything in this set is presented neatly in its own specially-shaped hollow, with the size marked below.
When you've finished the job, the bit goes back in its place, the carrying case is clipped shut, and it's ready for next time.
Presented in a neat and robust grey plastic carrying case with a handle, which opens into three sections, it contains everything you're likely to need for drilling, screwdriving, and small maintenance jobs, including a centre punch, automatic centre punch and countersink.
Bits and drivers include: six power nut drives, from 5 to 11mm; 12 power bits, all 30mm long, including three slotted three Phillips head, three Pozidriv and three hex sizes; 10 double-ended power bits, 45mm long, including three sizes of Phillips/Pozidriv, three double-ended stars, and one hex; five masonry drill bits, from 4 to 10mm; eight wood-boring bits; from 3 to 10mm; and 13 imperial sized high-speed drill bits, from  to ¼in.
Whether you're buying this set as a present, or for yourself, it makes a perfect gift.
It will help keep everything organised, and speed up endless d-i-y and craft tasks.
Priced at only £29.95, it's a gift you can't afford to miss.
Use order code DDB 
MASTER SHEARS £15.95 MULTI SHEARS £13.95
Burgon and Ball have been making shears in Sheffield for over 200.
Based on original sheep shears, 82 different models are exported all over the world.
Two models are made for use in the garden: Master Shears, with blade lengths of 5½in; and Multi Shears, with 3½in blade lengths.
They're basically the same, except for the blade lengths.
Manufactured from high-carbon tool steel, hardened and tempered for lasting strength and blade sharpness, the blades are hollow-ground to give an extremely shape cutting edge.
As the blades only meet at a single point when cutting, they retain their sharpness for a lifetime of use.
Unlike conventional spring-loaded shears, which are heavy to use, and which work through a linkage which becomes worn with use, the Master and Multi Shears are lightweight, and can be operated for long periods without hand strain, even by people with limited hand strength.
As they are used single-handed, they make it easier to dead-head flowers, prune shrubs, cut up chicken for the barbecue, and shape materials like leather, canvas, etc, for craftwork.
These shears are not generally available to the public, so take this opportunity to acquire a pair now.
Use order code MAS for the Master Shears, £15.95; and MUL for the Multi Shears, at £13.95, including VAT, p+p.
HOW TO ORDER
Complete the order form and posting label, indicating clearly the goods you require, and the total price payable.
Make sure your name and address are clearly written.
Include a cheque or postal order, crossed and made payable to DIY Offers , to cover the total cost of all the goods you have ordered, or write your credit card number and expiry date.
Send the coupon, and cheque or postal order if applicable to ,.
These offers are open only to readers in the UK until 23 November 1992.
Please allow 28 days for delivery.
Please note that different items may be dispatched separately.
Offers available only whilst stocks last.
NEWS
UP date
BECOME A BIG POOLS WINNER
A ready-made swimming pool delivered in one piece for installation within five days has been introduced by Sunquest Swimming Pools.
The pool costs about £10,500 plus VAT installed, or is supplied for £8,800 plus VAT for d-i-y installation.
The 95% completed pool is delivered to the site with all the fittings attached, ready to be positioned into a prepared excavation.
The pool is lowered on to a prepared crushed gravel base, immediately filled with water, and at the same time, a gravel back-fill is poured in between the pool and the soil.
Connecting up the pre-assembled pipe work to the pump and filter completes the job, leaving just the final tasks of adding coping and paving stones.
For more information contact:,,.
POLYURETHANE FOAM FILLER FOR LARGER GAPS
Are you having problems filling large irregular gaps, hollows and cavities?
The Polycell has the solution with its new Polyfilla Expanding Foam Filler.
It is damp-proof, suitable for outdoor and indoor use, and its strong adhesion to most surfaces means it is extremely durable and flexible.
Made form high-performance polyurethane foam, it has one of the highest expansion capacities of any foam filler on the market: it will expand to 2½ times the volume of the product extruded, allowing for more and larger tasks to be undertaken.
Ideal for insulating pipes, filling gaps around windows and door frames, skirting boards, or draughty areas in roofs and attics, Polyfilla Expanding Foam Filler will also insulate against noise intrusion.
The product is tack-free within 20 minutes of applying, and can be cut, sanded, plastered or painted after only two hours.
Once fully cured in 12 to 24 hours, the foam filler will not shrink and is non-toxic.
Available in two can sizes, 500ml and 750ml, which cost £7.99 and £ 9.49 respectively.,,.
FLEXIBLE RESIN PAINT FINISH
The new water-based Valspar Supertex Masonry Paint is easy to apply.
Available in 12 colours and Brilliant White, and in either Smooth or Fine Textured finish, the new range has been specially formulated to give long-lasting all-weather protection to a home.
Its tough, flexible resin content also provides an exceptionally attractive finish.
There is just time to apply a coat before the winter weather really sets in.
Complementing the range is a new Valspar Exterior Wall Primer for patch priming surfaces; a new Valspar Water Repellent Solution, and Valspar Supertex Stabilising Solution, specifically designed to stabilise flaking, chalking or powdering exterior and interior surfaces, and to provide a firm foundation for masonry paint application.
The paints are available from independent stockists throughout the UK.,,.
VERTICAL SUNDIAL
Wall-mounted time-keeping with a Vertical Sundial has been launched by Good Directions.
Measuring 3ft in diameter, the sundial is constructed of grp with a copper powder additive, which brings out the surface verdigris that normally takes years to develop.
The numerals, and a cragged sun and moon, are gold-leafed with double-thick English 23½ carat gold.
The sundial should be mounted on a vertical south-facing surface.
The price is £333.,,.
EASY EXTENSIONS
A highly effective device for typing in new walls to existing masonry has been introduced by Furfix Products.
Called Furfix Wall Extension Profiles, the advanced adjustable tie system offers total flexibility in the setting out and building of wall extensions, whilst also providing maximum grip to the mortar bed, The system saves having to key in new walls to existing walls.,,.
DIY DO IT YOURSELF
Write to us!
READER'S REPORT
Do you have an improbably but encouraging, or a practical but engaging d-i-y story to report?
If you've completed a project, big or small, that would interest other readers, then sent it to us with a picture.
If we publish it, we'll pay you too!
While renovating his Victorian cottage, one reader ripped out an ugly old boiler, and installed this beautiful fireplace
This stunning home, deep in the Welsh hills, was designed and built from scratch by these brave readers
The hot summer days didn't deter this reader from digging his own pond and creating a haven in his town garden
When the Cordorys had finished landscaping their garden, they decided to add the finishing touches and brighten it up by designing and making their own garden furniture
This house was run down until the owner completely renovated it and redecorated inside and out, and transformed it into an impressive home
Can you match these?
Send your name and pictures to ,.
GARDENING
Town garden with a Country feel
A year-round garden lacks the brilliance of colour that summer flowers create.
So plan now for a wonderful display next summer, but use the winter to make a plant trough to bring colour to paved or gravelled areas.
Suggested planting 
How to make a plant trough
Make a simple frame from 50x50 mm timber, using halving or tenon joints.
Ensure joints are a tight fit, and secure with waterproof glue and rustproof screws
Floorboards are ideal for the base; drill 12mm (½in holes for drainage.
Cut notches in end boards so they fit around the uprights.
Glue and screw
Use floorboards for sides and ends (glue tongues and grooves for extra strength).
Assemble as shown, and screw to uprights.
Finish with a preservative safe for plants
UP date
WATER-BASED WOOD CARE
Cementone Beaver has launched a range of water-based woodcare treatments, which incorporate ‘micro-emulsion’ technology.
The new Water-Based Wood Preserver and Water-Based Woodworm Killer perform in a par with traditional solvent-based treatments.
The secret is in the minute particle size of the micro-emulsion formulation, which leads to a very fast and uniform distribution of the active ingredient throughout the timber.
The products are also extremely fast drying: treated timber can be touch dry in as little as two hours.
Both the Water-Based Woodworm Killer and Water-Based Wood Preserver (for the treatment and prevention of both insect and fungal attack in timber) cost around £22 for a 5 litre pack, which includes a free brush for use with the products.,,.
SAFE AND SOUND BRASS PADLOCKS
The offer of four strong brass padlocks for the price of one — at approximately £7 — has been launched by The Tool Connection.
The new Laser Padlock Set comprises a long-shackled padlock, plus three more conventionally shaped locks in 25, 30 and 50mm sizes.
All are strong and made to high-quality standards, and provide a useful means of securing valuables such as workshops, tool sheds, tool boxes, etc.
Each padlock is supplied with three keys.,,.
PAINTING PROTECTION
The Harris Classic Masking Sheet is the new way to totally protect carpets, walls and ceilings when painting.
It consists of conventional masking tape, attached to a thin plastic sheet, which can be folded out to give 550mm (about 21½in) of protection.
It is statically charged, so it will cling vertically to protect both sides of the area being painted.
It comes in a long roll of 20m, and has a neat perforator which enables you to tear off a strip to the correct length.
It is available from branches of Wickes Building Supplies and good independent shops, and cost from £3 to £4 per roll.,,.
ADVICE CENTRE
MLA MASTER LOCKSMITHS ASSOCIATION
Imagine this scenario: you've just locked yourself out, and are frantically leafing through a neighbour's Yellow Pages to find a locksmith.
Having narrowed down the list to local companies which promise a quick call-out service, you're all set to dial.
At this point, it will pay dividends if you spend a few more seconds scanning the small print in the ads.
How do you know that the companies are reputable?
If you need a replacement lock, will the locksmith fit the best quality equipment, and advise you on its suitability for your particular door, or will you get a cheap-and-cheerful lock with a very short lifespan?
Does the company offer a parts and labour guarantee?
If the ad contains the words Company Member of the Master Locksmiths Association , and/or displays the MLA's distinctive logo of two crossed keys (reproduced here), you can be confident that you've made the right choice.
WHAT'S THE MLA?
The Master Locksmiths Association has its roots in the early 1950s, when a group of craftsmen set up the Greater London Locksmiths Association.
Membership applications were received from all over the UK, and the MLA was set up to meet the growing demand for a central organisation.
Today, the association has around 1,000 members.
Potential members must provide evidence of their honesty and integrity to the MLA's national council, and must also pass searching theoretical and practical examinations with distinction.
The quest for excellence doesn't stop in the examination room; training is an on-going process for MLA members who keep up to date with new technological advances in the security industry by attending weekend and annual conventions.
Members' apprentices are also required to take part in formal training courses.
The use of the MLA logo for business purposes is restricted to two categories of membership: companies which have already had locksmiths accepted as corporate members of the MLA (and which meet additional set criteria), and affiliate members.
The latter is open to companies, manufacturers and distributors of materials, equipment or services to (or in connection with) the locksmithing industry.
The MLA boasts that ‘Every British security product manufacturer of note is an affiliate member of the MLA’.
LOCKING UP
What sort of products and services can you obtain from MLA members?
Here's a quick checklist:
All types of locks and security devices supplied.
All types of locks and security devices fitted, and estimates given.
Locked out?
MLA locksmiths will get you back in with minimum disruption.
Lost keys?
MLA members can alter the combination of most locks and supply new keys.
Suppliers of free-standing, underfloor and wall safes to safeguard your valuables.
Master locksmiths can make duplicates of most keys — including those for cars, safes, padlocks, etc.
Locks, bolts or bars can all be supplied and fitted.
Advice on product suitability can be obtained from your local MLA locksmith.
NEW LOCKS?
If you think your existing locks are adequate, you needn't read any further.
But many homes are fitted with old-fashioned builder's locks, which, unlike five-lever versions, are quite weak in construction and have limited key variations.
if your locks are due to be replaced, you like to:
Replace old front door locks with five-lever mortise locks (which conform to BS3621), or a surface-mounted lock with a lockable inside handle.
Add a door chain (or restraint lock) and a door-viewer to your front door.
Fit a five-lever mortise lock to the back door, or supplement the existing lock with a mortise deadlock.
Replace all old surface-mounted bolts with key-operated mortise security bolts.
Contact your locksmith for advice on the best type of window locks to fit, and ask about specialist locks for your patio doors.
Remember that the opportunist thief travels light, but your garden shed will probably contain all the tackle he needs to force an entry (plus a ladder to reach inaccessible areas), so fit a good quality lock or padlock to your shed door, and put in window locks, or screw windows to the frame for maximum security.
Hang curtains at your shed windows to hide the contents from prying eyes.
Fit a good deadlock, a dead locking latch, or a locking-bar and padlock to your garage: garages provide rich pickings fro thieves.
CONSUMER HELP
The MLA produces two leaflets which are available free of charge:Take a closer look at your master locksmith , which outlines the various services you can expect from master locksmiths, and The guide to home protection , which offers invaluable advice on how to protect your home.
Names and addresses of local MLA members will be sent on request when you write to:,,.
SAFE AND SOUND
If you're tempted to ignore security measures, consider this evidence:
There is a break-in every 60 seconds in the UK.
If you live in a medium-risk area you stand a one in 35 chance of being burgled in any year.
If you live a high-risk area, the likelihood increases to one in 13.
Over 70% of break-ins are committed by people in the 14–21 age group, who rely on brute force or opportunism to gain entry.
Thieves lack one commodity…time.
Fitting the right lock in the right place will make a thief think twice — he might give up and move on to easier targets.
Left: MLA members will supply and fit all types of security devices with the minimum of disruption
Below: Make a thief's job harder by replacing an old and weak front door lock with a strong five-lever mortise lock
FINANCIAL HOW TO AVOID CHURNING
Suppose you have an endowment mortgage and plan to move house.
The odds are you'll now need a bigger loan, and the original endowment policy will not give enough cover.
Should you cash it in and take out another?
If not, what can you do?
Too often, rogue insurance sellers advise us to surrender our old policy, and sign up for one big enough to cover our new loan in full.
That's good for them, because they stand to make a commission of hundreds of pounds.
In the trade, it's called churning .
Churning is not good for buyers though: endowments are meant to be long-term investments, and it should have been made clear to you when you bought the policy that you would lose out if you cashed in before the end of the agreed term, which is typically, 25 years.
However, you may not have realised how low the surrender value was likely to be.
If you surrendered your policy within two years, you would get back little or nothing.
These early payments are used to clear up the cost of setting it up — and in particular the commission of the agent who sold it to you.
In the few years that followed, it is unlikely that you would get back as much as you paid in.
For instance, a man of 29 who paid £50 a month into a 25-year endowment, would fork out £1,800 in the first three years.
But according to Money Management 's annual survey of with-profits policies, actual cash payouts after that time averaged only £1,173 in 1992.
Only one company, Equitable Life, paid out more than had been paid in — £1,879 — and several paid out less than £1,000.
The lowest was around £700.
Even after paying £6,000 over 10 years, you might still make a loss — though Equitable paid £12,877, and several other companies paid more than £9,000.
So what can you do?
One solution would be to keep on your old endowment, and take out a new one to top it up.
Do not automatically accept the policy suggested by the bank or building society; they can usually offer only the policies of the insurance company they are tied to.
Shop around brokers for a wider choice.
Alternatively, ask if you could top up with a repayment loan.
Each monthly payment consists partly of interest, partly of capital, and no new endowment is involved.
Abbey National is one lender which arranges these ‘part and part’ mortgages.
WAKE UP YOUR SAVINGS
If you put money in a bank or building society some years ago, ask how much interest it is now earning.
You will probably find that there are newer schemes offering much higher rates.
It usually pays to get out of basic bank and building society deposit accounts, and older schemes that have now been superseded.
Cast a cold eye on National Savings Bank or ordinary accounts (2.5–5%), and National Savings Certificates which have come to the end of their five year period and are now paying only the ‘general extension rate’ of 5.01%.
SAFE IN DEED
Suppose you're about to make the last payment on your mortgage.
Where will you keep your house deeds when the building society returns them?
The best solution may be to leave them with the society.
Schemes vary, but usually you keep on your mortgage by holding back a nominal amount, say £1.
There may be a small charge for storage, for instance £10 a year with the Halifax's Deedsafe scheme, but you are normally excused payment if you agree to buy your house buildings insurance through them.
An added advantage through them.
An added advantage is that you have a mortgage already in place if you later need to take out a loan for house repairs.
REGULATIONS
ALTERATIONS TO ROOFS
If you're thinking about carrying out some alterations to the roof of your property, then you may require planning permission and/or Building Regulations approval.
A common alteration is changing the roof covering, perhaps replacing old slates for new concrete or clay tiles.
In this case planning permission is necessary, and there may be zombie difficulty in getting approval if the visual appearance of the building is substantially changed.
Objections could certainly be raised if your house is semi-detached, or forms part of a row of terraced house.
Also, there could be problems if your house is listed as being of historic or architectural interest, or is in a Conservation Area.
Where building materials are more strictly controlled.
In addition to planning permission, the Building Regulations classify the replacement of roof coverings as being a ‘material alteration’, requiring Regulations approval.
The Building Regulations apply even if the new roof covering is significantly lighter than the covering it replaces, and you may be required to demonstrate that a lighter roof covering will not affect the stability of the roof structure, particularly during windy weather.
Loft conversions usually result in roofs being altered.
Planning permission will be required if the height of the ridge is to be raised, or if a dormer window is added to a roof slope which fronts onto a highway, and roof alterations caused by loft conversions will certainly require approval under the Building Regulations.
If you're planning to cut or remove structural timbers, your calculations may also have to be submitted to prove their structural adequacy.
Assistance from a qualified engineer may be required.
Roofs of houses are now generally constructed with a series of individual trussed rafters, which do not rely on heavy timber purlins and common rafters, as in traditionally constructed roofs.
These trussed rafters are scientifically designed for maximum economy, and rely on a number of angled struts and ties with special pressed metal connectors for their strength.
Their presence makes it difficult for the roof void to be used in the same way as traditional roofs, and there is often a temptation to remove some of them to gain extra space.
However, these internal timbers should not be cut or removed, otherwise the strength of the roof will be seriously impaired.
It is possible, though, for trussed rafters to be altered to form openings for trapdoors in ceilings, framing around new chimneys and flues, and to insert roof lights.
However, structural advice from an engineer is needed to ensure that the roof is not weakened.
In most households, small areas of the ceiling joists within the roof void are often boarded over to provide storage space.
There's nothing wrong in this, provided the loads are lightweight, but if they are heavy, the ceiling joists could sag, which could result in cracks appearing on the ceilings below.
Some people mistakenly believe that ceiling joists can be turned into floor joists, simply by nailing other joists on top to double the depth.
If a structural floor is needed, however, then proper floor joists of adequate size must be laid between the ceiling joists, so as to be completely independent from the ceiling.
This is one of the reasons why a loft conversion is classed as a ‘material alteration’ under the Building Regulations.
Finally, if you have any doubts about whether or not an alteration you are planning to your roof requires permission, the golden rule is to ask your council beforehand.
GARDENING
RAISED BEDS
Raised beds make attractive garden features, and if you are beginning to find that bending is difficult, they can also make gardening a more practical and pleasurable hobby in the years ahead.
Autumn is an excellent time for this kind of construction work, when the weather is still mild enough to work outdoors in comfort, and there are relatively few urgent jobs to do in the garden.
The most popular materials for raised beds are bricks and concrete walling blocks.
Natural stone is more difficult and expensive, but the best option if you want to plant into the sides.
You can omit the mortar form some of the joints in a brick or concrete block wall, but the effect is never as natural-looking as plants growing in stone.
Choose a material that blends sympathetically with your home.
You may not be able to match brick exactly, because facing bricks won't be suitable for an exposed garden wall, but a close match is usually possible.
Raised beds should have a sense of purpose, proportion and design.
A single rectangular raised bed is seldom satisfactory, but a series of beds which form part of a patio, perhaps its boundary, clearly have a function.
Interlinking raised beds, each built to a different height, look interesting, and a raised bed that runs along the side of a path will give a strong design line — if the wall curves round with the path, the effect will be even more striking.
In a small garden it may even be possible to divide the area into a series of small paved ‘rooms’, using low raised beds to create a strong visual element without dominating or casting much shade.
Avoid very narrow raised beds, otherwise the thickness of the wall will look out of proportion to the planting area.
Aim for a minimum width of about 380mm (15in).
SEED OF THE MONTH
Sweet Pea Bouquet Mixed: Large-flowered, sturdy growing, with four, five or six flowers per long stem.
For earliest blooms next year, sow now in cool greenhouse or coldframe to overwinter, or March to May next year.
Also available as four separate colours.
Suttons Seeds
WINTER-INTEREST EVERGREENS
You don't need to have a dull garden in winter: a few well-chosen evergreens will ensure bright and cheerful splashes, as will a few winter-flowering bulbs and plants like Christmas roses (Helleborus niger ) and Algerian irisis (Iris unguicularis , also sold as I sylosa ).
Although they will inevitably be small at first, you can enjoy their benefits this winter if you plant now.
Too many evergreens can look boring, so plant just a few choice ones to add colour to dull areas.
For winter interest, evergreens must be bright.
Try a variegated spotted laurel (Aucuba japonica ) such as‘Variegata’ or ‘Crotonifolia’; a Choisya ternata ‘Sundance’(golden foliage and the bonus of fragrant white flowers in spring); the green and gold (Elaeagnus pungens )‘Maculata’; and for a low-grower at the front of a border,Euonymus fortunei ‘Emerald ‘n’Gold’.
If you have room, try a boldly variegated holly such as‘Golden King’, which is female, despite its name, so should produce berries if you also have a male bush close by.
All are interesting shrubs which will earn their keep through the year.
Below: Elaeagnus pungens ‘Maculata’.
TIME TO PLANT TULIPS
Tulips can be planted in October, November, and even into early December.
For a good display, plant them about 100mm (4in) deep, and no more than about 300mm (12in) apart; and for a more intense show, no more than 150mm (6in) apart — the closer the better, but not touching.
Grow species tulips, such as T tarda , if you want to leave bulbs in the ground to flower reliably year after year.
Right: Tulipa praestans ‘Fusilier’.
Darwin hybrids Very large flowers on tall stems .
Suitable for cutting & bedding, interplanted with plants like forget-me-nots and wallflowers.
Fosteriana hybrids Large, very bold flowers on dwarf plants .
Best used alone rather than in mixed bedding, in rock gardens, containers, & clumps at front of borders.
Greigii hybrids Large flowers that open wide in sun.
Foliage usually mottled purple-brown .
Rock garden, dwarf bedding schemes, & clumps in front of border.
Kaufmanniana hybrids Pointed buds opening to waterlily-shaped flowers.
Leaves striped purple-brown.
Dwarf and very early .
Rock garden, containers & clumps in front of border.
Early single Typical tulip-shaped flowers .
Use in beds & pots.
Good for exposed positions.
Early double Double or semi-double flowers on compact plants .
Containers & bedding.
Late single Typical tulip-shaped flowers on long stems.
Sometimes called Mayflowering tulips .
Use in beds, ideally interplanted with bushy spring bedding plants.
Late double Double or semi-double, peony-shaped flowers on compact plants .
Containers & bedding.
Lily-flowered Reflexing pointed petals on long stems .
Interplant with bushy spring bedding plants.
Parrot Fringed petals .
Use in tubs & for cutting.
Tulipa praestans Clusters of two to four flowers.
‘Unicum’ has cream-striped leaves .
Containers & raised beds.
Tulipa tarda Clusters of yellow and white, star-like flowers on 150mm (6in) plants .
Suitable for rock garden, raised beds, & naturalised in front of shrubs.
Viridiflora Petals with green stripes .
Use for tubs & cutting.
PROBLEM SOLVER
For free advice on any d-i-y problem, write to:.
We can reply only if:
1: You enclose a valid Free Advice Coupon with each query.
2: Also enclose an sae.
Each separate query must be accompanied by a valid Free Advice Coupon and an sae and each query should be written on a separate piece of paper.
We regret that we are unable to answer multiple queries that do not comply with these instructions.
And we are unable to supply plans for projects.
BUILDING
Garden walls
What sort of height can walls be built in the garden without support?
You can build free-standing walls half a brick (102mm/4in) thick up to a height of around 450mm (18in) without additional support, but over this height you should incorporate a 230mm (9in) square pier every 3m (10ft).
A wall that's one brick (215mm/8½in) thick can be built up to 1350mm (4ft 6in) high without piers.
Rail removal
I want to take down some dado and picture rails.
How's it done without damaging the walls?
Dado and picture rails can be tricky to remove without seriously damaging the plaster — it all depends on whether they were fixed in place before the walls were plastered or afterwards.
In both cases they were probably fixed with cut mails, which are notorious for pulling out chunks of masonry, let alone plaster.
The best way to find out how they were attached is to chisel away a little plaster next to the rail.
If this reveals buried wood, extend the cut right across the wall, above and below the rail, so you can insert a lever and prise the rail off without doing too much damage to the plasterwork.
Then fill the channel in the plaster.
If the rail was surface-mounted, simply lever it off as gently as you can using packing between lever and wall to protect the plaster.
Plasterboard repair
How do you mend a small hole in plasterboard?
Where there is a relatively small hole in the board, such as where a light fitting has been removed, you only need a small piece of plasterboard slightly larger than the hole.
Cut the hole at each side just sufficient to allow the patch to be passed through.
Push some plaster through the hole and spread it around the back of the hole.
Next pass the patch through and pull it down on to the plaster.
A small screw in the fact of the patch will help you to pull it down.
Leave it until the plaster has set then you can fill the hole with plaster in the usual way.
CENTRAL HEATING
Adding a radiator
Can you tell me if there are any problems involved in adding a radiator?
Adding a radiator to a system is not usually a difficult operation.
What causes problems is getting sufficient water to flow through it afterwards, so that it gives out enough heat.
Heating systems have to be balanced so that water does not all flow through the radiators closest to the pump.
This is achieved by the use of lockshield valves which can restrict flow through the most favoured radiators.
When an extra radiator is fitted all these valves may have to be adjusted, as the available water has to be reallocated between the increased number of radiators.
Assuming that the system was properly balanced before, each of the original radiators has to give some flow up to the new one.
We also have to assume that there is sufficient boiler power and that the circulating pump can cope.
If it is not already on its highest setting, the pump can usually manage one more radiator.
Increasing the pump duty may cause noise to be created in the pipework because of increased water flow speeds.
For this reason it is best to try and connect the additional radiator to the largest bore pipework you can.
CEILINGS
Lath and plaster repair
A foot has been put through the loft floor and now a hole needs to be repaired in a lath and plaster bedroom ceiling.
How is this done?
If the laths have been broken it's best to cut them back to the centre of the nearest joist.
Then fix battens between the joists to take the edges of a piece of plasterboard.
When the plasterboard has been nailed in place, the plaster will have to be built up in stages to finish flush with the existing surface.
If the laths are intact, you can either nail the plasterboard over them, or fill small holes using a one-coat plaster.
Larger holes would need a backing coat of Carlite Metal Lathing plaster, followed by Carlite Finish plaster.
DAMP
Which product?
What is the difference between a bituminous waterproofer and a bituminous paint?
Bituminous waterproofers are black liquids which are simply brushed on and left to dry, and form a waterproof coating that will cure pinhole leaks in surfaces such as flat or corrugated roofs.
They are water-based products which dry fairly quickly, and they can be washed off tools and hands with water so long as they are still wet.
Bituminous paints are used for protecting exterior metal work — gutters, downpipes and so on— and not as damp proofers.
FLOORING
Stair carpet
How is stair carpet fixed with gripper strips?
Gripper strips are nailed to the bottom of each riser and the back of each tread (or you can get right-angled metal stair grippers which simply fit into the angle between each tread and riser).
Cut the gripper strips about 40mm shorter than the width of the stair carpet so that edges won't show, and do the same for the underlay, which should fit from the end of each strip on the tread, over the nosing, up to the edge of the next strip on the riser.
Tack or staple the underlay, after marking edges so that you get an accurate fit in the centre of the stairs.
Leftover carpet (for when you reposition it) can be tucked under the stair landing.
Buying vinyl
I want to lay vinyl in a room which is L-shaped and has four alcoves.
How should I measure up what to buy?
Make a detailed plan of the room, measuring into all alcoves and doorways.
Once you know the maximum width and length required, you can decide which way the sheet will be laid.
Wherever possible, vinyl is best laid without seams — though this would not be possible in your L-shaped room.
There would be too much wastage.
So having to make seams raises the problem of cross-matching.
Most patterns need to go the same way on all pieces joined, so this must be taken into account when ordering.
If you have doubts take your plan along to the store and get advice.
GARDEN BUILDING
Floor laying
What site preparation is needed before building a kit summerhouse?
An adequate foundation is needed.
The main essential is that it is smooth and flat.
Any irregularity will put the building out of true, and you'll find bolt holes don't line up, making assembly really difficult.
Provided your building comes with an adequate floor, you can stand this on a row of substantial timbers, or on a number of carefully laid paving slabs.
It is a good idea to lay 500 gauge polythene over the foundation to keep back any rising damp.
Should the building have no floor, you need to lay a concrete raft upon which the building can stand.
It is a good idea to make the raft of such a size that the walls of the summerhouse just overlap and cover the edges.
This will prevent water seepage into the building.
The concrete should include a membrane to prevent rising damp.
GARDEN PONDS
Repairing leaks
How can I seal a crack in a pond?
It is often easier to locate the leak with the water in, or by marking the water level at which to search for the leak, unless of course the fault is in the bottom of the pool.
Small cracks should be enlarged by chipping out more concrete to make a V-shaped channel.
Brush the area with water before applying a mix of one part cement, two pars sand and four parts gravel (by volume); incorporate a waterproofing agent.
To be on the safe side, paint the repaired area with a pond sealant (from a water garden specialist or a good garden centre).
If the cracks are many or large, it's best to use a liner within the old pond.
B & Q garden at the Chelsea Flower show
GATES
Choosing hinges
I am going to hang some heavy wooded gates.
What type of hinges would you recommend?
A popular choice for use on heavier wooden gates is the tee-hinge , consisting of a long strip attached to the gate and hinged to a cross piece which is screwed to the post.
For maximum strength, the strap should reach across half the width of the gate.
The hinge may be secured to the gate by a coach bolt as well as screws.
The gate should be held level with offcuts of 50mm timber before drilling the hole for the bolt.
The hinge itself must also be horizontal, using a spirit level.
Gates which are flush with adjoining fencing can be fixed with a strap hinge .
Instead of a cross piece, another identical strap is used on the post.
Wall post
How can I fix a gate post to a wall?
I have tried large screws into wall plugs, but they don't hold.
Gates exert considerable pressure on posts, particularly on the hinged side.
Ideally, gates should be hung on sturdy posts set well into the ground, but where this is impossible, such as against a house wall, the only secure way to fit the post is to screw it to the wall using large expanding bolts, such as Rawlbolts.
For security use three evenly spaced bolts per post.
If a suitable masonry drill is not available, use a hammer and star drill to make the holes for the bolts in the brickwork.
Never attempt to make the holes in the cement mortar.
The holes in the post should be countersunk so that the heads of the bolts lie flush with the surface.
PLUMBING
Leaking a shower tray
Water is leaking through our ceiling from the waste outlet of the shower tray in the bathroom above.
It has been mended twice by the plumber — once with jointing compound, and then with a non-setting mastic filler.
It still leaks.
Is there a solution?
The manufacturers of plastic baths and shower trays recommend strongly that the waste fitting should be bedded into the waste outlet with a clear silicone sealant —not with putty or a non-setting mastic sealant.
Water protection
What is the best way to protect my plumbing system while I am away for a few days in cold weather?
If you go away for the weekend during the winter, leave the central heating on the minimum thermostat setting, with the programmer set to 24-hour operation and remove or prop open the loft hatch.
This should keep the whole system warm enough even if it is freezing outside.
For extended periods of a week or more, you must drain down the household plumbing system.
This will necessitate turning off the water supply at the main stopcock, and opening all the cold taps to drain the cold water cistern; then you'll need to attach a  hose-pipe to the draincock next to the hot water cylinder to drain this.
The central heating system does not need to be drained provided that anti-freeze has been added via the feed-and-expansion cistern — do not add anti-freeze to the main cold water cistern.
Blocked gullies
How can you clear a gulley which is blocked with leaves?
Gullies often become blocked by dead leaves and small stones which fall through the grating.
Most problems can be cleared by hand, using rubber gloves to lift debris from the bottom of the gulley.
Back-entry gullies do not suffer this problem quite so much, as there is no rush of water to drive the leaves through the grille.
It is a good idea to take off the grating occasionally and clean out any debris.
Flush the trap with a bucket of clean water.
Regular cleaning of the gutters and downpipes will prevent much of the dirt being washed into the gullies, which is what causes blockages.
Cistern replacement
Our house was built in the fifties and the original galvanised cistern remains.
How long will it last and what should we replace it with?
An old galvanised iron cistern is liable to spring a leak eventually.
Replace it with a plastic one, but make sure you'll be able to get it through to loft hatch.
You can buy flexible cisterns which can be squashed through the opening, but you'll probably have to leave your old cistern in the loft.
Make sure the new one is properly supported, well insulated, and has a lid.
Noisy wc
Our wc is particularly noisy when compared with other people's.
Is this because it's just old-fashioned?
Many wc cisterns are noisy in operation — either because of the type of cistern installed, or due to the ball valve.
Low-level cisterns are quieter than old-fashioned high-level ones, and are fairly easy to install.
Close-coupled  double-symphonic suites are quieter still in operation and a change over to a modern suite may be well worth considering.
Noisy filling is best cured by replacing the existing ball valve with a modern plastic type — either a diaphragm or an equilibrium/diaphragm model.
ROOFS
Felt fixing
My roof has no felt on the underside.
Is it a good idea to fix some?
Many houses, especially those built before the last war, have no roofing felt under the roof covering.
Not only does this decrease their weatherproofness, but it means dirt (and possibly snow) can get blown into the loft space.
You can apply strips of felt or building paper from inside the lift, secured with battens to the sides of the rafters or use a staple gun or brass drawing pins to secure it.
Using nails could disturb the roof covering.
Carry the felt out into the gutter.
Porous state
My slate roof is leaking through general wear.
I can't afford to have it reslated now so is there a stop-gap solution?
Where slates are frost-damaged and porous, you can effect a medium-term repair by using a reinforcing membrane bedded in bituminous or heavy-duty waterproofer.
Brush on one coat of the liquid, and then unroll and bed the membrane in this layer before covering it with two further coats.
You can also use this treatment on flat roofs which are in poor condition.
You must have the correct access equipment before attempting any kind of roof work.
WALLS
Tile cladding
Would you recommend cladding an exterior wall below a bay window with tiles?
Some concrete and clay plain tiles originally intended for roofing can also be used for cladding walls.
A range of colours from tile red to red/brown, brown/grey and blue, as well as various ornamental profiles are available.
These tiles are exceptionally strong and durable, and blend in well in most surroundings.
They look even better as they weather.
Fixing is on to timber battening, and because of their weight, manufacturers' instructions should be followed closely.
Fixing shingles
Because of the little maintenance they require I intend using shingles rather than timber cladding.
How are they fixed?
Shingles are fixed in much the same way as timber cladding, except that special nails have to be used (which are supplied with them) and they should not come in contact with the metals usually used on flashings.
Their light weight and longevity, as well as their attractive appearance, makes them a prime contender for a cladding material in the appropriate setting.
WOODWORM
Treating furniture
Do you have to inject woodworm fluid into every hole found in a table?
No, but extra penetration will be achieved by squirting some fluid into the holes about every four inches.
Use one of the proprietary woodworm injectors for this, as their special nozzles are designed to fit the holes and you are less likely to risk an eyeful of the fluid.
A small plastic squeeze bottle type is cheap and effective, and aerosols with injector nozzles are also available.
Remember to treat inside drawers as well as all furniture parts, including backs and feet.
You can also buy a woodworm-killing wax polish to protect polished furniture form future attack.
This should be smeared over all unpolished areas as well, to give extra protection against future infestation.
DIARY
PITIFUL SITE
Extracts from the diary of a working supervisor with a small building company, with useful tips on all sorts of building problems.
In the depth of a recession, saving a few pounds here and there is essential, especially where that status symbol/poverty maker, the car, is concerned.
Keeping a car fully maintained at your local cost-a-lot garage can work out at a small fortune — and it never ends.
Those who do routine maintenance and even major repairs themselves will know that it's no fun lying on your back under the car, trying to release that stubborn sump plug or awkward steering joint.
Without the usually dodgy jacking and flimsy ramps to give enough lift, the most comfortable and safest access to the underneath of the infernal object is a pit.
Making a pit is not a job you would pay a builder to do.
The materials are affordable — around £250 including skip and breaker hire for a modest pit — but when labour and VAT are added, they push it closer to £2,000 — at lot of money for a fancy hole in the ground!
My brother-in-law had decided to improve his existing pit, a pitiful sight indeed, resembling the remains of a Roman earth closet, and he'd rallied round his closest relatives for some helpful muscle.
Our trusty electric breaker was called for, and ear defenders were handed out — they were absolutely vital!
The acoustics of an empty garage or any interior location intensifies the decibels to an unbearable level.
We had to extend the length, as it was far too short, and it had meant rolling the car forward every time once you were in the pit — not ideal or safe, as it left no escape route.
How long is both practical and economical for most situations?
This depends how involved you are, or likely to become, in motor mechanics.
With more cars having front wheel drive, the pit needn't be very long, it could be as short as 2.4m.
Die-hard enthusiasts may prefer one the full length of the car to cater for all maintenance without having to turn the car round.
The method of access will also help to determine the length of the pit.
Concrete steps will need more room than step irons or a ladder.
If you choose steps, don't forget when estimating quantities and cost that only three walls are needed, and allow about 1.2m for seven normal-size concrete steps into a shoulder-deep pit, and about 2m overall in front of the car.
Step irons, such as you find in deeper manholes, save space and a lot of digging, but may not be the best option in later years.
Width isn't too important, as long as you've got a bit of elbow room: we made ours so that it finished at around one metre wide.
We dug the pit a little more than 100mm larger all round, and 75mm deeper than the finished size.
To provide foundations for the walls, we formed a toe around the outside, 75mm deeper and a shovel width (like a moat), and skimmed off the sharp corner.
To prevent dampness causing that unpleasant musty smell, we lined the bottom with heavy-gauge polythene sheeting, moulded as flat as possible into the foundation trench, and well up the sides, to overlap and continue when building the walls.
We didn't bother using a mixer, the small amount of concrete wasn't worth it, and we had plenty of manpower and shovels.
To keep the 1:6 cement/ballast concrete level and consistent thickness, we put a few levelled pegs at the extreme sides of the pit for guidance.
In a cool sheltered position, with a damp-proof membrane, it took a few days to harden enough to build on.
The important thing to bear in mind is that the walls are retaining ones and anything longer than about 2.5m will either need a pier in the centre to strengthen it, or for large pits, it may be better to build in 225m hollow concrete blocks: they're heavy, and very unloved by the professionals, who aren't expected to lay many per hour.
To avoid the risk of overdoing it, I wouldn't recommend the d-i-yer trying more than about four hours a day with these.
Our pit wasn't going to be big, but we still used a pier as a precautionary measure.
Concrete block piers are built by laying two blocks flat and two on edge on alternate courses: they don't have to look pretty on the back, as long as they're soundly constructed.
Mortar should be of the same strength as the materials to be bonded, particularly important for retaining walls.
Concrete blocks should be laid in a 1:3 cement/sand mix, and mixed a little stiffer than for absorbent materials.
Concrete blocks are well suited to d-i-y work.
Their weight is an advantage, as they almost level themselves, needing only the minimum of tapping down with the handle of a club hammer.
For 225mm work, laying is easier if the work has been calculated to block sizes.
There should be no need to cut them, as the length is exactly twice the width.
They bond perfectly, without the need for 100mm slips next to the corner block to make up the half-bond.
An internal garage presents no problems for built-in lighting down the pit, but garages 20m down the garden could prove expensive in armoured cable.
We didn't bother with lights.
As the work proceeded, we slipped a sheet of polythene behind the blockwork and the polythene of the base, to keep the pit dry in service.
Step irons were built in, neatly staggered and plumbed vertical for access.
Pointing the mortar joints had to be done long after laying the last blocks of the day, as the concrete absorbs very little moisture.
When it's necessary to build deeper than suitable for full block courses, the difference can be made up with bricks, laid normally for a 75mm depth, and on edge to give a 110mm course.
About 50mm depth should be left between the long walls and garage floor, for the covering planks to rest on when the pit is not in use.
The planks need a bearing of only 50 — 75mm each side, with one or two ventilation holes of about 25mm diameter bored in each to help keep the pit aired it's covered.