

The memorial service for the late Paul Arkwright was over, and those present had risen respectfully to allow the widow to leave the hall.
It was assumed that she would do so on the arm of one of her sons, but they followed behind in a somewhat passive procession.
Dinah Arkwright had laid her elegant black-gloved hand on the sleeve of a stocky young man with a short beard, whom only a few could name.
He was in any case eclipsed — they all were — by the presence of Dinah herself, strong and compelling as when she swept on to any stage.
Much childbearing had not impaired her beauty.
Her rich brown hair gleamed beneath the widow's veil; the bone structure of her face was overlaid with a suitable pallor, but no outward sign of grief.
No doubt that was natural, the watching assembly thought; the circumstances of the death had been regrettable.
Although no one spoke of it, not a soul in the hall failed to be aware that Paul Arkwright, possessing one of the most brilliant minds of the century, had died in a mental asylum after having, many years ago now, made an attempt on his own life.
Dinah Arkwright strode out into the sun, her fine bosom and amazingly taut waist evident beneath the closely-fitting mourning gown.
It had been made by a famous couturier.
In fact, Dinah was playing a part, and her sons knew it; the part of a widow leaving the past behind.
It would never have occurred to Nathan Holland, the young man on whose arm she leant, to think of such a thing; he had worked with Paul Arkwright in the publishing house which turned out many of the latter's books on philosophy, and soon Paul had asked him, knowing his astonishing gift for languages, if he would translate some of them.
That had been when he had invited Nathan to Hampstead to meet his wife and family, and ever since Nathan had adored Dinah Arkwright uncritically; she could do no wrong in his eyes.
How fortunate Paul was to have married such a woman!
There could be no other like her anywhere in the world.
‘Can't trust the French,’ the famous writer and philosopher had told the young man.
‘They put in whatever they choose, whether or not it's in the text: and it ain't worth suing them from over here.
You translate it, and see they alter nothing afterwards.
I'll make it worth your while.’
For Paul Arkwright, recipient of honorary degrees, had known very well what it was like to be a student, and poor.
That had been when he was made known to Robert Asshe, Dinah's father, heir of a long line of actors.
That was when he had met Dinah, who was to become his wife.
They said her father had opposed the marriage fiercely; but all that was forgotten now.
They had reached the door, and the motor was waiting to convey them back to Hampstead.
A tall man with silver hair bowed over Dinah's hand; John Lamprey, the publisher, who had first rescued Paul from hopeless poverty.
She smiled, and exchanged a few words with him; then others came to say farewell.
Finally they climbed into the motor, with the three sons, Paul, George, and Hubert, piling in docile fashion into the rear.
Every one resembled the dead man, none their mother; plump in the face, with brilliant blue eyes and straight brown hair; Hubert wore spectacles.
They had removed their tall hats and placed them on their knees.
The chauffeur started up, and they moved off.
No one said anything.
They stopped outside the tall grey house in Hampstead, made subtle and mysterious today by the autumn mists; the garden, where laurels grew with a lawn beyond, was wreathed in evanescent white.
Nathan Holland and the chauffeur handed Arkwright's widow out of the car with every semblance of respect, opening the gate for her to walk alone, head bent, up the path.
A maid, her white cap and apron immaculate, opened the door and gave a little bob as Dinah passed inside.
She went into the drawing-room, and flung back her veil, for the first time revealing a pair of remarkable green eyes, set at a slant like a cat's or lynx's.
The eyes had been used to great effect as Queen Gertrude, Imogen, Portia, and Lady Macbeth.
For the moment, they surveyed the room.
It was cluttered, as full of silver-framed souvenirs as those of the Princess of Wales were rumoured to be.
Since Paul's departure — she grimaced at the memory — Dinah had been able to do as she liked with it, and she liked to have objects about her that reminded her of herself.
There were photographs of her in the few parts she had been able to play in the years following her marriage; photographs of her in youth, when her father had begun to launch her on the career which would be interrupted by the coming of Paul.
There was — the green gaze flickered over it, then passed on — a self-portrait painted by a young man, her son Robin, who was dead.
They had given out that he had died of typhoid.
His face was not like his brothers.
The eyes started out of his head like a hare's, and were not blue but hazel.
Below the portrait stood, as if in memory, Robin's paints and easel.
He had thought that he was good enough to become a professional stage designer, and Dinah had disabused him.
After that his mind had gone, by degrees, like his father's.
‘It was in that family,’ Dinah reassured herself aloud.
She hadn't known, until after she was married to Paul, that he had a brother who was mentally unstable.
Papa had been right; there was risk attached to the marriage.
But at that time she herself had been determined to find out all there was to know.
Her mother was dead and could not advise her.
They had gone away together, she and Paul, to Papa's fury; and at first had been wildly happy.
When had the happiness begun to dilute itself, and at last to cease?
When had everything become humdrum?
Was it when he had forbidden her to rehearse aloud while he was writing?
Latterly he wrote all day.
By degrees she, Dinah, had become little more than his reader, except that he gave her too many babies, no doubt absent-mindedly.
Pregnant or not, she had had to read out passages from the scripts  which recorded Paul's thoughts, to see how they sounded; and he would make her rewrite the illegible parts in her neat hand at some length.
There was the house as well, and over the years the children; more and more children, four boys and three girls.
She had never liked them.
Then Nathan had come, brought by Paul, to whom he was devoted; but attaching himself to her also at once.
He would do anything to save her the slightest inconvenience.
He had relieved her of the reading aloud and rewriting.
She had been able to begin, a little, to live her own life.
She had even taken a small part at a provincial theatre until pregnancy again intervened, and had found that she was not forgotten, that Dinah Asshe could become Dinah Arkwright and be the same woman.
Then there had been Paul's breakdown, and Nathan Holland had been invaluable there also; she would have run mad without him.
What would she do if he ever left her?
It must not happen; he must be always near her.
But she would never marry again.
They had followed her up the path meantime, and were coming into the room; her uninspiring sons, Paul the lawyer, George the insurance broker, Hubert the medical student, his eyes strained with reading.
A hush of skirts had already told her the girls were coming down from upstairs.
They came in and kissed her dutifully, with affection neither taken nor given; Lilian, Clare, Olivia.
Only the last was pretty, and younger than the rest.
Dinah rang for tea, and when it was brought dispensed it.
There was subdued talk, of the kind that follows a memorial service and had already followed Paul's actual funeral some weeks before.
Dinah queened it over the teapot, smiling bravery, Nathan Holland at her elbow.
He bent solicitously over her, handing round the cups.
‘Is there anything more I can do for you today?’ he said presently.
‘I'll take myself off, if not.
If I may I'll call tomorrow.’
‘Do so, indeed, dear Nathan.’
She gave him her cool cheek to kiss.
‘Only you are capable of going through the papers.
You understood him so well; you know what he  would have wanted.’
She let a hint of tears well up in the green eyes; it was a stage trick, not often enough practised.
Nathan Holland bowed and took his leave.
The three sons rose, saw him out, then returned to sit stiffly down again.
George, who had more confidence than his elder brother, spoke.
‘We feel, Mama, that it is our task and no one else's to select Papa's papers.
Too much authority is given to someone outside the family, and has been from the beginning.’
He swallowed; it had cost him an effort to speak in such a way to his mother.
Dinah's eyes flashed.
‘You ungrateful puppy!
When would you be able to devote the time, or the knowledge, to select, as you call it, what is or is not fit to publish?
Nathan Holland worked closely with your father for years.’
‘He is made too free of the house,’ muttered Paul, feeling he must put in his word.
‘And if I choose that he shall be so, who are you, who are any of you, to deny me?
Get out, every one of you; go to some other room.
I want to be left in peace.’
After they had gone, and the tea-things had been removed, she rose from her place and walked up and down.
With every step her energy crackled; scarcely knowing at first what she said, she found herself reciting the lines from Cymbeline .
Where is Postúmus?
What is in thy mind
That makes thee stare thus?
Wherefore breaks that sigh
From th'inward of thee?
One, but painted thus,
Would be interpreted a thing perplex'd
Beyond self-explication; put thyself
Into a haviour of less fear, ere wildness
Vanquish my staider senses.
What's the matter?
Why tender'st thou that paper to me, with
A look untender?
If't be summer news,
Smile to't before; if winterly, thou  need'st 
But keep that countenance still.
My husband's hand!
At that point, she broke down into laughter; low, wild laughter, that could be heard in the rooms above.
The three girls huddled together for comfort in the small one  they occupied.
Mama was rehearsing, that was all; but it should perhaps have been kept for some other time.
Poor Papa!
It was true that they had all been children when he was taken away, but they remembered him as kind always.
Mama was never kind.
It was not the kindness that had first struck Dinah Asshe, but a young man's interest in herself; she had not been permitted to meet many young men.
Paul Arkwright had been brought to the house in Holborn one Sunday afternoon, a day when Robert Asshe habitually received a few carefully chosen guests, by his professor, an old friend and admirer of Asshe's unconventional renderings of Shakespeare's plays.
Recently Asshe's young daughter — Dinah was seventeen — had been permitted to play Cordelia to her father's Lear.
Earlier she had played Juliet; and there had been much adulation showered on her by the public and the newspapers.
Robert Asshe, that giant, with the blood of actors in him, however did not permit too much of all that; he insisted on stern rehearsals, and criticised every fault in the way he had always done, while Selene, the younger sister, sat by with the prompting-lines.
Selene was a mousy little creature, unlike the radiant Dinah, and with no prospects whatever on the stage.
She had a pretty singing voice, no more, and was still too young for social occasions.
That she was present that afternoon was fortuitous.
As for the mother of both girls, she was dead long ago.
Paul Arkwright was a stocky young man with a round face and straight brown hair.
His suit of clothes was shabby.
He was a recently appointed lecturer in English literature and philosophy at London University College, and was expected to have a brilliant future.
The one notable feature in his face were the eyes; they were brilliant blue, recognised as the colour of gentians by those who had travelled to the Swiss mountains in summer.
The eyes fastened on Dinah at once and scarcely left her.
Tea was served.
There was informed talk of the kind Robert Asshe loved.
Asshe himself sat in the midst, the long grey beard he had grown for Lear spreading out  abundantly, his white hair wild as though on the blasted heath.
He had small shrewd hazel eyes that as a rule missed nothing.
His teeth were his own despite his age, square, widely spaced and yellowing.
Six foot two when he stood up, he dominated any room and any stage; the latter was not surprising, for his forebears had been actors since the days of the early Georges.
If he was disappointed that his dead wife had not borne him a son to carry on the tradition, he had never remarried; there was Dinah, who was ample reward, investment for the future.
Asshe sat back in his upholstered chair now, making it creak with his weight.
The voice that could reach with ease to the upper gallery of the Shield Theatre sounded in the Holborn drawing-room, calling attention to the silent young man who had arrived with the Professor but so far had not said a word.
‘And what d'you do with yourself, Mr Paul Arkwright, when you're not at your books?
All work and no play, y'know; do you sing, or play any instrument?’
He liked his guests to give value for money; this wordless young fellow had so far given none.
Paul admitted modestly that he played the pianoforte a little, although he was badly out of practice.
‘Then get back into it; accompany Dinah in a song.’
Robert Asshe turned to the Professor.
‘I had both the girls taught, but they were idle, and I showed the teacher the door in the end.
Give us one of Mendelssohn's, will you?
Or one of the Prince Consort's.
That feller was underrated.’
O for the Wings of a Dove gave everyone pleasure, with Paul stumbling a little over the notes, but gaining poise with the full-throated singing of Dinah, true to the note, like a thrush, or perhaps a nightingale.
Later Selene joined in with Silent Long Have Been Those Numbers .
At the end Paul rose, bowed, and endured the applause; the girls were flushed and smiling.
‘Come back again,’ roared Asshe, ‘come any day you choose.
It's good for Dinah to stretch her voice.’
He was in fact close-fisted, and while listening had worked out in his mind that he need not consider paying a music-master if this young man should be eager and available.
‘Mustn't interfere with y'work, of course,’ he added.
‘All that's understood.
But any free time y'have, welcome.’
Paul Arkwright looked at Dinah with his bright eyes and gave a hesitant smile with his full lips.
Of course he would come.
Paul Arkwright was in fact older than he looked.
He had spent four unwilling years as an articled clerk in his father's law office, before being able to enrol as a student.
The office appointment had been intended for his elder brother Jonas, who appeared to possess the mind of a future attorney.
Paul on the other hand was impractical and dreamy, with his head full of notions; his ambition of going to Oxford seemed suitable, and could just be afforded by his family.
But six months before term began, and after Paul had won a scholarship to Corpus, Jonas Arkwright went out of his mind.
It happened suddenly, or appeared to do so; he had always been quiet and uncommunicative, having few friends.
He was found seated staring at the wall, as if something unmentionable was to be found there that they could not see.
Nothing would rouse him, and he continued in that state for some days, then grew violent if touched or spoken to.
For their mother's sake he had to be taken away.
He was lodged, at some expense, in a progressive asylum where he would be looked after by skilled doctors, but his condition did not improve.
Either he was in the early depressed state, with hands hanging, or else flailing his limbs about, unsafe to be with; at such times they had to strap him down.
At first it was hoped that he would recover; but as the months wore on, it became evident that the condition was lasting.
In any case he could not now be trusted with clients.
There was no question of his ever returning to the office, or of carrying on the firm.
‘You must take his place,’ said their father to Paul.
He was a thin old man with a monocle on a black ribbon, the plumpness came from their mother.
Paul's heart dropped like lead.
‘Papa, the scholarship —’
‘That cannot be taken up now.
It is your duty to step  into your brother's shoes.
You must be in a position to support your mother if anything should befall myself.
There is Jonas to support also, and in the way of nature he will live for many years.
Oxford cannot be thought of.
You must think instead of law examinations.’
Paul relinquished his dreams; the informed company and brilliant talk, the beauty of the college buildings, of Broad Walk and the Cherwell and Magdalen Tower.
For the next four years he sat as an engrossing clerk on a stool in the dusty office, so thick with dust that it entered the sunbeams; and bent over crabbed writing in the books, or showed dull clients in to see his father, or sat the examinations, which he passed.
Jonas continued the same; they had stopped visiting him.
Paul's mother sat at home, plump as a contented pigeon despite everything, and saw to their clothes and their meals.
In the evenings, for relaxation and forgetfulness, Paul turned to his piano, and improved his playing, staring always at the green silk panels and brass candelabra on the upright front.
His mother would sit with him, knitting, occupying a rocking chair which creaked regularly as she moved it.
Paul's father was upstairs, working by the light of a culza lamp.
He only stopped working when he ate or slept.
One day he did not come downstairs for supper.
‘Go and rouse Papa,’ said Mrs Arkwright placidly.
‘He is so deep in his books he would forget to eat, I declare, did I not remind him.’
Paul went up with his heavy tread to his father's room.
The old attorney was sprawled across his desk, dead.
He had not upset the lamp.
Paul stared down.
The fact of the death brought him no sensation, either of grief or shock.
Presently he found that he was glad.
A sense of power grew in him and spread through his body to his brain.
He knew exactly what he had to do.
The partnership took some time to sell.
The other member, who might have been expected to buy it for his own son, a young man recently qualified in law, did not at first do so; he said business was unreliable, there were not enough clients, the reputation of the firm had been  allowed to run down.
Paul saw this as a reproach to himself, as if he had not shown enough interest; perhaps in fact he had not; his heart had never been in it.
In the end the partner bought at a knock-down price, without naming himself as the buyer until the offer had been accepted.
That was in summer.
During the previous weeks there had been fine weather, and after a day in the office Paul would keep his mother company in the evenings for a little while, then, as they had nothing to say to one another, he would tell her he was going out for a breath of air.
She never offered to accompany him; she was a sedentary woman.
He himself was glad of the chance to stretch his legs.
He hoped greatly to be able to go to Oxford in the autumn; there should be enough money from a sale to support his mother, his brother and himself till he obtained a degree and could earn his living.
He walked some days now in one direction, now in another.
He was strong, if not athletic, and covered fair distances with his plump legs.
The exercise helped to dull the urges of his body, which troubled him during the early morning and the day.
His father had taught him that these must be suppressed, but now that the old attorney was dead Paul felt free to become himself; what that might mean was not yet clear to him.
Sometimes he would eye young women in the street, but they were always accompanied by maids or chaperones.
In any case he would not have had the confidence to approach one.
On this particular evening he walked towards the tannery.
He had avoided it hitherto because of the stink, which wafted on the air even when there was no noticeable breeze.
It stood on a piece of waste ground beyond which tinkers left their carts during the day, when they were begging or doing casual work.
Some tanned the leather in season, or boiled down hoof and horn in the great vats that stood inside the ramshackle building of the tannery itself.
Others, who came year after year, went north to the sheep sales for leftovers, driving the bleating creatures south to be skinned and boiled down.
It was a brutal place, which Paul would have avoided had he been thinking clearly; but his mind was far away.
Evening had begun to settle down, and he was walking along a narrow path of dry grass, towards the buildings.
Beyond, the tinkers were cooking their meal, and thin smoke rose in the air from their fires; one or two children ran about, ragged and barefoot, near the hooded carts.
He had almost decided to turn back, when a growl sounded behind him; a large mongrel stood there, with its teeth bared and its long ears laid back.
A piece of rope dangled from its neck; in his panic Paul wondered if it had been gnawed through.
At any rate he could not move; whichever way he went, the brute would get him.
He looked round helplessly, and saw no one.
He called out, but nobody came.
It was growing dark.
He was afraid of being trapped here, perhaps attacked or robbed.
He essayed a tentative movement, and in an instant the beast jumped at him, tearing at his jacket.
He cursed it, surprised at the strength of his own language.
If he had brought a stick!
‘Bran.’
The voice was a woman's, low and calm.
‘Get down.
Get away.’
She came out from among the buildings, the rest of the broken rope in her hand.
She raised an arm and slashed at the dog with it; it howled, and slunk away.
She was neither young nor old, a tinker; her hair, as with so many of them, looked as if it were bleached, while her skin was dark with outdoor living.
By contrast, the eyes showed light in her thin face.
They surveyed Paul without expression.
He was relieved, then angry.
‘Your dog has torn my coat.
It will have to be mended.’
‘Nobody didn't ask yer to bring yer coat here, lad.
Got a wife?
She'll mend it.’
The tone was insolent, and he began to shout at her.
‘The damage must be paid for.
I am a lawyer.
I can force you to pay.’
He knew well enough that he could not, but had had enough experience to know that aggressive tactics often paid.
He was still angry about the coat.
It was the only one he had, and would look shabby in the office with a mended tear.
‘I'll pay.’
She was smiling, and Paul suddenly realised that he  could not take money from her.
He was about to tell her not to trouble herself, when he saw that she had turned half away from him, revealing the curve of a breast beneath her shawl.
The shock of surprise — he had never seen a woman's breast before — gave him an erection.
He blushed, and heard her laughing.
‘Care for a short time, wouldn't yer?
Knew it as soon as I saw yer.
I could use someone, a fancy gent like you; my man's away at the sales.
Won't cost yer nothin'.
Come on in here.’
He moved in a dream behind her, watching her swaying walk.
He felt himself passing his tongue over his lips; it was unreal, everything that was happening; he should be at home in the parlour, playing the piano, staring at the
She led him through the main tannery to where a pile of raw sheep skins lay, and still with her light eyes on him lay down.
He had the notion that she was mocking him, and the anger he had felt earlier returned in a different form, a determination to excel, to beat other men who had been with her.
At the same time he knew that she would be aware that he had never been with a woman before.
He stood awkwardly, not yet unbuttoned.
‘Get a move on.
Never keep a girl waiting.
It don't take as long as they say.’
She laughed up at him, with the oily smell of the sheepskins rising about her; her teeth showed yellow, like an animal's.
Paul wanted to retch, and at the same time felt his member thrusting against his clothes; there was no denying that he had wanted this, when all was said, for a long time.
He pulled down his trousers, and straddled her, settling at last against her revealed body; then began.
He was inept at first, but the strong urge would not be deflected; by the end he was filling her, jerking the skins on which they lay.
He could feel a sense of power and satisfaction, as though his whole life had been lived for this.
He could even feel gratitude as the climax neared its end.
She had given him what he desired, made a man of him.
Now he could face the world.
He left her, lying disordered on the sheepskins; and after all left a coin beside her, walking out into the night.
The bad news came within a few days; there was no place available to him at Oxford this year in the Martinmas term.
He laid down the letter at breakfast with a white face.
‘What is the matter?’ his mother said, her hand on the teapot; the daily maid who served them was out of the room.
He told her.
She said nothing, and it occurred to Paul that she had shown little interest in any of it; the sale of the partnership, his own worries about money, his future, which included her constant maintenance.
She was a woman who had always been kept in comfort, had had no troubles to speak of, leaving all decisions to her husband.
Paul found that he could not stay with her at present; he excused himself, got up from the table, fetched his hat and a stout stick, and went out into the day.
He knew that he would make his way towards the tannery, and hoped that the woman — he had never asked her name — would be there at this hour.
He wanted desperately to forget himself and who he was, or had hoped to be; now, there was little hope, for the money he had carefully set aside for his expected purposes would not last for another year, and he had no employment.
He supposed he could find work in another law-office; the prospect daunted him.
He loved books, but not the dusty lexicons of the law; his mind longed to stretch itself in contemplation of other minds, in listening to brilliant talk, to lectures and debates.
All that would have been his years ago when Jonas had had to be put away; it was as though fate had conspired to ruin both of them.
Paul grudged the money spent on Jonas, in his progressive asylum; by now, the madman would not have known where he was; a cheaper one would have done, but Paul dared not suggest it to his mother.
The tannery had the deserted aspect it always wore; it took very few workers to keep it productive.
The stink assailed his nostrils, bringing back memories of that last visit and what it had done for him.
He strode on, prepared  to use his stick if the savage dog showed itself; but there was no sign.
There was no sign of anyone.
Beyond the rearing buildings the waste ground was empty.
The tinkers had gone.
He went home, with his misery increased.
A feeling of malaise which had beset him earlier, and which he had blamed on the news from Oxford, persisted.
He did not go in to see his mother, but went upstairs and lay face down on his bed.
If she asked or noticed it, he would blame it on the college refusal.
Towards evening he felt a little better, and having declined luncheon groped his way down for supper; the stairs were unlit.
His mother sat ready, having changed her cap but not her dress.
She looked up as he came in, her eyes suddenly shrewd.
‘Do not take it so to heart, Paul,’ she said.
‘I have thought of something.
Why do you not go to a provincial university meantime, and perhaps win a scholarship to Oxford from there?
I believe it can be done.’
How had she known such things?
He stared at her in amazement.
She smiled a little, her plump face crinkling.
‘You thought I was an ignoramus, did you not?
I have said very little all your life, because your father was there to guide you.
But I know that the money will not last if you do not begin your studies this autumn.
Half a loaf is better than no bread.
I have an acquaintance in Glasgow, the wife of the minister of the Collegiate Church.
He acts as chaplain to the students.
He is a man of position, and would put in a word for you.’
‘Is he certain to do so?’
Out of his lassitude, his misery, there had suddenly emerged hope.
He went to his mother and gave her a rare kiss.
She let her hand stray to his cheek, giving it a little pat.
‘If he does not, his wife will make him,’ she said.
‘Margaret Heatherton is a very strong-minded woman.
She is a trifle odd; you will find out more about that.
But I am certain she will help you, and may well introduce you to other young people; you do not see enough of them.’
‘Mama, I am going to work, not to attend social occasions.’
‘Perhaps a few; it will do no harm,’ she said soothingly.
Paul could not keep still in his place; he pushed back his chair, left the food on his plate, and began to walk up and down the room.
‘There is little time left,’ he said.
‘How soon will you write?’
‘I have already done so, while you were out.’
‘Mama —’ Gratitude rushed up in him; he realised that he had not always considered her, had taken her for granted, had consulted her in nothing; and now she had probably saved his reason.
‘What will you do?’ he asked her.
‘It will not be near enough for me to visit you often.’
‘I have thought of that.
There is plenty of room in the house now.
I shall take one or two lodgers, perhaps a second maid to help Lucy with the linen.
It will make a little money, so you need not be troubled as far as I am concerned.’
‘Mama —’ He seemed to say nothing else; he was proud of her, and yet what she proposed ran somewhat downhill socially; lodgers, and a lawyer's widow!
The shrewd eyes were watching him; he had never noticed them before.
‘You will not have to be ashamed of your mother, Paul,’ Sophia Arkwright said softly.
’ It is far enough away from London for nobody to know anything, and the Heathertons will give you some standing.
I advise you to call upon them as soon as you may.’
There had never been any doubt between them that the University of Glasgow would accept Paul, and this happened in time for him to make his arrangements; but meanwhile there was something else.
The malaise that had troubled him did not go away until, one day, when he was using the chamber-pot upstairs, he noticed an angry sore on his penis.
He was puzzled at first; his skin was generally clear, without rashes.
In the light of his impending journey to Glasgow, he decided that he could afford to consult a doctor.
He was ashamed of going to their usual practitioner, and went some distance away to a physician in Westminster, stepping past the beggars who lay about the pavement, demanding alms.
The doctor was an elderly man with a grey beard, who examined Paul gravely, then  looked up at him with eyes expressionless behind their spectacles; he had seen many such cases.
‘You have a venereal disease,’ he said.
Paul felt his heart stop; he had heard of such a thing; he should have known; that woman —
‘You are unmarried?’
He nodded; he was filled with shame and disbelief.
If only he had resisted, had ignored the dog, turned and gone home!
The doctor asked when he had last had intercourse.
He tried to remember; it was months, weeks, a hundred years ago.
He stammered something.
‘Can you cure me?’ he asked, and the doctor shook his head.
‘There is no certain cure for this; I might pretend to you that there was, but that would be to deceive you.
Fortunately you have a chancre which has appeared soon, and this means that the system has an opportunity to right itself as far as it can, having got rid of some of the trouble.
But there may be other symptoms over the years, and if you marry and have children they may inherit in various ways.
As for yourself, syphilis can affect the mind as much as the body.’
‘The mind!
I value that more than anything.’
He thought of Jonas, wild in his padded cell; had he acquired, or inherited this?
Had their father — the thought aroused crazy laughter — passed it on from some episode in his youth?
One would never know; and meantime the devil was in him, Paul Arkwright, in his blood, for life, and he could never be rid of it; yet he must live, and work, and write, and surely marry.
The children; one dared not think of the children.
Yet thousands of men, fathers of families, must have lain with a prostitute at some time, and caught this disease.
‘I can prescribe something which will cure the chancre,’ said the doctor.
‘But let an old man advise you, and avoid casual women.’
He returned with a packet of crystals of a deep purple colour, which one dissolved in water.
Paul took the stuff home, used it, and in a few days the chancre dried up and went away.
Since its appearance he had felt better, and he  made himself pack and get ready for Glasgow, where he must find lodgings near the Cathedral.
He kissed his mother goodbye at last, took his valise and went away.
The University buildings were old, ramshackle and black with soot.
Paul felt his heart sink at the sight of them.
It was so different from what Oxford might have been, with its gracious spires; here there was only the nearby cathedral, set on a slight rise, with its graveyard stretching up the hill.
Everything in Glasgow was huddled about this site; the Cross, the market, the courts and the infirmary.
The houses in the High Street went stravaiging down to the Gallowgate and the Saltmarket, to which last place no sane citizen would go as it was full of cutthroat robbers, avoided even by the police.
Paul heard folk talk on his way as though in a foreign tongue; he despaired of understanding the lectures.
He went into the college hall, and registered himself for matriculation among a rowdy assembly of students younger than himself; and came out into the street to find that it had started to rain.
It set the seal on his depression; he was almost ready to go home.
However he recollected himself, and tramped through the wet to find a lodging.
This was not easy, and in the first three places at which he enquired there was no room, they were all spoken for.
He went a little way off, up the Bell o' the Brae, and tried again; this time, although the woman likewise had no room, she pointed along the vennel.
Mrs McIntosh, she knew, had had a young man who pulled out at the last minute; she might take him in.
Feeling his valise increasingly heavy, Paul trudged along; and after further enquiry found the door.
Any kind of bed, by now, would have been welcome; but to his relief the woman who came to the inner closed door was clean, and her house had no odour of bugs.
Yes, she could take   him in, if he didna mind sharing a bed with Mr Hamilton, who was a pleasant young gentleman.
Mr Chase paid extra, and liked a room to himself.
Paul carried his luggage in, and surveyed the place in which he was to live and work.
There was a box bed, an oval mahogany table, some chairs, and a clothes chest.
He opened the latter and began to unpack, laying his shirts and other gear beside Mr Hamilton's.
The latter came in when Paul was halfway through; he was a gentle Scot in the late twenties, with slanting blue eyes, a fresh skin, and thinning light-brown hair.
He announced that he was a student of divinity; did Mr Arkwright read his Bible?
Paul foresaw ennui, and merely nodded.
‘You will be Church of England,’ said Willie Hamilton, as though Paul had been another species.
‘I joined the Free Church myself.
It is not so many years since it broke away.’
Paul asked where he might find a bookshop, and was told.
‘But there will be books to buy from men who are finished with them from last year; it will cost less,’ said Willie.
He proved useful in other ways, and when at supper, which was served early, they met Mr Chase, Paul was not too dissatisfied with his company.
Edwin Chase was an Englishman, evidently with plenty of money, passing his time before entry to Cambridge in the following year.
Paul resolved to ask him later about scholarships; but in the meantime, as Mrs McIntosh was present, ladling soup, he said nothing.
The good lady thought that he was shy, and constantly twitted him to bring him into the talk; Paul hoped that she would get over it as the days passed, and this proved to be the case.
He himself had resolved, as soon as possible, to call on Dr Heatherton and his wife, for the chaplain had undoubtedly eased his reception into the University of Glasgow.
The Heathertons lived in a tall grey house in Bath Street, in the best quarter of town; it had coachman's premises at the back, giving on to a narrow cobbled lane.
Paul traversed the lane, preferring the smells of horse-dung from the various stables to the constant traffic of the main  thoroughfare.
He turned the corner, and found himself at the front of the house, which had a mountingblock, well chalked.
Feeling some shyness — he was not used to social life, and this looked to be above his station — he used the brass knocker, polished as it was to show one's face, distorted, as though in a mirror at a fair.
A maid answered, trim in cap and apron.
Paul gave his name; but before the maid could carry out any instructions, two women swept into the hall, the elder saying in a high English voice.
‘Has not the coachman come yet?
He is very late.’
She was of mature years, and he rightly guessed her to be Mrs Heatherton.
Her eyes, too close-set for beauty, assessed him coolly.
She wore, instead of a bonnet, a veil over her smooth grey hair; her gloves were elegant, of the finest kid, and she used her small hands gracefully.
The girl behind her was a beauty, if a trifle too plump; she had dark hair, smoothed down like her mother's, and a flawless complexion of roses and cream.
Her great treacle-dark eyes surveyed Paul without any interest whatever.
‘Who are you, young man?’ demanded Margaret Heatherton.
On being informed that he had called upon her husband, she said coldly ‘Dr Heatherton is out.
You have come at the wrong time.
In any case he does not see students at home.’
Paul flushed.
‘My mother advised me to come, as Dr Heatherton has taken some trouble on my behalf.
She also says that she knew you.’
‘Indeed?
And who was your mother?’
The atmosphere was thawing a little; but Paul was not prepared to grovel.
He told Mrs Heatherton his mother's maiden name, and she gave a little grimace which in anyone else might have been a smile.
He found her a chilly woman.
‘Of course; I remember.
This is my daughter Georgina.’
The dark-eyed girl gave a little formal bow.
There was the sound of a carriage arriving in the street.
‘We are about to drive out,’ said Mrs Heatherton.
‘May we drop you at your lodging?’
He thanked her, and said that near it would do; he could  not see the well-groomed equipage negotiating the Bell o' the Brae.
They climbed in, and no talk was made as they journeyed down Bath Street towards the Exchange;, evidently Mrs Heatherton felt that she had done all that was required of her.
Paul climbed out in proper course.
‘Pray tell Dr Heatherton that I called,’ he said, but all the reply he received was the same cold, formal bow the daughter had made.
He decided to write to the minister instead of calling again.
Another such visit was a daunting prospect, and he would not willingly repeat it.
That night he wrote to his mother, leaning on the mahogany table while Willie read his Bible, seated on the box bed they shared.
Dearest Mama,
I obeyed your instructions and called on Dr Heatherton, but unfortunately he was not at home, and his wife was only just so; I met her and her daughter going out.
They gave me room in their carriage, but I found them very cold and strange.
I do not think that I shall go back there again; I will write to Dr Heatherton.
I told his who you were, and she remembered you.
My studies are proceeding, I think well.
I have managed to acquire all the books I need, and the lectures are interesting and instructive.
I get up early in the morning and read, then go to the lectures, then read again at night.
It is like meat and drink after the office.
I hope that you are well, and taking care of yourself, and that the lodgers are agreeable.
Your loving son, Paul Arkwright
Within a few days a reply came.
My dearest boy,
I was gratified to have your letter, as I had been wondering how you were faring, but understood that you must be too busy to write.
Do not work too hard, and be sure to go out walking a little, as well as reading,; too much of that is bad for the eyes, especially at night.
Mrs Heatherton may well have become strange.
I knew her as a girl because my own parents being much occupied, my nurse used to take me to the north to her brother's farm for holidays.
It was
near Bonsam, and Margaret's father was the Rector there.
I met her once or twice, at church and at other houses where there were children of our age.
Later she went to stay with her uncle and aunt at Bonsam Hall, which was of course too grand for us to visit.
Then a dreadful thing happened, or so I heard, for they had left the farm by then,; the poor Rector — I expect it was his own doing, for they say he drank far too much — set fire to himself in bed one night, and the house was burnt and he with it.
Everyone said that if his daughter had not left him, she could have saved him.
I have no doubt Margaret reproached herself,— perhaps still does.
She married a man named Howie, of whom I know nothing except that he was rich; there are several children, and then after his death she married Dr Heatherton, who was a widower with children also.
They had one daughter, who I believe is not right in the head; but that may not be the one you met.
I must close, my dear Paul, as the lodgers will be ready for their supper.
They are pleasant, genteel people,; I am fortunate.
Your ever loving Mama
Paul wrote to Dr Heatherton as he had intended, thanking him for his trouble and saying that he had called in the hope of meeting him.
No reply came, and he assumed that the minister was of the same cold fashion as his wife.
In fact, he saw him; Willie Hamilton persuaded him to come to church, and Paul, who had no belief, agreed on condition that they go to Savill's Old, where Dr Heatherton sustained the charge, as they expressed it here.
He was curious to see the minister, although he made Willie Hamilton come with him up to the gallery, so that he himself would not be noted by the dragon of a wife or her daughter.
As it turned out, he was able to see them while in no danger of being seen.
They occupied a pew in the body of the kirk, with Georgina shepherding in a row of dark-haired young women who might be Margaret Heatherton's daughters or her husband's.
The poor weak-witted last child sat separately, and was guarded by a nurse throughout the service.
One young man, very handsome and resembling Georgina, sat among them amiably, the only son.
Dr Heatherton made his entry and ascended the pulpit, where the beadle had already opened a large Bible.
The minister wore his gown, which was scarlet, denoting a Doctorate of Divinity, and bands.
His grey hair was close-shaven and he had no beard.
His stern eyes—in fact he was a gentle-natured man—looked out from behind metal-rimmed spectacles.
The sermon he preached was scholarly, and explained why he had been called to this well-found charge and to the chaplaincy.
Presently a handsome precentor with dark side-whiskers led the congregation in psalms, paraphrases and hymns.
Paul did not know them, but Willie sang boldly, lifting up his voice like Jacob in the Book of Genesis.
Afterwards he admitted that he had been favourably impressed with Old Savill's, except that the women were too grandly dressed.
‘I would not have gone in on my own,’ he admitted, ‘but I think that we might go again.
Yon was a notable preacher.’
Paul smiled and made no promises.
He himself had seen all he wanted of the Heathertons, and was free now to get on with his studies, without interruption.
To his surprise, they had evidently not forgotten him; an engraved card came some weeks later.
It was a polite invitation to a morning party at the minister's house in Bath Street, to take place on a Saturday, in about ten days' time.
There was no indoor lavatory at Mrs McIntosh's establishment; only the well-to-do had them.
Each young gentleman was provided with his own chamber-pot, which he was expected to empty for himself on the common midden, situated behind the houses.
Paul had reasons for the private emptying of his; he was still treating himself with a solution of the doctor's recommended potassium permanganate crystals, and had to make his exit quickly when Willie was out of the room, as that gregarious gentleman would have come with him on the same errand; then hurry outside with the tell-tale purple contents, empty them, rinse the pot at the pump, and come back.
As a rule he was unobserved, as he took care to go out at a  time when everyone in the house was occupied elsewhere.
He would turn and leave the purple streams puddling among the rest of the garbage from other houses, carrying the empty pot thereafter with nonchalance.
He had debated with himself whether he could not stop the treatment by now; he had had no trouble for some time, only the occasional itching and, once, a slight rash.
While he was thinking of this, a voice hailed him; Edwin Chase, for some reason emerging with his own chamber-pot at an unexpected hour.
He kept himself to himself as a rule, except for meals: attended what lectures he chose, and cut the rest.
His mobile features registered amusement.
‘Which of you has the clap, you or Bible Willie?
That purple waterfall can only mean one thing.’
Paul blushed, did not reply, and turned on his heel to go in.
He heard the other's laughter behind him.
‘Do not take it to heart; they say all you need do is lie with a virgin.
The trouble is finding one.
It cures it, I'm told; for myself, I do not know.’
He overtook Paul and suddenly, affectionately touched him on the shoulder.
‘Bad luck, old fellow,’ he said.
‘You have been to a physician, I see.
Perhaps it will give no more trouble.
I hope not; you have a distinguished future before you, they say among themselves.’
In spite of his distress Paul knew a rush of pride at the latter statement.
He had come out first of everyone in his early examinations, and worked constantly.
It was pleasant to know that that fact had been noted among the critical young gentlemen who comprised, as far as it could be done, Edwin's set.
He looked at the Englishman and achieved a small smile.
‘Thank you for all of that,’ he said.
‘Remember about the virgin.
If I hear of one I will inform you.’
They parted laughing, and Paul went back to his room, bestowed the chamber-pot in its place, and went out to his morning lecture on moral philosophy.
It had been about Hegel, the German idealist dead within recent memory, and Paul tried to assemble his thoughts on  the matter as he again walked up Bath Street Lane.
That it was a Saturday morning had made his presence possible — he would not have accepted the invitation had it been on some date in the week — and carriages had already piled behind one another in the main street; evidently it was to be a large party.
Paul stared dreamily at the stables, the horses, and the grooms and coachmen busily rubbing them down; and compared reason with romance, phenomenology — a word he had not previously heard used — with the behaviourism of the mind as he knew it.
Was it the case that an all-embracing unity replaced separate and finite things?
Was there such a state as logical positivism?
Was matter, or reason, the ultimate reality?
Would he himself ever know with certainty, be able to postulate his own thoughts as rationally?
They said Hegel had had to become a newspaper editor, a schoolmaster.
He himself wanted to be neither.
He had no clear view of the future, except that it must excel the present, as the present did the past.
He had come to the corner, and turned it; and beheld the carriages.
He was a little late, and entered the house with some trepidation; a maid took away his hat.
‘That way, sir.’
She had no need to tell him, for a buzz of talk sounded from the ground-floor room straight ahead, beyond the stairs.
He entered, and for some time stood alone and unrecognised on the Turkey carpet, seeing among the well-to-do crowd not a soul he knew except Dr Heatherton, in the distance, talking with someone; and Mrs Heatherton, followed by her bevy of obedient daughters, their skirts rustling prosperously wherever they went.
Georgina was among them, but did not look at him.
There was no sign of the handsome son.
A second maid brought Paul a glass of madeira, and he drank it thankfully, for his throat was dry.
He had almost resolved to make his escape — it would not be noticed — when a young woman with dark hair and a plain, wise face came up to him, followed by the bewhiskered precentor he had seen and heard at Savill's.
She introduced herself as Kate Heatherton, and the precentor as Richard Urquhart.
Urquhart's dark shining eyes followed her with a dog's  devotion; evidently she had qualities other than beauty.
Paul worked it out that she must be one of Dr Heatherton's daughters by his first marriage.
It was a complicated family.
‘I must make you known to Miss Emily Groundwater, who like yourself is a stranger from England,’ said Kate, after they had exchanged pleasantries and Paul had identified himself.
He followed her and Urquhart to where a coolly poised young woman stood by herself, holding but not drinking her madeira.
She was dressed in pale grey with a black braid trimming; it was a distinguished outfit, and her features were pale and fine, her skin like ivory.
She had a remarkable bosom for a young woman.
She made a slight acknowledgement of Paul's presence.
He felt clumsy and shy.
‘You are both from the south parts, so you must talk to one another,’ said Kate.
She made her way across the room to where her father was, still with Urquhart following; evidently there was no need to keep close to the stepmother with the rest; it looked as if Kate knew her own mind.
‘From which part of England do you come, Mr Arkwright?’
Emily Groundwater enquired in a voice that was fluting and controlled, but her expression stayed remote.
He answered her, and began to wonder if there was such a thing as a warm woman in the whole world, when she turned to him, her face suddenly full of expression, almost mischief.
‘Then you will not know Warwickshire at all?’
‘I have never been there,’ he answered truthfully.
Emily Groundwater's eyes opened widely, and he saw that they were smoke-grey, fringed by long dark lashes.
My father was the Earl of Holden s younger son, she said.
‘My mother died when I was born, and he died shortly after.
So I am an orphan, and live with my maid.’
‘In Glasgow?
It is a long way off.’
He was aware of her superiority, of the way in which she had stood by herself, not seeking out the company.
Her features, too, were refined, he decided; the nose somewhat long and swooping, the mouth thin, red and curved.
She had dark  hair dressed in a chignon, contained in a net of black chenille beneath her pork-pie hat.
The longer he was with her the more her attraction increased for him.
She had lowered her lashes.
‘My parents’ marriage was not approved of by my father's family, although my mother was a Darcy and well connected.
I do not speak of it very much.
Let us talk instead about our hostess; what an extraordinary woman!
You know, of course, that she will not let any of her daughters marry?’
‘But she has been married twice herself.’
Emily lowered her voice.
‘Yes, but she and Dr Heatherton take nothing to do with one another now; everyone knows of it, though nobody is certain why.
As for the girls, only Kate, who is the eldest stepdaughter, has been firm in her insistence; she is going to be married to Mr Urquhart, despite anything her stepmother may say.
No doubt Lissy, Dr Heatherton's second daughter, will follow her.
And there is a third, you know, who ran away.’
Her eyes glanced sideways to ensure that nobody was listening.
‘It is a very odd household indeed.
Mrs Heatherton's son John is not present today, and that will sorely disappoint all the young ladies present; he is so handsome it can hardly be believed.’
Paul did not mention that he had seen John Howie from the gallery of Savill's.
He stayed by Miss Groundwater's side, and at the end, when everyone was leaving, asked if he might escort her home.
‘Thank you, but my maid will do so; she is drinking tea in the servants’ quarters, and will come as soon as she is sent for.’
‘Then may I not see you again?’
He was attracted; and while not openly remembering Edwin Chase's remark as immediately practical, was convinced of one thing: here was a virgin.
She gave him her address.
After she had gone Paul made himself known to Dr Heatherton, to whom he had not previously addressed himself; was rewarded by a few courteous words and good wishes for his progress; and then went home.
If he could have foretold the course of the next two years, they would have seemed incredible.
His work prospered; at the end of the first year he won the Literary Medal, and a cash prize which enabled him to go down and visit his mother.
She seemed well and cheerful, the lodgers pleased with their lot.
Paul left for the north again with a light heart, aware of surprise that he should be so glad to be returning after arriving, at first, so unwillingly.
The reason was of course Emily.
As every young man foresaw, his courtship was protracted, but it sometimes seemed to Paul as if the time would never come when she would let him take her hand, let alone kiss her.
He attempted it once at St Mungo's tomb, in the crypt of the cathedral, to whose depths they had finally descended together; as a rule their outings were to Glasgow Green, if it was fine, or if it rained, the sitting-room, with Ellen the maid in constant attendance.
Ellen waited now in the nave upstairs, and Paul took the opportunity, in the gloom relieved by small stained-glass windows, to place his lips against Emily's ivory cheek.
She withdrew at once.
‘That is not proper here.’
She indicated the saint's tomb, a grey and time-worn block unharmed by the Reformation.
Her mouth was prim, and Paul knew despair.
‘Where is proper?’ he asked her.
‘I cannot kiss you with Ellen forever present.’
‘She is there for my protection.
We should go back upstairs now.
If you behave like this, you will understand that I cannot permit myself to be alone with you.’
‘Emily —’
But she had gone up before him, her narrow back and bunched skirts all that were visible of her from below.
Paul was aware of baffled fury.
She roused increasing desire in him; he thought of her in the night, when his abstruse reflections on the day's work were done.
He felt, in his mind, her soft body uncorseted beneath a nightgown, her round full breasts under his seeking hand.
It was all that he could do to contain himself when he was with her, and she held him off constantly, obeying the etiquette required of a genteel young female.
It was no wonder men turned to prostitutes, he thought; but he himself had had one  appalling lesson and did not need a second.
If only they could marry!
Emily — she seemed to be her own mistress, despite the grand connections — would surely not refuse an honest offer; yet he was not, at present, in a position to make one.
Perhaps, when she had recovered from this encounter, he could suggest that they become engaged, albeit in an unacknowledged fashion as he could not afford a ring worthy of her.
He joined her and Ellen; the young woman was again her cool self.
Ellen was an unremarkable creature, who could have been passed by in the street without being noticed.
She seldom spoke, but Paul had now and again addressed a kindly remark to her, to which she responded briefly.
Perhaps the presence of her young mistress made her desist from talk; Emily would address her in high tones as a servant, no more, although the woman was her only companion.
Leaving them at their close door he walked off, frowning.
No doubt the aristocratic Holdens paid the rent; there seemed no sign of hardship.
It did not occur to him to propose to Emily and assume that he could live off his wife.
He must wait — they must both wait, if she had any attachment for him — until he was able to support her.
But had she an attachment?
She endured his company, that was all; he told himself that she behaved in all ways like a young lady: it would not have been proper for her to show more feeling.
At the end of the second year, Paul won further awards.
He was beginning to be spoken of as a promising student who would be offered a lectureship at the end of the course.
This time there was no money to be won, and before term finished he went to see his professor, William Fleming.
‘Sir, I would ask a favour, if it is possible.’
He told the Professor then of his own ambition to be admitted to Oxford, of his financial difficulties, of the need to be near his mother.
He did not mention Emily or any prospect of marriage.
Was there any means of being recommended for a scholarship in the south?
‘This University is older,’ said the Professor gently.
‘It was founded by Bishop Turnbull in 1450, under Pope Nicholas V. You need not be ashamed of any degree from Glasgow.’
‘Sir, it is not that, but I hope for an appointment in England.
It would be less readily available from here.’
‘That is true; though I would always recommend you if you continue as you have begun.’
The Professor combed his beard thoughtfully.
‘I will see what can be done,’ he said.
‘I can promise nothing; but I will see.’
Paul said goodbye later to his cool love, and travelled south again to see his mother, whom he found less robust than before.
Her plump face was thinner, and lined down the cheeks.
He imagined the lodgers, who had mostly changed, to look at him as if he were a parasite, who should be working to support her.
The prospect of another two years of study seemed a long time.
But Sophia herself made no complaint, and when he asked her if she would like him to give up everything and come here to be with her, she smiled, and shook her head.
‘You are doing well where you are, Paul; I am proud of you.
We will see you a professor one day.’
At that moment Emily was very far distant from him.
He did not begin to think of her constantly again until the journey back north.
He had written her several letters, and had had two prim replies.
They were, of course, ladylike, and contained nothing of interest.
It did not displease him; she would make him a suitable wife, and would know her place when, as he hoped still, he had elevated his position enough to enable him to support her.
Term started, and he was immersed in work; he saw Emily only once, when they enjoyed a short walk together down the High Street.
She was looking particularly remote and cool; he was proud of her appearance, in her customary pale grey.
When he saw Edwin Chase striding up towards them he made haste to make known one to the other.
Edwin bowed, his knowledgeable gaze assessing the ivory face, the discreet hat and gown.
‘We have met before, I think,’ he said.
Emily froze.
‘This University is older,’ said the Professor gently.
‘It was founded by Bishop Turnbull in 1450, under Pope Nicholas V. You need not be ashamed of any degree from Glasgow.’
‘Sir, it is not that, but I hope for an appointment in England.
It would be less readily available from here.’
‘That is true; though I would always recommend you if you continue as you have begun.’
The Professor combed his beard thoughtfully.
‘I will see what can be done,’ he said.
‘I can promise nothing; but I will see.’
Paul said goodbye later to his cool love, and travelled south again to see his mother, whom he found less robust than before.
Her plump face was thinner, and lined down the cheeks.
He imagined the lodgers, who had mostly changed, to look at him as if he were a parasite, who should be working to support her.
The prospect of another two years of study seemed a long time.
But Sophia herself made no complaint, and when he asked her if she would like him to give up everything and come here to be with her, she smiled, and shook her head.
‘You are doing well where you are, Paul; I am proud of you.
We will see you a professor one day.’
At that moment Emily was very far distant from him.
He did not begin to think of her constantly again until the journey back north.
He had written her several letters, and had had two prim replies.
They were, of course, ladylike, and contained nothing of interest.
It did not displease him; she would make him a suitable wife, and would know her place when, as he hoped still, he had elevated his position enough to enable him to support her.
Term started, and he was immersed in work; he saw Emily only once, when they enjoyed a short walk together down the High Street.
She was looking particularly remote and cool; he was proud of her appearance, in her customary pale grey.
When he saw Edwin Chase striding up towards them he made haste to make known one to the other.
Edwin bowed, his knowledgeable gaze assessing the ivory face, the discreet hat and gown.
‘We have met before, I think,’ he said.
Emily froze.
‘I do not recollect it.’
She turned to Paul.
‘Shall we walk on?
Afterwards he asked her why she had objected to Edwin.
‘His manners are familiar,’ she replied coldly.
Paul reflected that this was perhaps true, and did not pursue the subject.
He preferred Emily's reticence to the over-eagerness of other women.
He left her at her door; they had not gone down as far as the Green that day.
On returning to Mrs McIntosh's he found two letters waiting.
One was from his mother, and Paul put it in his pocket to read later.
The other bore the University seal, and he tore it open.
It was from Professor Fleming.
Owing to your record I have contrived the Snell Exhibition for you, which sends a Glasgow student annually to Balliol.
I hope this news will give you pleasure .
Paul walked about the streets.
His triumph was so complete that it seemed to him that he must surely radiate some evident joy.
He felt the power in him grow, overflow, spill out of him; his eyes were bright with it, his cheeks shining.
He was hatless, and passers-by looked curiously at this young man who seemed to know where he was going, yet strode absently.
After some time he found himself down at the Green, where Emily had not come with him; and remembered Emily, and decided that he must ask her to become engaged to him before he went, to wait for him; would she agree?
If only they could be married now!
His body yearned for her; once she was his wife she would lose her prudery, as all properly brought up young women did; and they would wed and bed, like the two in the song.
He thought of her, and thought at the same time of Oxford; and remembered, with sudden guilt, the letter from his mother, which he had not yet read.
He took it from his pocket, and opened it.
Jonas was dead.
Sophia Arkwright did not give the details, which Paul was to learn later; the madman had slashed his wrists with a razor which a careless attendant had left within reach.
The funeral was over; Paul need not trouble to come down, everything had been arranged; Colonel Carteret, who lodged with her, had been most kind, and had seen to everything.
Paul remembered the Colonel, an old martinet who was one of those who had made it evident that he ought to be at home helping his mother.
He was glad that the matter was dealt with; it would have been inconvenient to travel south just now, he would have missed an important part of the moral philosophy course.
But the end of his mother's letter cheered him despite the regret he felt, the memory he could still conjure up of Jonas and himself as boys, flying a kite in a London park, tussling with one another, kicking a football.
There will be a little more money as a result of this sadness,she wrote.
I do not need it and will set it aside for you, my dear boy, to complete your studies.
I know that it has been hard to make ends meet over the past two years.
Poor Jonas' death was a blessing in disguise, though one could wish it had happened differently.
Your loving Mama
Paul stared at the reeds in the narrow river; the Clyde wound here like a country stream, and up the grass incline women hung out washing or spread it to dry on a fine day.
He had grown fond of this place, and now, soon, he was to leave it.
But first he must propose to Emily.
It was even possible now, with the prospect of the extra money, to think of buying her a ring.
Perhaps that would please her.
He found her in the parlour, doing nothing, seated with her pale skirts spread about her.
Ellen was polishing the furniture with beeswax, but collected her cloths and went out of the room wordlessly when Paul entered, shutting the door after her.
Her duties as a chaperone had become less evident now that she was accustomed to Paul and had been spoken to kindly.
Once they were alone, Emily stared up at him, her thin eyebrows raised, her long white hands lying still in her lap.
It was not unusual for young ladies to do nothing at all; unless they occupied themselves with Berlin woolwork or the making of shell boxes, there was practically nothing genteel to do.
After marriage it would be different; they would suddenly, without prior  instruction, be expected to supervise cooks and other servants, direct a household, entertain, and give to charity out of the housekeeping money.
Paul bore all this in mind, looking down at Emily; he could see her in his mind's eye presiding over tea-parties at Oxford, saying the right thing to professors' wives; playing her part as his own wife, while he continued with his work uninterrupted except — he dared not think of it now — for the nights.
Those would be bliss unimaginable.
‘I have come to ask you to marry me,’ he said simply.
‘Will you, Emily?
My brother has died, and I am alone.’
He knew this was disingenuous: he had made poor Jonas sound like a companion, to arouse sympathy.
She had raised her hands in a sudden fluttering gesture.
‘My family would never permit it, at least until you have established your position.’
He was aware of sharp disappointment and betrayal.
‘You told me your family had cast you off,’ he said sullenly.
‘Why should it concern them?’
‘Naturally they take an interest in my welfare.
Only last month my cousin, Viscount Hailes, wrote to enquire how I did.’
She moved languidly, in the way she had of emphasising the full line of her bosom as opposed to the slim waist below.
The gesture never failed to inflame him.
He recalled other ways in which she had led him on; the snowy mittened fingers laid on his arm during their walks, the occasional side-glance as if to show that he did not displease her, her endurance, to say the least, of his company.
He had never assumed her to possess a quality of mind like his own, a shared humour, interests in whatever interested him; but that did not matter in a wife.
Emily would be suitable; and the fact of her aristocratic blood weighed with Paul; one could always boast of it discreetly to colleagues, in the event.
‘So you will not consider me, after all our friendship?’ he asked, and Emily moved restlessly; he realised for the first time that all her movements were studied.
She had not condoled with him on the death of Jonas.
‘I must write to my relations,’ she told him.
‘I can do nothing without their approval.’
Perhaps after all she was a good, dutiful girl, he thought; he did not want to be unreasonable.
‘Emily, the marriage could not take place yet,’ he told her.
‘If you would consent to be affianced to me, would wait for me, would permit me to write while I am away —’
‘Can you buy me a ring?’ she said suddenly, like a child.
Paul flushed a little.
‘It would have to be a very small stone, but I would do so gladly if it binds you to me.’
‘Could it be a diamond?’
‘It could be whatever you choose.’
‘Then I will wear it,’ she said, and stretched out her white hand to him.
‘It will look well there, will it not?’
‘I shall like it better when there is a gold band as well,’ he told her.
‘May I kiss you?’
She permitted him to kiss her cheek.
As usual, it was cool.
On the next afternoon, as Paul was free, they went to a certain arcade to buy the ring, with Ellen following as always.
At the entrance Emily suddenly turned and said sharply, ‘Wait there.’
The woman stood still.
‘You were hard on her,’ said Paul reproachfully.
The thin eyebrows lifted a little.
‘I do not choose that she should know everything I do; she must keep her place.
Given an inch, such persons take an ell.’
He reflected that, after all, it was the attitude he would wish to see adopted by her with their own servants, when they should have them; and handed her into the jeweller's.
There was another couple in there, and it enabled Paul and Emily to have time to look about them undisturbed.
Emily decided that she liked a small sapphire flanked by diamonds.
‘It will not be too expensive, surely,’ she said.
Paul doubted it, and his fears were confirmed when the assistant told them the price.
It was the cost of half a term at Oxford.
But Emily held firm, and nothing else would please her; so he bought it.
It fitted as to size.
The assistant watched them go; a well-put-on young lady, the gent somewhat shabbier.
He derived a good deal  of entertainment from watching the engaged couples that came in.
Emily did not show Ellen her new ring; the glove covered it.
They walked home.
Having spent so much of his money, Paul allowed himself to spend more; having invited Edwin Chase to come with him, they went to a tavern and got drunk.
In that state, Paul talked more than he should; and boasted to Edwin of his engagement to a lady whose grandfather was the Earl of Holden in Warwickshire.
Edwin gave his low, cultivated laugh.
‘Is that the wench I met you with in the High Street?
She has told that tale all round Glasgow; you may have noticed that no company calls.
My people live in Warwickshire, and knew the Holdens well, and if you had thought to look up Debrett's Peerage you could have proved it.
The Earl married twice, and had no children by either marriage.
Nor is she a by-blow; the old fellow was churchgoing, and had no such leanings.’
‘You mean —’ Paul felt as if he had received a blow in the stomach.
No children?
Then Emily —
‘Not to put too fine a point on it, your Emily is a liar,’ said Chase.
‘Such persons commonly live in a dream world, and believe themselves in all they say.
Be thankful that you have uncovered the truth before the marriage.’
Be thankful…the truth…and the ring, which had cost more than he could afford!
‘Can I ask for the ring back?’ he mumbled.
Edwin shook his head.
‘If a girl returns it to you, good and well; though a jeweller will not give you as much as you paid for it.
They're all sharks.’
Sharks.
Her breasts.
He had so often felt his hands about them, and now it would not happen.
The years would stretch on, and he would share a bed with nobody.
He could never trust a woman again.
He began to weep.
‘Have more wine,’ said Edwin, pouring it.
‘I assure you, you have had a fortunate escape.’
Full of wine, afterwards, Paul did not go back with Chase to the lodging.
He walked up and down the streets while rage grew in him steadily, then made his way to Emily's.
As was his custom, he attempted to push open the door, but it was fastened; it was very late.
‘Who is it?’ called Ellen's voice.
‘Paul Arkwright.
Let me in.’
He heard her gasp, and unlatch the door; she was still dressed, with a candle in her hand ready to go to bed.
She smelled the wine on Paul's breath, and bade him sit down.
He sprawled in a chair.
‘Tell me,’ he said, ‘tell me the truth.
You know it, do you not?
You have been with her a long time.’
‘I know it.’
She had set down the candle.
Its flame showed up her hollow cheeks, the haunted eyes.
She drew up a second chair and came and sat by him.
‘I did not know that you had bought her a ring today, until we came back,’ she said.
‘If I had been there, I'd have stopped it, and she knew that.
You have enough to do with your money.’
‘I was a fool.
A fool.
Who are you?
What are you to her?’
‘Her mother.’
‘Her —’ He leaned forward in incredulity, his hands on his knees.
At one point he turned his head, listening for Emily.
‘She's gone to bed,’ said Ellen.
‘If you want the tale you can have it.
She had no right to promise to marry you.
She can't marry anyone.
The Countess forbade it in her will, knowing what the beginnings had been.
She left this house to us, and an allowance to Emily so long as she didn't marry, and one to me so long as I stayed with her.
God knows I've often been tempted to do without it and go into service; it's where I started.’
‘What happened then; Was the Earl her father?’
Some glimmer of hope still remained; but the woman's voice dispelled it.
‘The Earl was a good old man; he would never have touched a serving-maid.
I used to do the Countess's hair, and she was pleased with me; in those days it was a matter of a great many curls, and diamond clasps and the like, on  ladies’ heads.
Once my lady's sister was staying at Hurst Castle not far off, and there was to be a grand ball, and her ladyship sent me over in the coach to dress her sister's hair, Lady Winton that was.
On the way back, the coachman took advantage of me, tying up the horses first.
I told her ladyship and she saw to it that he was got rid of.
But in a little while I knew I was to have a child.’
She reached over and balanced the candle, which was dripping wax down one side.
The movement revealed her face as it might have been when she was young, comely and a temptation to coachmen.
He could think of nothing to say, and Ellen went on.
‘The Countess did all she could for me, arranging for me to have the baby away from the Castle, because of gossip in the servants’ hall, and afterwards she took me back into service.
She thought, you see, that it was her fault the whole thing had happened.
She was godmother to my baby, and when it grew she took to it, and used to have it about her at the Castle, saying to everyone it was an orphan.
A pretty little thing it was, with dark hair: well, you've seen Emily for yourself.’
‘What happened then?’
There was a core of cold rage within him, but he would not allow it to fill him yet; he would wait till the end.
‘The mistake my lady made,’ said Ellen, ‘was sending the child to a grand school.
I think she thought Emily would be able to earn her living as a governess or lady's companion, in the end, but she's too idle and she hasn't the wit.
There's a good deal of her father in her, I dare say.
When the Countess saw that Emily was going to be good for nothing, she let us have this house, as I say — she was Scottish, and had property here that was mostly sold after she died.
But knowing Emily's beginnings, as I say, she wouldn't allow any marriage, and I've watched you and her, but I thought sooner or later you'd see what she was like, and grow tired.
It's all make-believe with her.
She wouldn't make a wife to any man, or if she did she'd ruin him.’
Her eyes, which were a faded blue, regarded Paul steadily.
‘She's in bed, as I say,’ she told him.
‘You bought  her a ring today, and you won't get it back.
You're a nice young gentleman and you've always been civil to me, not treated me like a dog.
You go in and take your rights; I won't disturb you.
It's the end room.
The walls is thick.’
Miss Groundwater — he found that he thought of her in this way again, as a fillip to rage — was seated at her mirror, already in her nightgown, brushing out her hair.
His ring sparkled on her finger, lit by the flames of a fire in the grate; Paul had the fancy that she turned her fingers deliberately, enjoying the ring's brilliance and the evidence it gave of prosperity and caste.
At the sound of Paul's entry she paused, brush in hand, turned her head and saw him.
Her whole body stiffened.
‘How dare you come in here!’
He closed the door, and stood in front of it.
His voice was like ice.
Even the sight of her dark loosened hair did not move him.
He spoke slowly and clearly.
‘You lied to me.
You have lied from the beginning.
You have no Earl's blood in you at all.
You are the child of servants.
What is more, you are not permitted to marry, and you know it; yet you let me spend money I could not afford to buy you a ring.
You are a worthless and contemptible woman.
I would not marry you now were you the last in the world, but by God I will take you, for you have tempted me sorely all these months, of set purpose.
Put your brush down; I will lie with you, then I will go, and you will not see me again.’
‘Paul —’ It was seldom she had used his name; the use of it now made no impact on him.
He watched her mouth fall open like an idiot's, while her hand let the brush clatter to the floor; she fell sideways, whether in a real or assumed faint he did not know or care.
He strode to her, picked her up and carried her to the bed.
Her body, soft and warm beneath the nightgown, already inflamed him.
He laid her down, clawed up the nightgown, unfastened his clothes, and climbed upon her.
Once he had found his goal his hands were free to explore the big soft breasts; he handled them and her velvet thighs, her buttocks and flat belly, avidly.
She had turned her head aside and flung her  hands over her face; she did not make the outcry he had expected.
He thrust into her, and was gratified to discover one thing; she was a virgin, as he had hoped.
In fact, it was a stubborn virginity, which took all his strength to remove; while he wrought at it she gave way to wailing, then it broke at last, a cry; perhaps the only natural sound Emily had ever made in face of the only reality that had ever assailed her.
He had not intended to pleasure her, or to get her pregnant, and went cautiously, withdrawing at leisure.
But the needs of his body, so long suppressed, caused him to avail himself of her a second time, and towards the end he felt himself impregnate her.
It had been careless; he had been too much aware, at this last attempt, of outward things, the rhythmical creaking of the bed, the flickering of the fire.
He could have gone on, recklessly, but he was unwilling to reach a consummation where she shared any abandon with him; he had not forgiven her.
He looked at her for the first time since the beginning; her head was still turned away, her hands over her face; she had shown no further response to anything he had done.
The ring remained on her finger.
It would have been easy for him to take it off.
‘You have paid me for the ring, a little,’ he said aloud, and got off the bed, leaving her in disorder.
When he had dressed himself he went back out of the kitchen door; no doubt Ellen would latch it again once she heard him go, her vengeance at what life had done to her completed.
He only saw Emily Groundwater once again in his life, and that was at a soirée at the Heathertons', to which he was invited because the Professor had told the chaplain of Paul's impending journey to Oxford.
It was all much as it had been the first time, only evening instead of morning; and Emily stood by herself as before, and now he knew why, wearing his ring on another finger.
She was not pregnant, and Paul felt relief.
She cut him dead, and that was a relief also.
He was however grateful to her for curing him; he had not had to use the purple crystals again.
It was worth knowing that Edwin had been right.
There had been one other complication.
When he had arrived back in the cold dawn that early morning after the night with Emily, it was to find his landlady Mrs McIntosh waiting, his valise and books by her, her face severe.
‘I do not permit my house to be occupied by gentlemen who stay out all night.
You will need to find yoursel’ other lodgings, Mr Arkwright.’
He  pled with her; his examinations were close, and it would be difficult to find anywhere else at this time of year, for everything was taken.
Also, he had paid her to the month's end.
But she was adamant; he must go.
He took himself off, illogically cursing Emily Groundwater; if it had not been for her he would have been in a warm bed, with Bible Willie breathing beside him.
He took himself furiously to an inn, had breakfast there and reserved a room for the night; it was too expensive for him to stay long.
The following day, apart from lectures, he tramped the streets; it was as he had foreseen, everywhere was full.
He was in despair, when he came across a known face; Richard Urquhart, the precentor whom he remembered starting the psalms with a good clear tenor note at Savill's Old, at the beginning of his sojourn here; and later at the Heathertons'.
Urquhart knew him; and falling into talk Paul told him of his predicament.
‘I think that I can help you,’ said the precentor pleasantly.
‘My father's old housekeeper — he and she grew old together — has a daughter who needs to make money;, she lives in Nile Street, and if you were to say that I sent you, she might well be glad to put you up till it is time for you to go to Oxford.’
He smiled.
‘You will be glad to hear, by the way, that Miss Heatherton and I are, at last, with her father's consent, engaged to be married.
Mrs Heatherton made difficulties, but those were overcome.’
Paul congratulated him, and obtained the address of the housekeeper's daughter.
She proved to be a pleasant soul whose husband had been drowned at sea.
She could give him a room with a bed, and her asking price for it was only a little above that of Mrs McIntosh, and much less than the inn.
Paul worked hard all summer, obtained more prizes, and after travelling south to see his mother, journeyed to Oxford in October.
It was like a dream come true to see the spires and the river.
He could put the past behind him; whatever was to happen now would be by his own endeavour, his own will.
Dinah Asshe could not remember a time when she had not enjoyed dressing up.
At first it had been merely a matter of borrowing her mother's scarves and veils, draping these around herself or twisting them into turbans and sashes.
Then she would be a Turk, a slave, a dancing-girl, a duchess at a garden party; and, later, Juliet.
By then, her mother was dead.
She had died in giving birth to Selene, having already been nearly ruined by the birth of Dinah.
Naturally, such matters were kept from a little girl; there was only the squalling of the new baby upstairs, the coming and going of a starched nurse, the funeral — the black ostrich feathers on the horses’ heads intrigued Dinah, who felt no grief at all for the occasionally met-with, plaintive lady who had, as they put it, passed away — and the sound of one's own voice, strong and resonant in the empty room.
And bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth, Lies festering in his shroud?
She knew it all.
She knew the speeches from the balcony scene, could act Romeo as well; Mercutio, with his Queen Mab saga, did not attract her; the syllables were too short, there was no chance of an echo.
Papa, of course, was an actor, and had spoken to her about the pit and the gallery, the stage, the curtain and dressing-rooms.
When she was older he would take her to the theatre, he had promised; but not at present.
The funeral was over, and Selene grew, soon staggering about on fat legs.
Dinah was never greatly interested in her, nor was there much to interest anyone.
Selene was her   mother's child, a fact which held no value now.
They shared a governess, whose task was unenviable as the children's ages were so different.
She made up for the difficulty by striking their fingers with a ruler when they erred, especially when learning the piano.
One day when this happened, Dinah, exasperated, turned round and slapped the good lady's face.
Selene gasped, and the governess turned crimson.
‘Miss!
You should be whipped.
I will report you to your Papa.’
‘Papa won't whip me.
He has more sense than you.’
Robert Asshe came home at the end of the evening performance, traces of grease-paint still on his face.
He was met by the angry governess, who had waited up late.
Marching into the dining-room behind her, in her nightgown, was Dinah.
‘Papa, I slapped her face.
That is what she wants to tell you.’
The bristling governess, her mouth opened fishlike, ready to begin the tale, was forestalled; Robert Asshe began to laugh.
It was his first refreshment in what had been a heavy and unrewarding day; his leading lady had been difficult, and wanted to marry him; the audience, confronted with an expensive cast, had been unresponsive.
He was considering taking off the play.
He made himself stop laughing and look stern.
‘And what have you to say for yourself, miss?’ he asked his daughter.
Dinah began to recite the lines from Cymbeline .
He had not listened to her before.
Now, he realised that here, in future years, with that voice, those gestures, stood a star.
The governess started to interrupt and Robert quelled her.
He motioned to Dinah to continue.
Before I entered here, I call'd; and thought T'have begged or bought what I have took,; good troth, I have stol'n naught; nor would not, though I had found Gold strew'd i' the floor.
Here's money for my meat; I would have left it on the board, so soon As I had made my meal; and parted With prayers for the provider
.
She spoke as both Guiderius and Arviragus.
Money, youth?
All gold and silver rather turn to dirt!
As ‘tis no better reckon'd, but of those Who worship dirty gods.
Dinah went on, standing straight as a young tree,
I see you're angry.
(She smiled at Asshe.)
Know, if you kill me for my fault, I should Have died had I not made it.
They continued as far as Great men,
That had a court no bigger than this cave, That did attend themselves, and had the virtue Which their own conscience, seal'd them — laying by That nothing-gift of differing multitudes,
— and finished the scene, but by then the outraged governess had flounced out of the room.
She tendered her notice next day.
After that episode Robert Asshe coached his daughter for the stage.
Everything else was subordinated to it; piano lessons ceased, singing ones began; English was taught by Robert himself, and consisted of reading Webster's plays and Marlowe's, as well as Shakespeare's.
The latter Dinah already knew by heart and loved, and the sonnets; but now she was Imogen, Viola, Perdita, Portia, Beatrice, Juliet.
That last he visualised for her, on the boards, at no distant date.
It was miraculous to find so young a girl, of Juliet's own age, with a depth of passion which could by rights only have belonged to an older woman; the problem of casting the ideal was solved.
He made Dinah recite, time and again, the lines; modulate her voice differently, play on it, revise her gestures, go back to the beginning.
Dinah did not break under the pitiless régime, the constant criticism; she regarded it as natural.
Her father was the greatest actor-manager since Irving; she was proud to be taught by him, would as proudly appear in a part which left him, the great Asshe, with no other place for himself than that of Lord Capulet.
That he intended her to be the sensation of town Dinah did not yet realise, but if she had done so it would not have disturbed her.
She had an exact estimation of herself; she knew what she could accomplish  now, and was certain of what she would be capable later.
Once when she suggested that they should rehearse Lady Macbeth her father said ‘No.
Leave that for ten years.’
She appeared in due course as Juliet, having been subtly advertised.
London went mad; everyone flocked to hear her, to see her, so young, so seemingly innocent yet passionate, with her long brown hair hanging down her back beneath the small round cap, her slight frame clad in a simple white gown which fell straight to the boards.
It was like watching a child grow up too quickly.
The Romeo was nothing notable; he did his best, but all the notices were for Dinah.
Robert Asshe watched from the wings, satisfied.
This production would run for six months, if not a year.
After that, Dinah should disappear for a little; they must not grow accustomed to her, and he himself had a leading part waiting which demanded full passions; that of Tamburlaine.
At the moment, only as a dream at the back of his head, was the future, perhaps in a year or two; Lear, with his Dinah as a stubborn, tactless Cordelia whom, nevertheless, France had loved.
Dinah grew physically over the next few years.
At one time Robert had been afraid she would become too tall for the stage, but her height remained ideal at five foot six.
Her limbs were graceful, her whole body proportioned like that of a young goddess; as for her breasts, an infatuated young man who had seen her in a small part at Robert's Shield Theatre wrote her a letter quoting the Song of Solomon at length: Asshe threatened to horsewhip him.
He himself took precautions against admirers, who habitually waited outside the stage entrance afterwards and sent flowers with their cards into the dressing-room; but the latter was sealed off, entered only from Robert's own, and the devoted dresser, Mrs Seale, acted as a bulwark when he was absent.
As for Dinah, she was so greatly given to her acting that she took no notice of any of the young men.
Gradually they realised that their chances were at par, and dropped off, though wistfully.
Robert was becoming increasingly involved with his project of Lear.
He invited a well-known designer to create  the blasted heath, then altered everything and took a hand himself, with that and the costumes.
He grew a real beard, which would incommode him for other parts; he thought, behaved, responded Learwise, in as short-sighted a fashion as that monarch would have done, having handed on his characteristics to his youngest daughter.
Again and again they practised the scene with Goneril and Regan, Poor Selene as usual relegated to prompting; but none was necessary.
Dinah, as well as her father, lived her part.
On the opening night she would be as much at home on the stage as she was in Holborn.
The opening night was a triumph.
The half-forgotten memories of her Juliet were revived; there were headlines in the papers next day, some about Asshe, more about Dinah.
Robert was not envious; he knew that the time would come when he must retire, though not yet; and Dinah would carry on the name and the tradition.
That she should ever marry was not in his mind, though a spinster on the boards would hardly do.
No doubt Selene would marry and have children; that was all she was for.
Then a young man named Paul Arkwright came to the house with his mentor, and played the piano, and Dinah sang.
After that, nothing was the same.
Paul had done less well than had been expected of him at Balliol, not through his own fault.
Over the years he had worked hard into the night, had attended every lecture and tutorial, had scarcely taken time to attend student functions such as debates, except that these gave him fresh ideas; he never spoke at them.
Frivolity had no place in his life; the days of genteelly walking out with Miss Groundwater, of falling, further back, upon the tinker woman were over.
That matter was cured, and had ceased to trouble him; he had lain with a virgin.
He could have continued placidly with the life he had chosen, and would have excelled; but telegrams of a peremptory nature, saying his mother's illness had taken a turn for the worse and he must come, kept arriving from Colonel Carteret, and Paul had to leave his work, abandon lectures, and make the weary journey to London time and again, only to find Sophia weak but resigned, and reproachful for his having come at all .
He was angry with the Colonel, who seemed to have taken a great deal upon himself.
If that martinet had not been already married, he would have married Sophia, and would no doubt have made Paul's life even more intolerable as his stepfather.
But Carteret's wife, who frequented health spas, could not endure to live with him or he with her: there were no children.
The Colonel had taken Sophia under his wing as a frail and dependent woman, who because of her son's lack of responsibility must work, when she should have been maintained in comfort.
That he himself was made extremely comfortable under Sophia's excellent management the Colonel never considered.
Telegrams, accordingly, were sent, and continued to be sent; and just before the final Schools, on which Paul had banked everything, Sophia really did die; taking a sudden seizure in the dining-room, before the lodgers assembled ready at table.
The serving-spoon dropped with a clatter from her hand, and her head fell forward.
Someone, inevitably, screamed.
The Colonel strode up and took the dead woman in his arms.
‘A doctor must be fetched,’ he said, ‘and so must her son.’
A small mouselike woman, a retired schoolmistress, who had not screamed, suggested timidly that Paul was about to sit important examinations.
‘Can we not all contrive between us, without disturbing him?’ she said.
Colonel Carteret glared at her with his fierce blue eye.
‘The young pup can come for the funeral, surely,’ he said.
When things were being arranged, he sent his telegram; and Paul came.
As a result, when classes were announced, he had not obtained a first, only a good second.
It was creditable in the circumstances, but less than Paul had hoped.
Ironically, now, he could have supported his mother.
The Fellowship on which he had set his heart was not available, but his professor, who knew the circumstances, recommended him for a lectureship at London University College.
Paul obtained it, and found lodgings in the Marylebone Road.
His mother was buried not far off, and as a kind of atonement, on the day of his appointment he bought a bunch of asters and took them to the grave, laying them on the bare earth.
He stood looking down for some time.
She had been loyal to him, had understood him better than in all his youth he had ever known.
He had brought her little joy, after all was said.
He went away dejected, and spent the day in black gloom.
He enjoyed the work at University College, even though it was not Oxford.
His lectures became notable and popular; he had a command of words and of the crisp phrase.
Now and again he was asked to the house of his new professor, a bachelor whose sister kept house for him.
They were a hospitable couple, and Paul was made welcome together  with certain of the students.
These were a mixed lot, for the University had been put together by stages since its original foundation in the late reign of George the Fourth.
It had not the cachet of Oxford, but its teachings were sound.
Paul enjoyed the talk at the Professor's house, the give and take of ideas; presently he began to sketch out some of these at the lodging, and before many weeks had passed had a book on his hands.
In its rough state, he showed it to the Professor, who bent his grey beard over the neat script, and read for some time in silence.
‘If it is not worth my continuing, sir, I shall not do so.
I will accept your advice.’
The notable head was raised.
‘My advice is to continue, young man.
We have too little of this kind of thing; Wittgenstein began it in Germany, but yours goes further.
Do not end as he did, in an Irish seaside hut.’
The Professor's grey eyes twinkled, and the manuscript was handed back.
Whenever he had leisure after that Paul worked on it; but the Professor began to show a marked desire for his company, and took him with him to other houses where he would hear interesting talk of the kind that stimulated him.
One day he said ‘This visit is different.
I am taking you to the house of Robert Asshe, in Holborn.
We will find a cab, as it looks like rain.’
‘Asshe the actor?’
Even Paul had heard of him.
The Professor looked round; a cab was approaching, and he hailed it.
‘You seldom go to the theatre?’ he said as they got in.
‘They say Dinah Asshe, the daughter, is the most remarkable Shakespearean actress of her generation.
Perhaps, when you meet them, they will invite you to take a seat at the Shield for one of the performances.’
Paul was not really interested; he preferred to work at his book in the evenings, using a culza lamp.
But it would be discourteous to say so, and he merely smiled with his full lips, in the way he was presently to smile at Dinah Asshe herself, after they had played and sung.
That encounter would not leave Paul's mind.
It was some years since this had been preoccupied with anything but  work, which had taken the place of his former bodily urgings, fulfilling him completely.
Now he found himself remembering, not the song, not the singer, but her young breasts; the breasts of Juliet, springing like fruit from a bough.
He longed to touch them, even to see them again; but made no effort, yet, to go back to the Asshe house, though he had been invited to play the pianoforte whenever he wished.
It was as though his former experiences had scarred him, increased his reserve to a schoolboy's shyness.
If Robert Asshe sent for him, he would go, he knew; but until then he did nothing, except dream.
Nevertheless he still worked.
His book was almost finished, and he had thought of a title:The Character Of Completeness .
He took tutorials three times a week at twelve, and a daily lecture at two o'clock; that left him the mornings free for research or writing.
He knew the Professor had arranged matters for him in this way, and was grateful.
He would rise early, make himself tea on his landlady's stove, work for three hours with a pause for breakfast, then go out to walk in Regent's Park, unless it was raining.
The exercise was beneficial, and cleared his thoughts.
That particular day was cold, with a hint of coming frost.
The trees were leafless, and seemed to hold fog in their branches.
The figures walking along the paths were few, as it was still early.
Suddenly he saw two young women and a dog, a black pug, held on a lead.
The pug was fat, and came unwillingly.
Paul was staring at it, thinking how different from other dogs pugs were; even their bark was a kind of bellow.
Then a voice spoke, and he realised, incredulously, that Dinah Asshe was here before him, and he had not seen her because he was looking at the dog.
She held the lead in her gloved hands; behind her was Selene, with hers protected by a muff.
Dinah looked enchanting.
She was wearing a short fitted coat of wine-red velvet above her dress, with a bonnet trimmed with the same dark fur.
Selene was in green; but Paul did not notice what Selene wore.
He was listening to Dinah Asshe, who was addressing him with laughter in her voice; the voice that had charmed half London.
‘You forget your friends very quickly, Mr Arkwright.
You were going to walk past us, and you have not been back to see us, so I have forgotten how to sing.’
He babbled something; she was so beautiful that he could not assemble his words.
Nevertheless his eyes rested on her, as they had done that first day.
‘Selene, take Buffy,’ said Dinah, and handed the lead to her sister, who perforce had to abandon the shelter of the muff.
Dinah slipped her hand into Paul's arm, and they walked in front.
‘That is the housekeeper's pug,’ Dinah said.
‘She is as fat as he is, and won't walk either; so we have to do it.
The coachman brings us here early, so that there are not too many about who will know me, as Papa puts it.
And what are you doing here?
Do you also come every day?’
‘I will come every day now, at this hour, in the hope of meeting you.’
He had blurted it out, and with it had gone all his shyness; he turned and looked into her face.
The green eyes surveyed him coolly; her mouth laughed.
Papa did not permit her to meet young men, and this was an adventure.
Besides, Mr Arkwright was clever, and would be famous one day.
And she had never seen such blue eyes.
They talked.
Selene trailed behind with the pug, then dared to speak up.
‘It is time to go home, Dinah.
Johnny will be waiting.’
Johnny was the coachman.
‘Can we drive you to your lodging?’
Dinah enquired.
Some remote pain stabbed at Paul, where had that been said to him before?
In Glasgow, at the Heathertons' carriageblock.
He did not want to remember Glasgow.
He declined Dinah's offer; no doubt it would in any case be thought improper for two young ladies to drive a young man home.
And he would see her again, certainly; here, almost every day, and at the house, playing the piano for her; but there they could not talk so much.
After that, few days passed when Paul did not see Dinah, in one way or the other.
At the house, Robert Asshe was frequently in the room, and often chose the pieces they  were to play and sing.
Once he did as the Professor had hoped he might do, and gave Paul a ticket for an evening performance.
Paul noted little of the play, being only concerned with the entrances of Dinah.
To sit in the stalls and stare at her was bliss, and nothing notable, as everybody else was staring also.
Afterwards he went out and bought flowers from a seller, and took them round to Dinah's dressing-room, but was routed by Mrs Seale.
Next day, in the Park, they laughed about it.
‘She is a dragon,’ said Dinah, ‘but she keeps me from annoyance, and Papa had the room designed so that no one could get straight in.’
‘Am I an annoyance?’ enquired Paul, and she pressed his arm with her fingers.
‘You know very well that you are not; if you were so, I should have myself driven to some other park.’
It was at that moment that he ventured to propose to her.
The book had found a publisher; he could hope to write others; he could support her in the manner expected.
He felt himself blushing furiously.
Dinah's green eyes widened, with a sparkle of adventure in them.
To be married would be diverting; she would be free to do as she pleased, and Paul was such a dear he would cause her no anxiety.
She had, in fact, like most young women, very little idea of marriage; there was no one married in the house, and Mama was scarcely remembered.
She turned to him.
‘Why, Paul, dear, it sounds very agreeable,’ she told him.
‘It will, of course, be a matter of asking Papa.’
‘You useless whippersnapper!
You insolent puppy!
To abuse my hospitality in such a way, take advantage of my trust — never enter this house again, I will have the servants throw you in the street —’
Robert Asshe was in full flood, his very beard vibrant with rage, his eyes flashing, a mixture of Tamburlaine the Great, Lear at his most unreasonable and, above all, a Victorian father who was much displeased.
Paul weathered the storm, bewildered by its existence.
‘Sir, I have made you an honourable proposal for the  hand of your daughter, whom I am in a position to support now and, later, in increased comfort —’
‘Comfort!
Young man, do you realise that Dinah Asshe is, or will be, the greatest Shakespearean actress since Ellen Terry, perhaps surpassing her?
To expect a genius — yes, my daughter is a genius, I knew it from the first — to endure the humdrum ways of marriage, bear children, become a housewife — it does not bear thinking of!
No, out you go; and do not return on any account.’
He rose from his desk, a giant enraged.
Paul made one last attempt.
‘Sir, surely you do not expect Dinah to spend all her days as a spinster, living for nothing but the stage?
It would be no life for any young woman, and she —’
Asshe launched himself with a roar, and Paul, his face ashen, was marched out of the study; behind him he heard the voice of his host calling ‘Out!
Out!
And you do not see my daughter before you go, or later.
I forbid you to address her again, you understand?’
The familiar house, the carpeted hall, were before him for the last time.
There must have been servants listening; without seeing who was responsible, Paul found the front door slammed behind him, and himself in the grey street.
He spent the night in anguish, but later in some hope; Dinah was spirited; surely she would not endure this decision of her father's as to her future?
Next day he went to the park, hoping to see her there; but there was no sign of her, Selene, or the black pug.
In some way, Asshe must have found out about their meetings and forbidden them.
Paul walked about, feeling it begin to rain, not caring that the wet dripped on his suit of clothes.
His mind was empty of everything but resentment and shock.
Old Asshe had liked him, he had been certain, and should have welcomed him as a son-in-law; but evidently no man in the world was to be permitted to fill that position.
It was ridiculous; it was impossible.
The impossibility of it grew in Paul's mind, and by the time he reached his lodgings that was made up.
Somehow, in a way he must think of, he would see Dinah again.
There was the theatre; seated in the stalls he could stare, but could not address her; but afterwards?
She was  guarded then; but gradually he thought of a plan.
‘Your clothes is soaked, Mr Arkwright; put on your other coat, and I'll dry these by the fire,’ said his landlady, Mrs Patton, an obliging soul who liked him, a nice quiet young gentleman who caused no trouble and paid his rent.
Paul obeyed her, stripped off his clothes, and sat in his dressing-gown while they dried.
It was Saturday, and he had no need to go anywhere.
If only he could have been with Dinah at this hour, playing while she sang!
But there was a better notion; it grew increasingly clear in his mind.
The afternoon performance would be crowded, and Paul did not go; waiting till Monday evening was torment to him, but he contrived it.
On the night, he bought himself a ticket, watched Dinah from the stalls — how could she remain so cool, so competent, when her heart must be torn, as his, by reason of their separation?
He watched Robert Asshe come on, and play his part, without feelings of hatred; if the man would be reasonable, they could still deal with one another.
At the final curtain, Asshe took his daughter s hand and led her forward; the hazel eyes were fixed on the gallery, and did not perceive Paul.
There were four calls, and flowers thrown down from the boxes;, then the cast had gone.
Paul hurried out of his seat, a note he had prepared in his pocket.
The night outside was drizzling with rain, and everyone except himself hurried for a cab; the flower-sellers were disconsolate.
Paul bought the most expensive bunches on the stall, violets grown in hothouses in France; there was little else available at this season.
Their scent came up to him as he made for the stage door, thrusting his note carefully among the rain-wet blooms.
It bore a sketch on the outside of the envelope; a small black pug.
He had an idea that Dinah might not be permitted to open her own letters, or perhaps would throw them aside if there were too many admirers; but surely she would take notice of the sketch.
He tipped the doorman more than he could afford.
‘Please see to it that Miss Asshe receives my note,’ he told the man, who sniffed.
‘They all says that.’
But he took the tip nevertheless.
Paul walked away, determination in his gait; if she did not reply to this note, he would send others until she did.
He had enclosed his Marylebone Road address, which Dinah had not known.
At least she could write to him there; surely she must agree that her father was unreasonable!
To lose her was more than Paul himself could contemplate; and surely she had not been indifferent to him.
It would turn out for the best in the end; it must.
It did.
Two days later, after Paul had scarcely been able to give full attention to his work, a letter came.
He did not know Dinah's handwriting; there was so much he did not know about her, he told himself, tearing the envelope open urgently.
The letter was written on a large sheet of thin paper, in a flowing hand.
Some theatre tickets fell out.
My dearest Paul,
How clever of you to think of drawing the little pug; I knew it at once.
I took your violets home with me and have them in a vase in my room, and Mrs Gracie the housekeeper (who owns the pug) takes them out at night as she says they poison the air when one is asleep.
I think that is nonsense, do not you?
Selene told Papa about our meetings in the park.
I think she was jealous because you paid no attention to her, or perhaps she wants to capture Papa's, but has not.
In any case he has forbidden us to go back there and Mrs Gracie has to walk her pug herself.
She is almost as fat as he is and it will do them both good.
Paul, I will write to you when I may and somehow we will arrange a meeting.
I fear that if you send more letters to the theatre Mrs Seale will notice the pug and will tell Papa.
Do not fear that I will forget you.
Some day we will be married; I am certain of it, but it is a long time to wait till I am of age and we must think of some other way before then.
I am enclosing tickets for the new play and as they are in the front stalls, I may see you as I come on,; but do not expect me to salute you, you understand, as I shall be taken up with my part.
I hope that you enjoy it.
I am being a trifle cunning in this, as I do not want you to forget me.
Let us consider ourselves engaged; I will marry no one else, I promise.
Your loving Dinah Asshe
Paul folded the letter away in a box he had.
From time to time he would take it out and read it, but no others came; and he had to be content from time to time with the sight of Dinah above him on the lighted stage, playing her part superbly, her breasts outlined by scarlet netted silk.
He would dream of them, and of her; once again the demands of his body troubled him, and found no relief.
The term dragged on: somehow, Paul became absorbed in his work.
The book, now published, attracted favourable notices, and the Professor was pleased.
The attitudes of the different students interested Paul; he was popular among them as a tutor, and had there been women among them, might well have become interested in one of these.
But the image of Dinah would not leave him, and was strengthened by the times he visited the theatre and saw her in the flesh.
Once, on a day of snow and melting slush, he was walking back to the Marylebone Road when the Asshe carriage passed by, with Johnny at the reins.
Dinah was at the near window, saw him, and blew a kiss.
Asshe sat beyond, staring ahead, having noticed nothing.
Paul stood watching the carriage bearing his love away, oblivious of the wet snow trickling down his neck beneath his coat collar.
Presently he trudged on, alone and wretched.
He had begun to have wet dreams; early in the morning, he would find his thighs soaked with semen beneath his nightshirt.
The need for Dinah gnawed at him like bodily hunger.
He could not live sanely, wholly, without her; it was not enough to go to the playhouse, watch her tempting presence above him on the stage, without the least hope of possessing it.
Against all promptings of common sense, he wrote to Robert Asshe.
Sir,
My regard for your daughter has in no way diminished; I still want her for my wife.
You may not know, that I have had a book on philosophy published, and am working on another; my superiors at London University College are pleased with me, and promotion seems probable.
Will you not reconsider your former decision against us?
I will not interfere with Dinah's career on the stage; I have watched with great pleasure her performances as Lady Teazle and the other young lady in The Rivals; and I know, that
she owes a great deal, not only to her natural gifts, but to your tuition.
I venture to ask, again, for your permission to pay her my addresses, and for marriage between us at an early date.
Yours devotedly, Paul Arkwright
He waited; the days lengthened into weeks; but no answer came.
The foul weather continued, and Paul would arrive home every night with his coat soaked and his shoes letting in water.
His misery drove him to the theatre again, uselessly; he had used up Dinah's tickets, and was told at the box office that all seats were sold out.
He watched, and saw others purchase them without difficulty.
Angry, he went back to the ticket-window.
‘You told me they were sold.’
‘So they are, to the likes of you.’
The man had a red face and an aggressive manner.
A second, of the same sort, moved suggestively at the back of the box.
‘Get out,’ he said.
‘We has our orders, see?’
So Asshe had given instructions that he was not to be let in.
Filled with shock of a kind that had not been with him since the actor-manager's first refusal, Paul took himself out into the snow.
It swirled thickly, making it impossible to see where he was going.
For the moment, he did not care if some vehicle ran him over.
He trudged on, stopped at a tavern, and ordered a drink; then another.
The place was half empty owing to the weather, and Paul sat alone, staring at the engraved letters on the glass between him and the street.
Drink.
Many men took to it.
He could at least spend the money on it that he would have used in buying a ticket to see Dinah, in powdered wig and paduasoy, as Lady Teazle, once again.
In the end he lurched home.
The snow had stopped, and wheel-tracks and hoof-marks marred its whiteness.
He used his key to enter the Marylebone Road lodging; it was late, though not yet midnight.
The scared face of his landlady peered out of her upstairs room.
‘Mr Arkwright, there's a visitor for you, a young lady.
She's waited nearly an hour.
I showed her into the parlour.
I don't think —’
She was not like the Glasgow woman, who had shown him out into the street.
Paul strode towards the parlour, his misery forgotten.
There was only one young lady it could conceivably be; and yet was that possible?
It was possible.
The slender figure rose from the chair, and flung back its veil.
It was Dinah.
He had not seen her so close at hand for months.
He went to her, regretting the whisky on his breath.
‘Dinah!
You here?’
Holding her, he was still aware that it was not quite proper.
She flung back her head.
‘I had to come,’ she said.
‘Papa said he would beat me if I gave you any more tickets.
I made Mrs Seale come with me in a cab from the theatre, saying I must visit a sick friend.
Once I was out of the cab I ran and ran, and lost her; she won't know where to look, the pavements are covered with footmarks.
I brought this; look, it isn't gold.’
She peeled off her glove, and revealed a wedding ring.
‘I asked Mrs Gracie the housekeeper what to do,’ she said, and a sudden grin, like that of an urchin, showed on her face.
‘She has hoped to marry Papa ever since she came; they all do, then they leave.
She thought, I don't doubt, that if she got rid of me he would turn to her, but she's too fat.
Here I am, at any rate; aren't you pleased to see me?’
‘But — but — your father will look for us here, and take you away.’
‘I have money.
Mrs Gracie gave me some; he has never paid me a penny.
She says that if we spend the night together, Papa will have to let us marry.
We can go to a hotel; your landlady didn't like the look of me.
Tomorrow you can say I'm your wife.
We can be married as soon as it may be arranged.
Paul, we ought to leave here soon, in case they come looking.’
He had taken her to a modest hotel in Albemarle Street, and booked in there as Mr and Mrs Arkwright.
Dinah had brought a valise with her which contained her stage make-up; it would pass for luggage.
They were shown up to a double room, and Paul stood slackly, wetting his lips.
Dinah turned and laughed.
She had removed her hat and veil, and the rich brown hair was crushed a little; she  fluffed it with her fingers.
‘Lend me a hairbrush, Paul.
I shall have to buy all those things tomorrow.’
He had packed his own things; with fingers that trembled slightly, he unstrapped the case, took out his brush, and gave it to her.
‘Papa used to brush Mama's hair for her,’ Dinah told him.
‘a hundred strokes every night.’
‘Tomorrow,’ he said thickly.
The whisky in him fought with any consideration he might have had for her; all he wanted was to get her into bed.
He saw her fumble with the back fastening of her dress, and went over.
‘Help me,’ she said, ‘I can't do this by myself.’
He undid the buttons, aware of the smooth warm nearness of her flesh; the gown fell, with a hushing sound, at last to the floor.
Paul picked it up and smoothed it, laying it across a chair.
Dinah had taken the pins out of her hair, and its rich length unravelled itself down her back; she stood before him, Juliet again, innocent and unbound.
‘I shall have to sleep in my chemise,’ she said.
‘I didn't bring a nightgown.’
‘It won't matter.’
His voice was still thick.
‘Get into bed, while I undress.’
‘Paul, you've been drinking whisky.
I know, because Papa takes it sometimes.’
The green eyes were wide and considering, as though this were an aspect of him she had not considered before.
‘Get into bed,’ he muttered again.
He flung off his clothes with his back to her, pulled his nightshirt over his head, and turned out the lamp.
There were street flares outside still lit; it was not dark.
He found his way.
Having slid in beside her, he began to take her at once.
He soon realised that, despite all her confidence, Dinah knew nothing of physical love.
She began to cry out, then sob like a child.
Paul took no heed; he had waited too long.
He felt her cheeks run wet with tears, then heard her breaths shorten as he entered her; then fully, masterfully, possessed her body, so that she could no longer free herself if she would.
The bed shook with the rhythm of his crisis; the awareness pleased him.
He let his hands travel up beneath the chemise to her breasts, which he had so  often coveted, and handled them boldly.
Dinah was still weeping in bewilderment.
This was the strangest thing that had ever happened to her; he had hurt her at the beginning, but now that was gone.
Presently he tried to comfort her.
‘This is what men and women do together,’ he heard himself saying.
‘This is what Romeo did with Juliet.’
Suddenly the passion that drove him reached her also.
It was as though there was no part she was unable to play.
She began to thrust at him with her body; their mingled breaths merged, their open mouths met, tongues touching.
By the time dawn came Dinah Asshe was intrigued with the possibilities of her own physical self.
There seemed no limit to what it could achieve.
Next morning they took a cab to Holborn.
Dinah sat placidly beside Paul, aware that the bruised turmoil that was her body had subsided into a kind of contentment.
The need to face her father was in any case uppermost in her mind.
She told herself, now again, that she knew how to handle Papa.
He would not willingly part with his leading actress, his Asshe heir: and as friendly Mrs Gracie had said, he could not now refuse Paul and herself permission to marry.
She was wrong.
They were admitted by a surprised servant, who had been told to keep the young man out of the house, but not, or not yet, Miss Dinah, who had firm hold of Mr Arkwright's hand.
The whole establishment had, in fact, been upset over her disappearance.
This was the answer, evidently, and still grasping her lover's hand she made her way to the drawing-room, skirts trailing.
Robert Asshe was alone.
He leapt to his feet at sight of them.
‘Where have you been, Dinah?’ he demanded.
‘Where have you been?’
‘Papa, Paul and I have spent the night together.
You will have to let us marry now.’
Her voice was clear and confident, her head high.
Beside her, Paul was no more than a supporting member of the cast, who had no lines to say.
Asshe shook his fist, and advanced threateningly.
Paul moved in front of Dinah; he could at least protect her.
‘Marry?
You will never marry while I can prevent it.
I warned you of this; your conduct is on your own head.
Get out of my house, the pair of you, and do not return.
I am done with you; you may lead your lives as you wish.’
‘Sir, we wish to lead them as man and wife.
What good is there in preventing it, in soiling your daughter's reputation when it could remain clear?
We can be married as soon as you give the word; as it is, what is Dinah to do?
She belongs to me; this is no longer her home; but we would be on friendly terms with you if —’
But the famous Asshe roar quelled him.
Dinah stripped off her glove.
‘Am I to wear this, in pretence, until I am of age?’ she asked.
‘Am I to walk on to the stage at the Shield with it on my finger, and the whole audience thinking that I am a wife when I am none?
Papa, you would not be so cruel.’
She stretched out the hand to him in a kind of gesture; but he slapped it down.
‘You are not walking on to the stage at the Shield, or any theatre in which I have influence, again.
You elected to become the mistress of a poverty-stricken lecturer of nonsense; you have made your bed; lie on it with him, as you have chosen to do.’
The angry hazel eyes searched her; she felt her cheeks flush.
Paul strode forward, roused to anger.
‘Sir, Dinah has done nothing to deserve having her career ended in such a way.
She will go elsewhere; other managers will be glad to employ her, whether influenced by you, as you put it, or not.’
He believed this.
A cunning grin spread over Asshe's face.
‘We will see about that,’ he replied.
‘And now get out.’
‘Then you still refuse permission for us to marry?’
‘I still refuse it, and always shall.
When my daughter is of age, that is different; if you still want her by then.
Shopsoiled goods don't keep their value.’
‘Sir, you insult her!
There would have been no need for the action we have taken had you been reasonable.
You wanted Dinah as an attraction for your theatre; you denied her any life of her own.
I understand you did not even pay  her for her work.
That can be remedied by others, at least.’
Paul was by now as angry as Asshe, but without his force and power; the older man towered over him.
‘Let us go,’ said Dinah coldly.
‘There is no way of making my father see reason.
I was a fool to endure him for so long.’
‘You are a greater fool now!
A greater fool now!
See where this affair with a nobody will lead you; I would have made you the greatest actress of your generation, and now you are nothing and no one.’
‘We will go to law,’ said Paul.
‘Come,’ said Dinah.
She took his hand, as she had done on entering, and together they went out, leaving Asshe alone in his room.
They met no one on the way to the door; the servants were discreetly elsewhere.
Paul had a lecture in the afternoon.
He was shaking, and hardly felt in a state to take it.
He took Dinah back to Mrs Patten's on the strength of the spurious wedding ring; he could not afford to stay longer at the hotel.
‘This is my wife,’ he said to the landlady.
‘May we stay here for a little, until we find a place of our own?’
She said they could stay: the ring on Dinah's finger looked genuine enough.
She hadn't known Mr Arkwright was thinking of getting married; and what a lovely young lady!
She'd noticed her last night.
‘Take off your things, my dear, and sit in the parlour,’ she said.
‘You know where it is.
I'll have something to eat ready presently.’
Paul went to prepare his notes, and Dinah sat alone.
The room was sparsely filled with ugly furniture, a horsehair sofa, and an aspidistra which sat in pride in its brass pot on a green chenille tablecloth.
The chairs were austere, upholstered in matching, ugly green velvet; she was uncomfortable, and scarcely knew what to do about the performance tonight.
If Papa had not repented, the understudy would take her part.
It was probable that he had not, and best in any case not to go near; soon he would miss her, want her back, and perhaps give his permission for the marriage despite all he had said to the contrary.
One must hope for that; the present position was Mrs Gracie's fault, and had led to nothing but the discovery of passion.
That was renewed when Paul came home, and took her in his arms.
He began to kiss her, and at the touch of his mouth her own responded, grew soft and yielding; she felt her breasts prick and grow sharp, her limbs tremble; through it all she heard him speak, against her.
‘I have thought of nothing but you all day.
I scarcely knew what I was saying or doing.
God knows what nonsense they have written down in their notebooks.
Soon they will know they have a fool for a lecturer, and all because of you, my wife.’
‘Paul, I am not your wife yet; it is all pretence, until something can be arranged.’
She felt the blood drumming in her ears, his hands about her; while her mind was cool her body was burning, as though the two were separate.
She heard his voice again, disembodied also.
‘You shall want for nothing while you are with me.
What they pay me is not much, but it will keep us both if we are careful.
Dinah, Dinah, let me…’
‘Not in here.
Mrs Patten will come in about supper.
Paul, not here…’
But he laid her down on the horsehair sofa, and said Mrs Patten would not be in yet, and there was time; and time there was, and what had happened last night was repeated, once and then again, until she, flushed and dishevelled, pulled down her dress, and said ‘She is coming.
I heard her.
Let me get up,’ and swung her legs to the floor.
She found that it was difficult to stand; she put out her hand to the wall to support herself lest she sway.
Mrs Patten put her head round the door.
‘Supper is ready, my dears.’
She knew very well what they had been at; she and Patten had been the same, when they were young.
She served the sausage and egg she had prepared, making sure that the young lady ate well: sometimes it took away their appetite, at the beginning.
The next two days were the same; Sunday they spent in  bed, and Mrs Patten went out to her sister's.
On Monday Paul had his tutorial, and at the end of it the Professor sent for him; he looked grave.
Paul wondered if he had perhaps been remiss in his lectures with all that had happened; but it was not that, as it turned out.
The old man pointed to The Times, which lay on his table with other journals.
‘Is this true?’ he asked, and Paul scanned the brief lines of the advertisement.
My daughter, Dinah Asshe, is not married to Mr Paul Arkwright of London University College, and will not be so with my permission, or until she comes of age.
Paul looked up, his face white.
‘Sir, we have been seeking his permission for a long time; he will not give it.
He is the most unreasonable man I have ever encountered.
In the end Dinah came to me, believing, as I did, that if we spent a night together her father would relent.
He has not done so.’
‘This is a very grave business for you, Paul.’
It was a long time since the Professor had addressed him by other than his Christian name.
Paul waited, like a soldier in the firing line.
‘You will have to resign.
We cannot have you here in all the circumstances.
I personally regret it, as you know; but it is not a matter solely for myself, but for the young people under my care.
You must find some occupation where your morals — I speak deliberately — are your own responsibility.
Here they are not.’
‘Sir, what are we to live on?
Dinah's father has forbidden her the stage, and I —’
There was a pause.
The Professor took off his reading-glasses and polished them carefully.
‘I believe,’ he said, ‘that I can obtain you a position as reader in a publishing house in which I have a certain interest.
That will at least tide you over until better days, when they come.’
Better days!
He walked the streets.
He could not have told where he went, or what time of day it was, except that dark was coming down.
He was aware of nothing but anguish.
At one time he tried to assemble his thoughts in  some way; would it be better to go back to a law-office stool, with prospects of promotion, such as he had thankfully left to go to Glasgow, to Oxford, then to London?
But the pittance they would pay him meantime might be no better than what the Professor offered, and at least the occupation of reading would be more satisfactory than dry law.
But there was Dinah; how would he support her when he could barely support himself?
What were they to do?
What was he to tell her?
What a devil her father was!
Asshe must have known, when he put in the advertisement, that it would terminate Paul's employment, make them beggars, for Dinah also had lost her place.
How was he to face her?
How could he continue to pay the rent of their lodgings?
He had disbursed more than was customary with him on the hotel where they had spent the night.
The thought of that now brought him nothing but misery.
Passers-by looked at him in some curiosity, seeing the tears course down his cheeks; and still he walked on and on.
Presently, by what caprice of Providence he never knew, he found himself on the street that led to his lodgings, and stumbled towards it.
‘Paul.’
It was Dinah, with her arms full of packages; she had just come out of a cab.
‘Paul, carry some of these for me; they would have delivered them, but I wanted them for tonight.’
She turned her head and laughed; then noticed his state.
‘What is the matter?’ she asked, as he took the packages.
‘I will tell you when we are inside,’ he replied.
They ascended the stairs.
Mrs Patten was waiting with a grave face, and he could tell at once that she knew.
Dinah noticed nothing, and greeted the landlady cheerfully.
‘I have been to Peter Robinson's,’ she said.
‘Have we kept you waiting for supper?’
She disappeared into their room, with some of the parcels, and Paul, weighed down with the rest, faced his landlady.
They were light; he was aware of the fact even as he stared at Mrs Patten.
‘You'll have to go, sir,’ she said.
She sounded regretful.
‘You saw the paper?’
It was useless to pretend innocence.
‘I don't read The Times myself, it was a neighbour brought it round.
You see, sir, if it's known that you and she — well, the way things are — I wouldn't get other decent lodgers to come here, not after you'd left.
She's a beautiful young lady, and I wish you both well; but I've got my living to earn, and the place must be kept respectable.
You've been a good lodger and paid regular, and I'm sorry about it; but there it is, Mr Arkwright.
You can stay tonight, as it's getting late; but be on your way tomorrow.’
Dinah had spent the day shopping.
She needed several things she had not been able to bring away from the Holborn house; chemises, petticoats, nightgowns, drawers, a frilled nightcap that had taken her fancy, stockings, handkerchiefs.
It had all gone on Papa's account, as Paul had brought the fact to her notice that she had never been paid a penny for all her years of work.
The staff in Peter Robinson's knew her, and in case they queried the propriety of her being there alone, she showed them her wedding ring and told them she was married.
They had showered her with congratulations, and had been pleased to serve her.
Miss Asshe had been well known.
Now, when Paul told her the truth, her first thought was that she wished she had got herself an extra gown, while she was at it; in fact she had been unable conveniently to carry any more, or would have done so.
She was also glad that she had not squandered the remaining money Mrs Gracie had given her; from what Paul said it was going to be needed.
She heard his sobbing tale with less sympathy than was its due; it did not occur to her that she herself, by coming here, had brought about all his troubles and her own.
She comforted him; and meanwhile thought to herself that tomorrow she would go round the managers she knew, having met them more than once in the company of Papa.
One or other of them would surely employ her.
Don't cry, Paul,’ she said softly.
‘I will find work and make money to keep us, while you look for something.
You're so clever, you will find a situation soon.’
His head was against her knees; the parcels lay about them still wrapped, being easier to pack.
Dinah felt the weight of Paul's head, felt the smoothness of his straight brown hair as her hands stroked it; and was aware of a  shocking fact.
She was not Dinah, consoling her afflicted lover; she was Portia, strengthening her husband Brutus, who plotted to murder Caesar.
She could remember the lines.
They found a cheap lodging at last in a back street in Islington, giving their names as Mr and Mrs Smith.
The landlady, a currant-eyed lady in an apron that was not too clean, wanted money in advance, and Dinah paid her.
The room to which the woman took them was not too clean either; the bed, when they came to lie on it, was lumpy and the sheets grey.
Dinah spread one of her new chemises over the pillow.
Surprisingly, they knew ecstasy together in such a bed, falling asleep in one another 's arms with a renewal of hope.
Surely something in the way of work would be found tomorrow.
What was found tomorrow, though they did not see it for newspapers were beyond their means, was a further notice from Robert Asshe to the effect that he would not be responsible for his daughter's debts.
As a result, the store where Dinah had purchased her fine things sent a demand for payment to the University, as they were unaware of any other address.
The missive was handed to the Professor, who hesitated to send it on; he would have liked to pay the bill, but it was not certain what other extravagances the young woman would incur.
In the end he sent it, regretfully, to Paul, thus adding to the latter's troubles.
The filmy chemises were dearly paid for.
It led to their first quarrel.
Paul meantime had found work.
He made his way, with the Professor's letter of recommendation in his pocket, to the publishing house, walking all the way to Clerkenwell.
A lackadaisical boy with spots admitted him, and asked what he wanted, as if it did not greatly matter.
Paul replied that he wished to see Mr Lamprey; the name had intrigued him, but now he was too greatly assailed by nervousness to perceive humour in anything.
He was led upstairs by the spotty boy to a sanctum, dusty as the remembered law-office had been.
A man with grey hair rose to meet  him, courteously.
Paul reflected that the publisher could not possibly know yet who he was.
He stammered out his credentials, and produced the letter.
Mr Lamprey smiled.
‘I already know what it contains,’ he said.
‘The Professor came to see me yesterday evening, and told me all of it.
You will understand that I can only employ you meantime in the capacity of reader, till all this notoriety has died down.
Afterwards, there may be other prospects.
I do not like to think of an intelligence such as yours being wasted, Mr Arkwright.’
‘Sir — truly, I am most grateful —’
‘Be seated, and I will tell you briefly what I shall require you to do.
You may start at once, if that is convenient to you.
They talked, and in course of it Paul mentioned that he had already sketched out plans for a second book; the Professor had already informed Mr Lamprey of the first.
‘I cannot say that that has been very successful,’ Paul added ruefully.
‘No, but once you become known sales will increase,’ said the publisher.
‘I should, of course, be most interested in reading the finished script, though —’ he gave a little wry smile —‘I can make no promises.’
‘You have been more than kind already, sir.’
Paul was taken downstairs, and shown the place where he was to work; it was a dark room with a high office stool, and a second reader was busy at a similar one; this man was sullen, for he was about to leave and Paul would take over his job.
Paul sat down and began to make his way through the pile of unread papers on the table.
The work was dull, and he had to look at it closely.
But it was work, and he need no longer allow Dinah to pay for anything, except for what she chose to purchase for herself.
Dinah fared less well.
She had five managers in mind, who mostly were to be found in the same quarter of London.
It was some way from the lodging, and Paul's attentions still made walking difficult; it would not do to arrive dishevelled and swaying, and she had to use some of Mrs Gracie's money on a cab.
Once at the first theatre, Dinah  dismissed it, and gave the man too small a tip, for the first time in her life; he scowled and spat as he drove off, and this disconcerted her; never again, she swore, would she be short of money.
She walked into the theatre, and demanded to see Mr Stone.
‘'Oo shall I say?’ demanded the doorman.
Dinah turned a radiant smile on him.
‘Tell him Miss Dinah Asshe is here,’ she said.
The man stared admiringly.
‘Cor, Miss Asshe?
Miss Asshe from the Shield?’
It was a good beginning, but when he returned his expression had altered.
Mr Stone had said he was not available.
She was incredulous.
The manager had often been to Holborn, and drunk her father's wine.
‘Are you certain you made it clear who I am?’ she asked the doorman.
He looked her up and down in a manner that was no longer respectful.
‘I told ‘im.
‘E said you was to get out.’
She turned and walked out of the foyer, her skirts sweeping behind her.
It was the first time in her life that she had been openly insulted.
Papa had always protected her from such things.
Now, Paul could not.
She reminded herself that it was not Paul's fault; and yet, somehow, he should have been able to shield her from this kind of outrage.
She walked on up Shaftesbury Avenue, still weak with anger and shock.
There was nothing for it but to try again.
After this, she was prepared for anything.
The next manager, Mr Poole, received her differently.
Miss Asshe?
Of course, her name was a household word.
He himself had never been to Holborn, Dinah reflected; and knew why.
Mr Poole was not a gentleman.
He had thinning dyed hair plastered across the top of his head, and his clothes were loud, his hands fleshy.
He guided Dinah to a sofa in his office, and sat down beside her, thrusting his face near hers.
A part?
Of course; so famous a young lady would make instant bookings.
Could she play other than Shakespeare?
Dinah said she could; but was disturbed by the grasp of Mr Poole's hand on her sleeve.
Presently he squeezed her  arm.
Dinah withdrew, and Poole became more demanding.
A part, of course, assumed that certain favours would be forthcoming, especially as her reputation, in the newspapers, was in tatters; Mr Poole did not use so graphic a word, but his hands continued to make free of Dinah's body, and soon she rose and shook out her skirts.
‘I do not think,’ she said clearly, ‘that I will accept your offer.’
She turned to go, and heard his voice, high with outrage, behind her.
‘You're damned lucky to get an offer at all.
You will find, young lady, that nobody will employ you without what you evidently know only too well how to give.
I'm as good as you'll get, I can tell you.
Come on, let's see what you can do; or else get out.’
She got out.
The third and fourth managers, like Mr Stone, would not see her.
The last read her a lecture, told her he would not disoblige her father by employing her, and turned her out in the street like an errant daughter.
By this time Dinah was exhausted and desperate; she could not drag herself round any more managers’ offices today, they would look at her and see a bedraggled young woman who must be as bad as the papers said.
She would go back to the lodgings, lie down on the lumpy bed and rest, and try again tomorrow.
There were still places to go to; not the best theatres, but the down-at-heel, the halls, the ones that put on low comedy.
She would try anything, except for allowing pawing hands and worse.
She decided to tell Paul nothing.
If he came home, like herself, depressed and disappointed, she must not add her own troubles to his; poor Paul.
But Paul came home happy, his blue eyes brilliant as they had been when they first met; full of his new employment, the prospect of having the second book read, the kindness of the Professor in going to visit Mr Lamprey himself.
‘I think that I shall dedicate the book to the Professor; I can never repay what I owe him.’
He turned and looked at Dinah lying on the bed, her shoes kicked off  beside it, her hair out of its pins for comfort, her gown unlaced.
‘How did you fare, my darling?’ he asked her, and took her hand, seating himself on the bed's edge.
She turned a weary face to him.
‘Not as well as you did.
I shall try again tomorrow.’
He began to kiss her, and Dinah knew slight revulsion; if only he would leave her alone for once!
But it was evident that men required this, daily, nightly; and at least it was better than Mr Poole.
Paul was full of triumph, and made love exultantly, heedless of her reluctance.
At the end it was time for supper, which was almost as uneatable as the bed had been unsavoury.
They ate what they could, left the rest, and went back to the room and the bed again.
To Dinah's relief Paul did not touch her this time, but turned over and was soon asleep; he had to be early at work in the morning.
Next day she tried the Manatee.
It was not in the hub of theatreland, and its audiences probably never read the papers, or not those which mattered.
The manager, to Dinah's relief, hardly looked at her.
He was a fat man with a dyed black moustache.
‘You got experience, you say?’
‘I began acting when I was fourteen.’
He looked up briefly.
‘Comedy, was it?
We got a young woman off sick, and you can take her place; don't know when she'll come back, if she ever does.’
Dinah resolved to do so well that whether or not the young woman came back, they would keep her, Dinah Asshe, on.
She accepted the arrangement.
It involved quick learning of the part, for she would have to appear at the matinée; but in fact there were few lines to say, and most of the acting involved being laid on a sofa by a young man and proposed to, after various adventures which were mostly physical.
Dinah learnt the lines, was laced into the vulgar striped dress the part required, which had stains under the arms from the young lady off sick, was heavily rouged and had her eyebrows blackened, and walked on to the boards to the flare of gaslight and the outline of gentlemen in bowler hats they had not troubled  to remove, refreshing themselves at the bar which stood at the back of the theatre.
That was Wednesday.
She was paid on Friday.
She felt a mounting sense of triumph at taking money home to Paul.
She knew that he had been doing without luncheon, and now he could afford some.
As for herself, she could buy food to supplement the dreadful stuff at the lodgings; perhaps soon they would be able to move elsewhere.
For some weeks their lives took on a settled pattern of difference.
Paul would depart early in the morning, leaving Dinah still asleep; by the time he got back after his day's reading at the publishing house, had had a meal, and worked on his manuscript, Dinah was long gone.
He grew used to her absence, thought of nothing but his book, and decided to call it Principles of the Real .
A little money came in from The Character of Completeness , and he took Dinah out for supper in an hotel one Sunday, when she was not working.
He wanted to book them a room afterwards, but Dinah refused; sleazy as the lodging was, they must save their money if they wanted to get out of it.
Also, a hotel room would remind her of that first night they had spent together; what happened then had been repeated by now many times.
Often, and in vain, she begged Paul to leave her be; once he had grown angry.
‘My work gives me headaches.
I can only relieve them by this.’
She could not refuse him, accordingly, and did not; but more and more it was almost as if she had given in to Mr Poole's demands; one man was much like another.
Thankfully, at the theatre, there had so far been no familiarity.
The young lady who had left had returned, but the manager was pleased with Dinah and kept her in the lead, giving the other girl bit parts, which were resented.
Winnie Castle took every opportunity to do Dinah a bad turn, mislaying her make-up, borrowing her dresses and sweating into them, telling tales about her.
Dinah paid no heed; as long as they kept her on, she could put up with whatever came.
The play in which she had first appeared was still running; its clumsy comedy appealed to the audiences who  came here.
Dinah found herself acting in it nowadays like an automaton; there was no depth in the part, and she was weary of it.
In fact she had been feeling tired and queasy for the past few days; and that night, when the leading man laid her on the sofa, suddenly turned her head and, without letting the audience see, vomited quietly down the sofa back.
She said her lines with the sour taste of sickness in her mouth, but got through them and her exit creditably.
Next day, after she had arrived for the matinée, the manager sent for her.
He looked her up and down.
‘Got in pod, ain't yer?’
At first Dinah did not understand; the way he talked was strange to her, and in any case she did not know what the term meant.
She heard him, incredulously, go on to tell her she could take herself off.
‘Win can take over from yer again; she's ‘angin' about.
'Ere's ‘alf the week's money; now get away.
She got herself back to the lodging somehow.
The currant-eyed landlady, Mrs Seager — the late Seager had been a trundler of barrels in a bar — was in her kitchen, moving about.
Dinah walked in and faced her.
They seldom troubled one another in the ordinary way, but this was not ordinary.
‘Mrs Seager, what does ‘’ in pod'’mean?’
The lifeless eyes surveyed her.
In terse language Dinah was told what it meant.
‘I was expectin' it, the way yer was both goin' on; can hear it through the wall.’
The woman looked her up and down.
‘Don't show yet, at any rate,’ she said, ‘but I can't have the likes of you here with a brat.
Findin' somewhere else won't be easy; nobody wants 'em.
Better start lookin' now.’
Dinah felt her knees tremble.
‘When will it start to show?’ she asked, loathing the woman; but she knew nobody else to talk to.
‘You'll know,’ said Mrs Seager.
‘Swell up like a frog, you will; then you'll know.’
Her expression softened at sight of Dinah's white face.
This was a young lady, or had been; they never knew anything.
‘'Appens to all of us sooner or later,’ she said.
‘No hurry to move; as long as rent's paid, and you finds a place in time, that suits me.’
‘In time…how long is that?’
‘Takes nine months.
At the rate you've been goin' on, that might be a bit sooner or a bit later.
I'd start lookin', if I was you, while you can.’
Dinah made her way through the bedroom, flung herself on the dreadful bed, and wept.
How were they to manage with only what Paul made?
At the thought of it, her whole body shook with sobs; she had never before experienced such despairing weeping.
A baby!
Certain happenings in her body had stopped; she had thought it was something to do with being married, or almost so, to Paul.
She didn't want a baby, however it came.
She wanted to go on acting, even at a place like the Manatee, making enough money to live on, to help Paul until his books were famous.
She wanted — what did she want?
To be herself; not to be swelled up like a frog by an unwanted baby.
She went on weeping, making herself ill with it, until she heard Paul at the door.
He mustn't touch her tonight, headache or not.
It was because all that had happened so often that the baby was coming.
What manager would employ her now?
Not for nine months, if then.
It had been bad enough when it was only Papa and the newspapers.
Now, it was worse: as bad as it could be.
Even Paul, immersed in himself as usual, could not fail to notice Dinah's red eyes and white cheeks.
He went to her.
‘What is the matter, my darling?
What has happened?’
He had had a good day at the office and his head had not troubled him; they seemed pleased with his work; he had been looking forward to telling her about it over supper, and now this.
She broke out into renewed sobbing, to such an extent that he could hardly understand her when she spoke.
‘I am going to have a baby,’ she said at last.
‘The theatre have told me not to come back, and Mrs Seager won't let us stay on.’
‘A baby!
But that's splendid!’
He had spoken without thinking, and presently realised what it would mean to them both.
His mouth set.
I will go to see a lawyer,’ he told her.
‘I know a little of the law myself.
We must be married; there must be some way.’
She was wailing now like a baby herself; marriage with him would mean more of them, her body used every night, and no theatre again, ever.
Yet if she did not marry Paul, and had the baby, things would be worse rather than better.
What was she to do?
What was to become of her?
‘Let me comfort you,’ she heard him whisper.
She tried to thrust him away; that appalling woman through the wall would hear everything they did.
Paul thought her resistance hysterical, and was firm; soon it was as always between them, except that Dinah's face was suffused with blushes; it was like bedding with him in public.
She lay stiffly, letting Paul do as he would.
When he handled her breasts they were tender; she had noticed it for some time.
Perhaps that was another sign of the baby.
She loathed the baby.
If only there were some way to release her from this bondage, turn her again into what she had been; a young actress on her way to the top of the ladder, as Papa had often put it!
If only — the thought came for the first time — if only she had stayed with Papa!
Next day Mrs Seager accosted her.
‘If yer lets ‘im go on like that, 'e'll lose yer the baby,’ she said, and winked.
Dinah was revolted by the familiarity of it; then, after the woman had gone, thought about what had been said.
Thereafter she welcomed Paul's embraces, thrusting herself at him in the way she had ended by doing on their first night.
He was pleased; he had been disturbed by her recent unwillingness.
Now he made the most of the proffered opportunities, even putting the notion of a third book to the back of his mind meantime.
Lamprey was reading the second, and so far no word had come downstairs that it had been rejected.
If he, Paul Arkwright, could make his own name again in this way it might lead to even better things than a University chair.
But he and Dinah must first be married.
He had seen a solicitor, who seemed uncertain; what Paul asked cost money.
There was more interest to be taken in the prospect of damages due to the newspaper  insertion — the first only, the second was in order — than to any lessening of a father's due rights over his daughter until she was of age.
‘Otherwise, it will be a matter of the Queen's Conscience in the Division of Chancery, and that will be expensive,’ he said finally.
Paul, in his shabby old suit, did not look as if he could pay for anything; and the lawyer had sized him up.
But salvation was forthcoming, although Dinah did not lose her baby.
Mrs Paul Arkwright dragged her heavy weight along the trodden path that led to Highbury Fields.
She had taken a craving for the sight of green grass.
Also she still hoped to rid herself of her burden, which had persisted in her despite Paul's nightly penetrations and her own constant daily walking, as if that would shed it; walking, as now, with the almost waddling gait of a heavily pregnant woman.
She did not know how long she would have to carry the child, or when it would be born; she had no one to ask except Mrs Seager, who was still insistent that they go soon.
They could, at any rate, Dinah thought wryly, go with respectability; they had been married yesterday.
For some reason Papa's permission, which had stubbornly been denied to the lawyer's requests all these months, had lately been given.
They had not asked why, but Paul had made arrangements to be married quietly in an Islington church.
For the first time Dinah met his publisher, Mr Lamprey, who was the groomsman.
She herself knew she could not have made much of a showing, bulky as she was, wearing the Peter Robinson gown, let out at the seams, her state disguised only by a light scarf.
But Lamprey had been as courteous as if she had been in her father's drawing-room.
Dinah knew he had been kind to Paul, and was bringing out his second book; and Paul had started on a third.
Dinah closed her eyes for an instant, letting the long lashes lie on her cheeks as she walked.
The third book was about the progress of thought versus theology in mediaeval times; Paul had not yet decided on a title.
Now and again Dinah would come on a phrase that interested   her, but it was not the kind of subject she would have chosen to read, much less write out; and these evenings she had to write it.
Her handwriting was small and neat, and Paul's headaches had grown worse; after the day's work he preferred to dictate to Dinah, then get her to read the passage back.
She looked on it, without telling him, as a way of exercising her voice, practising her breathing as she would have done for the stage.
Paul would stop her now and again, alter a line, then demand that she go on reading; and so the time passed until supper and bed, when he would cure his headaches in the customary way.
She no longer thought of herself as anything but a tool, a servant; something to be used, with no separate life of its own.
Yet there remained a fierce energy in her, which allowed her, now, her time growing near, to walk the miles from Islington, stride over the rough grass at last with increasing ease.
There were not many people about at that hour; most women were marketing, most men at their work, and the children — Dinah turned her head away with distaste at the thought of children — were at school.
She was surprised, accordingly, to see a stout woman with a dog, a small black dog, approach; and then knew disbelief.
It was — it could not be — Buffy the pug, with Mrs Gracie!
Guilt rose in Dinah; she had never returned Mrs Gracie's money; she had not been able to.
She waited where she was, knowing that there was no chance the woman would not see her.
‘Miss Dinah!
I hardly knew —’ The good woman averted her gaze, the pug snuffled, and Dinah extended her hand.
‘I am glad to see you,’ she said.
‘I have not returned your money, because I could not.
It is not forgotten.
As soon as it can be done, I will send it.’
‘Well, don't send it to Holborn, dear; I've left.’
The former housekeeper tossed her head in its black bonnet.
They were always leaving, I remember, Dinah thought.
What had Papa done this time?
‘Expect you saw his marriage in the papers.
Not going to put up with that, I wasn't, not after all that service.
A girl young enough to be his daughter!
She didn't take your place in the theatre long; wasn't good enough, I'd say.
But  she did well enough for him.
Miss Selene's the housekeeper now, poor dear.
There was never any sort of life for her, and never will be.’
‘My father — married?’
She hadn't heard, of course; they couldn't afford newspapers.
It all went to show how far away she had grown from the life she had been used to lead; and the marriage, of course, explained Papa's sudden permission for her own.
It wouldn't matter now what she, Dinah, did; Robert Asshe would be hoping for an heir from the new wife, the young girl who couldn't act.
Dinah was filled with a sudden raw spurt of jealousy.
Lear and Cordelia were parted, never to meet again.
Existence with Paul was what she must look forward to; reading his scripts, bearing his children.
Mrs Gracie was looking at her shrewdly.
‘Is all well with you, dear?’ she said.
‘I maybe asks as shouldn't, but when is the little one expected?
Are you looking after yourself?
It's a difficult time, the first.’
‘Things are a little better now than they were.
My husband is beginning to make money from his books.’
It was the first time she had uttered the word husband; it gave her a sense of propriety.
‘We have been living in very poor lodgings, but hope soon to find better ones.’
‘Well, now, there's a dispensation of Providence if you like.
My sister, she was an invalid, died last week, poor soul.
I always had to pay a nurse to look after her; she wasted away, couldn't stand or walk, but her eyes were as bright as a child's and so was her wit.
Now she's gone, and I don't have to pay out, I'm not badly off; I've saved a bit, and I'd thought there would be no need to let the room, but if you and Mr Paul was looking for somewhere clean and comfortable, with good food, and reasonable as it's yourselves, perhaps you'd think it over.’
The pug snuffled again and cautiously circled Dinah's skirts.
She was overwhelmed by the miracle that had happened; Paul must agree!
To be rid of Mrs Seager and her greasy food and grey bed, and to have someone near who would help when the child was born!
She asked, tentatively, about the birth.
Mrs Gracie smiled.
‘Lord, dearie, I had one of my own, when Gracie was  alive, but it died; so I know all about having 'em.
It's bad for the time, but worth it when you've got 'em, they say; about that, I don't know.’
‘I don't even know how they come,’ said Dinah.
‘They come out the way they went in.
Never fear, if you come to me I'll be with you; you won't need no one else.’
Paul was less glad of the news than he should have been, in her opinion; it was too far from his work at Mrs Gracie's, he said.
Dinah rounded on him.
‘You never think of me, do you?
It would not disturb you, would it, if I had to bear our child in this hole, among this dirt — I have hardly been able to keep clean over the time we've lived here, with only a jug of cold water — and the unbearable food, and hardly enough light to see by when I have to read your script aloud to you in the evening, and then give you your pleasure in the bed every night with that woman listening through the wall?
You never think of anyone but yourself and your own cleverness, Paul Arkwright, do you?
If you won't come to stay at Mrs Gracie's, I shall go alone, and find work of some kind to keep myself.
Scrubbing floors would be better than this.’
He was aghast; he had been so immersed in his work, and his late success, that it had hardly occurred to him to notice the conditions in which they lived, the state to which he had reduced Dinah.
He went to her, and told her how much he loved her, and that she was not to heed him; it was the headaches that made him distracted; that day he had been almost blind; Mr Lamprey had suggested spectacles, and perhaps now he could afford them.
‘Then we will go to Mrs Gracie's?’ said Dinah, keeping to the point.
‘We will go to Mrs Gracie's, as it is what you want, my dear; and I will get up earlier and walk the extra distance; no doubt it will do me good.’
In fact, he was able to take the morning coach to Holborn and walk the brief distance to Clerkenwell, but the fare troubled him and he did not know how long he could afford to pay it.
One morning, in addition, he encountered his father-in-law, striding along in the pursuit of some business or other from home.
Asshe cut him dead.
Paul went on his way in rising anger, fearful of bringing on a bad head by it.
He must certainly see about spectacles; it would be worse than anything if he were compelled to give up the reader's position with Mr Lamprey.
Arrived at the office, the publisher sent down for him by Laurence, the boy with spots.
Paul climbed the stairs in trepidation; had he made some mistake in the corrections, blind with pain as he had been for part of the day?
How could he explain that only by emptying himself into a woman was there any relief?
There had been so much misfortune that to endure any more would be as a dumb beast might endure it; and what would become of Dinah and the child?
It was more than evident that her father would not help her.
However, the publisher was beaming, his grey hair smooth in the sunlight from the dusty window.
He stood up and offered Paul his hand.
‘I have some very good news for you, my dear fellow,’ he told the young man.
‘The Character of Completeness , and your subsequent book with us, have both been bought by a firm in the States which sells textbooks to Harvard University.
I have said nothing all these weeks, because there had of course to be an arrangement made by us with your former publishers, which is now completed, if you agree.
This will make all the difference to your own finances.’
He named a sum, adding ‘I cannot hope that you will agree to continue as a mere reader here.’
‘Sir, you have been so good to me that I would not leave, unless you require me to,’ Paul said.
The news, the sum of money, whirled round in his head; fortune at last!
And there was more, much more, ready in his mind.
He and Dinah together could make books that would be widely read in scholarly circles; he would achieve recognition of a sort he had never had before; in America they would know of no disgrace about him, and in any case he was now married.
Soon —
John Lamprey was regarding him quizzically.
‘I do not require you to leave,’ he said.
‘Sit down on that not very comfortable stool, and listen to what I have to say regarding your future, if you choose to accept it.
Otherwise, I have no doubt that you can maintain yourself by writing.’
Paul sat down.
His blue eyes were fastened on the publisher's face, his square hands placed on his knees.
He had put on weight in the short time since going to Mrs Gracie's; he was plump.
His clothes were shabby, his linen clean; the former housekeeper washed it and dried it out on the grass.
All this Lamprey saw, accustomed as he was to dealing with humanity.
He let his expression broaden into a smile.
‘Jonathan Holland, our senior member of the board of directors, has announced his impending retirement,, he said.
‘He is not in good health, and he asks only that his nephew, Nathan, who is sixteen, shall be given the opportunity to work with the firm, starting at the lowest rung of the ladder, to learn the publishing business thoroughly.
In other words, he will take your place as reader.’
Paul's heart sank.
So they did want him to go!
He realised that despite the money he would miss this place, the friendly faces, even the work that blinded him.
Above all he would miss Lamprey.
The other's voice went on.
‘I cannot ask you to become the senior member of the board; that place I reserve for myself, and there is also Lessing whom you have not met.
But if, as a man with a degree and an increasing fame in philosophical writing, you would accept a lower place among us meantime, you would find it interesting and, we hope, not unprofitable.
We are a small concern, but we make ends meet.’
Happiness rushed into Paul's face.
‘Sir, what can I say?’
‘Why, say either yes or no,’ smiled Lamprey, ‘unless you prefer to think the matter over.’
‘No — yes, certainly yes!
I cannot express my gratitude.
When I tell my wife, this will mean a great deal to her.’
But he could tell Dinah nothing meantime; when he reached home, she had fallen into labour.
She had been making her way towards Mrs Gracie's door after walking a little.
For some time she had felt a curious weightiness, then sudden relief.
To her shame, her thighs were wet, and there was a trail of more wet behind her.
Mrs Gracie, opening the door, noticed at once.
‘It's the waters, dear,’ she said.
‘It won't be long now.
Don't fret.’
She made Dinah go and unlace herself, put on a cotton wrapper she had lately bought, and stay near her bed till the pains came, but meantime to walk up and down.
‘Walking brings it on,’ she said.
‘I'll go and make a cup of tea.
You call if you want me.’
Dinah had not called, and had drunk the tea when it came; after that, she began to have sharp pains in the small of the back.
When Mrs Gracie came in again she looked at her and said ‘Best lie down.
It's coming soon, I can tell.’
‘How long will it take?’
She felt like a being whose body was no longer at her own bidding; the pains had stopped, then began again.
‘No one can say, dear.
The thing is not to worry, just take it as it comes.’
The hours passed; then the pains began to be severe.
Dinah bit her lips, to keep from screaming.
Later it was impossible not to; the thing inside her bore down, thrust, tortured her with its relentless coming.
She began to cry out.
Mrs Gracie came and put her arms about her.
‘That's my girl, my Miss Dinah.
Let it come.
Bear down.
We all has to put up with it; you're a brave girl.
Let it come, now.
Let it come.’
Dinah screamed.
The agony was unimaginable; she had never thought that there could be such pain in the world.
It went on and on.
She heard a door open and close; Mrs Gracie left her and hurried out of the room.
Dinah was left alone, screaming, bearing down.
The time passed; Mrs Gracie came back.
‘That was Mr Paul, enquiring for you,’ she said.
‘I told him he couldn't come in, not just now.’
Dinah turned her head away.
She didn't want to see Paul.
The baby suddenly revealed its head and thrust its way out of her, so that she gave a great agonised cry.
Mrs Gracie took it and pulled it away.
It was puny and small, for all the anguish in giving it birth.
The afterbirth was large, and the good woman narrowed her gaze.
That happened in a condition Miss Dinah couldn't possibly have, but Mr Paul —
One never knew, with men.
She took the baby away and washed it, then laid it, wrapped in a shawl, beside its mother.
It was a girl.
‘Take it away,’ said Dinah in a weak voice.
‘1 don't want it near me.
‘But, dearie, you'll need to feed it; not today, but soon.’
Dinah closed her eyes.
She didn't want to feed the baby.
She hoped it would die.
She hadn't even looked at it.
It had caused her too much pain.
Paul came in soon.
He knelt down by her, then went and looked at his child.
‘How are you?’ he asked Dinah gently.
‘Glad it's done with.’
‘What will you call her?’
He himself had no idea, nor had she.
In the end they called the child after Mrs Gracie's dead sister Lilian.
It pleased the good woman, and it gave the baby an identity.
Otherwise it was like a wrinkled prune, lying beside its mother, who loathed having her breasts pulled and sucked at for milk, which however came.
‘No.
No, Paul.
Don't touch me.
You have no idea what it is like to have to bear a child.
I'm done with it.
Go away.
Leave me alone.’
He was filled with anger.
It was some time since Lilian's birth.
During the evenings he had walked about for hours, pulled at himself, resisted the prostitutes who abounded between here and Primrose Hill; and all for this continued denial.
He stared at Dinah; she was half sitting, half lying in her cotton wrapper, the child in its cradle nearby.
A cold anger took him.
‘You came to me,’ he told her, ‘not by my invitation.
You lost me my appointment at London University.
Since then I have had to make do as best I might, to support you.
If, now, you refuse me my conjugal rights, I can go to a lawyer; I know something of law, after all, as I said.
Perhaps you did not realise how much I knew, of that or of anything.
I am your husband; had you forgotten?’
‘Paul —’
‘Do you hear me?
Do you even listen to me?
Will you allow me my conjugal rights?
If you will not — if so, I shall take steps to see that you do; there are two partners in marriage.
I spend the days working to support you; I do not grudge that, but now — now you deny me what is mine by right.
I shall go to law — to law, I know it — but my head, my head —’
His voice had risen to a scream.
His skull was filled with agony; but he lurched towards her, his tortured brain seeking her unwilling body's solace.
She could not refuse him; and conceived again.
From then on their marriage was misery.
Lilian Arkwright grew up into a pallid, spiritless child; there was nothing notable about her except her curious teeth.
These were serrated, short in the middle and with a point on each side.
When the milk teeth came in that shape, Dinah had taken no heed; no doubt the matter would rectify itself in time.
But when the second teeth showed, and were the same if not worse, Lilian was seven years old, and other things had happened.
She had been beaten into submission from the time she was a baby.
Dinah had always disliked and resented her, never forgetting the pain caused by her birth.
That the rest had given rise to as much pain did not matter; she herself had known by then what to expect and had steeled herself to bear it.
Meantime, there was Lilian.
At first Dinah had smacked her hard on the bare bottom with her thin strong hand.
Later she used a flat wooden laundry spoon, dismissing the howling child at last with a smart box on the ear.
‘Keep out of my way,’ she would tell her, and the little creature would creep into a corner, her drawers dangling below her scarlet backside, stifling her sobs for fear of worse to come.
By that time there were brothers and a sister playing about the floor of the nursery in Hampstead, and now and again a new baby in the cradle.
When Dinah appeared they would all be quiet; in fact they were not noisy children.
Hampstead had been purchased with the now substantial royalties from Paul's books, also the first excursion Dinah had made on to the stage since her marriage and the birth of three children.
It had come her way because, leaving them in charge of Mrs Gracie, Dinah   had gone for diversion to what she expected to be a dull sewing-meeting in the Islington church where she and Paul had been married.
In course of it a young woman came up to her.
‘Are not you Miss Dinah Asshe?’
Dinah flushed; since the newspaper insertion she had been wary of making known her name.
Since there appeared to be no help for it, she admitted to being who she was.
‘My husband and I have never forgotten your Cordelia; we saw it on our honeymoon,’ said the young woman, who turned out to be the wife of an enthusiastic amateur producer of plays.
‘We would not ask you to appear in one of our modest productions, but would you perhaps come and give us some advice?’
It was the beginning, for Dinah, of a change from almost yearly bearing, rearing, and reading to Paul.
In any case the latter now had a substitute, very agreeable to Dinah; the young man Nathan Holland who had come to read at Lamprey's.
His grasp of foreign languages was causing Paul to consider asking him to translate some of his work, and knowing Nathan to be more help in that matter than she, Dinah, would ever be, she left the pair of them to their task, and herself enjoyed the jaunts in the carriage sent by the devoted amateurs of the locality.
One day, she met a London producer there, like herself invited to give advice.
‘Why are you not acting?’ he asked her abruptly; more interested by far in her than in the genteel maunderings on stage.
They were acting out a version of one of Miss Austen's stories, and it could go on by itself.
Dinah smiled a little, the green eyes meeting his.
‘Marriage brings children.
I seldom have respite from expecting one.’
There was none of the coy evasion of most women in her, he was thinking; and went on as if she had not spoken.
‘When is your next child to be born?
Could you take a part which would involve the wearing of an acid-yellow loose négligée for the most part of the proceedings?
You are perfect for the part; a dry stick of a man marries his  passionate mistress, never thinking, or caring, that society will ostracise her.
The play may shock audiences; it may have to be withdrawn or rewritten.
But it will keep your name before the public, and money — well, money is useful to us all.’
He named a salary, and Dinah disguised her surprise and pleasure.
She was not, in fact, pregnant; if only it need not happen, and let the play run for long enough!
It happened soon after the start, but the négligée helped, and Dinah's entry in it was glorious.
However, those in the stalls began after the seventh month to observe her condition, and she went unwillingly home.
This time, though, there was hope; her strong young body recovered quickly from the ordeal of Hubert's birth.
The producer sent flowers; they almost smothered the new child in its cradle.
It was a quiet baby, and the children were also quiet in their nursery.
Dinah thanked her salary for the  latter's white-painted existence, and the fact that she had thrashed Lilian enough to ensure silence among the rest.
‘Mrs Arkwright, can the young gentleman come in?
He'd like to see the baby.’
Mrs Gracie still called Nathan Holland the young gentleman, although it was several years now since he had become practically an inmate of the house.
She herself had long abandoned Highbury to be with her Miss Dinah; not only was she devoted to the children, but she could make a little money by letting her own house.
She was something more than a housekeeper, more also than a nurse.
She did the marketing, saw to the housemaids, and supervised the cook.
Buffy the pug was dead long ago; between them the family had replaced him in her affections.
So now she asked if the young gentleman could come in.
She had asked the same thing following the last two births, Hubert's and Robin's.
This last, born several years later, when Dinah had hoped her childbearing days were done with, was a girl.
It had interrupted another part in a provincial theatre.
Despite everything, Dinah Asshe was not forgotten: in the intervals of pregnancy she was still offered parts.
She called out ‘Come in, of course, Nathan,’ and the young man entered, holding a bunch of flowers which he presented to her where she lay in bed.
Dinah laughed.
‘What can I do with them here?
Take them away, Mrs Gracie, and put them in water.’
He gazed briefly down at the new baby, pink in its cradle; and said nothing.
‘What shall we call it?’
Dinah asked him.
‘You think of a name.’
Nathan blushed and stammered, returning his gaze to where she herself lay; she was, he wanted to say, the loveliest  thing he had ever seen, and could not they name the baby after her?
He attempted that, but Dinah frowned.
‘No, something else.’
She was not going to permit any of the children to steal a part of her identity.
‘Something from Shakespeare, if you like.’
She had let Paul name the boys; with rare magnanimity, he had called the last one after her father.
‘Not, Nathan dear, a tragedy.
Think of one of the cheerful ones.
 Twelfth  Night ?’
‘Viola?
No.’
He could not explain why Viola was wrong.
He tried to think of other names, and remembered one; Olivia.
She was the beautiful lady with whom Orsino had been in love, at the beginning; then —
‘Olivia.
That would do.
We will call her that, and you shall be the godfather.’
Nathan mumbled that he was honoured.
He spent all his spare time at the Hampstead house now, not only from a liking for the work he was doing for Paul, and Paul himself, but for the sight, the nearness, of Dinah.
He himself would never marry another woman; there could be no one else like her, no one in all the world.
Mrs Gracie was arranging things in the drawing-room at Hampstead, with its white paint and large windows giving a view on to the garden.
That was still untended and wild; the house had been empty for some time before they bought it, or rather Mr Paul had.
Mrs Gracie had come to associate herself so much with the family that she almost included herself in the purchase.
As it was, her own little house was letting nicely; but it was astonishing how much stuff, with all respect to Mrs Dinah, had collected over the years when they all lived there together.
Much of it was even yet not unpacked, and Mrs Dinah was fussy about where it was put, as if the things were stage props; the whole of life for her, in fact, was a stage.
Mrs Gracie shook her head in its laundered cap.
The children sat about upstairs, pale and quiet, not like children should be.
It was time Lilian and Clare had a governess, and the boys someone to teach them; as it was, their father was too busy to arrange it and their mother not interested.
In any case Mrs Dinah had hardly recovered from the latest birth.
When would it all stop?
There were seven now.
Mr Paul might be making a great deal of money and becoming famous, and she'd heard they had asked him to accept an honorary doctorate, whatever good that might do.
But he was either moody and difficult, or else in tearing spirits, playing with the children and upsetting them so that their mother would come and whip them afterwards for the noise they made.
It wasn't a proper childhood for them.
They weren't bad children.
Master Robin was sometimes queer, withdrawn by himself, alone in a corner, his hare's eyes starting from his head.
He liked to draw.
If they had been her own children, she would have used them differently.
The sound of a carriage came beyond the window.
Mrs Gracie put down the silver photograph frame she had been dusting, and went to see who it was.
Nobody emerged, and the coachman waited, the doors remaining closed.
An odd way to behave; she'd go and see.
Five minutes later she burst into Dinah's room where the latter was feeding the baby.
‘Mrs Dinah, it's himself has come!
It's himself!
It's your father!’
Dinah wrapped a shawl round Olivia, who was still sucking at her and would not be dislodged.
The other breast oozed milk.
She ran a hand over her hair, arranged the shawl so that it covered both her and the baby, and went out with her long resolute stride; she had recovered quickly from this birth.
The coach door remained closed; she rapped on the window, seeing a still figure seated inside.
‘Papa!’
He reached across to the handle, and let her in.
She could hardly credit his appearance; it was that of an old man.
His beard was streaked with white among the grey, his face no longer majestic but drawn; only his body was upright, his hands placed securely on his cane.
He looked at her.
‘So you've pupped again, have yer?
Put that little animal on the carriage floor, and sit by me.
I have much to say.’
‘She is still feeding.
Afterwards she can lie in my lap.
Papa, what it means to me to see you!
How is Selene?
How is your wife?’
She felt nothing for him but forgiveness.
A spasm of pain passed over his features.
‘Selene is as she always was, and always will be; we need not speak of her.
My wife ran off with her leading man a month ago.
I believe they are in France.’
‘Papa!’
‘Stop saying that,’ Asshe put in tetchily.
‘She bore me no heir; that was why I married her.
It does not matter, accordingly.
When you went, I was angry; more angry than I can say.
To turn yourself into a brood-mare for the first man you met!
You with your talent!
You, an Asshe!
I saw from the papers some time back that you were acting again; I've followed every turn of your fortunes, I can tell yer.
Will you come back to me, now I'm old and forsaken?
Will you let me put you again where you should be, in the place you should never have left, in the hearts of all London, at the Shield?
Will you come, Dinah?
The house is empty — bring that brat with you if you must — and get a housekeeper, or a governess, or whatever's needed for the rest.
Arkwright can get himself a mistress.
Leave him, and come back.’
The famous Asshe charm was in full spate; he was leaning forward a little, his eyes, flashing their old fire, fixed on hers.
Dinah felt herself trembling; this was the man who had libelled Paul and herself, had made their early years wretched, had hounded her out of the only world she knew.
Yet he was her father, and she was aware, in this instant, that she loved him more than she had ever loved anyone on earth except herself; more than husband, far more than children.
‘I will come,’ she said.
‘Damn it, come now, in the carriage.
There are cupboards full of y’ clothes you left behind; you've put on flesh a bit round the bosom, but Selene'll let 'em out.’
So it was settled.
The carriage bowled away, with Asshe, Dinah and the baby inside.
Mrs Gracie heard it go incredulously.
They always were a mad lot, she told herself; and what was she to say to Mr Paul?
She told him in fact that Dinah had gone away for a day or two, but shortly a letter came.
Paul,
This is to let you know that I am leaving you.
For some time it has been evident that all I am to you is a vessel to receive your seed.
Forgive me if I am indelicate in saying so,; had you ever troubled to talk to me often, I could have made it evident earlier.
My life since I came to you has been miserable, uncomfortable and full of pain.
You have had no consideration for me at all; I doubt if you ever loved me.
Our minds are different; we have nothing in common.
That being the case, I have accepted my father's invitation to live with him again and to return to the stage under his direction.
This is my heart's dearest wish; perhaps you understand.
I may never see you again, but you have Mrs Gracie with you, who will look after the children and the house.
Also you have Nathan, who is of more value to you than a son.
I shall not require any money from you, being able to make my own.
If the expenses of the children's education are more than you can contrive, I will help with that if you inform me by letter.
I do not want you to call here.
I wish you all fortune, and hope that the memory of your life with me is not entirely unwelcome; after all, we once believed that we loved one another, even though we did not.
Your sincerely devoted wife, Dinah Arkwright
She had stipulated to Asshe that Arkwright must be her stage name.
There would be those who remembered the newspaper insertion, and it must be made clear to the public that she was married, not taken back out of charity.
Asshe, thankful for her presence at any cost, agreed.
As for Selene, she was already doing as she was bidden and making over the dresses till new ones could be bought.
The silk was of the first order, better than one could obtain nowadays, and had kept in good condition over the years.
The slight summer muslins however would not fit, but Dinah laughed at it.
‘I couldn't play Juliet now,’ she said truly.
She was in fact a magnificent figure of a woman, with no sag or spread; only, nursing the children had given her a  fullness of the breasts which would not lessen, although she turned the  little Olivia over to a servant with a feeding-bottle as soon as one could be found.
Thereafter Dinah forgot about Olivia; the child learned to crawl and walk without the fear of making a noise that had pervaded her brothers and sisters at Hampstead.
By that time Dinah was on the boards again, this time without fear of a shortened run.
She rejoiced in her freedom; her entry was that of a goddess, on stage or off, and Robert Asshe watched her with pride.
He would have defended her with lawyers against any attempt of her husband's to get her back, but there was none; perhaps, as he himself had barked out in jest, Arkwright had got himself a mistress.
A man who would get seven children on Dinah in twelve years would surely need one.
The crass stupidity of it!
But all that was done with.
Dinah's letter was received in a way nobody foresaw.
If, knowing, she would have stayed was one matter; probably not.
She had spread her wings, and taken flight.
Paul had worn metal-rimmed spectacles now for a number of years.
He persuaded himself that they helped him; but the headaches still came.
He was glad of Nathan for the close work, preferring by far to dictate to him, as he had used to do to Dinah, than to write directly in his own hand.
That, in any case, as he had mentioned to no one, had itself lately become uncertain, as though he were losing control of his arm and his brain.
Terror possessed him in the night; he would of habit turn to Dinah as his only solace.
It was the same when he walked; he found that he was unsteady on his feet, and liked to have Nathan's arm to help him into the carriage, as though it were a matter of ordinary courtesy from a younger man to an older.
Again, Paul said nothing.
He knew that he ought to see a physician, but was unwilling to do so lest he be told that he was not, after all, cured of syphilis.
In that case, would his children inherit it?
He had little time to see them, to know them; like others' children, they were left to a nurse and Mrs Gracie.
But that matter of long ago, which he had persuaded himself he had cured by finally taking the maidenhead of Miss Emily Groundwater; had all that been  useless?
He could not even mention to Dinah that he felt uncertain, unsteady, blind with pain; he could imagine her brisk reply ‘Take it to a doctor.’
The man long ago had given him crystals; what more could be done now?
There was only one way to relieve the pain in his head, the way Dinah knew too well.
He himself missed his nightly intercourse at the time of the births, even with the knowledge that she resented it.
He looked round the table at Clerkenwell, where they were having a directors' meeting.
Lamprey, not noticeably ageing, sat at the head, his report spread out before him.
Nathan was at the foot, for he had only lately been promoted to take part in all of the firm's business, having proved himself well able.
Opposite Paul was Arthur Lessing, who handled the accounts.
He was a dry, spinsterish man whom Paul disliked, and who could voice his narrow opinions as he chose, having means of his own.
He was a bachelor, already narrowing in his late thirties to the precise habits of his kind.
Like Paul, he had trained for the law in youth, and it had left him with a certain accuracy.
He had been tentatively invited to dinner at Hampstead once or twice, but Dinah had not taken to him, except to mock and imitate him after he had gone.
‘Do not let him hear you do that,’ Paul said to her.
‘He can be a useful friend, I believe, but a dangerous enemy.’
‘He is an old woman,’ she replied, and half turned away with a swish of her sea-green silk dress.
She looked more desirable than ever; now, closing his aching eyes behind their glasses, he felt lust rise.
She must admit him tonight; he had waited long enough since the baby's birth.
He did not hear Lamprey read the minutes, or Lessing make the financial report.
His whole body cried out for his wife; at the end, he rose before anyone, and stumbled to the stairs.
Lessing's close-set eyes followed him, and Nathan Holland who was hurrying after lest Paul slip on the stairs.
There was something wrong there, but one would hold one's peace.
Lessing held many secrets inside his narrow head, and this was one more.
They reached the Hampstead house.
‘Will you come in?’ said Paul to Nathan Holland.
It was a formality, no more; Nathan always came in.
Paul went upstairs to change his coat, and Nathan looked about for Mrs Gracie to ask if he might go to visit Dinah.
But there was no sign of that discreet lady, and in the end he went and knocked on Dinah's door, received no answer, turned the handle, and found neither her nor the baby inside.
Puzzled, he wondered if she had gone upstairs to her children, which she did not do as a rule, and was about to ascend; when from up there came a great cry, and the sound of a fall from the window.
Nathan rushed outside at once, Paul lay on the ground, quite still.
He was not dead.
Nathan thrust his hand inside his shirt and felt the heartbeat.
The eyes were open; only the spectacles were smashed.
He seemed to have taken no other hurt at all; but —
‘Oh, sir, oh, sir!’
Mrs Gracie had come running at last.
When she saw her master lying there she thought he was dead, and burst out crying.
‘What's to become of the poor children?
What's to become of the poor children?’
‘Send for a doctor,’ said Nathan curtly.
He took Paul up in his arms and carried him inside, laying him on the sofa.
Paul turned his head a little, and groaned.
‘Have I hurt you?’ asked Nathan softly.
‘No…no…it was her letter…’
‘We have sent for a doctor.
Lie there till he comes.’
It did not seem as if there were bones broken, despite the height of the fall.
Paul lay still and silent till the doctor came; a burly, bearded man who examined him after making sure that they could be left undisturbed.
He looked up presently.
‘There are no fractures,’ he said, ‘which is astonishing after falling from such a height.
Other things are less satisfactory.’
He rose from his knees.
‘Where is Mrs Arkwright?’ he asked.
Nathan, who was still present, shook his head.
‘I cannot find her,’ he said.
‘Paul spoke of a letter.’
Paul had closed his eyes.
The doctor drew Nathan aside by the sleeve.
‘It needed no letter,’ he said.
‘The man is in an early  stage of general paralysis.
He should not be allowed to remain at large, particularly after this attempt to end his life.
I would recommend a period in an institution.
As you seem the only person present able to take instructions, perhaps you will relay them to Mrs Arkwright when she can be found.
I can have him admitted today.’
Tears stood in Nathan's eyes; he had loved Paul.
‘Will his mind ever be clear again?’ he asked.
The doctor did not change his expression.
‘Maybe, maybe not,’ he said.
‘There are remissions in this disease.
It is changeable, and may have many forms.
I should like to see the children, if I may.’
He followed Nathan upstairs to where the children sat quietly, playing at nothing.
One look at Lilian's serrated teeth convinced the doctor; he nodded.
‘That is one certain sign of inherited syphilis,’ he said quietly, alter they had gone downstairs.
‘It is impossible to say what other manifestations may appear as they grow up.
It is better by far that there should be no others born.’
Afterwards Mrs Gracie found a letter in Paul's room, torn in two.
It was not her business, she decided, to show it to anyone.
Out of loyalty to Mrs Dinah, nobody should ever know why Mr Paul had tried to do away with himself.
She took the two halves of the letter away, tore them in fragments, and burned them in her grate.
It was, accordingly, never certain why Paul Arkwright had tried to commit suicide; it must, everyone said, have been because he was going mad.
Dinah and her father were discussing his forthcoming production of Macbeth over supper.
Dinah was peeling some fruit.
She did not let the knife slip from her hand when the door burst open, and Nathan Holland appeared, having thrust his way past the servant.
His face was chalk-white.
He went straight to her, ignoring Asshe as that personage had never yet been ignored in his own house, or in fact anywhere; and, of course, ignoring Selene.
‘Forgive me,’ said Nathan.
‘The news is terrible.’
He began to relate the story of Paul's throwing himself from the window, the coming of the doctor, the taking away of Paul to an asylum.
‘It was I who gave permission, as you were not there,’ he said.
‘It was the only thing to do, believe me — if you had seen him —’
He suddenly bowed his head in his hands and began to weep.
‘Come, now,’ said Robert Asshe.
‘You have done the best you could.
Do not distress my daughter further.
He will be well looked after.
What about the children?’
It was never suggested, or thought of, that Dinah should return and look after her own progeny.
‘Mrs Gracie is with them,’ said Nathan tentatively.
‘They saw and heard nothing; their room is to the back.’
‘Selene will go,’ said Asshe, as though Selene had not been present.
She rose quietly from her place at the side of the table and went out of the room.
Asshe roared for the carriage to be brought round.
‘Keep her occupied,’ he said.
He turned to Nathan Holland.
‘Have you eaten, young man?
At least have some wine, to put the colour back in your face; you came in like  a ghost.
We could use him for Banquo, eh?’
Dinah smiled.
She had not uttered a word during the relation of the news, nor shown any emotion.
Before Nathan entered, her mind had been filled with the prospect of playing Lady Macbeth at last, and to all appearance she might still have been thinking of nothing but that.
She finished peeling her fruit, and ate it.
Two days later a more decorous visitor called; Lessing, from the publishing house.
His long face expressed conventional regret at what had happened, the news having been conveyed by Nathan on the previous morning.
Dinah, who had not liked him at Hampstead, did not like him now; but the information he brought was useful.
He had already assessed Paul's due income from the returns of publishing, and proposed to make an annual settlement which would enable Paul to be kept in comfort in the mental home and, also, provide for the education of the children.
‘I understand they have had none,’ he said severely, looking at Dinah over the metal rims of his spectacles which reminded her of Paul's.
She shrugged, feeling the lace frill of her morning wrapper settle about her.
It was a pleasure to wear her former clothes again; fashions had changed so little that Selene had contrived very well.
‘They are still young,’ she said.
‘Mrs Gracie, the housekeeper, has taught the girls to sew and to understand money.
A school for the boys was thought of, later.’
‘A proper school would be expensive.
If you will permit me to make a suggestion, they would be better meantime with a tutor at home, and a governess for the girls.
I know of a couple who would suit, and who would live in the house with the children while you yourself were exercising —’ he smiled, showing false teeth —‘your considerable talents on the stage.’
‘Who are these people?’ asked Dinah languidly.
It would certainly save trouble to be rid of the children, and to know they were being taught.
She hardly listened to Mr Lessing's explanation; the tutor was his cousin, who had  been intended for the Church but proved to have divergent views from his bishop, and had resigned.
Afterwards it became evident that the man had been asked to do so, but Dinah made no immediate enquiries.
‘And the governess?’ she said, and laughed.
‘They can hardly live together in the same house; Hampstead would be greatly diverted.’
Lessing displayed no diversion.
‘My cousin's wife,’ he explained, ‘was a teacher before her marriage.
They have no children.
I think that you would find them excellently suited to your purpose, but of course it is not my business to force your decision.
I suggest that you take a day or two to think of it, but remember that my cousin may find other employment in the meantime.’
He smiled again, this time with closed lips: his eyes behind the spectacles were steely.
‘No, no,’ said Dinah hastily, ‘I am sure that I may rely upon your word.
You may tell them to move in, and purchase what they need.
I will send word to Mrs Gracie meantime, and I myself will see them when I may.’
She added the last phrase as if suddenly aware that she was taking no undue interest in her children's fate.
The notices for the production of Macbeth at the Shield Theatre surpassed all previous reviews.
Even the presence of the very famous actor indeed who had undertaken the part of Macbeth was hardly noticed; after all he was so much a part of the English scene as to be, very nearly, taken for granted, though his performance was, as always, brilliant.
But his lady stole the scene; and those who remembered the few lines in the newspapers about Dinah Asshe some years ago stowed them, charitably, in the backs of their minds.
She was, in any case, billed as Dinah Arkwright now; and old Robert Asshe himself, the last holder of the name, was not playing Macbeth, but King Duncan.
It was an admission that he was growing old; vet the brief appearance he made on stage, with his white beard, long robe and crown, was telling enough, and would never be forgotten.
The first night was a triumph, with flowers thrown from the boxes, bouquets thrust into the hands of the doorman, reporters scurrying to their  work before morning.
Mrs Seale, long departed after her disgrace over losing Dinah years back, had been replaced by a dresser who was less vigilant, and the Chinese puzzle of the dressing-rooms had, in the days of the departed Mrs Asshe, been altered so that admirers could come and go.
Dinah, accordingly, had champagne drunk out of her slipper, more champagne thrust upon her in a glass; and was driven home in the small hours of the morning, after supper at a famous restaurant with three escorts; Nathan Holland, the famous actor who played Macbeth, and her father.
She fell asleep, accordingly, at once, after her stage make-up was removed; and was not at all pleased to be wakened early with the news that Mrs Gracie had called.
Dinah had her maid comb her hair, put a wrapper round her, and bring her coffee; still sleepy and cross, but aware that her glorious breasts showed to advantage beneath the wrapper, she had the woman admitted.
‘What is it?’ she asked.
‘You knew, did you not, that last night was the opening night; It is not a suitable hour to disturb me.’
‘Oh, Mrs Dinah, I would not have done so, but it's the poor children.
They are having a terrible life of it.
That woman canes the girls, and the man birches the boys, and sometimes they can't sit down all day.
I watched it for a day or two, then they sent me out of that part of the house, because they knew I was watching what went on.
I don't doubt they know very well I've come to you, and will be on their best behaviour if you call.
Maybe I says it as shouldn't, but they're not a pair I like, educated and all as they may be.
It doesn't need all that whipping to teach those children; they're biddable enough.’
‘Perhaps they will not learn,’ said Dinah.
‘It is customary to beat children when they are being taught.’
She herself had forgotten the time when, long ago, she had slapped her governess's face for rapping her fingers with a ruler.
She moved in the bed.
‘I will come,’ she said.
‘Have you breakfasted; Do so while I am dressing, and then we will order the carriage.
How did you travel?’
‘By the public one, Mrs Dinah.’
‘Then we must repay your fare.
What does my sister say to all this?’
‘Miss Selene?
I didn't ask her.’
Mrs Gracie sniffed.
It was well known that Selene never had any opinion about anything.
They reached Hampstead before morning lessons were concluded, for the carriage had made all speed.
Dinah noticed that the garden was tidy and well weeded, and reserved her opinion of the scholarly pair until she should have seen their methods for herself.
She ascended to the schoolroom in a rustle of skirts, having bidden Mrs Gracie wait below; Dinah preferred to form her own judgments.
Without knocking, she pushed the door open and went in.
It was evident that Mrs Gracie's departure had been noted.
Nobody showed any surprise at Dinah's arrival; the assembly rose from a table spread with books and slates; the tutor, the governess, and the pale-faced children.
The latter were neatly dressed, the girls in calico aprons, the boys in knickerbocker suits with their hair combed flat.
Only one stood out; Robin, who had been placed in a corner.
The lids of his hare's eyes were red.
‘What has Robin been doing?’
Dinah asked; she had not wasted time on introductions; these people knew perfectly well who she was, and she knew them.
The woman answered; she wore a lace cap, and glasses on a chain.
‘He was inattentive, I fear, and my husband had to punish him,’ she said.
‘It makes a bad example for the others.’
‘Well, Robin, you must pay attention in future.
What about the others?
Are you happy, Lilian and Clare?
Are you happy, Paul, George, Hubert?
You must learn your lessons, you know, if you are to become anything at all when you are grown.’
They said they were happy.
‘Yes, Mama.’
There was no expression on their faces.
Clare was less often caned than Lilian, as she was more intelligent.
Robin, with shreds of birch-bark stuck in the bleeding weals of his bottom, said nothing.
They had suddenly pulled up his breeches and made him stand in the corner.
‘Yes,thank you , Mama,’ murmured the preceptress, and  they echoed her.
They dared do nothing else.
Their mother was a foreigner, whom they hardly saw.
Mrs Gracie had been sent away.
Aunt Selene was not interested.
They were in the power of these dragons.
It did not occur to them that, together, they could overpower the pair.
Dinah did not linger; Paul's children resembled him too greatly.
She left the schoolroom and, after a brief visit to her sister, drove away.
The erstwhile churchman, standing by the window where he could not be seen from below, turned round and advanced into the room, smiling, the patches of eczema on his face reddening with pleasure.
‘And now, Master Robin,’ he said, ‘we will finish what we had begun.
Come out of that corner, let down your breeches, and bend over the bench.’
The swish of the birch sounded again in the schoolroom, together with Robin's cries.
Mrs Gracie, left below stairs, set her lips.
There was no one except herself to protect the poor children, and she hadn't made much of a job of it.
Their mother didn't care two brass farthings for them.
Macbeth ran at the Shield for a hundred and fifty nights, the longest record in the play's history.
It was said that Dinah Arkwright made a finer Lady Macbeth than Mrs Siddons.
Offers poured in to her for future leading parts; there was even one from New York.
Dinah declined them all, saying that she preferred to remain under her father's direction.
Asshe himself was filled with pride on behalf of his daughter.
She made up to him for the son he had never had, the wife who had left him, even the dull Selene, who would never come to anything.
He himself made a kingly Duncan, radiating benevolence and gracious ease.
He had never been happier.
On a certain night in summer the house was full.
Dinah had just gone in with the dagger to smear the sleeping servants with blood.
She heard Macbeth say, on stage, Whence is that knocking? when the dresser came to her, her face white.
‘Madam —’
‘Be quick,’ said Dinah.
‘I have to go back presently.’
‘Madam, they'll have to ring down the curtain.
Mr Asshe — oh, madam, he —’
‘What is it?’ said Dinah.
She was smearing her hands with iron oxide, to simulate blood.
‘Say what is the matter, quickly.’
‘Madam, Mr Asshe is dead.
He is sitting at his mirror, not breathing.
Madam, you should come.’
‘Leave it now,’ said Dinah.
From the stage came her cue.
Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood clean from my hand?
No, this my hand will rather The multitudinous seas incarnadine —
‘Go on with the play,’ said Dinah.
‘Afterwards, we will see.
She swept on stage, her hands red.
My hands are of your colour, but I shame To wear a heart so white .
They finished the play, with the sleep-walking scene particularly well done.
The audience applauded; Dinah took the final call.
Her father was unwell, she explained; it would be helpful if everyone would leave the theatre as quickly as possible.
They rose at once, and went.
Dinah hurried to Asshe's dressing-room, to find him as the woman had said.
‘Fetch a doctor,’ she told them.
She knew it was too late.
She went to the dead man and laid her cheek against his; it was already cold.
His face was reflected in the mirror, pale, the eyes open.
Wake Duncan with thy knocking .
‘It was what you would have wanted, Papa, was it not?’ she whispered.
‘You would have wanted the play finished.’
Robert Asshe's will left everything, including the control of the Shield Theatre, to his daughter Dinah.
There was no mention of his absent wife, whom he had not troubled to divorce, but who would claim her widow's portion later.
As for Selene, she was left a hundred pounds a year so long as she continued under her sister's direction.
For the first time Selene, brought back from Hampstead for the funeral, spoke up.
‘I have never been considered in any way; it was always yourself.
I looked after Papa all that time you went off  with Arkwright, and I've tried to look after your children for you now.
I'm not enduring any more of it; you can keep the hundred pounds a year, I can earn it dressmaking and trimming millinery.’
‘Do not be ridiculous,’ said Dinah coldly.
‘Where will you live?
You cannot expect me to allow my house to be turned into a dressmaking establishment.’
‘It's been turned into worse things than that, I can tell you.
Mrs Gracie and I are leaving those poor children — there is nothing we can do for them, after all — and going back to her house in Highbury.
She is neat at sewing, and we will take in lodgers between us until the business is paying its way.’
‘Selene, I'm not mean,’ Dinah said.
‘I will allow you the hundred a year, and send you clients if I can.’
‘I don't want any favours,’ said Selene.
She left shortly, having surprised Dinah for the first time in her life; and there were to be more surprises.
The Asshe genius manifested itself, late but truly, in what was to become a flourishing couture business, having moved by then from Highbury to Holborn.
Selene never again made a long speech, but she was happy; and after Mrs Gracie died Dinah took shares in the business, which by then had set itself up in the old Asshe house while Dinah moved out to Hampstead.
This was not quite so convenient for her, and she spent a good deal of time travelling back and forth in her carriage.
However the children were less bullied, although Olivia, who till now had run about under her mother's feet, received her first caning the day after her sixth birthday, having grown pert in the meantime, living away from the rest.
That was soon rectified.
By law, Paul should have received the directorship of the theatre and the rest of Dinah's inheritance; but as things stood, it was impossible, and she continued to administer the estate.
She relied a good deal on Lessing, whom she disliked but who had qualities that made him useful to her; he was able to work out salaries, including those of his cousins in the Hampstead house, the expenses of running the theatre, lighting, heating, cleaning.
He also saw to the  payment of the doctors and nurses who looked after Paul, though he never visited him, any more than Dinah did.
Nathan Holland on the other hand was a faithful friend, and but for him Paul's last work might never have found its way into print.
Nathan waited patiently for the remissions which made it possible for the ruined mind to function for a time; he sat by the sick man, who by now was almost blind; the paralysis was, after all, general.
Paul knew Nathan, as a rule, and would talk to him in a slurred voice; Nathan had a notebook and pencil ready, and would jot down any thoughts that came, going through them afterwards as if they had been jewels.
When Paul was himself he had a dread of oncoming deafness.
‘That would be the end of me, I'd be nothing then,’ he would mumble, and once Nathan tried to tap out code on his hand, so that he would understand messages in the event.
But Paul turned on him.
‘I'm not finished yet, not yet.
Don't go on as if it had happened,’ he said.
He would often ask about Dinah and his family, and send them affectionate messages; Nathan passed these on to Dinah, but he did not think she spoke of their father to the children; it was better not.
Paul Arkwright's sons grew up without brilliance.
Their beaten and bullied childhood made them secretive and evasive.
Except for Robin, who had a slight talent for painting, they were plodders, who would never make a mark on the world; and even Robin was too unsteady to forge his own way.
If any of them had displayed a leaning towards the stage, Dinah would no doubt have encouraged it; but they had neither the presence nor the voice, nor, she would think despairingly, looking round them all, the appearance; every one was Paul over again.
She consulted Lessing, accordingly, about what to do with them; and the end of it was that the long-forgotten link with the law was revived, and young Paul was placed like his father on an office stool.
Unlike his father, he would remain there for the rest of his life, without resentment, becoming in the end a partner in a somewhat unenterprising firm.
George, the second son, more forthright and readily spoken, was  put to selling insurances with an acquaintance of Lessing's.
There remained Hubert and young Robin.
Robin was a failure.
He was given to fits of violent enthusiasm and subsequent fits of gloom; nobody knew what to predict regarding him.
Once, shyly, he brought sketches he had done to show Dinah, portraying ideas for backdrops and costumes for her new play.
She looked at them indulgently, saw at once that they were nothing notable, and said to him straight away that they would not do.
‘You cannot have those bright colours at entry right; they would obscure the character.
And that headdress would get caught up in the overhead wires, you silly boy.
By all means keep your painting as a hobby, but don't hope to make a living from it.’
Robin, to his loathing, was put to work in a bank; Lessing thought it would steady him.
By the end of six months he had had a breakdown and was asked to leave.
He was taken, not recalling anything about the journey, to the home where his father was; one inmate was kept above stairs, the other below.
They never met, and Robin grew steadily worse.
Knowing the father's case, the doctors were well enough aware that it was not mere instability that was wrong with the son.
Mercifully the illness did not take a long course.
Robin died within the year, having grown violent at times like his uncle Jonas, during which episodes he had to be restrained.
Before that, Hubert had announced that he wanted to qualify as a doctor.
‘That will put your mother to a great deal of expense,’ said Lessing, looking severely at the young man over his spectacles.
Hubert, who wore them also, looked back.
‘I will repay Mama when I am qualified.
Meantime she has nothing to pay for the upkeep of my two brothers; in fact, they are bringing in money.’
‘There is Robin.
It costs a great deal to keep him in the home, as well as your father.’
The sons had reached an age when they might talk of Paul.
Hubert bowed his head and said he was aware of it; but that there was nothing else he wanted to do.
Lessing consulted Dinah, who had come back tired from  an evening full of accidents; the scenery had fallen, the lesser lady had not come in on cue, the leading man had been a failure and she would have to find someone else.
She glanced at Lessing; how unattractive he was!
No woman could ever look at him.
‘Let Hubert do as he will,’ she said.
‘If one of my sons has solid ambition, I am pleased.’
When news came of Robin's death, it was at a weekend; she shut herself away, and saw no one, not even Nathan Holland who had come to console her.
If she had encouraged Robin in his mediocre talent, would he still be alive?
It was useless to think of that now.
She came downstairs, hung on the wall a portrait of himself that Robin had painted, and his easel below it; and gave orders that they were not to be removed.
Now that her sons were off her hands, and Olivia, at twelve, the only one of the children whose education was not completed, Dinah felt able to dismiss the tutor and his wife, with a warmly written reference for long and faithful service.
In fact, apart from torturing their pupils daily, they had taught them well enough; brighter subjects might have produced better results.
As it was, Clare had acquired a taste for reading, and had her nose constantly in a book; and it occurred to her mother that she might very well undertake the tuition of Olivia, to save the cost of hiring another governess.
This was done, accordingly; the two sisters spent some hours together each day in the schoolroom, neither making any complaint.
It remained to be seen what was to be done with Lilian.
She was too plain, and too shy, to bring out into society; but that, as Dinah told herself, was no reason for allowing the young woman to idle her days away in the Hampstead house.
It so happened that the dresser at the Shield gave notice, and Dinah decided that she herseelf could teach Lilian to make herself useful in that and other ways.
Young Paul happened to be home when she mentioned it, and looked up over his spectacles.
‘You can't take her to London with those teeth, Mother.
They're syphilitic.’
‘What?’
Lilian was not present.
‘You do not know what you are talking about, my dear boy.
That kind of things occurs only among prostitues.’
She was accustomed to speaking her mind, knew less than nothing about the subject, and uttered the word which no genteel person, particularly a woman, would have spoken, or even known.
But Paul persisted.
‘I saw a case in the clinic only the other day.
It is an infallible sign.
It is inherited.
Anyone seeing her in your dressing-room would know at once.
You should have them taken out; it did not matter here in Hampstead, where we see nobody.’
So Lilian was informed that she was to come to the dentist for an examination.
She was not accustomed to ask questions, and obeyed; Dinah accompanied her, saw her seated in the chair, the anaesthetic given, and the extraction begun; then for the first time let her own mind admit the possibility that Paul's illness might have some such origin, that she herself had in that case been the wife of a syphilitic for years, and might have caught it; that she might lose her face or her mind; that Robin had inherited it; and now —
Lilian moaned.
The extractions were almost completed.
When they were done, she was allowed to come round gradually, and tears of shock began to course down her cheeks.
She had wet her drawers, which was the kind of thing one would never mention to Mama.
Uncomfortable and in pain, she followed Dinah out of the dentist's consulting-room, then dared to ask the only question of her life.
‘Whey did he have to take all my teeth out?’ she mumbled.
Nobody had told her it was to happen; she had thought she was being brought here to be examined, and then the dentist had put a rubber mask over her face.
‘There was something wrong with them,’ said Dinah.
‘You will be given false ones, which will look better.’
Lilian firmed her lips over her swollen gums.
The bleeding had stopped.
She didn't want false teeth; they would make her look like an old maid.
That, at any rate, she had always known was what she would be, in the end.
They got into the carriage.
‘When we get home, go up to bed, and later I will have them send up gruel,’ said Dinah.
Now that the thing was done she was glad of it.
There was no other visible sign in any of the family, as far as she knew, now Robin was dead; poor Robin.
When they reached the house a letter was waiting from the asylum.
Paul had died at ten o'clock that morning.
Dinah closed her eyes for an instant, then knew a wave of tremendous relief.
Now, nobody would know for certain how he had died, or what had been wrong with him, her husband.