

The Trade
The essayist and poet Sir Richard Steel had a poor opinion of undertakers, writing in 1702:
Where the brass knocker, wrapt in flannel band,
Forbids the thunder of the footman's hand;
The upholder, rueful harbinger of death,
Waits with impatience for the dying breath;
As vultures o'er a camp, with hovering flight,
Snuff up the future carnage of the flight.
What had the trade done to deserve such harsh treatment?
Were they not merely carrying out a required social service?
Had not the medieval burial guilds done precisely the same?
So why should he, the late seventeenth-century undertaker, be treated with such disdain?
The answer is complex.
‘Generally speaking most tradesmen have some ways peculiar to themselves which they either derived from masters who taught them or from the experience of things or from something in the course of business’, but this did not strictly apply to undertakers,
…a set of men who live by death and never care to appear but at the End of Man's Life…their Business is to watch Death, and to furnish out the Funeral Solemnity, with as much pomp and feigned sorrow as the Heirs or Successors of the Deceased chose to purchase: They are a hard-hearted Generation, and require more money than Brains to conduct their Business; I know no one  Qualification peculiarly necessary to them, except that is a steady, demure and melancholy Countenance at Command: I do not know, that they take Apprentices in their Capacity as Undertakers, for they are generally Carpenters, or Herald-Painters besides; and they only employ, as Journeymen, a set of Men whom they have picked up, possessed of a sober Countenance, and a solemn melancholy Face, whom they pay at so much a Jobb.
How would the undertaker have defended his position?
Probably by saying that he only supplied what custom dictated as appropriate to the social status of the deceased, and that everything was done for the complete satisfaction of his client.
The argument advanced by the 1747 author of The London Tradesman is a little unfair, for ‘undertaking’ was at that time a relatively new trade, barely a century old.
Its aims and objective were more complex than, and entirely different to, those of the late medieval guilds which had, until their dissolution under the Chantries Act of 1547, taken under their wing the organization of the last of the Christian ‘Seven Acts of Mercy’, the burial of the dead.
We need, therefore, to examine the role of these guilds to see how and why the trade of undertaker came into being before deciding whether or not to cast our lot with The London Tradesman .
By the beginning of the thirteenth century there was a widely held belief within the Church that masses said on behalf of the dead would shorten the length of time a soul spent in purgatory.
The funeral liturgy included a mass for the dead, but to take full advantage of the memorial rite, masses had also to be sung on the third, seventh and thirtieth days following burial and, to complete the calendar of commemoration, the ‘obit’: a mass sung on the first anniversary of the death.
In some instances the masses did not stop with the obit but went on with the annual ‘year's mind’ for up to ten years or more.
As each subsequent requiem repeated the ritual exhibited at the primary mass, the cycle proved an expensive way of praying for the repose of the dead.
There were fresh candles to buy, the hire — or outright purchase — of mourning cloaks; the poor had again to be invited — it was considered worthy and laudable to remember them at one's death — and had to receive a further portion of the largesse exhibited at the funeral.
Some of the poor made quite a good living from these services and one can imagine an efficient ‘bush telegraph’ system to alert others of forthcoming requiems.
Not only did the mourners expect a meal but there was also the priest's fee, plus an appropriate ‘donation’ to church funds.
The endowment fund for such masses was enormous and in the thirteenth century some system of regulation was required.
In the larger towns many parish priests were singing the majority of their masses for the dead with no family member present and with only an altar server to chant the responses.
This was especially so regarding endowed perpetuity masses.
The solution was a simple one: employ priests with the sole responsibility of singing the memorial requiems so as to allow the parish priests to go about their customary role of caring for the spiritual needs of the living.
Those taken on from endowment income were known as chantry priests —‘chantry’ because such masses were chanted rather than said.
The Black Death exacerbated the situation; whilst there was no shortage of souls to pray for, endowments slackened off, owing to some of the wealthy dying  intestate.
In addition, parish priests were feeling the pinch through reduced income from alms and tithes.
Some villages — such as Little Gaddesden in Hertfordshire — were totally wiped out, whilst others were very badly hit, with as much as a third of the population dying.
William of Dene, a monk based at Rochester, wrote in 1349: ‘To our great grief the plague carried off so vast a multitude of people of both sexes that nobody could be found who would bear the corpses to the grave.
Men and women carried their own children on their shoulders to the church and threw them into a common pit.
From these pits such an appalling stench was given off that scarcely anyone dared even to walk beside the churchyards.’
A Latin graffito on the north wall of the church tower at Ashwell, Hertfordshire, records the plight there in 1350: ‘Wretched, terrible, violent.
Only the remnants of the people are left to tell the tale.’
That the rich did not escape the scourge is evident at Crich in Derbyshire when, in October 1349, William de Wakebridge added a small chantry chapel to the parish church in memory of his wife, his father, his two sisters and three brothers, all of whom had died of the plague in the summer of that year.
Though enough was provided for requiem masses to be chanted ‘for ever’, this lapsed 200 years later with the introduction of the Chantries Act.
One of the more unprofessional results of the plague was that some priests latched on to the idea of leaving the parochial ministry and becoming chantry priests — often, in the process, gaining a lucrative return for very little work.
So notorious was this practice that Chaucer used the antithesis of the  chase as a template of virtue for the poor Parson in his Canterbury Tales :
He sette nat his befice to hire,
And leet his sheepe encombred in the mire,
And ran to Londoun, unto Seint Poules,
To seken his a chauntry for soules,
Or with a bretherhed to been withhold.
There was little social justice in a system whereby simony could dictate the duration of one's time in purgatory; was it right that only the rich could secure such release?
It was this feeling of injustice on the part of the poor that brought into being the guilds, secular organizations of the laity whose members' contributions were pooled to endow masses to be sung for the souls of the poor.
It was their way of expressing the saying, ‘If you can't beat them, join them.’
Some of the guilds were quite large, especially in the greater towns and cities, and wealthy enough to have not only their own chantry priest but also their own altars within the church, and there were even instances when funds allowed for the building of an additional aisle as a guild chapel.
Before we romanticize the size, wealth and power of these guilds, it should be pointed out that in the main they were fairly small.
Meade cites the membership of the ‘little company of four men and four women who, in 1379, could afford to provide only a candle to burn during the daily mass at the church of St Nicholas, Great Yarmouth’.
Those slightly better off could organize an annual requiem for past guild members at All Souls' — 2 November — or on the occasion of the anniversary of the death of their main benefactor, and it was quite in order for bequests to be made to the guild in addition to the contributions given to it during  one's lifetime.
In many parish churches a parchment scroll or tablet of wood, inscribed with the names of those who had requested obits or provided chantries, was kept on the wall near to the high altar.
One of the duties occasionally assumed by the guilds was the maintenance of a charnel, a subterranean chamber into which were placed the bones of the dead disturbed when interments took place in the churchyard.
The charnel at Howden, Yorkshire, was maintained by the Guild of the Holy Trinity.
Many so-called crypts beneath churches are nothing more than empty charnels — G.H. Cook gives at least twenty such examples — though those at Hythe in Kent and Rothwell in Northamptonshire are still full.
After the Reformation it was not unusual for these charnels to be cleared and taken over by prominent local families as their burial vault, as happened at Saffron Walden and Thaxted, both in Essex.
Occasionally chantries were founded within the charnel itself, as at Norwich Cathedral (now the undercroft of the hall of the Grammar School), Grantham and St Nicholas, Bristol.
Here altars would be set up within the charnel and the priest would sing the mass in the company of a silent and skeletal congregation — or bits of them, depending on how much had been retrieved from the disturbed graves.
At High Wycombe a more sanitary state of affairs persisted with the erection of several guild altars in the Chapel of the Trinity and Our Lady, built over the bone-hole and served by two chantry priests.
In the churchyard of St Peter's, St Albans, are the remains of the charnel chapel of the Fraternity of All Saints, also known as the Charnel Brotherhood.
Chantries were not limited to the laity; some of the more senior clergy certainly availed themselves of the system and numerous chantry chapels survive in most of the monastic-foundation cathedrals to abbots and priors.
Regardless of their sacerdotal status they, too, had to provide sufficient funds for their endowment but, as they were often as wealthy and powerful as the nobility, this was no hardship.
And this did not stop with the Reformation for, ‘by virtue of the very generous pensions they were granted when they surrendered their houses to the Crown, ex-abbots possessed ample means to found chantries…or to make bequests for soul-masses after death’.
Chantries were more popular in London than elsewhere and every City church could boast at least one.
Excluding the lay fraternities, 280 private chantries were set up in London during the fourteenth century, the heyday of the movement.
Between 1403 and 1502 the number of new foundations fell to 120 and the downward trend continued into the sixteenth century with only thirteen new foundations between 1503 and 1547, the year of the Chantries Act.
A closer examination of the figures shows that of those founded during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, excluding those of the guilds and fraternities, one-fifth were perpetual.
By the end of the fifteenth century many chantries had served their term: some had dissolved through lack of maintenance on the part of the families concerned, while others disappeared through amalgamation; so that by the time of the suppression there were not more than 200 spread among the City churches.
Though the Act of 1547 provided that the surrendered endowments of the remaining 2,374 chantries be applied to public and charitable purposes nationally, much of it merely went into the pockets of Edward VI's advisers.
The chantry system was not introduced into the Anglican Communion until  1873 when three laymen of the parish of St James, Hatcham, formed the Guild of All Souls, whose objective was to maintain intercessory prayers for the dying and the repose of the souls of its deceased members and all the faithful departed.
It remains today the largest Chantry Guild within the Church of England with its own chantry priest, and survives on the contributions of its members, gifts and bequests.
It also holds the advowson of forty-one livings.
Apart from maintaining the cycle of requiem masses, the most important role of the parochial guilds and fraternities was the organization and servicing of the funeral procession.
It was they who maintained the parish coffin, the pall, the cloaks, the candles, the hearse and — in those instances when poverty made it necessary — the mass fee.
Of the trade guilds, the livery companies in the cities undertook to provide all that was customary for the performance of the obsequies of their deceased members, the street processions often reflecting in size and panoply the funerals of the nobility.
Knowing that nearly every parish in the country had their own guild or fraternity at one time, it is all the more frustrating to learn that little exists from the once vast stock of pre-Reformation funerary artefacts.
The exceptions are: a mid fifteenth-century embroidered pall from St Peter's, Sudbury, Suffolk (now in Ipswich Museum); two magnificent hearse cloths of 1509, one in the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford and the other in Great St Mary's at Cambridge, provided for the varsities' annual commemoration service for Henry VII; a pall of 1516 belonging to the Guild of St John at Dunstable Priory (Col. 1 ); and six palls of the period c.1490–1525 belonging to various livery companies in the City of London.
It is doubtful whether these palls would have been considered for outdoor use, their materials being too precious to risk inclement weather and inconsiderate birds.
The Cripps-Day mourning hood, the only surviving ‘late sixteenth-century’ item of its kind, has in recent years proved to be little more than a nineteenth-century pastiche.
As seemingly no contemporary guild records exist it is impossible to state with accuracy the role played by guild members immediately a death had taken place.
However, as the laying-out and preparation of the body was at that time the responsibility of the family, it would appear that the guild limited themselves to three actions: the marshalling of their members to attend, and the selection from that company of those to carry the coffin (though it would have been a strong guild able to command more than half a dozen of its members during a weekday); to see the coffin safely into the church and to ensure that the burial equipment was in place; and to attend the full obsequies on the following day, including the funeral feast.
Obviously someone in the guild's hierarchy — perhaps the clerk — would have acted as ‘master of ceremonies’, informing guild members of their required attendance and possibly liaising with the parish priest and sexton on behalf of the family.
Matters would have been made that much simpler had the guild clerk also been the parish clerk and it might well have been the case in some instances.
Indeed, this person's role would not have been dissimilar to that undertaken by the present-day funeral director.
Be that as it may, the precise chain is not known; somehow the guild was informed and the train of events set in motion.
Neither is it known where the accoutrements were kept.
For example, did the guild have storage space within the church or was it expected that they make  provision elsewhere?
Did the guild members look after their own coats or was there a central wardrobe at the church, or guild-hall in the case of the trade guilds?
Who was responsible for getting the coffin ready, the coffin stools and hearse in position and distributing the candles?
If we look to existing trends for advice, it seems likely that the coffin stools, hearse and candles would have been kept at the church and put into place by the parish clerk and/or sexton.
In the case of the small parish guilds the coffin itself was probably kept somewhere in the church as well, as would have been the ‘reserved stock’ of unbleached beeswax candles.
Again, the trade guilds probably had enough storage space in their own guild-halls for the coffin and cloaks, they might even have had a private stock of candles.
It should not be forgotten that only the endowed chantries were confiscated under the Chantries Act; the guilds still continued but more as funeral clubs than intercessionary fraternities.
As it was, the chantry duties of the guilds had been in steady decline since the early fifteenth century, so that by 1547 the majority had for many years been looked upon as burial societies.
This was not to say that organized and structured prayers for the dead had ceased, for the Roman Rite included plenary intercessions for the living and the dead at every mass; the annual mass for the departed was on All Souls' Day, a standard event in the Church's calendar, set apart for the benefit of souls in purgatory.
In the country towns the gradual decline in status undergone by the guilds also saw a reduction in the number of trappings provided for the funeral.
For example, the hearse around the coffin was practically unseen after the third quarter of the fifteenth century, though it survived for the greater obsequies.
In Westminster Abbey Library is a fragment of a funerary taper found in Abbot Thomas Mylling's tomb, which is presumed to have been placed there at the time of his funeral in 1492 and probably came off the hearse.
The last two recorded  instances of hearses of any size relate to those at Westminster Abbey provided for Abbot John Islip and Henry VIII (d. 1547).
Within parish churches the use of coffin stools were, in some areas, being overtaken by the bier and the custom of issuing mourners with wax tapers — slender candles some two or three feet in length and between half and 1&1/2 inches in diameter — was already in decline, not to be reintroduced until the late sixteenth century when they reappeared in their new capacity as flambeaus for night-time funerals; in the eighteenth century a more elaborate form of triple candle, twisted to resemble a three-branched candlestick and very much like the Candlemas candle once used in the Roman Rite, was carried by one of the undertaker's men proceeding the cortège.
An improved economic climate during the reign of Elizabeth I saw an increase in those able to afford their own coffin, and no longer was this presumed luxury limited to the middle and upper classes.
By the middle of the seventeenth century the parish coffin was regarded as fit only for transporting the corpses of the poor to the grave.
Coffin shapes themselves were beginning to change too.
The tapered-sided gable-lidded coffin was being challenged by the new single-break flat-lidded shell, though it appears only to have been the middle classes who focused attention on style.
Palls were getting larger: no more the short-hemmed highly embroidered creature; a huge sheet of black velvet twelve by fifteen feet, sometimes lined with white silk or a lesser-quality material of the same colour, and thrown right over the coffin and its bearers.
Mourning dress, too, was witnessing a change.
By the last quarter of the sixteenth century the issue of ‘official mourning’ was on the wane.
The tailored long-sleeved calf-length black coat with tight wristbands and single-button or tape fastenings at the neck was in a decline, as in came the fashionable three-quarter length cloak — of black, certainly, but heavily embroidered and trimmed with braid.
The chief mourner continued to wear a coat with train, together with the mourning hood, but even the manner of wearing the hood changed: draped round the shoulders like a short scarf rather than being worn over the head.
By the seventeenth century the hood disappeared as an item of mourning and in its place came sashes and scarves.
The short cloak had three advantages over the coat: it need not be tailored and so was available ‘off the peg’; it was more fashionable; and it allowed unhindered access to the sword.
Armourers knew this and they, too, jumped on the funerary bandwagon, producing black-hilted and pommelled mourning swords with black scabbards.
Indeed, it was not at all unusual for civic authorities to have a mourning sword which, on the death of a monarch, alderman or council member, was carried in the procession before the mayor in place of the civic sword.
A number of these ceremonial mourning swords survive, those of the lord mayors of London and Exeter both having black velvet hilts and scabbards.
The new economic climate of the late sixteenth century brought advantages and disadvantages so far as the funeral was concerned.
On the negative side, funerals were becoming so much more secular in outlook, appearance and context that the surviving guilds and fraternities found themselves hard-pressed to provide all that made for an average funeral of the new type; the rules were being rewritten by a public which no longer wished to perpetuate the simple ritual hitherto provided and which were looking for a pageantry close to that of the great baronial funerals as performed by the College of Arms, a corporation of heralds and part of the Royal Household.
There was no alternative for the guilds than for them to go out to trade for assistance, passing on their additional expenditure to the client.
Of course, had the guilds and fraternities included a handling charge in their reckoning they might have attracted an income allowing them the freedom to purchase for themselves those ‘extras’ now being clamoured for.
But they did not and this was to be their downfall.
Indeed, the new economy, the concomitant increase.in the standard of living and the purchasing power which it gave to the individual sounded the death-knell for the minor guilds.
For the client, the advantage was that he could go direct to those various tradesmen who, collectively, could provide all that made for an average funeral.
As for the tradesmen, some saw an opening into what could be a vastly lucrative enterprise.
And so it was that the guilds and fraternities melted away and commerce took the lead, as will shortly be seen.
Not everyone desired to mimic the magnificent pomp of the College of Arms; others knew what a risky business this could be, for the College maintained a rigid overview of funerary practices countrywide, taking to task any family which emulated that type of funeral reserved by the rules of etiquette for those of nobler birth.
Nevertheless, the College could not have informants everywhere and  though some funerals were based on the College's formularies, the client ensured that the most important hallmarks of a College of Arms funeral — the funerary ‘achievements’— were substituted by objects loosely indicative of them.
The funeral was now becoming a public display of private wealth — a statement of status — rather than a dignified journey to the grave, and there were any number of tradesmen in the private sector eager to cater for the demand and, thereby, to profit from it.
In 1631 the antiquary John Weever lamented this emulation:
Now howsoever the procuration of funeral, the manner of buriall, the pompe of obsequies, bee rather comforts to the living, then helpes to the dead; and although all these ceremonies be despised by our parents on their death-beds, yet should they not be neglected by us their children, or nearest of kindred, upon their interments.
But funerals in any expensive way here with us, are now accounted but as a fruitlesse vanitie, insomuch that almost all the ceremoniall rites of obsequies heretofore used, are altogether laid aside: for we see daily that Noblemen, and Gentlemen of eminent ranke, office, and qualitie, are either silently buried in the night time, with a Torch, a two-penie Linke, and a Lanterne; or parsimoniously interred in the day-time, by the helpe of some ignorant countrey-painter, without the attendance of any one of the Officers of Armes, whose chiefest support, and maintenance, hath ever depended upon the performance of such funerall rites, and exequies.
It would be misleading to imply that there were only three strata of funeral existing at the end of the sixteenth century — monarchial, noble and guild; what one had depended entirely on one's status.
For example the clergy, the landed gentry and freemen of livery companies and trade guilds would qualify for a funeral similar in style to those organized by the College of Arms for members of the peerage.
It was quite possible for someone to start from relatively humble beginnings and work one's way up in society through trade guild or livery company affiliation to become a member of the town council.
Councillors and aldermen commanded grander funerals than those of guild liverymen, for their status was higher.
The town council arranged the funeral and the guild members attended in a secondary role.
The College of Arms set and maintained a rigid scale of funerary etiquette: the obsequies of a royal duke would have been more complicated — and costly — than that of an earl, whilst a viscount's cortège would have exceeded in complexity that of a baron.
So it was that the trade emulated this sliding scale system for the populace at large.
A person of ‘quality’— such as a member of the landed gentry or the clergy — would be at the top of their scale, commanding a funeral similar to that organized by the College of Arms for a knight bachelor, with paupers and wayfarers coming in at the bottom.
This system was adhered to throughout the seventeenth century.
The inflated snobbery of purchasing a ritual traditionally reserved for those of a higher social rank did not appear until the very end of the eighteenth century; conversely, it was a dissatisfied middle class which, towards the close of the nineteenth century, ushered in a less complicated and confusing street procession.
The trade also regulated on the matter of pall-bearers; usually six in number.
In general, the rule of thumb was that one's peers were seconded to perform the  role.
A married man's pall was expected to be supported by his married friends; if single then bachelor colleagues would perform the duty; likewise for spinsters — but not so for children (except in certain rural areas), married women or widows, when the responsibility was delegated either to adult male relatives of the deceased or the undertaker's own men.
In the country it was the custom for the estate workers or tenants to act as both coffin- and pall-bearers, this was a necessity as the local builder often doubled up as undertaker and would not have had so many men at his command as the full-time town undertaker.
In 1898 four parties of bearers — colliers, estate workmen, tenants and labourers — were detailed to wheel Gladstone's bier from Hawarden church to Broughton Hall railway station, and in 1952 estate workers formed the guard of honour in Sandringham church around the coffin of George VI.
Sometimes the accepted etiquette was dispensed with.
William Pitt, First Earl of Chatham, should have had pall-bearers equal in rank to himself, but this was not to be and in a letter written in 1778 following the funeral in Westminster Abbey, the nineteen-year-old Pitt the Younger said to his mother, ‘The Court did not honour us with their countenance, nor did they suffer the procession to be as magnificent as it ought; but it had, notwithstanding everything essential to the great object, the attendance being most remarkable.
The Duke of Gloucester was in the Abbey.
The pall-bearers were Sir G. Saville, Mr Townshend, Dunnin and Burke.’
It was a simple duty to perform, walking alongside the coffin holding the hem of the pall.
For the average funeral the pall-bearer was expected to perform his duties en route as well as within the church; whereas at the funerals of the great, the pall-bearers were only called into service once the coffin was at the church  and ready to proceed up the nave.
Undertakers rarely advertised, for theirs was — and remains — a trade where discretion took precedence over high-profile marketing and one would not see an undertaker publishing testimonials from satisfied customers.
Nevertheless they did issue trade cards and it is from such items and other related mercantile ephemera that we are able to reconstruct a reliable overview of the trade, their connection with other business houses and their livery company affiliations.
Seventeenth- and eighteenth-century trade cards were quite large items, a far cry from the small visiting cards issued today, being single sheets of paper ranging from 4×6 to 8×12 inches in folio size.
How they were used is not generally agreed upon, for, whilst the obverse of some of these cards —‘shopkeepers' bills’ as they were known by the eighteenth-century tradesmen — were sometimes utilized as an invoice to the purchaser, the majority surviving in public and private collections were not.
Were they left on the shop counter for the client to take, distributed on the street or pasted up on to street notice-boards?
They were certainly not affixed to the merchandise as labels in the same way that  some furniture makers and picture framers did, as a recent examination of some one thousand coffins in the vaults at Christchurch, Spitalfields, has proved.
Nevertheless, trade cards seem to have been regarded as an important form of advertising and during the eighteenth century a number of well-known artists were commissioned to design such items.
The first recorded person trading as an undertaker per se is William Boyce, who opened a shop in c.1675 ‘at ye WHIGHT HART & COFFIN, in ye Grate Ould Bayley, near Newgeat’.
Almost at the same time William Russell, a painter and coffin-maker, opened his London shop; far more ingenious than Boyce, Russell entered into an agreement with the College of Arms in 1689 whereby, for a fee, its members would attend certain funerals which he had arranged.
This was a shrewd move on his part for it meant that he not only had the blessing, and guidance, of the College, but also avoided their censure.
For Russell, this was an exceptional opening into the mysteries of the craft, whilst for the College of Arms it was a great mistake as their involvement in funerals quickly declined, the embers briefly coming to life with the public obsequies of Queen Mary in 1695.
It is in any case debatable whether the College could have survived in the face of such rapid growth in the private sector; their lawsuits against usurping trade  diminished once they realized that they had priced themselves out of the market and had little extra to offer than the trade apart from kudos and tradition.
Yet even the nobility were loath to pay for such intangibles when they could obtain a similar ritual at less outlay and with greater speed from within the trade.
However, the College of Arms remained in charge of the obsequies of royal funerals until 1751 when a private undertaker, a Mr Harcourt, supplied and organized the funeral of Frederick, Prince of Wales.
Although this is the first recorded instance of a private undertaker being used by the royal household it is possible that they had been previously involved in some small way in royal funerals, for it is doubtful that the College of Arms provided coffins and it would seem probable that they contracted this out to the trade, to people such as William Russell — indeed, could it have been Russell who provided the coffin for Queen Mary in late December 1694?
There must have been many jealous eyes directed towards Russell who, owing to his association with the College of Arms, was able to attract a fair proportion of the up-market trade within London.
But neither he nor Boyce enjoyed an absolute monopoly, for there were others in business as undertakers at that time, such as Eleazar Malory of Whitechapel, well established by 1700, and John Clarke of Jermyn Street, who was advertising in 1725.
There were no written rules or code of practice in the early years of the trade, and anyone could set themselves up as a coffin-maker or undertaker.
An examination of extant trade cards shows that the furnishing of funerals in the early eighteenth-century was, in the main, limited to those already involved in the cabinet-making and upholstery trades.
Territorial boundaries seem also to have been tacitly adhered to, and it was usual, especially in London, for funeral furnishers to limit their operations to the confines of the parish in which they were situated, and though many of the late eighteenth-century trade cards include the words ‘Funerals performed to all parts of Great Britain', it is doubtful that this offer was ever taken up.
Fourteen trade cards issued by London undertakers during the period c.1680 to c.1760 survive, and as none indicate any other craft-affiliation it must be assumed that they were able to furnish from stock all that went to provide for a funeral.
The undertaker's trade card was explicit and left no one in doubt as to the range of items available from any one merchant.
William Grinley's c.1730 card was concise:
At y e lower Corner of Fleet lane at y e Sign of ye Naked Boy & Coffin you may be Accomodated w th all things for a Funeral as well y e meanest as those of greater Ability upon Reasonable Terms more particularly Coffins Shrouds Palls Cloaks Sconces Stans Hangings for Rooms Heraldry Hearse & Coaches Gloves w th all other things not mentioned by W m .
Grinley, Coffin Maker.
Robert Green's card of 1752 is more explicit, leaving nothing to chance; but he had a reason, for not only was he in business as a furnishing undertaker but also provided a wholesale service to the trade in general.
Unlike Grinley, Green did not own his own hearse and mourning coaches and was probably more at home performing in-parish funerals similar to that shown in a contemporary engraving by William Hogarth on a funeral ticket issued between 1730 and 1750 by  Humphrey Drew, the King Street, Westminster, undertaker.
From surviving pattern books, trade cards, bill headings, contemporary written accounts and livery company admission lists we learn that Southwark and Whitechapel were the two main areas in London accommodating funeral furnishing houses during the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
Southwark specialized in coffin furniture — the nomenclature given to the metal fittings found on coffins — while Whitechapel developed a particular expertise in the production of coffins and fabric-covered outer cases.
Yet this is not surprising when one realizes that both were close to the docks and that the iron foundries in their areas were more conveniently situated for the timber yards and wharfs  along the north bank.
Moreover, Whitechapel neighboured on to Spitalfields, whose centre housed what was known as the ‘black stuff’ industry, the manufacture of the rich and expensive silks and velvets reserved for the exclusive use of the funerary trade.
Yet whilst certain cabinet-makers and upholsterers occasionally furnished funerals there is no evidence to show that iron founders did likewise.
It seems, then, that the average undertaker was little more than a speculative cabinet-maker and joiner who, either by direct contact with the metalworking trades, or via such funeral houses as Richard Green's, was able to buy in at wholesale all that was required for a funeral.
Again, the undertaker offered two choices to the client: outright purchase of all the accoutrements or the hire thereof.
Obviously the hearse and mourning coaches were rented, but certainly not the coffin.
Reading through Robert Green's trade card it seems highly unlikely that a client would want to purchase outright such items as the velvet pall, the room hangings, the large silvered candlesticks and sconces, or the feathers and cloaks, for these objects would be of little or no use to the purchaser once the funeral had taken place.
Indeed, their hire was taken for  granted, and it would have been deemed a curious request had a client expressed a view to buy them.
Robert Green went further in his services to the trade, hiring out to the smaller undertaker those items required for an up-market funeral.
This enabled the humblest of tradesmen to furnish all varieties of funeral, rather than having to turn down trade owing to the paucity of his stock.
The investment made by such wholesale funeral furnishers would have been fairly steep, yet they were able to recoup on their capital outlay through hire charges, which were in turn passed on by the undertaker to the client.
This was — and, in some instances, remains — a standard system and an accepted one throughout the trade.
In 1843 Edwin Chadwick asked Mr Dix, a successful London undertaker performing upwards of 800 funerals a year, to explain how it worked:
MR DIX:
I frequently perform funerals three deep: that is, I do it for one person, who does it for another, who does it for the relatives of the deceased, he being the first person applied to.
CHADWICK:
The people, then, generally apply to the nearest person?
MR DIX:
Yes, they do.
Everybody calls himself an undertaker.
The numerous men employed as bearers become undertakers, although they have never done anything until they have got the job.
I have known one of these men get a new suit of clothes out of a funeral of one decent mechanic.
When Chadwick's comments on the trade are examined it becomes abundantly clear why hire companies such as Robert Green's were required: ‘The number of persons whose sole business is that of undertaker, whose names are enumerated in the post-office directory for the year 1843 for the metropolis, is 275.
It is stated that much larger numbers than are named in the Directory retain the insignia of undertakers in their shop-windows, for the sake of the profits of one or two funerals a year.
They merely transmit the orders to the furnishing undertakers, who supply materials and men at a comparatively low rate.’
The impression given is that anyone involved in woodworking would turn his hand to coffin-making and funeral-furnishing if the opportunity arose.
Such were the dangers of a trade not protected by its own guild.
In the countryside, matters were no better; the smaller shops in the villages and towns often produced insufficient income to support a family, so that the wife or daughter often looked after it while the man pursued another occupation.
Where the latter did keep shop, he might also double up as the local undertaker, as was the case in Essex between 1770–88 at Great Clacton, Thorpe, Toppesfield and Weeley, whilst the London precedent of upholders furnishing funerals (in addition to their established role of auctioneers and general tradesmen) was evident at Chelmsford and Halstead.
With the College of Arms hindering the grant of a new charter to the Upholders' Company in 1722, some London undertakers attempted to form their own livery company.
A contemporary trade card by George Bickham Jnr for the United Company of Undertakers survives.
It is quite an elaborate item: Youth and Age sit on an oval cartouche flanked by Time and Eternity.
The inscription on the cartouche reads: But was this nothing more than a co-operative of neighbourhood tradesmen?
Probably, for the United Company of Undertakers was never admitted at the Guildhall, and their ‘house’ was none other than the business premises of Robert Legg Snr, upholder, appraiser and undertaker.
Could it have been that the upholders contested the undertakers' application to join their guild, on the pretext that the furnishing of funerals was the prerogative of their members?
Whatever ensued, the United Company of Undertakers did not receive livery status, though they did excite sufficient interest to merit a sarcastic caricature from William Hogarth entitled ‘The Company of Undertakers’, and with the motto ‘Et Plurima Mortis Imago ’—‘The Very Picture of Death’.
This engraving was erroneously published by Bertram Puckle in 1926 as the ‘sign of the now extinct ‘Company of Undertakers’.
Whilst Robert Legg Snr and his cronies were enjoying a short-lived grandeur within the ill-fated United Company of Undertakers, the Upholders’ Company continued to support those members who furnished funerals as part of their everyday trade, though their list of admissions does not identify persons trading as coffin-makers or undertakers though they did admit upholders and mercers, who included funeral furnishing as a sideline to their main trade.
By the mid-1730s the Upholders Company saw fit to make available to their members  blank funeral invitation tickets for overprinting, affiliation to the company being shown by an inscription on the plate-mark beneath the illustration, reading ‘Perform'd by the Company of Upholders at Exeter Change & at their Hall in Leaden Hall Street.’
This copper engraving, designed by A.N.
Coypel and cut by Ja.
Chereau, was an up-market plagiarism of the more primitive original issued by the United Company of Undertakers.
In front of a tall classical tomb — the centre panel left blank for overprinting — reclines a shrouded skeleton, representing Death, who leans to the viewer's left to stop Youth from detaining Time who is shown flying off to his next assignment.
On the right, Age addresses her gaze towards Death, thereby distracting her from cutting the Thread of Life joining Eternity to a representation of Clotho, seen resting on a cloud to the upper right corner of the plate.
The silent war between the United Company of Undertakers and the Worshipful Company of Upholders did not last long, for by 1748 the imprimatur had been dropped from the Upholders' blank funeral invitations and we no longer hear from the United Company of Undertakers again.
Few illustrations survive of the interiors of funeral furnishing establishments prior to the introduction of the camera.
Trade cards tend to show stylized street processions with, perhaps, the occasional spurious hatchment and draped mute's stave.
The Victoria and Albert Museum holds a proof engraving of the 1730s trade card of the Strand upholsterer and cabinet-maker, Christopher Gibson.
Here Gibson is shown attending to clients, whilst to the left of the shop can be seen two painted hatchments of the type offered up on the house of the  deceased, with two smaller shields above of painted canvas mounted on black velvet, as applied to the palls of the nobility and others entitled to bear arms.
In the back of the shop, beyond the shelves of material and the cutting bench, are five more hatchments.
Judging from his stock, funerals must have held some position of importance to have merited such an impressive display of hatchments.
Conversely, views showing the exteriors of undertakers' and funeral furnishers' are less rare, probably the most well-known image being the shop sign appearing in Hogarth's engraving,Gin Lane , showing a suspended coffin and figure of Time.
An engraving from 1737 by John Kip (private collection) of St Clement Danes, Strand shows a shop-front of a furnishing undertaker not dissimilar to that of Messrs Barnard's premises in an anonymous water-colour (c.1850) in Brighton Museum.
Are we, therefore, to understand that the trade preferred to maintain a low-profile presence on the high street, in much the same way as it does now?
From the various addresses given on the trade cards of coffin-makers it appears that many were sited off the high streets, yet not so far away as to be inaccessible to their clients.
Barnard's shop would have had shutters, whilst the pavement-level trapdoor allowed for the delivery of ready-made coffins.
The trade had three branches: coffin-making, undertaking and funeral furnishing.
The coffin-maker did as the title suggests: he made coffins.
He might also have performed funerals, but not necessarily so.
The undertaker was a coffin-maker and performer of funerals, whereas the funeral furnisher did not make his own coffins, but bought them in ready-made, dressed them and in addition performed the funeral.
This, then, was the hierarchy of the trade.
A coffin-maker could look up to a funeral furnisher rather than to an undertaker; an undertaker might have respected the funeral furnisher in as much as he could afford to buy in his coffins; whereas the funeral furnisher, whilst relying on the coffin-maker, looked down on the undertaker (Col. 2 ).
Mr Sowerberry, the undertaker in Charles Dickens's Oliver Twist , was in the middle of the funeral hierarchy, but towards the bottom end as he only catered for parish funerals — that is to say those from the workhouse or those receiving  outdoor relief.
His shop would have been in a back street, probably in a run-down part of the town, amongst the dwellings of those whom he catered for; indeed, Sowerberry himself was only just above the bread-line.
It was to this ‘salubrious’ emporium that Oliver Twist was brought and, after a meagre meal of dog's scraps, shown to his bed: a mattress beneath the counter.
Oliver, being left to himself in the undertaker's shop, set the lamp down on a workman's bench, and gazed timidly about him with a feeling of awe and dread, which many people a good deal older than he will be at no loss to understand.
An unfinished coffin on black tressels, which stood in the middle of the shop, looked so gloomy and death-like that a cold tremble came over him, every time his eyes wandered in the direction of the dismal object: from which he almost expected to see some frightful form slowly rear its head, to drive him mad with terror.
Against the wall were ranged, in regular array, a long row of elm boards cut into the same shape: looking, in the dim light, like high-shouldered ghosts with –heir hands in their breeches-pockets.
Coffin-plates, elm-chips, bright-headed nails, and shreds of black cloth, lay scattered on the floor; and the wall behind the counter was ornamented with a lively representation of two mutes in very stiff neckcloths, on duty at a large private door, with a hearse drawn by four black steeds, approaching in the distance.
The shop was close and hot.
The atmosphere seemed tainted with the smell of coffins.
The recess beneath the counter in which his flock mattress was thrust looked like a grave.
The 1895 workshop of Alfred Morgan, undertaker and funeral furnisher of 2 Craven Buildings, Wych Street, Strand was not such a far cry from the confusion witnessed fifty years earlier by Oliver Twist in Mr Sowerberry's establishment.
Here, a recently polished elm coffin sits on padded woodworking trestles; it is in the process of having its chevroned starched linen fringe gimped to the upper edge of the inner lining, a length of which hangs outside the coffin awaiting turning-in, the lid having been temporarily replaced for the purpose of photography.
Against the left-hand wall nearest to the camera are three storage shelves; a lidless unvarnished coffin in the process of construction sits on the middle shelf.
To the left of the sash window and to the far right of the plate are stacked more coffin boards, probably of elm or oak, whilst the four half-lids are templates, as is the kerf-guide on the wall to the left of the chimney-breast.
In the corner farthest from the camera are propped lengths of beading with, to the right, a bracketed shelf on which sit a bottle and stone jars containing french polish.
The brick floor is exceptionally tidy, having doubtless been swept for the photographer's benefit.
The photograph itself is marred by the double-exposure of a dining-room laid out for a party, subconsciously reminding us to ‘eat, drink and be merry, for tomorrow we die’.
Morgan's coffins are of quality, towards the upper-middle range of the trade.
His workshop seems to have been situated in the basement of his house, with his office on the ground floor.
Morgan must have done quite well out of his business, being able to afford the rent on the entire house.
The house next door, Number 3, was let out as three flats, as can be seen from the three bell-pulls and the much worn doorstep.
Not every funeral furnisher was able to go independent, and relied on the wholesalers to provide items for which he was rarely asked and consequently had  no need to stock.
One such nineteenth-century wholesaler was J. Turner of Farringdon Street, a ‘Coffin Maker, Plate Chaser, Furnishing Undertaker and Funeral Featherman’.
His nine-page catalogue from 1838 contains a wealth of information for the funerary historian, listing 111 coffins of thirty differing types, twenty sizes of shroud (each available in four different qualities of material), fifteen types of ruffling, winding-sheets, mattresses, coffin furniture and palls.
He even provides quotations for bearers' and attendants' fittings together with the hire charges for hearses, coaches and horses.
Taking items at random, for 17 shillings one got a ‘good inch elm Coffin, smoothed, oiled, and finished with one row round of black or white nails, a plate of inscription, four handles, lined and pillow’; whilst for £9 one could buy the pièce de résistance , a ‘1½ inch Oak Case, covered with superfine cloth, finished three rows all round, and six ornamental diamonds, with best nails, lead or brass plate, glory and urn, four pairs of cherub handles, and four dozen rays or stars’.
This, together with an ‘Elm Shell, covered with 4lb lead, lined, ruffled, and pillow’ would provide a creature fit for the grandest vault.
His hearse and coach hire depended on whether the funeral was to be held in town, ‘on the stones’, or in the country.
For a town funeral he charged from £2 3s. for a hearse and pair to £6 9s. for a hearse and six; the cost was doubled if the funeral was to be out of town.
To get an idea of the profit made, let us compare Turner's prices against those actually charged by the funeral furnisher in Chadwick's 1843 Report for a simple earth-burial funeral in the metropolis.
Taking into account only those items bought from a wholesaler, Chadwick's undertaker was making a 175 per cent profit on his original outlay.
This mark-up would have been greater — almost 500 per cent— had the funeral in question been at the top of the market.
Turner also supplied establishments out of town, advertising ‘a Conveyance kept for the purpose of sending Coffins, Goods, &c. to any part of Town or  Country, with Dispatch’.
But by the third quarter of the nineteenth century, with an efficient railway service and a telegraphic system, road transport was no longer relied on and the two largest funeral furnishing houses, Messrs Dottridge of London and Ingall, Parsons & Clive of Birmingham, were dealing with telegraphic orders dispatched by rail, to reach any part of Great Britain within two days.
The funerals performed by the trade in the middle of the nineteenth century were anything but simple.
However, the question arises whether the undertaker was aware of the significance of the many trappings he insisted on providing.
The following embarrassing conversation ensued between Edwin Chadwick and a London tradesman:
CHADWICK:
Are you aware that the array of funerals, commonly made by undertakers, is strictly the heraldic array of a baronial funeral, the two men who stand at the doors being supposed to be the two porters of the castle, with their staves, in black; the man who heads the procession, wearing a scarf, being a representative of a herald-at-arms; the man who carries a plume of feathers on his head being an esquire, who bears the shield and casque, with its plume of feathers; the pall-bearers, with batons, being representatives of knights-companions-at-arms; the men walking with wands being supposed to represent gentlemen-ushers, with their wands: are you aware that this is said to be the origin and type of the common array usually provided by those who undertake to perform funerals?
UNDERTAKER: No, I am not aware of it.
CHADWICK:
It may be presumed that those who order funerals are equally unaware of the incongruity for which such expense is incurred?
UNDERTAKER:
Undoubtedly they are.
It was the undertaker, to give him his common nomenclature, who provided what was considered ‘correct’ in a given situation, and he alone decided on the trappings.
There was little individual choice of coffin, linings or handles; all was left to the aesthetic judgement of the undertaker, and the client was rarely asked to express his views.
The usual instruction was to ‘provide what is customary’, though this attitude led to extreme financial hardship for the poorer classes, though it would not be unreasonable to say that it was they who helped to perpetuate the meaningless and elaborate ritual well into the early decades of the twentieth century.
The later Victorian undertakers were arguably the most backward-looking tradesmen of their day.
There were many openings they might have exploited, but it never occurred to them to do so.
The manufacture of coffin furniture and soft furnishings were independent trades; here was a golden opportunity for the business to effect a take-over, but they did not.
Only Dottridge Brothers and Ingall, Parsons & Clive made any attempt at competing with the individual concerns.
Again, there was no assault made on mourning stationery or the extremely lucrative trade in mourning jewellery.
Both Courtauld's and Messrs Jay's of Regent Street could rest assured, for not one undertaker concerned  himself with buying-in to the mourning warehouses, thereby turning the tables on the mercers and upholders.
Nor did any undertaker take advantage of private cemetery ownership, Kensal Green and Highgate, for example, employing appointed ‘official’ undertakers from within the trade.
The trade in the nineteenth century does not stand up to close examination.
In the main they were a semi-educated band with neither trade nor union affiliation, and greedy — the occasional client was brought to financial ruin by undertakers charging over-inflated and extortionate prices for an unnecessary spectacle that few could either afford or understand.
This was especially heinous, as items charged for were often put back into stock to be ‘sold’ time after time until they wore out.
No wonder that the myth of handles being removed from coffins at the time of cremation perpetuates.
The opinion of the trade given by Campbell in 1747 applied equally to 1897.
By the close of the nineteenth century funeral furnishers had amalgamated the individual trades of coffin-maker, undertaker and funeral furnisher.
The time was coming for a change of name to describe the craft.
It was Banting, the crown undertaker, who provided the model for the future; for he rarely saw a corpse, contracting out at every stage of the proceedings.
He was a funeral ‘director’ rather than a furnisher, and it was to this practice that a number of top-rank funeral furnishers working in London looked — Ballard, Dowbiggin & Holland, J.D. Field, A. France & Son, J. Kenyon, Leverton's and John Nodes — though they were never quite to match his mastery.
In about 1895 the trade began to raise the popular image of the ‘undertaker’ from being a person who merely disposed of the dead to a funeral director whose main object is service to the public.
A London funeral furnisher, H.A.
Sherry, encouraged colleagues in Liverpool, London, Manchester and Preston to establish local associations.
By 1898 national interest had been aroused and the British Institute of Undertakers was formed, succeeding where the United Company of Undertakers had failed 160 years previously.
The British Institute re-formed in 1905 under the new title of the British Undertakers' Association, changing its name in 1935 to the National Association of Funeral Directors, whose prime objectives were to maintain, promote and protect the rights and interests of its members.
A separate organization, the British Institute of Funeral Directors, founded in 1982, exists to improve and develop the technical and general knowledge of those engaged in funeral directing.
Cross-membership between the Association and the Institute flourishes.
It is a pity that the same could not have been said of the United Company of Undertakers and the Worshipful Company of Upholders.
Taintless and Pure: Embalming Techniques
About the year 1737, were found in St Margaret's church-yard, Westminster, in a dry gravelly soil, at the depth of about 18 feet, or less, which had not been broken up for above fifty years before, three entire fir coffins; the two largest clampt together with iron, as boxes sometimes are.
In one was a fat, broad-faced man; the body perfect and soft, as if just dead; the lid had been glewed together, lengthways, and the weight of the earth had prest down his nose; his beard was about half an inch long; the winding-sheet was crape, tied with black ribbons; and the thumbs and toes with the like; the date was composed of small nails (1665) by which it appeared he had been dead seventy-two years; as were also the figure of an hour-glass, death's head, and cross bones.
In the second coffin was a female body, in the same state, in a white crape winding-sheet, date 1673.
And in the third a male child, perfect and beautiful as wax-work; the eyes open and clear, but no date on the coffin.
In one of the larger coffins was a dry nosegay of bay and other leaves and flowers, which appeared like a nosegay that had lain a year among linen.
These bodies changed within twelve hours after they were exposed.
The historian Kirkpatrick was recalling an incident fourteen years earlier when he included the above in his 1751 treatise ‘Reflections on the Causes that may retard Putrefaction of dead Bodies’.
If nothing else, he has provided us with an excellent description of coffin-making, coffin furniture and grave clothes of the mid seventeenth century.
But was what he saw the result of embalming?
Unfortunately not; and there are numerous recorded incidents of the discovery of corpses all owing their ‘preservation’ to natural causes rather than the influence  of man.
Had the bodies viewed by Kirkpatrick been embalmed then they would not have ‘changed within twelve hours after they were exposed’.
I was present in 1983 during the clearance of the vaults beneath St Marylebone parish church when the coffin of a two-year-old boy, who had died in 1815, was opened.
Once the lids of the outer case and the leaden shell had been removed, the workman prised off the lid of the inner coffin; the slightly yellowed silk sheets were drawn back and there lay the body of the child, looking as if he had gone off to sleep but a few moments before.
This child had not been embalmed and his preservation was due to nothing more than the construction of the coffin, for the wood was no less thick — 1½ inches — than that of an adult's coffin, and the lead was likewise no different in gauge.
The thickness of the wood gave a quality of robustness to the small coffin, whilst the lead made it airtight.
The funerary archaeologist has to be certain of the differences between desiccation and chemical preservation: embalming.
Mention embalming to any child and they will immediately conjure up visions of Egyptian mummies: Rameses II, Tutankhamun, pussy-cats and baby crocodiles in latticed bandages.
Similar images might occur to adults, too.
To medieval man it meant a process reserved for the preservation of the corpses of the important, so that they might sleep uncorrupted in their tombs until the Last Day, when body and soul would be reunited to appear before God for His judgement.
Even the humblest peasant probably knew that embalming entailed mutilation and evisceration of the corpse, and that such a ‘privilege’ was reserved for kings and queens and certain high officers and nobles of the land.
The originator of modern embalming techniques was the eminent eighteenth-century Scottish surgeon and anatomist, William Hunter.
He was dismissive of the Egyptian method of embalming, saying in 1776:
With regard to the embalming of the Egyptians, whatever they might say was their motive, it appears that it was a catch upon the public.
I saw a Mummy examined that had been embalmed for 2,000 years; the embalmer had taken out all the Viscera of the head, Thorax and Abdomen and cut all the flesh off the bones, and the cavities of the Thorax & Abdomen were filled up with Tar, Pitch & c and the form of the leg, Thigh & c were altogether made up of linen Rags dipp'd in Tar, Pitch, & c so that I have an Opinion that they were allow'd to carry the dead Body home by pretending to embalm it to preserve the Flesh & c , but you see they either buried or burnt the Flesh: this art always ‘till lately appeared to me ridiculous as I know how soon putrefaction took place after Death; since that time I have often thought it would be pleasing if we could fall upon a method of preserving dead Bodies & I thought that mankind in general would wish to have the Bodies of their Friends & c Preserved.
I conceive many People would be happy with an Art of this kind or at least it would be useful to those who die abroad and are brought back home: I often used to talk of embalming but never seriously took it in hand ‘til the year before last, which to this time is well preserved.
Although it is perfectly possible for Hunter to have acquired his own Egyptian mummy for dissection, it appears from the above that he did not.
So where did it come from?
It is quite likely that the source lay with the antiquarian, Smart Lethieullier of Aldersbrook, ‘a gentleman of polite literature and elegant taste’.
The son of a wealthy London merchant, Lethieullier was a Fellow of the Royal Society and a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries; he knew both William and John Hunter, who in turn must have been aware of his collection of Egyptian antiquities, amongst which were some mummies brought back from Egypt to Aldersbrook by Lethieullier's cousin, Colonel William Lethieullier.
Could it have been one of these specimens that succumbed to the examining blade of the paleopathologist's knife?
We know that Lethieullier was also interested in anatomy, for in 1734 he had offered to the Royal Society three infants preserved in spirit, ‘…of which one Elizabeth Baggs, a hard labouring woman in Oxford, was delivered at one birth in 1714’ and who lived for but a few hours afterwards.
What sealed the knot between Hunter and Lethieullier was the latter's curiosity in all things funereal, including embalming, as will be seen later.
E.F.
Scudamore interprets present-day embalming as ‘a treatment consisting fundamentally of the injection of some suitable disinfecting preservative into the vascular system, augmented by the relieving of the blood from the superficial vein, and such cavity, cosmetic, and derma-surgery treatment necessary to achieve a pre-mortem appearance, aseptic condition and preservation’.
Yet Scudamore concerns himself only with temporary preservation related to the needs and requirements of the modern funeral director.
Hunter would have gone further; to him, ‘embalming’ meant a technique more sophisticated than that practised by the Egyptians, a technique ensuring perpetual preservation of the corpse's remains, involving permanent chemical arrest of decomposition whilst  allowing for a pre-mortem appearance.
The bodies in Hunter's care were to last.
Warton, in his book The History of English Poetry , published in the 1680s, wrote, ‘Antient chemistry made people fancy that bodies could be preserved with the resemblance of real life, by means of a precious liquor circulating through every part in golden tubes artificially disposed, and operating on the principles of vegetation.’
When Jeremy Bentham, the radical jurist, philosopher and founder of University College, London, died in 1832 at the age of eighty-four he bequeathed his body to Dr Southwood Smith, an anatomist and author of Uses of the Dead to the Living , in which it was suggested that the difficulties experienced by medical schools in acquiring bodies for dissection could be alleviated if people chose to bequeath their bodies to them.
The terms of the bequest might seem bizarre, yet they were in keeping with Bentham's philosophical attitudes.
The body was to be dissected at a public lecture by Southwood Smith to be entitled ‘The Structures and Functions of the Human Frame’, after which the skeleton was to be used as the armature of an image — an ‘auto-icon’— of himself, to be attired in his own clothes and placed in University College.
It is still there, in a glass-fronted cupboard.
The head of the ‘effigy’ is a wax portrait — Bentham's own head was removed, desiccated, provided with glass eyes and placed under a glass dome to sit between the feet of the auto-icon; it, too, is now on public display — a little start-eyed, yet nevertheless recognizable (Col. 3 ).
Hunter, one can assume, would have advocated chemical treatment of the entire body.
It is, perhaps, a good thing that Bentham's eccentricity did not catch on, for ‘disposal of the dead’ might have become ‘dissection prior to auto-iconism’with nineteenth-century British cemeteries having galleries of the dead, as at Palermo, Rome and Toulouse.
Hunter's known subjects are few — two, to be precise, and both private commissions — and intended as practical examples of his research, related more to improving contemporary methods of preserving anatomical specimens for the medical student than as a deliberate contribution to the undertaking trade.
He should not, therefore, be regarded in any way as an up-market embalmer, but a serious scientist, extending his knowledge, and private curiosity, in perfecting a way to arrest the post-mortem decomposition of the human body by the balanced use of chemicals, spices and herbs.
Prior to describing his method, and that perfected by his brother John, it is necessary to examine in detail the state of the art that led to the seventeenth- and eighteenth-century experiments, culminating in the most celebrated of the Hunterian ‘mummies’, Mrs Maria Van Butchell.
It was not an uncommon practice in the Middle Ages, where the corpses of the rich and powerful were concerned, to remove one or more of the organs — usually the heart — for burial at the place of death, such as the monastery which had cared for the person in their infirmary during the final illness.
Indeed, some religious houses demanded the deposit as a prerequisite for their care.
Over the years these monastic institutions acquired a particular expertise in the embalming of bodies, an example of their handiwork being discovered in 1969 when the coffin of Archbishop Godfrey de Ludham (d. 1265) was opened in York Minster.
Meanwhile, the encoffined, eviscerated cadaver itself was returned to the family for burial in the deceased's parish church.
Apart from preserving the body for the sake of the Day of Judgement, two more important facts have to be taken into consideration, delayed burials and monarchial deaths.
When a person of rank died far from home, and it was known that the funeral would therefore be delayed, embalming allowed the body to remain recognizable long enough for the relatives to make a positive identification on its arrival home.
Embalming a monarch allowed for public examination of the corpse, not only to prove to all and sundry that the monarch was indeed dead but also to let the rightful heir be acclaimed and to deter any pretenders.
The information we have on early techniques comes from contemporary and later chronicles and, during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, from antiquarian curiosity in the examination of coffin contents during cathedral and church restorations.
The technique during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries had four stages.
To prevent putrefaction the soft organs were removed via an incision in the trunk, and then buried either at the place of death or separately with the body.
Then the inner cavities were sluiced out with various aromatic and disinfecting fluids prior to sewing up.
The third stage involved the treatment of the exterior of the body with preserving spices, applied either as an ointment or a paste, the latter probably being used in the case of Archbishop Godfrey de Ludham.
Finally, the corpse was tightly wrapped in cerecloth, a waxed linen, and the seams further sealed with beeswax so as to establish a near airtight condition.
This done, the cocoon was enclosed in a leaden coffin, very much like a mummy case, before being lodged in its outer wooden case.
If death had occurred abroad, the mos teutonicus method was sometimes employed.
This consisted of cutting up the body into pieces and boiling it in wine or vinegar until fat and flesh separated from the bones.
The skeleton was then shipped home for burial and the remainder deposited at the place of death.
It was a technique applied to anyone sufficiently important to warrant the effort, such as the Bishop of Hereford, who died in Italy in 1282.
But at the end of the thirteenth century Pope Boniface VIII tried to condemn the practice, especially as it was sometimes carried out in the side chapels of churches, which were deemed appropriate ‘kitchens’.
When Henry V died in Normandy in 1422 mos teutonicus was employed, as it was thought that conventional embalming would not hold out for the journey back to England.
Rather than bury the flesh and fat in France, it was sealed up with the bones in a leaden case, together with an enormous quantity of spices.
After a short lying-in-state at the Abbey of St Denis the remains were shipped back for eventual burial at Westminster, some two months after the death had taken place.
It seems unlikely, especially in the light of the papal prohibition, that monks would have had either the inclination or the experience to have practised mos teutonicus , and it has been suggested that butchers were called in to perform the grisly deeds.
That the usual embalming techniques bore a close similarity to the methods used in the preservation of meat for human consumption one does wonder what involvement butchers had in giving advice in the early experimental years of embalming.
One of the most curious and inexplicable methods of preservation was recorded by the antiquary, John Weever, in Chapter 6 of his Ancient Funerall Monuments .
In the North Isle of the Parish church of Newport painell in Buckinghamshire, in the yeare 1619 was found the body of a man whole and perfect; laid downe, or rather leaning downe, North, and South: all the concauous parts of his body, and the hollownesse of euery bone, as well ribs as other, were filled vp with sollid lead.
The skull with the lead in it doth weigh thirty pounds and sixe ounces, which with the neck-bone, and some other bones (in like manner full of lead) are reserued, and kept in a little chest in the said Church, neare to the place where the corps were found; there to bee showne to strangers as reliques of admiration.
The rest of all the parts of his body are taken away by Gentlemen neare dwellers, or such as take delight in rare Antiquities.
This I saw.
Was it possible for the corpse to have been so treated, with the ‘hollownesse’ of every bone to be filled up with solid lead?
Three royal coffins disturbed by workmen during the eighteenth century give credence to the fact that the corpses of the royal family were also subjected to embalming.
In 1703, at St Alban's Abbey, the small vault beneath the tomb of Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester (d.1447), was entered; antiquarian curiosity led to the opening of the anthropoid coffin, wherein, the body was found to be well preserved, ‘…except for the legs from which the flesh is wasted, the pickle at that end having dried up’.
In 1986 I too entered the tomb; the anthropoid leaden shell was resealed after the 1703 examination and placed in a new rectangular elm shell sans fittings.
It is doubtful that the 1703 visitors were looking at ‘pickle’ since the anthropoid shell fits so tightly that no additional liquid could have been introduced.
However, it is possible that the fluid seen during that visitation once saturated the body but had leaked from the cadaver during the intervening 250 years and thence from the coffin, owing to seasonal fluctuations in the humidity within the vault.
Some workmen digging for stone in the ruins of Bury St Edmunds Abbey in 1773 came across a wooden coffin containing a lead anthropoid shell.
Again, curiosity won the day and, as recorded by C. Collingnon in a paper delivered to the Royal Society, the body was that of Thomas Beaufort, Duke of Exeter, who had died in 1424.
That the body had been embalmed was established by the nature of the incisions, and its having been ‘soaked in pickle’.
Unlike the St Albans relic (the remains of Beaufort's nephew), the Duke of Exeter's face had been covered with cerecloth; the hair was in perfect condition, as was the flesh in general.
The discovery of the St Albans and Bury St Edmunds remains were certainly exciting, especially to the examiners, but they pale into insignificance when compared with the results of the research undertaken after the opening of the coffin of Edward IV (d.1483) in 1788, the subject of a paper read to the Society of Antiquaries on 26 January 1769.
When the coffin was examined in St George's Chapel, Windsor, the body was found to be in a sufficiently good condition to recognize the features; some of the yellow-gold velvet of the outer shroud was also present.
One wonders how close the cost of Edward's internment was to the £15 3s. 4½d. paid to Hugh Brice in 1471 for the cerecloth and spices used to embalm his predecessor, Henry VI.
To discover how these embalmed bodies were wrapped after the completion of  the process we need to turn to the report of the examination of the ‘mummy’ of William Lyndewode, Bishop of St David's (d.1446), discovered in 1852 during the reconstruction of St Stephen's Chapel at the Palace of Westminster.
The body ‘was swathed in cerements of strong, coarse, thick cloth or canvas….
Around this swathing, for about two-thirds of the length of the trunk from the hips upward, were several turns of a well-made twisted cord, fastened in what is called the half-hitch, in good preservation.’
Once the ‘mummy’ had been removed from its grave, a proper examination was carried out by a Dr W.V. Pettigrew:
The cere-cloth, which consisted of nine, and in some places of ten distinct layers, was originally dipped in wax.
It had become, as it were, welded into one thick compact mass, nearly as hard as wood, and which it was impossible to separate, unrole, or divide in any other way than by cutting…
The head had an extra covering of cloth or canvas beyond that of the rest of the body, forming a kind of mask.
On removal of that…the front part of the head was found swathed and tied round with cord in the same manner as the rest of the body…
On removal of the mask…the face was at once seen…
When first uncovered, a pledget of tow, imbued with wax, protruding from the mouth, forming a mass soft, black, and pliable, and producing some distortion in the countenance…
The colour of the countenance was dark brown, or chocolate.
The report continues to say that the body was entire and that no viscera had been removed.
Neither was there evidence of anything more than superficial surface treatment.
W.J. White tells us that the ‘decline of the embalming practice may be seen as one aspect of transitional funerary modes in fifteenth century England’.
However, the technique was still employed for monarchial corpses.
John Strype, the eighteenth-century antiquarian, gives an account of the care given to the corpse of Henry VIII immediately after his death at Westminster on or around midnight on 28 January 1547.
Once the body had been viewed by members of the Privy Council and others to confirm that life had ceased and that the king was dead, word went out to summon the surgeons, apothecaries and wax chandlers ‘to do their duties in spurging, cleansing, bowelling, searing, embalming, furnishing and dressing with spices the said corpse’.
Knowing the complications and expense involved in getting together the various unguents required, one can assume that these items had already been accumulated by those to whom the task of embalming the royal remains had been devolved.
As shall soon be seen, both plumber and carpenter were also alert to their requirements.
Casting discretion to the wind, there seems little point in not describing in small detail each stage of the given instructions.
‘Spurging’ entailed the general washing of the body with spiced and aromatic water to remove the sweat of the death-bed and generally to clean the corpse; ‘cleansing’was the euphemism given to the assisted emptying of the bowels and the plugging of the rectum; the removal of the soft organs, following an incision made from the bottom of the rib cage to the pelvic region, was known as ‘bowelling’; ‘searing’was the cauterizing of the cavity blood vessels after the removal of the soft organs as a precaution against post-mortem haemorrhaging; whilst the purification of the inner cavity was the technical ‘embalming’; the outer surface of the body was ‘dressed’by the  application of balms, a mixture of resins in volatile oils; whilst ‘furnishing’implied nothing more than the positioning of the sudarium (a linen square covering the face) and the close wrapping of the corpse in layers of cerecloth and waxed twine.
This complete, the body was further wrapped in fine velvet, a sheet of linen having first been placed between it and the cerecloth to stop staining of the finer fabric, and tied with silk cord.
The plumber then set to work encasing the ‘mummy’ in its close-fitting anthropoid shell after which the carpenter's men put it into its outer wooden case, upholstered in rich blue velvet.
The household's final act was to arrange for the immediate disposal of the viscera which, like the body, were almost certainly placed in a lead box within a velvet-upholstered outer case.
Here again we are assisted by Strype: ‘The entrails and bowels were honourably buried in the [St George's, Windsor]chapel’, for it was not usual for the viscera chest to take any part in the state obsequies; the coffin was reunited with it nineteen days later.
Katherine Parr, the widow of Henry VIII, saw out her last years at Sudeley Castle in Gloucestershire, dying there on 5 September 1548.
A letter of 29 April 1777 from J.C.
Brooke of the College of Arms to the editor of Archaeologia gave an account of her funeral: ‘As the funeral of this princess has been hitherto unpublished, I have sent, for your entertainment, the procession, from my collection of ceremonials, No.
VI.
originally copied from a book in the Cotton library.’
The manuscript reads: ‘Item, on Wenysdaye the vth of Septembre, between ij and iij of the Clocke in the morninge died the aforesaid Ladye, late Quene Dowager at the Castle of Sudley in Glocestreshyre, 1548, and lyeth buried in the Chapell of the seid Castle.
Item, she was cearid and chestid in leade accordinglie, and so remaynid in her pryvie Chambre untill things were in a readyness.’
It was not beyond the wit of any surgeon worthy of his calling or apothecary worthy of his phial to have been able to perform superficial embalming, and it is highly unlikely that assistance was asked for at the London end.
The above account was later reported in Rudder's History of Gloucestershire , which
raised the curiosity of some ladies, who happened to be at the Castle in May 1782, to examine the ruined Chapel, and observing a large block of alabaster, fixed in the North wall of the Chapel, they imagined it might be the back of a monument formerly placed there.
Led by this hint they opened the ground not far from the wall; and not much more than a foot away from the surface they found a leaden envelope which they opened in two places, on the face and breast, and found it contained a human body wrapped in cerecloth: Upon removing what covered the face, they discovered the features, and particularly the eyes, in perfect preservation.
Alarmed at this sight, and with the smell, which came principally from the cerecloth, they ordered the ground to be thrown in immediately without judiciously closing up the cerecloth and lead, which covered the face: only observing enough of the inscription to convince them that it was the body of Queen Katherine.
Four years later, in October 1786, the Revd Treadway Nash DD FSA went along to Sudeley Castle in the company of the Hon. John Sommers Cox and a Mr John Skipp of Ledbury to examine the coffin, having first obtained leave of the owner, Lord Rivers.
Unfortunately the hasty infilling of 1782 had caused the face to  decay.
Nash, a scrupulous and sensitive antiquarian, tells us what happened next: ‘The body, I believe, is perfect, as it has never been opened: we thought it indelicate and indecent to uncover it; but observing the left hand to lie at a small distance from the body, we took off the cerecloth, and found the hand and nails perfect, but of a brownish colour: the cerecloth consisted of many folds of coarse linen, dipped in wax, tar, and perhaps some gums: over this was wrapt a sheet of lead fitted exactly close to the body.’
The multi-layered cerecloth implies that she was embalmed in a manner similar to that of her husband.
A human touch was added to Nash's report: ‘I could heartily wish more respect were paid to the remains of this amiable though unfortunate Queen, and would willingly, with proper leave, have them wrapt in another sheet of lead and coffin, and decently interred in some proper place, that at least after her death her body might remain in peace; whereas the Chapel where she now lies is used for the keeping of rabbits, which make holes and scratch very indecently about her Royal corpse.’
Between 1859 and 1863 Sir George Gilbert Scott restored the chapel for its new owners, William and John Dent, at which time Scott designed a canopied tomb for Katherine Parr with a recumbent white marble effigy by John Birnie Philip; Nash would have been pleased.
A particularly gruesome tale is appended to the embalming of Queen Katherine de Valois, wife of Henry V. Katherine died at Bermondsey Abbey (by whose monks she was presumably embalmed) on 3 January 1438 and eventually buried on 8 or 9 February 1438 in front of the high altar of the new Lady Chapel at Westminster Abbey — indeed hers was the first royal body to be buried there.
When Henry VII demolished the chapel in 1502, ‘her body was taken up, and, the coffin being decayed, it was put in a wooden chest, and placed near her husband's tomb in the east end of the Friars’(as Stowe calls it).
Henry VII intended to have the remains reinterred in the new chapel but he himself died the day after its consecration and no one else bothered themselves with Queen Katherine's corpse.
In 1631 John Weever observed: ‘Katherine, Queen of England, lieth here, in a chest or coffin with a loose cover, to be seen and handled of any who will much desire it.’
The miserable mummy was to stay above ground for many more years yet; in the mean time it remained an object of spectacle.
Even Samuel Pepys went for an audience: ‘23 February, 1668–9.
To Westminster Abbey, and there did see all the tombs very finely, having one with us alone, there being other company this day to see the tombs, it being Shrove Tuesday.
And here we did see, by particular favour, the body of Queen Katherine of Valois; and I had the upper part of her body in my hands, and I did kiss her mouth, reflecting upon it that I did kiss a Queene, and this was my birthday, thirty-six years old, that I did kiss a Queene.’
The embalming had held out; but so numerous were the numbers of visitors that the body began to decay, and reports of 1711, 1723 and 1773 all allude to its degenerate state.
But this was probably more because of interference than natural decay: ‘The bones [are]firmly united and the flesh and skin dried up like tanned leather.
Of late years the Westminster scholars amused themselves with tearing it to pieces; and one in particular, who bore a principal character in the police of India, lies under the imputation of having contributed in an especial manner to that havoc.
I can just remember seeing some shapeless mass of mummy of a whitish colour.
It is now under lock and key near her  husband's tomb, waiting for the next opening of the royal vault for her last repose.’
Anon she was not placed in the royal vault; rather the opportunity was taken to put her in the Villiers vault in 1776 when the neighbouring Percy vault was opened for the reception of the remains of the First Duchess of Northumberland.
However, the nineteenth-century antiquarian dean, Arthur Penrhyn Stanley, had her removed in 1877 and the subsequent examination showed that although both torso and head had become skeletal, the legs remained entire, enclosed within twelve layers of cerecloth, whilst the left arm and hand were quite perfect.
She was eventually deposited, within a new coffin, beneath the altar-slab in her husband's chantry chapel in the Abbey in 1878.
As has already been seen, embalming was not a cheap process.
Moreover, no two surgeons were alike and the success ratio of the treatment was mixed — Henry VI's corpse leaked embalming fluid profusely during the lying-in-state.
Much primary research into the cost of embalming of the nobility and landed gentry of sixteenth- and seventeenth-century England was published in 1984 by Clare Gittings, the majority of which was based on family documents of Kentish and East Anglian families.
For example, when Nicholas Bacon of Stiffkey, Norfolk, died in 1578 three doctors were present at the embalming, though the primary incisions were undertaken by two surgeons; yet regardless of their importance and status, each was paid £2 for their services.
Even so, the process was not yet over.
A further five surgeons were required to sear and embalm the cadaver; they were paid a total of £7 8s. 4d., with the bill for the spices and perfumes for the balm amounting to the then enormous sum of £9.
Four women then dressed and trimmed the body — i.e. shaved the face and washed the hair — prior to its being wrapped in 8¾ yards of cerecloth and then placed in the anthropoid lead case.
But was this really necessary?
Could not the job have been done by a doctor, a surgeon and one attendant?
Certainly, but there was a particular status to be gained by the family in employing so many; it also gave a certain degree of importance to the corpse itself.
The total bill for Bacon's embalming came to £26 8s. 4d. which, when compared with the £28 4s. 1d. paid in 1596 for the embalming of Henry, Earl of Huntingdon, seems to have been a fairly standard cost.
There is some confusion as to whether or not Queen Elizabeth I's body was embalmed.
The contemporary historian John Manningham relates that it was the Queen's wish not to be so treated and that this was obeyed, her body being ‘…wrapt up in cerecloth, and that very ill too’.
It is difficult to believe that she was not embalmed and Elizabeth Southwell, a minor courtier, relates how Lord Cecil ordered it to be done and Clapham, in his Elizabeth of England , states that ‘The Queen's body was left in a manner alone a day or two after her death and meane persons [embalmers]had access to it.’
W.J. White confuses matters more by saying that ‘the body of Elizabeth I was so poorly embalmed that during the funeral the coffin exploded, owing to the accumulation of the gaseous products of decomposition’.
Whom are we to believe?
The only person to whom we can give any credence is Manningham; doubtless any delay in embalming the body was caused by Cecil's dilemma whether to obey the late Queen's wishes or not.
At no time did Elizabeth I's coffin explode.
The best refutation of this is given by Olivia Bland: ‘…such a  cataclysmic event could never have been hushed up and yet, it does not appear in any of the other memoirs of the time.
Mistress Southwell was a Roman Catholic and with several others sought to surround the events of the Queen Elizabeth's last illness and death with ill-omens and to suggest that she had not died in a state of grace’.
Queen Elizabeth's vault in Westminster Abbey was examined in 1868 by Dean Stanley: ‘There was no disorder or decay, except that the centring wood had fallen over the head of Elizabeth's coffin, and that the wood case had crumbled away at the sides, and had drawn away part of the decaying lid.’
The cereclothed corpse itself was enclosed within an anthropoid lead shell.
Elizabeth Southwell's tale can be confidently disregarded.
Queen Elizabeth I was not the only person to have her ‘no embalming’ request repealed by enthusiastic relatives.
James Montague, Bishop of Winchester, had decreed the same shortly before his death in 1618, stating that not more than £400 be spent on his funeral — an incredibly large amount even by early seventeenth-century standards.
Montague's brother chose to ignore the request and commissioned a Mr Rowland, surgeon, to perform the task for £2, assisted by two other surgeons at twelve shillings a piece; there was a further outlay of ten shillings for ‘a woman to attend the surgeons with water, mops, cloths and other things’.
The viscera were removed, encased and buried at night by torchlight.
But before the funeral of the body itself took place, the embalming failed and Mr Montague had to recruit others to repair Rowland's blundering, costing Montague £1 for the surgeon and ten shillings for his assistant.
In all the funeral exceeded the bishop's estimate by over £540, amounting to £940 18s. 11d.
The embalming of an ordinary gentleman of the period cost, by comparison, a mere £5, spices included, with the services of a surgeon for ‘ripping the corpse’, as it was so graphically described, being available for five shillings.
Clare Gittings suggests that one of the many reasons why embalming decreased during the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries was distaste on the part of the nobility — not so much with the practice itself as with the thought of having so many surgeons, apothecaries and wax-chandlers poring over a body at any one time.
She proceeds to give an illustration relating to Mary, Countess of Northumberland, who, dying in 1572, left the following comment in her will: ‘Do not in any wise let me be opened after I am dead.
I have not loved to be very bold afore women, much more would I loathe to come into the hands of any living man, be he physician or surgeon.’
Nor did the general public have a very high regard of embalming, believing it to be another unnecessary luxury meted out to the corpses of the rich.
The process is satirically described by Nashe in the Anatomie of Martin Marprelate: ‘Having bestowed his bowels in a ditch…and filled his hungry belly…with coal dust, for spice they could not bestow (his carrion being not worth it) and sawdust they could have none; they wrapped him in a blanket…for that all others are lapped in sheets.’
By the end of the seventeenth century the high-street undertaker was trying his hand at the technique, much to the chagrin of the surgeons and the apothecaries.
Thomas Greenhill was such a one.
In the preface to his 1705 treatise on the Art of Embalming , he says, ‘Some have spared no means to render themselves immortal…
It may be justly said of embalming, that it is undeniably  the most considerable and efficacious means to answer their intentions.’
Was he touting for custom from his readers?
Probably, for we later read that ‘want of opportunity has been in some respect a prejudice to my business’, and, ‘the noble act of embalming has been entirely ruined by the undertakers’.
The clearest single advance in technique was the introduction in the mid seventeenth century of preservation in spirits of wine.
The scientist Robert Boyle was looking for a method of preserving corpses so that they could be used for summer as well as winter tutorials.
His first experiment, shown at the Royal Society in September 1662, featured a puppy preserved in spirits of wine throughout the summer months.
Its good reception encouraged Boyle to set pen to paper, publishing his results in June 1663, at which time he observed, ‘Nor is it only by dissection of various animals that the naturalist may promote the anatomist's knowledge, but perhaps he may do it by devising ways to make the dead bodies of man and other animals keep longer than naturally they would do.’
His basic idea was to empty arteries and veins of their blood and replace it by something ‘fluid enough when it is injected to run into the branches of the vessels, will afterwards quickly grow hard’.
He exhibited a number of specimens to the Royal Society in 1664, and two years later published an account of another successful experiment in preserving ‘Birds taken out of the Egge’, so as to observe ‘the Process of Nature in the Formation of a Chick’.
Other systems also being tried at the same time included dehydration and injection techniques, the latter to be perfected by a surgeon called Ruysch (1665–1717), Professor of Anatomy at Amsterdam.
Ruysch, a member of the Royal Society, devised an arterial technique for human embalming; although a master of the art he was extremely secretive and never divulged his recipe.
He embalmed a child in 1717 so skilfully that he deceived Peter the Great, who thought the infant was alive yet in a state of normal repose.
When asked how it was done, Ruysch simply said that the corpse had been put in cold water for a day or so, the aorta and venae cavae were then opened, the blood cleared out and the whole put in hot water for four to six hours; for the injection he had used suet or tallow in the winter, and added wax, turpentine and resin in summer.
In eighteenth-century England, as a consequence of the demand for better preservation of anatomical specimens, many scientists and anatomists experimented with a number of techniques, including spirits of wine.
Few complete bodies were subjected to this treatment as it was a time-consuming and expensive exercise.
The Earl of Moira was one candidate who, having been so treated, was wrapped and bound in pseudo-Egyptian fashion prior to being deposited in his ancestral vault.
Charles White, the celebrated Manchester surgeon, was born in 1728 and received his anatomical training in London at William Hunter's academy in 1748.
It was there that he met up with William's younger brother John — they were contemporaries, having both been born in the same year — and began a friendship that ended only with John's death in 1793.
On leaving Hunter's, White returned to Manchester to continue his studies, developing his interests in surgery and obstetrics.
However, he never relinquished his passion for anatomy and, urged on by John Hunter, amassed an amazing collection of specimens, the most celebrated of which was the body of Miss Hannah Beswick, later known as the Manchester Mummy.
Hannah Beswick was the daughter of John Beswick of Failsworth — a small village between Manchester and Oldham — a man of considerable wealth, most of which his daughter inherited.
Charles White acted as her medical adviser for the last eight years or so of her life, until she died in February 1758 at the age of seventy.
Whatever the circumstances — and they are conflicting — White acquired Hannah Beswick's body and embalmed her, almost certainly by methods recommended by William Hunter, his former tutor.
It seems most odd that a genteel seventy-year-old spinster, or her executors, would want to have the body embalmed by a newly hatched 29-year-old surgeon.
Be that as it may, she was embalmed and formed the centre-piece of White's ‘Cabinet of Curiosities’ at Sale Priory, his Manchester home.
Amongst one of Thomas de Quincey's earliest recollections is a visit to Sale Priory to see Charles White's museum and, of course, Miss Hannah Beswick.
In his Autobiography de Quincey records that Miss Beswick had been placed ‘in a common English clock case, having the usual glass face; but a veil of white velvet obscured from all profane eyes the silent features behind’.
White died in 1813 and his collection was transferred to the Manchester Natural History Museum; Miss Beswick went too.
And here she stayed on public display until 1868 when it was decided not only to close the museum but also to lay Hannah Beswick to rest.
She now lies in Harpurhey Cemetery, Manchester, ‘…without stone or tablet to indicate the spot’, though a search through the cemetery ledgers of 1868 would soon reveal the whereabouts of the plot.
It would be interesting to see what state of preservation she is in, always assuming that the Manchester Natural History Museum had her properly encoffined.
Eighteen years after the production of the Manchester Mummy, William Hunter wrote:
With respect to the embalming [of]Bodies, the methods that were commonly practised could, I know, have no effect; at that time I read a good many Books upon ‘Balsamation’ but got very little instruction from reading these: according to my own Idea the best way would be to preserve the Body for some time that putrefaction should hardly be able to take place, & that it should gradually get rid of its moisture, & that, when it dried, it should have such imbalming juices in it, that it should resist putrefaction, & the insects at the same time be either kept off or destroyed: I set out with this Opinion & thought that something must be thrown thro' the whole Body: the when the Body was preserved, my Idea of getting rid of moisture was, to place the Body in some strong absorbent substance, & that substance which proved best I thought was Paris Plaister & I thought I could lay in a common Coffin such a quantity of Paris Plaister as would take out all the moisture & then I thought the Body should be rather in a wooden case than a leaden one because the Wood would assist the Absorption.
This was the plan I laid down, and the first time I had occasion to try it in practice was the Summer before the last [1774]& I then did it in the case of a Lady and in the hottest weather: the next Body I tried these experiments upon was Jan y .
13 1775 & that Body is vastly improv'd the longer it is kept & the little remains of fat shine a little more thro' & it is now very much the colour of Indian Copper, i.e. it is very near the colour of finished work'd mahogany & is really a beautiful mass, the Legs are now perfectly dry and from the Beginning to the end there is nothing of putrefaction.
The identity of the 1774 specimen is not known.
But his 1775 candidate is well known — indeed she was better known and more celebrated after death than at any other time in her existence.
14th January 1775.
At half past two this morning my wife died.
At eight this morning the statuary took off her face in plaister.
At half past two this afternoon Mr Cruikshanks injected at the crural arteries 5 pints of Oil of Turpentine mixed with Venice Turpentine and Vermillion.
Who was this lady, and what was her importance?
She was Maria, the wife of the empiric, Martin Van Butchell (1735–1812), son of Martin Van Butchell, tapestry-maker to George II.
A pupil of the anatomist John Hunter, Van Butchell later practised as a highly successful dentist before becoming an eminent truss-maker, specializing in the treatment of fistula.
Arguably he was known to Londoners less for his medical expertise than for his incredible eccentricity, which was exaggerated by a long beard, a predilection for extraordinary costume and his habit of riding about in the streets and Hyde Park on a white pony, which he sometimes painted all purple or, when the mood took him, purple with black spots.
He carried a most unusual weapon at all times, namely a large white bone which, he proclaimed, had once been used as an item of warfare in the island of Otaheite.
Despite his outer appearance and his bizarre equestrian habits, he was a highly respected practitioner residing first at St James's and then in Mount Street, off Berkeley Square.
Van Butchell kept a diary of the embalming of his 36-year-old wife, which took a month to perfect.
His second entry reads:
15th January 1775.
At nine this morning Dr Hunter and Mr Cruikshanks began to open and embalm the body of my Wife.
Her deseases were a large Empyema of the left lung (which would not receive any air), accompanied with Pleuropneumony, and much adhesion: the right lung was also beginning to decay, and had some Pus in it.
The spleen hard and much contracted; the Liver disease called Rata Malpigi.
The stomach very sound, the kidneys, uterus, bladder and intestine in good order.
17th January 1775.
I opened the abdomen and put in the remainder of the powders…
[And on the next day]Dr Hunter and Mr Cruikshanks came at 9 this morning and put my wife into the Box on and in 130 lb weight of Paris plaister at 18d a bag.
I put inbetween the thighs three Arquesbusade bottles, one full of Camphorated Spirits very rich of the Gum; one containing 8 oz of Oil of Rosemary; and in the other 2 oz Oil of Lavender.
11th February 1775.
I unluted the glasses to clean the face and legs with Spirits of Wine and Oil of Lavender.
12th February 1775.
Dr Hunter came to look at the neck and shoulders.
William Hunter kept a complete record of the process, occupying eighteen sheets of foolscap in a hurried hand.
The embalming involved three stages, a précis of which was published by Jessie Dobson in 1953 in the Journal of the History of Medicine .
The first stage featured the injection of turpentine and vermillion ‘…to fill the Arteries and Veins and even go further to produce extravasation to every part of the Body, i.e. til the face and all the flesh swell  which will be a proof of extravasation and the more there is so much the better’.
The body was left in an open state for several hours prior to the second stage, when the thorax and abdomen were removed and placed in water.
Hunter observed that ‘…the whole viscera when all the Blood is press'd out goes into a very little bulk, even the Liver will lose vastly of its bulk and in short the whole viscera will come into a small compass when they are well clean'd and put into dry cloths; you are then to go to the trunk of the Body and empty it of Blood as well as you can and press the Blood out from the Face, Hands, etc. as well as Arms, and the more Blood is pressed out the better’.
Regarding the bladder and rectum, Hunter was especially precise: ‘Instead of being only 10 minutes about this Process you must be ½ an Hour to an Hour about it.’
All parts of the body were then to be carefully washed in spirits of wine before proceeding to the third stage, which consisted in the injection of the body a second time — his system being an amalgam of that advocated by Robert Boyle and Ruysch — and the viscera, should it be considered necessary.
Unlike the Egyptians, with whose process Hunter was not impressed, he did not remove the brain, implying that it could be sufficiently well treated in situ by general injection.
The viscera were then returned to the cavity together with a substantial quantity of camphor, nitre and resin.
Then, having sewn up the body and filled the outlets with camphor, it was well washed, thoroughly dried and rubbed with fragrant oils — in the case of Maria Van Butchell this last act was done by her husband on 12 February 1775.
The final stage in the process was to make sure that the box provided was filled to half-way with plaster of Paris to absorb moisture, though he gives no guidelines as to how deep such a box should be; ‘after this, the cover and two windows were put down’.
Hunter ended his description with a comment on Maria and a hint as to his charges to Martin Van Butchell: ‘This body…yet promises exceedingly well, nor do I see any great improvement to be made; a number of experiments must be made before I embalm any other body, such as finding the exact proportion of moisture Paris Plaister will take up etc. but at present I know of no other Process at all useful and considering the trouble you must have during all these Processes now laid down, you ought not to undertake it under 100 Guineas.’
And of Mrs Van Butchell herself?
Well, she was the subject of much interest and became one of the sights of London.
Indeed, so pressing were the requests to see her, and no doubt her eccentric widower as well, that Martin Van Butchell was obliged to place an announcement in the St James's Chronicle on 21 October 1775, restricting the hours for viewing and putting conditions on those who wished to view.
Mrs Van Butchell was not to be gawped at.
The general public might have been disappointed but they needed only refer to a contemporary poem then available:
EPITAPH on Mrs Vanbutchel whose remains, preserved by a curious and newly invented method of embalment, are the object of her husband's daily attention.
Here, unentombed, Vanbutchel's consort lies
To feed a husband's grief, or charm his eyes;
Taintless and pure her body still remains,
And all its former elegance retains.
Long had disease been preying on her charms,
‘Till slow she sunk in Death's expecting arms;
When HUNTER'S skill in spite of Nature's laws,
Her beauty rescued from Corruption's jaws;
Bade the pale roses of her cheeks revive
And her shrunk features seem again to live;
— Hunter, who first conceived the happy thought,
And here at length to full perfection brought.
O!
Lucky husband!
Blest of Heav'n
To thee the privilege is given,
A much loved wife at home to keep,
Caress, touch, talk to, even sleep
Close by her side, when e'er you will
As quiet as if living still;
And, strange to tell, that fairer she,
And sweeter, than alive should be;
Firm, plump and juicy as before
And full as tractable, or more —
Thrice happy mortal!
Envied lot;
What a rare treasure thou hast got!
Who to a woman can lay claim
Whose temper's every day the same!
What the second Mrs Van Butchell thought of having her predecessor in the house is not recorded, neither was Hunter's opinion.
But Hunter must surely have known that Van Butchell, famed for his eccentricities, had no intention of burying his wife once the embalming had been done.
And why did he do it when it was perfectly possible for him to have experimented on any cadaver purchased by him for his medical academy?
Could it be that he was aware of Van Butchell's intentions and saw this as a means of bringing his technique to the notice of the public, being able, at the same time, to lay any charge of indecency at Van Butchell's door, if it arose?
That Van Butchell was willing to pay the 100 guineas is interesting and suggests that there were no bounds to his eccentricities.
Van Butchell died on 30 October 1814.
No record exists as to whether or not he was embalmed.
However, in August 1815 Van Butchell's son presented the embalmed body of his mother to the Royal College of Surgeons where it was placed in the Curio Room.
In 1857 C. Cobbe saw it, remarking that
…no doubt extraordinary pains were taken to preserve both form and feature; and yet, what a wretched mockery of a once lovely woman it now appears, with its shrunken and rotten-looking bust, its hideous, mahogany-coloured face, and its remarkably fine set of teeth.
Between the feet are the remains of a green parrot — whether immolated or not at the death of his mistress is  uncertain — but it still retains its plumage; it is a far less repulsive-looking object than the larger bi-ped.
By the side of Mrs Van Butchell is the body of another woman, embalmed by a different process about the same period: she is even more ugly than her neighbour.
As curiosities, these few loathsome relics are no doubt both valuable and interesting, but were there a heap of such dry rubbish, one would feel strongly disposed to make a bonfire of the whole, for it looks nothing fit for anything else.
Cobbe was to have his way, for Maria Van Butchell, the green parrot and the ‘ugly neighbour’ were all destroyed during an air raid in 1941.
The second body seen by Cobbe in 1857 was that of a Miss Johnson who had died of phthisis aged twenty-four at the Lock Hospital in 1774.
The embalmer was John Sheldon, a recently qualified surgeon not much older than Miss Johnson herself.
Sheldon had become much attached to her during his time at the Lock Hospital and it is said that she asked him to embalm her body after her death, which he did.
And that was Mrs Sheldon's side of the story as related forty-one years later after the death of her husband.
The true identity of the corpse was made known in 1838 by William Sweeting, Sheldon's nephew: the body was none other than Sarah Stone, a medical artist who had worked for both Sheldon and Hunter's assistant, Cruikshank.
Sweeting also confirmed that the Miss Johnson story originated from his aunt who, as he wittily put it, ‘could only know what was told her!’
Sheldon himself never lied to his friends about the mummy and we have to be grateful to Faujas Saint-Fond for the following account written shortly after a visit he had made on Sheldon: ‘It is [said Sheldon]a mistress whom I tenderly loved.
I paid every attention to her during a long sickness and, a short time before her death, she requested that I should make a mummy of her body, and keep her beside me — I have kept my word.’
Were we able to exhume the body of the Earl of Moira then we would see an example of John Hunter's technique, as performed by his two assistants John Doratt and Everard Hone.
Moira died in 1793 leaving instructions that his corpse be fully embalmed prior to its being deposited in the family vault.
John Hunter's system was similar to that performed by his brother on Maria Van Butchell.
The most important difference was the protection given to the embalmed body itself.
The limbs were individually wrapped, similar to the bandaging as perfected by the ancient Egyptians, prior to the whole being enveloped in cerecloth after the fashion of the late medieval English embalmer.
London was not the only place where such experiments were going on.
Sir John Pryce (1698–1761) of Newton, Glamorgan, was so distressed when his first wife died that he had the body embalmed and placed next to his bed.
He soon remarried and it appears that his second wife had no qualms about sharing the bedchamber with her predecessor.
Misfortune struck Sir John when his second wife died; she received the same treatment as his first spouse.
Sporting Sir John married for a third time but the new Lady Pryce refused to play second — or, perhaps, third — fiddle and insisted that the embalmed bodies in the moribund harem be removed.
They were, and the Pryces spent a few years in married bliss before the third Lady Pryce died in 1748.
No embalming this time — rather Sir John summoned the services of Bridget Bostock, known as the ‘Cheshire Pythoness’, who claimed that she could cure all known diseases.
Sir John's  request was a simple one: that Bridget Bostock raise the third Lady Pryce from the dead.
Mrs Bostock did visit Newton, but failed in her mission.
There was nothing else for Sir John to do but marry again; unfortunately, he died before he could accomplish this.
As has already been stated, the great majority of bodies were not embalmed, but put into a lined coffin, whose mattress overlaid a quantity of sawdust, wood shavings and bran to soak up any leakage associated with putrefaction.
Misson, in his commentary on the English funeral, tells us what happened next, and why: ‘They let it [the corpse]lye three of four Days…which Time they allow, as well to give the dead Person an Opportunity of Coming to Life again, if his Soul has not quite left his Body, as to prepare Mourning, and the Ceremonies of the Funeral.’
Embalming would not have allowed for this and, had the person not been dead prior to the beginning of the operation, he certainly would be once it was all over.
Arguably the only practical advantage in embalming was that it could reveal whether or not a person had been suffering from catalepsy.
An interesting discovery which would certainly have brought the Hunters running was unearthed at Danbury, Essex, in October 1779.
Some workmen digging a grave inside the parish church uncovered a lead anthropoid coffin inside of which was the body of a lad ‘…laying in a liquor, or pickle, somewhat resembling mushroom catchup, but of a paler complexion, and somewhat thicker in consistance’, according to Dr T. White of Colchester who, together with Dr Gower of Chelmsford, had been invited by the rector, the Revd de l'Angle, and the churchwarden, Lewis Disney Ffytche of Danbury Place, to examine the coffin.
White continues, ‘As I never possessed the sense of smelling, and was willing to ascertain the flavour of the liquor, I tasted and found it to be aromatic, tho’ not very pungent, partaking of the taste of catchup and of the pickle of Spanish olives.’
The body itself was late medieval, not wrapped in cerecloth but in a long linen shift with a narrow hem of lace; the features were discernible, though bald, whilst the ‘inside of the body seemed to be filled with some substance which rendered it very hard.’
As to the liquor, it filled about half the coffin and in it ‘feathers, flowers, and herbs in abundance were floating, the leaves and stalks of which appeared quite perfect, but totally discoloured’.
The body itself was not much more than five feet tall, the coffin measuring five foot 6 inches in length.
Once examined, the church was opened for a short time so that the locals could view the remains prior to the coffin being resealed and put back ‘as near as circumstances would admit, in status quo’.
A similar scenario had been enacted a little more than 100 years previously at St Paul's Cathedral, London, concerning the corpse of John Colet, Dean of St Paul's, who died in 1519.
In about 1680 John Aubrey retold the following story:
John Colet, D.D., Deane of St Paule's, London.
After the Conflagration (his Monument being broken) somebody made a little hole towards the upper edge of his Coffin, which was closed like the coffin of a Pye and was full of a Liquour which conserved the body.
Mr Wyld and Ralph Greatorex tasted it and ‘twas of a kind of insipid tast, something of an Ironish tast.
The Coffin was of Lead, and layd in the Wall about 2 foot ½ above the surface of the Floore.
This was a strange rare way of conserving a Corps: perhaps it was a Pickle, as for Beefe, whose Saltness in so many years the Lead might sweeten and render insipid.
The body felt, to the probe of a stick which they thrust into a chinke, like boyld Brawne.
How much of the liquor in this anthropoid coffin was body fluid will have to be left to the imagination; suffice it to say that owing to the construction of such coffins it would have been practically impossible to have introduced much liquid preservatives.
In about 1724 John Lethieullier obtained a faculty (that is, a licence from the ecclesiastical authorities) to construct a mausoleum with subterranean burial vault on to St Mary's, Little Ilford.
He left instructions regarding the disposal of his remains, directing that his body should ‘be first opened’ and decently deposited in a leaden coffin at Little Ilford with his late wife; this was so done in 1737.
The 1984 reordering of the church provided the opportunity to examine the contents, and amongst the eight coffins was that of Charles Lethieullier, brother of the celebrated antiquarian, Smart Lethieullier, whose coffin also lay in the vault, though it had lost its outer wooden case and the inner lead shell had split along the joint where left flank and lid met.
The lead coffin itself was filled to within one inch of the brim with a tacky ochre-coloured liquid, somewhat the colour of heather honey but not quite so solid.
Only by touch was it possible to  establish that the body inside was entire, though it was not practical either to drain the liquid or to lift the remains.
The viscera chest was, however, opened.
Beneath the wooden lid and at the bottom of the still damp aromatic bran lay the soft organs and the heart, still elastic and resistant to the touch.
The Hunters' techniques cannot, alas, be regarded as contributions to the state of the art as it then existed.
Embalming was rarely practised during the eighteenth century and it had almost entirely disappeared during the nineteenth century.
However, in the 1890s an attempt was made by the trade to introduce arterial embalming as practised in the United States, the leading campaigners for this being the funeral furnishing firm of Dottridge Brothers.
It soon received the acclamation of the trade and by the 1920s the majority of undertakers in this country were offering hygienic treatment of the dead to their clients.
Part of this success must have been due to the Dottridges' persuasive advertising:
It is now becoming a generally acknowledged fact that the Undertakers in England have too long neglected the importance of sanitation as applied to their own profession.
No doubt the neglect has been due to the absence of  knowledge in dealing with these matters, and the ignorance of the right methods and necessary articles for use…
We all know the prehistoric method of treating the dead, which obtains even to-day in the less enlightened parts of the country — the body hurriedly placed in the coffin, the packing with sawdust, and the necessarily precipitate screwing down of the lid.
We know, too, the frequent result of such crude precautions, the often painful unpleasantness-to use a mild term — which results from putrefaction, and which the undertaker assures the family is ‘quite inevitable’…whereas when the body has been prepared by the Operator it keeps the appearance of life for an indefinite period, and the last look remains as a pleasant remembrance to their friends.
Firm, plump and juicy as Maria Van Butchell, no doubt!
Dress'd and Trimm'd: Winding-Sheets and Shrouds
We went to see a dead man laid out, and it would be a pity not to give you an account of his state.
He was dressed in a long flannel shirt edged with lace, with flounces all down the middle, and five or six more on either side of the chest, all sewn with wool, in accordance with an Act of Parliament which forbids the use of linen or cotton for this purpose.
The sleeves end in cuffs.
This shirt is put on over the head and does not surround the body in one piece but is fastened at the back.
The body is laid out in a coffin resting on a bed of bran or sawdust.
The face is shaved, the head is dressed in a bonnet, fastened at the top, and a cravat and gloves of flannel are worn.
When the lady is laid out, it is in a mob-cap and an embroidered headband, and neatly pressed flounces.
The shirt comes right down over the feet, and threaded through with a woollen thread at the ankles, with tassels at the end.
This account, written by a foreigner in London during his travels through England, is a description of ‘corpse dressing’ current during the first quarter of the eighteenth century.
Its author, Antoine-Joseph Dezallier-D'Argenville, writing in 1731, records the then recently introduced fashion for flounces on the front of the shroud.
Until the second and third quarters of the seventeenth century not all bodies were buried in coffins; but they did have shrouds.
The sixteenth-century shroud was a voluminous sheet, gathered at the head and foot ends in a knot; those of the eighteenth century were more tailored, with sleeves and draw-strings; whilst in the nineteenth century they were fully fashioned.
But it was not always thus.
The illuminated manuscripts known as Books of Hours, produced in the  Lowlands during the fifteenth century, particularly those containing the Office of the Dead, not only show how corpses were dressed at that time but also indicate how the limbs were positioned.
In the Rohan Hours , produced for Yolande of Aragon between c.1418–25 and now in the Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris, the shroud is shown as a loose sheet, almost as if the dead man had been lifted from his bed and placed into his coffin; no attempt has been made to mould the cloth about the body or to position the limbs.
By contrast, a small vignette on folio 120 of the Bedford Hours in the British Library has the corpse closely wrapped in a manner not unlike that of an Egyptian mummy.
A very small illumination of about 1450, and not much more than 1½ inches square, provides an insight into how the body was wrapped.
A sheet of cloth has been placed on to a stripped bed, the winding-sheet has been folded over the left-hand side of the corpse, the remainder drawn over the right, whilst the arms have been folded across the body in line with the bottom of the rib-cage.
Sometimes the winding-sheet was pinned, at other times it was sewn along the centre; the artist of the c.1435 Heures de Neville , also in the Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris, shows two corpses with centre-sewn winding-sheets in a larger illumination of monks reading in a bone-yard.
The representation of personages on monuments before the second quarter of  the fifteenth century showed them in all their might, majesty and power, attired in their finery and dressed to illustrate their status.
Thus a king would be shown in full coronation robes, holding the sceptres of estate and with a crown on his head, a bishop in full pontificals, a knight in his finest suit of armour and his lady dressed for Court.
However, during the fifteenth century changes were introduced and we see for the first time representations of corpses, cadavers and skeletons, and it is from these — usually to be found on memorial brasses, and particularly on those in East Anglia — that we acquire our first glimpse of the English shroud.
The Revd Herbert Macklin did not like the shroud brasses:
The custom of engraving shrouded figures and skeletons was introduced shortly before the middle of the fifteenth century and continued until the end of the sixteenth.
It was a horrible practice, and became most common in the reign of Henry VII, and especially in the eastern counties.
The shroud is usually knotted at the head and feet, and sufficiently open to expose the breast and knees of the deceased.
These ghastly memorials were frequently laid down during the lifetime of the persons they were intended to commemorate, in order that they might constantly be reminded that they were but mortal.
The emaciated corpse is the form most frequently adopted.
Skeletons are rarer, but may be seen at Hildersham, Cambs; Weybridge, Surrey; Margate, Norwich, and other places.
In form, the skeletons are rather crude, looking more like playful chimpanzees than fearful osseous frames, with their wide mouths and eye-sockets being no bigger than chocolate drops.
There are, however, two styles of shroud, one all-enveloping with top-knot and flowing drapery at the feet, the fabric pushed apart to exhibit the remains from upper pelvis to forehead and with the arms crossed over the breast so that the fingers touch the shoulders; the other is knotted at top and bottom with the skeleton free-standing, something achieved by sitting the top-knot on the skull and letting the rest fall freely, acting as a backdrop to the ghastly remains, with the arms dangling free and the hands outstretched.
The corpse/cadaver brasses sport shrouds of a type seen on the skeleton examples, though the presence of flesh allowed the cutter to render a more accurate portrayal of human features — often producing a successfully recognizable human being, albeit one in want of a good meal.
It is in these brasses that one discovers the three different ways of positioning the arms of a corpse.
The more common form shows the hands in an attitude of prayer, centre-chest height, with the fingertips touching and, occasionally, the thumbs crossed; the second position involves the crossing of the arms with fingertips at centre chest, the right arm being placed over the left and the fingers of both hands remaining closed but outstretched; finally, there is the attitude of total repose, legs slightly parted at the knees, the shoulders down and the hands placed over the groin, again with the right hand over the left and the fingers together yet unclasped.
It is extremely difficult to gauge accurately the dimensions of the shroud from these brasses, but a mean average would be twelve inches longer than the length  of the body — to allow for a six-inch knot at top and bottom — and three times its width.
The method of forming the top- and bottom-knots was to twist a thin strip of the shroud material into a cord.
However, some scholars have maintained that it was not unusual to save a remnant of one's swaddling clothes — particularly the chrysom cloth — for this purpose.
Children do not appear on memorial brasses until the 1420s, though by the 1450s they were a regular occurrence.
However, shrouded children had to wait until 1467 before being considered worthy of commemoration, and their introduction is a dramatic one on the 1467 Astley brass at Standon in Hertfordshire where ten swathed infants, four girls and six boys, are shown.
Rarer still are chrysom babies.
At public baptism the head of the naked infant was anointed, immediately after immersion had taken place, with the chrysom oil, a mixture of olive oil and balsam.
To prevent this from running down on-to the rest of the body and the swaddling clothes, it was immediately covered by a narrow linen band known as the ‘chrysom’; and it was the custom, should a child die before it was one month old, that this chrysom was used as the head-covering to the funerary swaddling.
On memorial brasses chrysom children are depicted in this outfit, with a cross shown on the forehead.
Seven examples of such chrysoms survive, one each in Buckinghamshire, Essex, Middlesex, Suffolk and Surrey, and two in Kent.
The finest in the series is that at Stoke d'Abernon, Surrey, to Elyn Bray, who died in 1516.
Anointing with chrysom oil ceased with the introduction of the Second Prayer Book of Edward VI in 1552.
Even so the showing of chrysom babies on brasses went on until the second quarter of the  seventeenth century, the last three in the extant series being 1600,1606 and 1631.
Figures on sepulchral monuments sporting shrouds in place of customary day dress are not so rare as those depicted on memorial brasses.
Both the 1431 monument to Bishop Richard Fleming in Lincoln Cathedral and that of 1442 to Sir John Golafre at Fyfield, Buckinghamshire, are of a type known collectively as ‘cadaver’ tombs, in which a standard effigy clothed as in life, lies on top of the tomb-chest, with a shrouded, sometimes verminous cadaver visible through the pierced side of the tomb-chest.
Those two examples, both with shrouds, are little more than three-dimensional renditions of the monumental brass type, the shrouds held in place with a top-knot, the opposite end hanging *eely behind the feet.
It is not until the last quarter of the sixteenth century that the shrouded effigy appears as the central sculptural feature on funerary monuments.
On the north wall of the chancel of St Mary's Church at Burford, Shropshire, stands a magnificent monument to Richard Cornwall (d.1568) with his parents.
It takes the form of a painted triptych, eleven feet high, and is signed by Melchior Salabuss and dated 1588.
Beneath the centre panel is a predella which, when opened, displays the corpse of Richard Cornwall in his shroud.
Here we see the usual linen winding-sheet, parted to show not only the face but the entire body, with the arms placed at his side and turned in at the elbows so that the hands meet over the groin.
The macabre cadaver is not the chosen depiction — rather we see a fresh corpse, almost as though we are viewing him immediately after his shrouding.
At Annesley, Nottinghamshire, is a more discreetly dressed gentleman of similar date, whose loosely wrapped winding-sheet is drawn down, rather than parted, to show the facial features, shoulder-length hair and a delicately embroidered cap.
Two further monuments of the late sixteenth century with shrouded effigies can be seen at Chesterfield and Fenny Bentley, both in Derbyshire.
The Chesterfield monument (c.1580–90), commemorating an unknown member of the Foljambe family, has the corpse loosely wrapped in an end-knotted winding-sheet and lying on a bier — the corpse does not lie flat but is slightly concave, as though suffering from a slight rigor mortis.
The Fenny Bentley figures, for there are two of them, also wear winding-sheets, but here they are tucked under the feet, secured by linen bands around the calves, and finished off with a neat bow; but the head end displays the standard knot.
The male figure of the pair has his arms across his chest, level with the bottom of the rib-cage, whereas the wife has her hands resting on the chest and clasped in an attitude of prayer.
In 1617 the sculptor Nicholas Stone ‘…mad a pector lieng on a grav ston of gre marbell for Mr Corell of Hatfield for which I had £20’.
William Curll still lies flat on the floor of Salisbury Chapel in St Etheldreda's, Hatfield, in his loosely fitting grave-clothes.
Gone now is the stylized shroud, for here we see a naturalistic figure, almost a portrait, wrapped in a very convincing linen sheet.
The high-relief figure — one could hardly call it a three-dimensional effigy — is placed on a plain black ledger lying on the floor, and appears as a body rising vertically from the grave.
A similar monument exists at Bassingbourne, Cambridgeshire, to Henry Buller who died in 1647.
When Mrs Elizabeth Williams died in childbirth in 1622 her father, Bishop Miles Smith, commissioned a magnificent monument from Samuel Baldwin to be set up in Gloucester Cathedral to her memory and that of her child.
Mother and baby lie side by side: Mrs Williams, represented as wearing day-clothes, is propped up on her right elbow, staring adoringly at her deceased infant; the latter is wrapped in a fine close-fitting linen shroud, drawn up over the feet rather than under, and tied at the knees with a fairly broad linen band.
As to posture, the baby's arms lie flat against its sides but with the hands meeting at the groin, similar to the Cornwall painting at Burford, Salop; its face is wreathed in a supercilious smile.
To complete the ensemble, Baldwin carved a small ruffled bib and a stiff cap.
The infant on the 1623 Manners tomb at Bakewell, Derbyshire, is a less attractive creature than the Williams child, though the grave-clothes are of greater interest.
The little dumpling stands to attention with its arms stiffly by its sides, as if being told off by a parent; the shroud appears to be a shift with separate head-cloth but in actuality is nothing more than the usual loosely gathered linen, parted with greater than usual emphasis to show the entire face.
The tie, of twisted fabric, is placed around the ankles and the parted shroud displays a small cap with ruffling, this last soon to become one of the standard items of grave-clothing.
It is rather difficult accurately to describe the idiosyncratic monument by Maximilian Colt at St Peter's, Edensor, in Derbyshire to the First Earl of Devonshire (d.1625) and his brother, Henry Cavendish (d.1616)— perhaps the closest parallel would be a marble armoire with dressing-table in front, the whole flanked by two fearsome martial figures.
Beneath the table, hard up against the back of the monument, is Henry Cavendish's skeleton, executed with some precision in marble, whilst in front is a truly magnificent image of the First Earl in the latest fashion for the grave.
Gone are the ties round the feet and in comes a full, loosely fitting single-piece garment, pleated at the neck but still with the top-knot; the face is completely exposed, showing the features in a peaceful attitude of repose, the limbs no longer with a stiff formality but a far more relaxed naturalism.
This new fashion for dressing a corpse was to remain in vogue for the next fifty years.
Yet,à la mode as the Earl's effigy might have been, nothing was to have such a profound effect on the sculptural representation of the shroud than that introduced by Nicholas Stone in his standing effigy of Dr John Donne for Old St Paul's Cathedral.
John Donne wrote freely on the subject of dying in his poems and of the respect he wished to have shown towards his corpse by those who dressed it and those who came to view it.
He also knew what he wanted when it came to the matter of his monument.
A few years before he died he posed for this effigy, placing the completed picture in his room, adjacent to his bed, as a memento mori .
Isaac  Walton, Donne's biographer, relates the tale: ‘Several charcoal fires being first madde in his large study, he brought with him into that place a winding sheet in his hand, and having put off all his clothes, had this sheet put on him, and so tied with knots at his head and feet, and his hands so placed as dead bodies are usually fitted, to be shrouded and put into their coffin, or grave…with his eyes shut and with so much of the sheet turned aside as might show his lean, pale and death-like face.’
During his last agonies Donne was often to glance towards this fearesome drawing.
It was eventually delivered up to Nicholas Stone shortly after Donne's death in March 1631 for transformation into stone.
It is, without doubt, one of the masterpieces of English baroque sculpture, the result of an excellent collaboration between an ingenious wit and a highly important sculptor.
Donne steps forward, his arms relaxing as if to balance himself during his first few faltering steps after centuries of rest in the tomb.
The loose shroud impedes his progress and his feet strain in vain against the tie of the bottom knot, a highly stylized gathering, resembling more a crimped ruff.
When Amy Moyle, the wife of Josias Clarke, died in 1631 her husband decided to petrify his last memory of her by having cut a supine effigy, which showed his wife in her shroud.
Her monument in Boughton Aluph church, Kent, is a majestic tour de force and ably illustrates early seventeenth-century female grave-clothes.
The shroud is, again, a one-piece creation, sufficiently long to be draped over and under the feet, the sleeves equally full.
And here we learn something new, for though the sculptor has chosen to leave the left hand exposed he gives us an indication as to how shrouds were placed once the body had been encoffined: the right sleeve has been pulled down over its hands and gently tucked under the fingers.
Yet again we see the draw-string at the neck band, the ruching now turned down, as if a ruff.
The head, supported on a tasselled pillow, wears a frilled cap and the winding-sheet again hangs from the head in neat folds, running the length of the body underneath.
An identical monument exists at Spaxworth, Norfolk, but here we have two shrouded figures, William Peck (d. 1635) and his wife, he lying behind and a little above her.
Both wear shrouds of the Boughton Aluph type, though she is sans cap and he sans ruff; in both cases the winding-sheet with its discreet top-knot, acts as the cap.
The Spaxworth monument is by Edward Marshall; that at Boughton Aluph is so similar that it must come from the same workshop.
The Donne monument set a fashion for ‘resurrection’ figures.
William Wright of Charing Cross's 1634 monument to Lady Deane at Great Maplestead, Essex, has a more exaggerated movement than that of Donne, and the hands are now completely liberated from the shroud as she emerges from the black marble recess of the tomb.
The top-knot is still in evidence but the bottom tie has yielded due to the ‘movement’ of the corpse in answering the Resurrection Trump.
Less dramatic, but in a similar style of shroud, are the life-size standing figures by Joshua Marshall on the 1664 monument at Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire, to Edward Noel, Viscount Campden and his wife Juliana, whose emergence from a black niche gives added emphasis to the whiteness of the shroud and the posture of the figures.
In 1674 Marshall was commissioned to erect a similar monument at East Carlton, Northamptonshire, to Sir Geoffrey and Lady Palmer.
This is more romantic in concept than the Chipping Campden version.
Sir  Geoffrey, in a fashionable high-necked flannel undershirt leads his wife by the hand out from the niche, he inquisitive and she pensive, but both with their right foot firmly forward.
It is a somewhat ridiculous pose, as if they were dancing a gavotte at an exclusive pyjama party.
The shrouds are shapeless, almost winding-sheets, and the creases too deliberately crisp to be taken for flannel.
More popular — because they were cheaper — than the Joshua Marshall type of resurrection monument were those produced from the yard of John and Matthias Christmas.
These displayed a more immediate response to the Last Trump, with the shrouded figure depicted in the very act of rising from the coffin.
Five such monuments were commissioned from the brothers between 1628 and 1651: Constance Whitney (d.1628) in St Giles, Cripplegate (destroyed during the Second World War); Mary Salter (d.1631) at Iver, Buckinghamshire; Sara Colville (d.1631) in All Saints', Chelsea; Temperance Brown (d.1635) at Steane, Northamptonshire; and Mary Calthorpe (d.1640) at East Barsham, Norfolk.
A provincial rendition of the Iver, Bucks., version — and almost certainly not by the Christmas brothers — was erected at Rodney Stoke, Somerset, in 1650 to commemorate George Rodney.
All wear the same type of loose shroud, a garment similar to a long nightshirt with draw-strings at the neck and wrists and a cuff deep enough to cover the hand while leaving the fingers exposed.
Apart from George Rodney with his distinctive male top-knot, the head-dress of the other five appears to be nothing more than the broad folds of the linen winding-sheet.
John Tradescant Jnr and Elias Ashmole, Windsor herald, were great friends.
Tradescant's father, also named John, was an ingenious gentleman gardener, the Gertrude Jekyll of the seventeenth century.
He was first employed by the Cecils at Hatfield prior to his becoming arboriculturalist to George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, and then, in 1630, ‘Keeper of his Majesty's Gardens, Vines and Silkworms’, being succeeded at his death in 1638 by his son, John.
Both travelled widely in their search for new specimen plants and, on their sojourns, amassed an amazing collection of ethnographical curios and shells which they housed at Lambeth in a room known as ‘The Ark’.
These treasures came to Elias Ashmole in 1678 on the death of Hester, Tradescant Jnr's widow, and eventually formed the nucleus of the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford.
Amongst the curiosities was a series of Tradescant portraits, which were hung on the gallery walls.
One of these, by an anonymous artist, shows John Tradescant Snr on his death-bed in 1638.
The pose of the corpse recalls that of Thomas Aston's wife in the celebrated portrait of 1635 by John Souch of Chester (Col. 4 ) and, in a more romantic vein, that of 1633 by van Dyck of Lady Venetia Stanley on her death-bed.
Of the three, that showing John Tradescant is the finest, for neither corpse in the other two paintings is shown in shrouds, both women having been painted as if at the moment of death rather than after the laying-out.
By contrast, we see Tradescant lying on his newly sheeted bed, washed and with beard neatly trimmed, wearing a superfine linen shroud of the highest quality, the top-knot having now become nothing more than a small tassel attached to the linen itself.
It is, arguably, the finest pictorial representation of a seventeenth-century winding-sheet.
In one the vestibules of the rebuilt church of St John, Egham, is a reset monument of 1638 by Maximilian Colt to Sir John Denham.
Far more dramatic  than his 1625 Cavendish monument at Edensor, here he has Denham resembling a semi-nude Donne, for the top-knotted winding-sheet has lost its pins and slipped off the body as his reinvigorated corpse steps out of a coffin, his left hand raised as if to shield his eyes from the  brilliance of the Second Coming.
The particular feeling of revulsion held by certain members of the aristocracy against poor and lowly corpse-dressers gazing on their naked cadavers is more associated with embalming than shrouding.
However, Dame Margaret Verney of Claydon gave quite specific instructions in her will, drafted on 2 May 1639 and addressed to her son, Ralph.
Let me be buried in lead at Claydon next to where your father proposes to lie himself, and let no stranger wind me, nor do not let me be stripped, but put a clean smock on me, and let my face be hid and do you stay in the room and see me wound and laid in the first coffin, which must be of wood if I do not die of any infectious disease, else I am so far from desiring it that I forbid you to come near me.
.
So far we have been looking at the type of grave-clothes provided for the very wealthy.
But what about the poor and the lower middle class?
Haute couture in the tomb did not really preoccupy the majority of the populace and, in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, the system of requisitioning a single linen sheet from the household supply seemed to be the norm.
In instances where the corpse was to travel to the grave in just a winding-sheet, either palled on the bier or via the parish coffin, one does wonder whether there was an unwritten code that the sheet chosen be one of the best from the linen cupboard, or if the sheet upon which the person died sufficed.
Whatever the case, the sheet would have been wrapped around the body in the customary fashion with top- and bottom-knots.
Occasionally linen, holland or cerecloth would have been specially bought in for this purpose rather than sacrificing a useful item of domestic furnishing in an age when linen of any appreciable width was a luxury and worthy of bequest ('There are 4 very fine smocks in your father's little linen trunk and one of my four breadth Holland sheets for your own girl Peg…and I desire your father that he will not let any of my household linen be sold, but that it may go to you and your eldest son and I hope to his son too, only some of my broderies  of my own making give to your sister. ').
This cloth could be had off the baulk in length by the ell, a measurement approximating forty-four inches, with four and a half ells considered sufficient for the purpose.
Certainly it was possible to purchase shrouds ready-made by, at the latest, the second quarter of the seventeenth century, and Gittings makes mention of the body of Reginald Shrawley, a brother of the Hospital of St John, Canterbury, being buried in ‘a sheet, shirt and cap’, costing, in all, four shillings.
The precise choice of material was important, a status symbol almost.
Linen, when new, had a certain quantity of starch applied, thereby making it slightly stiff whilst remaining pliable; wrapped in such material a body would be given a neat, crisp appearance and presentable for viewing, the shroud being drawn away from the features for this purpose.
Holland was an unbleached linen with a glazed surface and, though slightly less attractive to the eye than bleached linen, had the same properties, with the addition of being water-resistant, an important matter to be taken into account when dead bodies were concerned.
Cerecloth, a waxed unbleached linen — nowadays only seen as the protective sheet between the top of an altar and the fair linen — was rarely used for shrouds and is more associated with the wrapping of embalmed corpses, having been used as an adjunct to such hygienic treatment.
The laying-out and washing of a corpse, the ‘dressing and trimming’ as it was known, might have been performed by a member of the family, though by the early seventeenth century it was more usual, both in town and country, for this service to be provided by the coffin-maker.
He would tend to have a number of lowly women on his books living in the locality whom he could call upon at short notice to attend — the Mrs Gamps of this world.
Once washed, the body was dressed in a shirt, cap and winding-sheet if male, or shift, ruffle-edged cap and winding-sheet if female, with the type of material and its finish dependent on the social standing of the deceased, the snobbery of the purchaser or the depth of the purse.
Chin-cloths were usually removed before the fitting of the headgear, the tapes of the latter producing the same effect.
Occasionally the women dressing the corpse might introduce sprigs of sweet-smelling herbs, such as rosemary, bay or thyme, in between the inner garments and the winding-sheet.
This helped to mask the odour of death if the corpse was to stay in the home, especially during the warmer summer months.
This appears not to have happened in the case of Samuel Pepys's uncle; writing in his diary for 6 July 1661, he related the incident of ‘My uncle's corpse in a coffin standing upon joint stools in the chimney in the hall; but it began to smell so I caused it to be set forth in the yard all night, and watched by my aunt.’
Poor aunt!
It was rare for corpses to be committed to the grave wearing day-clothes, items of personal jewellery or any other keepsake.
However, fourteenth-century people were sometimes buried with a purchased Indulgence, and there is at the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, a small latten figure, not much more than four inches high, of a man in a winding-sheet which might have been enclosed within the folds of the shroud, in the same way that stamped leaden crosses were used up to the seventeenth century, to foil Satan's attempts to claim the deceased's soul as his own; the date of manufacture of the Ashmolean item is indeterminate, but it seems doubtful that such an item would have been  produced much after c.1550.
Recent vault clearances of over 2,000 coffins of the period 1729–1865 from St Marylebone Parish Church and Christchurch, Spitalfields, 18 exhibit a change in attitude; for here, whilst it was not unusual to find wedding rings and dentures in situ , there were two instances — both men — of day-clothes having been used in place of the shroud: one in military uniform, the other an  octogenarian macaroni with his walking stick, sporting an outfit more suited to a man sixty years his junior, as did the coiffure of his wig.
How long these shrouded corpses lay above ground depended on a number of factors: whether or not an autopsy was required, the undertaker's schedule, the availability of a grave-digger — or the parish coffin if it was needed — the wishes of the family or any specific instruction left by the deceased.
Judging from entries made in burial registers it appears that three days was the average length of delay.
Misson agrees:
The Body being thus equipp'd and laid in the Coffin (which Coffin is sometimes very magnificent), it is visited a second time to see that it is bury'd in Flannel, and that nothing about it sowed with Thread.
They let it lye three or four days in this Condition; which Time they allowe, as well to give the dead Person an Opportunity of Coming to Life again, if his Soul has not quite left his Body, as to prepare Mourning, and the Ceremonies of the Funerall.
Dezallier-D'Argenville slightly reduces the delay: ‘Among the common people it is customary to stay at home for two or three days after death, and to keep the body in a room where friends and relatives are invited to come and see it.’
The year 1660 saw a major revolution in grave-clothes, indirectly leading to the firm establishment of undertaking as a distinct trade, the birth of a new industry and some additional work for the jobbing printer; for in this year an Act came  into force, which decreed that all persons had to be buried in shifts, shrouds and winding-sheets made of woollen material, rather than linen, and free from ‘Flax, Hemp, Silk, Hair, Gold or Silver, or other than what is made of Sheeps Wooll only’.
As it happened, not everyone was willing to kowtow to this woolly Act, so it had to be strengthened in 1678 by another, this time imposing a fine on all defaulters.
In addition, this 1678 Act ‘for lessening the importation of Linnen from beyond the Seas, and the encouragement of the Woollen and Paper Manufacturers of the Kingdome’ further instructed that the curate of every parish keep a register, provided at the expense of the parish, into which had to be entered all burials together with the affidavits taken by the justice of the peace, mayor, ‘or such like chief officer’in the parish or, ‘if there be no officer, then by any curate within the county where the corpse was buried (except him in whose parish the corpse was buried), who must administer the oath, and set his hand gratis’.
Compliance sometimes led to delay in burial, though there was a waiver for anyone dying of the plague.
The penalty for not complying with these terms was £5, of which half towards the relief of the poor of the parish.
It was a highly unpopular Act; nevertheless it remained on the statute books until 1815.
For the wealthy, the Act for Burying in Woollen imposed but another expense, as £5 was but a small price to pay so as not to be buried in a material proscribed for even the lowliest rustic.
John Aubrey records how Thomas Hobbes, the philosopher, was ‘put into a Woollen shroud’ at his death in 1679, arguing that had Hobbes received the £100 per annum pension granted by Charles II in 1660 —‘At the Restoration, Charles II awarded him a pension of £100 a year — which, however, His Majesty forgot to pay’— then he might not have been buried in such a common shift.
Some even went so far as to stipulate the use of linen in their will: Hannah Deane of High Ongar, Essex, took account of the £5 fine when drawing up her instructions in 1784: ‘And I do hereby Order and direct that sum of Ten pound shall be paid to the person who shall…see me Inclosed and laid in my Coffin in Linen and shall give Information and make Oath thereof wheereby the Poor of the parish Will be intitled to the sum of fifty shilling….’
However, it was an ill wind and some did profit by it, namely the undertakers.
If everyone was now to be buried in flannel then what profit could be gained in having ready-made shrouds in stock in a multitude of patterns and sizes and available on demand!
Consequently, specialist workshops sprung up, supplying not only off-the-peg shrouds but also coffin linings and other associated items of soft goods.
How much of a threat this posed to those drapers who themselves furnished funerals is not recorded, but as none appear to have taken legal action, it can only be assumed that they too had dealings with these manufacturers whilst continuing to offer a funeral service to the general public.
The other set of tradesmen to benefit from the Act were the jobbing printers, for it was they — rather than an alternative central source — who provided the blank affidavits.
Whilst most of these were quite plain, others had woodblock illustrations of skulls, skeletons, death's heads, crossed bones, spades, hour-glasses, winged cherub heads, shrouded corpses — in flannel, of course— and coffins.
There was no set text for the wording, it being left to the printer to ensure that what was asked for complied with the Act.
The acquisition of grave-clothes did not need to wait until death, and many a  young bride-to-be, especially in the more remote country areas, included such items in their trousseaus, either buying them ready-made from one of the known outlets, or having them made by a local seamstress, or producing them herself.
It was a dismal yet necessary task, and whilst one can imagine a young woman's producing such items for herself and her future husband, it is more difficult for us to accept that she probably also fashioned one or two smaller versions at the same time, for infant mortality was high.
The tradition continued throughout the nineteenth century and well into the twentieth.
Alice Shelley (d.1960) and Minnie Shelley (d.1966), two  nonagenarian  sisters of Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, were buried in shrouds which they had themselves made.
The most moving renditions of late seventeenth-century children's shrouds appear in two works executed by artists in memory of their own infants.
The miniaturist John Hoskins the Younger married Grace Beaumont in February 1669/70 and their first child, a boy, was born in 1670/71.
He died soon afterwards and Samuel Cooper executed a chalk drawing of the boy on his death-bed.
The bed has been laid with fresh linen, cold and white.
The shroud is a one-piece shift with a broad, slightly ruched yoke and, in place of draw-strings, black ribbons have been tied about the wrist over the sleeve; a further black bow has been attached to the neck of the garment.
The body has slipped slightly down into the bed, rucking the shroud at the waist and behind the right shoulder.
This type of shift was slit  down the back for ease of application and secured with back-tie draw-strings at the neck and waist; such items were, it is assumed, readily available from the undertaker.
To complete the ensemble there is a loose-fitting bonnet with pinked edging and a broad white tie-tape.
It is a highly accomplished drawing, full of pathos and the grief of the artist.
Lydia Dwight, the daughter of the Fulham potter John Dwight, died in 1674 when she was five years old.
Her father, as anxious as Hoskins to possess a memento of the child, executed two stoneware portraits, one a figurine of a small bare-footed child in a loose calf-length shift walking towards the New Horizon, the other a naturalistic representation of the little girl dressed for her coffin (Col. 5 ).
Lydia lies more comfortably than baby Hoskins, the angle of the corpse vis-à-vis the pillow being less exaggerated.
A detailed examination of the linen, the small pillow with its corner tassels and broderie anglaise hem and the wrap-over sheet with similar trimmings, appear not to be bedclothes but an exceptionally superior coffin suite.
Primarily the body has been dressed in a blouse with long sleeves and tightly buttoned cuffs; over this is a simple shift with integral hood, drawn back to show the features.
Beneath the hood Lydia sports a close-fitting cap with broad head-bean of broderie anglaise with similar tie-tapes.
On encoffining, the hood would be unfolded and drawn over the face, the top sheet turned up and tucked in around the neck, if not higher.
Her hands are clasped in the traditional manner, at centre chest with right hand over left, the index finger of the left hand placed between the index finger and thumb of the right, and clasping a bunch of small summer flowers.
Her natural expression removes some of the horror of death and, with her floral tribute, looks more like Little Red Riding Hood asleep under the tree; the same cannot be said for the Hoskins child.
One of the more interesting adjuncts to the Act for Burying in Woollen was the introduction of the funeral ticket — whether first suggested by the jobbing printers or a particularly ingenious coffin-maker is not known.
The majority of the early tickets, those produced during the last four decades of the seventeenth century, incorporated imagery similar to that found on the printed affidavits.
These tickets were produced en masse , though certain coffin-makers and funeral furnishers are known to have commissioned their own designs, with a central cartouche for the printed or hand-written details announcing the name of the deceased and the place, date and time of the funeral.
Alternatively, they could be had ready-printed with blanks in the text for completion by the funeral furnisher.
Whatever the method chosen, these invitations were issued only for the more important — i.e. expensive — funerals; those of lesser rank had to rely on word of mouth.
By around 1700 grave-clothes changed, probably as a result of the influence of the soft-goods trade in ready-made items, and adopted a form which was to last for the next seventy-five years.
The winding-sheet with its top- and bottom-knots had been in steady decline during the last quarter of the seventeenth century, its place being taken by the open-backed long-sleeved shift with draw-strings at wrist and neck, either with or without an integral hood.
The cap and bonnet had been a feature of grave-clothes since the 1630s, the under-shirt having been introduced at the same time.
However, with the coming of the off-the-peg shroud there was a designer influence coming into force, which resulted in a less  voluminous garment with tacked ruching, or gathered pleats, running the length of the garment, with or without applique horizontal bows.
For the time being the knot at the foot end remained.
Types of this shroud can be seen on the c.1700 trade card of William Grinley and to better effect on the c.1720 trade card of coffin-maker Eleazar Malory, the latter showing an extremely contented corpse modelling one of Malory's own creations.
The 1690s saw the end of the formal representation of the shroud in funerary sculpture with the commissioning in 1694 of the Catesby monument at Whiston, Northamptonshire.
Erected in 1700 it takes the form of two busts on a wide plinth, flanked by Ionic columns and surmount by a pediment.
Thomas Catesby wears semi-formal day-clothes with a full wig; however, Mrs Catesby sports a daring shift — loose, and rather too low-cut for decency in the tomb — and an à la mode one-piece shroud with attached top-knotted hood.
With eyes open and face smiling she appears to be unaware of the grave-clothes; it is as if the sculptor added them against orders, his way of telling the viewer that this attractive lady was now dead.
It is difficult to judge the material of the shroud from its marble representation, for sculpture does not lend itself easily to such subtleties.
However, the thin cut of the marble shift here contrasts with the slightly thicker gauge of the shroud; is the sculptor thus implying that the shift is of linen and the shroud of flannel?
During the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries the skeleton was a recurring motif in funerary art, appearing not only on trade cards and invitations but also on monuments; its symbolism was profound.
When Lady Diana Warburton died in March 1693–94, her executors commissioned a large standing monument for St John's church, Chester, from the sculptor Edward Pierce, the symbolism of which leaving no one in doubt of its meaning.
The central figure is a naturalistic marble skeleton holding open a winding-sheet to welcome Lady Warburton.
It is a tour de force ; for the sculptor, who died shortly after its erection, it was to be his last monument.
Two animated skeletons appear on an unusual wall monument of c.1710 by Francis Bird to Mrs Elizabeth Benson in St Leonard's, Shoreditch.
Having completed the fixing of a winding-sheet to a young oak, they proceed to tear the tree in two — an attempt to destroy the Tree of Life.
Less dramatic is Thomas Stayner's 1714 monument to Dr Thomas Turner at Stowe-Nine-Churches, Northamptonshire; large and grand, the inscription appears on an outstretched winding-sheet beneath a central baldacchino (or canopy).
Very little was published on coffins and coffin-making before the beginning of this century.
However, a detailed examination in the early 1980s of nearly 1,000 coffins of the period 1730–1860 in the vaults of Christchurch, Spitalfields, revealed a wealth of information previously unrecorded.
It was noticed that some undertakers dispensed with full-length shrouds, preferring to adapt the coffin lining to serve this purpose.
Once the coffin had received its primary lining and edged frill, two rectangular sheets — both the length and width of the coffin — were tacked to the base at its sides.
Once the body had been placed in the coffin and the fitted pillow positioned under the head, these ‘sheets’ were folded over the remains and either pinned together or roughly sewn into place.
The upper section of the sheet was left parted to expose the features to view and remained so until the time came to secure the lid.
In this way the body was put into the coffin wearing just a shift and bonnet.
It was not only a neat way to ‘finish’ the interior but also gave the dressed corpse the appearance of being in a bed.
This would have been more expensive than the winding-sheet but it presented the body in a more natural attitude of repose.
Mrs Strutt, the wife of the pioneer mill-owner Jedidiah Strutt, was encoffined in this way, in ‘a Suit of Superfine Crape consisting of a Shroud Sheets Cap & Pillow…£2 2s 0d’.
By the 1770s the winding-sheet had almost disappeared, to be replaced by coffin sheets.
The plain or flounced shroud with cap or bonnet became the standard mode of dress for the tomb, with the optional extras of mittens, stockings and, occasionally, slippers.
One coffin of the 1780s, examined at Spitalfields, had the remains dressed in gown, chin cloth, cap, mittens, stockings and slippers in addition to fitted side-sheets.
In the provinces it took a little time before London fashions were adopted.
When Thomas Spackman entered into negotiations with the sculptor John Deval in 1782 regarding his monument for Cliffe Pypard church, Wiltshire, he reverted to a style fashionable in the late seventeenth century: the ‘resurrection’ model as erected by Joshua Marshall in  1664 at Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire, and that of 1674 to Sir Geoffrey and Lady Palmer at East Carlton, Northamptonshire.
Spackman is seen walking out of a black niche, his right leg forward, and the right hand holding the winding-sheet against the outer thigh; underneath he wears an open shirt with broad cuffs from which the draw-strings have been released.
Unfortunately we do not know what his chosen undertaker, John Rogers, of Great Tittlefield Street, Oxford Market, London, provided in the way of grave-clothing on Spackman's death in 1786.
But why go to the expense of elaborate shrouds and superfine linen coffin linings; why not just put the naked body into the coffin and have done with it?
Dezallier-D'Argenville provides us with the answer: ‘Among the common people it is customary to stay at home for two or three days after death, and to keep the body in a room where friends and relatives are invited to come and see it.’
No coffin-maker or funeral furnisher worthy of his reputation would have failed to dress a corpse, no matter how lowly his subject might have been.
Funeral furnishing was a trade in which the outward and visible signs of his merchandise helped to advertise his craft.
It was important, bearing in mind private viewing, that bodies should be not only as wholesome as possible but also as well dressed; and dressed not only in a material according to social status but also in as well upholstered a coffin as funds would permit.
Agreed, there was little he could do to  ‘sweeten’ the corpse, but so much depended on how the body was ‘dress'd and trimm'd’; few people would be willing to patronize a funeral furnisher who took little care over the presentation of bodies.
The women weeping over an open coffin in a Rowlandson drawing of c.1760 would have had more reason for grief had the merchandise not come up to their expectations (Col. 6 ).
One particular difficulty experienced by the trade with the single-piece gown related to the positioning of the limbs.
The enveloping shroud covered a multitude of sins but, now that the corpse was exposed, greater attention had to be paid to posture.
One way of doing this was to tie the ankles together and to pinion the arms against the side of the corpse with the waist-band of the shroud.
This was in evidence at Spitalfields and again during Dr Owen Beattie's 1981–6 examination of three seamen from the Franklin Arctic expedition of 1845–8, particularly the corpse of John Torrington (d. 1846) which had ties at the elbows, wrist, ankles and big toes.
The majority of eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century grave-clothes were still being manufactured in London but by the 1830s more were coming from the Lancashire area.
With the repeal of the Act for Burial in Woollen the market was open to a variety of textiles: alpaca, calico, cambric, cashmere, etamine, flannel, holland, linen, muslin, poplin, satin, serge and silk being used for shrouds and winding-sheets; and calico, cambric, flannel, linen, silk and swansdown for linings.
By the end of the eighteenth century ready-made coffins were being supplied lined by the manufacturers but one had to purchase shrouds and winding-sheets separately.
From a trade catalogue issued by Turner of Farringdon in 1838 comes the following list of prices:
In all, Turner stocked twenty lengths of shroud, from twenty inches to six feet 3 inches and nineteen lengths of winding-sheet, from twenty-two inches to six feet 3 inches.
Both the ‘Fine Rose’ and the ‘Superior Rose fully trimmed’would have been provided with buttoned rosettes, similar to those shown on a late nineteenth-century shroud in the Castle Museum, York.
For those who wished to make their own coffin clothes the 1838 Workwoman's Guide came to the rescue:
A SHROUD, is composed of a peculiar kind of flannel, woven on purpose, and called shrouding flannel; it is made of a breadth and a half, full length, so as to cover the feet; one seam is sewed up, leaving the other open behind, like a pinafore; slits are cut for arm-holes, and plain long sleeves, without gussets set in; the front is gathered at the waist, and drawn up into a narrow piece; this is twice repeated, at intervals of three nails down the skirt, upon each of these gatherings, round the neck and at the wrists, a kind of border of the same flannel, punched at the edge in a pattern, is plaited, and an edging of the same is made at the bottom.
For men, the shroud is made exactly the same as the above for women, excepting that there is no gathering in the front.
There were also instructions relating to the head-gear: ‘CAP.
If the usual cap is not put on, the following is made for a man: it is of flannel, cut exactly like an infant's foundling cap.
A quilling of the punched flannel is put round the face, and a band of it laid on behind, and across the top of the head, strings of the same, are also sewed in.
CAP FOR A WOMAN.
This is of flannel: the round part is plaited up to form the front, and a quilling of the bordering put on, a band of the same laid on at the back, and strings.’
Post-mortem photographic portraiture is extremely rare but in the churchyard at St John's, Bedwardine , Worcestershire, is a small monument by James Forsyth incorporating a positive collodion on glass of John Garmston Hopkins, the son of Thomas Hopkins, hop merchant.
John Garmston Hopkins died at Belmont House, Worcester, on 22 January 1871 and his father commissioned Francis Charles Earl of Worcester Broad Street to immortalize the lad in a photograph destined for the churchyard memorial.
The finished product was  large, 6 by 13¾ inches, and shows a young man on a draped sofa, his head resting on a pillow.
He wears a one-piece cashmere shroud tied at the waist with a twisted silken cord and with rosettes on either side of the turned-down collar.
It is an interesting garment which, with its long sleeves, has the flavour more of a monastic habit than a shroud.
The arms are placed across the breast, with the hands directed towards the opposite shoulder, a pose not met with in funerary sculpture.
Although he was obviously placed carefully on to the sofa, the freshly pomaded hair is awry and could have benefited from a comb prior to being photographed.
It is a terrible image; the child is so patently dead and cold.
Yet perhaps Thomas Hopkins and his wife took some solace in so commemorating the death of their eldest son.
By the close of the nineteenth century the major centre for the manufacture of shrouds had shifted from London to Lancashire, the supplier selling either to the wholesale warehouses or direct to the funeral furnisher.
The shroud was beginning to adopt a couture of its own, with distinct styles for boys and girls, men and women; those for males were sans bows whilst the female styles had less panel ruching on the torso and a high-neck frill.
Stiffer materials such as swansdown and cashmere were replacing silk, whilst flannel and stiffened cotton remained the more popular lines.
There was a greater choice in colour and one could now acquire a purple cashmere for one's wife or a navy serge for a deceased child.
For the funeral furnisher and the hospital there was a very simple ‘manchestered’ cotton gown, suitable for laying-out purposes but perhaps too plain for encoffining.
There has been little development in style since the 1920s though the range of materials has increased.
The present-day funeral director has more choice now than ever before.
However, a glance at a catalogue issued in the 1920s illustrates how little the designs have changed over the last seventy years.
Lapped in Lead, Encased in Oak: The Coffin
W. PICKARD, UNDERTAKER, CABINET MAKER, UPHOLSTERER, PAPER HANGER, &C., MARKET PLACE, LICHFIELD Sole AGENT FOR THE New Patent AIR-TIGHT METALLIC COFFINS,
Answering the purpose of shell, lead, and outside coffin, at less than half the usual cost.
An inspection of the Models and the Testimonials of the most eminent of the Medical Profession of the country cannot fail to produce a decided conviction in their superiority.
The following are the Testimonials of the Medical Gentlemen of Lichfield.
‘Various reasons enable me to form a high estimate of the benefits to be derived from the use of the Air-Tight Metallic Coffins, in all cases of interment.
They are cheaper than wooden coffins, lighter than coffins of lead, and as safe as the most expensive contrivance.’
JAMES RAWSON, M.D., & c .
‘We consider the Metallic Coffins superior to any we have seen, in a sanitary point of view.’
M.B. MORGAN.
HERBERT M. MORGAN.
C.E.E. WELCHMAN.
W.F. SPOFFORTH.
HALFORD W. HEWITT.
A.C. MORGAN.
The foregoing announcement appeared in an 1865 issue of the Lichfield Advertiser .
Doubtless Mr Pickard was pleased to have the support of the medical men of the town — a great fillip to his trade — though it is questionable whether he would have received like acclamation from the superintendent of Lichfield Cemetery, for iron coffins, as well as lead shells, took a long time to break down if deposited in the soil.
The vestry of the City church of St Peter-le-Poore, Broad Street, also had this in mind and, as a result, officials were charging an additional £50 in 1838 for iron coffins deposited in their vaults over and above the standard fee of £1 15s. 2d. as against the extra £20 asked for a lead shell — with all fees double for non-parishioners.
A single-shell wooden coffin disintegrated in a shorter time, thereby releasing space within the soil for further deposits, to the financial advantage of the incumbent.
Equally, St Paul's, Shadwell, was at the same time looking for a £6 fee for each iron or lead coffin deposited within a brick-lined grave in the churchyard, though their most expensive intramural location commanded a charge of only £4 18s.
Convincing as Pickard's advertisement might appear, iron coffins did not capture the imagination of the trade nor that of the populace, being one of the least successful funerary innovations of the nineteenth century.
Francis Seymour Haden's ‘earth to earth’ wicker basket, Dottridge Brothers' lacquered papier-mâché ‘earth to earth’coffin, the metallic shell with glass face panel and gutta-percha seal — so convenient for viewing the remains of the repatriated — and the shallow cremation coffin with its combustible metal fittings and recessed lid (tailored to fit Gorini's furnaces at St John's, Woking) were four of the better-known alternatives available at the end of the nineteenth century to those interested in the sanitary disposal of the dead.
To the majority, the corpse was putrefying matter which formerly housed the soul and spirit; others were less realistic, seeing in it instead a human being in suspended animation, in a profound sleep beyond our ken, awaiting a miraculous awakening.
Whilst most recognized the coffin as a means of transporting the dead to an authorized place of disposal, some viewed it as a receptacle for a precious relic — so precious that the very thought of earth or elements contributing to its destruction should be avoided at all cost.
The coffin was — and, to some extent, still is — a status symbol, its finish and furniture indicative of the social standing of the deceased.
No fifteenth-century peasant or artisan expected to be buried in a coffin; by contrast no noble would have been subjected to shroud burial in the churchyard.
The introduction of the reusable parish coffin in the sixteenth century signalled a marked improvement in the decoration on coffins supplied for the nobility and gentry: in this way the class differential persisted well after death.
The contributing factor to the abandonment of the parish coffin in the seventeenth century was not the new and innovative trade of funeral furnishing — though that did have a profound effect on coffin types — but pestilence and the plague.
By the eighteenth century the trade had the total monopoly on the provision of coffins.
In 1668 the dramatist Sir William Davenant died.
‘I went to his funerall.
He had a coffin of Walnutt-tree; Sir John Denham said ‘twas the finest coffin that ever he sawe!
O rare coffin!
The funeral trade furnished funerals in accordance with the rank of the deceased, and it was they who decided on the suitable coffin type, quality of lining and shroud.
Sometimes, though certainly not as a general  rule, the family had some influence on what was provided.
As walnut was both an exceedingly expensive and difficult wood to work, few if any coffin-makers would have kept it in stock or have possessed the expertise to fashion it.
On balance it seems reasonable to assume that this coffin was supplied by one of the established London cabinet-makers with a small funeral furnishing interest.
But who selected walnut as the medium to be used?
Almost certainly it would have been the executors, after consultation with the family, as not even a cabinet-maker used to the undertaking trade would have been so bold as to have proceeded with such an elaborate item without having first enquired of the executors.
Some people, but only a very few, endeavoured to thwart the lucrative customs of the funeral furnisher by specifically requesting a coffin of a type not expected of their situation.
Sarah Hare, the youngest daughter of Sir Thomas and Lady Elizabeth Hare of Stow Bardolph, Norfolk, was very specific regarding the simplicity of her grave-clothes and coffin, making her wishes abundantly clear in her will of 1743: ‘…my coffin to be made of the best Elm lin'd with a thinn lead with a flap of lead sawder'd down over me, not to have a nail or any ornament that is not absolutely necessary, except a plate with my coat of arms and with this inscription: They that humble themselves shall be Exalted.’
Whilst Sarah Hare left a perfect template for a gentlewoman's funeral, Hannah Deane of High Ongar, Essex, went even further when it came to the specification for her coffin.
Indeed it would be more to the point had her will of 1784 been retitled ‘Funeral Instructions’ as most of its wording relates specifically to the funeral.
…
And my Will is that William Moore (Carpenter if living) shall make my Coffin and that the same shall be covered with Black Cloth and nailed with White Nails and to be of the value of Five Pounds or thereabouts.
But in case he shall die in my Lifetime then I desire that my Coffin be made by his Son in like manner as his Father was to have made the same for which I Will he shall be paid the Sum of Ten Pounds and that in such Case the said Legacy of Ten Pounds so given to his father shall cease and not be paid.
And my Will is to be Buried in Linen in a Suit which I shall provide for that purpose And I do hereby order and direct that the Sum of Ten Pounds shall be paid to the person who shall be the last in attending me to the time of my expiring and who shall see me Inclosed and laid in my Coffin in Linen.
This eighteenth-century fascination with funerary exactitude was not limited to the distaff side of society.
Nathaniel Houlton, a widower living in Bristol, itemized the details of his coffin in a will drafted on 26 May 1767: ‘First, It is my Will and Desire (if it can be done without being Offensive) to have my Body kept for the space of One Week at the Least after my Demise, before my Coffin (which I direct shall have a Double or false Lid, as my late Wife's had), be closed up;…
My Coffin I direct to be made by Mr Daniel Millard Carpenter or his partner, of the same Thickness and sort in every Respect as my said late Wife's.’
Bodies wrapped in blankets, linen burial suits, a coffin of the best elm lined with lead, one covered with black cloth and decorated with white nails — indicative of a spinster — and another with a double or false lid.
Were they more  exacting in the eighteenth century than at any other time?
Was this the only way whereby one could exert control over an over-zealous undertaker?
Moreover, were things quite so dreadful that such control needed to be exerted?
For the answer to these and many other questions we have to look in detail at the items giving rise to so much concern.
Until the appearance in the late eighteenth century of catalogues and pattern books on the types of coffin, linings and coffin furniture provided for the lower-class funeral, the details relating to the upper and middle classes of society have to be gleaned from undertakers' trade cards, eyewitness accounts of funerals and through specific instructions imparted via wills.
Much additional information can, however, be learnt from sepulchral sculpture, prints and drawings, paintings and memento mori jewellery.
Of all the hundreds of trade pattern books issued by manufacturers during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries it appears that not more than ten survive in public collections, and only one pre-Victorian priced catalogue relating to coffins and lining materials.
The majority of information on coffin types comes as a result of the recent introduction of funerary studies in archaeology and vault examinations — much from work carried out in the 1980s at such places as Christchurch, Spitalfields, at Hinton St George, Somerset, and Withyham, Sussex — where opportunities arose to study at first hand coffins dating from the sixteenth century to the present day.
Neither of the two Prayer Books of Edward VI, nor those of Elizabeth I and Charles II, make any reference to coffins.
The rubrics in the 1662 Order for the Burial of the Dead only make mention of the ‘corpse’ or ‘body’: ‘The Priest and Clerks, meeting the Corpse at the entrance of the Church-yard….’;
‘When they come to the Grave, while the Corpse is made ready to be laid into the earth.’;
and ‘Then, while the earth shall be cast upon the Body by some standing by….’.
It was enough for the Church that a corpse had been presented for burial.
Shrouds and winding-sheets were provided for convenience rather than necessity and, to some extent, to conform to common standards of decency.
The private coffin, on the other hand, was an item indicative of status, a luxury unobtainable for the majority and, until the mid sixteenth century, its use in England was limited.
However, whilst it should be understood that coffins were generally associated with those whose bodies were destined for intramural burial, it should also be noted that recent archaeology has revealed instances of pre-sixteenth-century encoffined burials in churchyards and intramural shroud burial.
This chapter, however, will be looking at coffins and coffin-making from c. 1450 to c. 1900.
Coffins and corpses are meant to biodegrade, the acidic content of one assisting the decomposition of the other; they are destined for burial or deposit, hidden away from the eyes of mortal man, and there it is hoped they will remain.
Consequently, very little has survived and, apart from a late fourteenth-century rectangular oak coffin in the St Peter Hungate Church Museum at Norwich, and a c.1500 ossuary chest in Winchester Cathedral (Col. 7 ), excavated in 1958 from the site of the Carmelite Friary at Cowgate, Norwich, we have to turn our attention to illuminated manuscripts of the period to see what was provided at the close of the Middle Ages.
Shortly before his 1430 coronation in Paris as King of France, the young Henry  VI was given a manuscrit de luxe (now known as The Bedford Hours ) by Anne of Burgundy, Duchess of Bedford.
Opened at the Mass for the Dead one sees a magnificent hearse within which lies a palled coffin, presumably raised on stools, with a gabled lid and sides tapering towards the feet.
This shape of coffin had been in use throughout western Europe since at least the middle of the fourteenth century, as shown by an illuminated manuscript in the Royal Library, Brussels, depicting the burial of victims of the Great Plague of Tournai in 1349.
An almost identical coffin as that shown in the Bedford Hours , though within a far less elaborate hearse, can be seen in the equally luxurious London Hours of René of Anjou from the Egerton Workshop.
But both the Bedford and Egerton manuscripts were produced by French artists working in Britain and we have to ask ourselves if what we see in these illuminated manuscripts also existed in this country.
In 1856 the South Kensington Museum (now the Victoria and Albert Museum) acquired a small enamelled gold memento mori pendant found at the site of Tor Abbey, Devonshire (Col. 8 ).
This sumptuous bauble, appropriately named the Tor Abbey Jewel, was doubtless made for a wealthy patron.
The gold is enamelled in white, black, opaque pale blue and white, translucent green and dark blue, with an inscription round the sides of the coffin: THROUGH.
THE.
RESVRRECTION.
OF.
CHRISTE.
WE.
BE.
ALL.
SANCTIFIED.
The detachable lid reveals an enamelled gold skeleton.
It is English, probably dating from c.1540–50, and confirms that the type of coffin depicted in the Bedford and Egerton manuscripts was in use in Britain.
To the funerary historian the Tor Abbey Jewel is a highly important record.
The  skeleton, whose hands are placed over the groin in one of the traditional attitudes of repose, is slightly proud of the shell; hence the gable lid, resulting in a close-fitting coffin.
From about c.1575 a new style appeared: the coffin is angled at the shoulders and the gable lid retained.
An early example of this single-break gable-lidded type (containing the remains of Lady Margaret Howard (d.1591)) is in the De La Warr vault at Withyham, Sussex.
It appears that no distinct regional trends in basic coffin style existed.
Consequently, in the early modern period, gable-lidded wooden coffins were no more restricted to any one area of the country than, say, the lead anthropoid type used for vault deposit.
The same applies to the upholstering of the outer flat-lidded shaped-shouldered velvet-covered cases of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, though some coffin-makers and funeral furnishers did have their own patterns when it came to the application of the round-headed upholstery pins — as noticed in the east Gostling vault beneath St John's Church, Egham, Surrey, used from 1817–41, where each of the five coffins had a similar cross motif between the three side panels — whilst others introduced variety through the use of two complementary colours of velvet.
The ‘Lancashire’ coffin appears not to have made its début until the second quarter of the nineteenth century.
Though it had little to differentiate itself from its colleagues, apart from double ring-grips at both head and foot, its construction was more elaborate than the standard framed and panelled model — thus it was more expensive and carried a certain snob value.
The casket was an idea introduced from the United States in the 1870s and does not, therefore, make more than the briefest possible appearance in this history of the English trade.
There are at least fourteen types of coffin recorded for the period 1450 to 1900, from the simple gable-lidded single shell, provided for late medieval Everyman, to the hulking triple-shell polished mahogany cases of the late nineteenth century.
The traditional wood for coffins is elm, being cross-grained and therefore less prone to splitting; it is also to some extent water-resistant.
Oak was occasionally used, but only for exceptionally important interments.
Walnut, beech and deal have also been used at different times.
However with the introduction of french polishing in the second quarter of the nineteenth century, oak came into its own, as elm could not be so treated.
This both pleased and hampered the trade: pleased, because oak was more expensive than the traditional elm; hampered, as it was easier, less time-consuming and required far less skill to cover an elm coffin with baize or velvet than to spend time on french polishing.
Waxing, a more traditional English technique employed by those unable or unwilling to undertake french polishing, ousted the latter by the 1920s, having run alongside it for the previous forty years.
Veneers appear in the 1880s although an eighteenth-century example was discovered during the 1983–4 excavations at St Augustine-the-Less, Bristol, but this might have been no more than an attempt on the part of the coffin-maker to mask some splits at the shoulder caused by over-zealous saw-cuts when kerfing.
The basic construction of the standard single-break flat-lidded coffin was fairly simple and any able carpenter could have produced one.
The corners were neither mitred nor dove-tailed; rather they were butt-jointed, with sides internally kerfed at the shoulders — usually seven saw-cuts — and then bent to  shape.
The base boards fitted within the coffin, screwed into position through the side.
This helped to anchor the sides to the base and maximized reliability, for a base board nailed to the underneath of the sides might have failed on lifting.
The sides were screwed to the head and foot ends and the lid spanned the sides.
In this way the item was immovable, each joint relying on its neighbour for strength and support.
The screw holes were countersunk and infilled once the screw had been driven home, though infilling was unnecessary with polished coffins where decorative beading was to be used.
Once formed, the joints were internally sealed with pitch to prevent the escape of any obnoxious  gases or liquids.
The type and quality of the inner lining was dependent on the purse of the purchaser.
In the eighteenth century it was the practice, as Misson reminds us, to put bran and sawdust at the bottom of the coffin to a depth of about four inches, and extra wood shavings at the head end.
Sometimes, rosemary or balm was added to the bran to counteract the smell of decomposition.
The undersheet was first tacked into place prior to fixing the side lining, the side-sheets and ruched frill along the visible top edge.
Everything had a purpose.
The sawdust and bran mixture not only provided a soft base on which to rest the corpse but also acted as a sponge for exuded matter; the side lining masked the bare wood; the side-sheets assisted in the presentation of the corpse; and the frill along the visible top edge formed a seal when the lid was screwed down and helped to keep it all airtight.
Occasionally one could dispense with the bran and undersheet and purchase a tailored mattress; likewise the sides could be padded and buttoned and a pillow provided.
The permutations were many and varied.
In this way were also made the double-shell and triple-shell coffins.
The anthropoid coffin is associated almost exclusively with the burial vault.
These coffins, England's response in lead to the Egyptian mummy case, became fashionable in the fifteenth century and were still to be seen in some areas in the last decade of the seventeenth century, though they were beginning to decline in popularity during the 1660s and 1670s.
The delay occasioned by the organization of, for example, a heraldic funeral required certain hygienic treatment to the body and it was necessary to encapsulate the corpse within a watertight container to prevent leakage, lead being the accepted material.
To aid in the process, the body was eviscerated and wrapped — though ‘trussed’ would be a more realistic description — in a number of layers of cerecloth, the outer layer being sewn.
The anthropoid shell was fashioned to fit this cocoon, and consequently the plumber had to be close at hand and work quickly to bespoke his client.
One of the earliest examples is that encasing the remains of Elizabeth of York (d.1503) in Westminster Abbey.
The lead is unadorned save for an appliqué lead Maltese cross on the breast; the shell follows the contours of the body, highly defined at the head end, and thus provides an indication of the true size of the occupant.
From the basic shape it can be deduced that the arms were placed alongside the body, turned in at the elbows, with the hands on the groin.
Conversely, Henry VII's shell is more tubular, probably allowing for a more natural appearance of majesty when positioning the funerary sceptres in the hands.
Along the right-hand side of the shell is an applique lead depositum plate, twenty-four inches long and four inches wide, with a cast inscription in raised letters:Hic est Henricus, Rex Angliae et Franciae ac Dominus Hiberniae, hujus  nominis septimus, qui obiit XII. die Aprilis, anno regni sui XXIII et incarnationis dominicae MCVIX .
The inscription is preceded by a cross alisée patée painted directly on to the lead.
At the east end of the south side of the De La Warr vault at Withyham, Sussex, is a group of children's coffins dating from the early seventeenth century.
Amongst them are two very small anthropoid shells, one of 1617, the other of 1618.
The babies have been laid with their arms along their sides and, as small coffins are always better preserved than those of adults, it is possible to ascertain from these undamaged specimens how anthropoid coffins were sealed.
It appears that the body was laid on a shallow lead tray with lip, and the upper section was shaped to fit over the body.
Once the top section had been put into place and its edge tucked in as close to the body as possible, the lip of the base tray was eased towards the sides of the upper half and the joint soldered.
In the case of the Withyham infants the joints were neatly burnished.
A slightly later anthropoid shell of the 1630s in the same vault displays an alternative technique.
The base tray is as deep as the corpse is high, the head section having been fashioned from a separate sheet of lead and soldered on to the main body of the shell.
With the body encased, the top lid — with the merest ghost of a form — was placed over the lip of the main case, as one would the lid of a shoe-box, and soldered with a 3/4-inch iron.
Finally, an incised depositum plate was soldered above the chest.
Over the years the lead has eased, the lid settling on the contents, highlighting the outline of the corpse within.
In south-east Leicestershire two anthropoid shells of local manufacture are to be found in an extensive seventeenth-century vault.
Originally ascribed to the 1660s it now seems highly likely that they date from the 1630s and were made within a few years of each other.
One, to an unknown female, pays particular attention to the facial features and the posture of the corpse, the other is not so highly detailed.
Again we have the standard format of the lower tray having been soldered to the upper shell.
The arms positioned alongside the body turn in at the elbows with the hands over the groin.
Whilst some attempt has been made to define both stomach and breasts, the hands are wanting.
The facial features are those of an elderly woman and, though not a portrait of the deceased, they are in line with standard representational portraiture of the period; viewed from above one can almost visualize the parted winding-sheet.
The attention paid to posture is most noticeable at the foot end, for rather than having the feet at right-angles to the ankles they are totally relaxed and display a more natural attitude of repose.
This would have been a somewhat difficult task for the plumber, but he was probably restricted in any case due to the close cering of the corpse.
There is no depositum plate though there are marks to show where one had been.
Depositum details were either cut into the lead or achieved by the imposition of cast lead letters.
Rectangular, square and shield-shaped appliqué plaques were also used, the details being either inscribed, cast or appliquéed.
The  Barnardiston vaults at Kedington, Suffolk, have a number of anthropoid coffins with appliqué shield depositum plates; two incised shields cut from anthropoid coffins of 1671 and 1676, together with most of the lid of Dame Ann Combe's 1658 lead shell with incised lettering — and four very high-quality cast armorials from the same coffin — can be seen on the walls in St Mary's Church, Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire.
Not all lead coffins destined for vaults were provided with outer wooden cases.
Those in the Culpeper vault at Hollingbourne, Kent, fall into this category, though it is just possible that the flat-lidded rectangular shell encasing Elizabeth Culpeper (d.1638) did have an outer case.
In south-east Leicestershire is a lead shell of c.1650 with its own lead lion's-head grip-plates and iron stirrup-handles; a similar coffin of the same date exists in the western St John vault at Lydiard Tregoz in Wiltshire.
Princess Elizabeth (d.1650), the second daughter of King Charles I, lies in Westminster Abbey in a lead shell, which marks the transition from anthropoid to flat-lid single-break; again, no outer case, rather simple iron grips affixed to the lead.
In the east chamber of the Maynard vault at Little Easton, Essex, lies a coffin from the 1660s elaborately appliquéed  with coats-of-arms similar to those at Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire; whilst in the eastern Poulett vault at Hinton St George, Somerset, are three children's coffins with delightful stamped filigree fringes around the lid (Col. 9 ) as well as simple iron grips, all three dating from the early 1700s.
By far the rarest type of post-medieval coffin is the gable-lidded tapered shape; this is frustrating, especially as they are so well known in contemporary art from the fourteenth through to the seventeenth centuries.
The 1615 St John triptych at Lydiard Tregoz, Wiltshire (Col. 10 ), shows three such coffins beneath their parents' sarcophagus.
In 1984, a faculty to examine the St John vault for these items proved that it had been extensively reordered in the early eighteenth century when the decayed earlier coffins were cleared and placed in a charnel cistern within the vault.
To date no such coffin has been discovered in Spite of their proliferation.
This is equally frustrating when one notices that the coffins appearing on a series of five resurrection monuments executed by John and Mathias Christmas between 1628 and 1640 are also of this type.
A further faculty acquired in 1983 to examine Temperance Brown's vault at Steane, Northamptonshire, also ended in failure, the coffin having disintegrated and she having ‘gone to earth’.
Though the single-break flat-lidded coffin had made its entrance in the last quarter of the sixteenth century — the lead shell of Lady Elizabeth Howard  (d.1591) with appliqué lettering at Withyham, Sussex, is of this type, as is the pictorial representation of Sir Henry Unton's 1596 coffin in the Unton portrait at the National Portrait Gallery, as well as a small sculptural representation of a coffin on the 1615 mural monument to Susan Kinges at Morston, Norfolk — the single-break gable-lidded shell seems to have been more popular.
An example of this type in lead, dated 1648, rests on the children's shelf in the De La Warr vault, but of greater interest are three wooden versions.
One is now no longer on view: when the church of St Peter's, Exton, Somerset, was being reordered in 1984 a clay-puddled grave shaft beneath the ledger stone of William Averie (d.1608) was exposed.
Within the grave were the remains of a single-break gable-lidded elm coffin, the outer surface covered with pitched cambric or linen and decorated with black-headed upholstery nails.
The lid had collapsed on to the remains, the sides had fallen outwards, but the two end pieces remained upright.
The clay-puddled cutting itself was of single-break shape and is believed to be the earliest example of the type.
Of.far greater importance is a little-known parish coffin of c.1645 at Easingwold, Yorkshire (Col. 11 ).
It is made of ½-inch oak, unlined and with simple iron ring handles, those at the angle of the shoulders being sufficiently high up to fit over a pierced hasp protruding from the lid through which a padlock might be fitted, thereby rendering the contents safe from body-snatchers.
The patination of the wood and the delightful patchwork of  sheet-iron repairs testify to its many years of service.
It is the only surviving example of a complete parish coffin.
A wooden coffin similar to that at Easingwold forms part of the 1655 Allestry monument in Derby Cathedral (Col.12 ), though this shell is pure theatricality, a coffin cut in half, lengthways along the ridge of the lid.
However, its importance lies within the ½-inch oak boards and the positioning of the nails along the butt-joints as a parallel to the Easingwold model.
The lidless 1664 parish coffin at Howden Minster, Yorkshire, is of 3/4-inch oak, better constructed than the Easingwold model, though with identical iron rings and, as there are no nail or screw holes on the upper width of the side panels, it is to be assumed that the lid was of the Easingwold type.
The presumed parish coffin at St James, Garlickhythe, City of London, is, in fact, an elm container made in 1855 for the safekeeping of ‘Jimmy Garlick’, the celebrated seventeenth-century desiccated corpse; he was subsequently recased in the nineteenth century in a glass-fronted mahogany vitrine, erect rather than supine, at which time it must have been decided to keep the coffin rather than discard it.
During c.1660–75 the trapezoidal gable-lidded coffin gave way to the single-break flat-lidded type, shaped at the shoulders.
The coffin furniture — the term given to the applique metalwork fixed to the black fabric-covered outer case — was usually quite plain, with very simple grip-plates and grips of a type found on most average items of domestic furniture of the period, being of sheet iron and wrought iron respectively.
Only in a few instances were brass or copper depositum plates provided, for it was more usual to outline the initials, date of death and age of the occupant on to the lid with black-headed upholstery nails with the possible addition of a skull and crossbones outlined at the head of the lid, whilst the sides were decorated with a single row of close-set nails all round.
Decorative angle brackets stamped or cut from thin sheet-iron and spaced along the edge of the lid at intervals of about six inches completed the furniture.
In the trade these angle brackets were known as ‘hinges’.
Cases of this type have been recorded in many vaults whilst another, of 1678 to Francis Osbaston, High Sheriff of Essex, was discovered in an earth-cut grave at Little Ilford, Essex, during excavations in 1984 prior to the site's reordering.
News concerning the development in style took a little time to percolate through to the country; a sculptor carving a resurrection scene on a 1707 headstone outside the south door of Uffington church, Oxfordshire, continues to depict the gable-lidded coffin.
By 1700–25 the funeral furnishing trade had become firmly established, providing funerals for all classes of society and at various costs, dependent on the social status of the deceased, basing their street ritual and panoply on that exhibited by the College of Arms during the last quarter of the seventeenth century, diluting or adding to it accordingly.
Most of the day-to-day trade came from the man in the street, and it would be wrong to infer that every coffin-maker and funeral furnisher hungered after catering for the top end of the market.
Further, many could not afford to undertake such pomp as they had neither the capital, credit facilities, stock, staff nor expertise; some simply did not have the inclination to become involved.
They were content to stay in the back-streets of our towns making their own coffins and providing a much needed service to a community which was either unqualified, unwilling or unable to extend to such outrageous luxuries.
Whilst the royal funerals continued to be furnished ‘in-house’ by the Lord Chamberlain via the royal upholders, there were a number of top-quality cabinet-makers, mercers and upholders willing to undertake the organization of funerals for members of the nobility and the landed gentry as an extension to their established clients; so it is not surprising that Chippendale, for example, also furnished funerals if called upon to do so.
In the same way that the jobbing funeral furnisher was unable to undertake the obsequies of the nobility, likewise the top cabinet-makers would have refused some of their lesser clients, referring them to one of more able members of the trade.
A number of tradesmen in the timber, textile and tin-plate industries looked upon coffin-making and funeral furnishing as something by which they could profit, and it was not unknown for some to meet with such success that they abandoned their established trade to go into undertaking full time.
Most preferred to remain as a supplier to the trade, others advertising their ability to furnish funerals in addition to their daily trade.
This increased as the use of the parish coffin began to wane, so that by the end of the seventeenth century and the  beginning of the eighteenth, the parish coffin had practically disappeared.
It could be argued that this was hastened in London by the Great Plague of 1665 when the familiar sight of cartloads of corpses contrasted with the decency and sanitary advantage of encoffining the dead.
Broadsheets issued at the time do not elaborate on the detail of the finish given to the coffin, but show a plain gable-lidded type with or without handles.
With the need for speedy disposal of the dead — and that organized by others than the coffin-makers — together with a dwindling supply of wood in the face of more work than they could handle, few involved in the trade were going to do more than fabricate a utilitarian box of standard shape.
In the rest of the country, and in post-Plague London, the change was due to social trends more than anything else.
The ‘golden age’ of the English funeral, as far as undertaking techniques were concerned, was the period from 1725 to 1775 and most of the finest extant coffins in public and private vaults were made during that time.
The constituent parts of a top-quality coffin of the period would have been as follows: a 1½-inch inner elm coffin with recessed lid, lined and covered with cambric — no depositum plate; a lead shell of five pounds — i.e. five pounds' weight per square foot — diapered and with lead depositum plate; an outer case of 1½-inch elm or oak, padded and covered with rich scarlet Genoese or black Utrecht velvet; four pairs of gilt grip-plates and grips; two rows round of gilt-headed upholstery nails; and escutcheons, lid motifs and brass or lead depositum plate.
When Smart Lethieullier of Aldersbrook had completed his mortuary chapel adjoining St Mary's, Little Ilford, Essex, in c.1740 he transferred the remains of his parents into the present vault from elsewhere in the church.
He had new cases made for the shells, covered in scarlet Genoese velvet with two rows round of gilt-headed upholstery nails on the lid, the sides and ends blank-panelled with a single row of the same.
On examination it transpires that he requested the retention of the original gilt brass depositum plates.
The coffins have identical plumbing and outer cases, and it therefore appears that the same funeral furnisher was used throughout, giving a continuity of thirty-one years.
Almost without exception coffins of the period 1725–75 were single-break and flat-lidded, obtainable in four basic types: single case; single case with double lid; double case; triple case, comprising an inner wooden coffin, a lead shell and an outer wooden case.
The collective noun for each of these types is ‘coffin', but the trade maintained its own nomenclature for the constituent parts.
Hence with a double coffin, the inner container was described as the ‘coffin', the outer container being the ‘case’.
Likewise, the triple container comprised an inner wooden ‘coffin', a lead ‘shell’ and an outer wooden ‘case’.
The single case was used for the  straightforward earth burial and was by far the most common coffin type — and remains so today.
However, some did slip the net and get into burial vaults, such as these three nineteenth-century intruders in the Atkyns vault at Sapperton, Gloucestershire.
As they were neither wholly water-resistant nor airtight some very unpleasant odours must have arisen from below.
In the 1820s the vestry at Christchurch, Spitalfields, had to issue general instructions against the use of the single case in their vaults, advocating the triple case in all instances.
The single-case double lid was a more expensive version of the single-case type, though what service the additional lid rendered appears to be a mystery.
It could have been provided as an additional barrier to odour, but this could only have been achieved by the use of waxed paper — as seen in the Lethieullier vault at Little Ilford, Essex — between the top of the sides of the coffin and the lid.
Again, what little space there was between the two lids might also have been packed with powdered charcoal.
The unleaded double-case double lid is met with in parochial, rather than private, vaults and both intramural and churchyard brick-lined graves.
Having said this, it would appear that this was the least acceptable type for vault and intramural brick-lined grave deposit.
The triple shell was the traditional coffin for the burial vault and brick-lined grave.
As they are the most common form met with in burial vaults it is worth looking at their construction in detail.
The inner coffin was usually elm, one or 1½ inches thick, planed and smoothed, butt-joined with recessed lid and covered in cambric.
These sections were both glued and screwed together, the base within the sides, the screw holes countersunk and infilled with putty.
To support the recessed lid a length of beading was affixed with glue and tacks around the upper inner side, one or 1½  inches from the top, dependent on the thickness of the lid.
The lid was anchored to the sides by screws through the sides.
Prior to fixing this lid the inner joints, base and sides were caulked with swedish pitch, the base covered with a shallow layer of bran and sawdust over which the bottom sheet was tacked — alternatively a fitted buttoned mattress could be supplied — then the side lining and, possibly, a ruched or broderie anglaise frill; finally the pillow and the shrouded body.
If there was to be no viewing of the remains, the coffin was at once covered with plain or waxed cambric, glued and gimped into place.
The lead shell had to be bespoke.
Few coffin-makers had the talent to fashion such an item, so an order would have gone out to a local plumber.
Eight different ways of cutting and fitting the lead have been recorded, but the two most commonly used were the ‘shoe box’ and the ‘smooth wrap’.
To produce the latter the inner coffin was placed on to a width of lead which was then cut so as to be three inches larger all round than the coffin itself; this was then turned up and tacked to the wood.
A similar-sized length was laid on the lid and likewise folded over the edge and tacked into place.
Lengths were then cut to go round the head end and one side and the foot end and the other side, and tacked into place.
All joints were then soldered and smoothed, the tack-heads soldered so as to maintain the water-resistance and airtight quality of the coffin.
A diaper design was then card-wired on to the shell using a template and a straight-edge.
Finally, the lead depositum plate was soldered into place.
The ‘shoe box’ type was similarly fashioned, though the sides were affixed before the lid.
Whether the coffin-maker produced a bespoke outer case or took one from existing stock is not known, though logic argues in favour of the latter.
Outer cases of the period 1725 to 1775 and later were sumptuously upholstered and provided with elaborate coffin furniture.
Veneers were used only to mask carpentry mistakes.
Cases made and upholstered by cabinet-makers, as distinct from coffin-makers, have had greater attention paid to the fitting of the velvet, those in the Poulett vault at Hinton St George, Somerset, and the De La Warr vault at Withyham, Sussex, being examples of this type.
The coffin of the Fourth Earl De La Warr (d.1795)(Col. 13 ) was padded with shoddy prior to the fitting of the velvet, shoddy and velvet being gimped to the chamfered base of the sides, with the coffin base itself shamfered along the edge.
The velvet — or baize, for the lesser mortal — was always used sparingly, tucked in behind itself at the angles of the coffin and the width of the plank at the top.
The lid was similarly fitted though sometimes the velvet did intrude on the surface of the underside.
Occasionally both underside of lid and inside of case were lined with plain cambric.
Care had to be taken in fitting the cotter-pins securing the grips, and grooves were cut on the inside of the coffin into which the cotter-pins were bent, so as not to come into contact with the lead shell.
The upholstery pins, escutcheons, lid motifs and depositum plate were affixed to the outer case prior to the insertion of the lead shell, their appearance being enhanced if applied to a fully upholstered case.
The positioning of the lead shell was a delicate operation, care being needed to avoid piercing or damaging the lead in any way.
Having been placed on to three lengths of webbing, six men would be required to lift the shell and put it into the case; the webs were then cut, as it would not have been possible to withdraw  them.
Finally, the lid was put into position and screwed or bolted down.
The trade never solved the problem of the aesthetic positioning of the case-lid screws — too often they either interrupt or abut the upholstery pins around the edge of the lid.
Some tradesmen did try to mask the screws by covering the countersunk heads with a small disc of velvet.
Whilst coffins of this type were produced for vault and brick-lined shaft deposit they were also required for intramural earth-cut graves; one such example from the 1820s was discovered during the excavations at St Mary's Church, Little Ilford, Essex in 1984.
Not all coffin-makers could go to the expense of buying in two-foot widths of wood; some made up their cases from twelve-inch or six-inch planks, relying on the velvet covering to mask their technique.
A number of cases of this type were noticed at Christchurch, Spitalfields, and St Marylebone parish church as well as in the vaults beneath St Paul's, Shadwell, and St John's, Wapping.
A classic example survives at Hinton St George, Somerset, with the coffin of Colonel William Poulett (d.1805).
The black velvet has perished, exposing the side of the case which, on examination, proves not to be a single plank but four six-inch lengths of ½-inch board bonded together by iron straps.
Identical grip-plates and grips were also provided for the case of Lady Harriet Poulett (d. 1802).
Not all coffins of this period were put to funerary use.
When the medieval roof of St Botolph's, Hadstock, Essex, was being recorded in 1974 a number of eighteenth-century coffin boards were found, having been used for running repairs.
Mrs Delany, in her Autobiography , records that in c.1720:
Sir William Pendarvis's house was the rendezvous of a very immoral set of men.
One of his strange exploits among other frolics, was having a coffin made  of copper (which one of his mines had that year produced), and placed in the great hall, and instead of his making use of it as a monitor that might have made him ashamed and terrified at his past life, and induce him to make amends in future, it was filled with punch, and he and his comrades soon made themselves incapable of any sort of reflection; this was often repeated, and hurried him on to that awful moment he had so much reason to dread.
On 6 February 1771, a Colonel Luttrell turned up at Mrs Cornely's Masquerade at the Pantheon, London, dressed as a coffin; R.S. Kirby, who was also present, recorded that Luttrell cast such a ‘pall of gloom’ over the proceedings that he was obliged to leave almost as soon as he had arrived.
But none of these incidents could possibly have matched that witnessed at a masquerade organized by Lord Tylney at Wanstead House, Essex, in 1768, as recorded by an Italian noblewoman staying with the Tylneys at the time.
Many lights appear in the trees and on the water.
We are off and have great excitement fishing up treasure (fake) tied to bladders.
His Lordship is hailed from the shore by a knight, who we are told is King Arthur, have you the sacrifice my Lord, who answers no, then take my sword and smite the water in front of the grot and see what my wizard has done, take also this dove and when asked, give it to the keeper.
Off again to some distance from the grotto, the lights are small and water still, the giant eagle appears and asks, have you the sacrifice, no my Lord answers, so be it and disappears in steam.
His Lordship smites the water with King Arthur's sword, all the company are still, a rumble sucking noise comes in front of the opening of the grotto the water as if boiling and to the horror of all the company both on the water and on the shore scream with fright, appearing as though from the depth of hell arose a ghastly coffin covered with slime and other things.
Silence as though relief, when suddenly with a creaking and ghostly groaning the lid slid as if off and up sat a terrible apparition with outstretched hand screeching in a hollow voice, give me my gift with such violence, that some of the company fell into the water and had to be saved, and those on the shore scrambled in allways confusion was everywhere.
We allmost fainted with fright and was only stayed from the same fate by the hand of his Lordship, who handed the keeper the dove (fake) the keeper shut its hand and with a gurgling noise vanished with a clang of its lid, and all went pitch.
Then the roof of the grotto glowed two times lighting the water and the company a little, nothing was to be seen of the keeper or his coffin, as though it did not happen.
[sic !]
This must have been a most amazing sight, coming as it did as the climax of a much longer event staged beforehand outside Wanstead House itself.
The idea was obviously Tylney's; but who arranged it?
There is a possible hint in ‘King Arthur's’ words ‘…see what my wizard has done…’.
King Arthur's wizard was  Merlin.
In 1760 an ingenious inventor called John Joseph Merlin (1735–1803) arrived in England from Paris in the suite of the Conde de Fuentes on his appointment as Ambassador Extraordinary in London.
Merlin was soon known for his fantastic mechanical automata, and it is not inconceivable that Tylney met him at one of the many masquerades then all the rage in London.
There seem to be few other candidates for such a mystery.
In 1769 Thomas Pickering, a tin-plate manufacturer in Southwark, patented a method of raising patterns in sheet iron which was to affect the production of coffin furniture.
From c.1720–30 coffin furniture had been produced by hand-operated die-stamping machines; Pickering's was power-assisted.
Nevertheless, some of the coffin furniture produced during the 1730s was of a high standard, though the designs were limited, rococo in style, and copied ad nauseam by a multitude of tin-plate manufacturers in London and Birmingham.
Some manufacturers could come up trumps and it is regrettable that we do not know the name of the supplier of a truly splendid set of stamped gilt copper grip-plates with integral coronets and a trinity of really charming chinoiserie bells on the 1777 coffin of the Second Earl De La Warr at Withyam, Sussex.
Of the three extant trade catalogues for coffin furniture of the period  1783–1826 — all in the Victoria and Albert Museum — that of 1783 by ‘J.B.’ issued through Tuesby & Cooper, Coffin Furniture Ironmongery of 221 Borough High Street, Southwark, is by far the finest.
‘A.T.’
of c.1821–4 is almost as fine, though the plates are not so highly finished, with ‘E.L.’
of 1826 coming in at a deserved third in the field.
Be that as it may, far more items have been discovered on extant coffins matching illustrations in the ‘E.L.’
catalogue than any other; and either their prices were keener or their distribution and service to the trade better.
From these catalogues we learn that coffin furniture has its own terminology: coffin plates are described as ‘breast plates’ or ‘depositum plates’; handle back-plates as ‘grip-plates’; handles as ‘grips’; lid decorations as ‘motifs’; upholstery pins as ‘nails’; and side decorations as ‘escutcheons’or ‘drops’.
Stamped iron depositum plates, tin-dipped and designed in the form of a concave oval cartouche encircled by a garland of flowers, first appeared at the end of the seventeenth century; so did grip-plates, which were similarly oval with a repoussé design of winged cherubs' heads.
When Tuesby & Cooper published their catalogue there was already a considerable variety of ‘finishes’ available for coffin furniture: gilt copper, copper, bronze, brass, silver and ‘white’(tin-dipped stamped iron, though silver leaf was sometimes applied on top of the tin); black (more expensive than silver, being tin-dipped stamped iron painted with two or more coats of matt black paint); and ‘coloured’for children's coffins (tin-dipped stamped iron, painted with two or more coats of matt white with certain details highlighted with water-gilding).
Opposite the title page comes some very useful information: ‘N.B. A Sett of Coffin Furniture contains a Breast Plate, Flower Pot and Angel, 3 p r Of Handles & Pins to fix them.
If order'd with 4 p r Of Handles & 20 Yds of Lace & c the Price is advanced in Proportion.
Large Wrt Cast Gripes to any of the Setts will be 1/ — p r Sett advance.’
A ‘Flower Pot and Angel’ was the trade's nickname for certain lid motifs; an alternative design was the Urn and Angels.
The tin-dipped stamped iron coffin furniture had one drawback: it was not possible to cut lettering into the depositum plates.
This would not have served for vaults, and the stamped lead plate remained the more usual item in such instances.
Towards the end of the eighteenth century both pewter and pure tin — natural or silvered — were also being used, though the nobility appear to have remained loyal to brass, it being more convenient for the engraver to work, especially if one's coat-of-arms was to appear on it.
The coffin furniture industry moved away from London during the early nineteenth century, transferring itself to Birmingham.
Nevertheless, many a London manufacturer had profited by it and was easily able to afford the type of little memento shown in 57 .
Coffin furniture was also exported to the colonies, it being so cheap to buy that it was unnecessary to produce it in far-flung corners of the Empire.
A very fine set of eighteenth-century coffin furniture of the highest-quality Tuesby & Cooper type was discovered in 1975 in a private vault in Jamaica.
Although the majority of depositum plates were rectangular, a few followed the dictates of heraldry.
Thus the plate for a young girl or spinster was lozenge-shaped, shield-shaped for a boy or young man, rectangular with central cartouche for a married woman or widow and rectangular with central square panel for an adult male, married man or widower.
However, it should be pointed out that not every coffin-maker or funeral furnisher knew this and one could end up with the horrendous mismatch of an elderly widower being given a plate intended for a young girl.
One innovation of the eighteenth century was the introduction of the patent self-locking iron coffin to foil body-snatchers.
This was really unnecessary, since a body would have been far too decomposed after eight to ten days to be of much use to any medical school.
It would have been better to build secure mortuaries rather than putting one's money into an expensive contraption.
Nevertheless, Messrs Jarvis did produce an ingenious creature which, with its standard outer case, would have fooled even Burke and Hare.
Jarvis informs the public that to provide one's relatives or friends with such a container would bring peace of mind.
Unfortunately their advertising trade card is too detailed and any Resurrectionist worth his salt could have worked out from the illustration how best to break it open.
Tuesby & Cooper, in their catalogue of 1783 make a passing reference to ‘lace’.
This had nothing whatsoever to do with fabrics, referring instead to an alternative to upholstery nails: tin-dipped filigree stamped iron available in rolls of — it must be presumed — twenty yards, a length sufficient to outline the lid, sides and ends of a coffin, such as that on the outer case of Lord Vere Bertie (d.1770) in the Wray vault at All Saints', Branston, in Lincolnshire.
His wife's tiny coffin was similarly decorated.
Not all lace was quite so decorative; that provided by Dottridge Brothers in 1922 was really rather crude.
But lace was nothing new; in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, is a late seventeenth-century English mirror with a delicate border of engraved blue glass in ten sections, each abutment masked by a thin strip of gilt lead coffin lace.
Does this mean that we are looking at an item produced by a cabinet-maker who was also able to furnish funerals?
One item not supplied by Tuesby & Cooper, nor by the other two warehousemen, were coronets, both the repousse and the three-dimensional type.
Throughout this chapter we have been coming across the coffins of nobles, all of which had repoussé coronets about the grip-plates and three-dimensional gilt copper versions — usually with gilt wooden baubles and remnants of the cap — sitting on the lid.
They begin to appear in the first quarter of the eighteenth century, a remnant of the funerary effigy, though it is not recorded that nobles, apart from those of royal blood, ever had them (Cromwell and General Monck excepted).
They were probably introduced as a spin-off from the revived interest in heraldry in the early eighteenth century.
Where they do not exist it can be presumed that either the genuine silver-gilt coronet was used at the funeral and then put back into the strongroom after the funeral, or they have disintegrated.
One such funerary coronet still sits on its tasselled cushion atop the coffin of the Earl of Clare in the 1837 catacombs at Kensal Green, whilst a very fine, though late, specimen of 1915 sits on the top of the Dowbiggen & Holland coffin of Rosa, Countess Poulett, at Hinton St George.
Colourful velvets for the outer case began to appear in the early nineteenth century.
No longer were the sole colours available black and scarlet, for one now had the choice of midnight blue, holly green and turquoise, the latter being usually reserved for infants.
And that was not the end of it, for there were permutations.
Black with midnight blue, scarlet with holly green and black with turquoise.
The predominant colours were black and scarlet, the midnight blue  and holly green being used to relieve the border in between the rows of upholstery nails.
A very fine light green velvet — almost eau-de-Nil — was seen on a child's coffin in the vaults at St Paul's, Shadwell, and made all the more attractive with its gilt furniture.
Coffins for churchyard earth burial were also fabric-covered, though black baize was more the norm than scarlet (Col. 14 ).
Arguably the most majestic covering was black Utrecht velvet (Col. 15 ); Nelson's 1806 coffin, furnished by Messrs France of London, with its gilt bronze fittings on padded velvet, was particularly sumptuous (Col. 16), but one would expect this of the crown undertaker's work.
From a trade catalogue issued by Turner of Farringdon Street, London, in 1838 we get an overview of the types of coffin used at that time: thirty-three are described, of which fourteen styles were for children's coffins only.
The cheapest ready-made coffin for a six-foot adult was a ‘Good inch elm Coffin, smoothed, oiled, and finished with one row round of black or white nails, a plate of inscription, four handles, lined and pillow.’
Turner's most elaborate case consisted of a ‘Double Lid Elm Coffin, lined with 4lb lead, and covered with cloth, finished two rows all round, close drove, best nails, lead or brass plate, angel and flower, four pair cherub handles, with grips and drops, lined and ruffled with fine  cambric.’
The words ‘lined with lead’ open a new avenue.
Until the end of the eighteenth century the inner coffin was covered with a lead shell, but now we see the introduction of the lead-lined coffin, i.e. sheet lead tacked to the inner sides of the inner coffin.
Taylor was also able to provide ‘off the shelf’ a lined and dressed elm coffin with outer lead shell for any child of two feet to four feet 9 inches tall.
Not all coffins slavishly followed regulation patterns.
Dr Clive Wainwright suggests that the antiquary and collector William Beckford was probably cased in a coffin designed by Henry E. Goodridge when he died in 1844.
The 1852 coffin of the Sixteenth Earl of Shrewsbury was designed by E.W. Pugin and made by Hardman of Birmingham —‘the edges…engrailed with gilt metal work; at its foot the Shrewsbury arms were engraved in gilt metal’— whilst in October 1887 Philip Webb sketches in his commonplace book the ‘outside dimensions of coffin & coffins for a six foot body for Lawrence Datchworth’, suggesting an outer case seven foot 6 inches long, three foot wide and two foot deep.
Three coffins in the Bell vault at Milton, Kent, depict the development of case decoration between the 1820s and the 1850s.
Eleanor Bell (d.1827) has a scarlet velvet upholstered elm case which, with its cherub grip-plates, might have been equally at home in the 1720s were it not for the idiosyncratic decoration of the lid.
The turquoise upholstered case of John Bell (d. 1836) is more à la mode with neo-Egyptian  ormolu fittings and a typical early nineteenth-century design in the upholstery nails: whereas Jane Bell (1855) has  an exceptionally elaborate 1½-inch waxed oak case with black-headed upholstery nails and neo-classical furniture.
Not all coffins were so beautifully made as Mrs Bell's.
The following judgement appeared in the October 1858 minutes of the Dunmow Union Workhouse, Essex.
Great complaint was made by the bearers and others of a Coffin supplied for William Taylor a pauper belonging to the parish of Great Bardfield by Mr Cole Contractor for Coffins for the Thaxted District.
Samuel Hitching stated that he examined the Coffin carefully and that it had two canvas patches on where there were decayed places in the Wood — he also measured the thickness of the Board and they were only 5/8 of an inch at top and ½ an inch thick at the bottom — the lid was also warped that they could not screw it down properly-One of the bearers also stated that he was afraid it would fall in pieces before they got to the Church with it.
Mr Cole appeared before the Board and acknowledged that the Coffin was not made according to his Contract whereupon he was strongly cautioned by the Chairman as to his future conduct.
In marked contrast is an outer case provided in 1864 by Maria Taylor, trading in Coney Street, York, as ‘Cabinet-maker, Upholsterer, Auctioneer, Appraiser and Undertaker’, for the remains of the Seventh Earl of Carlisle.
Handsome Outer Coffin in Spanish Mahogany covered in fine Genoa Silk Velvet, Solid brass handles & time Silver breast plate to ditto engraved with Coronet and inscription
In 1875 Francis Seymour Haden, FRCS, advocated by means of three letters to The Times a  disintegrating coffin ‘…of some lighter permeable material, such as wicker or lattice-work, open at the top, and filled in with any fragrant herbaceous matters that happened to be most readily obtainable.
A layer of ferns or mosses for a bed, a bundle of sweet herbs for a pillow, and as much as it would still contain after the body had been gently laid in it of any aromatic or flowering plant for a coverlet’.
From this, the Necropolis Company invented and patented the earth to earth wicker coffin.
It met with some success, and on 19 June 1890 the Kensington Burial Board discussed the possibility of the Guardians of the Poor using such wicker baskets for pauper burials, but the Board of Guardians declined owing to their cost.
Meanwhile, the Earth to Earth Society was marketing a framed coffin covered in pulp; Dottridge Bros offered two versions of this in their 1902 catalogue, the ‘Terra’ and the ‘Translation’.
Coffin designs were also changing in the 1870s.
The earlier introduction of waxed and french-polished woods had already given greater scope to the imagination of the coffin-maker.
In the De La Warr vault at Withyham, Sussex, is a series of polished oak coffins, rectangular in shape with tapering sides and flat lids, supplied between the 1870s and the 1890s, and based on an earlier design of 1856 by the architect George Edmund Street, as published in the Ecclesiological Society's Instrumenta Ecclesiastica .
In the 1890s Ingall, Parsons & Clive of Birmingham were producing thirty-five designs, of which the 1½-inch Canadian elm ‘Manilla ’, at £3 15s. was the most imaginative.
Not to be outdone by their rival, Dottridge Brothers came up with some interesting designs too — from the simple ‘Calais ’ in waxed elm, the ‘Cairo ’with its art nouveau grips, and the stolid ‘Newman ’in framed and panelled oak.
All four coffins shown on Plate 48 of their catalogue are available today.
Unfortunately the smaller coffin-maker could not cope with the high-powered advertising of IPC and Dottridge Brothers, preferring to place miniature versions of their handiwork in the shop window for the benefit of passers-by, though they probably relied on the funeral furnishing warehouses for the supply of linings and coffin furniture.