

letters
Strip tease Congratulations on producing in your September issue, one of the most thoroughly amusing pieces I have ever seen.
If ever there was a case for the old adage ‘horses for courses’, ‘Strip Search’ was it!
Kathryn Flett's well-written and often amusing text was coupled with the most outrageous designs Britain's ‘top design teams’ could come up with.
Only Paul Smith and Colin Harvey (I thought his full-time job as Howard Kendall 's assistant at Everton would have kept him too busy to put pencil and crayon to paper!) got close to producing something workable, but even Smithy's attempt in green would have fallen foul to Mr Clough's watchful eye.
As for Michiko Koshino, John Richmond and Judy Blame's submissions, they must have got the tea lady's kids to do the drawings (the fish was great Mich, honest).
Best hoot of the lot was the gladiatorial look dreamt up for Spurs by Jimmy Jumble.
Gary Lineker would have looked great in that, not to mention Gazza.
To quote from the terraces — sorry luvvies, you've had a mare.
You stick to the salon catwalks and we'll stick to the hallowed turf of Old Trafford, White Hart Lane, Wembley and the rest.
Funny fanny While reading your ‘Rubber Love’ article (FACE 48), I came across the word ‘fanny’.
I'd forgotten how funny it is; from now on I shall be using it in casual conversation more often.
And I can't wait to try out the Femidom!
Pill free I was concerned to hear of Shaun Ryder's predicament (FACE 48).
It must be horrible to be driven away from all your old haunts because you might bump into your drug mates.
So I've thought of a solution.
Shaun should move to Milton Keynes — there haven't been any drugs here for ages.
My mum says he can kip on her sofa because she likes anyone with a Manc accent.
Coming Klean Re: ‘Road Runners’(FACE 47).
When you send a reporter to a festival, why don't you send one who knows a little about it?
If you wonder why people give you a hard time, it's because you write shit like this.
You write about stereotyping, and then do it yourself.
If you write that people smell and dogs bite you, what do you expect?
If the Brew Crew are a minority, why continue to write about them?
Get your facts right — only four of us in Armageddon live on-site, not all of us.
Sorry to moan, but we trusted you to write the truth.
Running amok I found it strange you should attempt to glorify the existence of the so-called ‘travellers’.
To describe them as having a ‘positive lifestyle’ is laughable considering the laws they break and the havoc they cause.
Of course they deny responsibility, blaming any trouble on weekend ravers who they say expect ‘something for nothing’.
This seems ironic considering their drop-out position in life.
I cannot understand why positive support is given to people whose only objective in life (in their own words) is to ‘fuck the system’.
Light minded At last, a (sort of ) fair report on the travellers in England.
Will the artificial and shallow-minded of the world ever recognise the beauty of natural values and not shrug it off as sky-high idealism?
The light is inside everyone, it just needs to be released.
Body positive?
Can Sandra Bernhard (FACE 48) seriously believe that, because it is she who is stripping for Playboy and not some ‘subservient bimbo’, she has succeeded in subverting the soft-porn medium?
So ‘men are going to get off on women anyway, just walking down the street’ and of course magazines whose raison d'etre is the presentation of the naked or seminaked female body as a spectacle aren't contributing to this state of affairs, are they?
Unfortunately Bernhard fails to explain exactly which part of this ‘situation’ she is in control of — clearly she isn't in control of the production of the magazine, nor its distribution or consumption.
By succumbing to the pressure to appear in such a publication (why do it at all?) her ‘control’ goes out the window.
Unquestionably she has brought the might of the sexist porn industry to its knees and forced it to deal with a self-supporting woman with ideals and a philosophy.
It deals with her, of course, by getting her to take her clothes off.
Some triumph.
So tell us, Sandra, what makes a bimbo a bimbo?
Poptastic Re: Ekow Eshun's Monitor article (FACE 48).
Essential TOTP moments?
Simple — Bauhaus doing an OTT version of ‘Ziggy Stardust’ after being introduced by a slightly bemused Jimmy Saville, John Lydon wearing a vicar's collar and playing a violin, Robert Smith and Iggy Pop's fascinating attempts at lip-synching, wee Claire Grogan flashing her polka dot undies at the randy cameramen, Sir Bob Geldof mutilating John and Olivia…and of course, the godlike, awesome, seminal appearance of the Smurfs!!!
TOTP RIP.
Jeanuius Your article on capital E Levi's (FACE 47) was good and accurate until the bit about washing.
Most washing powders have an ‘optical whitener’ to get your whites white (and your Levi's), so even if you hand-wash, with most powders they'd still fade.
The answer is to use powder that's specially for nonfast colours.
Anyway, which self-respecting rocker would handwash his originals?
He'd get his mam to do them, or taken them down the launderette like Nick Kamen did.
Model making Instead of being a showcase of new modelling talent and the supposed depth of the new models, ‘London Girls’(FACE 45) turns into an unbelievably petty and hateful attack on the supermodels themselves.
It is the photographs (Meisel, Weber and their ilk) who hold the real power over images.
Supermodels are on top because of their metamorphic ability to bend their looks as the photographer demands.
It was disturbing to see just how personal Baker was with her attacks on Linda et al.
Abusing abuse In the item on Axl Rose's childhood abuse (FACE 47), it says ‘a history of childhood abuse is both hip and horrible’.
Child abuse is something no one would wish to endure, and using it as a sales/hype ploy is sick.
However, this issue can be looked at positively: perhaps someone may do something about their abuse as a result of Mr Rose's coming forward — telling someone is one of the hardest things a victim can do.
Child abuse is definitely not ‘hip’, and there are more victims than you might think.
SAVE FACE As announced last month, the SAFE FACE appeal is now — mercifully — closed.
The fund currently stands at £82,680; additional monies pledged and/or in the pipeline will take the total over £90,000 and ensure that THE FACE survives.
The names listed below have given their support in the period between press date and publication of the last issue, and their contributions are included in the sum mentioned above.
Our thanks to these, and to all the friends of THE FACE who have given their time and money so generously to help us through this difficult time.
Thanks also to the following for their help at the SAVE FACE PARTY (sorry we missed your names from last month's issue):
HYPE!
easy rider If London's cabbies were all so full of ‘The Knowledge’ they profess to have, then more would realise that being stuck in a traffic jam in the back of a black box being assaulted with banalities is nobody's idea of fun.
The limitations of the traditional cab have, however, spawned a new sight on the capital's streets: the taxi bike.
Fed up, with no reliable way of getting around London except on his motorbike, Robert Cave came up with this novel concept, which has now been adopted by a leading mini-cab and courier company.
From Cave's prototype of a converted Honda PC800, a fleet of taxi bikes is now set to emerge, all with heated leather seats and overblankets, running boards, luggage racks and intercoms.
‘The idea came from speaking to businessmen who had missed important meetings after being stuck in a cab in heavy traffic,’ says Cave.
More casual riders are also being attracted to the concept, recognising the fun in weaving about town with the wind in their hair.
‘Yeah, all right!’ commented Ealing's prodigal singer/songwriter Jamiroqua, who celebrated signing a big-money, eight-album deal with Sony by spending the rest of the day testing the taxi bike for THE FACE.
‘A taxi bike like this is good for the environment and with the parking problems in London, it's got to be a good thing.
I've had £230-worth of parking fines in the last couple of months!’
At the same price as your traditional cab and twice as speedy, riding pillion has never looked like being such a good bet.
Ashley Heath 
Robert Cave's taxi bike service available through Addison Lee on 071 387 8888
Jamiroqua's debut platter, ‘When You Gonna Learn’, is available through Acid Jazz 
Crime was our Hollywood in Chicago.
My grandmother kept scrapbooks about criminals, and I grew up seeing pictures of Leopold and Loeb.
I was obsessed with the way they looked, but I knew I wasn't being told the whole story about them.’
With his debut feature Swoon , director Tom Kalin has put on screen everything his grandmother didn't tell him about the infamous child murderers.
Gay lovers and Nietzschean delinquents, Leopold and Loeb scandalised America in the Twenties.
For Kalin and producer Christine Vachon (who worked with Todd Haynes on last year's Poison ), their case was crucial in establishing the popular myth of gay desire as murderous or pathological.
With Swoon's poised black-and-white images, which blend low-budget experiment, MTV edits and archive footage, they take that myth apart with remarkable assurance, pointing out the effects of sexual intolerance and the way Leopold and Loeb were scapegoated, but also showing how the crime was part of the sexual power play of their relationship.
By deconstructing one of the origins of the myth of the murderous homosexual, Kalin (who worked with Aids activists Gran Fury) has made one of the more productive contributions to the post- Basic Instinct debate.
Nevertheless, by posing questions rather than serving up morals, he's caught some flak from simple-minded gay critics.
In response,Swoon's defenders have championed Kalin as a leading light of a ‘New Queer Cinema’ which is concerned with putting forward a more complex vision of gay and lesbian sexuality.
Conscious of the dangers of marketing hype, the media-smart director remains sceptical, especially about being pigeon-holed as a purely ‘gay’ film-maker.
‘It's encouraging that work is being made which refuses this ridiculous demand for positive images, which tries to take on multiple aspects of identity.
But really I'm not as interested in ‘gay’ subject matter as I am in work that attacks the ideology of the family.
The kind of films I want to make in the future would be totally gay in sensibility, whatever that might mean, but totally about heterosexuals and aiming to seduce the general population.’
Jim McClellan 
Swoon director Tom Kalin — he wants to seduce the whole nation with his New Queer Cinema
It's the latest twist on the seminal Seventies Top Trumps boom, but whether it's such jovial playground fun is under debate.
The latest craze sweeping high schools and college dorms across the States is True Crime trading cards.
These Top Trumps for the Nineties feature stomach-turning photos of human freaks (including Francisco Lentini, the king of the freaks at the turn of the century, who had two male sex organs and three legs) and portraits of the most infamous mass murderers and serial killers.
These feature informative biogs detailing the number of kills and the preferred method of working as well as the gruesome details of their sicko frenzies.
In this bizarre world of teenage trading, a Charles Manson is a solid swap for a Ted Bundy.
A John Wayne Gacy thrashes an Ed Gein.
A predictable public furore on the other side of the Atlantic has led to court cases and an inevitable sales boom.
UK importer Mike Lake is unfazed by youth's transfer of interest from hot rods to hit men.
‘It's no different from reading about these people in books.
We're all fascinated by this kind of stuff if we're honest.’
Packs covering G-Men and Gangsters, Drug Wars and Human Freaks and Oddities don't improve matters, although the Dan Quayle ‘Danny Takes A Toke’ drug card is somewhat redeeming.
Have fun children.
Cliff Jones 
hailing from bonny Glasgow but destined for world domination, One Dove are one of the more permanent fixtures of a transient club scene and, despite the innocuous chemical reference, they'd rather whisper sweet nothings in your ear than whip you into a frenzy of fancy footwork.
Their first vinyl offering was the rhythm ‘n’ bruises of ‘Fallen’.
Last year they tracked down Weatherall in Rimini and consequently signed to Boy's Own.
‘It was one of those spur of the moment things,’ giggles vocalist Dot in recollection.
‘We got last-minute flights, turned up unannounced and accosted him.’
Bowled over by their demo, Weatherall offered his remixing services and has just put the finishing touches to their delicious debut LP ‘Breakdown’.
Coming from three diverse musical backgrounds — the rock'n'roller, the classical and the technological — and pulled together by doctor Weatherall's rumbling production.
One Dove operate from their own studio where they scribble ideas, gently squabble and concoct their ‘irn bru’ of dubbed-up, blissed-out music.
‘We work in a very haphazard way,’ muses Jim, the mixing desk whizz who used to be in, um, Altered Images.
‘We've always known what we didn't want our music to sound like, but we never realised that out of all that chaos we'd sound so laid back.’
Perfect for the postparty come-down — spliff up, chill out and get One Dove on them gramophones.
Mandi James 
One Dove prepare to give us their version of ‘I Could Be Happy’
they've been called the white Marxist Public Enemy; hypocrites; idealists; patronising liberal males.
Formed four years ago, Consolidated hail from the same San Francisco Bay area as Hiphoprisy and make a similarly militant rap'n'roll racket — indeed, the band's Mark Pistel co-programmed the Hiphoprisy LP.
Consolidated's latest LP, ‘Play More Music’, collects together intense, groovy and very left-of-centre raps and rants like ‘Veggie Beat Manifesto’ and the classic ‘You Suck’, rapped by women, about oral sexual equality —‘I know you think it's a real drag to suck my cunt when I'm on the rag’.
It certainly isn't your average rap album.
‘Our idea of fun is getting an audience to confront issues and eliciting a response from them,’ says main man Adam Sherburne.
Each Consolidated gig climaxes with a lengthy open mike discussion on anything from MTV to education, slam dancing to vivisection.
‘We're called liars and hypocrites all the time,’ claims Sherburne.
‘It would be easy to give in to that criticism and just make mindless, utopian house records or ambiguous grunge records.
But I'd like to think there is a place for us and our ideals.’
Danny Scott 
Frisco rap'n'rollers Consolidated
Nobody has ever put the boot into literature like Richard Allen.
His tales of skinhead aggro, teenage sex and general mayhem filled 18 thin paperbacks, as he catalogued the changing faces of Britain's Seventies youth.
Books like Skinhead and Suedehead , both million sellers, were essential reading way back when the length of your hair and the logo on your button badges were more important than the flavour of your trainers.
But after the release of Mob Rule in 1980, Allen retreated from the scene and his books became increasingly collectable classics.
With the vibrant Seventies Brit cults only now beginning to get the recognition they deserved, you'll pay good money for a copy of a rarer title such as Teeny Bop Idol and Punk Rock .
Allen is now set to re-emerge, however, with a ‘new epic’ underway in his Gloucestershire hideaway.
At Skinhead Times , we are meanwhile repackaging all of his original 18 novels, with The Complete Richard Allen Volume One — Skinhead, Suedehead and Skinhead Escapes our first compilation release this month.
It's right that Joe Hawkins and Allen's other legendary aggro merchants should now be given a new lease of life, and Allen is absolutely sure of his books' continued relevance: ‘The doubts and problems which confronted yesteryear's skinheads have multiplied at an alarming rate in today's world.
Joe Hawkins and his ilk were, essentially, patriots fighting for a heritage.
The battle was lost, though, when many in high places yielded to pressures from beyond these shores.
And these wishy-washy types celebrated what they believed was the end of a bothersome cult.’
It is as easy to knock Allen as it is to knock the cults he embraced.
Some of the stories will now appear dated, and as the years ticked by a few of his novels did tend to veer on to the wrong side of the far-fetched.
But when all is said and done, the name of the novel game is entertainment, and in that Richard Allen has never failed to deliver.
George Marshall 
George Marshall runs Skinhead Times newspaper and ST Publishing 
Bother girls steam in with skinhead reissues
What is the best form of entertainment in New York these days? 2,500 women think it is the Women's Action Coalition.
This all-female group includes singer Laurie Anderson, radical performance artist Karen Finley and painter Barbara Kruger among many other famous Manhattanites, artists, journalists, lawyers and women of all sizes, shapes and colours.
What do they want?
An end to misogyny in America.
No mean feat.
But WAC's ability to lampoon America's leading male figures and to descend en masse night or day wherever they see injustice, makes them the modern equivalent of Catwoman crossed with the Lone Ranger.
So far their almost daily antics have included a variety of canny offensives — successfully protecting against unsympathetic judges in rape trials, filling the White House garden with tennis balls covered in facts and figures of women's oppression plus the odd rude rad fem slogan, and sending Jane Fonda's husband, TV mogul Ted Turner, a ‘We Are Watching’ letter about his refusal to show pro-choice ads on his channel (although it shows all the antiabortion propaganda).
WAC's most elaborate ruse to date was to turn up at the Republican convention in Houston and install batch after batch of 20-by-60-foot high feminist slogans (designed by Anderson, Kruger et al) which greeted Bush's nearest and dearest as they exited from the convention.
This Tank Girl-style posse is only seven months old, but already it has grown beyond the founders' wildest dreams.
Going for world domination, WAC is setting up branches all over America with planned outposts in Amsterdam and Paris.
So far, though, there has been little sign of anyone wanting to start a branch in London.
Interested parties can contact them in New York on 0101 212 967 7711 ext 9226.
Lucie Young 
toon time!
In the wake of the resounding success of The Simpsons , a new cartoon series has taken America by storm.
The Ren & Stimpy Show , featuring possibly the most deranged comic duo in years, became an instant cult hit when it appeared last autumn in pilot form on cable channel Nickleodeon.
Snapped up instantaneously by sister channel MTV, the show has since left Americans drooling in anticipation of a forthcoming full-length series of gross acting characters undergoing all manner of grotesque facial distortions and transmutations.
With the merchandising machine grinding into production, 100,000 T-shirts already selling every week, along with video games, mugs and comic books, it's surely only a matter of time before the simple-minded feline Stimpy and the maniacal chihuahua Ren make their debut on our shores.
Fraser Cooke 
‘what I call dressing up and what other people call dressing up are two different things’
Jaye Davidson wanders into the Ground Floor Bar in Notting Hill and sniffs at the saloon-in-space restyle job with a languid disdain that is only mildly theatrical.
‘They're obviously trying to attract the gilded youth of London.’
Jaye has gone for the understated look: fatigues and T-shirt, hair tied back, no makeup.
Nothing gilded about this youth today.
But appearances can be deceptive.
‘I don't dress up.
I never dress up.
But what I call dressing up and what other people calling dressing up are probably two different things.
I mean, I go to Kinky, but I can't be bothered to wear high heels.’
In Neil Jordan's latest film,The Crying Game , a neon-lit romantic thriller starring Stephen Rea, Miranda Richardson and Forest Whitaker, Jaye looks fabulous and is most definitely dressed up.
In fact, the 24-year-old first-time actor puts on such a performance that audiences are likely to be surprised.
‘My only real previous acting experience was when I was working for Walt Disney Productions and had to visit sick children in hospital dressed up in a Pluto costume.
I got mobbed.’
In the film, Rea plays an IRA man who becomes a little too involved with the British soldier he has helped kidnap and, in a confused act of penance after his death, tracks down the soldier's wife back in London.
Whitaker (improbably) plays the soldier, Jaye (impeccably) plays the wife.
The film is uneven and only partially successful, but as an attempt to explore cultural, racial and, above all, sexual difference, it is ambitious and challenging.
Jaye is of mixed race, with a father from Ghana and an English mother and, though born in California, feels emphatically English.
‘They are so creative, they have brilliant ideas.
It's just unfortunate that people can't seem to believe in them.’
Jaye was brought up in Hertfordshire and didn't have a happy time of it.
‘I went to three different schools and didn't really enjoy any of them.
I thought most of it was pointless.
I thought the teachers were arrogant and condescending.’
Was it a question of not being allowed the space for personal expression, I wonder?
Jaye gives me a blank look.
‘I knew that I was gay from the age of seven.
It's one of my earliest memories.
It was never a problem for me and it was never a problem for my family.
I was always allowed to do what I wanted to do.’
Jaye flew the coop as soon as decently possible and in 1988 landed a job in London with the society couturiers, the Emmanuels.
Then the film offer came in.
‘It was quite a joke really.
I was at the Edward II wrap party and someone asked me if I wanted to be in a film.
I initially said no.’
Why?
‘Well, it's the oldest line in the book, isn't it?’
Yeah.
And who wants to fall for that?
Steve Beard 
books
Shopping In Space Elizabeth Young and Graham Caveney
This year's hippest hunk of literary criticism.
Young, currently the smartest culture, crit, and sidekick Caveney provide the first serious look at the new wave of American fiction — from the burnt-out brat packers to such authentic talents as Mary Gaitskill and Dennis Cooper
The Male Cross-Dresser Support Group Tama Janowitz
Not nearly so self-consciously ‘modern’ as, say,Slaves Of New York , this disaster-laden story of a Manhatten misfit who's had enough doesn't quite live up to the provocative promise of its title.
Quite good though.
Not In Newbury Mary Scott
Brilliant follow-up to last year's acclaimed Nudists May Be Encountered , in which we discover the quirky but mundane lifestyle of our heroine, Alice.
Like Iris Murdoch with laughs, this is both profound and painfully funny — a perfect novel for the Nineties.
Russian Beauty Victor Erofeyev
Finally available in English two years after it scandalised Russia, this is the tale of Irina, a femme fatale who sleeps her way to the top echelons of Moscow high life.
Almost painfully avant-garde in style, it nevertheless remains a landmark in post-Soviet literature.
Morrissey Shot Linder Sterling
It's probably the kind of irony that old Moz himself would appreciate: the only Morrissey book actually authorised by the great man is a celebration of that hoary institution, the rock tour.
Singer and backing band go ‘on the road’; best friend Linder snaps away.
Big in America, we suspect.
The Penguin Book Of Rock And Roll Writing Clinton Heylin, editor
Heavily drawn from the days when rock writers wore leather trousers and believed that rock would save the world.
This is serious stuff, as might be expected from an American editor who writes Bob Dylan reference books, but there are enough gems to counterbalance the struggle to forge a rock aesthetic.
Bad, Or The Dumbing Of America Paul Fussell
An anxiety classic, aimed at showing how stupid America has become.
Unhappily for Fussell, his book's true usefulness may lie in its future value to trash historians, who will pore ecstatically through the kitsch menus and gruesome adverts he has compiled.
Actually, the baddest thing about this book is Fussell's haircut.
Sex And Sensibility Julie Burchill
Worth buying for the introduction alone, this collection of Burchill's contributions to a variety of British papers and magazines (including us, of course) highlights why she has always been a great read.
Rarely sexy, it is nevertheless far spunkier than Ambition .
The Best Of Plimpton George Plimpton
Paperback anthology from the star journo who mixes the urbane gossip of the high society insider with the macho methodism of his John Noakes-style ‘participatory journalism’ and always, manages to get the angle.
Worth it for the anecdotes about thumbwrestling Norman Mailer alone.
A Class Apart James Gardiner
For all those who thought that homo-eroticism began and ended with Boyz magazine, this photo collection gives a lens-eye view of one Montague Glover, a British Bruce Weber for the Twenties and Thirties (but without the casting agent, American beefcake or dogs).
It lovingly documents Glover's chief obsessions — the army, working-class men and his lover Ralph.
Monkey  Andrew Davies A diary-like stream of consciousness novel as told by two chalk-and-cheese characters in their early twenties who become almost irrevocably involved with each other.
Their intense, passionate and ultimately destructive relationship is detailed with great intimacy and, although there is a foreboding sense of imminent danger throughout, the going never gets too tough.
Covering everything from recreational drug-taking to fucking, from tagging to shoot outs, it's a compelling read.
dirty beats
The terms have been cropping up increasingly in this magazine and elsewhere: ‘the London funk’, ‘the drum and bass groove’, ‘the jazz not jazz explosion’…a myriad of catchphrases for records that refuse to sit within any one easily categorised genre.
What can be stated with some certainty is that ‘London’ is by no means the be-all and end-all of the emerging story and that an ‘explosion’is occurring in terms of new record labels.
Where Acid Jazz and Talkin Loud (both London-based and founded by DJ Gilles Peterson) have looked to lead, others have watched, listened and learned.
And they're doing it just as well, if not better.
If Talkin Loud has been criticised in the past for not saying much at all, then the fact that storming releases in 1992 from the Young Disciples and Tammy Payne have taken months to see record shop racks hasn't helped.
Meanwhile the jury remains out on signings such as K-Creative.
‘My label is a reaction against Talkin Loud and its sound — that smooth production thing,’ stresses Trevor Jackson at Bite It!
‘We're looking for a dirtier funky sound that doesn't smell of record label money.’
Bite It! has emerged in recent months as the best British hip hop label, with Jackson's productions including essential jazzier cuts on the flip sides.
His comments ring true for much of the music now emerging in the wake of the Eighties rare groove scene — music that stretches from hip hop grooves to hard drum and bass soul.
Jackson talks of ‘the funk’ as Bootsy Collins does: a raw and dirty word.
This month sees the arrival of the much-anticipated Mo Wax label from DJ James Lavelle, with graphics and packaging by ex-FACE and Arena designer Ian Swift, the man behind Talkin Loud's distinctive imagery.
Mo Wax's debut release, from New York-based Repercussions, again suggests a dirtier proposition: ‘A funky, phat jazz thing on a hard hip hop tip,’ is how Lavelle terms the Mo Wax sound.
Closely associated with Bite It! records, Lavelle is more happy to acknowledge the contribution of the sound's forerunners.
‘Without Talkin Loud you wouldn't have Mo Wax or any of the new labels.
Conscious and Dorado wouldn't have made it either.
No one would have wanted to listen.’
Alongside Mo Wax, new records bearing the names of operations like Zero, Party Rockin', Somethin' Else and Soul Jazz have recently found the light of day.
The explosion of smaller ‘funky’ labels sees a wealth of records in the clubs and record shops days after they've been cut, not months.
And excellent debut compilation albums released this month by both the Dorado and Conscious labels are testament to two London labels that have established niches through funky, funky music played at its roughest.
Where London has perhaps taken a lead, it has been followed.
From Bristol, through Leeds and Manchester, to Edinburgh, there is healthy activity.
The Party Rockin' label proves that talk of any ‘Bristol sound’(ie a Massive Attack sound) is as overly simplistic as talk of a ‘London drum and bass sound’.
Zero has brought us killer Japanese grooves, Mo Wax chose to launch on a NYC tip, and Germany's funking along pretty nicely too.
There's an explosion of talent, sure, but it's coming from all over.
And it's hard, raw and increasingly dirty.
Ashley Heath 
Hardly compact enough to squeeze into your average Tokyo matchbox flat but all the rage nevertheless, this surreal Daliesque chair was designed by Japanese ‘furniture tailor’ Yoichi Nakamura.
Slightly confusingly named Utsly-Gtsly, this model is one of many Nakamura creations made up from sketches given to him by flat-proud clients with 200,000 yen to spend
Until now, house and techno have regarded their rock'n'roll adversaries indifferently.
Apart from the odd wrangle over samples, the two opponents have enjoyed a fairly benign standoff, and thankfully avoided a revival of the late-Seventies' punk vs disco debate.
But suddenly the storm clouds are gathering.
At a rave in Stafford's Bingley Hall last month, Altern-8 launched an offensive by proclaiming rock music dead, flying in an African witch doctor to ‘cleanse the air of rock’ with an ancient incantation, and rounding off the ceremony themselves with the sacrifice of a Fender Stratocaster.
Altern-8 were sharing the bill with the Prodigy.
The much-anticipated vinyl collaboration between Gallic hippie chick Vanessa Paradis and retro deadhead Lenny Kravitz arrives on these shores this month via New York.
‘Vanessa Paradis’— her breathless, helium vocals, his lyrics written specially for her, her first English-language LP — is pop rock with tinges of Suzanne Vega, Lou Reed and Motown.
Expect a big babes-and-boys following, lots of lusting and live shows early next year
Granada had never seen anything like it.
It's been a long, grey summer, but the clubbing community still celebrated the last Bank Holiday weekend of the season in style.
On the Sunday, regulars from Manchester's Most Excellent partied down in the Rover's Return in an enjoyable one-off hostessed by a leopardskin-clad drag version of Bet Lynch.
Some of the more, er, cheerful clubbers staggered over the cobbles of the outdoor Coronation Street set, but studio staff had few complaints: more used to the dry Rotary Club events and business lunches held on-set, they found it all ‘a pleasant change’.
Elsewhere, Hastings Pier was packed on Friday for Splash (rechristened by one DJ present as ‘the all-England gurning contest’), Saturday's country house alldayer near Bournemouth was generally acclaimed, while on Sunday night London's Strut finally took off with a full turn-out for guest DJ Danny Rampling.
At Notting Hill, Carnival was rained on but still managed to struggle past the 7pm curfew in parts, though sensible southerners spent Monday in the marquee at the Full Circle all-dayer.
It hasn't been the most memorable of summers: let's hope the autumn brings more positive energy (and not all of it chemically induced)
club news
No toilet paper, long queues, one cubicle…you know what we're talking about, but now we want to know the best of the worst.
Send on a postcard your name, address and nomination for the ‘Worst Club Toilets In Britain Competition’.
Entries must be received by Oct 19 in order for the results to be published in the December issue.
The first 10 entries will receive club toilet survival kits.
Equinox in Leicester Square might look like a cross between the Hippodrome and Liverpool St station, but it will be transformed into Britain's biggest fancy dress ball for Kinky Gerlinky on September 28 when the theme is ‘Sleaze’.
Kinky also travels to Brighton (Paradox, October 12) and Manchester (Flesh, October 28), before London clubland dresses up again on November 9.
After closing for the summer,Quiet Storm , the club for an older crowd (in age but not attitude), has reopened at Ormond's Yard in London on Fridays.
One club that has shut down permanently is The Brain in London, a victim of too few clubbers with too little money after one good summer too many.
well chuffed
At last month's Chuff Chuff Summer Ball in the gorgeous grounds of a Warwickshire agricultural college, the crowd were dancing to Birmingham hero Gordon Kaye's instrumental house mix in the main marquee when he suddenly slipped ‘The American Trilogy’ on the decks.
The dancing stopped, and while those who'd travelled to the all-dayer on coaches from Brighton, Hereford, Nottingham, Northampton, Leeds and Sheffield looked bemused at the sound of the King, the West Midlands regulars looked straight to Dermot Ryan, one of the three brothers behind promotions company Chuff Chuff.
Dermot, you see, is an Elvis fan, and given the right stimulants, has been known to think he looks like Presley (although, as one bemused clubber from Leeds commented, ‘He looks more like a young Max Bygraves’).
This abberation apart, Chuff Chuff offered one of the best days out of the summer — little surprise to those who already know them as one of the Midlands' most reliable and imaginative club promoters.
Based out of their menswear shop, The Depot, in Birmingham's Piccadilly Street, for the last five years, the Ryans and partner Lee Garrick have organised regular excursions to Nottingham's Venus, small, friendly boat parties (including one memorable all-nighter in London's Docklands and their regular Xmas fancy dress jaunt in Worcestershire), and high quality one-off events for bigger crowds.
‘The important thing is that everyone has a blinding time,’ says Dermot with the quiet confidence of a promoter who never promises attractions he can't deliver.
‘We try to get decent venues, good DJs, and make sure that people enjoy themselves.
That's the main thing.’
With Gordon Kaye and Jim Ryan as resident DJs and guests such as Mark Moore, Sasha and Dean Thatcher playing ‘music with vocals rather than techno — party music’, so far they have never failed to leave their crowd well chuffed.
Sheryl Garratt 
The next Chuff Chuff event will be a country house party at the end of October .
The Chuff Chuff crew at full steam (left to right): Jim, Mick and Dermot Ryan, Lee Garrick
club of the month
Renaissance is an all-nighter held on Sunday mornings at Club Zest in Mansfield, a pit town between Nottingham and Sheffield.
It's the work of Geoff Oakes, a quietly-spoken young man from Stoke who went to the Haçienda one night in 1988 and got bitten bad.
He stuck with the scene, promoted a little in his home town, and then grew bored.
As is often the case, his boredom was mixed with nostalgia, and so when he set out to create something new, he also had something borrowed in mind.
He wanted ‘something really special, with some of the atmosphere that was at the Haçienda when I was going there’.
Starting this year, he has thought and worked hard, and as a masterstroke recruited Sasha as the resident DJ.
As soon as you enter Renaissance you know the key word is style.
The foyer and staircase are hung with Mondrian-inspired abstract paintings.
At the bottom of the stairs is a chill-out room hung with white camouflage netting, scattered with cushions, massaged with ambient house, and perfected by the absence of people eager to discuss their evening's drug intake with you.
At the top is the dancefloor, which is magnificent.
It is long, high and wide, and hung with paintings and sculptures created for that renaissance feel by Twin, a design partnership from Manchester.
They replace the fittings every three months, and at the moment there are cherubs, and angels in rich red, gold and ivory.
There's no music policy beyond the basic house/garage starting point, but Sasha, taking over at about 5am, continues a mission to pick out the beautiful kick and rush in techno and its derivatives.
Like a growing number of promoters, Geoff knows that keeping the style inside means keeping the ‘riff-raff’— the Ecstasy raconteurs, the ten-a-penny ravers, the baseball caps — out, and to this end he has called up that ghost of clubbing past, the door policy.
The compulsory membership (necessary for the midnight–7am licence) sorts out some of the teds from the heads, but even with membership, hopefuls have to get past Geoff on the door.
‘You can tell if their attitude's right just by talking to them for a few minutes,’ he says.
‘It's not élitist.
I just don't want people coming in who are going to spoil it.’
And those who get past the door seem to agree with the policy.
‘It's good to stop all the twats getting in,’ said Clare, a forthright Liverpool girl at the club for the first time.
Clare had just been to the lavatory, which, she claimed, was a significant experience.
At Liverpool clubs, the toilets are full of catsuited girls who look at you as if you're rumoured to be a child molester.
Here, everyone had been friendly, and the difference carried through to the whole club.
‘It's like it was a few years ago, when no one bothered too much about how you looked, and you didn't get any edginess or aggression.
Also, you don't get a queue of aggressive-looking old men trying to sell you E all night.
If that's door policies, then let's have some more please.’
Billy Batty 
‘This is the best thing that could happen here,’ says Alex Lowes, organiser of the Southampton weekenders and a regular at Flying's latest Saturday night.
Certainly, the crowd at Middlesbrough's Arena seem to be learning fast: on the first night, most stayed in the rave room upstairs.
Weeks later, half were downstairs for the more tuneful brew mixed up by various members of the Flying DJ family.
‘It makes a change from jogging on the spot to ‘Sesame's Treet’,’ announced one girl in that unavoidable staple of female club culture, the loo queue.
Criticisms?
No water sold at the bar, scratchy loo paper, and a dancefloor that doesn't yet kick till after midnight.
But the crowd are friendly and well-dressed, the music as good as house gets; and given time to develop, this one will be worth travelling for
fashion police
‘I study fashion in Liverpool and I'm doing a work placement with Helen Storey.
These leather jeans are biker ones.
They're not too hot because there's plenty of room.
Leather's so popular because people are dressing more sexy.
It's the smell, the touch, the feel.
But you've got to avoid looking too slick.
I like the more rough-and-ready, tough, biker look.
They're a design classic and they'll never go away.
I love leather to design with: it's an absolute twat to sew, but brilliant on the body’— David Cooper
‘I design clothes and I made the trousers myself.
They're made of PVC.
I do an erotic Avengers kind of look.
Dressing up is part of going out.
Leather trousers have been around for two or three years now, but PVC's a good alternative and it's cheaper’— Catriona Smith
Shot at the Milk Bar by Patrick Harrison Text Camilla Deakin
Walking into a club these days, it's easy to get the feeling that you've accidentally come across the local Hell's Angels chapter double booked with a Skin 2 party.
The amount of leather (strides, biker boots, waistcoats) on your average dancefloor would constitute a cow the size of North Wales.
Forget junk food: soon we'll be forced to clear the rest of the rainforest, just to provide grazing for the cattle needed to clothe the queue outside London's posey Friday-nighter Glam.
Trouble is, there's a very fine line between looking flash and appearing cheap, between exuding sex appeal and simply looking ridiculous.
No matter how carefully you have studied that Elvis 1968 comeback special look, emulating the King of Sex before he turned into the King of Lard, those around you are reminded more of Alvin Stardust singing ‘My Coo-Ca-Choo’ in PVC.
Of course, this hasn't dissuaded thousands of hardened clubbers from carrying on ignoring the heat and wearing outfits that wouldn't be out of place on Scott's trip to the Antarctic.
But leather lovers beware, the fashion police are on your case.
‘I got them in some shop in Covent Garden.
They're not too hot and sticky.
This isn't any particular look, it's just a Zoom look.
I suppose leather is a pretty sexy material.
I like girls in leather trousers.
I like girls in leather, full stop’— Zoom
‘I'm a fashion student.
My trousers are from John Richmond.
I like the leather trousers look.
Not the biker look.
They're quite hot but it's worth it — they look good’— Peete ‘I study interior design.
A lot of people are wearing leathers, but there will be even more this winter.
It's quite a sexy look, but it only works on some people’— Mack
music
With the talk of ‘new’ British soul talent still on the rise (and much of it obviously focused on Don-E and Omar), the name of Noel has at last began to get some recognition.
It was the tail-end of the Seventies when a frighteningly young Noel McKoy and some schoolmates formed the Albians and recorded the all-time classic lovers' rock tune ‘Princess’.
Throughout the next decade, McKoy developed and honed his music.
Appearances with the James Taylor Quartet and a collaboration with Snowboy followed.
When Noel teamed up with brothers Cornelle and Robin and sister Junette to form a steady working unit — McKoy — things really started.
The ‘Family’ single (featured on ‘Rebirth Of Cool Too’) confirmed excited whispers: this was great soul music.
Now the McKoy crew release their long-playing debut ‘Full Circle’ on their own Rightrack label.
From the urgency of new single ‘Fight’ to the Snowboy-fuelled groove of ‘Lucky Fellow’, McKoy have come up with the goods.
More British talent showing the way, accomplished, mature and inspired…the world will listen 
Dieter Meier's Top Ten
A curious selection, but one that makes perfect sense once you realise it belongs to Dieter Meier, all-round oddball and the lyrical half of that crazy Swiss duo, Yellow.
Jazz, classical, the weird art-pop of Beefheart, techno; you'll find 'em all lodged in the grooves of any Yello track — if you're not convinced, check out the ‘Essential Yello’ compilation that's released this month.
‘I grew up listening to jazz,’ explains Meier, ‘because the Swiss charts were always full of silly songs.’
And what about all that techno, eh?
‘I listen to techno in the clubs, but never at home.
It would be like separating a film score from the film.’
Talking of films, Meier is still working on his wild, underground epic,Snowball , as well as producing a new Hollywood movie called MM, about some lass called Marilyn Monroe.
And he still manages to oversee his own record label, Solid Pleasure, home of his number-five choice, Whyte.
Ooo, you old nepotist you  
hype! trivia
WORKWEAR, so much to answer for.
Blundstone boots are showing no signs of receding and back in their birthplace of Hobart, Tasmania, they've walked into the city's art gallery which displays 35 Oz artists' response to ‘Do Something With A Blundstone’.
Crazy paint jobs and decoration with Christmas tree lights were high on the agenda, but we prefer Simon O'Mallon's effort —‘When You Go, Go With God's Speed’(left)— for that crucial Billy Whizz look
HIP ‘n’ happening dogs on LA's Venice Beach are imitating their owners by sporting shades, and, in extreme fashion victim cases, sunhats
CELEBRATING everything it can possibly think of this autumn (In The City, Haç tenth birthday parties), Manchester is not a place to miss out on honouring recreational drug use.
Kevin Fagan's Excess XS presents the ultimate dramatic (as in on the stage, not tabloid-style blind sensationalism) look at Ecstasy and the North-west dance scene.
Ultimately taking a positive stance, it also shows concern for abuse and misuse.
Catch it at the Contact Theatre till Oct 17 (061 274 4400)
WITH HAIR styling excess no longer flavour of the month, the smart ‘salons’ are looking for more Nineties methods of lightening your pockets.
Shiatsu massage is the current one to watch for.
London chain Zoo is amongst those now promoting a scalp pummelling from trained specialists — it sets you back £20, but it's better than a flat top
VIRGIN on the excessive?
From shiatsu in hairdressers to inflight beauty therapy on planes.
Virgin Atlantic now offers manicures and massages to ease the trauma of jet lag.
But only for suits in Upper Class.
Available to all passengers, however, are individual TV screens with a choice of six channels and Skyshow, presented by the finely-coiffured Jonathan Ross.
Not quite the perfect antidote to jet lag, but getting there
AFTER For Women with its sad, sad shaved pubes and abundance of smeared ice-cream and industrial oil, comes Ludus .
More like a ballsy Cosmo than a toned-down Playgirl , with its no bullshit approach to sex and sexuality, it'll have ‘imaginative images of men and their bodies’ explorations into sex education and sex therapy.
Ludus is strictly for women with their eyes set on newsagents' mid-shelves
Bastard Bunny
STEP aside Buggs.
Fluffy tailed and foul mouthed, kitted out with size-24 Docs and long floppy ears, Bastard Bunny is not only the ultimate rude boy rabbit, he's also the best thing to happen in British indie comics for ages.
Issue three, out now, price £1.50, features street-level surrealism, rude words, rodent sex, ALF tendencies and the view from the queue for Love Ranch.
Unmissable
GUYS — having trouble impressing the ladies?
Why not try some of the Hollywood chat-ups recently reported by Spy magazines.
Showing his usual finesse with regard to women, Oliver Stone's favoured approach is ‘Why are you wearing this?
I can't see your breasts’.
Relying (perhaps mistakenly) on his much-vaunted, er, sexual charisma, Warren Beatty goes for ‘Make a pass at me’, while, demonstrating his well-documented charm Big Arnie's suggestion is ‘Your bangability is very high tonight, baby’.
That was bangability and not bankability, eh Arnie?
LAST month's Q±A star, super funker George Clinton, keeps the Mothership vibe in the news.
Seven volumes of unreleased raw P-funk now arrive from the vaults of Castle Communications
WANT to deal drugs and kill people?
Easy.
Join the police force.
Black And Blue is BBC1's ‘controversial’ 90-minute drama (Sun 27 Sept, 9.25pm) guaranteed to get the law and order brigade hot under the collar.
In a nutshell: young country bumpkin black cop is drafted in to defuse the tension on a London estate and discovers who's really doing the dirty work.
Message: the police are bastards.
Verdict: makes a change from The Bill 
THE Kraftwerk influence continues.
Reversing years of electro wizards stealing from classical music, The Balanescu Quartet release ‘Possessed’ on Mute records — haunting string arrangements of ‘The Model’, ‘Autobahn’and three other technocrat gems.
Essential 
Eddie comes back to Earth (or back to Eartha?) with Boomerang.
The new Cary Grant, anybody?
films on release
CITY OF JOY One of those long, boring impeccably well-made, redemptive epics Roland Joffe specialises in.
Patrick Swayze is a doc with oedipal jitters who goes to India to find himself, only to get caught up in the struggles of the native people earning a crust on the heaving streets of Calcutta.
Joffe's pious vision of man's inhumanity to man all comes together in Pauline Collins' clinic: it squares off against the local mafia, saves lepers etc.
All very noble, but where's the sex?
GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS David Mamet wrote the screenplay for James Foley's adaptation of his own acclaimed play, in which a bunch of macho salesmen gripe, fume, bullshit and curse their way through an escalating number of existential plot devices.
Alec Baldwin is outstanding, Jack Lemmon, Ed Harris and Alan Arkin are good, while Al Pacino is good but miscast.
The stylised sets work a treat
GAS, FOOD AND LODGING Alison Ander's debut comes on like downwardly mobile John Hughes teen angst (sort of).
Set in trailer park America, shot with an arthouse eye, it has divorced mom Brooke Adams struggling with wayward daughter Ione Skye, who gets pregnant by a wacky English geologist called Dank (huh?) while the other daughter, 16-year-old newcomer Fairuza Balk, negotiates various adolescent crises.
Sweet, but nothing special
UNLAWFUL ENTRY Useful yups-in-peril thriller featuring psycho cop Ray Liotta giving spectacular Kurt Russell and wife Madeleine Stowe the standard LAPD treatment (harassment, bogus drug charges).
The depiction of post-Rodney King LA (fortress architecture/home security, the new class war, the police as the city's biggest gang) and the face-offs between Russell and Liotta both have potential, but director Jonathan Kaplan fluffs the politics (Liotta's just one lone nut) and the suspense.
Still one of the month's best bets
boomerang
Eddie Murphy's Boomerang isn't so much a comeback after recent failures as a career rethink, deliberately designed to show Fast Eddie easing up and losing the street hustle — coming on, in fact, like a black Cary Grant.
When actors say they want to be like Cary Grant, it's usually a sign they're about to make the worst movie of their career.
So it's a pleasant surprise that this buppie sex comedy is actually half-way decent.
Against a dated aspirational set-up, Murphy plays a marketing exec/hotshot ladies' man (a change — in the past he's always seduced other guys, in a manner of speaking).
When Eddie gets the brush off from his new female boss (the very wonderful Robin Givens), director Reggie Hudlin cues up comic reversals (she stands him up, drops in for a quick fuck, he bleats about commitment), which may not quite reflect the complexity of modern sex wars (no mention of Aids here) but are still funny.
And even funnier are the incidental routines — comic negotiations of casual racism and class tensions between buppies and their parents.
Boomerang does take way too long to resolve the plot and panders to Murphy's narcissism.
And Murphy himself often looks edgy, as if he's trying to button his lip (he seems happiest with the funny improvised boy's talk routines).
But overall this is a watchable stab at that most degraded of Hollywood genres — the romantic comedy.
films of the month
news and reviews compiled by jim mcclellan and steve beard
From this side of the Atlantic, the pointless remake of Wuthering Heights looks like a deliberate attempt to finish off British film (crap dialogue, laughable Barnsley-by-the-Seine accent from Juliette Binoche and Sinéad O'Connor as Emily Brönte).
But in Hollywood there's a mini-fad for adaptations of literary classics.
Scorsese's working on Edith Wharton's The Age Of Innocence , Coppola on Bram Stoker's Dracula and now Mel Brooks is promising to do Oliver Goldsmith's restoration comedy She Stoops To Conquer Although Slacker , the original film about twentynothings, remains unreleased over here, Hollywood has several attempts to tap the Generation X market on the way.
Following Singles , Cameron Crowe's account of Seattle slackers, comes Bodies, Rest And Motion , an existential romantic comedy about Xers featuring Bridget Fonda, Tim Roth and Eric Stoltz.
Bad Ideas 1: Don Johnson is to star in the movie version of The Saint…
Bad Ideas 2: Mickey Rourke is up to play Kurtz in a film of Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness…
Bad Ideas 3: Plans are underway for Yo, Alice , a hip hop streetwise version of Alice In Wonderland .
Janet Jackson, Paula Abdul and Whitney Houston are all interest in the title role.
This month's Keanu story: the studly one has started a band.
Called Dog Star, they sound like Nirvana mixed with the Sex Pistols and are apparently gigging LA clubs.
Causing a stink.
After reports of Keanu's personal hygiene problem, much star bitching now focuses on body odour.
Gurus of gossip The Hollywood Kids recently circulated a story about a hunky heart-throb labelled Pig Pen on the set of his latest film, whilst Movie Line magazine carried an item about an actress who had such a problem that her action hero leading man vowed never to work with her again 
OK, so the Carry On movies tap an essential strain of British humour and are relevant again in the post-alternative age, but that doesn't mean a new Carry On was a good idea — after all, Sid James' devilish cackle really is irreplaceable.
While Carry On Columbus has alternative types (Rik Mayall, Alexei Sayle) paying their respects, old troupers (wrinkly Jim Dale as Columbus) and modern inheritors of the tradition (a pretty limp Julian Clary), it just isn't funny or saucy enough.
Watch only when pissed
BITTER MOON In which Roman Polanski returns to the stuff he knows best; absurdist slapstick, sexual perversion and girls who look younger than they really are.
Peter Coyote and Emmanuelle Seigner are the deviant couple who entrap English stiffs Hugh Grant and Kristin Scott-Thomas on-board a liner bound for India.
The story of their relationship is narrated in flashback by Coyote, a manifest romantic idiot who nevertheless shares many of Polanski's obsessions.
Lots of laughs, but at whose expense, exactly?
Hot sex now: Emmanuelle Seigner in Bitter Moon 
WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP Great title for an unfocussed basketball movie directed by Ron Bull Durham Shelton.
Woody Harrelson and Wesley Snipes play off against each other in a comedic buddy movie about two hustlers who team up to cream money off LA's kerb-side courts, only to run up against problems with girls (Rosie Perez, Tyra Ferrell) and gangsters.
The black-on-white culture banter is predictable and Harrelson seems out of his depth, but watch out for Rosie Perez on Jeopardy 
The fake tans, fixed smiles and suburban kitsch of ballroom dancing are so obviously comic, you wonder why no one 's covered the subject before.
That said,Strictly Ballroom's attempt to outcamp the ultracamp doesn't quite click.
Almodóvar this certainly isn't — more like Come Dirty Dancing .
Dancing rebel Paul Mercurio adds a little Spanish sex to his stride, takes on the ballroom bosses and falls for frump turned dancehall diva Tara Morice, while the relentlessly zippy direction tries to match the hypermanic bump and hustle.
By the end all you can do is grin and bear it
going native
Hollywood Indians aren't what they used to be.
First, they're not Indians but Native Americans.
Second, they're no longer played by ugly gits like Charles Bronson, but by pretty ethnics such as Lou Diamond Phillips who can plausibly claim to have Cherokee blood somewhere in their veins (it was this which landed Phillips the lead in The Dark Wind , the recent Robert Redfordbacked adaptation of one of Tony Hillerman's Navajo detective novels).
Third, they are suddenly the good guys.
No longer murderous savages or martyred innocents, they are now Nineties guys in touch with their inner feelings as well as the outer fringes of the ecology movement.
Ever since Kevin Costner delighted impressionable audiences with Dances With Wolves , feathers, beads and tepees have been unusually in demand in Tinseltown.
Native Americans are big business and a whole slew of revisionist Westerns are in the pipeline.
Michael Mann's The Last Of The Mohicans , an adaptation of the classic James Fenimore Cooper tale starring Daniel Day Lewis and American Indian Movement (AIM) leader Rusell Means, looks the best bet to subvert old frontier stereotypes.
In the meantime, it is left to Michael Aspel to grapple with the contemporary record.
His Incident At Oglala is a documentary (again financed by Robert Redford) on the primal scene of Native American political activism: the scapegoating of AIM member Leonard Peltier for the murder of two FBI agents on the Pine Ridge Reservation in 1975.
Even more gripping than this documentary feature is Apted's fictional movie based on the same incident,Thunderheart , a tight, concentrated political drama which the director got off the ground thanks to the backing of Robert De Niro.
Val Kilmer plays a novice FBI guy sent down to the Badlands of South Dakota to help out legendary agent Sam Shepard on an Indian reservation murder case.
Kilmer is part-Indian and is expected to exploit this to mollify the natives but Kilmer rediscovers his tribal heritage while Shepard finds the politics of an already volatile situation beginning to spin out of control.
With Thunderheart Apted has made his best movie to date.
The fact that he has also been of service to AIM is a bonus.
SB 
videos on release
THE LAST BOY SCOUT (Warner Bros) Slam bang action pic whose hectic anti-drugs/sports corruption plot is really just a hook for inspired boy's own banter between Damon Wayans and Bruce Willis.
Smart lines and big explosions
CAPE FEAR (CIC) Scorsese's dazzling noir remake disappointed some, but is worth it for the directional flash, De Niro's grotesque hamming, and current gawk of the town Juliette Lewis
AUTOBUS (Artificial Eye) Overlooked Eric Rochant film about a ‘sentimental terrorist’ who kidnaps a school bus to take him to his girl, Charlotte Gainsbourg.
An off-beat road movie.
SHAKMA (20/20) Roddy McDowall is a mild-mannered professor who accidentally makes a Frankenstein's monster from a lab baboon.
He and his students pay for this mistake one by one.
Damn, that monkey sure is mad!
THE DIRECTORS' COLLECTION (Tartan £15.99 each) A formidable collection of directors' first titles will be released over the next 12 months — the first set of five covers work by the likes of Scorsese, Coppola and Robert Altman.
Seminal 
fashion hype!
Chipie takes a further step towards world domination with the UK launch of full sunglasses, watch and spectacle frame collections.
The watches cover everything from your chunky TAG divers look to the trademark quel joli Chipie style featuring Scotty dogs.
Prices from £50–£140.
Going against the grain of long split skirts and leather jeans, some of the most striking pieces of womenswear for winter come from Issey Miyake.
Pleats create a weird-looking smock effect, appealing to the adventurous with a touch of fashion victim in them.
In tones of blue, green, brown and black from Issey Miyake, Browns and Harvey Nichols in London
With the leather waistcoat near to reaching the club cliché point, it's the one-off, unique styles that are in demand.
Alan Roberts, who for many years has clothed the likes of Boy George and Bomb The Bass, is producing innovative and special leather styles with an emphasis on tone and texture.
Best-known for its coloured jeans and tops, Soviet has come up with a strong range of jackets for the autumn including reflective styles, zip-off sleeves and rubberised cotton and nylon bombers.
Watch for the return of the mountaineering look too.
The knitwear features excellent chunky roll-necks and logoed sweats for that Pet Shop Boys meets Stamford Bridge feel.
Available from Way In, Harrods, Knightsbridge; Tucci, Sunderland; Cruise, Glasgow
fashion news
One of Britain's most happening hip hop crews in the last 12 months has been Ronin, whose multi-media interests are now more fully embracing clothing.
Heavy duty long-sleeve T-shirts and sweats look good, but standing out is the Ronin doo-rag, a French-Foreign, Legion-meets-Dessert-Storm hat.
For the seriously down hip hop homie only at £15.
From the Rocksteady Crew circa ‘83 to the Soul II Soul posse and Madonna's ‘Toy Boy’, the name belt refuses to lie down.
For 1992, it's been reworked by Dolce & Gabbana with ‘James’ and ‘Marlon’embossed on the buckle to compliment their own ‘On The Waterfront’, docker-inspired collection.
From Browns, Harvey Nichols and Joseph in London at £85
Starting on a sad note, THE FACE pays respect to Savile Row's Tommy Nutter, the man who dressed Mick Jagger and Jack Nicholson (in Batman ) and made flared trousers hip (the first time around.
Having opened his first shop in 1969 (backed by Cilla Black).
Nutter consistently produced quality and original men's clothing.
He will be missed.
A welcome return for John Galliano, who is now working in Paris with a new backer, Faycal Amor, the man behind Plein Sud.
October sees Galliano's return to the catwalk, with insiders claiming his future plans are looking ‘ruff’.
The lower-priced Galliano Girl collection has also been relaunched.
Fur has seen its best days on the clothing front, although seriously rockin' on the footwear front right now is leopard skin.
Patrick Cox is, as usual, up there with a goodlooking loafer.
Hyper Hyper, Kensington High Street's much-loved home for burgeoning fashion talent, has opened a new boutique on the King's Road.
The shop, at No. 133, will only sell Hyper Hyper's new own-label ‘International Collection’ for women, which includes Lycra bodies from £50 and tailored jackets from £175.
More Hyper Hyper boutiques of this sort are now promised for elsewhere in the UK and Europe.
Hollywood bratpack style is flavour of the month at the moment, with 1970 the pivotal bratpack year in the new Burro autumn/winter range.
Steve McQueen in The Getaway and Bullitt and Paul Newman in The Drowning Pool are the big fashion influences cited at Burro, the people who in the last couple of years have flogged us tank tops as well as the classic ‘No Alla Violenza’ Ts in conjunction with Duffer.
Pullovers and turtle necks in crosses and stripes are looking good.
Classic movie-star style also crops up at Hope And Glory, who are opening a second shop in the new Thomas Neal development in Covent Garden at the end of September.
For the last two seasons, Hope and Glory's trousers have been winners — this winter check for classic Michael Caine chic.
Good Enough are still doing it right, with the G cotton drill shirt suits the current winner.
Shirts from £65, trousers from £59.
Watch too for button-down shirts on a Ralph Lauren tip at £69.
Also there's a Stussy video now out giving the full low-down on the Stussy world tribe vibe.
For the Stussy die-hard only and with a firin' soundtrack, it's around £9.95 and available through major Stussy stockists.
The fashion world learns flick to kick?
The people who brought us the old-school Arkwright football shirts are now bringing us Subbuteo merchandise complete with the classic Subbuteo falcon logo.
A winner for the authentic big match atmosphere every time.
Sign of the month, spotted on The Bead Shop in London, ‘Leather thongs out of stock until October.
The leather necklace trend shows no signs of ending.
Shame  .
Known for her quirky classicism, Lawley Duffey's shoes include a good square-toed loafer in denim.
It also comes in a fetching salmon skin.
Watch too for the ladies stack heels and boots in denim.
From £90 to £120 at Jones, London, and Ichi Ni San, Glasgow
Mooks is the brainchild of the Australian graphic artist Richard Allen and partner Peter Hill (Allen previously designed Mambo's distinctive graphics).
The collection has a full clothing feel, sadly absent with most new streetwear labels, and features hard-wearing classics like army-style pocket pants, oversized Harrington jackets and some interesting towelling tops and shorts.
With some of the best printed T-shirts to emerge this year, expect to see the Mooks lightbulb devil logo more and more in the coming months.
From Dr Jives, Glasgow; Slam City, London; Bond, London.
T-shirts at £25, pants £62 and Harrington jackets £80
home girl
Three years after her debut album, Neneh Cherry is back in the pop arena.
But first she invited us to her retreat in rural Sweden to talk about life, love, family — and home
Natural obstacles litter the 150-mile road from southern Swedish port of Helsingborg to Neneh Cherry's house in the tiny hamlet of Hassleholm.
Even before the drive, there's the shorthop plane ride from London to Copenhagen and a choppy ferry crossing.
Then one, two hours hard travelling — avoiding languorous Nordic motorists lulled into somnambulance by the gentle, cradling motion of their Volvos, and the squalls that hover over stretches of road, waiting to burst heavy clouds of rain on passing travellers — and then the moose.
As the journey draws on, the signs start to appear: ‘Warning — Moose Crossing!’
Surely they can't be serious?
But, some 12 hours later, Neneh's husband, Cameron McVey, leans into the car to say goodbye and cautions: ‘Watch out, 'cause we do get elk round here.’
All of this is a far cry from the usual routine of celebrity interview.
Typically, there's a flight to New York, LA or some exclusive Bahamian retreat.
Or, an increasingly popular option, for that carefully-studied-careless-informality, the tête a tête in some downtown coffee bar.
In the land where the moose roam free, few such codes of practice apply.
Here, on the outskirts of Hassleholm, the quintessential small-town-where nothing-happens, is the house where Neneh Cherry spent at least some of her roving, migrant childhood — her home, for want of a better word.
She's returned this spring, to spend the summer with her husband, children, close friends and assorted family members including her Swedish mother.
Moki, because ‘you gotta have the nerve to throw things around a bit, to decentralise and get some fresh air — and God knows there's enough of that around here’.
During their stay, Neneh, Cameron and production partner Johnny Dollar have finished cooking up ‘Homebrew’, the follow-up to her number-crunching debut, ‘Raw Like Sushi’, which sold two-and-a half million copies worldwide and turned Neneh from ‘your basic ragga-street-Afro-Swedish chick’, into a pan-global pop star.
Since then, cameras have captured her in a variety of moods, phases, faces.
Flash!
Singing ‘Buffalo Stance’ on television, eight months pregnant with baby Tyson, yet full of attitude and undimmed radiance.
Flash!
Years earlier, scowling from the cover of ‘I Am Cold’, an album by West London beat-boho-jazz-punk tribe Rip Rig And Panic.
Flash!
A sexy, forceful, beautiful presence, who crossed couture with club wear, and commanded highfashion magazine photo spreads.
Flash!
The Eighties career woman who had it all: looks, glamour, fast-track, moneyed lifestyle, husband, children.
But now, as the car curves to a halt in front of the house, anticipation builds.
Three years on, what to make of the original inner city mama, out here in the sticks?
Or, to paraphrase her own, mock-Cockney yell on ‘Buffalo Stance’, Neneh Cherry:‘Whaat is sheee liiiike?’
From somewhere out of sight a cockerel crows.
Old bicycles and a long-disused pram are scattered across the muddy front yard.
Around the back, there's a child-size swing, customised from a car tyre; a garage, inside which a vintage, first-edition Mini Cooper gently turns to rust; and — for want of an indoor toilet — a wooden outhouse.
Rising from this homely disorder is ‘the Cherry House’— according to the directions supplied, ‘a big, old, red hippie building’.
Light projects from its large, woodframe windows, offering a selective view of the rooms inside: big, busy, open-plan spaces, filled with primary-coloured art pieces; children's paintings tacked to the walls; sculptures, nick-nacks, anything, everything.
‘Hi, how ya doin’?’
Then there's Neneh herself.
Flip-flopping off the porch in battered Air Jordans, wearing voluminously baggy, clown-size trousers, a white body, and over that a faded green Adidas track top.
Her hair is knotted into careless plaits, she's got no make-up on, and she looks great.
Yet, hardly like a pop star.
Not, at least, of the sort who've emerged in the time since ‘Raw Like Sushi’: singers like Lisa Stansfield, Betty Boo, Cathy Dennis, Kylie and Dannii — all of whom are peddling an ersatz glamour drawn from adolescent fantasies of sophistication, untouchable otherness, phoney celebrity.
‘A lot of misery comes from being pressurised by the label of ‘pop star’.
It doesn't have to mean you run around with your collar up and a coat over your head.
So I've never based myself on any of that, because it's really just a myth,’ says Neneh.
Scrawled on a wall behind her are various titles from the ‘Homebrew’ album: ‘Twisted’, ‘Buddy X’, ‘Trout’.
Until the record's recent completion, the room served as a home recording studio for Neneh, Cameron and Dollar.
Now it's reverted to its original purpose — a dining room, dominated by a long, dark wood table, at which Neneh is sitting, absent-mindedly twisting a plait.
‘Pop,’ she continues, ‘is just about making something that comes across in a simple way.
Which is what I do with my records.’
Still, although ‘Buffalo Stance’, ‘Manchild’et al remains startlingly effective examples of that form — near-perfect equations of sweet melody, catchy hook and insistent beat — her success is based just as much on personality, her own star quality.
A crucial factor, after all, in a business where the bland die young.
Unknown outside the London club scene before ‘Buffalo Stance’, Neneh engaged the interest, fascination and finally affection of an enormous, crossover audience.
Men thought she was sexy.
So did women — but more, they admired her: for being pregnant with Tyson while her first record climbed the charts; for cradling her two-month infant through ‘Manchild’; then for celebrating all of that on ‘Inner City Mamma’, a song dedicated to the strength of working mothers.
It was a stance which set Neneh apart with a rare stamp of honesty and courage in an industry dominated by artifice.
‘Having the bump out the front was so obviously the right thing at the right time.
It meant I wouldn't be perceived as another girl singer — and I could set the look and feel and energy of what I was about.’
For a while, the working title of ‘Homebrew’ was ‘Feminist Slag’, to signify that feminism needn't come at the cost of ‘being able to let your sexuality really express itself’.
But, really, there was no need for such an obvious device.
Neneh Cherry, circa ‘89, had already been there, done that.
WHEN SHE WAS 15 , Neneh says, she knew she wanted kids, and ‘it was going to be a good thing for me to have them young’.
Her decision was made on ‘kinda like a mass exodus trip’ from New York with her natural father, Amhadu Jah (a Sierra Leonese percussionist who lives in Stockholm), and his family, to West Africa.
The experience was a defining period in her life, one which ‘really gave me a lotta confidence, and helped me come to terms with my womanhood’.
Landing in Nigeria,en route to Sierra Leone, and struck, initially, by the intense heat and strange, over-powering odours, Neneh felt frightened and alienated: ‘It was like a world I'd never been in, that was looking at me as being different — but also part of.
First night we got there, we hitched a ride with these Lagos ragga kids in a VW bus.
This guy sitting behind me started playing with my hair and touching me up.
Normally in New York, I woulda told the muthafucka to get off my tip, y'know.
But there, something about it was unnerving, yet fascinating; I couldn't believe it was happening.
That night I cried so much — I never felt so far away from anything I knew and I'd never missed my mother so much in my life.
I cried and cried and I memorised my passport number, 'cause I thought, ‘If I lose everything, at least I'll still be able to get home.’
Then, as the weeks went by, I got filled with this sense of pride.
The guys would chat me up, y'know, like —[imitating an African accent]‘I want you to be my wife’— and I found it all really flattering.
It was the first time in my life I wanted to carry myself as a woman, not like a weird, kinda little ragamuffin girl.’
A candle flickers on the table in front of Neneh.
Storm clouds scud past the windows, and, by turns, the room is washed in clear, bright light, then pitched into shade as steel-grey cumulus obscure the sun.
When gloom descends, the candle's flame sets into relief Neneh's African features — her strong, expressive mouth and dark, oval eyes.
Neneh now aims to maintain ‘a basic ragga approach to life — putting your fingers up to a lot of institutions and just going, ‘This is what we wanna do — fuck you’
‘In Africa,’ she continues, ‘it was the first time I was confronted by these women that were fearless with each other.
They do a lot of the day-to-day running of society, and they're rough.
Women would be coming up to me, putting their hands on my tits and going, ‘Oh, you're big enough to have babies now.’
I saw women dealing with having kids and working at the same time and the kids were happy because of the closeness with their mother.
They'd got babies on their back, and they'd be swinging them up over their hips.
It was all so provocative and sexy and proud that I just felt, ‘God.
I wanna feel like that about myself!’’
She breaks off.
‘Wanna see something cute?’
Tyson is in the kitchen, cradling an apparently tame, softly clucking rooster to her chest.
‘It's my mother's pet,’ she grins.
‘A neighbour gave us two, but one was really noisy and feisty, so it had to pass away.
We broke its neck and ate it, but everyone was really upset for days, especially my mother.’
Last seen as a baby in the ‘Manchild’ video, Tyson, now three, is Neneh's daughter by Cameron McVey.
By vulgar, racial accounting, she is primarily white and ‘one quarter’ black, and neither her cherubic, pink cheeks or pouty lips suggest much of her mother's African ethnicity.
‘There was definitely a point in my life where I wanted black kids,’ says Neneh.
‘And then, when it didn't turn out like that, I was like, ‘What the heck?’
If you love someone and wanna be with them, that's got to come first.’
In New York, Lamumba Carson of black nationalist rap group X-Clan criticised her for ‘contributing to the extinction of the black race’.
‘I had to tell him where I was coming from and what I was about,’ she frowns, upper lip curling in disdain.
‘Women would be coming up to me, putting their hands on my tits and going, ‘Oh, you're big enough to have babies now’…
It was all so provocative, sexy and proud that I just felt, ‘God, I wanna feel like that!’
Naima, Tyson's nine-year-old sister, is Neneh's child from a previous relationship with Bruce Smith of Rip Rig And Panic.
She met members of the group — graduates of west London's enduring boho culture — when she accompanied her step-father, jazz musician Don Cherry, on a UK tour.
Having dropped out of school in Sweden and returned from Africa to do little but hang out in New York, she leapt at their invitation to move to London and join the group in 1980.
Two years later, at 18, she found herself pregnant by Smith.
‘I kinda knew it was gonna happen sooner or later, and I really wanted that sense of responsibility, the discipline of it.
After Africa I felt I could deal with it.’
Now, reflects Neneh, ‘Naima and I are really like partners — she trusted me to give her strength and security, and I gained a life in my life — that's been a complete life-saver a lot of the time.
Having her gave me strength, I don't mean that in a ‘strong woman’ sense, but a drive, an immense determination to carry on with my work.’
THE CHILD HERSELF OF A fractured relationship, Neneh was raised by her mother and step-father Don Cherry, whom Moki (now an artist who works for most of the year in New York) met soon after Neneh was born.
Like many other jazz musicians in the Sixties, Cherry was drawn to Sweden by the country's mix of liberal legislation and open-minded society.
Their marriage, however, became the impulse for a network of fiendishly tangled family relations.
Neneh grew up with her brother Eagle Eye — currently a struggling actor in New York — and shared father Ahmadu Jah with a half-brother and half-sister, Cherno and Tityo (Tityo lives in Stockholm and is signed to Arista records as a singer).
Since then, Jah has had another three children, while Neneh has stepbrothers and sisters in LA from an earlier relationship of Don Cherry's.
There is also Christian — another of Don's children, who lives in Copenhagen and was born, by another woman, after the musician's marriage to Moki.
‘It's a complicated set-up,’ sighs Neneh.
‘But what used to make me a bit uptight was people looking at us like some wild, eccentric set-up.
I happen to get on with most of them and, even if there's things we don't necessarily love about each other, we just let it be.’
For Don Cherry, the beat principle of continuous, dynamic movement — always searching, reaching for the new — was as much a physical imperative as it was a philosophical one.
And when he toured in America or Europe, the whole family went too.
‘On the road, there was a real sense of release and freedom, that made it really fun,’ recalls Neneh.
Yet although Don's nomadic drive propelled the family across the globe, Neneh insists that ‘the whole thing was rooted and grounded around us as a family.
Even though we were always moving around, we'd always be on the same tip; we'd go to bed at the same time and my mom would carry cooking pots into hotels and cook — stink out the whole place with curry.
We'd set up home wherever we were.’
‘JUMP, JUMP… 
KRIS KROSS  makin' ya jump, jump…uh huh uh huh!’
Assorted members of the Cherry clan have formed a ‘jump ring’.
Tyson is hopping in the air; holding her hand is Charlene the child-minder; next to her is Pajah, Neneh's Sierra Leonese cousin; and Neneh herself is bouncing up and down, taking Tyson and bobbing the girl in her arms to the beat of the bass:‘Daddy Mac's makin' ya jump, jump, Mac Daddy's makin' ya jump, jump…check it outttt!!’
‘We have a whole lotta fun out here,’ laughs Neneh, breaking out of the circle.
‘We eat dinner, then jam some tunes on the record deck and have a bit of a dance.
In June, it wasn't getting dark till midnight, and we'd be sitting about talking, not releasing what time it was, and going to bed at four in the morning when it was starting to get light again.’
After sojourning in New York, Stockholm and Turkey, the Cherry family first moved into the house 20 years ago.
It was autumn, cold and windy, and the building, a former school house miles from the nearest town, seemed, to eight-year-old Neneh, to be isolated, inhospitable, lonely.
She wanted to leave as soon as she arrived, run to her grandparents in Stockholm, away from the faint echo of whole classes reciting their multiplication tables.
‘The first time it came to life was New Year's Eve, when lots of my parent's friends came down from Stockholm.
Everyone was up all night and there were all these fireworks going off outside…’
Afterwards, the house was always bright with colour: vibrant red walls, peacock blue and lilac ceilings, pink and pastel green window frames, natural blonde wood floors.
And with her best friend, Bodil, Neneh would explore a ‘really cool, imaginary world.
We'd go barefoot in the fields and play fairies, and horses and keepers: the horse would have to step in as many cow shits as possible and the keeper would have to clean it up from between their toes.
It was like an Alice In Wonderland world.’
‘MAKING A RECORD is a bit like having a kid,’ says Neneh, later in the kitchen, cooking up a soul food dinner of rice, chicken and black-eye peas.
‘It's very traumatic and difficult, but when it's over, it's very rewarding, you can stand back and say, I did that, it's mine.’
The result of 18 months work in London and at the Cherry House, ‘Homebrew’ is a more mature, less attitudinous record than the first.
That one was associated with the English dance explosion, but none of the tracks on this are dance records and they don't pretend to be.’
In contrast to ‘Raw Like Sushi’, ‘Homebrew’ 's collaborators are mainly American.
Its opening track, the self-assertive rap ‘Sassy’, for instance is a pairing with Guru and DJ Premier of Gang Starr, who went on to contribute a second track.
‘There was a really good vibe between us, it was a real case of mutual respect.’
‘I wore a dress by Azzedine Alaia; Tyson and Naima were bridesmaids.
I bawled all the way down the aisle…
Even though I see Cam every day, I still wake up in the morning and go ‘Wicked!
I wanna jump on his face!!’’
On the album's cover, Neneh, looking relaxed and happy, poses beside a pram in the yard outside the Cherry House.
A far cry from her ‘strong woman with positive aggression’ image, the photo looks more like a family snapshot.
‘I was very torn about whether to use that picture, 'cause it could be seen as too sensitive, but then, why does every photo of me have to be spread legs, arms crossed, strong woman?
That whole thing was getting to be a real cliché last time.’
‘Homebrew’ is an intimate, lyrical, at times moving record.
Neneh sings, rather than raps most tracks.
On the pro-sex education number ‘Trout’, she duets with Michael Stipe of REM.
‘Michael's a brilliant lyricist, he can talk about things that matter without it being obvious, so when we got together there was no way we were going to do a creamy, greasy duet.
And even though‘Trout’ has a message, it's not done in a tedious, obvious way — it doesn't hammer you over the head.’
Collaboration is, in part, the key to ‘Homebrew’.
Beside the big-name featured artists from America, other, no less vital, support has come from Britain.
Such as the group Trout, aka album producers Cameron McVey and Johnny Dollar, who composed the music for the song of that name, and then decided to continue working together as recording artists.
And Porter's Head — an unsigned Bristol outfit that are protégés of Neneh and Cameron — whose frontman Jeff Barrow wrote ‘Someday’.
‘It would be really cool if everybody was up there in the photos,’ says Neneh, ‘but the slightly tacky side of the pop star stuff is that it's all focused on one person.’
But, in the end, ‘Homebrew’is her record.
It's she who's the focus of the frenzied promotional campaign of press interviews, TV appearances and live PAs that will begin this month with the release of the single, ‘Money Love’— a gloriously busy, impossible-to-ignore, ‘wall of sound’— type production, built around a blazing fuzz-guitar riff.
And should all efforts fail to entice the public, it's Neneh who'll need to ‘go on a long holiday and bury my head in the sand’.
That's an unlikely outcome though; a mixture of the assertive, reflective and poignant, ‘Homebrew’ endures repeated playing, and proves to be that rarest of commercial releases — a nondisposable pop record.
‘Really,’ she says, ‘the album is about how we are as people and the way we've decided to live our lives.’
A life which Neneh now shares with Cameron McVey.
Although already married —‘in the spiritual sense, maan’— the couple officially wed two years ago, at Willesden registry office, round the corner from their northwest London home.
‘That was dope, man!’ she grins.
‘I wore a dress by Azzedine Alaia; Tyson and Naima were bridesmaids.
It was just, like, so beautiful I even bawled — all the way down the aisle,’ she laughs.
‘It was a way of giving thanks to all the good things that had happened, like the album and the fact that, even though I see Cam every day.
I still wake up in the morning and go, ‘Wicked!
I wanna jump on his face!!’’
Three years on from the first album, Neneh admits that ‘the till bells are ringing empty.
We're running on loans and stuff now.’
Much of the record's royalties have been invested in the couple's production company Cherry Bear, which now employs three staff and runs a studio out of their terraced house in London.
Massive Attack, signed as clients to the company, worked on their ‘Blue Lines’ album there, and Porter's Head are currently in residence.
‘The album made quite a lot in royalties, but it's not like anyone's bagging vast amounts of money,’ says Neneh.
‘We've invested our money back into a system others can come through, which is a way for us to stay fresh and help people we believe in.’
WORK, LOVE LIFESTYLE —‘they all connect’, says Neneh, sitting at the head of the dining room table.
Around her, talking, laughing, enjoying the soul food she's prepared, is the assembled Cherry House tribe: Cameron, Tyson, Charlene, Moki (who's fiftyish with cropped, silver-grey hair and tortoise-shell glasses), Eric (‘the man about the house who keeps the place vibesy’), and, returning late from a day in Copenhagen, Naima, a nine-year-old with blonde, wavy hair whose quite startling beauty is off-set by glasses and a long-limbed, pre-adolescent gawkiness.
The death, in recent years, of two of the couple's close friends — stylist Ray Petri, from Aids, and Bristol-based musician Sean Oliver of sickle cell anaemia, ‘put a thin-line aspect, an urgency into our life.
It meant we didn't want to take life with a pinch of salt in the same way any more.’
They now aim to maintain ‘a basic ragga approach to life — putting your fingers up to a lot of institutions and just going, ‘This is what we wanna do — fuck you.’’
Practically, that means recording in Sweden rather than claustrophobic, recession-hit Britain.
Neneh Cherry, daughter of a restless soul, has always dreamt of a place called home, ‘that happy little space where I can be free’.
Returning to the Cherry House, she discovered what, deep down, she always knew anyway: that ‘home is always with you, it doesn't matter if you're moving about.
And especially with children, family, it's where the heart is.’
A belief on which her album is based.
A distillation of her own wandering life in New York, London, Sierra Leone and Stockholm, ‘Homebrew’ is a record that comes straight from the heart of Neneh Cherry.
‘Homebrew’ is released on October 26 
the funniest man on television (allegedly)
Paul Merton, King of improvised comedy and Britain's unlikeliest sex symbol, makes up like his idol Buster Keaton
Paul Merton has decided to hold a party for some of his friends.
The prospect of the invited crowd of guests arriving at his house in the next half hour does not fill Merton with joy, but, as you quickly establish, this is pretty much par for the course.
Paul looks introspective, never quite sad, although this is not the picture of a comedian preparing for a night of chuckles to remember.
Dutifully he is moving the chairs in his living room, humming to himself and glancing repeatedly at his drinks cabinet, when the door bell rings.
Paul opens the door, to be confronted by a bespectacled American doing a poor impersonation of Chuck D. Four Eyes is pursing his lips, pointing a finger at Merton while offering him a mock high five.
‘Yo, yo, yo, I'm the centre of the show, I like your crib, this place is dope,’ splutters the visitor.
Paul Merton instantly fixes him a hard stare, saying nothing, before slowly pronouncing, ‘You're Bamber Gascoigne aren't you?’
The audience, naturally, loves it.
This is Paul Merton, currently the dullest bright star of British comedy.
The man that rarely smiles on camera, dresses like crap and is quietly emerging as the biggest sex-symbol despite-everything since Roland Rivron.
Or Roland Rat.
Paul Merton, the way that almost single-handedly kept Whose Line Is It Anyway?interesting viewing despite a rapidly repetitive format and two too many series.
Merton, the lightning-quick deadpan potato-head who would always claim someone in the crowd shouted ‘porn’ as a suggested film style and then would do 25 jokes in as many seconds which had nothing whatsoever to do with sweaty shagging.
This is the genius who turned to face compere Clive Anderson and declared, ‘Slaphead’.
For all of the above reasons, and many more, Paul Merton is now seriously challenging as one of the funniest men in Britain.
Although not if he has any say in the matter: ‘I understand I'm currently eighteenth in the list of funniest comedians…and falling,’ he retorts, before almost smiling, although not quite.
After all, he's off camera.
WE'RE SITTING IN A VERY GRIM pub somewhere on the outskirts of London's financial square mile and things aren't quite right.
Paul Merton is clearly being outdone at his own specialist brand of humour: being plain and uncouth and mad as well, to the point of hilarity.
At the bar half a dozen very grey old men sit and grimace at each other, saying absolutely nothing.
Behind them an old woman is standing, staring constantly at the fruit machine.
She doesn't even attempt to push any buttons.
‘God, this is one of those really terrible pubs you wander into by accident,’ says Merton, rather louder than desirable.
‘You're a brave man if you go back for another of these things,’ he adds, gesturing at a dodgy-looking sausage sandwich.
‘This is a place that people would come to die in.’
In the small crop of past Paul Merton interviews, mostly with TV magazines, he is invariably described as a ‘down to earth, average guy’, which is fairly accurate, although hardly an adequate explanation for Merton's increasing success.
Now, in the confines of The Pub From Hell, Merton, a surprisingly serious chap off-screen who tells me that in the past he's not been wild about interviews, comes into his own.
Surrounded by the most dour cast of characters known to man, Paul Merton suddenly seems excessively articulate, intelligent and well-read.
It's a little disappointing.
He does ‘an awful lot of reading’, he confesses.
A paperback copy of some financial blockbuster he is carrying around is dismissed as ‘not my sort of thing at all’(he has been asked to review it on a radio show).
His other real interests are, he concludes, Guinness and good comedy.
And when it comes to comedy, Paul Merton is near enough a professor.
‘Now, Ben Elton I have never really found very funny to be honest.
I've met him three or four times when he's been the compere of things that I've had some three-minute act on, and we've seemed to get on together, but he's not really what I go for.
I've never been into party political material as such and he just doesn't make me laugh.’
‘For my money, Paul is one of the greatest comedians of all time,’ says Julian Clary.
‘I would put him in the same bracket as Beryl Reid’
In the last couple of years, Paul Merton has emerged from a tidal wave of British comic talent, that swelled at the beginning of the Eighties and continues to rain all around us, and has done so on a laugh raft all of his own.
While Ben Elton and co, the Comic Strip crew and other Comedy Store gag masters emerged into the TV limelight as the Eighties wore on, Paul Merton remained a relatively lesser-known name.
He seemed somewhat separate from the ‘up yours Vivien, fuck you Thatcher’ explosion.
Whose Line Is It Anyway?was for many a first glimpse of Paul Merton.
Chances are though that by now your grandma will already be treasuring a TV Quick pull-out poster of him under her pillow.
‘When I started doing stand-up comedy, just over ten years ago, I think I was a fairly shy and naive individual.
I turned up at the Comedy Store here in London one night, petrified, because in those days it was a pretty testing place with a drunk, unruly audience.
My first ever act went really well; I was so over the moon I walked all the way home to Streatham with this huge smile on my face.
I'd always wanted to be a comedian at school, I've always been obsessive about comedy, and if I'd been rubbish it would have been a bit problematic.’
Indeed, in Merton's two only ‘proper’ jobs, his propensity for sudden comic interludes did not accelerate his career path.
He was sacked from his final job, at Motorbility, suppliers of Reliant Robins, for ‘encouraging a session of dirty joke telling on a wet afternoon’.
Before long, however, Merton (or Paul Martin as he was known then) was a more regular face at the Comedy Store and elsewhere.
In Comics: A Decade Of Comedy At The Assembly Rooms , John Connor's account of the rise of the Edinburgh Fringe Festival through the Eighties, Merton's name crops up a mere couple of times and his comic style is referred to only once, and as ‘surreal’.
Merton's early Edinburgh appearances read as a catalogue of disasters: one year he was set upon by a gang of burly Scottish lads when seeking to compete in the poster wars engulfing the festival, and another year he was rushed to hospital after only one show, having broken a leg in an intercomedian football friendly.
A resulting blood clot threatened his life and then he caught hepatitis A from the hospital food, although he was back in Edinburgh the following year with some droll observations on the events.
Merton only really came into his own, though, when his quirky (‘surreal’ if we must) vision of the world was put within the confines of the broadcast medium.
On the improvisational Whose Line Is It Anyway?, then the current affairs madhouse Have I Got News For You , Merton has shone.
Perhaps more revealingly, he is also consistently godlike on Radio 4's Just A Minute programme, where participants have to talk for a minute without repetition or hesitation.
Merton has a previously undreamed of knack of the one-minute, long-winded trainspotter diatribe.
If he has to talk about his dog, before long he'll be deadpanning his way through an entire history of his dog's cousin Spot's last tail operation.
Radio 4 could easily rename their show Just An Hour and put Merton on every week (Just A Minute,tellingly, is the only show he has actually asked to be included on).
Merton also stands out in fitting in very naturally with the other, older guests on the show — the likes of Derek Nimmo, Clement Freud and Nicholas Parsons.
His affinity with these older ‘funny’ men (using the word very loosely) would not, one suspects, be so readily achieved by Ben Elton, Lenny Henry or even Harry Enfield (who shares much of the same loutish ‘man of the people’charm as Merton).
Paul Merton is very much a part of a well-established lineage of British comedians who succeed in being funny without really cracking gags.
He would fit more naturally into an old silent movie than he would have done on Tiswas .
Tony Hancock and Spike Milligan are obvious pointers.
‘I ONCE SAID PAUL APPEARS to be very dull and stupid, but is in fact very clever,’ comments Clive Anderson on Merton's style.
‘He got annoyed when I said that though and said it wasn't true, so I'd like this time to say that although he appears to be very clever on stage and TV, in real life he is extremely stupid.’
Merton's friend and script-writing partner, Julian Clary (they wrote Sticky Moments together as well as Clary's new sitcom Terry And Julian ) is rather more convinced about his talent.
‘Paul Merton is undoubtedly one of the most original and peculiar comedians; he has a vision of the world unlike anyone else.
Like Spike Milligan, his jokes are very hard to explain — it's difficult to say what exactly is funny about them and they don't read well if you write them down.
His delivery is brilliant.
For my money, he is one of the greatest British comedians of all time.
I would put him in the same bracket as Beryl Reid.’
From the explosion of ‘alternative’ comedy of the last 15 years, it is people like Paul Merton and Julian Clary who are now showing to have the staying power.
Commentators on the Eighties alternative comedy scene made much of the politicisation of British comedy.
With arts budgets being slashed by the government, stand-up comedy became a cheap and effective form of entertainment — all you needed was an upstairs room in a pub and a small PA system.
‘Suddenly everyone was getting on stage and doing a load of angry jokes about the Prime Minister or nuclear war and not just about how pretty table napkins were,’ comments Merton.
Along with Clary, however, Merton tends towards discussions about his auntie's table napkins rather than cracking a string of Stalinist corkers.
Which is probably just about where the similarities between Merton and Clary end.
The pair in fact decided to work together after Merton added a joke to a skit of Clary's a few years ago: a man is returning from a holiday in Morocco, and is stopped and questioned by Moroccan customs.
‘And did you come into contact with any illegal substances while you were on holiday here, sir?’
Merton punchline: ‘No, I was too stoned to leave the hotel.’
Merton's emergence in the public eye has been steady, and somewhat at odds with the prevailing comedy spirit.
Watch out for him in the second series of The Young Ones when it's next repeated, making a brief guest appearance as an exploding peasant.
‘I had five lines of dialogue,’ he reflects.
‘Offers of exploding peasant work didn't come flooding in.
On reflection, it's not a corner of the market you should get into.’
When the boom in improvisational comedy came along later, however, Merton niched himself rather better.
On Whose Line Is It Anyway?
, Merton was supreme.
When games were about to start he would hang about, scuffing his feet, almost side-stage: the worst dressed and least effective outlaw ever.
His suits were black and ill-fitting, his T-shirts scrotty and his hair unkempt — more Johnny Ball than Johnny Rotten.
But the second games started, Merton would move, striding like a supermarket trolley attendant into the ring and ignoring all the ‘rules’ of improvisational comedy that the other clever-clever types had been carefully developing for the previous few years.
If Merton's ‘partner’ adopted a character, he would refuse to accept it, or would decide he's rather they were something completely different.
‘I do think improvisation has become like some born-again cult, like the church of Scientology, with all these golden rules of how we should do it,’ says Merton.
‘I thought the shows were often not as good as they could have been.’
And the burning question: did he and the other comedians have a couple of drinks or healthy snorts before the shows?
‘Actually, I've always made it a rule never to get drunk before going on stage.
You do need to be as sharp as possible, because you have to be so quick with your gags.
Anyway, I've always had this real fear of me appearing in the Mail On Sunday with my eyes shut and looking pissed, with some caption underneath saying ‘Whose beer is it anyway?’ or ‘Have I got booze for you’.’
Ian Hislop, Merton's opposing ‘captain’ on Have I Got News For You and editor of Private Eye , co-incidentally tells a very different story.
At Private Eye's 30th birthday party, a very pissed Merton turned up, reveals Hislop, and staggered on to the stage.
He then began to tell his trademark joke.
This is the one where Paul recalls his parents telling him during the war not to worry during air raids, ‘because it's unlikely the bomb will ever have your name written on it, son’.
Cue Merton punchline: ‘Mind you, that wasn't quite such good news for our next-door neighbours, Mr and Mrs Doodlebug.’
In front of the assembled largely-Oxbridge old-boy throng, Merton swayed on stage and repeated his joke, identically, three times in a row.
‘And the thing was, it got funnier and funnier every time he did it,’ laughs Hislop.
In Ian Hislop, Paul Merton has found an ideal foil.
The reason Have I Got News For You will continue to be such compulsive viewing is the brilliant three-way relationship between Merton, Hislop and host Angus Deayton.
Merton here really plays up his loutish commoner pose: the gloomy tabloid man, violently opposed to Hislop's irritating broadsheet smart alec.
The behind-the scenes image created is of Hislop swapping Fergie news in the Groucho Club, while Merton is round the corner in The Three Ferrets reflecting bluntly on the real tit-bits.
Merton's clothes on this show had by now reached previously unfathomed depths: shrunk, unironed Magic Roundabout T-shirts and lumberjack shirts without washing instructions (on the one occasion Merton wore a smart suit, he stopped the show mid-way through and exclaimed: ‘Isn't anyone going to ask me why I'm looking so smart today?’).
‘It's disappointing, but Ian Hislop and I do get on pretty well really,’ owns up Merton, with his copy of the Guardian on the table in front of him.
‘I can reveal that all the rivalry is just showbiz — we did decide to have these two rival team captains.’
A bit like Emlyn and Bill?
‘Oh no, I'd hate to be either.
If I was a captain on A Question Of Sport , I'd be Fatima Whitbread…such curious muscle development.’
Ian Hislop believes Merton really is ‘a full-time miserable bastard’.
‘What he does do really well is to suddenly come out with something brilliantly surreal.
When discussions get highbrow, he's suddenly in there and talking about his metalworth O level.’
‘I think Have I Got News For You is a very difficult show to do and we're both lucky because we've had a few goes at it,’ says Merton.
‘I would concede that some of the guests are good and others a little disappointing.’
He's being kind, of course.
John Sessions was far from his best on the show (and that's saying something), while Julian Clary has seen many better days.
As for Cecil Parkinson, he was the highlight of many people's month.
‘Ah, Cecil,’ grins Merton.
‘Well, he was very good value and he likes the show, but he was very worried that we'd be making the obvious sexy Cecil innuendos…
Er…yes, perhaps just a few more condom and illicit sex gags turned up in that show than normal.’
THE LAST ISSUE OF THE Boy's Own fanzine (a tone Merton is unaware of —‘I do like music a lot though, I've just bought those new compilations of Julian Cope and Scott Walker’), lists ‘posh farker humour’ as one of the downs of ‘92.
With a growing and avid audience from the nation's chattering classes, Merton is in danger of becoming, unfairly, a posh farker humour guru.
‘I've told him to stop doing all these dreary panel shows,’ Julian Clary tells me.
Merton is amused by the ‘posh farker humour’ suggestion, but refutes it.
‘I am aware of these people who are professionally famous and turn up on all these clever panel shows, but I think Have I Got News For You is watched by a really wide spectrum of people and that is a big part of its appeal.
It had six million viewers and it's by far the most popular thing I've done, but I do think it was watched by all types and ages of people.’
Certainly it was watched by a fair few housewives, posh farkers or not, with growing numbers of women around the country now tuning in for Paul Merton's steadily increasing TV appearances.
The line at the Channel 4 press office is that Paul Merton now gets more female fan mail than anyone else on the channel.
‘He gets a lot more fan letters from women than Jonathan Ross,’ says the head of press for light entertainment in revelatory fashion.
No huge feat, let's be honest, although Paul Merton is indeed emerging as the thinking woman's Chippendale.
He'll try and shrug this one off, mind you.
‘I do get quite a lot of fan mail I suppose,’ he eventually concedes after much probing.
And exactly how much is ‘quite a lot’?
‘Well, er…
I'd say on average I get about 10 letters every day.’
And what do they say, Paul?
‘Oh, certainly none of it is explicit.
Well, not really explicit.
They're intelligent letters from women saying they like my series.
They don't send knickers or anything.
I just think women find humour sexy and if you've made a woman laugh you've won half the battle.
A lot of women write and say I wish I'd met you 20 years ago.
One wrote that and then said, ‘It's not that I've got anything against my husband, it's just he's pig ignorant.’’
‘You can definitely understand why he's so popular with the ladies,’ comments fellow Comedy Store comedian and Whose Line regular Josie Laurence.
‘He is a very pretty lad and he's so unique.
Women like the fact that he looks like he's been rolling around in hay.
He looks like he's never seen an iron.’
‘He arouses intense sexual curiosity,’ agrees Julian Clary.
‘But all these women had better hurry along though before his looks start to fade.’
If his growing army of fans are only writing to say they like Merton's own TV series, then they are either shy or lying.
If truth be told, Merton's solo series (Paul Merton: The Series)was nearly as disappointing as those of the rest of the go-it-alone Whose Line- ers.
In a stand-up scenario, as the crazy newsagent, Merton was on form (although rarely at his very best), but put him in one of his sketches and the limitations of his acting are obvious.
Merton admits his first own series was rushed and that more material needed to be written for each show.
‘I was happy with it, mind you.
It did have a central theme to it, but we're taking more time over the next one.
DOWN THE ROAD FROM The Pub From Hell, Paul Merton is being groomed at a photo studio and shot for THE FACE in the style of his big hero, silent movie star Buster Keaton.
Merton's beloved haircut —‘horrible length, horrible shape’— is being cut.
He claims he had to develop such a style for his latest role, as the couch potato host of TV Hell , last month's one-night-stand featuring some of the classically bad moments of popular television.
Nobody believes his story, of course— he looks the same as he always has done.
Merton is sporting M&S tracksuit bottoms, green polyester socks and black plimsoles.
His T-shirt reads ‘Hippy Chick’ and is horrible.
‘People have started sending loads of appalling T-shirts in the post now,’ he reflects.
As the afternoon wears on, Paul Merton gets into the swing of things.
Buster Keaton would never have worn a straw hat, he stresses, and London is scoured for a felt one.
He offers everyone a serious comparison of Keaton and Charlie Chaplin (with Harold Lloyd and Fatty Arbuckle trivia thrown in for good measure), revealing that Keaton was, for him, the true genius on account of his invention and comic daring.
He then recounts a dozen brilliant Buster Keaton scenes.
‘Keaton did all his own sketches, you know.
There's this one where the front of a building falls down and Buster's standing where one of the windows is, so he walks away unhurt.
That was a real building, with real bricks.
They measured it all out painstakingly.
What was incredible was that during an eight-year period, Keaton shot a short film every month and two feature films every year.’
Merton nods his head approvingly at the prodigious workrate.
But such enthusiasm for working on as many projects as possible has lead to serious cautions from doctors for Merton.
‘I was, at one point, on that dangerous curve that leads to a full mental breakdown,’ he says.
Unlike Keaton, though, Merton claims he will take time out and be wary of the mass of bad scripts and ideas.
‘When sound came in, in 1928, Keaton had signed to MGM and began being used as a vehicle for really average production-line gags.
By 1933 his career was over and he was broke and an alcoholic.
The more I read about this man as a kid, the more fascinated I became.’
Merton describes at length the deadpan face of Buster Keaton he had across his south London bedroom wall as a teenager.
‘You see for me, comedy was always this way of communicating with your mates and entering into this schoolboy world of laughs.
It was how I communicated.
I certainly never used to use my sense of humour to attempt to pull girls.
[He confesses however his current partner fell in love with him when watching him on stage pretending to translate a Peurto Rican goalkeeper onstage.]
I've always been too shy to construct a tactic in order to attract women.
At one point I was so inordinately shy of girls that I would blush and tremble if one came within a 50-yard radius of me.’
Merton breaks into a smile: ‘It's down to around 35 yards now.’
As he stands and wanders his shopping-trolley attendant way across the photo studio, wearing two right-footed shoes, the assembled women know he's jesting.
Paul Merton is on the rise.
Dudley Moore, watch your back.
MONITOR vampire's kiss
Steven D Wright talks to the world's coolest gothic novelist
As an ex-Catholic,ex-alcoholic, ex-hippie fifty-something from New Orleans, dressed in goth-style black and looking something like an old-fashioned schoolmistress, Anne Rice is not your typical American bestseller author.
But then, with an output that encompasses hard-core pornography, horror and romance, her books hardly fall into typical bestseller categories either.
Still largely a cult figure in Britain, Rice has written 13 books in as many years under three different names.
As Anne Rampling she writes modern romantic novels and as A N Rouquelaure she writes highly avant-garde sado-masochistic pornography based around the sleeping beauty legend.
But it is as Anne Rice that she is most accessible, writing about history and horror with everything from eighteenth-century castrati in Venice and Scottish demons to Egyptian mummies in Edwardian England.
‘There is this bias with critics that if it is about vampires it has to be junk — well it is absolutely not true’
Despite this wide canon, she remains best known for one thing — vampires.
Made famous by her Vampire Chronicles (Interview With The Vampire [1976],The Vampire Lestat [1985]and The Queen Of The Damned [1988]) she has successfully reinvented the tired myth of the vampire.
In the fourth chronicle, out this month,The Tale Of The Body Thief (Chatto & Windus £14.99), our old fanged-friend, Lestat, has given up his previous rock star persona and yearns again for human life.
Like all of Rice's vampires, he desperately wants the little human pleasures denied to immortals: food and drink, sex and exposure to daylight.
A New Age nasty, Lestat is unlike any of the macabre, inhuman vampires of old black-and-white films.
A 200-year-old French aristocrat now living in New Orleans, he is sexy, funny and highly charismatic.
The perfect anti-hero for the Nineties.
Indeed, he has subverted the stake-in-the-heart, garlic-and-cross myth and has become so popular that he now has his own New Orleans-based fanclub.
He is also Rice's favourite character.
‘He evolved in such a way that really came to life for me,’ she says.
‘The cliché is true: he is a living, breathing creature and he haunts me.
It's almost as if he paces in the corner of the office waiting to get his hands on me — and he gets jealous when I'm writing about someone else.’
Rice's talent is in making these undead creatures so lifelike, so human, that the reader begins to feel for them.
Her forte is recreating historical scenes, characters and lives.
Like the vampires, the reader quickly falls in love with the people in her stories.
Ironically, despite her growing success (the initial print run for Body Thief in hardback is the colossal figure of 500,000), Anne Rice is still regarded as a ‘cult’ author by the close-knit literary establishment in both America and Britain.
Unfortunately, this means almost no mention in the book columns of the serious press.
Banished to the uncool shelves marked ‘fantasy’ and ‘horror’and even serialised in comic book form, she is beyond the pale of most critics.
This really pisses her off: ‘There is this bias that if it is about vampires it has to be junk — well it is absolutely not true.’
Rice is, however, having the last laugh.
Suddenly, after a century of realism and what Rice calls ‘little Protestant novels’, the tide is turning back towards the fantastical, towards ‘magic, the extreme and the eccentric’.
And with at least six vampire movies (including Coppola's Dracula and the Luke Perry starrer Buffy The Vampire Slayer ) and numerous bloodsucking books coming out between now and Christmas, Rice is particularly well-placed to take advantage of the coming vampire boom.
But she doesn't go along with the various analyses of why vampires are becoming hipper.
‘I think it would be a terrible mistake to see this as a sort of decadence,’ she says.
‘It's more a return to a belief in the heroic, the magical and the transcendent.’
It is not too difficult to see why vampires have a more relevant place in today's world.
Heroic, magical and transcendent, they are a perfect symbol of human society and can be made to fit into almost any political, moral or religious view.
Like Lestat, the vampires can be an immortal god; the rich capitalist bleeding the workers dry; the sex fantasy whose kiss can kill; the personification of death, of pleasure and pain, of blood and even of the essence of life itself.
Now, after all the years of struggling against the critical tide, Anne Rice is proving herself master, or rather mistress, of her own destiny.
‘The only one who can kill my career at this point is me,’ she says.
‘By writing bad books and disappointing my readers.’
Then, in an aside that could have been uttered by one of her own vampires, she adds, ‘If I fail I will destroy myself.’
Bloody great  
Anne Rice: she's bloodsucking good
terminal Addiction
Want to know the tyre width of a certain Soviet tank, the Latin name for a tropical fish, or the Bay City Rollers' Seventies tour dates?
Japan's computer-obsessed otaku kids can't tell you because they don't like talking to other people, but plug into their networks and you'll find a mine of useless information
Three years ago the serene Tokyo dormitory town of Hanna was shaken by a series of grisly crimes.
Four pre-teen girls were abducted, molested and mutilated in a serial killing spree the New York Times described as very ‘un-Japanese’.
But the perpetrator, who had sent bone and teeth fragments to the grieving families, couldn't have been more Japanese.
Tsutomu Miyazaki enticed the children to his tiny suburban studio apartment, then molested and murdered them, recording the gruesome details of his deeds on the hard-drive of his computer.
When police caught up with him, they found the 27-year-old living in two realities.
By day he was a sullen apprentice at a local print shop.
By night he lived out the fantasies he had internalised from avidly watching his collection of over 6,000 slasher videos and pornographic manga comic-books.
Miyazaki's attorney's defence of his warped client was that, for Miyazaki, video and reality had merged; he couldn't tell gory fact from gory fiction.
After Miyazaki's much-publicised trial, one thing was clear: a new generation of anti-social, nihilistic whiz-kids had arrived.
THE OTAKU ARE SOCIALLY inept, information-crazed, often brilliant, technological shut-ins.
Their name derives from the most formal way of saying ‘you’ in Japanese, the implication being that there is always some kind of barrier between people.
First identified by Japanese lifestyle magazine SPA!in 1986, the otaku are Tokyo's newest information age product.
These were the kids ‘educated’ to memorise reams of context-less information in preparation for filling in multiple choice school entrance exams.
Now in their late teens and twenties, most are either cramming for college exams or still stuck in cramming mode.
They relax with sexy manga or violent computer games.
They shun society's complex web of social obligations and loyalties.
The result: a burgeoning young generation of 100,000 hard-core otaku who are too uptight to talk to a telephone operator but who can kick ass on the keyboard of a PC.
Zero, 25, a self-proclaimed otaku , flunked out of the maths department at Tokyo's Keio University because he didn't like being ordered around by teachers to whom he felt superior.
‘They couldn't deal with someone like me,’ he says.
‘Now I'm independent and I don't need to deal with anyone like them.’
His life revolves around computer games: he only ventures out of his room in the Tokyo suburb of Kawagoe to acquire more gameboards, the green, maze-like ‘minds’ of arcade games.
At home, he plugs them into his own console, analyses and dissects for bugs and flaws.
Zero is dressed in a plain white T-shirt and ill-fitting jeans rolled up about six inches.
He doesn't look you in the eyes when he talks; he answers quietly with head bowed.
His face has gentle features but is sickly pale.
He makes his living as a software trouble-shooter, looking for problems in new software before it hits the market, earning 350,000 yen (£1,500) a month.
He works in his murky home, where the windows are permanently covered with yellowing newspaper to block out sunlight.
‘I've always liked playing games.
As a boy, I preferred videogames to other kids,’ Zero says.
‘So I understand technology.
I'm more comfortable with computers than human beings.
Finding the malfunction of a computer programme or game is thrilling because I'm basically exposing the phoney computer experts who invented the game in the first place.’
Zero threads his way over the straw mat floor, a high-tech junkyard of old computer circuit-boards, obsolete monitors, fiveinch disk drives and a spluttering coffee-maker.
He strips down to his T-shirt and striped boxer shorts.
Now he is in his element.
ZERO SITS ON A swivel office chair and clicks on his Quadra 900 Macintosh PC with 240 megabytes of memory and a keyboard which he has remodelled to conform to his own idea of how a keyboard ‘should have been laid out in the first place’.
As he waits for the computer to load up the programmes, he scans the rolls of newly arrived faxes.
The first is from his ‘buddy’ Kojak.
It's a chart of a mid-Seventies Bay City Roller tour of Japan, including tour dates, attendance and play lists.
Zero is impressed.
Another from a character called Piman announces he is selling a rare 1978 edition of Be Bop High School for 50,000 yen.
Zero thinks it's overpriced.
He casts them aside to read one from Batman in Nagoya, who claims that the Thunder Dragon and Metal Black video games employ the same game-matrix with different graphics and scoring systems.
Seventeen pages of notes support his hypothesis.
Zero is not impressed.
He's known this since Metal Black his the market way back last Tuesday.
Zero gets busy.
Flashing on terminals all over Japan, he disseminates his latest data through modem, warning other otaku on the Eye Net computer network to be on the lookout for some poser named Batman pushing stale info.
For those few moments, as Zero's invisible brethren attentively scan and store his transmitted data, he is no longer a wimp.
He's a big gun, a macho man in the world of the otaku .
Information is the fuel that feeds the otaku 's worshipped dissemination systems — computer bulletin boards, modems, faxes.
For otaku , the only thing that matters is the accuracy of the answer, not its relevance.
So no piece of information is too trivial for consideration: monster otaku may collect the names of the various actors who wore the rubber suits in an episode of Ultraman (a trashy humanoid vs monster Japanese TV show, still watched on endless reruns) and who were conspicuously shorter than in other shows; ‘idol’otaku may discover what university the father of Seventies teenybop star Hikaru Nishida attended.
Anything qualifies, as long as it was not previously known.
Although he spends most of his waking hours exchanging information with fellow otaku , Zero only knows his tribe through the computer bulletin board.
He has never met any of them.
He doesn't even know their real names.
Zero speaks of Kojak, who he has also never met in their five-year, digitallydriven ‘friendship’.
Besides being a computer-game otaku , Kojak is an idol otaku .
Idols are the interchangeable performers who form the bread and butter of the music business in Japan.
Every year 40 or 50 idols appear to satiate pre-teen musical tastes.
Some, like the still-popular singer Seiko Matsuda, become fantastically successful.
Others quickly vanish.
But Kojak isn't interested in the successful idols.
He doesn't care that the music sucks.
Today he wants all the information he can get about Miho Nakayama — a cute-as-a-button, up-and-coming idol.
Of course he needs to know the obvious data like her starsign, blood-type, favourite foods and what her father does for a living.
But he will delve much further for arcane and perverse factoids like her bra-size (30A) or any childhood diseases she may have had (chicken pox).
Kojak scours celebrity magazines.
He accesses a Nifty-Serve bulletin board which may carry idol information deposited there by other otaku , and he desperately seeks a way to hack into the mainframe of Nakayama's record company with a code-cracking programme he designed himself.
There, in the company computer, he imagines he will find tons of choice titbits such as upcoming record store appearances or release dates for new singles — information that will make him a real idol otaku king when he transmits it over the networks to other idol-loving otaku .
The point for Kojak will not be the relevance of the information, nor the nature of it, but merely that he has it and others don't — that's what makes it valuable and Kojak a computer stud.
Their obsession with gathering may, at first glance, seem no different than the fanaticism of collectors of rare books or woodblock prints.
But it is as if , instead of trading actual items, book collectors were to trade only information about a particular novel.
(‘Did you know that Hemingway's original manuscript of For Whom The Bell Tolls was returned because of insufficient postage?’)
The objects themselves are meaningless to otaku — you can't send Ultraman through a modem.
But you can send every piece of information about him.
‘Masturbation is better than conventional sex.
I watch videos and read manga, and that's about as far as I want to go.
If it were possible to have sex with objects, then that would be a different matter’
‘THE OTAKU ARE AN underground, but they are not opposed to the system per se ,’ says sociologist and University of Tokyo fellow Volker Grassmuck, who has studied the otaku extensively.
‘They change, manipulate and subvert ready-made products, but at the same time they are the apothesis of consumerism and an ideal workforce for contemporary capitalism.
The parents of otaku are from the Sixties generation, very democratic and tolerant.
They want to understand their children, but the kids purposely look for things their parents can't understand.
In a sense, the parents themselves are immature and childish.
In Japan there is probably no obvious image of what a grown-up is.’
Grassmuck believes that this communication barrier between parents and children led to a series of killings of parents by their sons.
The Kinzoku Bat Murderer, for instance, bludgeoned his mother and father to death with a baseball bat in the early Eighties.
Five or six other kids — who, says Grassmuck, would probably be called otaku today — carried out copycat crimes in the following months.
Then there's the murderous Miyazaki, but he had communication problems of a different sort.
He was an outcast of the otaku community as well as with his own family.
Every otaku emphasises that Miyazaki is the strange exception to an otherwise peaceful, constructive movement.
‘Miyazaki was not really even an otaku ,’ says Taku Hachiro, the 29-year old author of the book Otaku Heaven .
‘If he was a real otaku he wouldn't have left the house and driven around looking for victims.
That's just not otaku behaviour.
Because of his case, people still have a bad feeling about us.
They shouldn't.
They should realise that we are the future — more comfortable with things than people.
That's definitely the direction we're heading as a society.’
Many otaku make their living in technology-related fields, as software designers, computer engineers, computer graphic artists or computer magazine editors.
Leading high-technology corporations say they are actively recruiting otaku types because they are in the vanguard of personal computing and software design.
And some otaku entrepreneurs have already made it big.
Self-proclaimed ‘Otaku Mogul’ Kazuhiku Nishi is the founder of the ASCII corporation, a software firm worth a quarter of a billion pounds.
‘Lots of our best workers are what you might call otaku ,’ says an ASCII spokesman.
‘Maybe as many as 60 per cent of our 2,000 employees.
You couldn't want more commitment.’
However, Abiko Seigo, a manager with the same corporation, complains that otaku types easily lose sight of company goals beyond the project before them.
They can also be lousy team players, unable to communicate verbally with their co-workers — and in the corporate world, the team mentality still pervades.
IF TAKU HACHIRO IS RIGHT , and the otaku is the man of the future, how will these chronically shy people reproduce?
What about the sex-lives of people who admit their terror of physical contact with another human being?
‘Masturbation is better than conventional sex,’ claims Hachiro, a self-confessed virgin.
‘I guess I'm frightened of sex.
I watch a lot of videos and read manga , and that's about as far as I want to go.
I don't know if it's fear so much as a matter of getting along with objects better than people.
If it were possible to have sex with objects, then that would be a different matter.’
It is therefore not surprising that otaku are fascinated with new technology such as virtual reality or digital compression as it connects to pornography.
The sales potential for technologydriven, ultra-real pornographic and violent experiences via the computer is so great that computer engineers are furiously designing software that will satisfy an otaku 's ‘sexual’ needs.
Though some otaku wait — no doubt breathlessly — for the development of sexy technology they can plug into their underwear, black-market programmers already sell ‘seduction’ and ‘rape’fantasy games through otaku networks.
In December, a software firm in Osaka whose product was deemed ‘obscene’ by the powers that be was raided and its stock of ultra-graphic porn ‘games’confiscated.
Perhaps police have good reason to worry.
Showing pubic hair is illegal under Japanese obscenity laws, but international computer networks like CompuServe are already on-line as efficient and low-risk international smuggling routes for sexually explicit pornographic images.
The police are only now beginning to crack down on this type of smuggling.
The Osaka Police Department says plans are on the board to increase monitoring of computer bulletin boards used to distribute and sell illegal pornography.
But they are not optimistic.
‘Much obscene material is already being transmitted by facsimile over phone lines and is therefore virtually impossible to monitor,’ a police spokesman explains.
‘However, we can choke distribution of some pornography by censoring the bulletin boards.’
The Osaka police department has considered one strategy to clamp down on otaku porn networks: hire otaku policemen.
‘We would probably be more effective in combating crime if we could train reformed otaku .
But unfortunately we don't have the budget right now.’
The police believe the Tsutomu Miyazaki case was an exception, not an omen for the future.
But the case has ensured that, for the time being,otaku are likely to remain a fringe group perceived by the public as anti-social computer kooks or, worse, potential serial killers.
But as things stand, the otaku are indeed making their mark as work-loving employees in hightechnology industries.
And, as the constant stream of new hardware and software becomes crucial to competitiveness in all business fields, the ascension of otaku may be inevitable.
Or, as Zero confidently predicts from his gloomy lair in Kawagoe: ‘One day, everyone will be an otaku ’.
Eight ways to be an info freako
Monster Otaku
Love everything and anything about the monsters in trash Japanese TV fodder like Godzilla, The Smog Monster, Gamera, Rodan and Ultraman.
The shows may have been made aeons ago, but endless reruns have ensured kitsch classic status for information obsessives.
Most elusive factoid: who or what exactly Godzilla mated with to produce Son of Godzilla
Military Otaku
Construct replica models of everything from F-15 fighter planes to World War I British infantry corned-beef rations.
Special treat: surrounding themselves with plastic ship models and watching Tora!
Tora!
Tora!on video
Tropical Fish Otaku
Can distinguish between the average lifespan of an angel fish in captivity in the northern and southern hemispheres.
Futile pastime: memorising the Latin names of 150 fish species when they've never even owned a goldfish.
Nothing to do with surrealism
Jeans Otaku
Can spot the difference between Levi's and Lee at 100 metres.
The obsession for vintage denim, both genuine and reproduction, has added a new twist to the syndrome and depleted bank balances up and down the island.
Washing tip: clean jeans only once a year — without soap
Manga Otaku
Specialise in collecting and trading underground, hard-to-find manga comic-books like Angel, Uncoloured and Blind Logic .
Puts those strange beings who hang out in London's Forbidden Planet to shame: at the big bookstores in Tokyo's student district, some will stand there reading Rapeman for eight hours on end
Imperial Otaku
Make our royal watchers look like rank amateurs.
Hello!readers with knobs on, they can tell you the length of Emperor Hirohito's reign down to the second.
Most coveted item: a fax of Princess Michiko, daughter to current emperor Akihiro, with a blemish on her forehead
Idol Otaku
Have got real problems.
Not content with being obsessive about failed British pop performers like Belouis Some and Matt Fretton (who, as they will always tell you, were ‘big in Japan’), these star victims get all steamed up about their own home-grown talent-free singers, which the record companies churn out year after year.
Dream: to see all the way up Miho Nakayama's skirt (but don't ask us why)
Cartoon Otaku
Are beyond help.
Wayne's World may have made Scooby Doo hip, but we're talking serious addiction to cartoon characters that even your five-year-old sister would think are naff.
You might think Pluto is cute; they want to know which brand of dogfood he eats  
MONITOR the x-factor
Lucie Young on the Malcolm X merchandise frenzy
First there was Malcolm X, then Malcolm X — the movie, and now Malcolm X the potato crisp.
New Yorkers are being whipped into a frenzy for mo' Malcolm merchandise by shrewd businessman and film mogul Spike Lee.
The X spin-offs are not quite on the scale of the Batman trinkets, mags and furniture put out by Time Warner.
But Spike's company is thinking big.
Big enough for a giant X to have mysteriously appeared in mid-town Manhattan and another not a million miles from his flagship shop in Brooklyn.
Earlier this summer, Lee opened a franchise of 16 ‘Spike's Joint’ stores in the crassly commercial, all-American department store Macy's.
The place is stuffed with T-shirts emblazoned with such legends as: ‘Do The Right Thing’, ‘Mo's Better Blues’ and ‘Malcolm X’.
In short, you pay for the privilege of being a walking billboard for Lee's past and future films.
And joining Spike's gang doesn't come cheap.
An X baseball cap will set you back a money-grabbing $19, the shirt $19 and sweatshirt $30.
Those on a budget might prefer the Malcolm X badge ($3) or postcard ($1).
Movie memorabilia is nothing new but cries of blaX-ploitation have been heard in some quarters.
Spike, himself, is said to be all X-ed out about the memorabilia that is being sold by other people .
Malcolm X film producer Marvin Worth says Lee has been deluged with offers to create merchandise and promotional tie ins, ranging from comic books to fast food.
But Worth, who frowns on unauthorised X products, says sniffily: ‘We don't want hamburger stands endorsing Malcolm X.’
But the Malcolm X crisp has already made a guest appearance at this year's African American merchandise mart.
Sadly, the furore surrounding its launch means it was a damp squib, vanishing without a trace and leaving African American foodies to return to the other essential flavour of the month, the hugely popular Homeboy and Homegirl crisps.
X marks the spot: when it comes to promotion, American movie companies sure know how to do the right thing
Rebels without a cause: they're young, they're disaffected, they wear DM boots and they probably like the Wonderstuff.
They come out in force to get mucky at this year's Reading Festival, but would they subscribe to Britain's most derided youth cult: the soft crusties?
The Levellers.
What do they say in their most famous line?
‘There's only one life to lead, and that's your own.’
If that's not a summary of failed inspiration and failed compassion, then the Levellers are the next Sex Pistols
Soft crusties
They're Britain's most ubiquitous youth cult, but nobody could care less about them
In a dusty Victorian town hall in the East End of London, I stumbled down the steps to the exit, and left half of young, disaffected London dancing and laughing in rooms decked out like candy-striped pleasuredome marquees.
‘Size Of A Cow’ was playing, the long, brown hair was aswaying, and young London was wearing washed-out T-shirts, batik waistcoats, face paint, Indian cotton shirts, Uzbeki hats, old Miss Selfridge frocks, holey leggings, black canvas trousers, plaited wristbands and DMs.
DMs, DMs, DMs, always boots, mostly black, and often daubed with ohms, stars, and yin and yangs, sometimes just sprayed gold or silver, and threaded with laces — purple, red, green, yellow, pink and striped.
This young London, happy tonight to be among its own kind, sometimes dangled a polythene bottle of cider by the neck, laughed at itself for acting crazy on the dancefloor, and now and again tried to look thick, or stoned.
I could have found exactly the same clothes and expressions anywhere in the United Kingdom that night of course.
While you lovely nouveau beatniks, Eton-cropped dancers, workwear groovers and full-effect ravers were holed up in a handful of chosen niteries, these suburban salopes , these soft sixth-form crusties were out everywhere, going forth nationwide and multiplying .
These children that you tastefully spit on have, for months, been spreading like mould on muck, and yet —o one knows their name .
There have been no articles in the Sunday papers to keep the grey-templed liberals in the swing.
No one causing a scene at the NME.
Not so much as a sociology essay, or an urban character sketch in London's Evening Standard .
But there they are, mid-teens to twenties, neither cruise nor indie, po-faced, well-spoken, and in every good school, office and higher education campus that you're unfortunate enough to visit.
What is all this, then?
I didn't know any more than you, but curiosity was killing this cat, and I wanted their measurements.
So there I was at the Whirl-Y-Gig, which is a New Age club much favoured by the Haight-Ashbury set.
It plays world and indie music, it has face-painters and babies, and, if you're interested, it's held in the Town Hall in Shoreditch on Saturday nights.
Were they from Camden communes?
Or maybe long-haired bohemian bivouacs on the edge of town?
I asked Sarah and Mouse, who, as it turned out, were from Slough.
Sarah had her hair in plaits, and Mouse had his in a ponytail.
She was a graduate and worked in a record shop; he was doing a law course.
Did they like the Whirl-Y-Gig?
They did not!
‘There's too many rich kids ‘ere,’ said Mouse, taking care to drop his aitches.
‘It used to be really anarchic, but then all sorts of casuals started wearing in and yang on their hooded tops because it was trendy.’
Sarah was staring away, looking distinctly unimpressed.
So I asked her why she wore those clothes (a green cotton dress with its hem coming down, holed leggings, and uncared-for DM boots).
‘What?’ she said.
Well, were they making any statement about herself, perhaps?
‘No,’ she said.
So why wear them?
‘It's not a religion.’
I'm sorry?
‘I just wear what I want.’
But why do you want those things?
(Pout)‘Comfortable’.
Progress!
Had anyone ever taken the mickey out of her because she looked untidy?
‘Fuck off,’ said Sarah, and walked away laughing with Mouse.
Well, hippies — they told us never to trust them, didn't they?
I bought a little carrot cake, watched someone juggle, awoke from the consequent torpor, and collared a mixed tatty flock lounging at the edge of the dancefloor.
They were thin (soft crusties always are, unlike their ancestors the goths, who wore those loose black garments to conceal their lumpy bodies — you fooled no one , goths!), and they worked as publishers, temp secretaries, or, in one case, as an articled clerk at a firm of environmental lawyers.
Did they feel something in common with the rest of the Whirl-Y-Gig clientele?
Everyone looked at everyone else, except for Zöe the environmental lawyer, who was as eager and friendly as your dad's new girlfriend.
‘Obviously there's something or we wouldn't be here.
But I think you have to say the club's just not as much as an event as it used to be.
There's loads of kids who are just fashionable London types, and they're not into it.’
It ?
What was it ?
Coca-Cola?
No no, the idea of something communal, and spontaneous, she said, which sounded like the ‘it’ of any other bag you might be into.
Was there, I enquired, some spirit or belief I was missing?
What if I said they were just playing at being drop-outs?
A ripple of life went over the face of Mark the publisher's assistant.
‘Nah, 'cos you don't have to drop out, like, completely, the Sixties’ people, right, or the crusties or whatever dropped out, and that didn't change anything, but you can change things sort of from the inside.’
Now I knew why there were so many badly-written books — Mark was proof-reading them.
But what was he changing?
‘Aw, you can't put it like that, in that exact way,’ he said.
‘You just change yourself, and don't put up with the crap.’
The crap?
‘Well, you know, like…like there's exploitation of people, politicians, racism, all that shit, you just don't want to be a part of it.’
So, politics then?
Nope, no takers here, comrades!
All the parties were the same (such cynicism from our beautiful people, I thought), although, someone droned, ‘Maybe anarchy would be alright if you could make it work.’
Lord!
I sighed, and I despaired — and then Zö, bless her pent-up tie-dyed heart, came back in:
‘People just don't want to be part of a world that doesn't have comparison, or spontaneity, where playfulness is just limited to football and sex!
You look at a so-called adult world,’ she said, ‘and people just behave ridiculously .
So you want your own thing.
The trouble here is that these kids just don't understand it.’
Truly, there is nothing worse than a world-weary hippie, and nothing more strictly self-superior than the elders of the benevolent-beat-bohemian class.
Without humour to camouflage themselves, they give themselves away every time, and when Zöe said ‘adult world’ and ‘these kids’, then, suddenly, I had them, by the scruffiness of their necks!
I saw then that Zöe, and the Whirl-Y-Gig, and the whole soft crust of young Britain were just scared to grow up .
Irresponsibility, spontaneity and hedonism are the primary colours of any youth culture worth its sweat, but they are not world-changing legacies, and they never have been.
That is why hippie, in all its shabby, flabby, dope smoke-yellowed mutations always, always, always FAILS
They hated the kids who, being kids, wanted to try this buzz for laughs rather than love, and they hated the ‘so-called adults’, rotten with self-importance.
But they daren't take on the decisions and responsibility that would allow them to make their own alternatives, and to drop right out.
Life was just a little too sweet.
They just wanted everybody to be nice, like they're nice to you when you're a kid.
Now to be fair, the dilemma was there as the whole soft crust thing got going on 10 November 1989, when the fall of the Berlin Wall gave a prop of plausibility to the caring-Nineties mediaschlock, and to Rifat Ozbek's baggy Kleenex-vagabond numbers.
For a month everything was beautiful and inspired, and you could believe in the innate and irresistible urge towards freedom and fellow-feeling that would take care of political nastiness, or of the crap, as our eloquent friend might have put it.
But deep down you also knew that it couldn't be so simple.
Sooner or later some crap, and a lot of nastiness would have to be dealt with before Europe could come together.
Sadly it was sooner, and it spoiled the whole party.
It wasn't long after the ball got rolling, together with the head of the Eighties opinion formers, that it got going in the wrong direction.
In 1990 the commercial success of the Wonderstuff and Ned's Atomic Dustbin started drawing in the disaffected.
The desire to be Miles Hunt soon led to the Levellers.
(Nirvana and grunge are really sideline interests for the soft crust, who like a good melody with their nasal, mockney invectives, and hence favour groups who are, at heart, folk groups.)
By 1991, the Levellers, then without a chart hit to their name, were said to be the fourth most bankable live band in the country.
And in 1992, having been mere space-fillers in the music press, the Levellers had a top 20 single.
The Levellers.
What do they say in their most famous line?
‘There's only one life to lead, and that's your own.
’ If that's not a summary of failed inspiration, failed compassion, and the failed dream that would bring us together, then the Levellers are the next Sex Pistols.
It is simply a footnote to the failure of people who can't focus their displeasure, and who anyway are scared of acting upon it.
In short, it is the soft crust itself: Eastern mysticism and compassion, sealed with a sulk.
When you see them as grown-ups who'd rather not grow any more, you realise that even their clothes resort to childhood in the face of responsibility and decision.
There is no disgusting crusty dirt that doesn't care if it loses its job; instead there are the big boots and frocks of the playground dressing-up box, the scruffy jeans and last year's trainers like the ones set aside for playing after school.
The soft crust thinks the rotten so-called adult world shops at Next, and it takes itself too seriously (like any sullen delinquent) to explore the groovy games of style, experiment and enterprise played by the ‘kids’.
All it can do is say, ‘I hate everybody and it's not fair.’
On behalf of their inarticulate owners, these clothes say ‘I'm not playing!’ and then sit on the sidelines (so you can see how upset you've made them), and wait for the world to be nice.
It won't last, thank the Lord.
Wanting to remain a child becomes unfeasible even to the most stupid old beard at the age of about 35; they eventually give up and accept they were born to be schoolteachers.
If you want to change, you create something you can pass down to the young.
Irresponsibility, spontaneity and hedonism are the primary colours of any youth culture worth its sweat, but they are not world-changing legacies, and they never have been.
That is why hippie, in all its shabby, flabby dope smoke-yellowed mutations from beatnik to gothic,always, always, always FAILS .
Reality overtakes it and it hasn't the reserves to claw back.
It gets old: ignore it, and it goes away.
There are no Sunday newspaper features, no Evening Standard sketches, no Def II interest because we need to label things only if they challenge the status quo.
A name means we understand, and it allows the press to encourage or denounce, depending on whether the subject threatens or bolsters things as they are.
The soft crust, by its own sullen admission, does neither, and so — nobody cares.
Not even the music and style press, who ought at least to register their existence, can find a good word for them.
Although they could try ‘failure’
mo funny
Damon Wayans has always been sexy and funny — now with Mo' Money he's also a massive movie icon.
So what's it like being the biggest star in America's most talented family?
Few families would deliberately groom their kids for the liveon-a-tightrope, where's-my-next-job? world of comedy.
But 31-year-old Damon Wayans grew up in a household where the unremitting rule was get funny or get ignored.
Out of ten quickwitted siblings, big brother Keenan Ivory emerged first to test his home-grown humour in the real world, co-writing the industry parody Hollywood Shuffle and creating the ultrahip, irreverent US TV series In Living Color (a kind of blacker and ruder Saturday Night Live , shown here on BskyB).
Sister Kim chose a different route, cracking sex and colour barriers in the dog-eatcat world of stand-up comedy.
But it is Damon, fourth from the top, who has vaulted ahead of the others, thanks to the cutting-edge characters he developed for Keenan's show: an angry circus clown, a flamboyant film reviewer, and, riskiest of all, Handiman, ah, uh, differently abled super-hero.
Successfully negotiating the tightrope of taste isn't easy, but it certainly has its rewards.
‘Handiman made everyone think about the handicapped person in their family that it's easy to deny,’ says Damon, who may have found the character's roots in his own childhood club foot.
‘At any moment, the audience could have thrown chairs at me, but I wanted to bring up one of our greatest fears and make people really laugh about it.’
Although the show elevated him from struggling stand-up comic to greeting card icon in two short series, last spring Damon bailed out of In Living Color to devote his energies to writing and starring in films.
After small parts in movies like Roxanne, Hollywood Shuffle and Colors , his much-anticipated major feature debut in the schlockbuster The Last Boy Scout was a big disappointment.
Cast against type, the genial Wayans played an ex-jock addicted to bad women, bad drugs, bad odds and bad company (the last played by Bruce Willis).
‘I try not to look back,’ Damon shrugs in hindsight.
‘But I wish we had played it more for comedy — it was too depressing.
Think of all my vices!
What was there to root for?’
Then came Mo' Money .
On this side of the Atlantic, it is difficult to imagine what kind of impact the film has had.
Wayans wrote the script, executive produced it, and stars in it.
With $36 million in the box-office after only five weeks' release, and the movie yet to travel outside America, big profits are guaranteed.
It has been the making of the kid from the comedy family.
The idea for Mo' Money came from an experience Damon had when he was in his early twenties and working in the postroom at a credit card company.
He seems slightly embarrassed discussing the incident, but admits to going on a shopping spree with someone else's card, and buying shoes, clothes and dinner for himself and his friends.
He was arrested, but avoided prosecution.
In Mo' Money , a young street hustler, Johnny, who thinks he needs to be richer to win the love and respect of the beautiful Amber (Stacy Dash), takes a job in the company where she works and soon becomes embroiled in a dangerous credit card scam.
‘I have to write my own material.
The stuff that they're supposedly writing ‘black’ ain't happenin'.
So I'll write my own: take charge of my own destiny’
The comedy is pumped up by cherished characters from In Living Color — including the bad, brash, man-eating Wanda The Ugly Woman — but the film isn't played just for laughs.
The Jam and Lewis soundtrack powers up some fairly physical action sequences, and there is a surprising amount of killings.
The movie also has a strong message: that wealth isn't all it's cracked up to be.
‘Success is not about money,’ says Damon.
‘Money doesn't make you happy.
And money doesn't take away the problems of the world.’
‘Speak fo’ yo'self!’chips in baby brother Marlon, who — hardly a big stretch for the actor — plays the comedian's younger brother in Mo' Money , and is joining the interview at Damon's request.
‘Money doesn't make you happy,’ insists the elder brother.
‘It can't erase the injustices in the world.
People have this perception, ‘Man, if I had what you had, I'd be happy.’
That's not true.
'Cause money is just more stuff to worry about.’
‘So Damon's giving all his money away to charity,’ retorts Marlon sardonically.
He may preach the virtues of an empty bank account, but Damon is fairly obsessed with filling his own.
A few minutes later he's explaining that he recently left his agent at the powerful Creative Artists Agency so that, unlike almost everyone else in Hollywood, he wouldn't have to hand over ten per cent of everything he earned.
‘I have a manager [Eric Gold]and an enforcer, my business partner Steve [Barnes, a lawyer], and we work well together,’ he says.
‘We are in synch in terms of where we're going, and we don't need anybody else trying to change our views.’
Besides, adds Damon, he doesn't need an agent to find him scripts, because he's planning to write his own.
‘I have to write my own material.
I see scripts coming through and they're disappointing.
I have to wait for a white actor to turn down a role because the stuff that they're supposedly writing ‘black’ ain't happenin'.
So I'll write my own: take charge of my own destiny.’
Deeper insight into Damon's contradictory personality can be found in his second-favourite In Living Color character, Homey, a circus clown with an attitude, whose disdainful refrain, ‘Homey don't play that!’ now echoes through schoolyards across America.
Honey's anger, says Wayans, stems from his being ‘sentenced to be a clown.
He has no control.
This is his life.’
So is this like the comedian's own darkside acting out?
‘Probably subconsciously,’ he acknowledges.
‘Sometimes I wish I wasn't that funny because when I'm not having fun or thinking funny, I get really depressed.
People want me to be funny all the time.
That's when I feel trapped.
People meet me and they get all excited because they think I'm going to have something funny to say.
All I do is go, ‘Hi’’
As a boy growing up in New York, he recalls his father doing whatever he could to keep food in the ten hungry mouths, including buying up condoms and sunglasses wholesale and selling them to shopkeepers.
Damon himself became a father at 22.
He now has four children, and insists that having kids early ‘was the greatest thing that ever happened to me.
I felt a responsibility to take care of my child.
That was the motivation to bring home the bacon, even if it was only Spam.’
Although making mo' movies is his main focus now, the comedian recently returned to stand-up comedy because, he said, he found himself unhappy without an outlet for his anger at social injustice.
‘For eight years, I did my act on stage.
I would go home and I was this happy guy.
Then, when I stopped, there was no way to release all this stuff building up inside me.
If I see things and they make me mad, I have to talk about it.’
Wayans prides himself on his no-sacred-cows approach to comedy, even when it has led to controversy.
One of his most beloved and criticised characters is the flamboyant film reviewer in the ‘Men On Film’ segment of In Living Color .
While some gay rights groups denounced him for promoting negative stereotypes, ‘Men On Film’ also became a regular feature on the gay club circuit.
‘I do those characters for the people in the bars, who love it,’ responds Wayans.
‘Special interest groups I don't listen to.
They say they're speaking for everyone, but they're not.
The masses of the gay community love those characters.
I walk down the streets of New York, the Village, and they stop and they talk, they want autographs.
Same thing in West Hollywood.’
In a scene in Mo' Money sure to offend some gays, Damon and Marlon revive similar characters to scam a jewellery shop.
In an obvious riff on Aids phobia, Damon's character disorients the assistant by repeatedly sneezing on him.
Wayans insists the joke is meant to lampoon those who display unwarranted fear of Aids and is no way in poor taste.
Nonetheless, he admits to editing out one joke that created some controversy when it appeared in a promotional reel earlier this year.
The line referred to a cold the character had had for six months and ‘couldn't shake’.
‘There was no pressure to take it out.
It just didn't work,’ he insists.
When walking the fine line between bad taste and biting satire, offending your audience and getting them to laugh at themselves, Wayans is guided by only one credo: ‘It's our own imperfections which make us funny.
We have to stop taking life so seriously and really have some fun with it’.
In New York over 100,000 drug injectors are HIV positive, mainly infected by sharing dirty needles.
Most people don't care if they live or die, but a few are willing to risk imprisonment by going on to the streets to hand out clean syringes.
Addicted only to love for their fellow man, these needle guerillas know that all life is precious
East Third Street runs between Avenues A and B on the Lower East Side of Manhattan.
Also known as Alphabet City, or Loisaida to the Hispanics whose numbers dominate the area, it lies a few blocks north of Little Italy, the spiritual home of the Mafia, and a few blocks south of the East Village, where New York beatniks gave birth to our modern global drug subculture.
The area has always been a major centre for the narcotics trade.
The term ‘smack’ originated here in the Thirties, when the area was dominated by Jewish immigrants — it's derived from the Yiddish word ‘schmecker’, meaning taste.
By 1978, heroin dealing was out of control in the area and New York police mounted Pressure Point, an operation aimed at closing down the area's drug markets and hailed as a great success.
Today, on East Third Street a casual passer-by would notice nothing untoward.
‘Nearly everybody in this hotel uses crack.
If they ain't smokin' it, they sellin' it.
I don't know how long I got left, but gettin' high helps me pass the time’
With closer scrutiny though, you can pick up on the activity of the street.
An African American in his late forties walks around in circles, chabbering to himself.
Occasionally he bends to examine a white pebble or a piece of paper.
The homeboys call it ‘Ghostbusting’, the tendency to see pieces of crack everywhere after you've smoked your own supply.
As you walk along the street, Puerto Rican youths whisper offers of ‘Poison’ and ‘Cash’, two of the brand names of the local heroin, stamped on the bags the drug comes wrapped in.
New York drug dealers seem to go in for sophisticated marketing ploys.
There are no pieces of tinfoil or wraps of cling-film here.
It isn't unusual to see a dealer studying Donald Trump's book,The Art Of The Deal .
Halfway down the street, a loose line of people has formed outside a house.
Lookouts sit on the sidewalk opposite.
A man with the physique and demeanour of a night-club bouncer keeps the line in order.
One by one, punters disappear into the doorway, pick up a couple of dime bags of coke, and move off.
On the corner of the street a thin woman propositions customers.
‘Sealed works?
Three dollars apiece.’
Syringes are on sale at most dealing locations, though sometimes they have already been used and the package resealed.
You pay your money and you take your chance.
Though crack, a smokable form of cocaine, dominated many traditional heroin markets during the Eighties, heroin is making a comeback.
Drug Enforcement Agency intelligence reports have noted that the Colombian cartel, having saturated the market with cocaine, has begun to grow opium poppies.
However, contrary to popular myth, it isn't heroin injectors who are most at risk of contracting HIV.
Research in New York has identified cocaine injectors as being at potentially greater risk, mainly because of the highly compulsive nature of the drug.
A heroin addict probably injects two or three times a day, but cocaine is often injected at regular 15-minute intervals until the drugs and the money have run out.
According to Sam Friedman, a New York drug researcher, New York is a speedball city.
Cocaine is so inexpensive that most heroin injectors like to have both drugs in the mix at the same time.
Today the United States has about a million injecting drug users.
A quarter of them live in New York City.
In the mid-Eighties, when epidemiologists identified injecting drug use as a major route for the transmission of HIV, the virus had already hit New York hard.
Today, some research suggests that 50 per cent of the city's intravenous drug users have been infected.
The virus has since been passed on to their children, their sexual partners and their partners' partners.
The vast majority are black and Hispanic.
My friend Edith works as an Aids trainer.
Now in her midforties, she is an ex-addict who works in her chosen field out of emotional necessity — the Aids virus has claimed the lives of half of her community.
‘New York has always had laws prohibiting the possession of syringes and needles,’ she explains.
‘Junkies would travel from their own neighbourhood to the Lower East Side or Harlem to cop, because the dope was cheaper and better quality there.
You wanted to try the drugs before parting with all your money, and you didn't want to be arrested in possession of a works.
So you'd slip into a shooting gallery to test the dope.
For a few dollars you could use the room, rent a works and get high.’
In galleries across the city, needles were passed indiscriminately from arm to arm, and along with each hit went the deadly virus.
LENA HAS USED HEROIN since she was 17.
Today, at 43, she is no longer addicted to it — but she does have Aids.
The city council, responsible for housing people with Aids, has taken her off the streets and put her in a room in a single-occupancy hotel.
A welfare hotel.
A crack hotel.
A place where everybody, employees and residents alike, smokes crack.
As we talk, she cooks up a rock.
‘I've always been around dope.
My mom and dad both used heroin, and most of the people in my neighbourhood liked to get high, smoke a little reefer.
I used to turn tricks to pay for dope.
Eventually, dope got too expensive and I couldn't afford to get high any more.
Then crack showed up.
I don't know whether I got Aids from a needle, from a boyfriend, or from a trick.
I do know that my time is nearly up.
My social worker says that I shouldn't be gettin' high, because it damages the immune system.
But nearly everybody in this hotel uses crack.
If they ain't smokin' it, they sellin' it.
I don't know how long I got left, but gettin' high helps me pass the time.’
Access to clean needles might have saved Lena.
Unsterile injection equipment will almost certainly shorten her life, introducing bacteria into her bloodstream that her depleted immune system is unable to fight off.
‘THERE IS A HIGHER GOAL than the reduction of transmission of HIV, and that goal is the elimination of use of illegal narcotics by injection, period.’
‘It's a wonderful goal, except that it is not going to be reached overnight.
What they are saying by setting this goal exclusively is that there are a huge number of people out there who are expendable.’
THERE HAS BEEN A CONSENSUS among European drug researchers for many years over the value of needle exchanges, but US politicians ignored their recommendations.
Evidence that needle exchange programmes play a vital role in limiting the spread of HIV was dismissed as irrelevant to the American situation, and federal regulations barred further research into the issue.
Eventually, in 1988, under pressure from drug experts and epidemiologists studying the spread of Aids, New York mayor Ed Koch established a pilot needle exchange programme.
Many of those involved with the programme believe it was an experiment that was designed to fail.
Koch decided that no exchange could be located within 1,000 feet of a school, which ruled out the possibility of a communitybased programme.
Eventually it was located in the Department of Health building, downtown in the business district and opposite the Tombs correctional centre, where arrested drug users are brought, handcuffed, to await trial.
New York's District Attorney publicly threatened to arrest the scheme's clients for possession of drug paraphernalia.
In the immediate vicinity of the building is the highest concentration of narcotics detectives in the Western world.
The Department of Immigration and the FBI offices are also nearby.
Places in the programme were limited to 200, out of 250,000 injectors in the city, and to make things worse each client would only be able to exchange a single needle.
Despite these constraints, the programme was regarded as a success.
But overwhelming political opposition to the programme meant that when David Dinkins was elected as the city's first black mayor the following year, one of his first acts was to close it down.
Black politicians and community leaders who opposed needle exchanges claimed the programme was racist and genocidal.
Senator Charles Rangel, Democratic representative for Harlem and chair of the Congressional Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, believes needle exchange programmes ‘encourage and support drug addiction, while black youth is mortally jeopardised by drugs’.
Yolanda Serrano, a Harlem resident who is the Director of ADAPT, an advocacy group for the rights of intravenous drug users, disagrees: ‘He claims that needle exchange is genocide.
In fact, what we have now is genocide.’
Charles Eaton, director of the pilot needle exchange programme and now a city health official, agrees: ‘There is no evidence from any syringe exchange scheme anywhere in the world suggesting that they encourage people to inject.
Our critics argued that we should be putting resources into rehabilitation programmes, but the places aren't available.
Also, you can't rehabilitate a dead addict’.
A central figure in America's struggle for clean needles is Jon Parker, a 37-year-old ex-addict from Boston.
While studying for a master's degree in public health at Yale, Parker heard the director of an English needle exchange scheme speak in Boston.
Fired with enthusiasm, Parker decided to get needles out on to the streets.
In August 1988, he was arrested for possessing illegal drug paraphernalia — syringes.
In January 1990 he was acquitted.
The judge found that, though he had violated the law, Jon Parker's illegal action was justified by the severity of the Aids epidemic.
Though the federal government still regards them as criminals, some Americans view the guerilla needle exchangers as heroes.
Above and left: a Lower East Side syringe exchange volunteer promoting Act-Up's clean-up message
Like Parker, America's gay activists have long been critical of US Aids policy, arguing the virus has received insufficient priority because it was ‘only’ killing gay men.
Eventually, some of those activists began to take a wider perspective.
If the lives of gay men are undervalued, how about the lives of homeless black and Hispanic people who shoot up drugs?
In February 1990, Rod Sorge and some other members of Act-Up got together with Jon Parker and occupied the intersection of Essex and Delancey, another copping block on the Lower East Side.
Over on the opposite corner, the Guardian Angels staged a counter demonstration.
As Act-Up distributed needles, bleach and Aids education materials, the Angels stood chanting ‘No drugs, no needles!’
Eventually, ten members of Act-Up were arrested.
Once again, the court found that the Aids epidemic was such a grave medical emergency that the defendants were justified in their actions.
JOYCE IS A PUERTO RICAN woman in her late twenties.
She views heroin addiction somewhat differently to most people employed in the drugs field.
‘I don't use drugs myself, but I grew up in the South Bronx where heroin use was all around me.
Both my parents were addicts, so I get so angry when I see the way that drug users are portrayed.
All of their lives are reduced to their drug use.
In fact, drugs are just a minor part of their lives.
First, addicts are people — workers, housewives, mothers, fathers, brothers, sisters, members of a community.
Though I don't live there any more, I still regard the South Bronx as my community and I want to try to give something back.
My needle exchange operates on a dealing street.
It couldn't happen without the permission of the dealer, but he too is a member of that community and he cares what happens there.
He sees that this thing is in everybody's interest and gives me protection.
Today, the exchange is run by the clients.
When I arrive on Saturday morning, the people are all there, waiting to help me set up the table, making up kits, giving out leaflets.’
The patrol car arrives again and parks across the road.
One bedraggled man warns us: ‘Be cool.
As soon as you go they'll roust us’
Saturday morning, 10am.
I have arranged to visit the syringe exchange scheme that operates on the Lower East Side.
Half of the volunteers stay in one place, while the other half tour the neighbourhood.
We walk down the street and are instantly recognised by a handsome Latino man and his girlfriend who come over and ask us for works.
In their late twenties and smartly dressed, no one would suspect that they are both injectors.
They tell us that they only do dope occasionally, a factor that potentially puts them at greater risk.
Confirmed junkies have their own works, but impulse users can get caught short and may use someone else's.
We give them syringes and bleach with which to clean them — but they don't want condoms.
As we turn a corner on to Forsyth Street, a handful of people is waiting for us to arrive.
Most just take the needles and go, but one lesbian woman wants some advice on safer sex.
The group has a counsellor who specialises in this area.
A patrol car spots us and its occupants make it clear we are under observation.
We head for the local needle park.
Men and women of all ages are sitting around, chilling out, soaking up the rays.
The homeless and the housed, workers and unemployed, black, white, Latino, Jewish.
Dealers and consumers.
All ages.
Everybody wants works.
Some want to chat about their problems: their upcoming court cases, where they can get an Aids test, how they can get into drug treatment.
Almost all of them express gratitude that somebody gives a shit.
The patrol car arrives again and parks across the road from us.
One bedraggled, beaten-up man comes over to warn us.
‘I'm, like, the king of this park.
I can tell you what goes down.
The cops be over there again.
Be cool.
They won't do anything while you here, but as soon as you go, they'll roust us.’
We hand out the works a little more surreptitiously.
I get into conversation with a black man in his fifties.
Married for over 30 years, Michael is the father of five girls.
He is extremely dapper, with shaved head, a Nike shell suit and a beeper clipped to his pocket.
We talk about his aversion to methadone.
‘That's bad shit.
I'm in a programme now, but only for a month.
If you don't watch out, you can get a worse habit than the one you started with.
I first had methadone tablets, dollies, when I was in the Tombs, back in 1960.
It was cool, gettin' high every day.
Then, I got sentenced and went upstate to do my time.
Man, to this day I've never been so sick.’
Michael is what used to be known as a righteous dope fiend.
He always goes to work, pays his mortgage and supports his family and his habit.
Today, many thousands of men like Michael have died of Aids.
At around 1pm we arrive at our final destination.
Near the end of Canal Street is a piece of waste ground, about 60 feet square, where a shanty town has sprung up.
Houses have been fashioned out of cardboard, canvas and corrugated tin.
Halfway across the site, the earth is scorched, and the remnants of dwellings bear witness to a horrendous fire.
In the centre of the site, a hand-fashioned cross bears an inscription: ‘Mr Yi-Po Lee.
He was one of us.’
A small memorial garden has been planted to commemorate Mr Lee, and a small fence erected to prevent people trampling on the flowers.
According to Eric, one of the residents, some two weeks before our visit there was a dispute over drugs and one of the shacks had been torched.
The fire spread rapidly, consuming many of the pathetic homes that had been erected.
Over 100 people lived on the lot before the fire.
Now there were only between 30 and 40.
The old Chinaman had died.
As the residents bring out their used syringes and collect new ones, a neighbour of sorts, a working-class black man who lives in an apartment across the street, brings a bundle of used clothing on to the wasteland.
‘If anybody can make use of those,’ he tells one of the residents, ‘well, they're welcome to them.’
WHEN MAYOR DINKINS closed down the needle exchange, he said: ‘Giving out needles gives the wrong message.
We need to fight drug addiction in the first instance and I don't want to give people the paraphernalia to continue using drugs.’
This is simplistic rhetoric.
For the SoHo yuppies, drugs are just another commodity in the American dream of conspicuous consumption.
For the dealers, selling drugs is one way to ensure that they don't end up in a shanty town.
For the people condemned to live in shanty towns, drugs are a means of survival, a way of facing another day.
Today, there are five syringe exchanges operating in New York.
They are still technically illegal, but there is now a bill before the New York state legislature seeking to change the laws relating to needle possession and distribution.
Plans to transfer the management of the schemes to community organisations are almost complete, and Liz Taylor's pet Aids charity, AMFAR, has set aside a small sum to fund them.
By the time city and state officials stop wrangling with the charity about who will pay insurance premiums for the programmes, it will be too little, too late.
Add it up.
Five needle exchange schemes, each running for a couple of hours a week.
A quarter of a million injectors in the city, 125,000 of them already HIV positive.
It's like offering an elastoplast to somebody who has just been disembowelled.
Since the Aids epidemic began, 20,000 children in New York City have lost one or more parents to Aids.
Drugs, racial tension, street crime and a massive urban underclass are some of the biggest problems facing the United States today, but for many right-wing politicians, Aids isn't a problem — it's a solution.
By the year 2000, the number of Aids orphans in New York City will exceed 100,000.
Some day, those children will demand answers.
Since my visit this summer, little has changed.
The staging of the Democratic convention in New York spurred the city into making a concerted effort to get the homeless people off the streets, and people who lived in the shanty town were evacuated, their homes cleared by bulldozers.
Mr Yi-Po Lee's memorial garden has been razed to the ground 
Soap Dodger
Joe Mangle is a cult hero .
He is the main — no, the only — reason for tuning into Neighbours .
Although incredibly irritating with his overstated Ocker accent (Australian Cockney —‘Beaut mate’, ‘Let's crack open a tinny, mate’, ‘Jeez mate, that's a beaut Sheila’), Joe Mangle is the laddish but new manish gardener-next-door in Ramsay Street who everyone laughs at yet sympathises with.
The soap's comic everyman, Joe was estranged from his wife and kids when he first appeared three years ago to ‘replace’ Kylie.
Since then he's had to live through his first wife being run over and his second screen love, unconvincing animal righter and hippie chick Kerry Bishop, being shot dead by illegal duck hunters.
And that's not the half of it.
But over the years, Joe's tragic-comic character has been tamed by Ramsay Street, progressing from a down-to-earth bit of rough to a civilised dad and owner of golden labrador Bouncer.
Mark Little is a funny man.
He comes on stage performing ballet steps, pirouettes off into the wings, makes some weird grunting sounds, then reappears.
Mark Little is Joe Mangle's alter ego, the real-life actor who was doing comedy for nearly a decade before Neighbours .
He made his first appearance at the Edinburgh Festival two years ago with his much-acclaimed ‘What If Dolphins Talk Shit Too?’ and this summer he returned to play eight sell-out nights at the Assembly Rooms' main theatre (sponsored not by some Australian lager but by Stella Artois).
He's also brought all his family with him.
In fact, Joe, er, Mark Little has upped and left Oz in favour of England — after touring this country with his one-man show (he fancies himself as a bit of a new age traveller), he wants to settle down in near Manchester.
Anyone who's ever caught a glimpse of Neighbours would hardly expect Joe's real-life counterpart to be an anti-government revolutionary with a phobia of the bourgeois and a passion for the planet.
When he's finished his ballet routine —‘Lots of people come to see what Joe Mangle is going to do, and when I appear on stage doing my best arabesque, you can feel people thinking ‘Oh no, he's really lost the plot’— he throws out a few one-liners.
Swigging a bottle of mineral water: ‘Coming from a cultural desert, you tend to get thirsty.’
Pulling on a pair of ‘Afro-American tribal dance boots’(ie Nikes) to complement his khaki tie-dye T-shirt and army trousers: ‘It was a toss-up between this and a shell suit.
Bloody marvellous.’
But the main part of the 90-minute show is a denial of smart, stand-up one-liners.
It's more a case of conceptual comedy that takes a topical theme like the travellers and tackles it in a right-on way, trying to draw the humour from it.
‘Comedians shouldn't feel so bloody important, shouldn't think they can get away with just standing there.
Cheap laughs aren't good laughs.
Pretending you're sexist or racist, which a lot of comics seem to be doing up here at the Festival, isn't good enough.
I know there's a recession, but being commercial, seeking the lowest common denominator, is no answer.’
This is less Ben Elton-speak than naked ambition to be an admired state-of-the-art comedian who can acknowledge the wrongs of the world, shift with the politics of the time, try out new techniques (in this case performing in theatres with a captive audience rather than in a back room full of hecklers getting up and wandering to the bar every 20 minutes)and be funny.
Of course, Mark Little is an audience pleaser too.
He knows that we want to hear about his experience of Neighbours —‘They asked me to do Neighbours The Cyber Series , but I couldn't go that far…feeling what it's like to be in Jim Robinson's shirt, what a waste of technology’— that we want tales of drugs and tripping, and an outsider's observations on British cultural mistakes (the shell suit).
And if the current show suffers from being too long and too scripted, his ad libbing is good enough to carry it along.
Granada TV is so excited about Mark moving here that there's talk of a walk-on part on Coronation Street , and there are already tentative negotiations with the channel about a TV show.
‘I can't wait to get at it, but I'm not saying anything about the ideas behind it 'cause people will be doing it before I get the chance.’
He is equally unforthcoming about how he gets written out of Neighbours ; Joe Mangle will be no more in the New Year, but he won't reveal how.
‘I left because no one could take what he's had to take; surely he'd have put a gun to his mouth by now?
No, three years was enough, it was really tiring working with the kids and Bouncer…
But no, I won't tell you if I lose another wife, or even if I marry again.
I'd have hated it if someone told me who killed Laura Palmer at the start of Twin Peaks .’
Joe Mangle: RIP  
bovril babes
They wear long plain skirts with Nike Huraches and strange craftwork jewellery.
And that's on a good day.
Their unpolished tastes are being labelled ‘ugly fashion’— but designer Joe Casely-Hayford claims there's method in the madness
The scene is a west London Californian-Italian restaurant.
Picture a perfectly coiffured, big-haired woman in a sharpshouldered, mini-skirted suit, vampy heels and portable telephone.
The Dynasty Dame.
At the table opposite, an androgynous waif-cum-designer bag lady munches her arugula salad.
Let me introduce the Bovril Babe.
Her floor-length sludgecoloured wrap skirt is worn with a snug-fitting, narrowshouldered, heavily-darted jacket.
Hair is centre-parted and lank.
The two eye each other disapprovingly.
Versace versus Margiela!
Alongside the much-publicised success and excesses of Gianni Versace and his ilk, a new diametrically opposed mood in fashion is on the rise.
Although the original inspiration for this latest ‘anti-fashion’ movement has come largely from London street style (and not its designers), the mood is being nurtured and developed in Paris and northern Europe.
Armed with the British style magazines, the Continental fashion set have now created a new order: ‘anti-chic’.
It is here the Bovril Babes dwell.
They despise the received good taste of garish Italianate fashion and its social connotations: too flashy and cashy.
Instead they mix the commonplace with the exquisite: a C&A skinny-rib sweater with a silk leather-look jacket by Helmut Lang perhaps.
Such harmonious discord is the deliberately created statement.
During the sterile Eighties, we overdosed on design and killed freedom of expression.
Too much chic!
Too much pseudointellectualism!
The Bovril Babe is about style, not fashion slavery
The leading protagonists in Paris include Martin Margiela, Ann Demeulemeester, Veronique Leroy, Andre Walker, Helmut Lang, Jean Colonna, and Xuly Bet — all very different exponents of the new sensibility.
But although this burst of new direction has logically exploded out of Paris, the world's fashion capital, the energy and creativity emerging from countries with traditionally low fashion profiles is what is truly intriguing and inspiring.
Belgium, Holland, Norway and Sweden are producing some strong new designers of clothes, shoes and accessories.
I occasionally lecture at the Hogeschool in Holland, where the talent is now exceptional, and a new mood is being defined out of a profound rejection of wearing your logo/status/money on your sleeve.
Why is this breakthrough occurring in these countries?
Some of the best ideas emanate from territories with no street or club culture to speak of.
The designers are drawing on broader influences: architecture, painting, and dance.
Their respective folk art and rural crafts are playing an important role in the development of their clothes.
They do, however, tend to project an austere and serious image, lacking the humour and kitsch that is inherent in the multi-cultural energies of cosmopolitan London and Paris.
London is losing out in the fashion stakes: our designers are considered either wacky street stylists or ladylike purveyors of dowager dresses.
This of course is not true, but those who try to escape the pigeonholing with work that is stylishly individual are labelled ‘young designer’.
Fashion in this country is for adolescents or youth only.
Design is perceived as having little cultural or social significance.
Having undue interest in clothes is still socially unacceptable and simply not British!
This is a major sensual tragedy!
Every fashion comes with its own set of justifying phrases, and the new mood is no different.
Versace is able to justify dressing men and women as leftovers from Dynasty by seducing his rich clients with a vulgar bimbo and himbo glamour.
The Bovril Babe rejects this false display of sexuality, and gains confidence from wearing accessible yet individual, non-status fashion.
Versace has been the butt of much criticism for his grandiose vision of late, though some of his clothes — when taken out of his prescribed context — can be beautiful and visually dramatic.
These become even stronger when combined and set against clothing from an opposing standpoint.
The lead of the Bovril Babes encourages us to mix fashion ideas to create some humour and wit.
It allows the bold mixture of ‘designer’ clothes with market stall finds, customised and recycled techniques, as well as the influence of rural and preindustrial craftsmanship.
An irreverent attitude towards traditional fine fabrics (such as cashmere, wool, silk and cotton) is emerging.
They are now often juxtaposed with previously scorned synthetics.
While the fashion press continues to use a bourgeoise equation for good clothing —‘tasteful’, expensive fabric — the new designers' use of ‘cheap and nasty’ fabrics and unorthodox technique takes the wearer even further away from the slick chic of the ‘establishment’designers.
Global issues have played an important role.
Economic recession has forced consumers to reassess the need to update their wardrobe every six months, while conservation awareness has begun to cause some clothes lovers to approach fashion anew.
There is an increasing divide between those who need to display their wealth and power during hard times and those who — for humane, aesthetic or intellectual reasons — decide to adopt a look which better mirrors the times we live in.
A look which questions the accepted notions of taste, beauty, and sexuality.
Should these notions always be synonymous with money, sexual stereotyping, and power?
The new mood turns the idea of what is received taste on its head by employing the use of sometimes ‘naff’ items from previous decades, and incorporating them in a fresh context.
During the height of the Reagan-Thatcher era, the name of the game was to ‘dress for success’, although this was the period which also spawned hip hop, rap, and its attendant anti-statusquo culture.
The contribution of black urban culture to the modern aesthetic remains underestimated.
The formerly reviled ghetto culture has now begun to be absorbed by fashion designers of the Nineties, who are discovering beauty in deals outside the white middle-class mainstream.
During the sterile Eighties, we overdosed on design and killed freedom of expression.
Too much chic!
Too much pseudointellectualism!
‘Designer’ black became the epitome of good taste: a defence against true style and protection for a multitude of sins.
It said: ‘I wear the perfect Comme des Garçons black suit, therefore I know all about fashion.’
The Bovril Babe is about style, not fashion slavery.
The growing do-it-yourself spirit does not make the fashion designer obsolete, but it does reject the instant ‘good taste’ acquired by the designer label.
Margiela uses a blank one — which ultimately will become a label in itself.
The Japanese ‘no name’ department store Muji, meanwhile, is fooling only the stupid with its supposed anti-label ethos.
The Bovril Babe does not deny sexuality, but challenges the relentless parade of tits and arse, which has dominated maintstream fashion in recent years.
(Witness the clutch of ‘Panned People’ adorning countless crap pop videos — the Bovril Babes have never dug George Michael!)
This is reflected in the non-conformist beauty of the unsupermodels — the leading Bovril muses.
Marie-Sophie, Orla, Sarah Murray and Hortensia de Hutten, the 47-year-old Margiela model, all exemplify the new breed.
These mannequins are not the glamourpusses of Vogue , but the strange girl next door of a Diane Arbus photograph.
They are certainly not ‘ugly’.
The Bovril Babes signal a revival in the genuine passion for clothing founded in individualism, romance, and mystery, not seen since the Seventies.
But making individualism for the masses is by definition self-defeating.
Beware of an opportunist rag trade beginning to sell you recycled clothing under the guise of social awareness.
A look, movement or philosophy may start energetically and idealistically, only to be killed off by hype.
Watch it happen.
The rich woman will buy the ‘complete look’ and summon its demise.
A look that typifies a decade is not usually established until its mid-years.
The elements of the new mood are starting to shape the look of the Nineties.
Having been accepted, absorbed, and then parodied, the precursors will move on, and a new ‘new mood’ adopted.
Hopefully, the spirit of self-expression will live on.
joking apart
From Eddie Murphy to Richard Pryor, black American comedians have established themselves in the comic maintstream.
A new wave of black British talent is now threatening to do the same — breaking out of a burgeoning club circuit and gearing up to colonise the nation's TV sets
Eddie Murphy prowls the stage of New York's Felt Forum, glowing with a vibrant, kinetic dynamism that captivates the full house of several thousand.
He spins out a sketch, builds anticipation, until finally, with a well-timed line and a choice epithet, he sets them free and they howl with laughter, heads rocking backwards and forward, forward and back…
On this occasion, Murphy's skill can only be admired visually, and the real force of his audience's response is only to be guessed at.
Here at Cabarave, east London's black comedy club, the video monitors replaying his classic stage show Raw are turned down — displaced by the sound of jokes told in real time and laughter that's live, spontaneous, uncanned.
Although the venue is hot and cramped, with a stage so small that audience and entertainers can stand nose to nose, clubbers cram in every week, straining its 300-person capacity.
Smart, well-dressed, mainly black, they're a good-time crowd out for a form of entertainment that's virtually impossible to find elsewhere in London on a regular basis — black comedy.
In recent months, Angie La Mar, Roger D, Ethnic and Minority and many other comics have played here — names which, although largely unknown to the mainstream, are guaranteed to sell out the night.
On stage, organiser Miles Crawford, who also hosts TV's black talent show The 291 Club , is warming up the crowd: ‘South London — south London, throw your hands in the air!’
Like a house party, the atmosphere at Cabarave is intimate and irreverent.
And just as important as the comedy is the sheer pleasure of participating in an event based exclusively upon the shared culture and identity of both performers and audience.
‘It's great, because we can laugh at ourselves here,’ says one club regular.
‘We can look at our culture in a very direct way, without worrying about whether it's positive or negative, what anyone else thinks, and we can really identify with it all.’
Backed by this popular demand, a black comedy scene is starting to emerge at clubs and one-off events across Britain.
‘It's got a way, way, way to go yet,’ admits Crawford.
‘But we're building the foundations here, making something happen.’
Yet, an indecently short time ago, comedy and race had quite a different relationship.
Sitcoms like Love Thy Neighbour, Till Death Us Do Part and Mind Your Language were stuffed to bursting with gags which operated on the principle that differences of colour or culture were an endless source of easy laughs.
And how they laughed.
Especially at the grand-daddy of all ‘funny black people’ programmes,The Black And White Minstrel Show , which, at its all-singing, all-dancing, blackface-'n-white-gloved, eye-rolling, lip-smacking, ‘Ol’Man River’— singing peak, drew an audience of 20 million.
(Although it was finally axed in 1978, a new live stage show promising more of That Old Minstrel Magic opens this month in Bristol.)
By contrast, the all-black comedies created to ‘redress the balance’ of TV's negative stereotypes — such as The Fosters, No Problem!and more recently Desmonds — never achieved similar figures.
But then, the turf was always uneven.
Weighed down by the burden of representing all of black experience in a half-hour sitcom, most perished after a few series.
It's from live events, not TV, that today's black comics have emerged.
In the late-Eighties, stage plays imported direct from Jamaica — wicked Rabelasian farces like Ragamuffin and Boops — brought substantial black audiences to the theatre for the first time.
Theatres such as Deptford's Albany Empire, west London's Tabernacle and, principally, east London's Hackney Empire began to hold tentative, one-off black comedy nights — events aimed at gauging demand, and also nurturing the talent to meet it.
Out of these shows have come successes such as The 291 Club , which aspires to the status of America's Live At The Apollo ; comedians Curtis and Ishmael, hosts of Paramount City ; and The Real McCoy , TV's black sketch show.
But the heart of the scene is still in live performance, where there's a diverse range of performers including ‘womanist’ comic Angie Le Mar, iconoclastic quintet They Wouldn't, and Leo Chester, the comedian who's also a member of black Muslim organisation, the Nation of Islam.
‘What's the point in a term like black comedy, anyway?’ asks Suzette Llewelyn of seven-woman comedy group the Bibi Crew.
‘It gives the  impression that there's only one sort of comedy for one sort of people.
What do, say, Yoruba, Ghanaian, Jamaican, Trinidadian and African-American humour have in common?
Not much — so there can't just be a term like black comedy to describe all that.’
Formed this spring, in a bid to break down such oversimplifications, the members of the Bibi Crew are all experienced performers — including actress Judith Jacob (Carmel in EastEnders ) and Janet Kay, singer of lover's rock anthem ‘Silly Games’.
Frustrated at the limited roles offered to black actresses, they produced On A Level , a revue-style show ‘which gave us a chance to express ourselves as artists, not stereotypes’.
‘Out of the same racist experiences have come Richard Pryor, Eddie Murphy, Lenny Henry, because we as black people have always used comedy as a liberating force’
Independently, eight similarly high-profile, equally frustrated male actors formed into the Posse, whose own sketch-show Armed And Dangerous packed out London's Theatre Royal Stratford East.
For both groups, comedy was the obvious medium with which to reach a wide audience.
Says Brian Bovell of the Posse: ‘I remember when I was growing up in Tottenham in the Sixties, how my mum and dead dealt with potentially scary, racist situations — they found dignity through humour.
Out of those same experiences have come Richard Pryor, Eddie Murphy, Lenny Henry, because we as black people have always used comedy as a liberating force.’
And free from society's normal constraints, comedy is also the perfect vehicle to tackle ordinarily taboo subjects.
At the height of their crowd-pleasing, knockabout show, the Posse perform Romeo And Julian , a sketch in which Shakespeare's lovers become two gay black men, whose relationship is doomed by the endemic homophobia of Britain's black community.
Audience reaction is extreme.
There are shouts of abuse, yells of ‘Die!
Die!
Kill ‘em!
Kill ‘em!’
Bovell explains that the point of the scene is to say ‘Look at yourselves.
You're not being talked to by the mainstream now, but by us who you grew up with.
Look at the situation and see how you read!’
BLACK MUSLIMS FROM the Nation of Islam are gathered in force outside the Hackney Empire.
Dressed in well-cut suits, and hats that cover shaven heads, they hawk copies of their newspaper,The Final Call , and hand out petitions calling for Louis Farrakhan's right to enter Britain.
Inside, a seven-year-old child is raising a storm of cheers.
‘It's time for revolution, brothers and sisters — revolution!’ yells boy-preacher I'endeh Baptist, eyebrows furrowed, staring intently ahead.
The applause crescendos, as if the boy is really present, and not simply broadcast from a video tape of an American Nation of Islam meeting.
A crash of thunder and lightning follows.
Then, intoning ‘Malak a salaam ’— Arab words of welcome — Leo Chester walks on stage.
Around his neck is a gold, Sphinx-head pendant and on his right hand a ring in the shape of the Arabic crescent moon and star.
‘Greetings beloved, my name is Jesus [crowd laughs].
Oh, you're laughing?
Well I'm quite angry.
It clearly says in the scriptures about Jesus: ‘His head is like lamb's wool, his feet like burnished brass.’
Which is like my hair and skin.
So I want to know who this is?
[Holds up an idealised portrait of Jesus with blond hair and blue eyes.]
Jesus was a black man, not this pale one they give us in church!
[Loud applause.]’
If none of that sounds particularly funny, it's because it's not supposed to be.
Closer to Monty Python than Eddie Murphy, five-strong They Wouldn't join the Ministry of Silly Poses (above) before baring their comic credentials (left)
Hard-hitting humorist Leo Chester contemplates why he's still not the son of God (opposite page)
This isn't conventional stand-up comedy, it's ‘edutainment’— part comic monologue, part history lecture-cum-sermon.
Performances last for over three hours, no smoking or drinking is allowed, and each one has sold out the 700-seater Hackney Empire.
‘Black people are the original people of the Earth, no one could exist on the planet without us and we must wake up, to struggle and do what we have to do to come into power,’ announces Chester, striding across the stage, as the audience cheers.
And if there's an irony in draping such serious words in the trappings of comedy, he's unwilling to acknowledge any.
The medium, for Chester, is merely the means to an end: ‘When we take over the theatre, we create an atmosphere so charged with positivity that people leave feeling uplifted.
They go in to have a laugh and they come out feeling they can change the world.’
‘WE'RE ALWAYS LOOKING to do that thing which makes people stop and say, ‘No!
They wouldn't!’ because we always will,’says Paul Nathan, explaining the name of five-strong, mixed-gender group They Wouldn't.
True to their word, the troupe perform a joyously irreverent show called Oops Uranus , which owes more to Monty Python and Carry On than Murphy or Pryor.
Like the Posse's Romeo And Julian , they too feature a gay love sketch.
But whereas, in the former, the lovers are effete, foppish and ultimately doomed, in They Wouldn't's Gay Yardie routine, the characters Rupert and Denzel are ‘two rough-up, ragamuffin characters’ who exit the stage arm in arm and very much alive, leaving the audience with no option but to confront their own prejudices.
Rupert: ‘I missed you man, I was lonely without you.’
Denzel: ‘Well, jus cool y'self, cos I'm back now y'hear.
And I bring back the livin' herbs, some overproof rum, some italvital dubplates and some duty-free ribbed condoms.
So come, let's go.’
Such frankness has meant the group are unofficially blacklisted from certain venues, both black and white.
‘We expect opposition,’ says dreadlocked troupe member Fox, ‘because we're dealing with a bigger picture than the odd jokes about West Indian parents.
What we're about is a redefinition of black identity.’
Following that principle, Fox will be open about his own bisexuality during the show and, bravely — given the intolerance of some black audiences, invite a response from the crowd.
‘Last time,’ he grins, ‘one guy said, ‘I just kissed a man for the first time and it felt good.’
The whole house was like ‘Yeah, gwan!’
As a further, perhaps ultimate gesture of their openness, They Wouldn't strip naked in their closing sketch.
‘It's about throwing away our inhibitions,’ says Paul Nathan.
‘After all, what could be more honest, more stripped-down performance-wise, than just getting plain butt-naked?’
‘People leave my shows feeling uplifted.
They go in to have a laugh and they come out feeling they can change the world’
‘I WANT TO TALK ABOUT black comedy on TV — I won't be long.’
Angie La Mar smiles wryly at her own joke.
After six years working up a polished stage show and building a loyal fan base, she's all too aware of the scene's limitations.
‘There's so many of us out there and we're getting a lot of exposure, but we're not moving.
It gets to the stage where you think, I'm good.
I've done my dues, now give me a TV show, or at least a guest appearance somewhere.’
Inspired by Joan Rivers and Whoopi Goldberg, La Mar's acerbic routines are concerned with the inequality of male-female relations.
Performing live, La Mar shrinks into herself, pitches her voice higher and allows her lower lip to sag.
‘We fight.
Well, I don't fight, he beats me up — it's my fault, I provoke him.
I ask him stupid things like, ‘Where have you been for the past six months?’
He said he needed space, so I moved out of my flat.’
TV exposure, though, continues to elude her.
At present, black comedy's screen coverage is limited to The Real McCoy — whose shaky sets and second-rate scripts hinder the scene's advancement as much as the very presence of the show helps it.
Produced properly, argues La Mar, it could have formed the sort of entry into the mainstream that The Comic Strip Presents …first gave to alternative comedy.
‘Everybody's saying that black comedy is the next big thing, because it's something strong and different — but unless we do something ourselves, it's not going to happen at all.’
With only small amounts of money changing hands, a limited number of dedicated venues, and, if it were to restrict itself solely to black audiences, a finite number of punters, the black comedy scene is clearly still in its infancy.
But what makes those involved remain optimistic is the number, and talent, of the performers who've emerged in the past two years.
Comics such as Marcus Simmons, Roger D, Stereo ‘n’ Type, Ethnic and Minority, Jefferson and Whitfield.
Among these, it's Roger D who seems most likely to find wider success.
His rambling sketches, delivered in a casual, off-hand manner, belie an acute sense of timing: ‘White people hate how we walk — especially when we cross the road.
Black guy's walking, taking his time crossing the street, traffic is piling up.
White guy's getting pissed off in his car.
It's like when you hear on the news that there's been a threemile pile-up on the M1.
It's no pile-up — it's just a black guy crossing the road.’
Earlier this year, D became the first comedian to fight his way to the final of the notoriously tough 291 Club .
Its organisers, the Hackney Empire, were impressed enough to suggest he return, as host of the 289 Club — their new black comedy talent night, held at a pub next door to the Empire.
The intention, says D, is to nurture new performers and broaden the scene's support base: ‘It's up to us, the established people, to bring this thing further and then for the next wave to strengthen it even more.’
A decade ago, the alternative comedy scene looked puny next to the mainstream.
Now it is the mainstream.
Britain's black comics are hoping to follow that example — by ploughing an independent path — building their own support base and establishing their own venues.
‘It's always the case of black people having to go mainstream to be accepted, instead of us doing our shit how we wanna do it and them coming over and taking a look,’ says Roger D. ‘We're doing it for ourselves now.
If we practise and wait, eventually they'll have to come to us.’
legal highs
The dangers of Ecstasy are becoming more apparent.
The pills on sale are increasingly impure, leading to nausea or worse.
Arrests are increasing, and sentences are harsh.
But what are the legal alternatives?
The human species has three innate drives — we need sustenance, shelter and species reproduction.
In this book Intoxication , Californian psychopharmacologist Ronald Siegel claims humans may have a fourth primary instinct — we need to get high, to change the way that we feel by artificial needs.
There is good evidence in support of his claim.
All human societies have used some form of intoxicating drug (except eskimos, apparently).
Despite many attempts to link drug use with social deprivation, the association is spurious.
It's just that the poor get caught more often.
Look at Elvis, he had everything that a man could desire, looks, talent, wealth — but after he'd eaten all the cheeseburgers he could swallow, when he got bored chasing young girls in white panties, how did he spend his time?
Recreational drug use is bigger today than it was in the Sixties, but enthusiasm for Ecstasy may be starting to wane.
People have begun to notice that the initial pleasure can give way to spiritual and psychological disruption.
Fear about the impact of Ecstasy on health is growing.
Some 20 people have died after taking E in the UK over the last two years.
Other problems associated with the drug are still emerging.
Doctors have discovered an association between Ecstasy use and disturbance in liver function.
Other experts fear for the future — MDMA damages nerve terminals in rats and monkeys, and there is a strong possibility that it causes similar damage in humans.
Personally, I'm bored with feeling so nice every Saturday night.
As a society, our attitude to intoxication is based on a double standard.
Certain intoxicants are culturally approved, and therefore acceptable.
Alcohol and tobacco inflict great harm on individual health and have a high social cost.
Yet the dealers are respected members of the community.
Cannabis dealers, on the other hand, make far less money and can end up in prison.
In order to save law-abiding FACE readers from a possible prison sentence, I decided to investigate some of the legal highs that are available.
There might well be all kinds of exotic drugs as yet undiscovered and uncontrolled.
If I could just discover one, and come up with a catchy marketing phrase like ‘Turn on, Tune in, Drop out’, I might well become the next Timothy Leary.
My search began after reading a piece in the Daily Sport .
Following an article in which drug experts warn that dog worming tablets and water oxygenating pills are being passed off as Ecstasy, there was a half-page advertisement.
‘New legal buzz takes the country's raves by storm.
Europe's top glamour model launches safe rave tabs.’
Safe rave tabs — could this be what I'm looking for?
‘Trine Micheson, ex-Miss Denmark and currently Europe's top glamour model, is set to smash the drug culture that is destroying so many young lives today.
Lives have been wrecked by evil designer drugs such as Ecstasy, but at last a healthy, legal alternative with the same buzz is now available in raves up and down the country.
Incredibly, these little pills of pleasure are totally legal and actually good for you.’
Trine's testimonial was highly persuasive.
‘Make no mistake, Love Hearts have kick (sic).
The rush comes on in five minutes, lasts for an hour, and you're buzzin' and still going for hours.’
The effects of a drug are dependent upon the relationship of three factors — the pharmacological properties of the drug, the mental state of the drug user, and the setting in which the drug is taken.
In order to give Love Hearts a fair trial.
I decided I should try them at a rave.
After all, the price was right.
As the advert said, ‘The average price of a tab of Ecstasy is £15 — yet Love Hearts cost only £4.95 for a packet of three — just one tenth of the designer drug equivalent.’
Bt Saturday night, I had grown somewhat wary about the ex-Miss Denmark's claims.
I was even starting to wonder if she really was Europe's top glamour model.
The pink, heart-shaped pills came in foil packets that listed the ingredients.
Nicotinic acid, cellulose, lucerne, yellow dock, plantain, lapacoho, guarana, caffeine, cornsilk, cloves.
The active ingredients were 50mg of caffeine and 300mg of nicotinic acid (Vitamin B3).
Perhaps they might be good for you after all?
I began asking people if they knew anything about them.
One girl told me that though she had never taken them herself, her friend had tried them and turned bright orange.
Later, I met three teenage lads from Blackburn: Colin, Neil and Stephen.
They had each taken three that night.
They had bought them in the local sex shop in the hope of saving the money they would normally spend on E. So what were they like?
They looked a bit sheepish as they answered.
‘They come on in a kind of rush, then you like, glow all over.
A glow all over your body — like central heating for kids.’
Well, they had each taken three and they weren't dead yet.
Perhaps Trine was telling the truth and Love Hearts were being taken at raves all over the country.
When one clubber was taken to hospital following an Ecstasy-induced fit at a rave in Southport, I decided that Trine was right about something else: Ecstasy is dangerous.
Time to go for it.
The safest way to test any unknown substance is to start with a low dose and gradually increase it.
It's very easy to put drugs inside your body, but very difficult to take them out again.
Removal usually involves inconvenient trips to the hospital, tubes in the stomach, that sort of thing.
Anyway, we started low.
A friend and I took one tablet apiece.
For 20 minutes, nothing happened.
We sat around, waiting for the caffeine to hit.
Then, the surface of my skin began to get hotter and hotter.
We went into the foyer to check each other out in the light and relative quiet.
Our skins had turned bright red all over.
My lips felt engorged, there was a ringing in my ears, and I could feel the blood pumping around the veins in my head.
After an hour, the sensations began to subside.
The effect wasn't uplifting, it was simply unpleasant.
There was no effect on my mind at all, but my body felt as though it had been in the sun too long.
On a scale of one to ten with ten representing normality and one representing having your teeth pulled out without an anaesthetic, I'd say Love Hearts rated about a four.
I managed to trick four or five other people into trying the pills, just to verify my own experience.
They all agreed.
Vile.
It's very easy to put drugs inside your body, but very difficult to take them out again.
Removal usual involves inconvenient trips to the hospital, tubes in the stomach, that sort of thing
STILL, I WASN'T ABOUT to give up.
Love Hearts might be a cynical attempt to rip off the drug-obsessed rave scene, but there must be a host of other legal substances that might do the trick.
While my skin was burning away in the foyer of the Floral Hall, I fell into conversation with some lads from North Wales.
After explaining the nature of my quest, they told me about their own favourite legal high.
Potter's Herbal Cigarettes are a smoking preparation made from stramonium.
My new companions break up the cigarettes, and make tea with the herb.
They claimed that drinking the tea gave them an intense, trip-like experience.
I gave that idea short shrift.
I don't want an intense, triplike experience, thank you.
Besides, I already know about stramonium.
It is derived from a plant called Datura that European witches used to make into a psychedelic ointment.
They would apply it to the mucus membrane of their vagina using a broomstick.
The high that resulted produced sensations of flying, often accompanied by fantastic visions of strange lands.
It was probably this practice that gave rise to the popular image of witches flying on broomsticks.
In America, the Datura plant is better known as Jimson Weed or Loco Weed.
Who wants to be the Timothy Leary of Loco Weed?
I had a much better idea — Khat.
Khat is the Ecstasy of the Yemen.
Some experts claim that it is addictive.
Which might explain why the people of the Yemen spend a third of the gross national product on the vegetable-like drug.
The whole country stops work at one o'clock.
People gather for their daily chew.
It is a social ritual, somewhat akin to a few drinks after work.
There have also been reports of psychosis following overuse.
I hit home at a Liverpool city centre newsagent.
At first, the shopkeeper looked perplexed.
‘No, I haven't got a cat.’
After she finally twigged, she went downstairs into the shop's cellar, and returned bearing half a tree.
‘This is Yemeni Khat.
On Saturdays, we get Ethiopian Khat.
The Ethiopian is more powerful — you can sleep on the Yemeni, but Ethiopian keeps you awake all night!.’
Apparently, a whole drug subculture exists under our noses but is completely invisible.
Khat has to be fresh in order to work, so the shop gets a delivery every day.
Moderate strength for the weekdays, and the heavy-duty gear for a Saturday night.
I made a wad out of the young leaves and twigs and tried to masticate slowly.
It tasted like a privet hedge.
Seconds later, I had a mouthful of pulverised leaves.
I spat it out and tried again.
This time, I took a more substantial amount.
After positioning the wad in my cheek I sat around waiting for the hit, feeling smug with my new-found anthropological skills.
The hit comes on in a rush.
A couple of hours of amphetamine-like stimulation is followed by a laid-back, introspective period.
This drug actually works.
The sensation is similar to a small dose of amphetamine.
I felt stimulated — mentally alert, talkative and sociable.
The main problem was the constant stream of bright green saliva that I was expectorating every minute or two.
Yemeni homes and cafés provide a spittoon for this purpose.
I wonder if it will catch on here, and fantasise about enormous Khat raves all over the country: ‘Mastication — featuring DJ Chewing Tunes and MC Yorker, 100K lasers, 60K sound system, gyroscopes, brain machines, Yemeni massage and solid silver spittoons.’
Sadly, there are a number of reasons why Khat is unlikely to catch on.
Imagine how club bouncers would react to finding a bundle of Khat during a door search.
And when you're trying to impress the opposite sex, a foot-long bundle of foliage might just not cut it.
Bored with the enterprise, I decided to give up.
There is an enormous range of substances that people can use in order to change the way that they feel, but the safest and most reliable ones, the drugs that have stood the test of time, have all been made illegal.
The experience forced me to think about our drug policies.
I wonder just how it is that the Daily Sport can advertise and sell Love Hearts, while youths who get caught selling counterfeit Es get arrested and charged with deception or ‘going equipped to cheat’?
I wonder why the newspapers get hysterical over 20 deaths attributed to Ecstasy, when two kids die every week as a result of sniffing solvents?
Why can the tobacco industry still advertise their products, while cannabis, one of the safest drugs known to man, still remains illegal?
Drug laws are shaped by vested economic interest, and the real reason that some drugs remain illegal is to allow the law to intervene in the lives of those the state perceives as threatening.
But where there's a will, there's a way.
Even if the state does manage to stem the supply of a particular drug completely, people will always find a substitute — except it may be more dangerous than the original drug.
Personally, I'm off to the chemist to buy myself a bottle of Gee's Linctus (active ingredient; tincture of opium).
Go to Boots.
Spend a pound.
Throw up!
living the lo life
B-boys go preppy!
Brooklyn's Polo cult is growing, but Ralph Lauren isn't always getting paid…
Anti-clockwise from above: at home with a Lo Lifer — respect to Ice Cube and Polo's teddy bear logo; Superia's album charts his penchant for Lauren gear; straight outta the Ivy League — Brooklyners Anthony, Danny and Superia doff the godfather of prep; graffiti on the projects
Opposite: a ‘customer’— Lo Lifers sell on the stuff they've ‘boosted’ from Ralph Lauren shops to, usually younger, Polo aficionados, who often graduate to stealing themselves
‘It's got the horse, baby, it's got the horse!
Look at the horse, baby, the horse is saying a lot…’
What is the horse saying, exactly?
Ralph Lauren's trademark steed certainly isn't speaking the same language on a bootleg shirt here on a Brooklyn market stall as it is on Manhatten's Upper East Side.
There, in someone's misbegotten idea of an English country house, sits the flagship of a worldwide, 145- store empire worth an estimated $3 billion, and built on America's nagging class insecurity.
The company founded by Ralph Lauren in 1967 traffics in all manner of hunting, fishing, nautical, equestrian and golfing-themed clothes for Americans who still look to the mythical British Empire for their cultural cues.
(The apex of this Wasp aesthetic is probably George Bush relaxing at his weekend retreat in Maine.)
With adverts exclusively featuring models of European stock, Lauren continues to prosper by bucking the multicultural signs of the times.
But when a group of black kids from Brooklyn adopted Lauren's Polo line of apparel, they gave a new reading to his class/race code.
Like the Eighties terrace tearaways in Britain who showed up for the match in Barbour jackets and deerstalkers, these B- boys were appropriating the ruling class style and parading it with a sardonic grin.
Brooklyn's Polo cult originated largely in the Crown Heights section of the borough, at the corner of Utica and St John's Avenues.
Back in 1983–84, around 20 or 30 individuals styled themselves the Polo Posse — later Lo Lifes — setting out to steal (‘boost’) Ralph Lauren gear to wear, and resell to the growing number of black kids turning from the B-boy aesthetic to the preppy look, going from LL Cool J to LL Bean.
(The Lo Lifes' neighbouring gang the Deceptions were meanwhile terrorising entire subway cars with hammers.)
‘A lot of people from Manhatten are wearin' Lo now.
It used to be a Brooklyn thing, but now there's kids who use the name and try to make up their own little Lo Life thing.
That's not fresh, that's not cool — they just usin' it like it was a slang word’
And despite the recent rise of Girbaud's logocentric Eurotrash look and Cross Colours' Lego sensibility, the Polo cult continues to grow.
Many Brooklyn high school kids carefully copy Ralph Lauren's faux -heraldic crests on to their book bags alongside the name ‘Lo Life’.
Everybody, it seems, wants a slice of the action; lately there have been sightings of Lo Life graffiti in Philadelphia, Pittsburg, Virginia, even South Carolina.
Which means big trouble for the originators.
AT THE CORNER OF Utica and St John's, Grand Puba's single ‘360 Degrees’ pumps from a parked car while a handful of youths hang out by the kerb.
Down here it's strictly hardcore and, as EPMD say, you can keep the crossover: local heroes Das EFX have, along with dancehall reggae, done much to take hip hop back underground.
A couple of years ago this crowd would have been in Ralph Lauren from head to toe, but today there's a mixture of Guess, Nautica, Tommy Hilfiger (‘Tommy got the colours’), Fila and even Duck Head, an obscure Southern prep-wear firm.
The Polo gear on display features, instead of‘cookies’(the horse and rider logo), Lauren's stars and stripes designs, images of hearty outdoorsmen, and his new teddy bear (!) logo.
With a confusing number of Lo Life impersonators causing havoc around New York, this is, unfortunately, where people come looking for payback.
The Utica/St John's posse denies, however, that it ever had any kind of gang affiliation or that the current troublemakers are connected with them.
‘If we was into that shit, you wouldn't be able to stand on this corner with us like this, you'd get killed,’ points out one former member, who declines to identify himself.
‘All these young knuckleheads are wearin' back packs and Polo gear, goin' through stores snatchin' chains, cuttin' people and shit, sayin' ‘We Lo Life’,’ growls Jazz, a Lo Life acolyte.
‘I'm only 22 but I feel like an old man sometimes when I see what these little kids are doin',’ says Superia, a three-year Lo Life veteran.
‘They're doin' the type of violence we wasn't even thinkin' of at that age, takin' guns to school and all that.
These kids are 13, 14, and they wanna be down with somethin'.
We've been out so long that we've made a name for ourselves, we got props [respect].
So now they wanna use those props for negative things.’
The name's certainly getting around.
as if it wasn't enough to see discredited Lo Life Boostin' Kev trying to make a record about the posse, Superia nearly went ballistic when he saw Harlem R&B/rap group Zhigge shouting ‘Lo Life in tha house!’ on stage.
For chrissakes!
Uptown is still into Timberland and those wack Pelle Pelle $700 coloured leathers.
It turned out, though, that one band member, Prancer, is from East Flatbush, Brooklyn, and got the rest of Zhigge into it.
‘A lot of people from Manhatten are wearin' Low now,’ says Prancer.
‘It used to be a Brooklyn thing; that's how Brooklyn used to stand out.
But now there's kids who use the name and try to make up their own little Lo Life thing.
That's not fresh, that's not cool, 'cause that's exploiting the name.
They just usin' it like it was a slang word.’
Ironically, these kids are doing to the Lo Life name what the real Lo Lifers themselves do to Ralph Lauren's — using its status for their own ends.
Superia, though, denies any violent intent towards these groupies.
‘I'm too old to be resentin' things like that,’ he shrugs.
Instead, the Lo Lifes reserve their vitriol for Ralph Lauren himself.
They interpret his promotion of the Wasp aesthetic as excluding blacks and other minorities.
‘I do it for two reasons,’ affirms Superia.
‘Because I like the fashion, and because I'm an activist for what I believe in.
I hate people that are prejudiced against any races.
We're taking money out of his pockets.
We're saying, ‘Fuck you’ to this rich, white millionaire.’
Still, the Lo Life is beginning to lose its allure for many of the faithful.
As his crew starts to fragment, seeking bigger rewards on either side of the law, Superia is looking to his studio engineering course and his rapping for escape.
‘I'm a fashion type,’ he reflects, ‘but I would never raise my kid wearing any brand names.
Times are bad but they're gonna get worse…’
WE HOP A SUBWAY across Brooklyn to Brownsville in search of some ‘old heads’, the Lo Life pioneers whose names are spoken with awe in these parts.
This isn't a good time, though, because September marked the start of the lucrative winter season for serious boosters.
The likes of Rak Lo, Hec Lo, Ralph Lo and G- George are among the faces who originally put Ralph Lauren on the map of Brooklyn, but they're probably on field trips to New Jersey, Philadelphia and upstate New York looking for Lauren's $600 down jackets and parkas.
The Lo Life is beginning to lose its allure for many of the faithful.
‘I'm a fashion type, but I would never raise my kid wearing any brand names.
Times are bad but they're gonna get worse’
Ski shows up but is reluctant to talk to the press after a New York Daily News story labelled him and his friends ‘reformed gang members’.
Big Boo, however, goes back further than most, and he's happy to reminisce about the old days.
‘It goes back to ‘83, ‘84,’ he explains.
‘We started off on Izod, Lacoste shit when we was in school.
But then we stole one Polo shirt and that was it .
After a few fat years, store security tightened up and Boo ended up doing a stint in the big house.
‘That slowed me up a little bit.
I'm gettin' too old for that — it's been ten years, time for me to chill.
‘The system ain't fair no more,’ continues the 24-year-old.
‘Before when I was boostin' it was shoplifting, misdemeanour, doin' 90 days — nowadays it's robbery one, and attempted assault if you get caught with a razor.
We use razors to cut blunts [cigars]open and smoke some weed.
That means time , baby.’
THE FOLLOWING NIGHT , down in the Lower East Side's garment district, a few dozen B-boys huddle round a cassette deck in a threadbare rehearsal room.
This is the Lyricist Lounge, where twice a month aspiring rappers run new rhymes past each other in something that's closer to an old school jam than to videogenic 1992 hip hop.
Much of the talent comes from the fiercely competitive world of hip hop dancing: Snakeyes, the Funky Apprentices and Short Cut all show promise, but the star turn is Stretch, a dancer for Ce Ce Peniston and the choreographer on Michael Jackson's ‘Remember The Time’ video.
Sitting back and taking it all in is another former hip hop dancer, Moet Lo, who lost his Wall Street messenger job when his firm discovered his penchant for the five-finger discount at Polo stores.
Moet reckons the wannabes (or ‘customers’) haven't only stirred up trouble, but have spoiled a good thing with their inept boosting methods.
‘A lot of guys out there now don't know that you gotta have the timing and planning for this stuff, and they just go and do it on the spur of the moment and get caught.’
Thus, the JanSport backpacks which were once Lo Life standard issue are now widely derided, as Moet and his friends turn to more sophisticated techniques: ‘The way me and my friends do it now is to wear a suit and tie like we was just comin' from work, and carry a travel bag to carry another suit.
They don't know what's hit ‘em.’
Although he's still boosting big time, Moet's main aim is to start a club with a couple of his Lyricist Lounge partners, including Danny Castro.
An 18-year-old Brooklyn native, Castro favours Guess himself, but sees the Ralph Lauren boom continuing unabated.
‘Everybody's getting into Fila for the winter, and I'm startin' to see some Giorgio Armani, but it's still gotta be Lauren.
And if you come out with something nobody has, you'll get props for it.
So they go to Vermont, down south, all over.
This girl just told me about this Polo factory outlet up near Canada…you can get a $200 knitted sweater for, like $20 — that's outrageous!’
With prices like that, it's a steal.
Sister Love
The Sisters of Perpetual Indulgence are an order of gay male nuns founded in San Francisco in 1978 ‘to spread universal joy and expiate guilt’.
The British chapter was founded three years ago, and has made its presence felt in various ways, although they emphasise that ‘We're terribly shy and retiring — we'd hate to think anyone felt we like drawing attention to ourselves.’
They have, however, put on their habits for various demos, vogued onstage at an Edinburgh Larks In The Park festival, dominated the dancefloor at Sign Of The Times parties, made Derek Jarman a saint, performed weddings, house blessings and baptisms, and now granted THE FACE a nihil obstat.
Usually, this is granted to publications written by the clergy and approved by the church — in our case, it was awarded for services to the lesbian and gay community, and for generally being a good magazine.
In an entertaining yet moving ceremony, seven nuns exorcised the pain of the last year and the demon of censorship from the office, presented us with a certificate, and sang their hymn ‘Amazing Pride’, as well as turning at least one staff member's face a fetching shade of red with some well-placed innuendo.
They also offered a few words of comfort to those who may have been encouraged by the church to believe their lifestyles were sinful: ‘We can assure lesbians and gays of heaven.
In fact, it's almost compulsory’.
TEN MINUTES IN THE MIND OF Q&A colin angus
Who is Ebeneezer Goode and do you think he understands that the song concerns him?
I can't name names, but the song concerns a series of people who'd recognise themselves in there if they examined the lyrics.
They include a club promoter, at least one DJ and at least two dancers who've been associated with the scene we've been involved with for the last few years
Have you always enjoyed comedy records?
I've always liked amusing pop records.
I remember buying a record by Bernard Cribbins and one by the Turtles in a Battle Of The Bands series.
With ‘Ebeneezer Goode’ we wanted to express our own sense of humour through the track.
There's actually another comedy track on our new album, but it hasn't got any lyrics
What would you do if someone sampled your records?
On the Utah Saints track with Kate Bush on it, I recognised drum patterns from ‘Pro-Gen’.
We didn't take any action because I take the fact that someone else uses part of your song as a compliment really.
Look at how many times Kraftwerk have been sampled and they've never done anything about it.
I'd only really think about taking action if someone completely ripped off one of our songs and made heaps of money from it
Have you ever broken the law?
I've ridden a bike up a oneway street once, but I didn't get caught
When did you last use your LSI on someone?
A week ago in Peru!
I was a holiday of sorts taking in the Amazon and rainforests.
That was the last time I used my LSI because I've actually been ill since I got back — a touch of the Peruvian tummy-bug, which has put things out of the question ever since
Have you learned to cope with the loss of Will?
I've been given a lot of support from fans, especially letters written to me nearer the time.
Also there's been friends and people around me that have helped make things easier.
I've now come to realise that physically Will is no longer around, although I still like to think that I can feel his presence in other ways
Do you believe in God or a higher power?
I'm not really sure.
I believe in a mysterious thing called ‘the other’, to use Terence McKenna's words.
But planetary consciousness is something I definitely do believe in, in that I believe the planet is an organism in itself
Do you really hate being asked about drugs in interviews?
It has become a bit tiresome of late.
I was interviewed recently and I mentioned the long-term effects of being asked about drugs in interviews.
It's bad for your health
Do you still get a buzz from rave culture?
Rave culture itself has become separate from other more progressive aspects.
I still think the culture has a positive potential, being one of the most powerful forms of youth culture and entertainment since punk and even since the Sixties.
But what has happened with the more commercial manifestations of rave don't interest me.
I think many of the worst aspects of rock have now resurfaced in rave: the macho, aggressive energy.
It's predominantly young guys, tattooed, with their shirts off.
Musically, what originally attracted me to dance was its shamanist aspects, using natural magic to change people's neurological states and to psychologically empower them.
Today the music lacks imagination, to say the least
What books have given you most pleasure recently?
The last two I've read, both by Terence McKenna:Food Of The Gods and the more speculative Archaic Revival .
There's a convergence of a lot of intense ideas, particularly surrounding the psychedelic, evolution and the apocalypse itself.
It was quite refreshing to see and read that someone else saw these things and could articulate them in a better and more entertaining way than I could
Do you ever regret giving up your job as a psychiatric nurse?
No!
I'd have ended up a patient if I'd done it for much longer.
It's really not the thing to do as a career.
It didn't give me a positive attitude to psychiatric care or the regime in the National Health Service at all What do you fear most for the future?
The thing I most welcome — the apocalypse
What gives you the greatest cause for optimism?
The belief that human life will continue to survive and also the apocalypse we'll have to go through.
Unfortunately, I'll probably be at the end of my life when it happens
What pop groups  do  you most despise?
Of the current pop stuff, I can't understand why the formula PWL tracks exist at all.
But it's rock music that I despise most of all
What would you say to Fergie if you sat next to her on an aeroplane?
I'd say — the last time I saw an arse as big as yours, it was in the Grand National
Have you ever fallen in love with somebody you shouldn't have?
I've only ever really and truly fallen in love once and I didn't manage to make it last, so that probably was the person
Where did Mr C go for his rap lessons?
I'm not sure if he went to an established rap school, although it's more likely that he's a self-taught man.
Colin Angus was talking to Lee Harpin 
The Shamen's album, ‘Boss Drum’, is out now.
On October 5, they release a limited-edition eight-track ‘Face EP’ featuring specially remixed versions of ‘LSI’, ‘Ebeneezer Goode’and two album tracks as a final fundraising effort for THE FACE