

letters
Blunt object I was interested to note that your November cover star Marky Mark is apparently something of a born-again cockney, a fact betrayed perhaps by the self-descriptive rhyming slang on the front of his baseball cap…
The real meaning of his ‘Phillies Blunt’ cap was revealed on p 30 of the same issue
Black chat Having never read your magazine until FACE 49, I was pleasantly surprised at how many features were about black people.
Britain has one of the largest black populations in the Western world, yet magazines seem to try to appeal only to the white mainstream.
How refreshing to find a magazine which has no prejudices.
Flying high Concerning your piece on Flying's weekly night at the Arena, Middlesbrough (FACE 49).
When you visit a club, why not ask the views of people who actually know something about the place and not some ageing promoter who only visits it once a month?
To say that the crowd is ‘learning fast’ implies that before Flying arrived they had some catching up to do — which is not true.
Quality DJs from all over the country have been coming to Middlesbrough for the last couple of years, including London DJs who are now returning through the Flying organisation.
Also Li'l Louis played recently, and the atmosphere that night rivalled any club in the country.
Decked The vast majority of events offer club-goings nothing but the same laborious DJ line-ups.
For the past year, every flyer concerning hardcore/techno nights has featured the same line-up, and it's become very tedious.
We seem to have a breed of unadventurous promoters who can only offer us the likes of Grooverider and Carl Cox, making it difficult for talented newcomers to get the break they deserve.
I am a loyal follower of (in my opinion) one of the country's most talented, innovative and under-rated DJs — Nipper.
By rights this guy should be alongside the big names of the scene; technically he is a wizard.
There are many others like him, lurking in the background when they should be centre stage.
So, a word to the sponsors — we're bored!
Give the new faces a chance!
Clobbered Thank you for one of your funniest features for quite a while (‘Fashion Police’, FACE 49).
Check the fashion student who has obviously been far too heavily influenced by the recent Abba revival — Benny goes porno!
Plus the young Catriona who designs and makes all her own clothes (you're kidding!) and informs us that leather trousers have been around for ‘two or three years now’.
That long!
The idea of Jim Morrison in a pair of black cotton slacks doesn't quite have the same ring, does it?
Nice one.
Croaking it As my article ‘Legal Highs’(FACE 49) was so subjective, I knew somebody was going to take issue with it.
(Why has he only given magic mushrooms four for euphoria, when Collis Brownes gets five?)
Still, I have to admit, I didn't expect anybody to make a case for the inclusion of the Cane Toad (Letters, FACE 50).
Unfortunately, the Cane Toad doesn't warrant inclusion, because anybody who scrapes the skin off the toad would find themselves in possession of a substance called Bufotenine, which happens to be listed as a Class A drug under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971.
Just because nobody actually wants to use a drug that hops around on two legs, croaking, it doesn't mean that you can't get nicked for it.
High on life?
Could you try to contradict yourself a little less?
FACE 49, page 19: ‘Perfect for the post-party comedown: spliff up, chill out and get One Dove on them gramaphones’.
Then on page 27, regarding the club Renaissance: ‘Perfected by the absence of people eager to discuss their drug intake with you.’
In ‘Legal Highs’[same issue], your reporter spends the whole evening discussing his [legal]‘drug intake’.
I agree that E-heads nabbing your drinks and fags all night are the bane of most decent clubbers' lives, but try to be a little more consistent!
Body politic I have yet to see an article in THE FACE dealing with disability.
For instance, how many magazines covered the Paralympic Games in Barcelona this year?
Many issues affect us as disabled  people, from accessibility down to ignorance.
Even fashion — everyone's idea of a disabled person is someone in a grey NHS wheelchair, with a pink frock and big cumbersome boots.
This is definitely not true!
So how about having a look at disability — perhaps then we'll be seen as people and not charity cases capable only of living our lives in day centres away from the public, instead of blending in harmoniously with the able-bodied world.
Search and destroy In every rock magazine or paper, you find plaid and flannel shirt-wearing, long-haired, headbanging, headbutting, stagediving youth!
On every radio or TV show, you hear the grunge of Nirvana or Pearl Jam.
Often you even come across portraits of Kurt Cobain in teenage girls' weekly mags.
Cut the crap!
Can't you keep anything underground?
I am a life-devoted young fan of both the Seattle and the British indie scenes.
I filled with pride as I watched people puzzled over the band names I scribbled in my notebook.
Call me an egotistical slime, but I only want to preserve the purity and integrity of the current alternative, and hope that it won't pass through the mass-media grinder into the mainstream, where it will eventually be recalled as one more passive, stupid fashion.
There is a saying that if you can't destroy something, make it a fashion.
Wouldn't it be a zillion times better to destroy it?
Hot lips The interview with Sandra Bernhard (FACE 48) was an inspiration.
What a star!
Her determination to succeed and getting what she wants out of her career and life makes her a laudable influence.
Male abuse I'm concerned about your comments in FACE 47 regarding Axl Rose's childhood abuse.
Although certainly no fan of Guns N'Roses and their offensive lyrics, I am pleased that he has spoken about the still largely-hidden subject of male sexual assault.
It is important that men feel able to discuss this issue and not experience ridicule and smug responses from so-called enlightened magazines such as yours.
Comments such as‘a history of childhood abuse is both hip and horrible, the rock'n'roll statement with knobs on’ do not encourage other men to discuss the issue, nor do they treat this subject with the seriousness it deserves.
Male survivors of abuse and our society in general pay a high price for the current silence.
Correction The ‘Utsly-Gtsly chair’ shown in October's Hype was not, as we were told, the work of ‘furniture tailor’Yoichi Nakamura.
Mr Nakamura is in fact the director of E&Y, a company who made the chair in collaboration with Japanese artists Hironen
SAVE FACE THE SAVE FACE/Lemon Fund has closed with £94,445 banked, only a few pounds short of the money we were required to pay Jason Donovan in settlement of the libel action he brought against us earlier this year.
A cheque completely clearing the debt has been sent to Donovan's lawyers.
Royalties yet to be received from sales of The Shamen's limited-edition FACE EP, which has sold out, will go towards paying off our own legal bills.
The fund is now closed; please don't send any more money.
We have still to mention the following, whose contributions arrived after the last published list: Pete Silverton, Pat O'Neill, M How, Brad Hatton, W McColl and William Gibson.
Our thanks to them and to everyone who gave so generously of their time and money to help us through this difficult time.
HYPE! write to reply
Next time a stranger tries to stop you in the street, perhaps you should think twice about looking at the pavement and brushing past.
Maybe if you'd spared a few minutes, you could've become part of Gillian Wearing's extensive collection of personalised banners.
After being ignored by streams of tight-lipped Brits, the Goldsmiths graduate finally amassed almost 400 portraits, a selection of which are on display at the Marconi Gallery in Milan this month.
‘I've spent the last year asking the public to write something, anything, and then be photographed.
It's funny how ideas shrink away when people are put on the spot.
Homeless people came up with the most poignant things, probably because they're used to communicating this way.’
Placards do seem to be in vogue at the moment: there is a pastiche of Bob Dylan's ‘Subterranean Homesick Blues’ lyrics-on-cards promo film in Bob Roberts and super photographer Steven Meisel used slogans on white cards in a recent celebrity shoot for Italian Vogue.
But Wearing has already moved on.
Her latest pester-the-public project involves hanging outside a shoe repair shop and testing people's trust by asking to take a copy of their house key.
So will she go and nick their furniture if art doesn't pay?
‘Ooh, no way!
The only way people will trust me is if I give them a signed piece of paper with my address on.’
Amy Raphael 
With poetry about as popular as evening crochet classes, it's no mean feat that Lemn Sissay is fast establishing himself as an ingenious scribe with a tangible vibe.
Rather than locking himself in his bedroom staring mournfully out of the window, Lemn reaches out to his audience, grabs them by the lapels, rapping and ranting his bitter sweet rhyming couplets.
‘I've always had a fertile imagination,’ he says.
‘I was always drifting off and losing myself in my head, which I suppose is no different to anyone else except I carried it further, wrote it all down.’
Relying on his street knowledge rather than tracing the lineage of classical literature, Lemn's strength lies in his love affair with language and ability to shoot straight from the lip.
‘I've never been into that ‘I wandered lonely as a cloud’ type poetry, couldn't really get to grips with it.
At school, I'd write rude poems for my mates so, when a teacher turned me on to Linton Kwesi Johnson, it was like ‘Yes!’’
Lemn now appears at poetry readings alongside LKJ.
At the tender age of 20 his first anthology of poems,Tender Fingers In A Clenched Fist , appeared, and Lemn went on to write plays, set up his own theatre company One Step, conduct poetry workshops, and front the acid jazz ensemble Secret Society.
His latest contribution to your bookshelf is Rebel Without Applause (Bloodaxe, £5.95), a neat anthology of poetry which rips open black experience in white society, conducting its private pain for public consumption with razor sharp wit and a wicked sense of humour.
‘I'm not your angry young man with an axe to grind,’ says Lemn congenially.
‘Humour's a more effective defence than violence, which ends up consuming or destroying you.
People who go through any kind of shit come out with a certain sense of humour: it comes from the pain you go through and how you handle it.
My humour is my honesty.
It's the best policy.’
Mandi James 
Bubbling under: laughing northern poet Lemn Sissay
hip hop culture may not have meant an awful lot in Britain in 1992 but in America it remains a hot spot of commerce, musical cred and political dialogue.
When Quincy Jones became a convert, validating the view that rap is the bebop of our time, he saw an opening for a magazine which took the music and its environment seriously.
Vibe is that magazine, founded by Jones and published by Time.
Stepping up for the pre-fight weigh-in at a solid 144 pages, it comes across as a black, grainy, militant meltdown of Premiere, Rolling Stone, Spin, The Source and Details .
Unlike the somewhat parochial hip hop magazines that have proliferated during the last few years,Vibe's vibe (assessed through a preview issue, which may be misleading) aims for a mixed appeal.
Packed with roots and culture discourse (white people who think they're black, dreadlocks, the limitations of rap as a revolutionary force),Vibe also delivers moody profiles of the impeccably hardcore (Naughty By Nature, Super Cat) alongside bankable acts a studio executive might have heard mentioned at a funky party (Bobby Brown, LL Cool J).
Street verité rubs up against fashion, and interleaved among some impressively fat advertising are columns of tittle-tattle, industry news and those inevitable lists.
Intellectually substantial and provocative, outernational, cautious but daring, visually striking yet predictable,Vibe is currently surrounded by controversy.
Its white, openly gay editor Jonathan Van Meter says he's a journalist not a hip hop artists, but this assertion (and the fact that other staff members are gay) didn't stop Russell Simmons, Def Jam owner and Jones' original partner in the project, from resigning — because of‘philosophical differences’ rooted in hip hop's general ambivalence towards homosexuals.
Are these just bad vibes and sour grapes or is hip hop just too naughty by nature for the mainstream?
Time will tell.
David Troop 
Vibe: Naughty By Nature, nice by design
As the Christmas battle for the computer games market reaches critical mass, Sega wheels out its big gun this month with Sonic 2 .
Released worldwide on all formats on November 24 (Sonic Tuesday, apparently), once again it sees the animal libber hedgehog taking on the evil Dr Robotnik through a series of worlds (The Mystic Cave, The Toxic Plant Zone etc).
In the continuing attempt to out-Mario Mario, Sega has now given Sonic a sidekick, Tails the fox.
In the one-player game Tails trails after Sonic; in the two-player version, the screen splits to let the cute twosome compete.
Undoubtedly Sonic 2 will do the business with gameheads — Sega is anticipating selling out within a week of release — but what about the rest of us?
Some of the tricks are familiar, though technically superior to the original, but Sonic 2 does boast new features (corkscrew loop-the-loops, a 3D race between Sonic and Tails, a new gimmick which allows Sonic to ‘warp through time’).
And there are more levels than before (over 35), perhaps in response to criticism that the original relied too much on arcade spectacle over depth of play.
That said, it's still the graphics that impress the most: the colours are deeper and sharper than before, the action faster.
Push things all the way, and the on-screen mayhem achieves an almost cyberdelic overload.
Older gameheads might perhaps prefer something deeper, but, in terms of pure techno-flash,Sonic 2 defines the current state of the art.
Sonic gives the thumbs up to cyberdelic overload
the latest model war in the US is being televised weekly as a sort of gladiatorial slugfest.
In one corner, Cindy ‘watch my mole’ Crawford.
In the other, Christie ‘hausfrau’Brinkley.
To be fair, they aren't fighting in person, only in the ratings.
Cindy's half-hour of fashion chit-chat on MTV, titled House Of Style , features the covergirl with an assortment of gal pals — Sandra Bernhard, Naomi, Linda et al .
They diss whatever takes their fancy, while ‘the mole’ flicks her hair and wears lots of silly outfits — just like on photo shoots.
For a long time Cindy's only competition was a sad show called Style With Elsa Klensch , a yapping Aussie who looks like the missing link between Morticia and Uncle Fester in The Addams Family .
Klensch is well-known in the trade for patting all the most dreadful couturiers on the back, claiming, ‘If I say a show is bad and a designer has very little talent, it really can have an adverse effect and I don't believe that is my job.’
In stark contrast, Cindy's producer Alisa Bellatini claims, ‘We don't suck up to anyone.
You won't see Donna Karan of House Of Style .’
But since mid-September, Klensch has been sharing the spotlight in CNN's new Style programme, co-hosted by Christie Brinkley.
‘Christie will be telling connecting stories and anecdotes about herself and the trade,’ explains executive producer Jay Suber.
And for Americans who cannot get enough, CNN has arranged for a gruelling daily schedule of Brinkley on four other topics: food, travel, showbiz and health — laughingly titled Living In The Nineties .
Not to be outdone, Crawford has a new MTV show in the pipeline, plays co-host to the channel's seasonal specials, and recently started the odd appearance on MTV Europe.
Where will it end?
How about Newsnight with Naomi?
Cindy Crawford: MTV's fashion mole
john Noakes was a giant of a man.
For over a decade he strode like a colossus over children's TV, manfully climbing mountains, bravely jumping out of aeroplanes, ruggedly falling off bob-sleighs.
The Seventies were heady times: one word from John, and every Blue Peter viewer from Belfast to Basildon would try to save the world by collecting milk bottle tops.
He had a border collie in his lap and the world at his feet.
Then, 12 years ago, John mysteriously disappeared from our screens.
Where is he now?
Why did he ditch Peter Purves and Lesley Judd for closer bonding with Shep and Go With Noakes ?
Does he still have that orange Pac-a-Mac?
Comedian and writer Ben Miller has the answers, and has incorporated them into a tribute performance,Gone With Noakes (playing at Covent Garden's Donmar Warehouse on Dec 4–5).
Part lecture, part slide show, part comedy act, it is Miller's take on Noakes' life, whisking us from John's fledgling years in Halifax, through to startling revelations about Valerie Singleton, Joy Division and Shep's death, and finally to Majorca, where he comes face to face with his hero.
We just need to know one thing, Ben: why?
‘I just had to share my experiences.
I'm one of the few people who can really claim to have gone with Noakes.’
BROTHER (l to r): Rebel MC, Curfew (director), Formula One (minister of information)
Oh Brother!
Six months after their initial media blitz, the BROTHER Movement's ‘Ghettogedden EP’ finally emerges this month, having overcome difficulties in gathering their enormous roster of artists together.
Since 1989 the Black Rhyme Organisation To Help Equal Rights have continually aimed to address the problems of apartheid and black-on-black violence in Britain.
BROTHER are now also the subject of a BBC2 Open Space documentary on Dec 9, featuring artists like the Cookie Crew, Demon Boyz and Rebel MC, on whose Tribal Bass label the record is released.
With all the proceeds from sales of the record donated to Sickle Cell Anaemia Relief, the blood disorder currently affecting over 5,000 black Britons, it was fitting that a variety of black sportsmen, including footballers Ian Wright, Garth Crooks (chairman of SCAR) and boxer Colin Macmillan, were all present to support ‘Ghettogedden’ 's launch.
‘We all know someone affected by the disease,’ says Crooks.
‘The record's commercial success doesn't matter, it's the commitment that really counts.’
BROTHER now plan a series of school seminars aimed at presenting a positive role model for black children.
‘With high-profile black figures, we can show that drug dealing isn't the only way to gain a nice car,’ explains BROTHER director Curfew.
Watch this space.
december manifesto
This month Gavin Hills demands the following:
Amendments to the Maastricht treaty take into account this nation's very real fears about being swamped by French rock music.
The owners of wide-collared, thigh-length, black leather jackets have the belts pulled so tight they split in two.
Instead of a Christmas bombing campaign, the IRA start sleeping with leading Tories ministers.
This will not only destabilise the Government and get the IRA maximum publicity, it will also save the lives of a few innocents out buying walnuts and tangerines.
Vera Duckworth produces her own book of sexual fantasies.
It's sagging middle-aged mothers who need to feel comfortable with their bodies, not well-lit millionairesses.
The actors of The Bill replace the real police so we know in advance who the bad eggs are straight away.
Rudolph the red-nosed reindeer admits to habitual cocaine usage.
He wasn't the fastest for nothing, and that wasn't real snow around Santa's grotto.
Teenagers be renamed tensomethings.
The moratorium on the British coal industry takes into account the fact that Father Christmas can't fit down a gas fire's flue outlet.
On New Year's Eve we skip the next four years and go straight into 1977.
With any luck the country will be out of depression, Leyton Orient will be in the Premier League, and Madonna will have got religion
‘I never wear my jeans that tight…
A lot of people are into weird shit, especially in the  suburbs ’
What would you get if you let John Waters direct a Levi's commercial?
Answer:Hold Me, Thrill Me, Kiss Me , the new movie by first-time director Joel Hershman, starring pouty hunk Max Parrish.
When Parrish was young he dreamt of his movie debut, envisaging a brooding, macho lead like De Niro in Raging Bull or Pacino in The Godfather .
Instead, he gets to play Fritz Westinberger, a petty thief whose life is spent wrestling with Sean Young, fixing Diane Ladd's plumbing and suffering physical abuse at the hands of a Madonna look-a-like brandishing a vibrator.
Hershman calls the film a fairy tale on acid to a soundtrack of the Violent Femmes, Pixies and Cramps.
Parrish calls it ‘whacked out’(his favourite phrase), especially the clothes he wears — cowboy boots, sawn-off T-shirts and Levi's.
‘I never wear my jeans that tight,’ he says self-consciously.
‘But Fritz thinks he's real cool.
A lot of people are into that weird shit, especially in the suburbs.’
Hershman says his movie is inspired by Jean-Luc Godard's Breathless , and that he was looking for the new Jean-Paul Belmondo to play the lead.
With his Gere-good looks (the 27-year-old has done model assignments for Bruce Weber and Calvin Klein and commercials for Miller beer and Coke) Parrish was deemed perfect despite having no movie background whatsoever.
An occasional surfer, Parrish eats Indian food, listens to everything from Metallica to Motown and hangs out with friends and family in his valley home.
Hershman was charmed by his knicker-wetting hybrid of seriousness and vulnerability.
Parrish has acted before in the theatre though, landing a couple of solid psycho parts essentially not a lot different from the Fritz character — who changes his name to Eli and then Bud as he escapes across the country having gunned down the demonic rich bitch Twinkle (one of Sean Young's better performances).
With Twinkle dead, Bud-Eli-Fritz settles into a new life in a trailer park in El Monte, home to such Pink Flamingos -style crazies as Diane Ladd and Sixties psychedelic leftover Timothy Leary.
Here he also meets bondage babe Sabra whose idea of making out is to whisper in his ear: ‘I like your nose, it's really big.
I would like to put that big fat juicy honk of yours smack dab in the middle of my altar of love.’
This, and other offers, are passed up in order to pursue Sabra's virginal sis, Dannie, played by Adrienne Shelly.
Parish calls it ‘a love story that just goes through a few crazy things’, but he's under selling it; Time Warner so liked the film it is thinking of turning it into a TV series with Parrish in the starring role.
top tomes
THE FACE's essential guide to the books to buy your friends this Christmas.
The best novels of the year according to more than a dozen bookshops 
1.
WISE CHILDREN Angela Carter Carter's obsession with performance gets a final airing as twin sister vaudeville actresses go to Hollywood and aim for the big time.
A pity the author only got the respect she deserved after her untimely death.
Who to buy it for: theatrical types
2.
ALMA COGAN Gordon Burn Alma Cogan was a British plain Jane who reinvented herself via extravagant frocks and bouffants to become a massive Fifties singing star, dying in 1966.
In the novel she lives on, uncovering links with Moors murderer Myra Hindley.
Who to buy it for: morbid Erasure fans
3.
WRITTEN ON THE BODY Jeanette Winterson The genderless narrator is deeply in love with a beautiful woman who returns to her doctor husband when she develops skin cancer.
Occasionally gruesome, but who can argue with Winterson's immense self-belief?
Who to buy it for: women who love women
4.
SEVENTH HEAVEN Alice Hoffman Divorcee shakes up sleepy Long Island suburban neighbourhood in the summer of ‘59.
A Hal Hartley script in a time-warp?
Not quite, but the sense of a dislocated backwater is very real, and the characters and period detail very sharp.
Who to buy it for: Kennedy-era obsessives
5.
WAITING TO EXHALE Terry McMillan America's hippest book of the year — even people who don't read books bought this one.
Four single black females dissect the failings of the modern male in a riotously rude fashion.
Sassy!
Who to buy it for: Sandra Bernhard (except she's got a copy already)!
6.
TIME'S ARROW Martin Amis Mr Self gets a conscience (sort of).
Inspired by Kurt Vonnegut's image of World War Two in reverse (Europe's wounds healing as bombs rise up into planes), Amis sends the life of a Nazi war criminal spinning backwards, undoing all the evil and sending the Jews home.
Who to buy it for: clever people
7.
FRISK Dennis Cooper A ‘gay American Psycho ’ they said, but you'll search in vain for long lists of clothes and accessories.
An American flees to Amsterdam, depicting his life there as a chain of sadism and serial killing.
Who to buy it for: people with pierced nipples
8.
THE SECRET HISTORY Donna Tartt Already a US best-seller, this brilliant first novel starts with a murder then backtracks to explain why five Greek classics students at an exclusive college kill their classmate.
Who to buy it for: intellectuals who secretly read thrillers
9.
THE BUTCHER Alina Reyes ‘Utterly, absolutely sexy’ said the Literary Review , and they ought to know.
A slim dose of women's erotica from France (and a whole lot less risible than The Lover .
Young girl gets a holiday job in a butcher's and gets more flesh than she bargained for.
Who to buy it for: Morrissey (OK, Madonna then)
10.
TWO GIRLS, FAT AND THIN Mary Gaitskill The fat girl is an obsessive devotee of popular novelist Anna Granite, the thin girl a New York writer who goes to interview her.
As their relationship develops, the comedy gets blacker and the eroticism more perverse.
Who to buy it for: Shakespears Sister fans
native truth
The story goes like this.
Pahaska was born a full-blood Native American in Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
At seven weeks old, she was left outside a church and shortly afterwards adopted by a white family.
Her new father was a minister, her mother a teacher.
Pahaska lived with them in South Dakota's Black Hills for 17 years before leaving home because ‘things were becoming too awkward’ and she wanted to find her real parents.
She travelled round the States, got deported from England, and, with only two photos in her book, got some modelling work in Paris.
This isn't a movie script, but it easily could be.
Only Pahaska's story doesn't yet have a happy or conclusive ending.
She can now be regularly seen within the pages of various glossy magazines, but she hasn't forgotten her homelands.
‘I went back for a couple of months this summer for the first time in four years.
I couldn't believe how bad things were.
It's very hard to leave a reservation once you've been brought up there.
Deserters are called ‘apples’, red on the outside but white inside.’
Pahaska laughs, but not for long.
She talks of her own upbringing in the Black Hills through gritted teeth.
A traditionally holy part of Dakota which was seized by the American government, stripped of its mineral wealth and never returned to its rightful owners, the hills house a world-famous testament to white power.
The huge stone carvings of Presidents' faces at Mount Rushmore — which began to take shape following the routing of the Sioux in 1876 — overshadow the Pine Ridge reservation, a place plagued by an unemployment rate now at 82 per cent, an alcohol problem, numerous gambling dens and the inevitable resulting loss of young people to neighbouring cities.
Melvin Lee, assistant to President John Yellow Bird Steel of the Oglada Tribe, is keen to draw attention to the more positive aspects of life on the ‘res’ in the Black Hills.
‘On Columbus Day, we had a moment of silence to honour all the tribes who've disappeared over the last 500 years.
But we're also looking to the future.
Of course I admit there's an alcohol problem, but then again it tends to look worse than it is because the res is dry so everyone congregates at the nearest bar, which is two miles south, in Nebraska.
I don't know how many other nations could survive such a history — land being taken off us, our buffalo being killed.
And the racism hasn't gone away, it's just better hidden.’
Trying to set the record straight and put Native Americans on the monument map is Crazy Horse, a massive new sculpture being blasted out of the mountains.
A mystic and religious leader of the Oglala people in the late nineteenth century, Crazy Horse was revered for his military prowess and for his honesty.
‘When he went to Fort Robinson in Nebraska to try and conduct peace talks, he knew he'd be killed,’ says Lee.
‘The monument won't be finished till the millennium, but it gives another side to American his-story…this is our-story.
‘Around two million people visit the Black Hills every year, but we still see very little of the money.
We want to encourage people to come and see our beautiful countryside and stay in our tee pees.
We, the Oglala Dakota, are proud to invite people here.’
Pahaska meanwhile is determined to walk off the catwalks and rejoin her community by Christmas to help in its struggle.
‘It's very trendy to be a Native American these days, with all the films and fake jewellery, but I want to return to find my family and join the Bureau Of Indian Affairs.
America is a stolen country, and I want to help give some of it back to its rightful owners’
Paris-based Native American model Pahaska at Mount Rushmore: a monument to dead white Presidents amid her people's holy grounds
Recession-hit restaurants are trying to inject some fun into food — at better prices.
The latest addition to the Zen chain at 593–599 Fulham Rd, London SW6 is two eating houses in one.
Upstairs, Bonjour Vietnam offers a bar built on a 30-foot curved glass fish tank (above), a giant prawn in the window and set meals from £12.50.
Downstairs, Teppanyaki San is Japanese food as theatre, with knife-juggling, joke-telling chefs cooking at your table — express lunches from £5.50
X marks the spot, or so they say.
Looking like the sort of accessories children may use in their doctors and nurses games, these rubbers with a white cross on the side are in fact a serious attempt from Switzerland to promote safer sex.
If the Swiss flag isn't your thing, there's also some flavoured and fluorescent numbers — all available from the recently-opened Condomeria, Klingerstrasse 23, Zurich
In the past it might've been written off as artwank.
But desperate times call for desperate measures, and in response to post-Aids paranoia/homophobia, artists (gay and non-gay) have begun to use bodily fluids in their work, the best known being Andres Serrano, who, for a show a couple of years back, photographed his own ejaculations.
In the late Eighties Jeremy Ridgway and David Bennett, Zimbabwe-born but living in London, produced the ‘Cum’ paintings which were made up in part from semen and shown in New York.
The duo have been busy recently preparing their first London exhibition (work in progress shown above, middle picture), a display that goes on show this month at the City Racing Gallery.
‘Ram’ features more work using semen, aggressively sexual words and a jackhammer humping away against a wall.
The rough-and-ready DIY edge to the show is a clear reaction to the marketable art of the Eighties, and their confrontational ‘aesthetic’ of indecent materials is given depth by a conceptual cleverness, by sexual puns and wordplay.
‘There's still a real conservatism here.
Although new galleries, squats and collectives are opening up spaces, there isn't the same sense of dialogue between artists here as in New York.
Over there, things really seem to matter.’
Dressed to kill?
Apparently not.
The RedMan suit may inspire shouts of ‘RoboCop’, but it's actually intended to give bobbies protection in potentially violence situations.
Already being used by the law in the US, the head-to-toe outfit gives that Michelin man effect but is, we're told, light and flexible at the same time as being resistant to punches, bottles and the occasional kicking.
A Midland-based company, British Contact Sports Supplies, is currently trying to make the suit knife- and bullet-proof and, although no one from the Met Police could confirm or deny the rumours, it seems that plans may be afoot for them to adopt the suit in the future
word up!
In downtown Los Angeles, on the corner of Westlake and Wilshire, in the midst of crack-heads, loafers and general Nineties lowlife, sits the grandiose County Medical Association.
Inside heavy doors, in a reception lined with heavy wood panelling, the weary employees perk up when I ask for Marisela Norte.
La Norte, it would seem, is a bit of a cult hero among her work colleagues.
They see the tiny, vivacious Chicana poetess as someone who can give a voice to their experiences of LA.
Her live performances are something to behold, her low, sweet voice shifting from English to a passionate, rhythmic Español , her words capturing contemporary moments as brilliantly as Kodachrome snapshots.
With much of the impact being in her delivery, Norte's poetry has, until recently, been more legendary as performance art rather than as written verse.
But with a hit recording on cassette and CD, her work is at last becoming accessible to those outside California.
‘Norte/Word’ leapt off record store shelves only ten days after its release and its success led to three reading tours.
Norte weaves her observations into a witty text, filling it with multicultural detail.
From slang to puns to points of conflict, the end result is something like homeboy fashion meets voodoo charm and, back in ‘88, the LA Times gave her a fitting nickname, ‘East LA's Ambassador Of Culture’.
More recent pieces — like ‘976-LOCA: Call Me’, which links phone sex ads to the fetishising of Frida Kahlo — put mainstream poets to shame by marrying languages and creating a deft mix of styles and concerns.
As we pile into a rented car, I express my thanks for her portraits of a city which headlines and Hollywood love to distort.
She tells me others agree — and she's thrilled about the phone calls which followed last night's local radio slot.
‘All these young girls were calling me, from way out in the projects!
They said: ‘You make us proud to be Mexican.’
Then an old guy called and said: ‘I haven't heard anyone mention a ten-cent bus ride in 15 years!
It made me sit down with my wife and remember all kinds of things.’’
Since she has done the unthinkable in LA and has never got round to buying herself a car, bus rides are the only way of getting around and the 6am commute to work brings her daily inspiration.
‘The bus is my ticket to freedom.
It takes so much time, and conditions can be terrible, but it's worth it to see the passengers.
This morning an old Mexican guy and his wife got on; she looked tired and drawn, he had a baseball cap with Mi Otra Esposa Es Guera — My Other Wife Is A Blond!
When I see something like that, I know I have to write about it.’
All these girls were calling me, from way out in the projects!
They said: ‘You make us proud to be Mexican’
music
Timing his new album release in the US for election day could be interpreted as a sign of Ice Cube's inflated self-importance.
But perhaps Cube was also determined to add his thoughts on America's ‘state of emergency’(as he has termed it) to the electoral so-called debate.
Movie star, chart topper, record label boss, conspiracy theorist, member of the Nation Of Islam, self-appointed spokesman for young blacks; Ice Cube is precariously balanced between entertainment and polemic.
With hindsight, the morbid, aggressive packaging and inflammatory lyrics of last year's ‘Death Certificate’ LP constituted an advance warning siren for the ‘92 Los Angeles uprising.
No surprise, then, to see riot footage cut into the apocalyptic video imagery of ‘Wicked’, the first single from ‘The Predator’(Priority Records).
Musically, the LP represents a step forward from both his previous work and the churning noise and verbal violence of Da Lench Mob's ‘Guerillas In The Mist’(first release on his Street Knowledge label).
Although Ice Cube's role as an agent provocateur  is unequivocal, his future as a bankable revolutionary must be open to doubt, despite his assertion on the liner notes of ‘Predator’: ‘I will become an African-American when America gives up the oppression of my people .’
Graham Massey's Top Ten
All may have been quiet on the 808 State front over the last year but, far from resting on their laurels, the techno titans have been locked in the studio, ripping it up on the mixing desk.
As well as putting the finishing touches to their epic 20-track album ‘Gorgeous’—‘the most diverse thing we've ever done’— DJing 808 duo the Spinmasters have been spinning discs over in the US, while Graham Massey has been remixing everyone from the Sugarcubes to Future Sound Of London.
Over the Christmas period they're touring the country with Madness in a bid to ‘spread our disco magic — there's no point preaching to the converted’.
Snatching two minutes on the phone, Graham Massey explains what he likes to spliff up and chill out to.
‘I like a lot of musak, fantasy music with no function whatsoever.
After spending 300 hours a week in the studio, the last thing I want to listen to when I come home is heavy techno.
I like to escape into the world of exotica, and play along with my Hawaiian guitar’.
hype! trivia
RECESSION-friendly, yummy and ridiculously popular since opening in April, Japanese eaterie Wagamana is offering a festive alternative to turkey and sprouts.
On Dec 5 between 10pm and 6am, you can stuff your face then bop it off at their Yes-Let's Party do.
Tickets from Wagamana, 4 Streatham St, WC1 and Michiko Koshino, Neal St, WC2
THE brilliantly titled Portobello Surfer fanzine arrives this month, aiming to provide a surf guide for ‘all the real surfers in the city who miss the beach’.
It is, in fact, a quite brilliant little tome, with special pages for women surfers and for the grommets (kid surfers).
Amongst the news, views, product reviews and UK surf gossip, arrives Speng — The Cool Ruler, a cartoon surfing dude who travels the world's beach breaks in the company of Dog Gorgon.
Find out more by calling PS on 071 792 3134
MUCH rejoicing in Manchester as The Athenaeum bar throws open its doors to the public.
Fully-equipped with a state-of-the-art light and sound system, set in opulent surroundings and offering more beers than you can shake your tongue at, The Athenaeum aims for that more sophisticated European vibe, competing with the likes of well-established watering holes Dry and Manto
THERE'LL be lots of rib tickling in the capital this month when the new season of Comedy Shorts kicks off at the Donmar Warehouse in Covent Garden on Fridays and Saturdays.
From an explanation of life, the universe and everything, to a dissection of the mother/daughter relationship, this series of comedy dramas is a must.
And while we're on the comedy tip, Jongleurs, that comfortable but overpriced cabaret club in Battersea, has moved on to bigger and better things by opening a second, larger-scale club, based in the old Dingwalls building at Camden Lock.
Should be a right giggle
THE FILM that catapulted Tim Robbins (above) from second leaguer (remember Jacob's Ladder?
Cadillac Man?
We don't!) to bankable star is out this month on video via Guild.
Yes, we're talking about The Player , the hip Hollywood satire with star cameos oozing out if its smart, cynical celluloid.
We've got ten copies to give away for ten correct answers (picked out on Dec 17) to the following question: who is Robbins' wife? a Geena Davis.
b Susan Sarandon. c Madonna.
Send your postcards to ‘Tasty Tim’, THE FACE
IF YOU missed the October march when the heavens opened on over 200,000 supporters, there's still time to do your bit for the miners.
On Nov 28 there's a benefit concert at the Sheffield Arena with Primal Scream and the Orb along with guest DJs.
Don't bother trying to blag yourself a ticket — everyone pays 15 quid.
Period.
More details on 0742 565656.
On Dec 6 Rebel MC, Apachi Indian and Stone Grove (see p42) join the rally for Coal Not Dole at the T&C in north London, with proceeds being split between UK and South African miners.
STILL on a charity tip (well, someone's gotta be), the Boogie Night on Dec 8 looks like being another worthwhile event, this time supporting the homeless.
Expect to see folk such as Chris Evans (the funny ginger one on The Big Breakfast ) and Banderas on stage at The Powerhaus in north London.
For tickets (minimum donation a tenner) and more info dial 071 837 8727
WITH Arrested Development now top of the pops through ‘People Everyday’, get ready for the spin-off projects.
First up, an album from Dionne Farris, the storming vocalist on the ‘Tennesse’ single
MR LYSONS of 21 Norton Rd, Rochdale, is a man with a mission — why else would he publish a fanzine dedicated to the works of that erstwhile Genesis mixer and general eminent musical mastermind — Jonathan King.
Curiously titled Streets Of People , you have to admire this fellow's genuine adulation of such an ‘all-round media personality’ as JK.
Anyone with the nerve to embark on this courageous venture deserves your two quid   
If the transformation of a group of indie revivalists into New Age messiahs was hard to swallow, then Mr C's Ebeneezer rantings reaching No. 1 took the disco biscuit.
Surviving into 1992 against the odds, The Shamen are now releasing records that are going right over people's heads.
Just how far can they go?
It's a few hours before he's due onstage at the Tower Theater in Houston and Mister C is telling me, in a roundabout way, what his name stands for.
In a few days The Shamen take their millennial grooves and positive paganism to Salt Lake City.
They're expecting, or rather hoping for, an ‘intense’ reception from the Mormon capital.
Ever eager to get the party started, Mister C has been trying to stir things up in advance.
‘I did an interview with the Utah Review , this student paper, and at the end they asked me if I had anything I wanted to add.
So I told them about the C in Mister C. I said ‘It's C as in E equals MC 2 .
C is the velocity of light, as it says in ‘Space Time’, the way we measure the velocity of light, and therefore I am the bringer of light, the prince of light, Lucifer himself.’’
He giggles.
‘I hope something comes off.’
So that's what the C really stands for then?
‘No, actually C stands for cunt.’
Pardon?
‘C stands for cunt.
I'm a wind-up, a piss taker, a joker.
I like to have a laugh, and my friends used to say, ‘Oh you're just a cunt, man.’
So…’
So, Mister C for cunt, seriously?
‘Yeah.
Not cool, not calm, not collected, not charisma, none of those things, but cunt.’
At this point I feel honour bound to remind Mister C that he's talking to a journalist, that what might be an affectionate insult from his friends will probably piss him off massively when he sees it in print.
‘I don't mind, you can put what you like.’
He gives me a completely guileless smile.
‘I'm a pretty uninhibited sort of person.’
In the end, when all's said and done, you just can't help liking Mister C. He has his enemies, of course.
To club hipsters, he's an embarrassment, a once-credible DJ turned uncool fool.
To the music papers, he's a joke.
To many ordinary punters, he's simply the most irritating man in pop.
But there is something vaguely amusing about his ascension to the ranks of pop star/folk devil.
It's just so unlikely.
The same goes for The Shamen as a whole.
1992 has definitely been their year.
It was always possible that Will Sin's death might have signalled the end for the band.
But rather than fade quietly from view, Colin Angus has racked up a hit album, ‘Boss Drum’, hit singles and, with ‘Ebeneezer Goode’, orchestrated a good old-fashioned tabloid fuss into the bargain.
On the face of it, The Shamen (bespectacled ex-indie rocker Colin, gabby geeky white rapper Mister C and part-time disco diva Jhelisa Anderson) don't look like an obvious pop proposition.
But more than any other band at the moment, they've managed to translate the lessons of dance culture into mainstream pop success.
With a major breakthrough in America beckoning, they look well on the way to becoming the first stadium techno band.
Undoubtedly they deserve their success, but you can't help wondering how on earth they did it.
A SUNNY HALLOWE'EN MORNING in Houstin, midway through The Shamen's American tour, and Colin Angus is sitting by the hotel pool.
He looks a little weary.
 Perhaps it's because he's just been asked yet again about that record.
Though ‘Ebeneezer Goode’ itself might have left a little to be desired, if was impossible not to enjoy the accompanying media panic.
The kind of farcical spectacle pop hasn't provided for a while, it had everything from Radio 1 getting in a tizzy about whether to ban it to TOTP carrying drug warnings, from ageing DJs singing along to the chorus to ageing rockers (Francis Rossi of Status Quo) crawling out of the woodwork to condemn it.
Colin insists that they had expected the ensuing fuss.
‘It all happened in exactly the way we wanted it to.
Perhaps it wasn't very subtle, but I'd like to think it was funny.
It really was about these characters we know on the club scene.
Admittedly the chorus was ambiguous.
But it was not meant to be a paean to Ecstasy.
I've already done that with ‘Adam Strange’ on ‘In Gorbachev We Trust’.
Perhaps Ebeneezer is Adam's bastard cousin.
There was a positive message in there about moderation and I think people did get it.’
It's perhaps typical that even with a track as self-consciously silly as ‘Ebeneezer’, there has to be a message.
Ever since their days as left-leaning indie rockers, The Shamen have always seen music as a medium for communicating ideas.
Nothing wrong with that, of course.
What is surprising is that even after their post-'87 conversion to the gospel of the groove, they still retain a belief in the power of the word.
The textures, sounds and rhythms of The Shamen's output from ‘En-Tact’ articulate their pleasure politics well enough, but they still seem drawn to lyrical sloganeering.
But this kind of literalism can actually repel some who might otherwise enjoy the band.
Colin disagrees.
‘I do feel the need to use the lyrics to get the information across to people who wouldn't necessarily pick things up.
Critics can say we're unsubtle, but even so, some people still don't get it.’
He mentions a recent snide NME review of a gig at Barrowlands, Glasgow.
‘One song they went for was ‘Space Time’.
Now that was always about Will.
How obvious can you get?
‘Hard living on since you've been gone, there'll always be a place for you in my space time.’
But the guy doesn't see it.
He thinks it's us trying to come on like Einstein.’
He laughs in disbelief.
‘Perhaps we aren't very subtle but even then people miss the point.’
It does sound a touch obtuse, but in a way you can understand how the mistake might be made.
Nowadays people expect cosmic significance from The Shamen.
When I first heard ‘Ebeneezer’ on a tinny radio, I thought Mister C's request,‘Has anybody got any veras?’— meaning Vera Lynns, or skins for rolling joints — was actually ‘Has anybody got any theories?’.
And The Shamen have plenty of theories.
In the past they've been the band most closely associated with the post-'88 cyberdelic  culture .
They've talked about Mondo 2000 , virtual raves, about smart drugs and new psychedelics, about chaos theory and fractals.
But with ‘Boss Drum’, Colin has gone one step further.
The album is a self-conscious attempt to translate tribal shamanism into a rhythmic faith for the Nineties dance culture.
Just as the shaman uses rhythms and natural psychedelics to conjure healing visions for the tribe, so Colin argues for raves as techno-pagan festivals, the potential site for a spiritual hedonism, a place where beats, psychedelics, dance and light can reconnect people with nature, transforming their vision of the world.
In doing so, he relies heavily on the work of ethno-botanist and psychedelic frontiersman Terence McKenna.
A hypnotic orator, McKenna can be heard on the album track ‘Re-evolution’, delivering bite-sized chunks of the philosophy he developed in books like Food Of The Gods and The Archaic Revival .
Put simply, he's anti-drugs (any kind of synthetic intoxicant from crack, acid and E to TV) but pro-natural psychedelics (mushrooms etc).
Psychedelics, he argues, can be used to reconnect us with the earth itself, or rather, the Gaian mind.
Beyond that, he says that the rediscovery of the lessons of shamanism and the power of psychedelics is setting the scene for a general Archaic Revival, which will see a return to the magical knowledge of tribal times.
In part, McKenna sees this as a natural reaction to the ecological crisis brought on by the modern era.
But it's also part of inevitable human evolution.
We are apparently being drawn to the end of time, to an apocalypse (which will happen on 21/12/2012) at which point some of us will achieve a mystical transformation to a more enlightened realm of being.
Clockwise from left: Mister C sports specially made Shamen T-shirt and pagan symbol pendant; Houston's progressive house fans file into the Shamen Hallowe'en ‘rave’ at the Tower Theater; dancer from support band Utah Saints gets into Ebeneezer garb and joins The Shamen on stage for ‘Ebeneezer Goode’
It's a fair cop: female fan gives in to the shamanic rhythms in Houston
After chasing the Mister Big of Acid House, the press finally had a real-life folk devil, Mister C. The tabloids couldn't have asked for anything better
Your average post-political millennial rap, in other words (or as Colin says, ‘the-end-of-the-millennium psychosis blues’).
From the interviews they've given, you get the impression that The Shamen buy all this unquestioningly, that ‘Boss Drum’ should really have been called ‘Terence McKenna Says’.
But the truth is that Colin, while interested in his theory of psychedelic shamanism, remains fairly sceptical.
‘Perhaps I haven't made it clear which are my ideas and which are Terence's.
So perhaps I can sound like a mouthpiece for Terence, which I definitely am not.
He's been an influence, but we have our differences.’
Colin diverges slightly from the McKenna party line that psychedelics should be taken on your own with the help of someone like a psychotherapist, and for illumination rather than recreation.
And Colin sees nothing wrong with certain synthetic intoxicants like E and acid, if taken in moderation.
‘Perhaps Terence is right to say that the most creative way to use psychedelics is in your own home, lying down in silence,’ he continues.
‘But I'm certainly not anti-mass recreational use.
It's not all they're about, but I suppose my attitude is psychedelics for all.’
He admits to reservations about one of the central elements of McKenna's work — the suggestion that DMT (Dimethyltryptamine, a psychedelic which delivers a short 15-minute blast) works the same for everyone, that it transports all of us to an alien realm, bringing us into contact with the ‘machine elves of hyperspace’.
‘I do wonder about that.
DMT existed in the streets in the Sixties where it gained a reputation as the businessman's acid, because it could be smoked and didn't last too long.
Now people I've spoken to who used it then never said anything about machine elves of hyperspace.
They said it was just a 15-minute nightmare.’
He smiles.
‘I haven't done DMT yet, but I suspect the initials stand for Don't Mean a Thing.
We shall see.’
Recently Colin became friends with a bona fide shaman, Davide, who gave him a dose of ‘ayahuasca’.
‘It contained mushrooms, psychedelic plants and extracts from some hallucinogenic jungle frog.
You can get hallucinogenic everything in the jungle.
It's outrageous.’
The experience left him unable to move for ten hours.
‘Doing it recreationally, you lose sight of the divine revelational aspects of it.
So it was good, a re-centring experience for me.
I'd love to do it in the jungle context.’
And shortly he probably will.
When the current world tour ends in January, Colin is off with Davide to spend a month learning about shamanism in the jungle.
So what does he think he'll get out of it?
He laughs.
‘Another album, maybe.’
FOR THE PHOTO SHOOT , we decide to trek out to the NASA Space Center.
According to the tour guides, the place is a working research centre.
But with its space shuttle fairground rides and souvenir shop selling a variety of space junk — black hole jelly beans, lunar juggling balls, astronaut snacks, holographic jewellery — it looks pretty much like a theme park.
For the shoot, Colin, C and Jhelisa have been joined by the rest of the touring band, keyboard player Robert Graham and drummer Gavin Knight.
Kitted out in black, sporting assorted bits of PVC and leather, they look a little like bikers from outer space.
As they cut ironic poses in front of a giant, upended Saturn 5, they're almost in danger of becoming another tourist attraction — the visiting British pop stars.
Every ten minutes, another group of tourists arrives to check out the rockets and winds up taking pictures of Kevin Davies taking pictures of The Shamen.
Meanwhile band manager Charles Cosh tells me how they're going to crack America.
They've already had three consecutive number ones in the dance charts.
But going beyond that seems inevitably to involve playing up to the rockier side of The Shamen.
‘Although there's an established rave scene on both coasts, I don't think there's a club crowd here like there is in Britain,’ Cosh continues.
‘Anyway, clubbers don't buy albums.
They buy 12-inches or spend all their money on drugs.’
So The Shamen have to win over the college/alternative scene.
Though ‘LSI’ bombed with them, the college crowd already seem to be going for the more obviously British routines of ‘Ebeneezer Goode’.
During the photo shoot, a slow stream of curious tourists and bona fide fans wander up for autographs.
One girl who works at the Space Center seems almost beside herself — she was planning to come to tonight's gig, but after a late night last week her parents (strict Christians) grounded her and took away her ticket.
Mister C nods sympathetically.
‘Climb out the window,’ he says.
‘We'll put you on the guest list.’
Later I tell C that if I worked for the Daily Star , I'd have my story already.
The Evil Mister C Lures God-Fearing Girl To Satanic Drug Dance Orgy Shocker.
‘The evil Mister C,’ he mutters.
‘Yeah, can't you see my horns?’
Mister C is something of a godsend for the British press.
When they finally caught up with the aftershocks of the mid-Eighties housequake, they immediately started looking for ways to whip up an old-style moral panic.
There was the ludicrous quest for the Mister Big of Acid House.
Since then, there has been a running drug scare, complete with pics of comatose teens and tales of deathbed agonies.
But it hasn't quite clicked.
The tabloids really need names and faces to hang their stories on, but the starless void of club culture hasn't delivered anything apart from anonymous Djs, bleepy E chants and interchangeable disco divas.
Up until‘Ebeneezer Goode’, that is .
After chasing the special Mister Big of Acid House, the press finally had a real-life folk devil, Mister C. Like it or not, he's rave culture's first pop face.
The tabloids couldn't have asked for anything better.
His shamanistic beliefs and espousal of the Zippy/techno-pagan attitudes that have flourished in clubland in recent years mean that when they're not running scare stories (Mister C organises sex and drug cult, Shamen gigs as wild drug orgies etc), they can do ‘Mister C — New Age Wacko’ stuff instead (tales of his telepathic connection with his twin sister).
‘The tabloids are the tabloids,’ Mister C concludes later as we sit in the bar after the soundcheck.
‘No one can take them seriously.
The Star is just looking to lynch us.
They want us bad.
But sod'em.
I don't care.’
He does care about the critical flak coming his way from the music press though.
A recent suggestion that he can't DJ irks the most.
‘That's a complete cunt,’ he grumbles.
‘I am a DJ.
I DJed at Clink Street [the infamous after-hours warehouse just round the corner from the original Shoom club].
I've been doing it for years.
It's what I do.
I know how to mix.’
If anything, he defines himself as a DJ rather than a rapper, and he remains desperately committed to the dance scene.
He's starting up his own progressive house label Pink Plonk, which he says will feature ‘underground talent’(he mentions Bang The Party.
Irresistible Force, Femi B, Richie Hawkins and others), and he's also planning to continue organising parties when The Shamen world tour ends in January.
‘You have to be good-humoured about the music press.
But there is a limit.
I'm a dance kid, a Londoner, working-class, and I think there's definitely some middle-class bigotry in all this.
They've been calling me a baboon and shit.
I'm an entertainer, not a fucking baboon.’
Perhaps they're referring to your, um, ‘distinctive’ dance style?
‘It's not my fault that these people don't understand what dancing is.
They might laugh when I wave my hands in the air, but what they don't understand is, my fingers are dancing to high hat rhythms.’
Mister C hops up and gives me a demo.
‘And when I'm doing this’— his arms loop around —‘I'm on the snare drum, and when I'm shaking my bum, I'm on the bassline.
At the end of the day, they can say what they like, and after they've said what they like, they can suck my dick.’
Certainly the criticism Mister C has received for not knowing what he's talking about, for faking it or just for coming late to the whole shamanic party seems a little sniffy and actually beside the point.
His real problem is that he believes it all.
Unlike Colin, who remains slightly sceptical, Mister C espouses the McKenna message with an evangelical fervour.
His innocent enthusiasm is disarming, and, in the end, positively sweet.
But it does make him an easy target.
It's not long  before he's trying to explain the telepathic communities that will flourish after the apocalypse to me and offering this example: ‘It's like when you fancy someone, and you know you're going to go with that person.
It's going to happen because you know it, you  know .’
Later he tells me that the apocalypse will also mean the end of macho.
‘It's the rhythm of atoms which form a solid object, but when we inhabit space-time we'll be able to change the object.
We won't need muscles any more to move things around.
So it's the end of macho and the end of history.’
You could almost see Colin and Mister C developing the same kind of double act as Flavor Flav and Chuck D. The prof and the prat.
The dancehall mystic and the club space case.
‘I had thought of that myself,’ says Colin
Taking the piss out of this is, let's face it, a little easy.
The truth is that C is a convenient scapegoat for those upset by The Shamen's commercial ambitions and looking for a way to convince themselves that, underneath it all, Colin's still credible.
But, remember, it is Colin who calls the shots.
As he points out, the idea (and a lot of the lines) for ‘Ebeneezer Goode’ were around before Mister C. And The Shamen had long had their sights set on the charts.
OK, some tracks which feature C upfront are pretty atrocious (the woeful ragga rap of ‘Coming On Strong’, the rabbity rap of ‘Fatman’).
Perhaps in general he should ease up, get a little lower in the mix.
But ‘Boss Drum’ 's failings aren't just down to him (Colin actually helps write the raps).
Colin is the first to acknowledge that he really needs Mister C. It might sound a little ridiculous, but you could almost see them developing the same kind of double act as Flavor Flav and Chuck D. The prof and the prat.
The dancehall mystic and the club space case.
‘I had thought of that myself, I see what you mean,’ Colin concludes.
‘Mister C's certainly brought a sense of humour and energy.
I'm directing his energy and he's bringing out the humour in me, at last, which can't be a bad thing.’
‘EXCUSE ME, SIR, BUT D'Y'ALL THINK there'll be some noshing tonight?’
The security men at the Tower Theater are trying to bone up on what to expect later on.
It seems unlikely, but last night in Dallas the audience started slam dancing.
‘I wasn't too happy about that,’ Colin comments.
‘One person even stage-dived.
He got told off by Mister C. It's inevitable, I suppose.
America really is a land of rock'n'roll, after all.’
Perhaps things will be different tonight.
It's Hallowe'en and the city seems vaguely unhinged.
Outside, various drag queens spill out of the gay bar across from the gig and teeter down the road on high heels flashing passing motorists and drawing a barrage of horns in reply.
Down the road, three guys strut along dressed in full Clockwise Orange gear — white long johns, jock straps, black bowlers and canes.
Inside, people wander by in fetish gear, gothic slap, bad drag and movie outfits (The Terminator, Edward Scissorhands, Batman and Catwoman).
Backstage, Mister C is explaining the ‘LSI’ smart drink to me.
It's all about six essential amino acids, apparently.
He isn't, however, indulging.
‘No, I've drunk too much already.
I think my amino acids are OK.
You don't want to drink too much.
Look at bodybuilders.
They survive on amino acids and look at the state of them.’
As he bobs off to get ready for his DJing stint, someone hands me another packet of the smart drink.
A promo gimmick for the single release of ‘Love Sex Intelligence’, it promises to set ‘synapses snapping, assist memory and verbal ability and energise both mind and body’.
On the packet, intelligence is misspelt: ‘Love — Sex — Intelligence’.
Mister C might be fine, but clearly someone needs to down a few more smart drinks.
Mister C spends 45 minutes DJing before the set proper and gets what seems to be the typical reaction.
People nod their heads but don't dance.
If anything, his trancey selection is a little too subtle.
You get the feeling they'd respond to some headbanging techno.
When the band proper comes on, however, they warm up.
For all the talk about creating a club vibe, in Texas the audience have basically come to see a gig.
And The Shamen don't disappoint them.
After all, Colin is still standing in the middle with a guitar.
Despite some early lows (‘Coming On Strong’), The Shamen string together a powerful set which plays up the rockier side of their pop equation.
Acid pop numbers like ‘Phorever People’(the next single) sound almost anthemic while the tribal thump and dub space of crowd-pleasers like ‘Hyperreal’ and ‘Make It Mine’is cut through by crunching guitar from Colin and euphoric hollering from the criminally underused Jhelisa, daughter of funk legends Bobby Byrd and Vicki Anderson, sister of former Young Disciples singer Carleen.
As the set ends, Mister C tells everyone to hang around.
‘We'll come down and party with you.’
But although the crowd has danced its way through the set, once the band are off stage, everyone scarpers.
Within five minutes, the place is virtually empty.
Mister C remains undaunted.
Chomping a guarana chewing gum, he bashfully accepts the compliments of a rather old-looking female fan.
‘I really like the way you move.
You're an awesome dancer.’
As Colin (looking wasted as in exhausted) goes off to the tour bus to sleep and Jhelisa disappears with a relative, he hangs out with various fans.
Someone hands out a flyer for Digital Bubblebath, a rave set for next weekend.
But though people listen enthusiastically to Mister C slagging off hardcore and singing the praises of progressive house, you get the feeling things are just a bit different here.
Later, in search of a party, we drive off to an after-hours club.
It's the closest we're going to get to a rave tonight, but it's a long way from the kind of thing Mister C is used to.
The soundtrack is industrial dance, the punters the kind of alternative/college crowd who presumably are about to go for The Shamen in a big way.
There's certainly a tribal vibe here, but it's not the kind of ecstatic enlightenment and spiritual hedonism The Shamen are promoting.
It's grungier, looser, sleazier and just plain rockier.
A few people come up to C and congratulate him on the gig, but as he watches the dancefloor (the three Clockwork Orange clones are getting down), he looks vaguely perplexed.
‘It's a bit weird here, isn't it?’ he says.
You get the feeling Colin would understand.
PERHAPS THE SHAMEN'S SUCCESS is down to the fact that, even more than in their indie dance days, they are a bundle of productive contradictions.
They're in love with rhythm but they still believe in songs.
They're a dance band with a message, pleasure politicians with some Big Ideas.
But they're also responsible for the gormless gibberish of ‘Ebeneezer Goode’.
With ‘Boss Drum’, they've produced what is virtually a concept album.
But it also contains pure pop like ‘LSI’ and ‘Phorever People’.
Somehow it all works in their favour.
Somehow The Shamen manage to come up with something for everyone, to keep all the factions of club culture happy.
It's a balancing act, and at the moment no one pulls it off better.
But the further they go, the easier it will become to produce something that winds up pleasing no one in particular.
‘We shall see how we deal with it on the next album,’ Colin concludes.
‘We've not managed too bad so far.
We like to concentrate on the pop stuff in a few tracks and indulge in the more experimental stuff with the rest.’
Of course it's getting to the stage when one version of the album alone won't be enough to satisfy everyone.
For example, to satisfy those who feel The Shamen's rhythmic landscapes would carry the shamanic message much better without the ‘conscious lyrics’, he's planning to put out ‘Boss Dub’, an instrumental remix of the album, early next year.
But though you can do a different remix for each different section of the audience, in the end you can only do one show at a time.
It's hard now to see how The Shamen will keep the club vibe going in the stadiums they will undoubtedly end up playing, how Colin will avoid the rock postures he hates so much.
But then again, you couldn't have predicted they'd get this far in the first place.
Perhaps, as Mister C might say, we should trust in the power of the rhythm and keep the faith.
jazz not jazz
stone grove
The man behind Working Week is back with massive drum ‘n’ bass soul and the vocals of Janette Sewell.
Is this psychedelic urban thrash jazz?
‘We don't want to be one of those faceless bands who go on Top Of The Pops , have two hits and that's it.
What they're saying and representing to me means nothing — it's just production-line music.
I don't mind that, but I think we're going deeper.
The word we keep using is an earthiness, a vibe.’
Vibe.
It's a word that has been percolating in dance music for the past couple of years, a reminder that there was life before raves, gripping club culture by the scruff of its Joe Bloggs shirt, and shaking it until the penny drops.
Sometimes, in the case of the Talkin Loud or Acid Jazz artists, we occasionally listened.
Dance culture doesn't have to be a drug culture, there are other ways of putting a smile on your face than chemical compounds, strobe lights and a relentless babble of beats.
Once upon a time there was something called soul.
If the message sounds almost-evangelical in its tone, Simon Emerson is not making any apologies.
As part of Stone Grove, a four-piece band who have spent the last two years quietly writing and recording in the relative obscurity of Clapton, east London, Simon has been revising, reassessing, investigating his roots, or in his own words, ‘taking notes’.
You might remember him as Simon Booth from Working Week, that brave if ultimately flawed melting-pot of disparate rhythms and cultures, whose anarchic soul was mistaken for jazz revivalism and who ended up being misunderstood by both record company and public alike.
‘At the first Working Week gigs we had an unbelievable atmosphere.
And that's what we need back, that rapport, that ‘soul’ of live performances.
In a sense dance music and the corporate soulboy mentality has destroyed a lot of that — the industry is now based around DJs, recycling hits, remixes and following the latest trend in dance music.’
The fact that Simon has reverted to his original surname is an indication that Stone Grove are not on any nostalgia trip.
Their debut single, ‘Don't Fight The Feeling’ on Bump ‘N’Hustle Music, features the abrasive soul vocals of Janette Sewell, who has been causing a buzz via a recent Joey Negro project and a solo outing on the ‘Totally Wired 8’compilation.
There's also a baseline heavy enough to hang half a dozen DJs from, and a funk aesthetic that you can currently detect in everyone from the Sandals to Galliano, Brand New Heavies to D-Influence.
If there is a new vibe — a reiteration of yesterday's values attuned to today's desires, erupting into the voids that the synthetic world of vinyl and plastic just can't fill — then expect Stone Grove to be up there, recycling nothing but what was once called soul.
screen dreams
Computer games are taking over our leisure time.
But are they messing up our minds?
The other night I woke in panic, shell-shocked from the Gulf War.
An unlikely scenario: I've never been to a desert and the nearest I've ever got to authentic military action is when Action Man introduced eagle eyes and gripping hands.
But this wasn't to do with fearsome flashbacks from the great TV war.
It was a high-tech nightmare caused by video game addiction.
Playing Desert Storm on my Sega console had not only eroded my morals, it had disturbed my beauty sleep.
I woke shouting ‘More fuel!
I need more fuel!’ having seen my helicopter burst into flames and plunge towards the desert.
It was all so horrifyingly real.
I was on level four, I' [d rescued hostages, destroyed the nuclear reactor, and was all set to finally put an end to the madman.
But just at that crucial point, fuel had run out, and my entire crew and I had perished in a piece of computer sand that will be forever Hackney.
All very worrying, especially since the only sleep I lost in the real Gulf War was in staying up listening to late-night doomsday discussions on Channel 4.
We've spent our lives watching TV, staring at the box, until everything from Wogan to war washes over us.
Now, the recent boom in advanced home computer games has meant that fool boys like me don't sit at home flicking the channels for blood, guts and gore: they recreate it by playing silly silicon war games.
The TV set has become a point of entry to worlds of personal fantasy.
Yet, unlike simply watching a TV programme or a video, your complete attention is required.
Your mind must be more involved with the screen image, the very nature of the games demand response.
So warped fantasies about being a big bad soldier start to be taken for real in some dark corner of my deluded male brain.
And so I wake in the night panic stricken over a lack of fuel.
Given the possibilities that the current crop of Sega/Nintendo consoles offer, it does seem a bit worrying that the whole deal is such a male-orientated affair.
‘The truth is men like gadgets, they like to control their environment,’ points out Dr Margaret Shotton, author of Computer Addiction?and one of the few academics to have taken a serious look at video game culture.
‘They also have a lot of testosterone to discharge,’ she remarks, ‘always having to play cowboys and Indians or drive fast cars!’
Or win the Gulf War.
The appeal of the games to particularly young boys may be in the fact that a lot of the games are all about some little guy fighting and eventually conquering a large evil monster.
Many see these monsters as father figures which young boys, obsessed with dear old mother, want to take on and usurp.
Although such intellectual theories may hold some water, they don't explain why teenage boys appear to be the only ones with the manual dexterity required to be a video games ace.
Perhaps the secret's in the wrist action — testosterone isn't the only thing that males have to discharge.
Despite the advent of widespread home computer technology, a certain old pastime hasn't been killed off.
In fact, if you think about it, masturbation and computer games go hand in hand.
Across the country thousands of teenage boys regularly retire to the privacy of their own bedrooms for some much-needed adolescent relief.
You don't have to have the insight of Claire Rayner to see that sexual frustration needs more than one outlet.
Interacting with the television is the only sort of intercourse you're going to get at that age.
Shooting 'em up on screen and soiling your favourite hanky may both be furtive exercises, but they do train your digits a whole lot better than cross-country runs and cold showers!
Like all things essentially adolescent (rock ‘n’ roll, spots, the Gulf War), this is not a laughing matter.
Console users take gaming seriously , and their brand loyalty is frightening.
The Sega versus Nintendo battle puts to shame anything Millwall against Leeds ever threw up.
In one corner we have Nintendo as represented by a dodgy Italian plumber called Mario, and in the other we have Sega which has put its faith in a trendy blue hedgehog called Sonic.
Flick through the pages of any of the glut of games magazines and you'll find torrents of abuse flying between Mario and Sonic followers.
Many channel their hatred into art and fill magazine galleries with hedgehogs kicking their trainer-clad feet into a blood-spattered plumber's head.
The shock of the new is techno-brutalism and the medium is the felt tip.
The only real difference you can find between Sega and Nintendo users is penis size.
Sega owners are bigger in the trouser department.
An apparently astonishing claim, and a puerile one too, but true nonetheless.
As a Sega owner myself, I feel relieved by the knowledge that Sega users have bigger willies than the chipolata Nintendo crowd.
But it's not really that much of a boast given that they also have bigger buttocks, breasts, and just about everything really.
Sega users, you see, tend to be older, hence the extra inches.
BUT IF BRAND LOYALTY can indicate age, the type of game you play is also a cause for concern.
While shoot 'em up and take no prisoner-type games may put you firmly into the hand-relief category, other games can be just as telling.
One that everybody seems to have played at some time is Tetris .
The original cartridge in the hand-held Nintendo Game-Boy, it has a popularity to equal even Mario and Sonic.
Andrew Lloyd-Webber saw fit to do a dance mix about it.
Be warned, anything that inspires Lloyd-Webber to make music should be handled with care.
The game itself is all about fitting blocks together so they make a nice tidy brick wall.
While most people enjoy fiddling with this latter-day Rubik's cube, some take it to extremes.
Tetris obsessives find themselves placing the objects in a room neatly together in their mind.
They stare from train windows trying to get all the houses to fit into each other, and watch the anarchic autumn leaves fall with sheer disgust.
Tetris players want order from chaos.
The subtext of this game is severe and retention.
It's no coincidence that it originated in Moscow — this was the Communist old guard's parting shot.
A subliminal message to Western youth.
Retain!
Keep the order, fit neatly into your place in the wall!
Another player best avoided is the racing game enthusiast.
Be it wannabe Mansells, latter-day Barry Sheenes, or plain James Hunts, the racing demon is one to watch.
After a couple of hours on Outrun or Road Rash , you'll see them whizzing through Kwiksave with a trolley on a mission or storming through red lights in a Fiat Panda.
You can sometimes hear them in a busy street brrrming and screeching away to themselves, negotiating their way through the pedestrians.
This sort of behaviour may be cute and quirky when Tom Hanks does it in a feel-good age-swap movie, but in real life it's pathetic, regressive, and very very sad.
Keep an eye out for the sport simulation freaks as well, most have a strong competitive streak.
The tell-tale signs are a complete humour transplant, temper tantrums, and strong Nietzschean overtones to all their actions.
Crap footy games like European Club Soccer will be played in an atmosphere of strained silence and any game won will be greeted with fascistic glee.
The real purpose of role-playing games is in providing a healthy alternative for potential child murderers and perverts.
‘Yes, Tommy, you have got friends!
There's Mumphkin the Leprechaun, Spazzle the Wizard and all the twitchy rabbits of Colostomy Castle!’
Advanced role-playing games sounded like more fun to play, although I soon discovered they had far more to do with train-spotting than they did with handcuffs, celery and a latex grope-suit.
Role playing games (or RPGs) are basically Dungeons And Dragons type affairs where you live life as Twinky the Hapless Goblin, or Anthrax the Warrior Warthog.
They're ideal if you just want to lose it for a couple of hours, but try not to get hooked.
Serious RP gamers tend to be the sort of nylon misfits who have no social life and can afford to spend the best part of a month mapping out Narnia-esque landscapes and jotting down all the facts and clues they can glean from meeting a variety of talking mushrooms and jovial trolls.
The notional idea of these games is usually to ‘find the missing emerald of Garnath’ or ‘free the land of Codthorpe from the evil Knights of Knobtwat’etc, etc.
But the real purpose is in providing a healthy alternative for potential child murderers and perverts.
‘Yes Tommy, you have got friends!
There's Mumphkin the Leprechaun, Spazzle the Wizard and all the twitchy rabbits of Colostomy Castle!
So be a good boy and remove the masking tape from your hamster's mouth and zip up your little trousers.’
The only RPG that you won't get too embarrassed buying is Toe Jam And Earl , an ideal chill-out kind of game about two alien rappers who strut the screen looking for the missing parts of their spaceship so they can return to planet Funkotron.
The whole thing is like a journey through one of George Clinton's trips.
You travel from place to place trying to avoid Mad Shopping Women and their trolleys, a Suburban Lawn-Mower Fiend, a Dentist of Destruction, and numerous other warped creations.
As you go on, you pick up presents, and if you're lucky you'll find a man dressed as a carrot who tells you what's in them.
If you're really lucky, you get to fly to Hula Girl Paradise where you can drink as much lemonade as you like and share a jacuzzi with some grass-skirted hula-hula dancers.
Not everybody's cup of tea, I know, but it beats battling it out with the Republican Guard or the evil Knights of Knobtwat.
I don't know what the programmers were on when they made up this game, but as Boy's Own once said about liquid E, if it comes in pints, I'll have two!
Given that most aspects of humankind's quest for entertainment and stimulation often result in a quick visit to the casualty unit, one is prone to ask whether or not this particular pursuit of the pleasure principle is bad for you.
Be it nuking the world, winning at Brand's Hatch, or wrestling with pixies, will all this fantasy turn you into a blob-shaped brain-dead computer-zombie?
And will too many shoot 'em ups eventually lead to blindness?
Well, apparently not.
Margaret Shotton doesn't think so, anyway, and she's a doctor.
‘Apart from increasing your manual dexterity and hand to eye co-ordination, video games speed up your neutral pathways,’ she claims.
Your neural pathways are the links in your brain through which knowledge passes.
If you speed these up, knowledge can travel around quicker.
Like a faster-acting computer programme, decisions and judgements can speed up, and it could lead to a higher IQ!
Dr Shotton pours scorn on mothers who chastise their offspring for playing video games: ‘It's far healthier than watching TV.
Few children remember anything more than the adverts.
If your child was playing chess all day, you'd boast that he was a genius!’
Games like Krusty's Super Fun House and some parts of the much-heralded Sonic 2 promote the much-needed skills of lateral thinking.
To be successful at such games you need to explore and find new levels and different solutions.
Seeking high and low for new rewards and new ways forward.
Learning that there is more than one solution to things is a valuable lesson.
Those who don't indulge in the video games world may be losing out in many more ways.
It is a language that needs to be learned to communicate fully in the years to come.
Video games are increasingly the starting blocks to full computer literacy.
NEXT FEBRUARY, SEGA BRINGS OUT the Mega CD, a compact disc attachment for the current Sega Mega console.
This will enable games to be bought in CD form rather than cartridge.
The advantage will be smoother, more life-like, more in-depth games — and probably more vivid nightmares.
Virtual reality is currently virtually nothing like reality and more like the confusion you get if you've drunk heavily on antibiotics, but Interactive Video is here and it works.
The Mega CD should be fun, though its only real effect on society at large will be a new set of designer tidy racks at Woolies.
But its games-oriented appeal will introduce basic interactive technology into thousands of homes.
Things like Philips CDI, Amiga CDTV, and a whole bunch of other stuff under the loose title of CD ROM will take things a bit further.
With CD ROM you can bung a disc into your drive and do lots of exciting things.
Take a walk around one of the great art galleries of the world and, if inclined, touch up a great master with a spray-can.
Have a go at surgery with a DIY home doctor's kit.
Built around a mixture of video footage and computer information, its potential is enormous.
Couch potatoes can run the London Marathon, take an in-depth reccy around St Paul's, and do nine rounds with Chris Eubank, all while tucking into a freshly-delivered deep-pan!
Very soon the computer world which we associate with work, word processors and video games will start connecting us to our TV in a relationship we've never had before.
Our love affair with the box may finally be coming to consummation.
This isn't so much a brave new world, more a retrained version of the old one.
The problems we'll encounter will all be products of our own brains.
Arriving back from a particularly hard night's clubbing.
I lay on my bed and my eyes finally fell shut.
Squealing mice seemed bedded in my ears, and green hoppity things abounded, but right smack in my mind's eye were two teams of digitised Ice Hockey players fighting it out in front of a packed stadium.
They were large as life recreations from the EA Hockey game I'd been playing all week.
Despite my appeals to postpone the match, things kept bashing away in front of me.
The most worrying thing is not that life was imitating video game imitating life etc; that my perception of reality had been fatally flawed by subliminal computer messages; or even that my brain was becoming all-too transparent to any two-bob amateur psychiatrist who cared to take note.
No, the really worrying thing was that my side ended up losing 3–1.
Invade my space, compact my disc, shrink my knob and turn me into a blue hedgity-hog .
jazz not jazz
Us3
Jazz history is being rewritten — check out the first-ever Hip hop project from the legendary Blue Note label
There's Rahsaan, one wired-up 19-year-old rapper shouting down the phone over the background music of a Brooklyn studio.
Then there's Geoff Wilkinson, a quietly-spoken, thoughtful producer and major jazz record collector, sipping orange juice in an east London cafe.
Mel Simpson, the other half of the production brains, is permanently locked in the studio.
Collectively, as Us3, they've made vinyl history with the hopelessly addictive ‘Cantaloop (Flip Fantasia)’, the first hip hop record to be released by the internationally-respected jazz label Blue Note.
Now they intend to seduce the world with more jazz hip hop, more samples —‘Cantaloop’ itself used six, all from the Blue Note archives, built around Herbie Hancock's ‘Cantaloupe Island’— and fistfuls of new British talent.
‘Jazz exploded in London in the mid-Eighties, but only a handful of people got a deal out of it,’ says Geoff, who got into hip hop via rare groove and whose CV includes organising CND and Artists Against Apartheid benefits, putting on jazz rap weekends to try and prove bands could carry it off live as well as on record, DJing at Camden's Jazz Cafe and, until recently, booking the bands there too.
‘Lots of jazz players have been doing it now for six or seven years and are on a level with the Americans.
Mel and I want to work like A&Rs, showcasting people like Gerard Prescencer, who played trumpet on ‘Cantaloop’.’
Us3 star of the moment, though is Rahsaan, who was nurtured on jazz then reggae and hip hop.
Mention UK hip hop and he immediately denounces it as a pale imitation of the ‘real thing’.
Introduce Public Enemy or Ice Cube into the conversation and he yells: ‘Hip hop in its worst form, do you hear me?
So many wannabes.’
So, um, who counts?
‘Parliament and Funkadelic.’
The veteran rapper (he started nine years ago) will appear on the forthcoming Us3 album.
Planned for release in March, following a second single in the new year, it's already got a title, a long list of potential artists and an A to Z of possible samples (when they signed to Blue Note, the label's entire back catalogue came at their disposal).
‘When we got that first call from the company, we thought they were going to sue us because we'd used some samples on a record without clearing them,’ laughs Geoff.
‘But they loved what we'd been doing.
We even met Bruce Lundvall, the head of Blue Note in New York, and he offered us access to everything on DAT.
It's good that the old artists get paid.
We sample out of respect and we pay our dues.’
A future album may involve collaborations with some original Blue Noters; the first one, ‘Hands On The Torch’, will namecheck them in the hope of encouraging people to search out source material.
That's not to say that all the tracks will be jazz-heavy.
Expect instrumentals, funky numbers and some soulful jazz vocals from one Marie Harper.
And for the future?
‘Hip hop is rediscovering funk's roots, it's slowly finding its feet as the rave scene dies out.
Hip hop is the most adventurous form of music at the moment, although life's too short not to listen to all sorts of music.
I must say, though, I'm not a huge heavy metal fan.’
The water is freezing and there are no bikini-clad girls ti impress, but winter in Cornwall sees the surfing hardcore come into its own.
Away from Newquay and its tired Day-Glo tackiness, a group of north coast surfers are promoting a different approach, personified by the campaign group Surfers Against Sewage.
This is the tale of the boys from the Badlands
Clockwise from left: Surfers Against Sewage members at the Porthleven Harbour demo; Rob Small rides the winter Cornish surf; holy tampons in the water!
Who is the masked avenger?
‘Money, money, money…root of all evil .’
In the white VW Transporter van hurtling through the maze of winding Cornish lanes and down the hill into the village of St Agnes, the word of Horace Andy is god.
As is the word of King Tubby, Augustus Pablo, Prince Far-I, Lee ‘Scratch’ Perry and Jacob Miller.
Returning from an early morning ‘hit’ at Porthleven harbour, on the opposite south coast of Cornwall, the St Agnes surfers have piled their wet boards and steamer suits in the back of the van, and the talk has turned to reggae and dub.
‘We go for that old-style thing,’ explains James Hendy, 21, recently third in the Cornish and Open surf contest, and taking the day off from his father's carpet business in nearby Truro.
‘It's the old feel we check out, that Seventies sound.’
Hendy's propensity for the ‘old style’, for an antidote to ‘the modern commercial stuff’, extends through both his taste in reggae and surfing.
Which is not to say he's a hippy soul surfer, a revivalist sporting a long Malibu board and casually riding a wave's length as if strolling in the park.
James Hendy is a surf animal.
He can destroy a wave.
As can his older brother Greg, and mates Drustan Ward and Adam Hillier, all swaying and nodding in the back of the lurching van as the dreaded remix of Arrested Development's ‘Tennessee’ begins.
While British surfing in recent years has developed into Day-Glo sporting fantasy, into pipeline boasts in city pubs, and into Newquay, Newquay, Newquay — booming as the ‘surf capital’ of Britain — these boys have looked to carve a different route.
‘The Newquay crowd just pose in Beetles covered in stickers and show off to the dodgy girls hanging around on Fistral beach,’ opines Adam, who claims he'd only visit the town to compete.
For Adam, his own patch offers far superior surf, surfers and girls.
His patch is called Badlands.
IF SURFING ROSE IN THE Eighties as the new British cool sport meets yuppie accessory lifestyle (complete with accompanying surf jargon and fluorescent add-ons), then by 1992 the fad had got stupid.
In Newquay, now established as the kiss-me-quick centre of the British surf nonsense, things were quieter this summer as the recession took its toll.
But despite this, in London, never known for its beach breaks, the surf talk continued to prosper.
The media continued to look for surf nirvana — now rehashed as the perfect antidote to Eighties careers and pressures — and was helped in no small way by the successful opening and marketing of the Low Pressure surf shop in Notting Hill.
Mambo graphics had long crossed over and splattered the high street, while surfer-turned-designer Shawn Stussy was being lined up by BBC2 (in its The Look ) as a street version of Ralph Lauren, a marketeer with a useful line in Californian surfer drawl.
Things were looking decidedly naff.
‘Each summer we were really noticing more trippers from up country,’ say the boys in the speeding white Transporter.
‘More and more come down to learn to surf and, more noticeably, there are a lot of boogie boarders in the water.
We call them toast riders, spongers, shark biscuits or escalids, either that or targets.
There can be a really heavy feeling sometimes between local surfers and visitors and between the real surfers and the boogie boarders.
And if the Newquay lot turn up round here we have to really run 'em down.’
By October, the waves off Cornwall are usually reaching their best and, as the ‘escalids’ disappear, paddling off on their stomachs, the ‘real’surfers can begin to ride the biggest waves of the year.
At Badlands, an area that focuses around the three north coast villages of St Agnes, Chapel Porth and Porthtowan, the surf activity remains high throughout the winter for the hardcore.
Christened ‘Badlands’ by a Cornish surf magazine years ago, both for its surf conditions and for the local resistance to the surface sheen of the nouveau Newquay surfers, the area currently represents the most vibrant winter surfing.
If the numbers in the sea are limited to good friends and well-known faces from the (packed) Driftwood pub in St Agnes, and outside visitors are few, then the Badlands surfers are not complaining.
‘We keep meeting these people who travel down to Cornwall and say they've surfed big breaks, but it's all false.
It's all part of the shallow commercialisation of surfing which is what we are really against,’ explains the group, unloading in St Agnes [‘Aggie’]and preparing for the afternoon's surf.
‘People get to the end of their lives and they must realise they haven't seen or experienced anything real.
For us, surfing is real.
We're against all the stupid surfing talk that's gone on.’
Badlands surfers in reflective mood as lumberjack shirt-clad friend summons up the spirits of The Pit (left); the SAS tighten up (above)
‘Sometimes I'm so frustrated that I sit on a rock and shout my head off.
Then some great fucking panty liner washes in and lands on my foot and I just get up and get on with it’
THE BADLANDS SURFERS ARE currently in a position of relative strength.
The Eighties surf bubble has well and truly burst, and competition prize money for the sport side of surfing is on the wane.
This year, the world championships did not visit Newquay, and the town was thus deprived of an event that spearheaded much of the hype.
The British surf scene has had to look back to its roots, to the old school, and the philosophy of the Badlands boys has returned to vogue.
James and Greg Hendy's father, now keeping the carpet business afloat when his sons make regular disappearances, is said to have brought the very first Malibu surf board to Cornwall.
Other long-time surfers settled in the St Agnes area in the Sixties and continue to influence the younger crowd.
Johnny Manetta arrived on a scooter in the Sixties and never left.
Now 44, he runs a small but ‘proper’ surf shack on Porthtowan beach.
‘I watched the professional events arrive in Cornwall and the whole thing get hyped up, but certain groups let all that drift by them,’ reflects Manetta.
‘Right here, for me, is the homegrown area of British surfing, and the attitude has always been more true to what it's all about.’
The older surfers like Manetta and the younger Badlands faces meet and surf together at the less well-known spots on the local coastline.
A spot like ‘The Pit’, a jealously guarded beach near Porthtowan, will see teenagers and fathers sitting out in the line-up together.
‘Sometimes one of the oldies will shout, ‘Make way for a blind pensioner’, and we'll let them take a wave,’ the younger surfers laugh.
The Pit derives its name from the steep galley down from an old tin mine, which the Badlands surfers must negotiate to reach the beach below.
To reach the cliff edge, the surfers have to leave the coast road and drive along a rough track and across the old mine site.
It's a distinctive and barren spot; an episode of Dr Who was once filmed here, and the local surfers do a nice line in Cyberman jokes.
But today, the talk in the line-up at The Pit — the line of surfers waiting just beyond the breaking waves — is more sombre, and centres on the local sewage problem.
The morning's visit to the harbour at Porthleven was just one of a whole series of annual ‘hits’ and demonstrations carried out by the campaign group Surfers Against Sewage [SAS], which from a St Agnes office has now swelled to close to 7,000 members across the country.
At low tide, the sewage outfall at Porthleven harbour can be seen depositing thick sludge into the sea.
Two years into the SAS campaign, the Cornish surfers are as angry as ever and as adamant that change must come.
THE GROWING STRENGTH , both in numbers and influence, of Surfers Against Sewage, is the most visible evidence of the unique surfing community that has built in the Badlands area.
Their spirit is rapidly spreading.
Drive around Cornwall during the winter months, and many of the cars and vans you see are sporting SAS window stickers — and they're not all driven by young blond wave riders.
The sticker phenomenon is most noticeable, understandably, around the SAS' St Agnes base, although, surprisingly, in Newquay the profile of the SAS is relatively low.
‘The SAS couldn't have happened in Newquay because there just wouldn't have been the community behind it,’ believes Chris Hines, a Leo Sayer look-a-like (he claims it's more Lou Reed), a long-time Badlands surfer and the founder and general secretary of the SAS campaign.
‘We now have a very healthy nationwide membership that's growing all the time, but I'm afraid we still don't have many members from Newquay, supposedly the country's surf capital.
We have as many members in Hartlepool.
In Newquay there are both local councillors and members of the town's surfing community who are looking to shun our work and deny there is a big sewage problem; in fact, Newquay receives around five million gallons a day off its beaches.
Basically it's the Jaws syndrome — there are people who don't want to admit there's shit happening in the water.’
‘People get to the end of their lives and they must realise they haven't seen or experienced anything real.
For us, surfing is real’
Gas mask used for Dalek impression by Badlands boy Adam Hillier (left); the SAS' Chris Hines copies, but fails to disguise uncanny resemblances to Leo Sayer
If the Badlands surfers are looking to escape the stereotype of Beetle-driving,Baywatch raver clones, then at the SAS, Chris Hines is looking to escape the stereotype of the surfer as the stoned hippy layabout.
On the noticeboard behind his desk, two prominent names are scrawled: ‘Tampons’ and ‘Seb Coe’.
Both are currently on the SAS hit list.
The MP for Camborne and Falmouth, formerly a god at running in a circle for 800 metres, is not proving as supportive as the St Agnes surfers had hoped.
‘We hoped that a local MP who was a leading sportsman would identify with our cause rather more than Seb Coe has done.
Would he ever have got to the Olympics if every time he went to train at his local track he got swamped by the waste from a few thousand local toilets?
What if Seb had found syringes in the long-jump pit?
He hasn't ever voiced real support, and when the local water authority at last decided to build a basic screening plant, Sebastian Coe made a statement to the local paper with a pathetic one-line thanks to ‘the local surfers’.
There was no real acknowledgement of all the hard SAS campaigning.
A lot of people round here were furious, and rightly so.’
Since first appearing in the pages of this magazine (FACE 33), the SAS campaign has developed enormously, and 1992 has proved to be the breakthrough year.
‘This year, our organisation has really started to be taken seriously at an establishment level,’ says Hines.
‘We're being listened to and referred to by the Water Research Centre, by the Environment Council, by the Royal Yachting Association and by other local MPs.
We now get calls from serious companies — the companies who are involved in building the country's sewage systems — who inform us of the problems and the reality behind the scenes, because they want to see our efforts succeed.
‘The UK Government is now saying that by 1995 all bathing waters will comply with the EC bathing water directives.
We're saying that by 1995, all UK beaches will only be reaching the bare EC legal standard in order to avoid being prosecuted.
And this is all based on a regime where the tests for bacteria in the water are crap.
To give an example of how inadequate official testing can be, at Swansea, where a hell of a lot of people use the sea for recreation, until 1989 it was not disclosed that the official testing point in the sewage outfall pipe was above the point where commercial waste was joining the system.
A company like BP has paid money to the Welsh water authority in order to be able to discharge through the authority's outfall, and it will not be until later this year that the public will be able to find out the results of any testing.
In the UK, companies pay in order to discharge into the sea and, as Greenpeace has always claimed, we effectively sell licences to pollute.
Meanwhile the Government tries to deny there's a problem — apparently Thatcher even claimed at one point that no untreated sewage goes into British seas.
Four hundred million gallons a day enters our seas and 80 per cent is untreated.’
As a spokesman for the UK surfing community, Chris Hines is increasingly well-informed, so much so that he is now a worthy opposition in the corridors of power.
He has a sewage horror story to tell for nearly every area of the country.
Having began as a wild idea with a group of mates in a St Agnes pub, provoked by anger, frustration and too many evenings of getting home ill from the beach; the SAS' influence is now spreading well beyond Cornwall and the surfing community.
The media are receiving such an informed, dynamic and visually striking group with open arms: from picketing South West Water to protesting in full surf regalia at Parliament, from surfing in gas masks to demonstrating with a huge inflatable turd, the SAS has come up with a series of media-friendly stunts that have caught the headlines.
More importantly, what might have initially looked like a lightweight novelty campaign group has grown and developed to become a full-time pressure group recognised as a leading authority on UK water pollution.
‘It's hard for people to really understand and identify with a problem, whether it's Aids, Somalia or pollution, until they really get to see it first hand,’ reflects Hines.
‘The surfing thing has been a successful edge to the campaign, because it does have that ‘flirting with death’, ‘young men out there against nature’ kind of angle that people stop and want to read about.
I don't see the SAS stopping its campaigning until the sewage problem is completely dealt with — the good thing is that this is a problem that does have a solution.
There are times when I go down to the beach at The Pit and I'm the only surfer down there and I'm so frustrated with it all that I sit on a rock and shout my head off.
Then some fucking great panty liner washes in and lands on my foot and I just get up and get back on with it.’
‘They come from outer space’ pose at the former Dr Who filming site (right); on the sewage pipe at Porthleven harbour (below)
THE DAY AFTER THE SAS visit to Porthleven harbour, the seas off the Badlands coast are virtually empty.
A strong south-westerly wind ruins  the swells coming in off the Atlantic.
Drive north up the coast, however, and the view above Newquay harbour is impressive.
The sea is full of figures and this is one of the few places in Cornwall capable of still being surfed in such winds.
The view from the beach is rather less striking, though.
The sea is full of Day-Glo boogie boards, the car park littered with cars sporting fluorescent ‘Wicked’ stickers, and the waves here crumble every time.
As the day winds on, many migrate to the local pubs, notably the Sailor's Arms, where a DJ plays Zoë's ‘Sunshine On A Rainy Day’ more times than could be believed possible; and the Bowgie, a short drive from the beach and a legendary Newquay pub that has attained a reputation as a bit of a rave spot.
In the Sailor's Arms the surfwear brands can be seen in all corners: Quicksilver, Hot Tuna, Mambo and, most worryingly, Fat Willys.
A group of surfer clones at the bar tell a story of a mate who buried his ‘hash’ on a beach in Morocco, while travelling and surfing there, only to return to find someone had parked a VW Camper on the burial spot.
‘Of course Mikey waited until they went to sleep then got underneath and dug it up,’ chortles a chap in a Hot Tuna sweatshirt.
‘You can't waste a good supply of spliff!’
The acceptable face of Nineties surf style?
Badlands boho pin-up Rob Small
In the Driftwood at St Agnes, the pub talk also invariably turns to Morocco, although the tales of waves far outnumber the eulogies to drug and carpet buying.
Most of the surfers at the pub have trips planned at some point in the winter, with Morocco beating off challenges from Indonesia and the Canaries in the popularity stakes.
There's a grungy, thrash band playing upstairs, who get the approval of the reggae crew, and if Zoë suddenly came over the speakers, then people would probably wave their arms in the air.
In parody, of course.
There's a distinct sartorial difference too, although, as the leading Cornish surfer Rob Small concedes, ‘Most of the surfers round here do end up looking like gypsies.
‘We go for darker clothes generally — plainer stuff,’ explains Small, who is responsible for buying the clothing merchandise at a popular local surf shop.
‘All the guys down here will choose to wear plain, dark wetsuits, although quite a few of us are dictated to by sponsors on that front.
Surfwear brands like Quicksilver, Billabong and Gotcha all sell here — they're so well established — but if someone's wearing a name like Fat Willys, then you know they're a joke surfer.’
Notably, it's the surf brands that look for a plainer, old-school feel that receive the most enthusiastic response from the Badlanders at the Driftwood.
American brand Rusty, founded by an American guru board shaper, is seen as good clothing, as is the surf/skate label Gordon & Smith.
Stussy is still held in high regard too, although more surfers sport French bleus — the cotton workwear they can pick up cheap when driving through Europe.
The big surf companies have caught on to such a trend towards the plain and dark: Quicksilver is understood to be behind the Pirate Surf label, and Gotcha runs a second, more cultish label called More Core Division.
Where the mainline brand still sticks with up-front, sporty advertising pictures, More Core Division is promoted by a tattooed ex-convict with a drug history.
‘Most of the surfers here ignore all the big surfwear names that have crossed over into mainstream street fashion,’ says Small.
‘It's more important to be the best surfer at St Agnes on a Sunday afternoon than to have the right T-shirt.’
A TALE OF TWO CORNISH surf cities Well, not quite, although the divisions between the Badlands region and Newquay are not difficult to spot.
The surfers in other areas of Cornwall (St Ives for example) and from other parts of the country like the burgeoning Welsh and North-east scenes are talked of with great enthusiasm by those on the beach at The Pit.
At the Driftwood bar, Chris Hines is sinking a Guinness and explaining that the Parliament tune, ‘Promentalshitback Enema Squad (The Doodoo Chasers)’ is the unofficial SAS anthem.
‘You know, for me, it's all about people getting in the water and having a lot of fun in safety,’ he concludes.
‘At the end of the day, who cares if they're boogie boarding off Newquay or riding big waves in Scarborough?
It's all about enjoying the sea.’
By the time you read this, results from the new monitoring at the Swansea sewage outfall will be available, and Hines and other Badlands surfers will have joined with Welsh SAS members to respond to the findings.
Water companies are now being forced to listen to British surfers.
Following a recent demonstration at the City stockbroking firm James Capel (where water companies' finance is influenced), the SAS is now buying shares in the British water companies in order to attend their AGMs and have a say.
And ethical investors in the City have taken up the SAS cause — some actually turning up to the SAS summer ball and joining in the dancing to Dezzman Devan's reggae band and London funksters Push.
The Badlands spirit is swelling — catch this wave now, but don't think about doing it in a Fat Willys T-shirt.
‘You know, for me, it's all about getting in the water and having fun in safety.
At the end of the day, who cares if they're boogie boarding off Newquay or riding big waves in Scarborough?
It's all about enjoying the sea’
jazz not jazz
raw stylus
With Paul Weller and Peter Gabriel on their case, can this hard-playing mob cope with the excess of peer approval?
They met in a soup kitchen in Hull, decided that cutting a record together would be fun, and before long had Paul Weller offering to play guitar for them.
Or at least that's their story.
Jules Brookes, the multi-instrumentalist and driving force behind Raw Stylus, can't keep a straight face as he attempts to recount his version of the group's history.
The truth is anyone's guess, but Weller certainly offered to play on Raw Stylus' single ‘Pushin' Against The Flow’, and their name cropped up in one of the few recent interviews given by the former Cappuccino Kid.
‘He's been a great help,’ reflects Jules.
‘He understands where we're coming from.’
Where Raw Stylus are coming from is that area where much of the best British music is currently being produced: the vibrant vibrazone where jazz and soul tunes collide with a hard hip hop feel.
And that doesn't mean that Raw Stylus just stick a rap on their records in an attempt to gain club credibility and pander to the (already much-maligned) jazz rap tag.
‘It's the hardness of hip hop production that's really important to us,’ explains Ron, the Raw Stylus production boffin.
‘We sample the odd bassline here and there, but we're not about looping up whole bits of music.’
‘And I can't rap,’ interjects vocalist Marcella, ‘so you're stuck with my vocals, aren't you!’
Marcella is taking the piss.
It was when her voice joined the Raw Stylus combination on the ‘Pushin' Against The Flow’ single that things really started.
The single ranks as one of ‘92's finest, receiving huge club play from a limited white label pressing and proving to be the stand-out tune on the first ‘Movin' On’ British soul compilation album.
When DJ James Lavelle recently founded his Mo Wax label, he approached Raw Stylus immediately.
‘For me, they're just really distinctive — a London crew with a really phat funk sound,’ says Lavelle.
Through Mo Wax, came the current clubland stormer ‘Many Ways’, and the equally ruff ‘Something About You Missing’, due for release early next year.
There's some remix work for Peter Gabriel coming up soon too.
Despite major record labels making the customary silly noises, for the moment Raw Stylus are doing it their way, playing out with a full eight-piece line-up.
‘People are blowing horns like mad and pogoing,’ grins Marcella.
‘Everyone's got fed up with that lame club PA vibe, they want to hear it done better on stage than on record again.
Oh, and one other thing, I'm fed up with people saying, ‘It's just that London Talkin Loud vibe.’
‘We're taking this sound nationwide.’
Some call him Nobski, others claim he's just a cartoon, a caricature of damaging black stereotypes.
Normski says he's just being himself.
As Dance Energy enjoys a successful fourth series, will the real Norman Anderson please stand up?
‘Yo, yo, yo.
Yes, we reach again.
Dance Energy is back, Normski is here, so make some noise — Resspppectt!!!’
The screen is too small for him.
He fills it with a restless, bristling energy, as if he might clamber out of the frame and into real life.
His hands windmill in a frenetic semaphore and his body shifts in ceaseless motion, with a life of its own.
Once watched, never forgotten, Normski's broadcast manner breaks all the rules of TV.
He's not sexy, suave or sardonic — the qualities most neophyte presenters in neighbouring DEF II shows strive for.
Instead of their polished manner and measured tones, he sweats under the studio lights and delivers his lines in a bellow.
And where they maintain a cool detachment from their subject, Normski's in the crowd during his show, dancing alongside the audience.
Yet while they're professionally bland and anonymous, Normski is, well, Normski.
‘I have no shame, even my mum says so,’ he says, when asked whether there are moments during the filming of Dance Energy when he stops and wonders what he's doing, why he's there.
‘I'm a survivor, an Aries, a ram.
I don't sit and think about things, I run at 'em and dive in.’
He laughs, gazing out of his apartment window towards the dome of St Paul's Cathedral, rising above the City of London's grimy skyline.
From outside, his three-storey EC1 home resembles a heavily fortified office block.
The exterior walls are bare brick, the ground-floor windows are barred, and the only way in is through a heavy iron gate.
Normski moved in 18 months ago, soon after he began a relationship with Janet Street-Porter, renowned as the most powerful woman in television.
It is her house — full of contemporary art curios, exposed stonework and a neglected Bafta award, gathering dust on a shelf.
In the expansive lounge, with its wide-angle view across the City, Normski absently manipulates the television image of himself stored on a tape of Dance Energy , watching as he clicks forward, frame by frame, until his face fills the screen.
A curious thing to do.
Wander through Hackney or Dalston, Ladbroke Grove or Battersea, and there are hundreds, even thousands of Normskis, all in over-size Chipie jeans and Fila trainers, with a crop of baby dreads sprouting from their heads.
On or off-screen, there's no difference between him and the capital's hip hop homeboys.
His achievement has been to cross that hitherto unrepresented culture into the mainstream; to disrupt the patina of early evening viewing simply by being himself.
‘I have a lot in common with the people who watch the show, and I think one of the things which has made me popular — even at the start, when I wasn't very good, when I was nervous — was that people could really relate to this unsettled black guy on television.
I was real.’
But his hyperactive personality has also made him an easy subject for parody.
Black comedy show The Real McCoy sent him up with a character called Can't-stand-still-ski.
When Private Eye digs at Janet Street-Porter, it also takes a side swipe at ‘Nobski’.
And London clubzine Chortler's Inc has featured a cartoon strip with a bumbling yoof TV presenter, again called Nobski.
‘With what I've done, I'm going to get a certain amount of flak,’ he says.
‘But if I start looking up my own arsehole and acting differently when people parody me, I don't think that's a good way for me to live.
Those people will always find bad in what you do, but I'm certainly not going to go out of my way to avoid being a subject for them to beat down on.’
DANCE ENERGY  BEGAN two years ago — bright, optimistic, and fundamentally flawed.
Ostensibly an attempt to recreate a club atmosphere on TV, its format was closer to that established by pop shows such as Ready Steady Go in the Fifties: a studio band doggedly pretending to play live in front of an audience whose enthusiasm was so unreserved it was obviously phoney.
After two series, the overbearing white set was replaced by the house, the show was renamed Dance Energy House Party and the focus was broadened to include comedy.
Normski prowled the corridors, bumping into his own split-screen comic personae: stern Auntie Norma from Jamaica, and Normalski, his straight-laced counterpart from a parallel planet.
They uneasy structure militated against spontaneity or the development of real humour — the show looked uncomfortable and so did Normski.
Yet the current, fourth series — which relies on the interplay between Norm and professional comedian Vaz Blackwood — is more relaxed and often genuinely funny.
From the loose, self-consciously corny humour to the playful structure of the plasterboard set, the influences are American —Pee Wee's Playhouse meets The Fresh Prince Of Bel Air .
‘The show's taking the piss, really,’ says Normski, in the green room of DEF II's Manchester studio set.
‘It's about putting the positive, funnier side of things in your face.
I'm uncomfortable as hell doing comedy, but that's good, 'cause when I'm comfy I get complacent, then I get lazy and naff.
So I'm uncomfortable, but in the positive sense that I didn't go to no acting school, so all I'm doing is being myself.’
BORN IN NORTH LONDON 26 years ago, Norman Anderson realised in childhood that life was about individual motivation.
At school, the teachers assessed his quality by his colour and damned with faint encouragement, suggesting he aim low to avoid disappointment.
But one friend, Zak Ove, son of film-maker Horace Ove, encouraged him to pursue an interest in photography.
And simultaneously, the first wave of raw, uncut, old school hip hop reached Britain from New York, and he consumed signs of the new culture insatiably.
‘I couldn't get enough of it, the clothes were fly — Adidas and bump laces and all kinds of stuff — the dance moves…
I ate it all up like bubblegum.’
Young and eager, he was well placed to capture the emergent UK rap scene, and his forthright personality also made him a match for America's often egoistic rap stars.
Only later, as a reputation as the best hip hop photographer on either side of the Atlantic was developing, did the appropriateness of his childhood nickname, Normski, become evident — given that is, the abundance of ‘skis’ in the world of rap, from T-ski Valley and Joeski Love to Jamalski.
Word of his fuel-injected mouth was enough to secure a casting for Dance Energy in ‘89, and originally he was to co-present the programme beside Prince's former dancer, Cat.
At the eleventh hour, she bowed out, leaving him to anchor the show alone.
‘I was shit scared, and it was so hot under the lights that I could smell burning — my clothes were smouldering.
Then, suddenly, I got this power, and I walked through the crowd feeling like a Don Gordon [big man].
Everyone was cheering and the nerves disappeared 'cause it was so much fun.
It was fresh.’
Now he is more famous than many guests on the show.
‘When Dance Energy first started, I was shit scared.
It was so hot under the lights that I could smell burning — my clothes were smouldering.
Then, suddenly, I got this power, and I walked through the crowd feeling like a Don Gordon.
Everyone was cheering and the nerves disappeared 'cause it was so much fun.
It was fresh’
Yet he seems, in a way, terribly vulnerable.
As I watch the programme being filmed, I imagine that the cameras are rifles, lining up telescopic sights at his head.
It's true that no one 's actually out to shoot Normski.
But if character assassination were a crime, there'd be a long list of suspects.
The homeboys who should be amongst Dance Energy's most loyal followers diss him.
They say he's gone soft, sold out.
At a UK rap jam held at London's Marquee this summer, they booed and hissed when he stepped on stage.
‘Aaawww man, that's never happened to me before,’ Normski says, shaking his head.
‘They weren't stopping, so I just took the mood down and told them I never knew any of them back in the days of groups like Dynamic 3.
Then, it was like, ‘Respect, old school’, and they all shut up.
It was just little homies who thought, because it's Normski, and they're at a rock club, it's cool to throw things and boo.’
But there are adults too, many of them black, that are vociferous in their criticism.
Some are afraid their children will grow up like him.
Others complain he provides a moronic stereotype of black people for which they in turn must suffer.
He seems genuinely upset by the charges and pauses as he considers an answer.
‘I hear what you're saying…that's quite deep…
But it's the sorta thing I'd expect to hear from older people who've been fighting a fight and aren't interested in anything I'm doing.
But it's kind of a shame, because I'm only one element of blackness that you can see on television, and I'll tell you, if I'd been a kid and seen someone like me on telly, I'd be a hell of a lot happier about the way I am in this world.’
Indeed, were there more than a handful of black presenters on TV, he wouldn't be burdened with the impossible task of being all things to all black people.
‘I feel a pressure 'cause there ain't that many people who've been able to look, speak or represent the types of styles I have, but I ain't doing this for everyone, I'm just doing what I do best and that should be more than enough.’
AT HOME IN LONDON , Normski plays back a song he recorded the previous evening on a four-track.
It's a surprisingly lyrical rap, delivered over a laidback drum and bass accompaniment he played himself.
In between Dance Energy series, he's been making demo tapes, with the aim of securing a record deal some time in the future.
That there's more to Normski than his manic public persona is obvious here, with the music playing, and the beaming photos of himself and Janet Street-Porter that are propped up through the house.
Unsurprisingly, he's reluctant to discuss their relationship — after all, since DEF II falls under her authority, most people assume she is responsible for his career.
‘It doesn't work like that.
You don't just say, ‘Gissa job’, 'cause it's like, ‘Sure, I'll give you a job, wash the fucking dishes homeboy.’
We help each other out, and suggest things to each other, but that's as much as we talk about work or TV.’
They met, he insists, soon after, not before, he began presenting Dance Energy —‘I got talking to her and I liked that woman’— and his admiration for her today is obvious.
‘She's really done a lot, like, she's the one who brought punk to Britain.
She's the voice of all things that don't get a voice.
I'm cool with Janet, because one thing we have in common is that both of us are out there.
It's a loving bond.’
When it began, their relationship was dragged over the coals by the tabloids.
But if the pairing still seems unlikely, bear in mind that both are extrovert, larger than life and indefatigably self-confident, with two of the hardest-working mouths in the media.
‘You only live with people you get on with,’ grins Normski.
‘And, big-mouthed people need someone who'll answer back to them.’
THE CENTREPIECE OF THE games room on the ground floor of the house used to be a full-size snooker table.
Normski covered the baize with an enormous Scalextric set, and sometimes he'll call up friends and they'll race cars round the track for hours.
‘To me, having fun is very important.
But even though I'm having a laugh, that's no good if you don't understand the depth and seriousness of things.
Like, we were in Belfast filming, and even though there were guns everywhere, the people were really bubbly and joyous.
Even here in EC1, I've almost been blown up twice by bombs, so you don't escape reality wherever you go.
But the thing is, can we still have fun?
That's what I'm trying to do.
‘I'm a freelance human being,’ he says later, about to leave the house on his mountain bike.
‘Dance Energy is only a phase in my life and unless I can do every idea I want on the BBC, then I'll obviously have to do them somewhere else.’
Almost pathologically resistant to remaining stationary, Normski has been keeping up his photography career, and earlier this year he staged an exhibition of his rap photos, appropriately at the Covent Garden clothes store RAP (since closed).
In pilot at Radio One is a Dance Energy radio show, also fronted by Normski, and there are unrelated plans for a cartoon, featuring an animated version of himself.
The key to survival, he believes, is to remain a moving target.
‘Last week, I was on the bike, riding really fast, this car stops suddenly, and I hit the brakes.
I haven't fallen off, but my back wheel's in the air, and I'm leaning on the guy's boot.
I'm like, ‘It's OK, I'm in control.’
And I push myself down, do a move, bunny hop, and I'm gone — nothing can stop me.
gilbert & george
They live together, eat together, collect male pin-up magazines together and share a reputation as the fogeys of the art world.
The critics knock them, but clamour to see more.
As for the buyers, G&G's latest paintings are worth a cool £2 million
‘Old boring farts,’ says Gilbert smiling.
‘We know that's what people think of us.’
He sips some tea and glances at George, who's dressed like him, in a stiff tweed suit, cut from a pattern last popular during the austerity years of the post-Wear era.
‘Yes, we know our image,’ he continues.
‘Miserable fuckers.’
It's not surprising really.
For the past 20 years, Gilbert and George have refined a public persona which is more famous than any one of their pictures.
They are artists.
A couple, who live and work together.
They also dress alike, visit the same cafe for lunch each day, and speak with one voice, a plural ‘we’.
They've sparred with the media throughout their career and, out of repeated interviews, a ritual has evolved.
You meet Gilbert and George at their home in Spitalfields, in London's East End.
Its interior has been restored to its original eighteenth-century wood-panelled glory, and in each of the sparsely-furnished rooms is some of their extensive collection of nineteenth-century vases and pottery.
Tea is served.
Questions are asked and answered with courtesy.
It is all polite, charming and refined.
Only afterwards is it plain that, for the most part, they've given the same answers they've supplied to the press for years.
So, the artists' shell remains intact, the fusty public image undisturbed.
And all of this would be fine, were it not for the questions raised by their art itself.
Vast photographic tableaux in garish colours, they are provocative, controversial pictures that address issues of sexuality, eroticism, race and cultural identity.
In their latest show, ‘New Democratic Pictures’(the first in Britain for three years), Gilbert and George (who often appear alongside their exclusively male models) pose naked for the first time.
At any given period, their art will be on show somewhere across the world.
Last year, a travelling show toured Russia and America, next year an exhibition of new work opens in China.
The pair are among the world's most important and successful artists.
Their work is anything but boring, so why the tweedledum-tweedledee of their public face, with its immaculate fogeyness?
Afternoon at their Spitalfields home, which began with the obligatory tea ceremony, stretches into evening.
As the hours go by, it's clear that neither Gilbert nor George is particularly miserable.
And despite the suits, which give them the air of ex-cons, just out from a time-warping jail sentence, they also seem younger than their 50 years apiece.
George is the taller one in the glasses, who has the accent and slightly stiff manner of a public school house master.
Gilbert was born in the Dolomite region of Italy, and speaks English with a hesitancy and sibilance that's eerily reminiscent of Peter Lorre.
They have a sprightly air and a sly mischievous sense of humour.
Recently, the pair combined their 50th birthdays into a 100th anniversary celebration at a Mauritian restaurant they consider ‘the best in the world’.
Champagne was quaffed and truffles munched by the 30 guests: ‘It was quite an orgy, very close, very friendly,’ says Gilbert.
But at a different point in our conversation, they seem to have forgotten about it, and instead painted a bleak picture of lonely Londoners: ‘We don't have a circle of friends or acquaintances…we don't want to have to relate to friends.’
To relax, said George, they'd sometimes take the 113 bus to the end of the line at Shoreditch and then walk home.
‘GEORGE THE CUNT AND Gilbert The Shit.’
In a provocatively titled photo portrait from 1970, the pair attempted to pre-empt any future criticism of their work by ‘getting there first’.
At St Martin's School of Art, where they'd met three years previously, they had already decided to make themselves the subject of their art.
‘We were fresh out of art school, we had nothing, no money, we were alone in the world, but we knew that we were artists, and we wanted to make that the artwork,’ says George.
They became ‘living sculptures’, only painting and photographing themselves and, famously, spraying themselves bronze, climbing a pedestal in a gallery and performing an eight-hour mime to ‘Underneath The Arches’.
They've been art celebrities since then and, although the scale of their work has increased — pictures can now include several people, and stretch up to ten metres across — the real subject remains G&G (as they sometimes describe themselves).
They've been under scrutiny since they met — a considerable strain for any relationship, and doubly so for one as close as theirs.
Gilbert and George are gay.
Their work carries highly charged images of male sexuality, such as‘Naked Beauty’ where two young, naked models abase themselves before an open, budding flower, while George looks on with the impassivity of a voyeur.
Yet when Lynn Barber of the Independent interviewed them last year, she revealed that George was once married with two children who are now in their teens — information which surely fractures their carefully cultivated image.
George: ‘We are anti-enjoyment, we're anti the simplicity, the narrowness of pleasure seeking.’
Gilbert: ‘I like The Golden Girls, they're my favourite’
‘Not at all,’ says George.
‘It's totally irrelevant if I was married.
Every artist we know has been married two or three times, and, throughout history, artists are the trendsetters that way.’
Gilbert, smiling, interjects: ‘Artists have always been the biggest fuckers, no?
They were the first ones to invent free love.’
G&G DO NOT USE the word gay.
Nor are they comfortable with terms such as straight or lesbian.
They prefer instead to talk simply of ‘sexuality’.
Sex itself is a key aspect of their art; the erotic nature of some of their pictures is unquestionable.
Add to that the recurrence of phallic imagery and the exclusive presence of men, never women, in the photos, and it's no wonder that some critics describe the work as homoerotic.
Much to the artists' chagrin.
‘What people mean when they say homoerotic is images of gorgeous, sweating guys and we don't do that,’ retorts George.
‘This,’ he says slapping down a copy of THE FACE — bare-chested Marky Mark on its cover — with an air of triumphalism, ‘is more homoerotic than our pictures!’
Still, as we tour their house, from one vase-filled room to another, the subject recurs.
Gilbert and George have a theory about homoeroticism.
Gilbert: ‘We say, if a picture of a man stripped to the waist is homoerotic, then every naked woman is ‘lesbierotic’.’
George: ‘And they'd never call women that, so their argument about a man must be wrong.
They're saying one thing for one sex and one for the other.’
So you wouldn't accept that your work is phallocentric, that it doesn't have a great deal to say to women?
George: ‘If you prefer 2,000 years of art history, whereby if you have an exhibition for nudes, then everyone assumes it must be women, that's fine.
But we say that needs challenging.’
Gilbert: ‘But we do believe that the biggest god in the world is the penis, it's the most important thing in life.’
George: ‘You wouldn't have been born and writing for THE FACE if it wasn't for someone spunking off.’
That suggests that life is all bound up with the penis, and has nothing to do with women.
Gilbert: ‘Go in the street and listen to a conversation.
What word to you think is most important?
Penis!
That's all they talk about — penis, penis, penis.
But in the art world it's not allowed to be mentioned.
It's all abstract this and that.
When we had a show in Basle, they asked questions in Parliament.’
Judy Rumbold suggested in the Guardian that one of the reasons for the maleness of your work was that you both had domineering mothers.
Gilbert: ‘That was the worst article we ever had.
She said that we were trying to push the penis down women's throats.’
George: ‘Not one picture shows that.’
Gilbert: ‘When we had a big exhibition at the Hayward Gallery, 80 works, only three or four had a penis in it.’
Is it you or others who are obsessed with penises?
Gilbert: ‘They are obsessed with sex otherwise they wouldn't see forests of penises that are not there!
They want to see them!’
ARE G&G THEMSELVES OBSESSED?
Probably.
In a Sunday Correspondent questionnaire two years ago, they rated their most overused word, ‘dick’.
But they also take an amused, almost anthropological interest in the subject.
In one room, there are three wooden painted phalluses, from a collection they once made of Indian tribal art.
‘Look, there's even a G&G one,’ grins George, brandishing a double-headed stick.
And in the library there is a more recent collection of men's pin-up books dating back to the Fifties.
Although it's only two years since they began acquiring the magazines, there are now so many that the bulk must remain in storage.
We flick through a few of them, Gilbert and George pointing out the anachronistic charm of the airbrushed male nudes.
They also keep children's books from the same era, particularly ones with titles that have acquired a Viz -like smuttiness across the ages, such as Scouts In Bondage, Dick's Chum and Courtney's Choice .
‘Faith Drop’(opposite, top): religion is the opiate of the masses (or something)
‘Necked’(opposite): a cautionary tale for substance abusers everywhere?
‘Teeth’(right): dental damn
‘Stroll’(over page): giving Madonna a run for her money
‘Old boring farts,’ says Gilbert smiling.
‘We know that's what people think of us.’
Above all, though, the pair are concerned with subverting norms.
‘Everything's horribly coventionalised, ridden with habit,’ says George.
‘We have to open things to discussion.
If there is distress involved in that, then that's very good.
We don't want to make an art that pats people on the back.’
Instead, their pictures are an open challenge to traditional standards of taste and liberal cultural values.
Works such as‘Human Bondage’ evoke emblems of the right-wing like swastikas and Union Jacks, while in ‘Paki’and ‘Here And There’there is a disturbingly ambiguous relationship between the artists and the black and Asian subjects they share the photos with.
Numerous other works, like ‘Bum Cross’, ‘Holy Cock’ and ‘Shit Faith’, are both scatalogical and irreverent.
In fact, G&G have something to offend everyone.
George: ‘It's totally irrelevant if I was married.
Every artist we know has been married two or three times.
Artists are the trendsetters that way’
But when Gilbert sighs ‘They give us names like paedophile, racist — all the names you can imagine’, it's as if they wonder what all the fuss is about.
‘We want to provide the opportunity for change in the viewer,’ declares George.
‘So if somebody starts talking about racism when they see our work, that's very good.
Because there's obviously a concern inside that viewer that's come out in 90 per cent of other artists’ work.’
But although G&G talk endlessly of providing ‘art for the people’, they themselves are well insulated from the masses.
‘We only want to communicate our ideas with our pictures,’ sniffs Gilbert.
‘We don't like to have big discussions as to how our art should be.’
They have a streamlined routine — lunch at the Market Cafe on the same street as their house, a local barber and tailor — which never takes them far from home and avoids unprogrammed encounters.
George pauses, momentarily confused, when I ask whether they actually like people.
‘Well…yes…they're the basis for our inspiration — everyday, closing our eyes and imagining all the people alive at the moment, wherever they are.
If you imagine it for more than two or three minutes, you start crying.’
It wasn't always this way.
G&G spent a good part of a decade — the Seventies — getting drunk, the memory of which still prompts a wistful smile from Gilbert, and they were habitués of the Blitz even before it became the early-Eighties club.
Now, they are simply too busy, and life is dominated by work.
When a show is imminent, as it almost always is somewhere in the world, they spend over ten hours a day in the immaculately ordered studio at the bottom of their garden.
To produce the 47 works in ‘New Democratic Pictures’, for instance, they sorted through 70,000 photos, enlarged, printed and coloured the selected images, organised their framing, paid for the publication of a catalogue, constructed a scale model of the exhibition and oversaw the hanging of the pictures in the gallery.
Some of the new works have already been shown in Denmark and 29 can now be seen at the Anthony D'Offay Gallery in London.
But Gilbert and George have already begun work on their next exhibition at the end of 1993, in China.
‘We produce more shows than a big gallery like the Tate does in a year,’ says Gilbert with some pride.
IT IS LITTLE WONDER THAT some of their opinions seem anachronistic at times.
Despite the collapse of communism, the concomitant crisis in left-wing ideas and the unravelling of the Eighties consumerist fantasy, they still maintain, as they have for years, that socialism is an evil malaise, while professing a support for Conservatism, as unblinking as that of a home counties Tory loyalist.
Or at least they say they do.
It's tempting, but probably inadvisable, to accept their statements — often pat slogans they've been repeating for years — at face value.
They are, after all, skilled provocateurs.
In their ‘kitchen’(a sink, a hot plate and a kettle, with no proper cooking or storage facilities), they point proudly to some Tory Party mugs they had biked over from Smith Square after the election.
But even they can't resist a smirk at the surreal image of John Major's floating head, stamped without an accompanying body, on the side of the cups.
However it's not true that their life is all a deceit.
Or that there is a ‘real’ private Gilbert and George, and another fake public persona.
What does seem likely, at least in part, is that a practice which began in the Sixties — distinguishing themselves from their left-leaning peers through a pose of premature reactionism — has since become an indistinguishable part of their character.
Angered for instance by the archetypal ‘freaky’ artist of their student days, ‘with special whiskers and special sandals’, they adopted formal suits.
Now those clothes are as much a trademark as were Andy Warhol's ill-fitting silver wigs.
Changing out of them would risk destroying the brand image they've developed over 20 years.
‘Every one of our pictures has a title so you can remember it, and our suits are based on that, so you can remember us,’ says Gilbert.
‘Everything is based on that.
How could we change them?’
For the same reason, they maintain a united front of grim  asceticism , never smiling in photos, the friendless lonely Londoners.
So when they laugh, as in fact they do often, they must muffle the sound beneath sobriety, and hope no one notices.
George: ‘We are anti-enjoyment, we're anti the simplicity, the narrowness of pleasure seeking.’
Do you like to watch TV?
Gilbert: ‘I like The Golden Girls , they're my favourite.’
George [quickly]: ‘But we're not avid TV watchers, are we?’
Gilbert: ‘No.’
Indeed, their conversation is peppered with contradictions.
They are ‘conservatives doing socialist art’, they abhor organised religion but are ‘the most Christian of contemporary artists’; they are for the people, but not of them; reactionary and radical; sacred and profane.
‘We want to say shit-face and we want to say God,’ smiles Gilbert.
What do they believe in?
Although they are naked in their latest pictures, the images are as oblique as ever, and George merely shrugs, ‘If everybody else has to be, why not us?’, when it's suggested there might be some special significance involved.
Neither is money an issue.
Their works sell for between £25,000 and £50,000, which means that the ‘New Democratic Pictures’ alone are worth around two million pounds.
But they live simply and have even stopped collecting their nineteenth-century vases.
George: ‘Nothing matters except the pictures.’
Gilbert: ‘We are trying to create a vision.
What you get from our work is small things that are very important in becoming part of your life.
In America we met one young person who saw a picture of ours and told us he felt so happy in front of it because he didn't feel alone in the world any more.
Every viewer is searching for himself, searching for his soul in front of the work.’
Would you call yourself evangelistic — in the sense of wanting, needing to present your vision?
George: ‘We have been described as having a missionary streak.’
Gilbert [smiling]: ‘Mad zealots!’
But what does their ‘vision’ amount to?
Like everything else, it can be seen in two ways.
As a collection of grand, but empty, symbols, ultimately signifying nothing but a schoolboy's penchant for rude words and offensive gestures.
Or perhaps, as an open-ended enquiry into contemporary culture, faith and mores.
And no doubt, the answer lies with both.
Because although there is only one vision, it is the work of two separate minds.
monitor off the ball
Lee Harpin ODs on a long weekend of TV football
England's glory: the top buzz of 1966, in the years before blanket satellite football coverage
‘So what did you get up to last weekend?
Were they good?
How many did you do?
Good buzz was it?’ asked a friend over the telephone.
It was Tuesday morning.
Time to answer those Tuesday morning questions again.
‘Errr, I did five this weekend,’ I replied.
‘Where d'you do ‘em, then?’
‘At home.’
‘Who with?’
‘The TV and the satellite.’
‘So what were they then?’
This was not actually an easy question to answer.
It hadn't been the best of weekends.
Even though weekends now unofficially end on Monday night, few of these recently elongated rest periods have actually justified the inclusion of an extra day.
I pondered hard over the reply to my friend's question.
I'd done five but I could only remember one.
I'd buzzed off one, but the rest I found hard to remember.
And then, slowly but surely, it all came back to me.
‘Saturday [pause ].
Yeah, on Saturday afternoon I did Newcastle versus Barnsley.
They showed it live on that German satellite channel.
Couldn't understand a word the commentator said.
He spoke German.
Mind you, the game was a load of crap.
I can't even remember the score.’
‘Sounds like a right downer,’ replied my friend.
‘What one d'you do Saturday night?’
‘Match Of The Day of course!
Didn't have much choice, it was the only one about.’
‘And Sunday?’
‘Sunday afternoon — wicked buzz,’ I replied.
‘I did AC Milan/Lazio on Channel 4.
Those Italian ones are the best.’
‘Yeah,’ screamed my friend down the phone.
‘2.4 million people done those Italians last weekend, I just read about it in the Daily Mirror .
Channel 4's the top buzz at the moment.’
‘Shame about ITV though,’ I said.
‘Yeah, those First Division ones are almost as poxy as the Premier League ones on Sky.’
I pondered on the Italian touch Id experienced early that Sunday afternoon, and reflected on why the rest of the weekend had just fizzled out into one empty blank.
The first person to dent my euphoria had been Brian Moore, ITV's match commentator for West Ham versus some town up North, later that same afternoon.
The half-time score was nil-nil — yet there was our Brian promising us that the second half would be better!
How did he know that the second half would be better?
It was a live game, for God's sake!
If he had told me that the first half was going to be crap, I wouldn't have bothered to watch it in the first place.
And now, Brian, you expect us to trust in your psychic powers concerning the entertainment level of a second half that hadn't even started.
What kind of drug-crazed morons do you take us for, Brian?
But Monday night was the biggest downer of all.
It wasn't Sky's fault that the Premier League football on display represented the biggest mis-use of the word ‘premier’ since Adam and Eve learnt how to spell.
And it wasn't Sky's fault that I used to watch better football at Barnet for exactly the same price as the weekly rental price of a satellite dish.
But it was Sky's fault that Sonia's musical non-charms were offered as half-time entertainment.
And it was Sky's fault that the match commentators chose to talk about anything and everything except the horrendous football on display.
And consequently it was also Sky's fault that for every one person watching Sky, six people choose to tune into Football Italia on Channel 4 on Sunday afternoons.
‘So before I go,’ I asked my friend, ‘which one is your top buzz of all time?’
‘1966,’ he replied, ‘when they only used to show the important ones — the ones that really mattered.
When you only used to do four or five a year — never mind five in one weekend.
And it wasn't just because England won the World Cup, either.
It was just classic football television with classic commentary as well.
You probably wouldn't even recognise a moment like that today if it happened, now they've turned us into football TV junkies with all this coverage.’
‘So exactly what moment was it in 1966?’
I enquired.
‘Kenneth Wolstenholme was the commentator.
Geoff Hurst was just about to score England's fourth goal.
‘There's people on the pitch,’ he said.
‘They think it's all over.
It is now!’
And that's what I really call TV football ecstasy,’ remarked my friend before the phone went click .
Showing out
When the parties, the celebrity faces and the wild speculation prove more compulsive viewing than the catwalks, has the fashion world got a problem?
Kim Bowen and Ashley Heath on the Paris and London shows
Paris
Flying direct from Cairo to Paris and surviving the worst earthquakes that Egypt has ever suffered might sound excellent training for Paris Fashion Week, but proved to be more rigorous than the event strictly called for.
The parts of the fashion feast that seemed most relevant were those that were concerned with the here and now: such as Susanne Bartsch's Love Ball, which raised $750,000 for French Aids charities.
The rest seemed somewhat vacuous, in particular the endless miserable pursuit of Paradise Lost which was continually played out in forays into the Seventies.
As has been firmly documented in much of the British press, Paris was divided into those designers attempting to proceed through the Nineties and more or less disappointing our expectations, and those who have love bombed straight back into the Seventies.
The most upfront version of the latter was offered by Veronique Leroy, former assistant to Azzedine Aläia, who displayed a rapier approach to cut but an almost demented obsession with the decade that spawned Slade, Kojak and Abba.
The long Bengali shopping corridor in which she presented her collection was a photogenic backdrop, but the relentless Seventies muzak combined with a final bellow from Barry White was annoying.
Despite its elegance, the collection managed to depict an image of women so passive that the designs would probably have been snapped up by Qantas as uniforms for its air hostesses in late 1972.
Amongst the others enjoying the retro hustle was Martine Sitbon.
Since she has pushed the decade for almost her entire career, one can only wonder what she'll do now that everyone else has followed suit.
Martin Margiela continued with his deconstructed long lean line, this time showing two collections in two separate locations, one in black and the other in white, both lovely and possessing a purity which is integral to his work.
Helmut Lang played the same old song too: ugly but beautiful, perfect if you are a model/15 years old/savagely stylish.
Jean Collona also slunk through the Seventies and underlined a look that will for at least a year separate the old from the young.
Those who do not share the dewy youth and slenderness of Kate Moss will only look older and more swollen if they adopt the ‘new’ look; but if they don't and stick to the Lacroixs and the YSLs they'll still look their age, so it's a no-win situation for the power dressers.
John Galliano and Vivienne Westwood continued thankfully on their own merry way and, though both regularly rummage through the past, they somehow managed to be forward-looking and new.
Galliano showed two hours late, which could have ruined him, but fortunately didn't because the press loved him and his audience welcomed him back with loud approval after an absence of two seasons (due to the lack of financial backing).
Jeremy Healy's music was loud and passionate, and designer/stylist Judy Blame agreed that it was the only decent stuff he'd heard all week, adding that French Djs are the worst on the planet and that there is virtually no point in clubbing in Paris until the situation is remedied.
Galliano's eclectic and unique approach (try flagpoles incorporated into jackets for a start, and chiffon dresses treated with gelatine so they puff out more exquisitely) won him a Venus award.
The Venus awards are presented every season for the best fashion designer, make-up, set design, model etc.
The awards are held at the Bains Douches club and provide an opportunity for the exhausted fashion business to get together, congratulate each other, slag each other off, and get appallingly drunk.
John Galliano was no exception and failed to receive his award in person as he had been gently taken home earlier, his face wreathed in smiles.
At the same event one of the MCs, a massive New York drag queen, hurled abuse at a tardy Naomi Campbell who took her time reaching the stage to collect her award for best model of the season.
‘Get up on this stage right now you bitch.
We're your goddam public, so don't you fuck with us.’
When she arrived she looked exhausted like everyone else, and was dressed in a droopy Seventies handkerchief dress from Lagerfeld's collection for Chloe.
Galliano sat front row at Vivienne Westwood's show alongside Azzedine Aläia and Jean Paul Gaultier.
Westwood appeared on the runway herself, presenting a perverse image of respectability, while her menswear managed to be both impeccably elegant and street credible.
The metallic denim jeans and jacket combos were desirable and, along with the Westwood diamante chokers and galaxy print scarves, will surely become the season's classics.
The catering at the splendid party afterwards was curious; held in the palatial home of Hubert, the owner of the Bains Douches, revellers dined on moelles (beef marrow) and elegantly killed the taste with champagne.
Jean Paul Gaultier also showed a collection which looked firmly forward, the sexiest pieces being bras, corsets and skirts slit to reveal midriff and belly.
Hair was the big news, with full-length skirts made of artificial hair and wondrous Jacobean wigs in auburn.
His collection was a continuation of his massive Aids benefit show held in Los Angeles in September.
The LA show featured Raquel Welch, Joe Dallesandro, Faye Dunaway, and superstar photographer Stephane Sednaoui grinding onstage with the Red Hot Chili Peppers.
For a finale, Madonna bared her breasts and inflamed an already delighted crowd.
At the massive party afterwards the Seventies were celebrated in a most appropriate way: Gloria Gaynor, Thelma Houston and one half of the Weather Girls were on hand to perform the songs that defined the liberal optimism of the period.
At Susanne Bartsch's Paris Love Ball (Ballade De L'Amour), at the Folies Bergères, Thierry Mugler and Jean Paul Gaultier took to the stage together and swapped jackets in tribute to one another.
(Mugler also held an equally magnificent Aids benefit in Los Angeles earlier in the year.)
Aläia was also expected to appear on the runway riding on the shoulders of Jean Paul Goude, but apparently he hid the bag containing his gold evening dress so he didn't have to do it.
Sandra Bernhard MC'd the first part of the show alongside American Vogue's André Leon Talley, Daniel de la Falaise escorted Kylie Minogue down the runway, BodyMap's David Holah and film-maker John Maybury appeared in drag, as did Pierre and Gilles dressed as bride and groom.
Neneh Cherry, Roman Polanski and Nina Hagen also appeared among the multitude of celebrities.
The fashion industry is now fighting Aids with everything it has got.
This is because it knows how desperately it is threatened by this disease.
It would be tremendous if all other industries fought with as much passion: the tragedy being that they haven't yet realised that they too are likely to be as overwhelmingly affected.
The present infatuation with the Seventies no doubt represents in the most superficial way a turning away from the horrors of our time, which is perfectly understandable.
There's plenty wrong with the world right now, but it's all we've got, and the only way forward is to face up to it.
It is for this reason that the money raised at Susanne Bartsch's Love Ball was the most potent fashion statement of the season.
Enough respect!
JPG and Thierry Mugler pay tribute to each other at Susanne Bartsch's fundraising Love Ball
Flying the flag for British fashion on the Paris catwalk: welcome back, John Galliano
Deee-magical: Lady Miss Kier, the Love Ball fairy, struts her stuff for Aids charities
Yasmin Le Bon auditions for an air hostess job at Qantas on the Veronique Leroy runway
The hair bare bunch: Christy Turlington proves too sexy for her wig as she sashays for Jean Paul Gaultier
Kate Moss captures the youth vote for Jean Collona (below); Gaultier end-of-show parade (bottom)
Glam slam!
John Richmond does what he knows best
London
The best story appeared in the Guardian and was published on the day that London Fashion Week began.
‘Fashion Mad’, it was titled, and this one was not written by a celebrated style pundit, but by a previously unrecognised talent called Associated Press.
It switched the action from London to Australia, although somewhat surprisingly it did not involve a dingo or a randy member of the Neighbours cast: ‘A man killed himself yesterday, minutes after disrupting a lingerie fashion show hosted by Australian model Elle Macpherson.
The 22-year-old man was thrown out when he climbed on to the show's stage at a department store in Adelaide.
Soon afterwards, the man went to the seventh floor of a nearby building, smashed a window with a chair and jumped to his death.’
The most recent London catwalks were without doubt a Jackanory time.
Everyone had a good story to tell.
Paul Smith doesn't rate Rifat Ozbek…
Jasper Conran doesn't rate British fashion…
Rifat Ozbek isn't really British at all and, bloody hell, did you hear he wasn't let into the John Richmond party!
London's Evening Standard was moved to add fuel to the fire and proclaim ‘this year, the long knives were out’, but it was only the tall tales that were really in evidence.
The controversy began when both Paul Smith and Jasper Conran turned down their nominations to become British Designer of the Year.
Despite both giving reasons for their withdrawal — Smith describing the awards as ‘self-congratulatory’ and Conran labelling them ‘muddled and confused’— the anti-Rifat gossip was soon swelling.
When he took the stage to collect the award (winning it for the second time following two years of Vivienne Westwood), Ozbek didn't stand a chance.
The Chinese whispers the next day were even claiming that Paul Smith stormed out of the awards in disgust.
Paul Smith has never attended the British fashion awards.
Rifat Ozbek and Paul Smith are good mates.
At times the real story, the important message, was being completely lost.
Paul Smith and Jasper Conran are both completely disillusioned with the hollow slap on the back British fashion tries to give itself every year.
Smith emphasises that designers here need business advice and assistance more than glitzy awards.
‘There are too many designers starting out without proper backing, borrowing money from their mothers or making collections on Visa cards,’ he says.
‘We have a goldmine of talent in this country — the best fashion designers in the world — but this talent is being wasted.’
Paul Smith has, as usual, got it right.
It is all too easy to be cynical about British fashion, but his constructive criticism and public demand for action is long overdue.
Instead of the kind of government support the fashion industry receives in other European countries, here there are glossy awards and that's about it.
And what awards.
The Clothes Show coverage of the fashion event could at best be described as embarrassing, at worst, a tedious waste of prime-time TV.
The script was stodgy, with the only highlights being the video of the Duffer of St George at work (a classic), and watching the fashion elite go quiet when Marks & Spencer nearly walked off with an award.
Meanwhile, at the shows themselves, more than ever this year people seemed to be running around confused, cynical as ever, while the future of the British catwalks was looking ever more shaky.
Hamnett, Galliano, Ozbek, Smith and Westwood all now show abroad.
Fair play.
But the Red Or Dead catwalk show offered a ray of hope.
It was good.
Really good.
On the surface, Red Or Dead could be lumped in with all those old-school London names who used to show wacky creations and sell zilch.
Except Red Or Dead sell a lot.
Its show combined adventure, innovation and fun with the important wearability factor, and only the blinkered did not leave impressed.
John Smedley knitwear was given the Red Or Dead once-over and became mock-boy scout gear, while Russian babooshka doll prints on stretch velvet should be everywhere next summer.
The old prejudices still remain though, and at the end of the day far too few people really applauded this season's winner.
Nicholas Knightly was the name that a lot of fashion editors were instead catching up with.
After a fair few spot-on write-ups in the last few months, now the fashion pack moved in on him.
Nicholas you see, makes good copy: he's 23, just out of college, financed by a mystery backer (rumoured to be Virgin) and sports a Soho crop.
He also seems to want to be the Nineties Coco Chanel, so street fashion bods can rest easy.
His debut collection had brilliant crisp white shirts, beautiful eveningwear (if you're in those crucial cocktail circles) and denim that was a little suspect.
Lots of hype is now going down — let's hope the lad can live with it.
John Richmond can handle any attention.
He got on stage at his party with a black Strat and a motley rock crew called Miss World.
The ploy did not stop a lot of people muttering about the flaws in his catwalk show (rather unfairly), although the Destroy line certainly got better once again by opting for the tight ‘Partridge Family’ look and foxy jersey dresses with denim trims.
Elsewhere, Big John seems to be on a bit of a cowboy C&W bent: interesting, but tread with caution.
For Eastern chic was flavour of the moment with others (Amanda Wakeley, Bella Freud, Red Or Dead), and lots of people are doing Nehru collars.
Michiko Koshino wants to turn all bomber jacket-clad clubbers into Huckleberry Finn-like waifs (brave, but could be tricky) and espadrilles were, rather worryingly, everywhere.
Best tale of all though, was the special guest invited to the party to launch the new Thomas Neal's shopping arcade in Covent Garden.
Rubbing bouffant haircuts with a partying throng of British street stylists (Duffers, Komodo, Boxfresh et al ) was the man who inspired the classic fashion phrase ‘a nice pair of Lionel's’.
For services to British fashion, this season's FACE award winner: Lionel Blair.
Respect!
Hard times!
Michiko Koshino embraces rural America
Coco cups!
Nicholas Knightly, the new Chanel?
On the edge
Tim Roth has been on the edge of major success for years.
But now, with the much-praised gangster film Reservoir Dogs , his time may have come.
Will Roth get rich, or will he just piss people off again?
Barcelona, 2 o'clock on a Sunday afternoon.
Sipping his first beer of the day, Tim Roth is telling me how, for a few hours, he was rich.
He was lined up to do this independent film ‘which for once had some decent money attached’.
His agent was sorting out the fine print.
Almost time to start thinking about buying the car.
‘It was all go.
We went off to go see Husbands And Wives , because one of the actresses in that was going to be in the film, someone I wasn't that keen on.
Doesn't matter who, but I thought I'd better check her out.
So we went and one of the other agents came into the cinema, found my agent who was with us, and started negotiating, and suddenly, just like that, it was all off.’
He hoots with laughter.
‘Maybe it just wasn't meant to be.
I'm obviously not meant to be rich…he says, pouring himself another beer in Spain!’
Tim Roth may not be rich.
Perhaps he never will be.
But, as he admits, he's not doing too bad.
He's spending an afternoon in Barcelona, knocking back beer on someone else's account.
He's also in one of the year's best films.
Quentin Tarantino's stunning directorial debut Reservoir Dogs , a blisteringly comic dissection of tough-guy manners which also stars Harvey Keitel, Chris (brother of Sean) Penn, Steve Buscemi and Michael Madsen.
Plus he has plenty of other work on the way:Bodies, Rest And Motion , an existential romantic comedy for the twentysomething generation in which he plays opposite Bridget Fonda; and the low-budget Jumpin' At The Boneyard , in which he plays a Bronx street kid trying to straighten out his crackhead brother.
More importantly, as his anecdote about the fortune that came and went suggests, he's back where he belongs, back in the game.
Things certainly look better than back in the late Eighties, when he went unemployed for nearly two years.
There just wasn't any work, even for someone with his track record.
The edgy, intense performances he'd racked up (as the raging skinhead in Alan Clarke's Made In Britain , as a retarded teen in Mike Leigh's Meantime , as a gangster hooligan in (The Hit ), the Most Promising Newcomer Award the Evening Standard gave him — none of it really helped.
After all, it's not much use being fingered as someone who's going places if there's nowhere to go.
As he says, the British film industry is permanently shut.
So to pay the rent he had to go off to Czechoslovakia and Australia to do films he knew weren't much good.
He did a couple of commercials, even the odd British film.
He did The Cook, The Thief, His Wife And Her Lover and had a laugh trying to get Peter Greenaway to loosen up.
But the yobby sidekick he played was a kind of retread of his earlier roles, a dead-end kid that signalled the career cul-de-sac he was facing.
Then Robert Altman cast him as Vincent Van Gogh in Vincent And Theo .
People who say Roth just does aggressive yobs have got it wrong.
His early performances always brought out the vulnerability behind the front, the uncertainty behind the violence, the sense of sliding out of control.
And play Van Gogh, he caught the descent into madness perfectly.
It gave roth a chance to underline what he was capable of (Vincent wasn't just another lad).
It also got him known in America.
Perhaps it was inevitable that he would eventually have to follow the likes of Gary Oldman across the Atlantic.
But whereas Oldman always seemed to have mainstream Hollywood in his sights.
Roth has aimed instead for the booming American independent sector.
As he says, it's an actor's heaven on earth.
People are making films which require actors rather than special FX, which run on good dialogue rather than a high body count.
OK, the salaries might not be much to write home about, but successful indie films can pay off in other ways.
‘You get to travel round the world.
We've had a blast with Reservoir Dogs .
We've been able to lig round the world.’
All down to the fact that American independent films — particularly something like Reservoir Dogs , which comes complete with established names and a huge critical buzz — are in demand on the festival circuit.
And though Cannes gets all the attention, there are hundreds of film festivals around the world, all keen to ‘premiere’ the latest hot American independent.
This week the Dogs gang (Roth, Tarantino and producer Lawrence Bender) are doing Spain — first Sitges, Barcelona's beach resort, for the annual horror and fantasy festival, then Madrid.
Next week they'll be in New York for the US premiere.
‘Really this is the Quentin Tarantino roadshow,’ says Roth.
‘He's probably had two hours sleep in the last seven months, but he doesn't care.’
Unlike Roth, who's been working, Tarantino has been everywhere with Reservoir Dogs .
Chatting in the bar at the festival centre, the 30-year-old writer/director shows a few signs of wear (a bad back, a persistent cold) but is obviously still riding the adrenaline rush of getting his movie made after years of struggling on the margins of the film industry.
As we talk, Dolph Lundgren waddles by.
Dolph is Sitges' big star this year, here to puff Universal Soldier , his team-up with Jean-Claude Van Damme.
‘My first job in the movie business was as an assistant on the Dolph Lundgren exercise video,’ Tarantino comments.
‘They shot part of it outside in this lot which was just covered with dogshit.
My job was to clear it all up so Dolph wouldn't mess up his trainers.’
Surely big Dolph will remember him with affection then?
‘I don't think so.
All he did was yell at me to get out of his trailer.’
Though both might be called guys' films, there's a world of difference between the boy's own homoerotics of Universal Soldier and the deconstructed gangster pathologies of Reservoir Dogs .
That both can find space at Sitges is tribute to this perversely funky festival.
Middle-brow types might write it off as just a splatterfest — this year's big event is the world premiere of Sam Raimi's Army Of Darkness: Evil Dead 3 .
But it's showing some great films (the Japanese tech noir classic Tetsuo 2 , and Man Bites Dog , a stunning Belgian film about a charismatic granny killer).
‘What they're interested in is the cinema of the extreme,’ says Tarantino.
‘And on that level we fit in.
Reservoir Dogs does have some pretty extreme scenes.’
Something of an understatement.
At one point a gangster tortures a copy to the bouncy accompaniment of the old Stealer's Wheel song ‘Stuck In The Middle With You’.
It's difficult to describe in detail without spoiling the effect for future viewers, something that goes for the whole film.
On one level it works as a straight crime whodunnit.
The action revolves around a failed robbery and the attempts of the various hoods involved (all dressed in black suits and ties and given colour-coded aliases) to figure out which one of their number is an undercover cop.
Tarantino says he never thought he was taking a risk by casting Tim Roth as an American.
‘I knew stuff like Made In Britain and The Hit .
There was no doubt he could do it.
And when we met, I just got on so well with him.’
To help, Tarantino took Roth on a tour of places like In And Out Burger, and gave him a crash course in the kind of trash culture that would have surrounded an LA child of the Seventies — old TV copy shows, cartoons like Speed Racer, Fantastic Four comics, bubblegum pop.
However, a lot of that never made it on to the screen.
Wounded during the robbery, Roth (Mr Orange) actually spends most of the movie slowly bleeding to death, while Harvey Keitel (the sentimental old-time thief Mr White), Steve Buscemi (the motormouth obsessive Mr Pink) and Michael Madsen (the quietly psychopathic Mr Blonde) bicker and brawl about who sold them out.
As Roth says, the film is a meditation on codes of honour, on professional and personal loyalties.
‘Who is the real bad guy here?
Is it the criminal who tortures the cop, who's looking out for his own, or is it the undercover copy, who's selling them all out?
Quentin's done it so you support the cop, when maybe you should support the criminals.
It's clever.
He's done the same thing with the torture scene.
He uses the music to suck you in, then you sort of pull back in horror at what you've gone along with.’
‘We always get a few walk-outs with that scene,’ Tarantino grins.
‘But I'm willing to bet no one walks out here.’
Tarantino also has a bet on about his interpretation of Madonna's ‘Like A Virgin’.
The opening scene of the movie features the gangsters discussing the true meaning of the lyrics, with one insisting that it's about a nymphomaniac who's been around but has now met up with ‘some John Holmes motherfucker’— in other words a guy well hung enough to make her feel ‘like a virgin’ again.
‘Madonna's coming to see the movie in New York next week.
She doesn't know yet.
Quentin's going to ask her then if he's right.
I think he probably is, but I bet against him.
Someone had to.’
Exactly.
Someone had to pick up the challenge.
It's a guy thing, the kind of guy thing which Reservoir Dogs puts under the microscope.
Like early Scorsese, or some David Mamet, it's a film which shows the limits of a certain kind of masculinity.
Tarantino catches the way men relate to each other, how they talk and what they talk about, but pushes their banter to a blackly comic self-destructive conclusion.
‘I suppose it depends which kind of men you hang out with.’
Roth comments.
‘Personally I think it's more about gangs, group mentality.
I honestly think you could take the same script but reshoot it with women and it would work.
It would be the most controversial film ever.
To have a woman torturing a woman cop.
And some of the dialogue like the Madonna stuff, would be even funnier.
You could call it Reservoir Bitches .
That would piss everyone off.’
Pissing people off is clearly something Tim Roth quite enjoys.
During the afternoon drinking in Barcelona, I ask him to tell me a joke.
He repeats one he once told at an audition for a right-on theatre company.
‘It was told to me by a black guy: ‘What's black with red stripes?
Freshly whipped nigger.’
I've never heard a room go more quiet.’
Were you surprised?
‘It's interesting.
If a black guy tells it, it's not racist.
If a white guy does, it is.
And if a white guy tells it to a bunch of woolly liberals…’
So why did you tell it to them?
‘Because they pissed me off.
I think I did end up working for them though.’
Actually pissing people off isn't quite right.
It's more a question of getting on someone's case.
You can see it in his approach to acting.
Born in London, an ex-punk who started acting while at art school during a course in sculpture, Roth never actually went to drama college (aside from one afternoon when he got pissed and snuck into RADA to see what he's missed).
‘If I had, I wouldn't have been an actor.
Once you had to study something, I got bored.
That's why I'm not a sculptor.’
Consequently he dismisses all talk of method.
‘Fuck all that.
Yeah, I've got a method — my own.’
But he does practice a kind of English methodism, an immersion into character he learned on the job from Mike Leigh and Alan Clarke.
Typically, the way he describes it gives it all an edge, a challenge, like he's looking out to make sure no one can get the drop on him.
‘It's about building up a character till you know everything.
It's like I know what my character did yesterday, did ten minutes before this scene, whatever.
It's the safest way of acting — no one can argue with you because you know all the answers.’
Flip through his press cuttings and you get the feeling journalists piss Roth off almost as much as liberal theatre types.
‘I used to get really angry, but now I don't give a shit.
The thing is my father was a journalist, and he taught me all the fucking tricks.
Like the journalistic silence, where they go, ‘So you just went through a divorce.
Was it painful?’ and you nod and they wait…
You'll be nervous so you fill the gap with all the shit they really want to hear.’
Most actors approach interviews as just another job.
Some treat them like a performance.
A few treat them like confessionals, therapy even.
To Roth, they're a game of wits: the object being to give away as little as possible.
‘What this interview is really all about is how many drinks I can get out of you,’ he informs me, after I've paid for yet another round.
A query about Mr Orange's motivations gets the reply, ‘I know what I think, I've done my job.
Now you do yours.
What do you think?’
He likes trying it on.
He wants to see if you want to play.
If you do, he's perfectly willing to play things out all the way.
By the end of the afternoon, after a few more pints, he gets involved in a Q&A challenge — he says he'll answer any question, so long as I keep them coming.
OK, so who was he in his past life?
‘The Marquis de Sade.’
Which does he prefer, great food, great sex or great drugs?
‘Great sex, which can incorporate the other two.
This is fun, keep going.’
The part of his body he would like to change?
‘My dick.
I want it bigger.
Doesn't every man?
Next.’
The fastest he's been in a car?‘120mph, I crashed.
Next.’
The worst haircut he ever had?
‘I saw Rosemary's Baby , fell in love with Mia Farrow, went to the barber and asked for a Mia Farrow cut.
It looked fucking stupid.
Next.’
Any part of his body pierced?
‘I did have my right nipple pierced, but I had to keep taking it out for films, so it kept healing up.
It became 50 times more sensitive.
Piercing is great.
If I wasn't an actor I'd be covered in tattoos and pierced up the fucking ying-yang.
Next.’
On and on he goes.
The last time he was high?
Five months ago — mushrooms.
The member of the Royal Family he's sleep with?
Diana.
‘I wonder if she's into kinky stuff — still you can guarantee that their idea of perverted is from behind.
Do you reckon Andrew's a good fuck?
I have my doubts.’
Did he wear platforms?
His mum made him wear sensible shoes (bit of an admission, this).
Has he been arrested?
Yes, for threatening behaviour (there's a surprise).
The one thing he wishes he hasn't done?
Slept with a friend's girlfriend (they're not friends any more).
Every time he has to wait for a question, he claims victory.
‘Nailed ya.
Come on.’
When I can't take it any more (after about an hour), he sits back in triumph.
‘Call yourself a fucking journalist?’
It's 11 o'clock at night and Tarantino, Roth and Bender are onstage introducing Reservoir Dogs .
Bender has prepared a short speech in what sounds like Catalan.
Determined not to be outdone, Roth delivers a list of the only Spanish words he knows.
‘Dos cervezas, tortilla, pornografie .’
He gets the biggest round of applause.
Despite subtitles which obviously struggle to get the profane poetry of Tarantino's script, the film goes down a storm with the festival audience, though the torture does send some people scurrying for the door, among them one Wes Craven, director of the first Elm Street movie and much else.
Afterwards in the bar, Bender takes great delight in ribbing him over it.
‘We're going to put it on the poster, Wes.
‘Too tough for me’— Wes Craven.’
Next day Roth has a morning full of interviews to deal with and, despite having been out clubbing till six in the morning, he manages to make it — although his jeans and T-shirt look like he slept in them.
A photographer from Spanish Cosmo tries unsuccessfully to get him to go outside for a shoot.
‘It's too bright out there.
Too early in the morning,’ Roth mutters, pointing to his head.
He also refuses requests to remove his baseball cap.
‘My hair's a real mess.
I look much worse with it off.’
He vogues unconvincingly.
‘Tim Roth —Cosmo boy.’
Perhaps unsurprisingly, during the interview, Gary Oldman's name keeps cropping up.
At the official press conference, one journalist gets up to compliment Roth on his performance alongside Gary Oldman in Rosencrantz And Guildenstern Are Dead .
‘There was some special chemistry there, I think.
Could you tell me please the nature of your relationship?’
‘We're lovers.’
Actually Roth and Oldman are mates, though they don't hang out together in LA.
‘He's always off working, isn't he?’
Roth acknowledges that Oldman has opened doors for an actor like him.
‘I hope Dracula's a success.
I'm hoping it'll be Oscar time, either for that or Last Of The Mohicans (which stars Daniel Day-Lewis).
It'll keep up the demand for English actors.
I figure that if people can't get Gary or Danny, then sooner or later they'll go, ‘Who's the other one?
Let's get Roth in.
He's cheap.’’
Oldman's success does have its downside for Roth.
Talented actors usually have to learn to live with critics calling them ‘the new De Niro’.
In America, Roth has to live with being called the new Gary Oldman.
Perhaps surprisingly, he laughs it off.
Perhaps he is mellowing a bit.
He says the year and a half he's spent in America has helped him grow up a little.
He's now the happiest he's ever been in his life.
‘It has to do with working out my relationship with my son [Jack, aged eight, lives in London — Roth and the mother of his child have split up but remain on good terms].
Americans are better at all that than us.
We have this built-in repression, well, not repression exactly, but it's very hard for us to say ‘I love you’.
Americans just do it, sometimes when it's not necessary.
Being there has changed me completely.’
So he won't be coming back?
‘I don't know when I'll be coming home.
It's not like I wanted to go.
I didn't go because I wanted to be rich.
I just had no fucking choice.
I don't miss England, but I do feel guilty for leaving.
But all the directors I like have left too.
I can't get a job.
No one 's making the kind of films I like.
Like Scum, The Firm, The Long Good Friday — those films are really about our country.
Films about people getting slightly fucking cross with each other while leaning on the mantelpiece…let's face it, they're not that interesting.
Now I'm doing the kind of films I always wanted to do, but in a different accent.
As soon as I can do them in my own accent, I'll be back’.
Love is the hug: Tim Roth with girlfriend Nikki Butler
monitor
20th century foxed
Gavin Hills on the V&A's new 20th Century Gallery
The Victoria and Albert is the national museum of Art and Design.
A recent inclusion to this Kensington palace of culture is the 20th Century Gallery, the museum's interpretation of design in this century.
Cunningly, the museum has narrowed the range of exhibits down to examples of design that are either quirky, avant-garde, or bourgeois pickings from the delightful realms of popular culture: all the things that the liberal design establishment like to have around their personage.
Designer blasts from the past carefully chosen to look nice in a west London living room.
See it and weep.
Museums were built to educate, enlighten, and pay tribute to people's achievements.
Yet now a combination of government cutbacks and free market management thinking has meant that the V&A and similar establishments are forced to compete as ‘attractions’ with the likes of Madame Tussauds, the London Dungeon and Thorpe Park.
Their purpose is increasingly to provide entertainment.
Come see the circus of Art and Design!
Dine at the restaurant, traipse through the shops — laugh at the exhibits.
The 20th Century Gallery reinterprets design history into a novelty spectacle.
Take the inclusion of the G-Force Cyclonic vacuum cleaner, a large pink plastic machine that looks like a cross between the Pompidou Centre and an ice cream sundae.
With pastel pink tubing and see-through waste compartments, it's a stylish sucker and a novel solution to the design of a household object.
But why is it in the hallowed halls of a gallery of twentieth century design?
Its inclusion is typical of the exhibits, most of which are either dinky or bloody ridiculous.
You laugh, not learn.
The best-selling model in the current Hoover range is not included, even though it would seem a classic example of successful design.
The real problem with this gallery is that it confirms what the public has always thought: that designers are a bunch of elitists who don't live in the real world.
At a time when product design has lost its way, the gallery fails to provide a proper historical context that might give it some sense of direction.
With subtle revisionism, it chooses examples throughout the years such as the Cyclonic vacuum (on sale for £1,000, but have you ever seen one?).
The famous Surrealist Dali sofa based on Mae West's lips is included in the section on the Thirties, though it's no more a reflection of furniture designed in that era than Leigh Bowery is of Eighties fashion.
The avant-garde rarely leads design anywhere except up its own arsehole.
Only occasionally will a movement throw up interesting solutions to everyday design.
Both Dada and Surrealism were once at the cutting edge of art and design.
Their ability to shock was based on a calculated rejection of exhausted artistic values.
Same as it ever was.
In those days it was easy to offend: the establishment liked its Monarch of the Glentype pieces over its Adams fireplaces.
By neglecting the design interests of both the shocked conservative patrons and the everyday design used by those who didn't give a toss, the gallery sanitises genuinely progressive movements like Dada.
Without such a juxtaposition, you cannot make a rational assessment of twentieth century design.
You can only stare at seemingly tame Dada graphics in nice little glass cabinets.
Things like Doc Martens and Air Jordans are included in the cabinets — unfortunately, this is not so much an attempt to give genuine examples of successful design, more a sign of the current infatuation with popular culture.
The student sons and daughters of the curators wear such items on their feet and talk about Madonna and Terminator, so it's time for a rethink.
But they haven't thought that hard.
In the Sixties section they have the cover of the Beatles LP ‘Please Me’.
This is a particularly bad album cover.
‘Rubber Soul’ had far better graphics, but that's not the point.
Everyone knows the Beatles.
Don't worry about the design it's trash — but then so is the Dali sofa.
It's included because it amuses the punters.
Some of the few inspiring things in the whole gallery come from the 1951 Festival Of Britain exhibition.
The clarity of design, the hope it contains, and the naivety of it all proves a welcome contrast to the rest of the exhibits.
An egalitarian mixture of social realism and modernism, the Festival conjured up a real sense of design direction: it was all about building a better environment for everyone, with stylish cars, labour-saving gadgets and buildings that were easier to inhabit.
It wasn't about creating quirky objects for kitsch fashion victim consumers, it was about improving the real world.
The designer decade of the Eighties appears to have been quickly forgotten.
Eighties furniture is represented by a Memphis shelf unit which looks a bit like a squatting man with his arms in the air (quite likeable, actually).
There's not a trace of matt black in sight!
Surely, no matter how despised matt black furniture is these days, it was the Eighties statement.
Perhaps the people at the V&A are embarrassed?
They probably used to have stocks of the stuff at home.
Now that even MFI does its own successful matt black range, can they really admit to knowledge of such a thing?
Well why not?
The whole matt black thing was good, classic design which grew out of the Seventies infatuation with high-tech.
Its colour void led to clean, efficient lines which had an appeal that passed right down to the high street.
I mean, I hate the stuff — partly because of its Thatcherite overtones, but mainly because it's so utterly naff these days.
Museums are not supposed to be in the business of wiping out bad memories, though, and it won't be long before we start getting nostalgic.
But as we leave the twentieth century and reflect on the last 100 years, we should expect more than a shallow gallery of designer fancies.
This does art, design, Victoria and Albert no favours at all.
We are not amused.
jazz not jazz
jamiroquai
Why did Sony give this young white funkateer an eight-album deal?
Everyone who's heard ‘When You Gonna Learn’ knows why
Jamiroquai is something of a natural.
Far more cool, calm and level-headed than his 22 years should allow, he is one of the new breed: intent on restoring a live, funkier and altogether more sincere approach to modern dance music.
By embracing rather than plundering elements of jazz, soul and funk, Jamiroquai's debut single on Acid Jazz, ‘When You Gonna Learn’, served as the perfect foretaste to his future work and in the process instantly distanced him from the retro-funk-by-numbers style of his less talented peers.
‘Initially, I was quite surprised how well the single went down,’ says the Ealing-born vocalist/multi-instrumentalist (the record went top ten in the national 12-inch chart in its first week of release).
‘That song had so many lyrics and different types of music in there, that I didn't think it'd go the distance.
But when people like Norman Jay and Omar said they were into the track, it sort of backed up in my own mind that it was a safe tune — they're not the sort of people who give you compliments just to make you smile.’
And it's easy to see why critical acclaim was so forthcoming.
Jamiroquai had ingeniously redefined his obvious past musical influences, recreating a sound and style that emerged as both progressive and modern.
‘It's not pure jazz and it ain't pure funk,’ he explains.
‘It could be defined more as a jazz-funk fusion, drawing from influences as far apart as Miles Davis and Parliament.
By taking elements from the two and learning how to play them live together, it's what I'd call a real fusion.’
Now signed to Sony for an eight-album deal, Jamiroquai is adamant that he will not be called upon to compromise his musical philosophies, relishing the fact that the lengthy deal will enable him to take his experimental visions further.
‘In the end,’ he says, ‘I think you draw influences from every type of music.
There's always one tune, even with something like heavy metal, that taken in its own right is a great track.
I want to bring in influences that are totally off the cuff in the same way that Isaac Hayes and Sly And The Family Stone went on to do.’
With a new single imminent and a debut album currently in the writing stage (both definitely on the funky tip), Jamiroquai can justifiably hold his head high.
Funk but not funk, jazz but not jazz — his is strictly no sell-out either way.
Clockwise from above: another lonely Londoner Gbenga Agbenugba mother with attitude Naomi King; novelist in hiding Victor Headley; publishing's DIY trail-blazer, Q
rough & ready
Like Spike Lee and fellow film-makers, black British novelists have learned how to get their message across — by doing it themselves
The Black London Novel has arrived.
It started with Q selling DEADMEAT in the clubs a while back.
It made news when Victor Headley sold 10,000 copies of Yardie earlier this year and then went into hiding because some guys thought he knew too much about their business.
Now the momentum is growing: Alan Cooke's Shades Of Grey last month, Gbenga Agbenugba's Another Lonely Londoner this month, Naomi King's O.P.P. next month.
At last there's something stirring in the literary undergrowth.
It's a breath of fresh air on the stale London literary scene.
What little new fiction by youngish writers there has been has tended to be incestuous tales of fast-track living in the media boomtown of the Eighties: books sold and written in the Groucho Club bar.
Over the last five years, Martin Millar has stood alone as the one London novelist who seems to inhabit the same city as the rest of us.
Meanwhile black youths looking for novels that reflect their own experience have had to make do with poetic accounts of life back in the Caribbean, or black gangster pulp imported from the States.
But just as black British musicians have developed the confidence to create their own sound independent of Jamaica or the USA, a new generation of black novelists is now emerging, dedicated to telling their own stories in their own style.
Such has been the lack of literary models, though, that the nearest parallel is not with any literary bratpack but rather with the new wave of black film-makers in the States.
And just like Spike Lee, they have had to start by doing it themselves, since, of course, all the major publishers knew that black people don't read books.
Q, a sharp twentysomething, set the ball rolling by applying the lessons of club culture to literature.
Instead of wasting time hawking his book around the publishing houses, he simply printed up the first three chapters, complete with his own photos and illustrations, and took them out on the streets.
Turning his car into a mobile advert for the book, he hustled copies outside clubs and used the money to print up part two, which in turn funded part three — in which Q broke the ultimate literary taboo and swapped the printed word for audiocassette, reading ever ambient funk backdrops.
‘I grew up in London nightlife,’ says Q, hiding fashion model good looks behind a disconcerting pair of wooden wraparound shades.
‘That's what I write about, because that's what I know.
The book came from a basic frustration, I just wanted to read something about what's happening now.
I like to read about my time and it was only really in the style magazines that I could get in touch with people of my generation — black or white.
Magazines are fine, but you want to be able to go into bookshops and have access to other people's minds and lives through fiction.
‘The writing world is like the music business — they wait until something is already a success.
They don't understand, they say things like, ‘Rap's never going to make it.’
I thought, ‘It's the Nineties and a lot of people just don't know what's going on.’
So I just got up and did it.
You can bosh it out, use the same strategies as the independent record labels.
There's people out there with stories to tell, and we've got to get them into the bookshops, get something different on the shelves.
After all, what's Martin Amis going to do for me?’
Q plans to put out the final part of his novel on video with the narration over Super 8 footage shot by Don Letts, before issuing a DEADMEAT ‘remix’ mass-market edition, and then moving on to a new book to be called Supermodel and concerned with, well, supermodels.
WHILE Q IS AIMING FOR a young, hip and multi-racial clubbing audience, Victor Headley's first novel Yardie went straight to the mainstream black audience.
Headley used to write for The Voice , Britain's leading black newspaper.
Among the first to see the manuscript were two of his colleagues, journalist Dontun Adebayo and editor Steve Pope.
Adebayo remembers his reaction: ‘If you meet Victor you wouldn't believe he's the author of a book, he looks more like a gangster.
When he initially came to me with the novel, I thought, ‘Victor's a Rasta, it's going to be something about Haile Selassie.’
It took about three months of him distressing me before I read it.
And then I finished it in one go.
I honestly hadn't read anything as interesting since I first picked up a novel by Thomas Hardy.’
What Adebayo had discovered was a brutally convincing British equivalent of the Seventies American ghetto thrillers written by the likes of Iceberg Slim and Donald Goines.
Recognising that this was hardly fodder for mainstream publishers, he and Pope promptly set up their own publishing company, X Press.
They designed the book on an Apple Mac, borrowed the £1,500 needed to print it and launched Yardie upon an unsuspecting public.
Author ‘n’ the hood: former actor Alan Cooke
The novel rocked the black cultural establishment.
It's not strong on positive imagery; the front cover photo stares straight down the barrel of a gun; and the book's hero, D, is a crack-addicted rapist, killer and drug baron.
But on the streets the book's reputation spread like wildfire, selling thousands of copies in Brixton alone.
After all, as Adebayo points out, the reality for too many black people is that positive images have precious little to do with their lives.
‘We went to a black bookstore in Birmingham, the guy took one look, saw the gun on the cover and said no.
Because black culture is supposed to be positive, political and so on.
Publish a book about Malcolm X, no problem, even if it's terrible.
People look at Yardie negatively because it's a book about a black guy who is a drug dealer, although there are redeeming characters in it.
‘You've got to be true to your readership.
You can't fool a black audience.
You've got to look at the real situation.
Go to Brixton jail, or any British jail, there are too many blacks there.
You want to buy some weed, you go down to the Railton Road front line, now you'll find it's all white people selling weed, the black people on the front line are selling crack.
That's the real situation.
That's what Yardie's about.’
So Yardie sold 10,000 copies in a few months — an unheard of amount for a small press publication — and has now been picked up by Pan Books which will be putting out a mass-market edition in the new year.
Meanwhile the popularity of Yardie amongst jail birds has led to certain elements deciding that the book comes a little too close to the truth for their liking, and Victor Headley has disappeared into hiding to work on Yardie 2 , leaving Adebayo and Pope to speak on his behalf.
NEXT OVER THE PARAPET was east Londoner Alan Cooke, with his entirely self-published Shades Of Grey , a rough and ready roller-coaster trip through a couple of weeks in the lives of a black detective and an out-of-control street kid with a gun.
A former actor, Cooke started work on the book after growing ever more frustrated at the lack of decent roles.
‘Being a black actor means there are limited roles available, so you start writing about black characters yourself.
Then you start thinking about characters that should be there but hardly exist — black detectives, politicians, tennis players.
A play runs for two weeks, but books stay up there on the shelf.
So I found myself writing a novel for people like me, primarily for a black audience.
I haven't bothered to explain certain things because, if I had, black people would have found it boring.
If white people are interested, I think they'll find it valuable.’
Cooke's territory in the far East End, West Ham, Woodgrange and Plaistow, places that the denizens of most London novels have scarcely heard of, let alone visited.
It's territory shared by Gbenga Agbenugba, the 26-year-old Anglo-Nigerian author of Another Lonely Londoner — although the similarities between the two novels stop there.
Cooke creates a gallery of characters, each illustrating a different faction within the black community, from the middle-aged policeman Benjamin to the buppie lawyer Dexter or the Black Panther wannabe Toby.
Agbenugba's novel is a more personal work, the more or less autobiographical story of a young Nigerian looking to make his fortune in the big, bad city.
Agbenugba's inspiration, as his book's title makes clear, is the original Black British Novel — Samuel Selvon's 1958 masterwork,The Lonely Londoners , the book that told the real story of Notting Hill in the Fifties (and was heavily borrowed by Colin MacInnes for his rather more celebrated City Of Spades ).
Like its predecessor,Another Lonely Londoner offers a distinctly bittersweet account of the immigrant experience, in which the racism and the shitty jobs and housing are balanced by the excitement of living in a major metropolis with its siren promise of one day making it big.
Agbenugba confirms the similarities between his own experience and that of his protagonist, Akin: ‘I came over from Nigeria in 1987.
I applied to correspondence courses for writing, I joined a music workshop, and at the same time I had to rush into a job, as I came over with just one bag and no money.’
He learned how to format a screenplay and then studied film and, like Alan Cooke, it was frustration at getting nowhere with his screenplays that propelled Agbenugba into attempting a novel.
‘I'd read The Lonely Londoners and I could relate to it from what my parents had told me about their early days in London [before moving back to Nigeria when Agbenugba was ten].
And, as I grew more frustrated at not getting the screenplays into production, and I saw Q bring his book out, I thought I could maybe do what Selvon did, but in our time.
So I thought about what had happened to me and to people I knew, and put it all in the book.
Rattling a lot of people's cages!’
CAGES WILL CERTAINLY BE rattling if Naomi King has her way.
The literacy models for her O.P.P are very contemporary.
While there have been precious few literary models for black male writers to follow lately, there has been a boom in black women's writing, particularly in the States, with the success of Alice Walker, Toni Morrison and now Terry Macmillan.
Macmillan is the closest to King's heart, concerned as she is with dirty domestic dramas dealing with the increasingly fraught relations between black women and men.
This is precisely the minefield that King is gleefully preparing to step into with her debut novel O.P.P. (a title lifted from the rap hit by Naughty By Nature and standing for Other People's, uh, Property).
‘I think I have a reasonable knowledge of how black men are!
And I think the novel is dead on and I expect to be slaughtered for it!
Because black guys don't like being exposed.
They are concerned it should stay in the community, in the house.
You shouldn't wash dirty linen in public but, as far as I'm concerned, if it's a reality, it should stand.
In particular one thing I'm dealing with is black women going out with white men, which is a big issue now.
Black guys say it's a monetary thing, but I don't think its strictly money.
They've had enough of black guys who're not prepared to listen.
What black men and black women want are two different things.
What women want is commitment, and if black men are not prepared to give it then they'll get it wherever they can.’
So who is this story of four black women, a dead man, a white man and a pile of contraband cash aimed at?
‘Black women who waste their time buying Woman's Own and Cosmopolitan or reading silly love stories about blue-eyed guys.
A lot of black girls will read Jackie Collins or Jilly Cooper on the tube and say, ‘Yeah, that's a good book.’
Well I'm going to do it from a black point of view.’
Some of these books are raw as hell, but whether the inspiration comes from Jilly Cooper or Thomas Hardy, Iceberg Slim or Samuel Selvon, what can be said for sure is that the Black British Novel is here to stay, giving voice to a bunch of people with a whole mess of new stories to tell.
And if anyone out there has a story of their own, then the word from these new authors is to follow the traditional indie creed.
It was easy.
It was cheap.
Go and do it.
monitor
the new camp
John Godfrey on the welcome Nineties confusion about sexual identity
When Boy George first skipped on stage caked in make-up singing ‘Do You Really Want To Hurt Me?’ ten years ago, he stuck out like a fairy on a rather drab Christmas tree.
Adam Ant and Duran Duran might have worn just as much greasepaint and hairspray, but they were post-punk dandies in leather trousers, whose heterosexuality was never open to question (ie they grabbed their crotches).
Boy George, though, was nothing less than a man in drag, a gender-bender who flounced his sexuality in the faces of outrages tabloids and ecstatic teenage girls.
He was a cavalcade of theatrical camp, a marionette who dressed up gay attitudes in new frocks, and sold it to grannies from Neasden.
In 1982's pantheon of popular culture though, Boy George was pretty much alone.
Drag queens were either stuck in the back of dingy Stockwell pubs, or performing in Christmas pantos in Eastbourne.
Camp was John Inman's limp wrist in Are You Being Served ?, or Larry Grayson's mincing walk on The Generation Game .
And the only man in a dress on telly was Les Dawson.
Ten years later, and you could be forgiven for thinking you'd stumbled into Liberace's Grotto.
Two of the most successful television hosts are a man who used to call himself Joan Collins Fan Club and wears skirts that show his bare buttocks (Julian Clary), and the other is a post-panto Dame (Edna) in diamante spectacles and aurora frocks.
In nightclubs and pop promo videos, it's as if the banshees have come down screaming from the catwalk, staggering in their stilettos under the weight of their Max Factor cosmetics and costume jewellery.