

On the lofty Burgh Muir above the hill-girt city of Edinburgh all was activity, bustle and impatience.
Far and wide over the common-grazing's green undulations the encampments spread, colourful tents and pavilions erected for the lords, chiefs and great ones, banners fluttering in the October breeze, cooking-fires smoking, horse-lines being watered, smiths busy shoeing and beating out iron for spear and axe heads, troops and squadrons practising formation riding, infantry deploying to form squares, hedgehogs and wheelings-in-line, trumpets and horns sounding, captains shouting commands — and half the citizenry and dogs of Edinburgh out to watch and add to the din.
At the central Borestone mound round which the most important pavilions were pitched, a group of leaders conferred, and it was here that the impatience was manifested — especially by Sir William Douglas.
That was his way, of course, always; but on this occasion he had some cause for it.
Already the muster was a week late; and there were not a few contingents still to come in, including the Regent's own.
It was 17th October and Balliol was known to be on the move.
Just where he was now and where he was heading was uncertain, this possibly having much to do with the non-arrival of Murray and the Steward, since both would be coming from the West Country and Balliol was thought to be marching southwards down the middle of the land.
The debate amongst the leaders was mainly concerned with that important question.
They had spies out, to be sure, but so far no definite reports had come in other than that Balliol and the English army, now unfortunately reinforced by the Highland and other Scots adherents, had left Perth ten days before, cavalry and foot marching southwards by Auchterarder and the Allan Water, to cross Teith by the Ford of Keir and Forth by the Fords of Frew, presumably to avoid any opposition at the vulnerable Stirling Bridge; which conjecture had set Alexander Ramsay worrying about Doune Castle and Mariot Randolph, not to mention her brother raising his levies thereabouts.
However the Earl John had duly turned up at Edinburgh, with one hundred and fifty men and the information that the enemy had passed well to the east of Doune.
There were various suggestions as to Balliol's intentions in this southwards move: that his aim was first to divide the west from the east, then to work round and isolate Edinburgh; that he knew of Sir Archibald Douglas's mustering of his Galloway vassals and sought to keep this force from joining the main Scots array; that perhaps he was expecting further English reinforcements from Carlisle and the West March; and so on.
Sir William Douglas, who was in command here until the Regent arrived, held the opinion that Galloway itself was the first objective.
The Balliols, through Devorgilla, heiress of the vast lands of the ancient Lords of Galloway, had inherited most of these; and the Comyns, their kin, had also major properties there.
They could raise between them up to ten thousand men in that great remote province; and at the same time assail the western Douglas strength.
There was another question to trouble them — Dunbar.
What would that strange man do?
Few there had any faith in  him, nor expected him actively to aid them.
But might he actually side with Balliol now, if he deemed his cause in the ascendant?
Or would he cautiously hold his hand, there in the East March, as he had done before Perth, until he saw which side seemed to be winning, and then join it?
Ramsay, who found himself at the head of nearly a thousand men of Lothian, largely Lindsays — whose chief, Sir David, Keeper of Edinburgh Castle, was sick and so not present — Setons, Hepburns, Sinclairs, Keiths and other lesser clans, as well as his own men, offered to ride fast for the Borderland, to join Scott of Rankilburn whom Douglas had alerted to watch Dunbar; together they would make up a force large enough to give that Earl pause.
But Douglas, concerned about numbers, was against any diminution of their main assembly which might at any time be faced with confronting Balliol's entire army.
If only the Regent would come, from the West…
It was the Steward, however, who arrived from those parts, in the late afternoon, with over five hundred from Bute and his Renfrew and Paisley lordships.
He could tell them little about the enemy, save that his party, coming here, had crossed the tracks of a great host in the Kilsyth area of Strathkelvin, by the horse-droppings at least a day old.
Which seemed to imply that Balliol had crossed the Fintry and Campsie Fells and was still heading southwards, presumably for the Clyde valley.
This was worrying, for it could mean that he was on a collision course with the Regent, who was raising the Bothwell and Airdrie areas.
Anxieties were temporarily forgotten when a cheerful contingent arrived from the North.
This proved to be Sir Simon Fraser and Sir Robert Keith.
Fraser was Sheriff of Kincardine, and with Keith from Dunottar, marching south, had heard that Balliol had left Perth, appointing the Earl of Fife to command there in his absence.
Not thinking much of Fife's soldierly abilities, and judging him in need of a lesson for his crowning of the usurper, he and Keith had attacked Perth town, and found it surprisingly easy to take.
They had captured the Earl and taken him to Stirling Castle; also Murray of Tullibardine, and him they had promptly hanged, for his betrayal at Dupplin.
The news much cheered the waiting assembly.
And when, just before dark, the Regent himself put in an appearance, with a larger than anticipated company, spirits rose further.
He reported that he had had to wait, hidden in the Murdostoun woodland, whilst Balliol's army marched southwards across his front, hence the delay.
His scouts had assessed that the enemy numbers would reach around twenty thousand, and were moving fairly fast, a mounted host save for the Islesmen and Highlanders who, trained to proceed long distances at the run, and lightly clad, did not hold up the horse to any extent.
Their destination could only be guessed at, but by their line of march through upper Clydesdale it looked as though they were heading for the West March, possibly even Galloway.
This projection coincided with Douglas's.
It was decided that unless they got word of a change in direction from the scouts the Regent had sent to follow the enemy's route, the Scots host, now numbering some thirteen thousand, would set off at first light, south-westwards, on a converging course.
They made a gallant array next morning as they marched off from the Burgh Muir in great companies, cavalry and infantry, banners and standards waving, heraldic surcoats colourful, armour glinting in the early morning sunlight, trumpets blowing; but Ramsay reminded himself that Mar's army had looked fully as fine and had marched only to disaster.
This time, however, they were under commanders who were soldiers, not just high-born magnates, and were not underestimating their foes.
Their foot were not in the main Highlandmen — although they had some of these, from upland Perthshire and the Glens of Angus — and so could not travel so fast and far each day.
But Murray was determined that the knightly chivalry should not ride far ahead, as so often happened, and so endanger both.
He aimed at fifteen miles a day, and they would march down the southern flanks of the Pentland Hills, to Biggar and Broughton and thence by Tweedsmuir to Moffat, at the head of Annandale, some sixty miles.
Four days.
From there they ought to be able to gain a better notion of Balliol's intentions.
Also, hopefully, link up with Sir Archibald Douglas and his Galloway host.
They reached The Carlops that first evening, to camp on the moorland to the east, although Douglas would have pressed on further.
There was no word from the Regent's scouts as yet.
By next night they were at Skirling, near Broughton, and here trouble broke out between Douglases and Hamiltons of the Regent's contingent, ever a danger in Scottish feudal hosts where clan loyalties and feuds often created tensions.
Sir William dealt with this in his own typical fashion, hanging three Douglas ringleaders there and then, but demanding a like example to be made of the Hamiltons, which was scarcely equitable, since the Douglases had started it all and were three times as numerous as their hereditary foes.
The weather broke down thereafter, and in driving chill rain tempers were cooled.
Unfortunately these conditions also much reduced their rate of march and they got only as far as Polmood, for they were now in the high uplands of the infant Tweed and the going difficult at the best of times.
It was a much less gallant-seeming host which eventually reached the town of Moffat in upper Annandale, where three waters met to form the Annan.
Here they found Sir Archibald Douglas awaiting them, his Galloway levies, to the number of almost two thousand, hidden in a great declivity of the hills to the north-east.
This Sir William's uncle was a genial and uncomplicated individual of middle years, lacking his late brother's energy and drive but considerably easier to deal with than his nephew, indeed seeming to find most of life much to his taste.
His news for them as to the enemy was as anticipated, but with an unexpected postscript.
The usurper's army had indeed proceeded on down Annandale, almost certainly to link up with another large Galloway force collected by Sir Walter Comyn and Henry Balliol, Edward's brother, from their estates in that province, many thousands strong, the reason why Sir Archibald had not risked coming on to Edinburgh.
The unexpected news, however, was that Edward Balliol himself had here, for some unknown reason, left his army and with only a comparatively small escort of possibly five hundred men, struck off north-eastwards into the Ettrick Forest hills in the direction of St Mary's Loch and Selkirk.
Intrigued, there was much discussion about the reasons for this strange development.
Suggestions were that it was to rendezvous with another English force crossing into the Middle March; or to meet up with Dunbar on the East March and convince him to join Balliol actively.
Whatever it was, the Regent saw it as an unlooked-for  opportunity.
Here was Balliol detached from his army and so comparatively vulnerable personally.
If he could be captured and dealt with, much of the danger for Scotland would be dispersed and his Scots support would dissolve.
Murray decided that he himself would go after the usurper, as was suitable, the lawful Regent after the false king, with perhaps one thousand hard-riding Border mosstroopers who knew the country, whilst the rest of the Scots army went on down Annandale after the main enemy force.
There was some demurring at this, especially from William Douglas, who thought it dangerous.
Defeat the enemy first, was his advice, and deal with the wretched Balliol afterwards.
But Murray was determined, and eager to be off eastwards without delay, for Balliol had already had two days' lead.
There was something of a problem as to whom to appoint in command of the army whilst the Regent was absent.
William Douglas was the obvious choice militarily; but with Scotland's High Steward and High Constable now present, not to mention the Earl of Moray and Douglas's uncle, and even Sir Simon Fraser older and more senior, that would not do.
Yet the Steward and Moray were only youths and the Constable not much more, and inexperienced, with Sir Archibald scarcely a renowned warrior.
Murray got over the difficulty by appointing a triumvirate in command: Steward, Constable and Sir Archibald, with the Flower of Chivalry as specific military adviser.
For himself, he would take Sir Alexander Ramsay with him, since he knew the Borderland intimately, and hoped to rejoin the main army in three or four days' time, God willing with Balliol either prisoner or dead.
by no means to everyone's satisfaction, they parted company.
The deliberately chosen Border mosstroopers, Johnstones, Elliots, Turnbulls and the like, were at home in this country and expert at following Balliol's party's trail, even at two days old.
Ramsay himself did not know this Ettrick Forest area so well as the main Middle and East Marches; but from the route the usurper had taken from Moffat, it looked as though he was heading either for the mid-Tweed or Teviot dales — although he could have reached the former more easily by turning off in the Broughton area of Tweedsmuir.
Mystified, they rode eastwards at a great pace, Ramsay for one not  ungrateful to be done with the restraints of keeping to the pace of marching men.
They got as far as Eldinhope at the head of St Mary's Loch before the early November dark made following the tracks of even five hundred difficult; and the Regent and Ramsay spent the night in that remote peel-tower of a Scott laird.
He was not the most welcoming of hosts, alarmed at the thought of what one thousand men and horses could do to his winter's supplies and forage; but at least he could tell them that a large mounted party had indeed passed this way two days previously and had turned off out of this main Yarrow valley southwards, to climb by Altrieve to the high pass of Tushielaw, which would take them to the Ettrick valley.
In the morning they left Scott of Eldinhope in rather better mood, the Regent being at pains to pay for benefits received, which clearly the laird had not expected.
He told them that by turning off here, the company they were following would almost certainly be heading for upper Teviotdale, by Rankilburn, Buccleuch and Bellenden, since the Ettrick valley would merely bring them back to its junction with Yarrow again.
This sent them on their way without having to trouble too much over casting about for tracks.
In somewhat better weather conditions they climbed the five-mile drove-road to the lofty Tushielaw pass, and down to Tushielaw itself, with its bridge across Ettrick, making good time, although the burns and streams were running high and making fording a problem in places.
Enquiries at Tushielaw confirmed that Balliol's people had indeed proceeded on southwards, up Rankilburn towards Buccleuch, still Scott country.
There could be no other objective than Teviotdale, in that direction.
Will Douglas should have been with them, for he was Sheriff of Teviotdale.
Not having to pick their way carefully now they were able to cover some thirty hilly miles that day, good going for so large a party of horse, even mosstroopers.
This brought them to Teviot, in the Hawick area, where they learned that the Balliol company had passed there, avoiding the town, the morning before, having apparently camped at Goldielands just to the west.
So they, the pursuers, were catching up somewhat.
On the well-defined Teviotdale road they proceeded next  morning, and now were able to check at the villages and communities they passed that they were still on Balliol's route, without the time-consuming searching for tracks.
They were past Jedburgh by noon, and Ramsay, who now was in country he knew fairly intimately, pointed out that in another ten miles they would be out of Teviotdale, with Teviot joining Tweed at Roxburgh and Kelso.
Thereafter they would be into the East March, and following the enemy would be less straightforward, with the country opening out and various routes possible — into the Merse, down the Scots side of Tweed, down the English side, or southwards into the Till valley of Northumberland.
Where was Balliol heading, and why?
They learned part of the answer as dusk was falling and they came to the tower and castleton of Heiton, beyond Kale Water.
Their quarry was at Roxburgh, three miles ahead, Heiton of that Ilk informed them.
He had arrived there the previous day and was still at the castle.
This news had them puzzled.
Roxburgh was a royal castle and its associated township, both quite large, situated within the narrow point of land where Teviot joined Tweed; a strong position where King David the First, son of Malcolm Canmore and Saint Margaret, had established his headquarters on accession to the throne, and from which he had in effect ruled Scotland.
It was only six miles from the English Border, but in his day England was friendly, and as well as an English wife he had a great many links with the southern kingdom, in which he owned large lands and from which he had brought so many sprigs of the Norman and Flemish nobility to settle in Scotland.
So Roxburgh made sense for that King David.
But hardly for his present namesake.
With England now the enemy, this was inevitably one of the most vulnerable places in the northern kingdom — and indeed had been captured early in the Wars of Independence by Edward Plantagenet and remained in English hands ever since, its garrison readily supplied and reinforced from over the nearby Border.
The English used it as a convenient base for raids into the Scots East and Middle Marches, and as a permanent threat, its strong position on the rocky spine at the junction of the two rivers making it a very difficult nut to crack.
Needless to say, the Earl of Dunbar, as chief Scots Warden, had never attempted to retake it.
What, then, brought Edward Balliol all this way to Roxburgh?
To meet Dunbar?
Surely not.
If a meeting with that strange character was important, the usurper could have summoned Dunbar to himself, not had to ride eighty miles to see him.
Was it to meet someone else?
From England perhaps?
Something fairly vital must have occasioned this visit.
Andrew Heiton could offer no suggestions.
Whatever the reason, the Regent was no less determined to try to capture Balliol while he was thus detached from his main force.
How to attempt this?
It was out of the question to consider attacking or besieging Roxburgh Castle, of course, without heavy cannon.
Would it be best to wait, hidden, and seek to ambush Balliol's party on their return to their main army — as surely they must intend?
The difficulty there would be to achieve surprise.
One thousand men could not enter and remain in the vicinity for any time without being discovered.
Balliol would undoubtedly soon learn of their presence, however heedfully they hid.
And when he learned their numbers, he could seek reinforcements for his five hundred from over the Border, from the castle garrison, even from Dunbar.
Ramsay suggested a ruse.
Detach say two hundred, and use these to make a gesture at Roxburgh, some sort of sally towards the castle, hiding the remainder away, if necessary in groups.
If only two hundred were to be seen, then the chances were that Balliol would assume that this was their full strength.
So either he would be confident enough to set out westwards again with nearly three times that number; or else he might attempt a sortie against them.
In which case they would try to decoy the enemy towards some of the hidden groups, where they would be outnumbered and beaten.
Murray judged this a sound scheme.
But it might not provoke Balliol into action.
He might just sit tight inside the castle.
How to ensure that he came out?
Some enticement?
Suppose he learned that it was the Regent himself who was there.
That might bring him out.
But how to get that information to him?
The royal standard, Ramsay suggested.
If the decoy party displayed the Lion Rampant of Scotland, that would surely indicate high authority, for only the King or his Regent were entitled to fly that flag.
Murray was doubtful as to whether this would be enough; but Heiton declared that he could send  a couple of men into the Roxburgh township, to the alehouses and howffs, to spread the word that the Regent himself was in the vicinity.
Undoubtedly someone would carry this important news to the castle.
That, with the standard idea, was accepted as worth trying.
The rest of that evening was occupied in selecting suitable hiding-places for the eight hundred horsemen towards which the enemy hopefully could be lured.
The right area for this was all-important.
It must be to the south, across Teviot, for the Tweed, to the north, was the greater river, with no fords nor bridges available for a considerable distance upstream; and downstream, at Kelso, the Scots could be trapped too easily.
So the hiding-places must be reasonably near a suitable ford of Teviot.
Fortunately, of course, Heiton knew every inch of the ground hereabouts, much of it his own property, and so could advise.
The ford at Sunlaws Mill, he told them.
Cross there.
Broken ground this side of it.
Some men could hide there, where he had a small tower.
Not sufficient, but a couple of hundred perhaps.
Decoy the enemy past there and on southwards for Kalemouth, another long mile.
Then up the Kale Water.
Plenty of cover in its narrow, winding valley.
The Sunlaws people to come on after, to Kalemouth, and so closing the valley behind.
The enemy bottled up, trapped…
This sounded an excellent strategy, and all plans were made for the morrow.
Although Ramsay proposed that he should lead the decoy party, under the royal standard, Murray insisted that he himself must do that, as was suitable.
None would accept a young man as the Regent.
Ramsay should command at Sunlaws and close the trap at Kalemouth.
So next morning the thousand mosstroopers divided into three sections, two hundred to go with the Regent as decoys, two hundred to hide near Sunlaws ford and the remainder, six hundred, with a score or two of Heiton's own men, to head for the Kale Water valley where Heiton would place them in position from which they could ambush the pursuit once Murray's fleeing party was past.
It would all be wasted effort, of course, if Balliol refused to be enticed out from Roxburgh Castle.
Murray and Ramsay rode together as far as the ford at Sunlaws, a wooded terrain of bluffs and hillocks, another Heiton peel-tower and the riverside mill.
Here they parted  company, wishing each other good fortune, and the Regent splashed off across Teviot, unfurling the proud Lion Rampant standard.
Ramsay spent a busy hour placing his two hundred in the available cover amongst the hummocks and wooded hollows.
They were over two miles from Roxburgh Castle here, it hidden by the lie of the land.
Timing was hard to calculate.
It would not take the Regent long to ride there, but the displaying of himself and party in the quite large township and before the castle itself could take time; and coaxing Balliol and his people out, if successful, might take longer still.
So it was a case of waiting and readiness.
It seemed a long wait.
Ramsay ensconced himself in the upper storey of the mill building, where he could gain as wide a view as possible.
Even so, he could not see more than half a mile in the Roxburgh direction owing to a slight ridge of grass and whins.
He debated whether it would be worth sending a scout out to that ridge, to give him better warning, but decided against it.
It was almost two hours before he saw movement — and then it was fast and furious.
The group of horsemen, wide-scattered, not in any formation, appeared silhouetted on the ridge and came streaming on towards the ford.
At that range it was impossible to distinguish details — but the royal standard should have been visible and was not.
More horsemen came into sight but in twos and threes, riding their hardest obviously.
But they totalled nothing like two hundred, not much more than half that probably.
Biting his lip anxiously, Ramsay prepared to hurry down to alert his men.
Then the Lion Rampant did appear over the rising ground, perhaps three hundred yards behind those first riders, but it rose above a fairly compact party, and this was backed by a still larger body of men.
Suddenly it dawned on Ramsay that this flag was considerably larger than that flown by the Regent.
Something was wrong, direly wrong, he had to conclude.
That would be Balliol's standard, proclaiming his usurped kingship.
And the people in front were obviously fleeing rather than decoying: Murray's men.
So, it was failure — and they had lost their standard.
He had only a few moments to decide on what he should do.
Move his two hundred in behind those fleeing ones, to  confront the enemy?
There were many more than two hundred behind that large banner, so was it the wisest move?
It could lead to a second defeat.
Better to abide by the original plan.
Let decoys and pursuers past, and then follow on, so that the enemy would be trapped in the Kale valley and their own full strength of six hundred more could be brought to bear, surely much outnumbering Balliol's company.
Hurrying down to his men, he readied them.
He did not mention what he feared had happened to the Regent's party; they would guess that soon enough.
He had just time to form them up and move a little way forward himself from their hiding-place, to where he could see the ford and its approaches on either side, when the first fleeing riders came pounding down, splashing over and racing on.
Anxiously he watched.
Turnbull of Bedrule was there and Johnstone of Lochwood, but no Regent.
However appalled, Ramsay could do nothing more at this stage than try to carry out the original plan.
In only moments the pursuers were in turn coming down to the ford, and in much more disciplined order, professional English cavalry-men, not mosstroopers.
But although they might be better mounted, by normal standards, they were not so well horsed for rough riding as were the Borderers on their tough, sure-footed hill ponies; on this terrain the fleeing men ought to be able to keep ahead.
As the pursuit thundered past, Ramsay saw, under the great royal standard, a richly armoured knight who wore a golden circlet round his helmet — Balliol himself.
Ramsay waited impatiently after the last riders had passed out of sight.
He would have liked to hurry off eastwards, towards Roxburgh, to endeavour to see what had happened to Murray, and to do what he could to help.
But the first priority undoubtedly was to defeat Balliol, if possible.
So, when he judged that the enemy would be sufficiently far ahead not to perceive that they were being followed, he ordered his company into pursuit.
They had a mile and a half to go to Kalemouth, and owing to the broken and wooded nature of the country, only occasionally did they glimpse the enemy ahead, Ramsay deliberately holding his men in.
Clearly Balliol had not caught up with the decimated decoy party.
Fording the Kale Water, they turned up its far bank into the  quickly narrow shallow valley.
They did not have far to go before they heard the din of conflict ahead.
So the trap was already sprung.
Rounding one of the many bends in that valley, less than a mile up, they came upon a widening, almost an amphitheatre, where two small streams joined Kale through high banks.
In these declivities the ambushers must have hidden, for here battle raged amid yells and screams and the clash of steel.
It seemed at first sight to be a chaos of struggling men and horses, a wild mêlée; but soon it became apparent to the newcomers that it was in fact more like a whirlpool of activity, with the ambushed English, above whom the royal standard wavered uncertainly, in the centre, whilst their more numerous attackers circled round them, smiting and thrusting but apparently making only moderate impact.
Although his first impulse would have sent Alexander Ramsay spurring to join in this process, he restrained himself and his men.
These English were trained soldiers, and their reaction to the ambush was that of the cavalry equivalent of an infantry hedgehog or square.
The Scots' encircling assault, however spectacular, was not likely to break that tight formation and overwhelm the enemy.
Something more effective was required.
Ramsay made a swift decision — and it demanded some resolution, since it would entail cost.
Reining round, he shouted to his two hundred to form themselves into an arrowhead.
This was more easily commanded than achieved, for these mosstroopers were excellent horsemen and guerrilla fighters but unused to disciplined formation warfare.
Urgently Ramsay directed them, all but physically pushing and prodding them into the approximate shape of a great wedge.
Then, snatching a lance from one of them, he placed himself at the apex and, couching the lance, shouted to charge.
They had only about one hundred and fifty yards to gather speed and could not achieve a full gallop in the time.
But at a drumming canter they bore down on the mass of men and beasts ahead, the circling Scots and the stationary English.
‘A Ramsay!
A Ramsay!’ he shouted, and the slogan was taken up by those behind in yelling threat.
Inevitably this assault had to mean trouble for some of their own folk, since they must drive through the outer ring of Scots to get at the enemy — the cost which had caused Ramsay  momentarily to hesitate.
But he calculated that it had to be worth it, that such casualties would be minor compared with those which would result from a prolonged, slogging, hand-to-hand battle.
It was the sort of price any commander had to pay for hoped-for victory.
The charging wedge's impact on the circling horsemen was sufficiently drastic.
Men and horses went down like ninepins before them, in a tangle of waving limbs, flailing hooves and broken lances.
In front, Ramsay's own mount tripped over a fallen beast and rider and all but threw its own, but recovered.
Impetus and the driving weight told, and the wedge, only a little misshapen now, crashed through and bore down the few extra yards upon the waiting English.
This was a very different impact, head-on against all but stationary horsemen, solid in their ranks and having seen the approach.
The shock of it was breath-taking, shattering.
Ramsay's lance snapped off, broken, and left his right arm and hand too numb to draw his sword.
Horses reared high and screamed their terror, men, open-mouthed, fell from their saddles.
But it was the horses which decided the issue, as Ramsay had calculated they would.
Stationary beasts will never withstand charging ones.
Whatever their riders might desire, those English mounts broke, reared, panicked, cannoned into one another to get out of the way, and doing so caused utter confusion and collapse amongst the enemy.
The tight ranks wavered and melted before the driving spearhead, even though it was now sadly deformed and its speed slackened.
Pounding his beast with his left fist to try to maintain the momentum, Ramsay sought to head into the press for that Lion Rampant banner.
But the enemy leadership, Balliol or other, recognised realities.
Their coherence broken and morale likewise, outnumbered and with the rest of the Scots now rallying to exploit the new situation, a tight group at the centre of the company formed their own small wedge and spurred from inactive watching to furious activity — not towards Ramsay's threat but in the opposite direction.
This was flight, obvious and through their own men.
Lashing their horses and beating aside all in their way with the flats of their swords, Balliol and his immediate lieutenants drove off, through and away.
The royal standard fell in the trampling rush and was left behind.
Ramsay would have followed on, to try to capture the  usurper, but still in the midst of the heaving crush of men and beasts he was hampered and held up.
By the time that he had battled through it was too late.
Balliol's party had gained enough of a start to almost ensure their escape.
Besides, Ramsay's wedge was now attenuated, scarcely recognisable as such, and their mounts wearied.
Everywhere the English were now fleeing, singly and in groups, pursued by mosstroopers.
It was victory, of a sort.
Panting, dizzy with reaction, and seeking to ease his all but dislocated arm and shoulder, Ramsay surveyed the scene.
Then, riding on, he stiffly dismounted, avoiding the kicking of disabled horses, and stooped to pick up the now trampled and muddied Lion Rampant standard of Scotland.
Some of the Scots around him cheered as he raised it.
He however shook his head.
It was but a poor trophy for the day — a flag in exchange for a Regent, and Balliol still at large.
Casualties on both sides proved to be fairly light, the horses having suffered the most.
While these were being put out of their misery, wounded men succoured and prisoners rounded up, Ramsay went to demand of Johnstone of Lochwood and Turnbull of Bedrule what had happened to Sir Andrew Murray.
They told him that all had gone well until, between Roxburgh town and the castle, before which they were demonstrating, seeking to decoy Balliol, by chance an English party had come up behind them, presumably having ridden over the Border and by Kelso ford, and they had been trapped.
It was the Devil's own luck.
They had to fight their way out and back, and in the midst Balliol himself and these others had issued out from the castle.
Murray had turned to face them, and had his horse shot under him.
And when his standard-bearer went to give him his own beast, that too was slain beneath him.
The Regent was surrounded and captured.
There was nothing any of them could do to save him, scattered and outnumbered now as they were.
It was desperate ill-fortune, but…
So Scotland's new Regent was a prisoner in Roxburgh Castle, and the land was leaderless once more.
Ramsay had barely digested this sorry information when he learned more.
Amongst the casualties left on the field by the fleeing enemy was a Northumberland squire named Foster, who had been stunned when his horse toppled on him but not seriously injured.
This prisoner, from Coquetdale, disgusted  at the way Balliol and his group had abandoned the struggle and left himself and others to their fate, was prepared to talk, no doubt in the hope of improving his own position.
Brought before Ramsay and questioned, he explained the mystery of why Balliol had left his army at Moffat and ridden all this way eastwards to Roxburgh.
It was because he had been summoned to do so, by no less than his paymaster, Edward, King of England.
Now that he was crowned King of Scots, he was to pay homage for his kingdom to the English monarch as Lord Paramount.
He was a vassal, as indeed his father had been forty years earlier.
Thomas Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, was sent to Roxburgh to receive that formal fealty on behalf of his sovereign-lord, and to state the price of English help in the matter.
Balliol had formally signed documents conceding that Scotland was a subordinate kingdom under the English crown.
The King of Scots would hereafter be liable on request to provide an army to aid the King of England in any of his campaigns.
The Scottish castles of Berwick-on-Tweed and Roxburgh, hitherto only occupied by the English, were now ceded to England for all time coming.
Two thousand librates of prime tillable land, that is one hundred thousand acres, convenient to the Border, of the Plantagenet's choice, were to be handed over as free gift, with all the folk thereupon.
And the Princess Joanna's marriage to David Stewart was to be declared null and void, since both had been mere infants at its celebration, and the princess free to marry whomsoever her royal brother selected, Balliol himself being glad and privileged to wed her if this was his Lord Edward's will and choice.
Scarcely able to believe his ears, Ramsay listened to this shameful catalogue.
So much for Edward Balliol, the Toom Tabard's son!
Robert the Bruce must be tossing in his grave at Dunfermline Abbey!
Ramsay now found himself to be in command of this detachment, the only knight present.
What to do now?
Much as he would have liked to try to rescue Murray, he recognised that to be out of the question.
Roxburgh Castle was proof against all but prolonged siege and heavy artillery.
But Balliol himself? presumably he would now return to his army in the west.
In which case might he not still be vulnerable to capture?
The trouble was, he was now warned that there was a sizeable force in the vicinity to challenge him, and would no doubt hereafter take all possible precautions.
He might even elect to ride westwards across the borderline on English ground, to Carlisle and then north.
And the Earl of Warwick might well provide him with additional escort.
Weighing it all up, Ramsay came to the conclusion that the chances of capturing the usurper at this stage were all but non-existent, and that their wisest course was to return at once with his dire news to the main Scots array in Annandale or wherever it had reached by now.
They need not return all the way as they had come but could strike southwards up Jed Water and over to Hobkirk and so by the Note o' the Gate pass into Liddesdale.
Then west by Hermitage Water to Ewesdale and Langholm and so over to Annandale in the Lockerbie area, rough going but saving much in distance.
Sixty to sixty-five miles, he reckoned.
Less than two days' hard riding.
They would take the prisoner Foster with them.
Their own wounded could be attended to at the nearby village of Eckford, and then disappear into these their own Border hills.
The enemy prisoners and hurt could be left to find their way back to Roxburgh as best they could, stripped of their arms, armour and anything else worth having — although some of the mosstroopers were for slaying them out of hand.
The move was made, back up Teviot, for the Jed Water valley.
Ramsay's company had no difficulty in finding the Scots army once they reached lower Annandale, for any large host leaves ample tracks behind.
Moving at the pace of the infantry, they had not covered any great distance in the interim and were in fact only half a day's march ahead when Ramsay reached Lockerbie in the Johnstone country.
They saw the camp-fires lighting up the winter dusk well before they reached the Hoddom area, near where the Water of Milk joined Annan, which meant, of course, that the enemy ahead presumably would be apt to see them also; but it was practically impossible to hide the presence of a major army anyway.
Their arrival, without the Regent, created no little stir and consternation.
Presently in the great hall of Hoddom Castle, which the leaders had taken over, Ramsay made his report and handed over Balliol's royal flag, eating hungrily as he spoke.
Most  there listened in grim silence although Will Douglas inserted a host of interjections and questions.
There was no doubting the seriousness with which all viewed the situation.
Douglas inevitably took the lead in the decision-making called for.
He declared that, in this situation, it was a case of first things first.
No use beating their breasts and bewailing the loss of Murray.
Until he could be restored to them, as Regent, they required an acting Regent.
Without that the royal authority could not be exercised, and the realm would be like a ship lacking a rudder.
Even here, in this host, since Murray's departure, there had been difficulties of command.
Some lords considered themselves to be above command — and he glared round the company.
An acting Regent was necessary, and in the circumstances would have to be appointed here and now, from this assembly.
There were indrawn breaths at such plain speaking, but no actual rebuttals.
Ramsay, accepting the need, wondered whether even Douglas would have the presumption to propose himself for the position.
The Flower of Chivalry did not go quite so far as that.
Eyeing the magnates one by one, he nodded his head.
‘We have here not a few whose high office would make them suitable for the position,’ he said.
‘The High Steward.
The High Constable.
The Knight Marischal.
The Earl of Moray.
All sound and excellent lords.
But, all young.
Too young to be Regent, I say.
Lacking in experience, necessarily.
They will none, I swear, contest that?
The realm will better heed an older man to represent the child-king.
And one who has the power to enforce his decisions, if need be, with armed might!
And we have such a one here.’
There was silence round that table, amidst darting glances, as men waited.
‘I propose Sir Archibald Douglas of Douglasdale, Lord of Galloway, who commands more men than any other here.
Who better?
Brother to the Good Sir James, the Bruce's closest friend.
Companion-in-arms of the heroes who saved this kingdom in the late wars.
I name you, Archibald Douglas, as Regent!’
For a few moments there was little apparent reaction.
All there were taken by surprise; by his expression, Archibald Douglas himself.
That man was scarcely a heroic figure, however genial and powerful in manpower, but never ambitious  to lead.
Always he had been overshadowed by his elder brother, the famous Black Douglas — and never wished it otherwise.
On the other hand, he could field more men than any other lord south of the Highlands, and the Douglas power would be invaluable to the regency; indeed lacking it or opposed by it, any other Regent would be in difficulties.
He was one of the very few left of the Bruce's close company, even if no paladin.
And he was no man's enemy.
Likewise he was Sir William's uncle, with all that implied.
Alexander Ramsay marvelled.
Here was shrewd reckoning.
Will Douglas was more cunning than he had thought.
This way he would largely control the regency without the drawbacks of office, paper-work, jealousy.
It was clever.
Many who would have opposed his outspoken and disputatious self would accept his uncle.
‘I agree.’
Young Bleary, the Steward, was first to speak.
‘I propose Sir Archibald Douglas, Lord of Galloway, as Regent — until we have the good Sir Andrew back.’
‘I also,’ Moray said.
‘Likewise,’ Hay the Constable added briefly, always a young man of few words.
After these three had given their approval, it would have demanded considerable determination to have put forward an alternative nomination.
None did.
Oddly, it was left to Alexander Ramsay to express the only doubt.
‘My lords,’ he said, ‘excellent as this is, can we so appoint?
Is the appointment of Regent, or acting Regent, not the responsibility of the Privy Council?’
There was some murmured agreement at that — but not from William Douglas.
‘There are sufficient of the Council here present to serve!’ he asserted.
‘Only the clerks absent.
They can confirm later.’
His contempt for churchmen was undisguised.
‘This is the army of the King of Scots.
We require the royal authority now, not when priests find it convenient to be present!
Is it agreed?’
There was no cheering nor acclaim, but no countermotion either.
Will Douglas rose from his seat, and bowed to his uncle — and perforce all others must do likewise.
Sir Archibald looked embarrassed.
He spread his hands.
‘This is…surprise,’ he said.
‘I do not desire the position.
I  doubt my ability for it.
But, if it is the wish of you all, I will do what I can.
With the help of you all.
Until the true Regent is restored to us.’
‘Well said,’ his nephew commended, resuming his seat.
‘Now — to business.’
Nothing could more clearly have demonstrated the realities of the situation than those three words, and the tone in which they were said.
Ramsay smiled inwardly.
Will Douglas leaned forward.
‘Informants tell us that the enemy has halted at Annan town.
Sir Eustace Maxwell has turned traitor, as I knew he would, and has joined Balliol's host there, with his own people from Caerlaverock and Dumfries and also the Comyn and Balliol levies from Galloway.
Henry Balliol, Edward's brother, and Sir Walter Comyn, are with him.
The word is that the usurper, or those acting in his name, have sent out a call for all Scots lords and landed men to repair there, to Annan, to do homage to him.
Give him their oaths of fealty — God damn him!
Which must mean that he intends to be there for some time.
It is only ten miles to the English border, twenty from Carlisle.
So he could be reinforced from England swiftly.
He has over twenty-five thousand there already.
I say that we should strike now, before he gathers more.’
There were murmurs for and against such action.
Sir Michael Wemyss pointed out that they were much outnumbered already; also that Annan was a defendable town with a fairly strong castle, the Bruce's former main seat.
‘Annan Castle is part in ruins,’ Douglas said.
‘King Robert never rebuilt it fully after the English wrecked it and he went to Lochmaben and Turnberry.
Forby, I say that they will not wait in the town to let themselves be besieged.
Since they outnumber us, they will come out to challenge us, But if we choose the battle-ground, and with surprise…’
‘Maxwell is a good soldier,’ Sir Simon Fraser said.
‘I have campaigned with him.
Do not underestimate Maxwell.
And Balliol must have some good commanders to have done what he has done.’
‘No doubt.
But we have come here to fight, have we not?
We have not marched all this way to sit and wait!
And the longer we wait, the stronger Balliol will get, I judge.’
Ramsay spoke.
‘We should not wait for long, no.
But wait for a little, I say.
For what is our aim here?
Is it to win a great  victory?
Over largely our own countrymen, who see this usurper as a stronger king than young David can be?
Or is it to bring down the usurper himself?
That, surely.
So Sir Andrew Murray was right, although he failed.
Our prime task is to capture or destroy Edward Balliol, who has sold our realm to the English.
We have failed once, but we can try again.’
‘How?’ barked Douglas.
‘Not by attacking Annan when he is not yet there, to be sure!
If we do, and win, will he not merely flee over the Border, and come back with more English?
For this is now Edward of England's cause.
I say, wait until he has had time to return from Roxburgh — as surely he will.
Then a surprise raid, probably by night.
Not any full battle.
He will be lodged in the castle, awaiting his homage-makers.
I know the castle, as will others here.
It is not in the midst of the town, but a little way to the west, on the river-bank.
And there is a good ford below it.
A strong company of horse, in the night, could reach that ford undiscovered, cross, cut off the castle from the town and the enemy's main encampment, enter the half-ruined castle and capture Balliol, and away.
It is not like Roxburgh, a strong fortress in good order…’
He got no further, his words lost in cries of acclaim and agreement.
Even Will Douglas looked interested.
‘How long until Balliol returns, then?’ that man demanded, when he could make himself heard.
‘Not long, I should think.
It took us a day and a half to come, riding fast.
Even if he is in less haste he will not delay, I think.
This homage-taking.
Give him two more days.
You spoke of informants from Annan?
Let them send us word when Balliol returns…’
‘I say this makes good sense,’ Sir Archibald put in.
‘Let us so plan, Will.’
This was his first decision as Regent.
His nephew was not one to yield the initiative readily.
‘A surprise attack by night would require to be in strength.
Once the enemy camp was roused, thousands would move in on the castle.
We would need a large number to hold these off, form a barrier.
A thousand, at least.
And a thousand horse crossing a ford, in darkness…’
‘I have crossed that ford times without number,’ Johnstone of Lochwood put in.
‘The Annan there is broad and shallow.
There is a causeway.
Men could cross it a score abreast.’
‘Will it be guarded, then?’
‘That we shall have to discover.
Scouts out…’
So the discussion got down to practicalities and planning, a new keenness evident.
When, weary, Alexander Ramsay sought his couch, it was to leave an animated company still at it, Will Douglas now as involved as any, indeed automatically assuming the leadership.
That impatient man did not have so long to wait as he had feared, for the very next evening a young townsman arrived at Hoddom from Annan, ten miles distant, with the news that Edward Balliol had indeed returned to his army.
The messenger had been sent by a group of Annan citizens loyal to the Bruce connection; after all, the late King Robert had been the sixth Bruce Lord of Annandale.
But as well as indicating strong loyalist sympathies in the town, he had to inform that these were evidently not shared by Bruce's own nephew, the new Earl of Carrick, Edward Bruce's second son, who was lord there now and had handed over the castle, with his allegiance, to the usurper.
There had always been bad blood between Robert and Edward Bruce; now this was transmitted to the next generation apparently.
It was decided to make the raid on Annan Castle the following night; and the messenger was sent back to inform his fellow-supporters of the attempt, in strictest secrecy.
He was to have them arouse the citizenry, when they heard the attack develop, so as to cause panic and alarm behind the enemy forces when these were roused to counter-attack.
The numbers to be employed in the raid provided something of a problem.
Sufficient they must take; but too many would be counter-productive and would militate against surprise and secrecy.
It was decided that about one thousand was right, three hundred to storm the castle itself and the remainder to seal off the approaches thereto for long enough to allow the raiders to achieve their ends and retire back across the ford, it was to be hoped with Edward Balliol dead or alive.
Another problem, unexpected, was that practically everyone amongst the Scots leadership wanted to be involved.
But they could not all go, for if the attempt failed, there must be those left to command the main army.
Nevertheless it was apparent that there was going to be a greater preponderance of lords and knights in this affair than Will Douglas, for one, desired; but his uncle was reluctant to  refuse any.
As a sort of consolation for the others, it was agreed that a second force of cavalry, somewhat larger, perhaps two thousand, should come along behind, as support, but to keep their distance for the sake of secrecy and only move if called for.
So the next evening the two forces were readied.
It had been a wet and unpleasant day, with sleet threatening, but none the worse for their purposes perhaps.
They would wait until complete darkness, necessarily, longer indeed, and then ride behind Johnstone guides who knew the terrain intimately, not by the main riverside road, which might well be guarded, or at least watched, but by little-used tracks and byways, with Johnstone scouts out ahead, under Lochwood.
A start was delayed until about eight o'clock.
Although it was only ten miles direct, it would be fully half that again by the route planned; and they would be able to go only very slowly, in the darkness.
Midnight for the attack, then, no earlier.
Although in theory under the personal command of the new Regent, in fact Will Douglas led, grumbling at having to carry so many lofty ones along when what was needed for this attempt was the toughest of mosstroopers.
Their guides took them by a route well to the west of the main Annandale road, round the hill of Trailtrow, although they did not see it, avoiding the Brydekirk area, and on down the winding valley of a small stream running south-eastwards.
Only the Johnstones knew where they were in all this, the night being as dark as it was wet, and the going unpleasant to say the least.
And slow, slower even than anticipated, for moving a thousand horsemen through narrow and all but trackless unknown country by night is no easy manoeuvre.
Inevitably the column became grievously extended, and Ramsay and others of the leadership were occupied throughout in riding up and down the line trying to keep the various groups together and in touch.
Oddly enough, some of the young lords seemed to enjoy this, despite the conditions, John Randolph and the Steward in especial finding it almost a sporting activity.
It was after midnight before they passed a dimly discerned height called, apparently, Spittalridding Hill, where there was a monastic hospice; and there was still a couple of miles to  go to the Annan ford, they were told.
Will Douglas, at the front, cursed as he rode.
However, presently they were heartened by a subdued glow in the night ahead, which would be the camp-fires of Balliol's army, being kept alight through the night.
The great encampment, they had been informed, was on the level ground to the east of the town, its common indeed, the opposite side from castle and river — which was a blessing.
Scouts came back to them to tell that the ford was unguarded.
They heard the river before they saw it, if seeing is the word; and although this was daunting to most, sounding as though it was running high with the rain, the scouts assured that the noise was actually caused by the shallows of the ford area, where the water was more disturbed.
They would cross without difficulty.
At the river's edge, whilst the party was reassembling and being marshalled behind them, the leaders went to peer across.
Their vision was by now more adapted to the darkness, and silhouetted against the glow of the fires, they could make out the black bulk of the castle.
From this angle at least no light showed therein, at this hour, an encouraging sign, although undoubtedly there would be guards on duty.
A decision fell to be made here — whether the castle party should cross first, or the larger group which was to form the barrier?
The latter had further to go and should be in place when the raid on the castle began; but if, by chance, their crossing and arrival was discovered and the enemy alerted, then the main objective could be aborted.
Douglas held that they dare not risk this, Ramsay agreeing, and they persuaded his uncle to so rule.
The castle group would go over first, dismount and take up their preliminary positions.
When they were ready, send a messenger back to bring over the remainder, who would endeavour to ride on and past as silently as possible and form the barrier between town and castle.
With urgent commands for quiet, Douglas himself led the way into the river, glad enough now of its noises.
They rode slowly to avoid splashing, although the horses' instinct clearly was to hurry over.
In the event, they found the crossing reasonably easy, the water never reaching as high as the beasts' bellies.
By testing, they found the ford, cobbled like a causeway, was indeed wide enough to accommodate as many as a score of riders abreast, so that the seventy-yard crossing did not take long.
There was some unavoidable noise, but not much.
Once over, and dismounted, the three hundred of the assault party moved quickly into their prearranged positions.
Many of the leaders knew the castle fairly well, it being a Bruce seat.
The entrance-front and gatehouse faced the town.
It was hoped that, in present circumstances, the drawbridge would not be up nor the portcullis down, with the enemy army camped so close at hand, and its leaders no doubt either in the castle or lodged in houses in the town.
So two-thirds of the attackers moved round, as silently as they could, under the high perimeter walling, to the front of the establishment, whilst the remainder, leaving a small guard on the horses, went in the other direction, west-about, to the area of the broken-down curtain walls, nearer at hand.
These, under the Steward and Moray, were not to attempt ingress until they received a signal from the front party.
As Douglas and Ramsay stationed their people about one hundred yards out from the gateway, peering to see if the drawbridge was indeed down, they were startled by two figures who materialised out of the gloom from behind a low wall of the forecourt — and were almost leapt upon there and then.
But one proved to be the young courier who had come to Hoddom, the other his father, a magistrate of the town.
These whispered that so far all was well.
The bridge was not up, the portcullis raised and the guard in the gatehouse evidently keeping warm before a fire therein.
None seemed to be patrolling the curtain walls.
Many of the townsfolk were waiting, ready to move out and make trouble for the enemy when the camp was roused.
Nodding their thanks, Douglas sent two messengers, one to tell the barrier party, under his uncle, to move across and into position; the other to inform the Steward's group that he, Douglas, was moving in, and to do likewise, but quietly.
Then, passing the word back, he and Ramsay led the way forward, pacing heedfully.
They reached the drawbridge, and were careful to tread even more softly, for heavy footfalls on its timbers above a void could echo hollowly.
Almost tip-toeing, indeed all but holding their breaths, the two hundred crept over.
No challenge rang out as the leaders entered the deeper gloom of the gatehouse-pend, under its vault.
Doorways opened off this stone passage right and left, one to give access to the porter's lodge, the other to a stairway leading up to the gatehouse itself, above the pend, from which the drawbridge and portcullis were managed.
Both doors were presently shut against the winter's night.
Setting men to guard both, Douglas and Ramsay moved on into the outer bailey, hardly able to believe their good fortune thus far.
In the cobbled enclosure of the outer bailey they were aware of a vague stirring and sound.
But it did not trouble the invaders, for with it was the smell of horses.
Round this yard was a lining of lean-to stabling; it was the slight movement of scores of horses they were hearing.
From here they could see a light from an inner window of the gatehouse.
There was a second guard-chamber between the outer and inner baileys, but it was unlikely to be on the alert at night when the main gate was manned.
The leaders approached it cautiously nevertheless.
No challenge was forthcoming.
The inner bailey, instead of stabling, was lined with the barrack accommodation for the men-at-arms and garrison.
How many might be therein, in present circumstances, there was no knowing.
Ramsay counted four doorways, and stationed guards on each.
Ahead now reared the dark mass of the main keep of the establishment, wherein would surely be found Balliol and his close associates.
There might well be a guard at its door also, but, it was to be hoped, no more alert than the rest.
Douglas was forming up a tight group to tackle this entrance, and another to proceed round to the rear to block any back-door escape, when the night's wet quiet was suddenly disturbed.
Shouts and yells erupted from nearby, to the west.
The Steward's group had presumably been discovered entering the semi-ruinous domestic quarters of kitchens, bakehouse, larders and so on, at that side.
Cursing furiously, Douglas ordered the main keep entrance to be rushed, silence no longer essential.
Swords and dirks drawn, they ran up, threw open the great door, and flung themselves within.
There was little real resistance.
Heavy-eyed, yawning and bewildered men appeared in doorways, and were promptly  cut down by the attackers.
Leaving Fraser to deal with the occupants of the vaulted basement chambers Douglas and Ramsay raced up the twisting turnpike stairway to the first floor, where would be the great hall, followed by fifty or so mosstroopers.
Bursting into this, the main apartment of the castle, lit still by the flickerings of two large log fires, they were into a scene of confusion.
Some men, awakened by the shouting, were on their feet, demanding what was to do, peering from windows, reaching for weapons.
More were still on the floor asleep, part-drunken no doubt, for the long tables were littered with wine-flagons and beakers and broken meats.
Shouting to Wemyss to cope with this situation, Douglas wasted no time.
Edward Balliol would not be couched down there, but upstairs in one of the principal bedchambers, for sure.
With Ramsay and many others he ran on, up the turnpike.
There were two apartments on the next floor, intercommunicating.
Douglas burst open the door into the first, where somebody had lit a lamp.
Men here, in various stages of undress, were pulling on outer clothing and armour.
Some had time to grab weapons before the intruders were upon them.
Ramsay found himself attacking Sir John Moubray, whom he knew slightly.
Sword against mere dagger, he felled the older man without difficulty.
Turning to deal with the next, his glance went to the intercommunicating doorway.
This door had now been opened and a man stood therein, staring.
It was Edward Balliol himself, clad only in shirt and breeches.
Shouting, Ramsay flung himself thither.
But he was just too late.
He tripped over a fallen body and this gave Balliol sufficient time to jump back and slam the door shut behind him.
As Ramsay reached it, he could hear the draw-bar within click into place.
That door would not give way without some sort of battering-ram.
Yelling the news to Douglas, who was swording with Sir Walter Comyn, Ramsay dashed through the struggling mass of men back for the stairway, Down he raced, two steps at a time, and out again into the night.
Almost certainly there would be a second stair leading down from that inner bedchamber.
He must reach that.
He was vaguely aware of some of his own Dalwolsey men, led by Wattie Kerr, at his back.
Hastening round the keep they came up against unexpected obstruction.
The Steward's party, having cleared out  the domestic quarters, arrived at that side of the keep, driving before them a crowd of servitors and general retainers, women amongst them, many only partially clad.
Confusion reigned.
It was Ramsay's turn to curse.
Seeking to push through this terrified and bewailing throng and their attackers, making for that rear door, he recognised that this might well ruin all.
If Balliol was already down a back stair, he could mingle with this crowd of panic-stricken servants and nowise stand out, in his shirt and breeches, since others were in approximately the same state.
No amount of authoritative shouting would prevail in that uproar.
Furiously he elbowed his way through the crush, his men behind him.
When at length they reached the expected doorway it was to find the door open.
So his quarry could be already out.
Swinging round there, on the step, he stared back into the throng; but in that darkness and chaos it was impossible to distinguish individuals.
Turning, he ran inside into a vaulted lobby, empty.
Up a narrow circular stair therefrom he went, and in the almost pitch darkness cannoned into somebody coming down.
Who this might be he could not tell, but if it was Balliol he had donned more clothing, which seemed unlikely, in the rush.
Pushing this individual bodily round and down, into Wattie Kerr s arms, he shouted to hold him, and raced on up the stairs.
Blessed light showed faintly at the second-floor landing, coming from an open door.
Into this chamber he went, to discover a woman standing beside a great canopied bed, who screamed at the sight of him, armoured and sword drawn.
Clutching a blanket partly around her, she was obviously naked.
She was alone.
Ramsay paused, bowed mockingly to her, and turned back.
There were two more floors above this in the keep, but the chances of Balliol having gone upstairs rather than down were remote.
Ramsay left the upper floors to others, and ran downstairs again.
In the courtyard, frustrated, he gazed about him.
Someone had lit a torch, but its smoky, wavering light only emphasised the hopelessness of trying to pick out individuals in the seething turmoil.
The attackers could be identified by their armour and helmets, but in that confined space that was all.
Pushing his way back to the keep's main entrance, Ramsay  found Douglas emerging.
To him he shouted his tidings, to that man's hot anger.
They agreed that they must seal off this inner courtyard and all within it, and sift through the trapped folk.
But Balliol might well have already escaped.
It was maddening to have achieved so much and yet to have lost the object of it all.
They had other problems now to occupy their minds, as well as Balliol's whereabouts.
The enemy army could be upon them at any time, in however disorganised a state.
What of the Regent's seven hundred?
And the town?
Had the alarm yet roused the camp?
How quickly must they organise their own retiral?
Douglas said that he would see to the situation in the castle.
Ramsay should go out and discover the position outside.
Inform Sir Archibald, if possible, and arrange a signal for the retiral to the ford.
Hurrying out with his little band through the inner and outer baileys, at the gatehouse their guards told them that they had heard rather than seen the Regent's force riding between castle and town some time before.
They had however heard no sounds of disturbance from the encampment area beyond the town, and there was no observable brightening of the fireglow from there.
Certainly, as he stared out eastwards, Ramsay could perceive no signs of alarm or even movement in town or beyond.
He was surprised, assuming that all the uproar at the castle must have been heard.
But possibly not; the rain, and the town between, might have to some extent blanketed the noise, from the camp.
The same might apply in reverse, of course, and the enemy army's arousal not be heard from here.
He hurried out into the forecourt, and on.
Soon he came upon the first of the Regent's horsemen, Douglases to a man, riding back and forward, to form a cordon cutting off the castle.
He asked for Sir Archibald, and was directed further.
He found the Regent dismounted and talking to the magistrate-father of the messenger.
They both were astonished that so far no indication of trouble had come from the town common; but reckoned that it would not be long now before it did, for a few escapers from the castle had been glimpsed running in that direction.
They had tried to head these off, but because they could slip into the lanes and wynds of the town, this had proved difficult, Ramsay interrupted to  demand whether one of these fugitives had been a tall man in shirt and breeches; but they said that in the darkness they could not tell.
When the Regent heard about Balliol, he was much put out.
There was nothing that Ramsay could do now save return to the castle.
He did suggest that Sir Archibald send out a couple of scouts to as close as they could get to the enemy camp without being noticed, to send back word of any development there.
As this was being arranged, they were interrupted.
The sound and beat of hooves, many hooves, halted their talk — but coming from the west, not the east.
Alarmed, the Regent hastily mounted, ready for trouble.
But when the first horsemen loomed close, they proved to be Sir Andrew Leslie and his lieutenants, leading the two thousand reserve force.
Contrary to instructions and tired of inactive waiting, they had decided to come and see what went on.
It was not Ramsay's place to rebuke them, and Sir Archibald did not do so — for in the circumstances it looked as though no harm was done.
But it would complicate the withdrawal, with three thousand men to get back across that ford, instead of one-third of that number.
He said that he would return and inform Will Douglas.
Back at the castle he found that man efficiently commanding all.
Douglas was annoyed at this arrival of Leslie's contingent but changed his tune suddenly when he heard that there was still no sign of the enemy encampment being alarmed.
Drawing a deep breath, he abruptly beat a steel-clad fist on Ramsay's breastplate.
‘By the Mass!’ he exclaimed.
‘Here's a ploy!
Man, we have three thousand horse here now.
If the enemy are not roused and ready, three thousand could ride through their camp and cut it to tatters!
It could be God's gift…’
Ramsay grinned.
‘I wondered whether that would come to your mind,’ he said.
Quickly, then.
Leave a small guard here, on the prisoners.
Send for our horses.
Bring them to the forecourt.
Hurry, Sandy!’
It did not take long to fetch the horses round.
There was some confusion as to who was to be left behind, as ever all wanting to be in at the action, the Steward and Moray flatly refusing to stay.
In the end, Hay the Constable and Sir  Michael Wemyss were left in charge of castle and prisoners, and the rest hurried out to the forecourt and mounted.
There was now a great congestion of horsemen milling around in the area between town and castle.
Douglas and Ramsay drove through the throng, to where the Regent and Leslie were still conferring as to what to do now.
Will Douglas took charge without any pretence of consulting his uncle.
Three columns of one thousand each, he ordered, under himself, Ramsay and Fraser.
Ramsay to ride north of the town, Fraser south, and he would ride through the streets themselves.
Wait at the edge of the common until he blew his horn.
Then advance at the charge, in line abreast, and ride down the usurper's camp.
Through it, turn and back again.
Cut them to pieces…
Ramsay interrupted to ask what should be their plan if they found the camp roused — even though there was still no indication of this?
Douglas said, having got that far, they would go ahead.
If there was organised resistance, on their return charge, they would seek to carry on right back to the ford and over, picking up Hay, Wemyss and the prisoners on the way.
But with most of the enemy leaders undoubtedly caught in the castle, he did not think that the surprised army would be in a position to counter-attack swiftly.
Time being of the essence, they delayed no longer.
Breaking up the confused concourse of horsemen into three echelons of a sort, in the darkness and without much noise and shouting, was a problem, and no very exact division resulted.
But that was not vitally important.
Ramsay was the first to ride off, with an unknown but substantial following, north-about round the town's broken-down walling.
It was not difficult to find their way, for the faint glow of the many camp-fires guided them and showed up the loom of the burgh's buildings.
Annan was not a large town, and getting into their appointed position did not take long.
Once there, with the common area open before them, it was obvious that some disturbance now prevailed in the camp; but not as yet any general alarm apparently.
There was some activity, and the fires were clearly being stoked up with fresh wood to give more light; and lit lamps were moving here and there.
But there was no indication of a great army of over twenty thousand being roused or in the process of marshalling.
Ramsay, forming his men into a lengthy line four deep, had not long to wait before the high wailing of a hunting-horn sounded in the windy gloom, for his group had probably had furthest to ride.
Stationing himself approximately in the centre of his front, he raised his sword high and ordered the charge.
It could be only a very moderate charge, in the darkness, since any gallop could have put them into dire trouble over unseen obstacles, whinbushes, ditches and the like.
So no more than a canter was practicable, and even so Ramsay, peering urgently, was much concerned with possible upset and consequent break-up of the formation, if not worse.
Surely seldom had a cavalry commander led a charge with less preoccupation with the enemy ahead.
They had perhaps three hundred yards to cover to the edge of the encampment; and as they neared this it dawned on Ramsay that, of all things, the enemy had placed their horse-lines here at this western rim of their cantonment.
So this is what he would reach first, thousands of tethered horses.
It was on a par with the rest of their good fortune that night — save the missing of Balliol himself — for nothing could more assist their project than to drive hosts of panic-stricken and riderless horses before them through the sleeping camp.
Before they reached these lines, their right wing merged with the left of Douglas's front.
No need now for quiet.
Yelling ‘A Ramsay!
A Ramsay!’ he led straight into the ranks of stationary horses.
For moments, of course, it was utter pandemonium, as the neighing, screaming beasts staggered and reared, their own mounts contributing.
Then the tethered horses broke loose and began to stream away.
Inevitably it was into the long rows of tents, pavilions and blanketed men that they plunged.
Hell broke loose on Annan Common.
What followed was as indescribable as it was chaotic.
Admittedly the attacking Scots had a planned assault to carry out, but in the circumstances keeping to the plan was all but impossible.
The fleeing horses in front certainly had no plans, and the riders behind were thereby constrained.
But the impact on the camp lacked nothing in effect on that account.
Whatever warning might have been given earlier, little arousal seemed to have resulted.
Most of the enemy still seemed to be asleep as the avalanche of horses and riders bore  down upon them in pounding fury.
There was no resistance.
Men were trampled on where they lay or tried to rise, pavilions were trodden down, tentage swept aside, stacks of arms tumbled.
The noise and clamour did tend to warn those on the far side of the encampment that something was very much amiss, but this did not produce any organised stand or opposition, only flight.
Ramsay did what he could to try to keep his men in some sort of order, or at least in touch with each other and himself, but this proved to be scarcely feasible.
His objective had to be to drive on through the tumult and horror as best they could, not to get involved with individuals or groups, not to be sidetracked, so as to reach that further side, there to turn and repeat the dire process, difficult as this must be.
Before they started, he had warned his people on this, pointing out that if they allowed themselves to be delayed, they themselves would be in grave danger of being ridden down by their own fellows on the return charge.
In the event it was a very ragged company which won through to the east end of the common, to rein up and turn.
Ramsay delayed the return for as long as he dared, to allow stragglers to come up.
There was no way that he could tell what proportion of his command had managed to get thus far, but undoubtedly all had not.
In the darkness he could not see what went on further down the line, but obviously the same problems would prevail there.
He shouted to his riders, at least those near enough to hear, to try not to ride down any mounted men in their way, as those would likely be their own folk, it being improbable that the enemy would have been able to catch any of the fleeing horses.
Then he ordered the second charge.
Inevitably it was even more chaotic than the first, with no sort of line possible to be kept by the attackers, and what was left of the encampment now a shambles.
As far as beating down and killing went, nothing very much was achieved, for the enemy were now everywhere in flight, such as could run, none staying to fight, not in Ramsay's sector at any rate.
Through on the town side of the common again, he pulled up, to take stock.
Only a small proportion of his men were actually with him now, others coming in singly and in groups as they could disentangle themselves from the embroilment.
It seemed pointless to repeat the process.
Ramsay decided to  leave Johnstone of Lochwood, who was in his party, in command meantime, and go seek Will Douglas.
He found that man more easily than he had anticipated, quite near at hand, indeed, having himself just completed his return charge and now wondering what to do next.
Hailing each other, they found that they had come to the same conclusion: that so far as they could tell, in the gloom and confusion, the night was theirs, the camp completely broken up, the enemy scattered and leaderless and unlikely to rally now.
Despite their preponderance in numbers still — for probably not a great many had been slain — fleeing in all directions as they had done, horseless and with few if any senior commanders, it was all but inconceivable that they could re-form and offer any coherent opposition.
Likewise, for themselves to go chasing after the dispersed fleeing men in the darkness would be a waste of effort.
It was sufficient.
So Douglas's horn was blown time and again in the recall.
It took some time to reassemble their people, so much so that presently Douglas, growing impatient, left some of his lesser commanders to round up the stragglers, attend to the wounded and collect the booty from the camp.
Then he led the way back to the castle.
There, presently, sustained by appropriated wines and provision in the great hall, steaming before replenished fires, the victors considered the situation.
Nobody had seen Edward Balliol unfortunately, but apart from that it seemed to be success all the way.
The enemy dead proved to include Balliol's own brother Henry; also Sir Walter Comyn, Sir John Moubray, Sir Richard Kirkby, one of the English leaders, and other notables.
And there were many prominent captives, including none other than their involuntary host, Alexander Bruce, the new Earl of Carrick.
Many there were for executing this weak nephew of their late King there and then; but Moray, who was his kinsman, pleaded for his life with the Regent, and promised to stand surety for his better behaviour in the future.
It was decided that there was no point in returning to Hoddom, so messengers were sent to acquaint the main Scots army of the position and to bring them on here to Annan in the morning.
Then, weary but triumphant, with sufficient guards set and scouting parties out to ensure that no possible rallying of the enemy endangered them, the victors were given  one final item of news before they couched down to sleep.
Amongst new captives brought in were a Maxwell laird and an English under-officer, both of whom testified that they had seen King Edward Balliol riding off eastwards from the camp area, alone, still only in shirt and breeches, presumably making for the Border and Carlisle.
There was no doubt about the identity, for it was the English officer's horse which the fugitive had commandeered, by royal command.
So, it seemed that Scotland had got rid of her usurper, after a bare three months.
God save King David!
Alexander Ramsay was back in his own house of Dalwolsey for Yuletide, and glad to be, for apart from the festive season's celebrations, which he always enjoyed, there was much that required his attention as chief of a great lordship of many baronies, many manors and wide lands.
His brother William made a good deputy in most respects and could deal with much of the day-to-day management of the properties; but he was very much a stay-at-home character, immersed in his books and studies, and the more distant affairs tended to get neglected.
Moreover there were functions which only the lord himself could carry out, particularly in matters of justice, for as a baron of Scotland, Ramsay had the power of pit and gallows, conferring on him the right and duty to adjudicate in most issues not reserved to the crown, a grave responsibility for a man who took his obligations seriously, and one in which his brother could not replace him.
Also there were major repairs to property to decide on, as well as seasonal considerations, and orders to transmit, with regard to land use of many thousands of acres, the annual survey of cattle and horse stock and especially the great sheep-hirsels in the Lammermuir Hills, the wool from which, largely exported to Flanders and the Low Countries from Berwick-on-Tweed, constituted the lordship's principal source of wealth.
So time did not hang heavily during the weeks which  followed the victory at Annan and Balliol's flight.
Nevertheless there were times when Alexander Ramsay had to admit to himself that he found all this, essential and worth while as it certainly was, somehow less than satisfying after all the excitements of the recent past; a feeling of being understretched as it were, less than fully challenged.
And this, oddly enough, tended to be linked, at the back of his mind, with thoughts of Mariot Randolph.
He often thought of her.
He had had his ventures and connections with young women in the past, enjoying them usually whilst remaining heart-whole.
Not that he was now smitten with Moray's sister in any serious fashion, he could assure himself; but he had been much impressed by her at Doune that time, her looks, her manner and behaviour, her quiet competence — and probably the fact that the young Steward was so evidently captivated, something which might hold its own challenge.
So Yule and January passed, and the lord of Dalwolsey quite frequently caught himself wondering how he might contrive an excuse to pay another visit to the Doune of Menteith.
It was in early February that such preoccupations were abruptly, if not dispelled, at least pushed to the back of his mind, by the arrival of a messenger from the Black Knight of Liddesdale.
Would Sir Alexander Ramsay, of his goodness and in his leal duty to the King's Grace and his Regent, come to Lochmaben Castle in Annandale at his earliest convenience, bringing with him such armed and horsed supporters as he could raise at short notice?
With all due greetings…
Ramsay did not exactly cheer, but Will noticed a certain lightening in his brother's step thereafter, as he set about the business of summoning men.
The very next day he was on his way, with some fifty of a tail, including his cousin Pate, Ramsay of Redheuch and Wattie Kerr, matters of justice, building repairs, sheep and even young women relegated meantime for future consideration.
It had been a wet, raw winter, with the ground waterlogged and streams running high; but at least there had been little snow and the hill passes were open, which was just as well for a journey to mid-Annandale.
They rode almost due south, by the Morthwaite foothills and the Eddleston Water to Peebles, then westwards up Tweed to that river's great bend southwards at Broughton, and so on towards its source on Tweedsmuir, darkness halting them at Oliver, where they learned that its lord, Sir Simon Fraser, had already departed likewise for Lochmaben, in strength.
So it looked like a fairly major muster.
The following day, in more dismal rain, they crossed the dreary high watershed moorland where Tweed, Clyde and Annan all were born, to accompany the latter river down to Moffat.
Here they met up with Scott of Rankilburn, and a couple of hundred of his mosstroopers, going in the same direction.
He told Ramsay that he understood that the Regent — which meant Will Douglas — was planning an invasion of England, no less.
Since the Scotts, like so many other Borderers, more or less lived by making raids into the North of England in search of cattle, women and other benefits, Rankilburn was entirely in favour.
Ramsay was more moderate in his enthusiasm.
Lochmaben lay some fifteen miles down Annandale, its fortalice a former Bruce stronghold, now a royal castle, of which it appeared, since the present Earl of Carrick's shame and declension, Douglas had had himself appointed Keeper, by the Regent.
It was one of the strongest holds in the land, built at the extreme tip of a narrow peninsula jutting far into the loch, and well nigh impregnable.
They found Lochmaben town full of armed men and anticipatory excitement rife.
At the castle Douglas received Ramsay, cheerfully masterful, his uncle amiable in the background.
The situation was explained.
Edward Plantagenet of England, disgusted at his minion Balliol's miserable failure at Annan, had announced that he himself would now take over the subjugation of Scotland, despite the Treaty of Northampton, and was presently assembling a great army to bring north with him.
He would invade in the east, making no secret of his intention from Northumberland; and Balliol, necessarily stiffen d by Lord Dacre and Sir Anthony Lucy, the English Middle and West March Wardens respectively, was to march in from Carlisle and Cumbria.
So something had to be done, and swiftly.
Was actual invasion of England the answer, Ramsay wondered?
Was that not overly ambitious?
It was a raid rather than an invasion, he was told; a raid with  a purpose.
Balliol, after flight to Carlisle, had passed Yule at Gilsland with Lord Dacre.
He was reported to be still there.
Gilsland, near Lanercost Abbey, was only fifteen miles from the borderline at Kirkandrews.
Cross there, by night, and they might with luck even capture the man.
But at least they could frighten him, show him that the Scots would never forget nor forgive what he had done, that he would never be safe anywhere near Scotland.
And give warning to Dacre that if he led a force into Scotland hereafter, as reputedly planned, he would suffer at his house of Gilsland.
It was all a gesture towards Edward Plantagenet likewise.
He was not the only one who could break signed treaties.
Douglas, ever impatient, decided to wait only one more day — for there could be some Balliol supporters even now in Annandale who might send word into England of this muster.
He had asked Moray, Lindsay, Leslie and others, but they had further to come, and could follow on later if they had not come by the morrow.
He had now three thousand, all horsed, which should serve…
Next afternoon, then, they set off, a cheerful host, for this was the sort of venture that appealed to most, not any long campaign or set warfare but a raid, a dash into enemy territory, a showing of the flag, a swift paying off of old scores — and with the prospect of booty.
It was as good as a holiday.
Johnstone of Lochwood and Jardine of Applegirth led the way, in their element, for this was just their accustomed Border reiving on a larger scale, and they knew all the hidden ways to go, darkness hereafter no trouble, since that was normal for the business.
It was, they assessed, about forty-five miles to Gilsland by the way they would go.
Ride to Langholm in Eskdale this first night, then lie up there over the morrow.
Then on in darkness down to where Liddel joined Esk, cross into England at Kirkandrews and, avoiding Kirklinton and Brampton, populous areas, cross the Lyne valley and the moorlands of Bolton and Walton Mosses to the Roman Wall at Birdoswald.
Then Gilsland, before dawn.
So they rode up the Water of Milk, Jardine country, and through the empty Tundergarth Hills to Eskdale, Armstrong territory.
The Armstrongs were a lawless lot, paying little more allegiance to Scotland than they did to England, for they straddled the borderline; so they were not to be trusted, but Johnstone and Jardine assured the Regent that on this  occasion they would not cause trouble, for although they would care nothing about Balliol one way or the other, they hated Dacre, who as English Middle March Warden had recently hanged some of their people.
Indeed when they heard that Gilsland was the objective, they might well be glad to join the venture.
This in fact was what happened.
Despite the darkness and unannounced approach, the raiding party found the Armstrong chiefs, Mangerton, Gilnockie, Whithaugh and the rest, awaiting their arrival at Langholm, their ‘capital’, with some hundreds of their very tough riders assembled, a significant indication of their excellent information system in this wild Border country; and when they heard of the descent on Dacre's castle of Gilsland, they appeared to take it for granted that they would go along.
Will Douglas, who as Knight of Liddesdale, and Keeper of that unruly area, looked on all Armstrongs as eminently hangable, was doubtful, to say the least, but recognised that to refuse to take them would be considered a grievous insult and could endanger them all thereafter.
The next day was spent at Langholm in a sort of wary amity, much new-killed beef being provided for the troops — they were assured, all English-bred.
A further advantage was forthcoming.
Armstrong of Mangerton offered to send a messenger to Graham of Netherby — his wife was a Graham — to ensure that there would be no trouble with that warlike English clan.
All fords of the Esk, including Kirkandrews, were guarded on the English side by Graham peel-towers; and though these would not be strong enough to hold up three thousand from crossing for long they could send warning back to the English authorities if so inclined.
This service was appreciated.
The following dusk, then, they rode down Eskside, a reinforced company.
They passed the mouth of Liddesdale, and soon after came to the Kirkandrews ford.
Actual guides were waiting for them on the Scots side, from the Graham tower, producing a grim smile from Douglas, for one of his principal headaches as Keeper of Liddesdale was apt to be the inroads and cross-border raiding of these same Grahams, Kirkandrews prominent.
The laird there himself, a brother of Netherby the chief, gave them God-speed most civilly, once across, the fact that  they were Scots invading English soil seemingly holding no significance for him, Borderers keeping an open mind on such matters.
He did not go so far as to offer to guide them onward to Gilsland, by night, since that would have been to insult the Armstrongs, Jardines and Johnstones.
It was gathered that Lord Dacre was not a popular warden — if wardens were ever popular.
They made good time thereafter, considering the darkness, encountering no problems.
Presumably the passing of over three thousand horsemen could not have gone entirely unnoticed, even of a winter's night, but discretion in such situations was another and necessary Border virtue, and no alarm was raised in the hamlets and farm-touns which they could not avoid, however many dogs barked.
Across the next south-flowing river, the Lyne, they went without difficulty, for it was comparatively shallow, and then over the commons of Bolton and Walton beyond.
So they came to the great Roman Wall, at Birdoswald, built to keep out their Pictish ancestors a thousand years before.
No patrols paced its grass-grown ramparts now.
But they went warily, for Gilsland was only a couple of miles ahead.
Douglas hoped to surprise the castle sufficiently to gain access; but he recognised that however much of a surprise, this might not be possible, for it was a fairly strong place, not a major fortalice but moated and walled, with drawbridge, gatehouse, portcullis and the rest.
In which case they would have to content themselves with making a demonstration, burning the castleton and village and driving off Dacre's and his people's cattle and horses.
The main objective, if they could not in fact capture Balliol, was to frighten him, give him warning to keep away from Scotland in future, and show Dacre and the North of England generally that if they aided Edward Plantagenet, they were vulnerable to dire reprisals.
In the event this last had to satisfy them, for although they reached Gilsland village unannounced, they found its castle effectively beyond their reach, its gatehouse guarded, its drawbridge up and its portcullis down, Dacre presumably a man of caution.
Ramsay was not surprised, having anticipated no less.
Douglas, disappointed, had of course been prepared for this also, and wasted little time in cursing.
He divided his force into three, one division under Fraser to sack the village and set it on fire; one under the Border chiefs to  round up all the cattle and stock they could find in the vicinity — they were the experts at this; and his own grouping to encircle the castle and at least present Dacre and Balliol with a challenge.
In pursuance of this last, they waited until the first yells and screams sounded from the unhappy village, followed quickly by the glow of fire.
Then Douglas sent his thousand horsemen to ride round and round the perimeter of the castle, on its slight mound, shouting.
They could not get very close under the walls because of the moat.
He led his leadership group to the drawbridge-end, and had his horn blown loud and long.
From the gatehouse there were answering shouts.
Declaring his identity, and announcing that here was the Regent of His Grace David, King of Scots, he demanded the presence of the Lord Dacre.
He had a fine carrying voice for this sort of thing.
There was no reply from the gatehouse.
Douglas repeated his demand.
Now the growing fires from Gilsland village and castleton were beginning to cast a lurid glow over the scene and to show up the encircling horsemen, a menacing sight.
When there was still no evident reaction from the castle, the Regent himself took a hand.
He urged his horse forward to the very edge of the moat, for he had not so loud a voice as his nephew.
‘I am Archibald Douglas, Lord of Galloway and Regent of Scotland,’ he called.
‘I understand that the Lord Dacre entertains within this hold the man Edward Balliol, who seeks to usurp the throne of our liege-lord David.
Deliver him up to me and I will withdraw my forces from this place and return to Scotland.’
With all the background noise now prevailing, it was doubtful whether all that would be heard in the castle.
No answer was forthcoming, at any rate.
Will Douglas took over again.
There was little doubt that his bellow would reach them.
He repeated his uncle's announcement and added peremptorily that swift compliance was required or it would be the worse for Gilsland.
That elicited no response either.
What was going on in the castle they could only guess at.
Lights were visible now in sundry windows, but that was as far as reactions seemed to go.
This situation could not, of course, be allowed to drag on.
They could not storm the castle, and there was no time for siegery.
Will Douglas ordered Scott of Rankilburn to go back to the now blazing village, the cottage thatches burning readily, and round up a crowd of men, women and children.
Bring them here, in torchlight.
Ramsay for one did not like the sound of that, and said so, but Douglas cut him short, assuring that it was only a gesture.
After all, did he not bear the title of the Flower of Chivalry?
There was still no acknowledgment from the castle, even when a wailing, sorry concourse was driven up in terror, children screaming, women sobbing, men beseeching, frantic as they were forced to penetrate that shouting ring of circling horsemen.
They were brought up to the drawbridge-end.
Douglas had his horn blown again and cried out that the Lord Dacre must hand over Balliol, or these, his people, would pay the penalty.
He left that penalty unspecified.
Even this produced no evident response.
Disgusted, Douglas shouted that there were plenty of trees on the village green to hang all these, and ordered the sad crew to be herded back to their burning homes.
There was, it seemed, nothing more that they could do here, in the face of this masterly inactivity.
The leaders turned and rode back to the inferno of a village.
Fraser s men had spared nothing.
Even the church was ablaze.
Most of the inhabitants had probably escaped into the night, and there had been little killing, although a number of women undoubtedly had been caught and forced to pay the price of conquest.
The scene was a terrible one.
The Regent was concerned about the time.
It would be dawn in less than three hours.
They were a bare score of miles from Carlisle, where there was always a large English garrison.
Less from Brampton.
This burning, lighting up the sky, would be seen from afar.
They had fifteen miles to go to get to the Esk, and would be delayed by the cattle.
Time that they were gone.
His nephew reluctantly acceded.
They might well prevail in any skirmish with the local forces, but in the circumstances that would be of little profit.
The horn was sounded for the recall.
This took some little time to effect, with no sign of the cattle-lifters evident.
However, presently a rider appeared, from Jardine, saying that they had heard the horn.
They had  rounded up an excellent spoil of beasts, and would drive them to meet the main host at Birdoswald or thereabouts, in a short time.
So the move was made, leaving behind a silently defiant castle, a devastated village and a terrified population.
A fair amount of booty went with them, but no prisoners.
Most of the Border contingent were in fact awaiting them, with a large herd of cattle and horses, at Birdoswald, although there was no sign of the Armstrongs.
Jardine and Johnstone guessed that they had decided to strike out on their own now, no doubt reluctant to have to share any of their gleanings with others.
This sounded entirely in character, and believing that the said Armstrongs were well able to find their own way back to Eskdale and look after themselves, Douglas ordered onward progress.
That progress was now direly slow, with many hundreds of cattle to herd, however expert some of the herders.
The leaders, men-at-arms and levies of the lords and knights chafed sorely at this delay, none more so than Will Douglas.
Nevertheless he insisted that, at least until they were over Esk, they must all stay together; they owed that to the Border men and indeed all who looked for a share in the spoil.
Dawn overtook them long before they reached the Esk, or even the Lyne.
However, no pursuit was in evidence, although they maintained patrols behind them as well as on the flanks to ensure early warning.
It was broad daylight when they crossed at Kirkandrews — and here there was a surprise development: John Randolph, Earl of Moray, in process of fording the river with a couple of hundred men, come late to the venture.
Moray, it transpired, was not grievously disappointed in having missed the Gilsland affair.
His mind was, in fact, preoccupied with a very different problem.
Just before leaving Doune he had heard from his elder sister Agnes, Countess of Dunbar and March, that her peculiar husband had now entered into a treasonable arrangement with Edward of England, not only to hand over Dunbar Castle to the English but actually to strengthen it first, at the Plantagenet's expense.
Also to assist Edward in capturing the great castle at Berwick-on-Tweed.
Black Agnes was outraged, declaring that she would never yield up Dunbar Castle to the English, despite her traitor husband, and she was now seeking help.
This news, needless to say, greatly concerned them all, Douglas and the Regent in especial.
With the Earl of Dunbar in outright co-operation with King Edward, invasion of Scotland on the east would be greatly facilitated.
Something had to be done, and quickly.
Not only must Dunbar Castle, of much strategic importance, be denied to the invader, but Berwick Castle, where Sir Alexander Seton was Governor, must be warned that the Scots Chief Warden of the Marches was in league with the enemy.
While the slow business of getting the reluctant cattle across Esk was in process, a Council was hurriedly held at Kirkandrews, resulting in the decision to send Moray, and Ramsay with him, directly to Berwick-on-Tweed, to inform Seton of the dangers; and then on to Dunbar itself, to assist Black Agnes.
They would have to avoid the Warden's forces, in these circumstances, so would require to plan their approaches carefully, keeping away as far as possible from Teviotdale and Tweeddale.
Tired as he was, Ramsay was glad enough to leave the slow and wearisome convoying of cattle for swift riding and positive action.
Detaching his fifty Dalwolsey men to add to Moray's two hundred, he said farewell to the Regent, Douglas and the others, and set off north by east, up Liddesdale.
Going this way, up the twenty-mile-long Liddesdale and over the high Note o' the Gate pass of Wauchope to Hobkirk, and so down Rule Water to the Jedburgh area, was around thirty-five rough miles, and halfway to Berwick.
They covered that without difficulty before dark, their only delay a meeting-up with their late fellow-invaders, the Armstrongs, whom they came across at the Kershopefoot crossing of Liddel Water, driving an even larger drove of cattle from Gilsland than the main body had collected, and taking a more northerly course home.
These evinced no embarrassment at the encounter.
In order to avoid any trouble with the Warden's forces, they decided to give Jedburgh itself a wide berth, so followed Rule Water down to its junction with Teviot at Menslaws, where they camped the night.
Thereafter they crossed the greater river at that ford and proceeded eastwards by Ancrum and over the low Fairnington hills to the Makerstoun ford of  Tweed.
This brought them into the Merse by the fairly empty country of Nenthorn and Stichill.
This area Ramsay knew well.
Into the Home territory beyond they had to go fairly warily, but less so than if they had been a weaker company, not because of fears that the Homes would betray them to Dunbar but in that they were always jealous of their declared rights to decide who should enter their country and what they should pay for the privilege; but two hundred and fifty well-armed men in tight formation carried their own safe-conduct, and they rode through without challenge.
Still, they avoided the near vicinity of Home Castle, Purves, Blackadder, Paxton and other strongholds of the clan.
They eventually approached Berwick from the north-west, rounding the skirts of Halidon Hill, and from there able to look down on the grey town at the wide mouth of Tweed, two miles off.
The castle towered high above the northern limits of the burgh, outside the massive walls.
All looked peaceful, with the harbour busy with shipping, for this was the foremost port of Scotland.
They had no difficulty in gaining access to the castle, where Sir Alexander Seton greeted Ramsay warmly.
They were friends and neighbours, Seton's lands in Lothian being near Dalwolsey.
Ramsay had not seen him since that day at Musselburgh when the good Regent Moray died and Seton had been sent off to Fife to try to hamper Balliol's landing at Kinghorn, a gallant but unsuccessful endeavour in which Seton had been wounded.
Now he was much perturbed to hear of Dunbar's treachery.
Like most others, he had never really trusted that Earl; but this throwing in his lot with the English, while still Scots Chief Warden of the Marches, was a dire betrayal by any standards, and most menacing for Berwick, since as Warden he had overall authority for the town and port, if not the castle.
The big question was, how much support was he likely to have, in the East March generally and in Berwick itself in particular?
He was overlord of vast lands hereabouts, the only earl south-east of Forth, feudal superior over many lordships and baronies.
Even though most of his vassals might disagree with his policies, it would demand brave men indeed actually to outface him.
The Homes might well do so, but the lesser East Border clans, the Kerrs, Turnbulls, Olivers, Rutherfords, Cranstouns and the like were unlikely to feel  sufficiently strong to do so.
As for Berwick itself, strongly-walled as it was, its inhabitants were merchants, traders, shipmen, artificers and so on, not soldiers, looking to the Warden to marshall and direct them.
And they had suffered a great loss when John Crabb, their notable leader, had been captured by the English on his return from his ill-fated venture to the Tay and Perth in support of Mar.
Seton, warned, would now of course do what he could to help the townsmen, but his actual authority was limited to this royal castle.
For his part, Seton was able to give his visitors some information.
Edward of England had ordered an advance headquarters to be set up at Bamborough in Northumberland, with levies from all over the North of England to assemble there; he himself was expected to arrive there in late March or early April, to lead his assault on Scotland in person.
Next day they left Seton to his problems and set off northwards up the coast for Dunbar, thirty miles.
They encountered no  difficulties en route , although they had to traverse one of the most dangerous ambush points in all South Scotland, at Pease Dean, where the Lammermuirs came directly down to the coast in steep wooded slopes cut up by deep ravines, and round which travellers had to wend their narrow, devious way.
However, there were no opposers there today.
Necessarily strung out at no more than three abreast, the column threaded the mile or so cautiously, Ramsay for one, keen-eyed to note danger-spots and ambush possibilities for future reference.
When Edward Plantagenet invaded, such knowledge might be valuable.
Only a mile on, they passed the last of the Home outposts, at Dunglass, in a strong position above another of these precipitous deans; and soon thereafter Dunbar came in sight, town and castle jutting into the Norse Sea, the eastern gateway to the fertile Lothians, red in blood to match the now prevailing redness in soil and stone.
Those new to the area were always astonished at the vivid crimson of the earth and buildings.
Closer at hand they were apt to be still more astonished at the castle they saw, for this was different from any other in the land.
Instead of being built on a mound, natural or artificial, and surrounded by a moat, Dunbar's rose in lofty towers on a series of pointed rock-stacks which thrust  out of the sea, these linked ingeniously by covered stone bridges.
There was no need for a water-filled moat, although there was a drawbridge, for the nearest stack to land was separated therefrom by a deep tidal creek with beetling walls.
Added to all this, to keep cannon, mangonels, battering-rams and other siege-engines at a safe distance from the first or gatehouse tower, an artificial trench had been excavated across the approach headland.
A further refinement was that the entrance to the town's harbour was under the furthest-out of the bridges, so that entry and exit thereto could be denied at any time by the castle's occupants, with a great boom to be lowered.
This extraordinary stronghold, flying the banners of two earldoms, stretched out to sea, the waves boiling around the bases of its soaring stacks.
Ramsay had seen it before, but had never been inside.
They were halted at the outer guardhouse at the aforementioned trench, to identify themselves.
Here they had to part with their horses, for of course there could be accommodation for only a few animals in this castle itself.
Dismounted, the leaders crossed over the first and second drawbridges on foot, leaving their men to take the horses down a long ramp to barracks-quarters and stabling at harbour level.
In the main gatehouse tower on the first stack, Moray was asking of the guard-captain whether the Countess was at home when the door from the first of the bridge-corridors was flung open and a young woman came in at the run, hair blown, laughing-eyed, skirts kilted up the better to run, fine bosom tumultuous — as unusual a Countess of Dunbar and March as was the castle of which she was chatelaine.
‘Johnnie!
Johnnie!’ she cried, ‘How good!
How good!
Where have you come from?
Mariot said that you were gone to Annandale, bent on battle?’
She made a striking picture, dark, vivacious, impulsive, well built, with masses of black hair, not actually beautiful but very attractive, arresting of appearance indeed: Black Agnes of Dunbar, an unlikely wife for the strange, sour and introverted Earl Patrick.
Ramsay knew her by repute only and had been looking forward to seeing her in person.
Nevertheless his reaction now was less than might have been expected, for he was an impressionable man where women were concerned.
This  because, behind the Countess, another young woman had appeared, the Lady Mariot Randolph, her sister.
Unexpected, this affected him strongly, indeed left him for the moment in a strange turmoil emotionally.
He had been tending, of late, to think a lot about this girl, not always in the most correct of contexts, as lusty young men will.
Now he stared at her in a mixture of surprise, guilt, appreciation and gladness.
He found himself being introduced to Agnes, and managed to withdraw his gaze from one sister to the other and to make some rather incoherent answers to the Countess's greetings.
These were sufficiently warm and outspoken, even flattering, for apparently she had heard much of Sir Alexander Ramsay and, by the sound of her, to his credit.
He sought to respond suitably.
Mariot came to kiss her brother, then turned to Ramsay.
‘We meet again, Sir Alexander,’ she said.
‘An unexpected pleasure.
I well recollect that night at Doune.’
‘Yes,’ he agreed, inadequately.
Then he realised that, after kissing her hand he was still holding it.
He dropped it hurriedly.
‘I do also, lady.’
They eyed each other, with nothing else to say meantime.
‘How came you here, Mariot?’
Moray asked.
‘When I left you at Doune there was no word of this.’
‘Why, after your call to arms in Annandale and the news about, about Patrick, I felt that Agnes might be glad of company here…’
‘And I am,’ her sister declared strongly.
‘I need all the help and support that I can get in this latest folly.
And so the happier to see you, Johnnie.
And Sir Alexander.
I despair for Patrick.
I can do with some men to advise me — and you are a man now, Johnnie, I see!’
And she gave her young brother a hug.
Embarrassed, he turned to Ramsay.
‘I think that Agnes was always the man of our family!
I mean…’
He grinned.
‘You know what I mean.
She always took the lead, played the master…’
A playful but quite vigorous slap on the ear was his reward for that.
‘I'll thank you to watch your words, my new lord of Moray!’ she exclaimed.
Mariot smiled.
‘It does not take these two long to trade endearments!’ she informed Ramsay.
‘Thomas was different.
Poor Thomas!’
For a moment or two there was silence, as they considered the brother so recently slain, and no doubt the beloved father who had died.
‘Yes,’ Ramsay said again.
He found himself considering how different were these two sisters, Agnes vehement, voluble, exclamatory; Mariot quiet, with a sort of serenity to her, but warm somehow he felt — where the other might be hot.
Changing the subject, Black Agnes announced that the men must be hungry, if not tired, and led the way over the next bridge-corridor, through the vaulted basement of a second tower and over yet another bridge to the main keep of the castle.
There, in an upper hall a great log fire blazed and all was comfort and warmth, with attractive furnishings, colourful wall-hangings and tapestries, cushioned benches, skin rugs on the floor and the feminine touch everywhere evident.
All this in such dramatic contrast to the scene outside, for the windows showed only white-capped seas, spray and blown spume and wheeling, screaming gulls.
It was like being on a ship, but a steady, secure and snugly protective ship.
While servitors were bringing food and wine, the visitors accounted for themselves, where they had come from and what had transpired, the situation at Berwick and over on the West March.
Themselves, they learned the Countess's attitudes and intentions regarding Dunbar Castle.
‘Patrick may intend to deliver this house to English Edward,’ she told them.
‘But I do not!’
‘Can you prevent it?’ her brother asked.
‘I believe that I can.
I must at least try .
It is a strong place, and will be stronger.
Patrick has given orders for it to be strengthened further, at Edward's expense.
So be it — but not for England.
Against!’
‘You mean…?’
‘I mean, Johnnie, that defences are defences.
Against whomsoever.
Even he who may be paying for them!
It is unlikely that Patrick will come here and wait for the Plantagenet.
He will join him before then, before Berwick probably, with his men.
And when they both come to Dunbar, chapping on this door, they will find it locked and barred.
I am my father's daughter enough for that!’
They stared at her, wondering.
‘Agnes has it all planned,’ Mariot said.
‘She will aid in this strengthening and building, which the English desire, encourage it indeed.
Then fill the place with our own folk.
And when King Edward comes, defy him.
And her husband.’
Moray hooted delighted laughter.
Ramsay was less amused.
‘You are brave, lady.
Gallant.
To be congratulated on your spirit.
But, have you sufficiently considered?
Edward will be at the head of a great army, thousands of men.
He may not bring siege-engines when first he comes, ballista and cannon.
But he can get them.
He will need them, if he tries to capture Berwick.
This Dunbar is a most notable stronghold.
But against the might of England…’
‘That is why we must strengthen it, in every way possible.’
‘Even so.
Cannon-fire.
Great rocks, thrown by mangonels.
And not only from the land.
Edward has his fleets of warships.
Strong as this is from the land, it could be battered from the sea.’
‘Then we must strengthen our defences seaward also, Sir Alexander.’
Hating to resemble a wet blanket he held his peace.
But his expression was eloquent enough.
‘You do not think it possible?’
Mariot asked.
‘I do not say that.
But…perhaps you do not know — how could you?— what cannon and mangonels can do to even the stoutest walling.
I fear…’
‘Then if you do, you can show me what must be done.
If King Edward thinks that Dunbar is worth the strengthening, presumably to withstand assault, then he must have reason.
It must be possible.’
Against such feminine logic Ramsay could make no adequate response.
He switched to asking what extra works Earl Patrick was planning.
It appeared that these were mainly concerned with strengthening the outer landward defences, in especial the far guardhouse building, the approach from the harbour area, and the excavation of an extra moat or ditch, work due to start any day now.
This led to some discussion on the Earl's attitudes and behaviour.
Agnes was very frank.
She said that admittedly he was a strange man, always had been, difficult and unapproachable.
But it would be a mistake to think of him  merely as an errant traitor.
He looked on the national position, and his own part therein, differently from others, his blood and background accounting for that.
He did not look on the house of Bruce as the true monarchy for the realm.
His line, directly descended from Bethoc, daughter of Malcolm the Second, in legitimate succession — whereas Malcolm the Third, Canmore, was illegitimate, by the miller of Forteviot's daughter — was the true representer of the ancient Celtic royal house, and the succession belonged to him, he claimed.
His grandfather had been one of the Competitors for the Throne; but Edward the First had chosen John Balliol, as sufficiently weak to accept him as overlord.
So Patrick had no use for Edward Balliol; but, by aiding Edward the Third, almost certainly saw himself as in a position to displace the unsuccessful Balliol and himself take over as King of Scots, with English support.
He might well have made some bargain with the Plantagenet — after all, this Edward owed something, for it was here, to Dunbar Castle, that his father, Edward the Second, had fled for refuge after the disaster of Bannockburn when Patrick, as a young man, had received him kindly and provided him passage by sea to England.
Once on the Scots throne, whether he would be content to remain a vassal of England, as was Balliol, was another matter; his wife thought probably not, for whatever else he was, Patrick was no man's puppet.
He might even make a strong and able king, for he had his virtues, even though being a good husband was scarcely one of them!
If this frankness made Ramsay a little uncomfortable, it did not seem to disturb the others.
Indeed it drew from Moray the comment that this was the one matter that he had against their father: that he had married off his elder daughter, as a mere girl, to a man more than twice her age, as a matter of policy, to endeavour to attach Dunbar more firmly to the national cause, unsuccessful as this had been.
Although Mariot nodded, Agnes, shrugging, turned the matter by asking if this was not what earls' daughters were for?
Wait until Johnnie had a daughter of his own!
Of course, my lord Moray already had an unmarried sister…!
It was at this stage that there was an interruption, a quite noisy one as the Master of Dunbar put in a shouting appearance, three-year-old George, Agnes's son, his nurse in full cry behind him, a couple of deer-hounds also in  attendance.
For some time thereafter matters of defence, policy and filial duties were in abeyance.
Later, with the shutters closed against the night, the four of them sat within the ingoing of the great fireplace of the hall, on two cushioned benches on either side of the glowing, hissing log fire.
It was delightfully snug and companionable there in the firelight, with the roar of the seas outside muted, all draughts excluded, sufficiently warm without being too hot; for the fireplace was no less than twelve feet wide, its lintel a massive slab of stone more than that in length, reputedly taken from a Pictish stone circle, so that the ingle was like a little open room of its own in the thickness of the walling.
But although there was ample room lengthways for sitters to draw back from the blaze sufficiently for comfort, there was less space broadways-on, so that the pairs had to sit fairly close together — which suited Alexander Ramsay very well, for he shared a bench with Mariot.
Inevitably this proximity involved a fair amount of touching and occasional pressures, which the man found very much to his taste, and which the young woman at least did not object to sufficiently to draw away to the limits of her corner.
Separated from the other two by the fire, a pleasant intimacy was engendered, so that each couple tended to intersperse the general conversation with their own.
Noting this, Black Agnes smilingly warned the pair opposite.
‘Be careful what you murmur in each other 's ears, you two,’ she advised.
‘If you look up behind you, Mariot, in the corner, you will perhaps discover a small hole in the stonework.
That is the laird's lug!
From it a pipe of sorts, a speaking tube, leads up to the room above, which is the Earl's private chamber.
Where it opens in his fireplace.
So sitting there he can hear all that is being said down here; a notable convenience on occasion, I am told!
We do not have any such refinements at Doune, I fear!’
‘Fear not,’ Mariot told her companion.
‘There is nobody up there tonight at least!’
Which was a comforting comment from her, he ventured to assess.
When, in time, Mariot announced that she would now seek her couch, and the men rose to stoop their way out of the ingle-neuk, Agnes remained sitting.
‘Mariot will show you to your chamber, Sir Alexander,’ she said kindly.
‘I have something to discuss with Johnnie.
Sleep well.’
Mariot raised an eyebrow at her sister, but after goodnights, led the way out.
‘Agnes, as Johnnie said, was always the masterful one,’ she murmured, as they climbed the two flights of the torchlit turnpike stair.
On the third floor, she led him to one of four doors, which opened on to a firelit bedroom, with a great canopied bed, steaming water-jugs and wash-basin, and a garderobe in the thickness of the walling with candle-shelf, stone seat and chute.
The sigh of the waves sounding up that chute only emphasised the genial security of the chamber.
‘I think that you will be comfortable here, Sir Alexander,’ Mariot said.
‘This is a well-run house, despite its position and its curious lord.
Better than I run Doune, I am afraid.’
‘I was very well treated at Doune,’ he asserted.
‘But, as I recollect it, I — or rather we — escorted you to your room that night, not you to ours.
The man's privilege, surely?
And, and my friends call me Sandy.
Will not you?’
‘If you so wish, yes.
Very well — but my room is this next door to yours, so you have no need to fare far.
A good night to you, Sandy.
May you sleep soundly, despite the sea noises.’
‘Yes.
I thank you.
And you, Mariot.’
He took the two or three steps with her to the other doorway.
‘I shall lie the more pleasantly for…for thinking of you…but through the wall!’
‘Let not that thought keep you from your well-earned sleep,’ she advised.
He reached for her hand, to kiss it, as she opened her door.
It took him some time to sleep.
Next day, inevitably, the talk was again on the matter of strengthening defences, with Ramsay, experienced in soldiering, being asked for advice.
After going out to inspect the works already projected, he could only suggest a still further-out ditch to be dug, in the rock, for the greater distancing of cannon and balista.
Also he pointed out that the portions of the castle most liable to be hit by missiles, especially the parapets and roofs, could be thickened in the masonry, and reinforced to good effect.
But it was the possibility of attack from ships which concerned him most; and he proposed that he and Moray make a survey, by boat, to consider what, if anything, might be done protectively.
Early March was scarcely the time of year for pleasure-sailing, but the young women insisted on going along; and wrapping up warmly, they went down to the harbour and found fishermen to row them out in one of their high-prowed cobles.
The sea was choppy, and sitting still in the stern of the boat less than comfortable.
But at least the conditions made clear the hazards for shipping approaching this coast, the innumerable rocks and reefs and skerries over which the rollers spouted and boiled, many just below the surface, and the greater danger therefore.
The entrance to the harbour was by a clear channel for the last two hundred yards or so, unmarked but familiar to the fisherfolk, the rest a widespread menace.
This, of course, did simplify the problem of defence, since warships could approach only by that channel, with little room to manoeuvre.
But the channel was wide enough and deep enough to allow quite large vessels to come very close to the castle-stacks, certainly well within range of their cannon and mangonels.
‘Booms,’ Ramsay announced.
‘Booms of timber, held in place by chains.
Slung across this channel, anchored to the rocks and stacks.
A succession of booms.
Cannon have a range of no more than two hundred yards, to be effective.
So booms that will keep shipping beyond that.
Mangonels throw their stones further, but not greatly.’
‘But, that would close the harbour to fishing boats also,’ Agnes objected.
‘Fishing is the people's living.’
‘Hang the booms so that their chains can be hitched and unhitched.
Or, better, have them weighted down under the surface, so that even at low tide these shallow boats can pass over them, but deep-draught ships can not.
Have your Dunbar smiths forge great chains.
Your men cut heavy baulks of timber: oak, elm, beech.
Have stones bound to these, to weigh them down.
And…do not tell the Earl Patrick!’
The Countess clapped her gloved hands.
‘You are a wonder, Sir Alexander!
Bless you , Johnnie, for bringing him!’
‘Sandy is a knight who does not fail to rise to the occasion,’ Mariot observed.
‘Sandy, is it!
We progress!
We poor women must be looking to our defences, I swear!
How say you, Johnnie?’
Moray did his best.
‘I think that the boot may be on the other leg!’
After prospecting the places to put the booms across, dictated by the situations of suitable anchoring rocks, they returned to the castle.
Ramsay was interested to note, in the passing, how as a couple of boats entered the harbour ahead of them from the fishing, under the bridge between the two outermost towers, they each provided a basket of new-caught fish to be hoisted up on ropes to men on the bridge, this seemingly how they paid their rents and harbour dues to their lord.
That evening, in the hall, Mariot entertained them with songs, accompanied by the harp, to their enjoyment; although Ramsay qualified his rapture by some regret that, there being insufficient room in their ingle-neuk for playing the harp, she had to perform outside it, and he was deprived of the nearness which he found so much to his taste.
However, singing over, and Agnes bringing wine to sip, he got his companion back alongside for a little, before the bedward move was made.
At that, again, Moray and his sister waited behind.
This time, at the bedroom doors, the man waxed a little more bold when Mariot wished him a good night's sleep.
‘You are not the one apt for wishing me that, Mariot,’ he told her.
‘Last night, I remained awake for long, thinking of you.
So near.
Tonight, I am the more…engaged.’
‘Do I disturb you so?’ she wondered.
‘You, a man of much experience, I am sure.’
‘Experience of some matters, perhaps — of fighting and warfare, of joustings and councils and the like.
Not of women.’
‘No?
Do not tell me that Sir Alexander Ramsay of Dalwolsey, renowned in the ranks of chivalry, has been deprived of all dealings with the female kind?
That I cannot believe.
You, who are not unattractive to women, I judge.’
‘To you, Mariot?’
She raised a cautionary hand.
‘Say that I recognise certain…felicities, sir!’
‘Felicities?
What mean you by that?’
‘Why, but the opposite of failings, shall we say?
You do  not strike me as ugly, nor mis-shapen, nor lacking manners.
Given time, I might even think of more felicities, Sandy!’
‘Time?
How long a time?’
‘Ah, now!
Is impatience one of your infelicities, sirrah?’
‘I think that it must be, Mariot Randolph.
Where you are concerned.’
‘Then I must beware, must I not?
I am warned.
A good night to you.’
But she smiled.
That smile did it.
Impulsively he reached out, to take her in his arms and draw her close.
She did not resist, even when urgently he kissed her hair, her brow, her lips.
Then she stirred, sighing, and gently pushed him back.
‘As well…that you do not assault…this citadel!’ she got out, a little breathlessly.
‘You storm to…some effect!’
Still holding her arms he searched her flushed features, wondering, wondering.
He found no words.
‘Again, goodnight,’ she said firmly, but still gently.
Freeing herself, she entered her doorway.
‘Man of action!’
He spread his hands.
‘The motto of my house is Ora et Labora — Pray and Work!’ he said.
‘Then now try you prayer, Sandy Ramsay!’ she returned, and quietly closed the door on him.
There are prayers and prayers, admittedly.
That night the man did not altogether fail his fine motto.
His orisons, however, tended to be interrupted by a recurring question.
Had Mariot's lips moved under his when he kissed her?
Or was that the wish fathering the thought?
Again and again he tried to recreate that moment.
He slept even less that night than the previous one.
Time, she had said, given time…
Unfortunately time was not what Ramsay was given, in that context.
For the next forenoon a messenger arrived, sent by Seton at Berwick, with dire news.
It was disaster in the West.
The Regent's force had been all but annihilated.
They had been caught up with at Dornock, east of Annan, on the shore of the Solway, by a fast-riding English host under Sir Anthony de Lucy of Cockermouth, who had crossed the shallow firth at lowest tide by the temporarily dried-out Knockeross sands, from Bowness in Cumberland.
The Scots had been entirely unprepared for this, thus far into their own country, and were engaged in herding the great herd of Gilsland cattle across the Dornock Water's estuary, some one side of the river, some  the other.
It had been utter surprise and defeat, casualties grievous.
The Regent himself had escaped but his nephew was captured, and the slain included Sir Humphrey Jardine, Sir William Carlisle, Sir Humphrey Bowes and innumerable others.
Appalled, Ramsay and Moray heard it all.
The courier had orders for them to repair at once to Edinburgh, where the Regent was to summon an urgent Council.
So pleasant dalliance in the cause of defence strategy was to end.
Unhappily the men were sent for from their temporary quarters in the town, and goodbyes were said at the castle.
Ramsay certainly obtained a kiss and a hug from Mariot in farewell, but in front of the others it was not of the sort to analyse carefully; indeed he got a similar embrace from Black Agnes.
They rode off north-westwards without delay, worried men.
Whither Scotland now?
Will Douglas a prisoner.
Who to lead, with only his amiable uncle as Regent?
The hurried Council in Edinburgh Castle did not, could not, solve many problems — and certainly did not produce any obvious new leadership.
For one thing, there had not been time for the more remotely-seated lords to arrive, if indeed many of them heeded the summons; and the Balliol supporters, of course, remained absent.
In the event, Ramsay himself made the most useful contributions to the debate, with the young Steward and Moray backing him, the Regent out of his depth and almost pathetically grateful for any guidance he could get.
But there were earls present, Strathearn, Lennox and Ross, who were conditioned not to take over-kindly to too much prominence for a mere knight, even one of so illustrious a line as Dalwolsey.
And it was the earls who could produce the great and so necessary manpower.
Ramsay's contention was that, despite the recent emphasis  on the South-West, Annandale, Carlisle and the rest, the key hereafter would be on the East March, particularly Berwick-on-Tweed.
Edward Plantagenet was massing his forces at Bamborough, sixteen miles south of Berwick, not at Carlisle.
Sir Alexander Seton believed that was where the main English assault would come — indeed Edward had said as much.
He had ordered the strengthening of Dunbar Castle, thirty miles north of Berwick; why, if not because he intended to use it as his base against Lothian and this Edinburgh?
The Earl Patrick of Dunbar had now openly thrown in his lot with the English, and as Chief Warden of the Marches, was also in theory master of Berwick.
Everything pointed to an eastern attack.
There was little disagreement with that.
What to do about it was the problem.
There were the inevitable assertions that they must raise a great army to defeat the insufferable Edward should he dare set foot on Scottish soil, this earl promising his thousands and the next outdoing him.
But specific strategies were sadly amissing, for few there were experienced soldiers, used enough to inter-clan battle and feud but not to full-scale national warfare against the English might, as their fathers had learned to be.
Sir Simon Fraser, one of the few veterans, made the first practical proposal.
Dunbar should be replaced forthwith as Chief Warden, a suggestion which met with no opposition.
It was left to Ramsay however to point out that Dunbar was not likely to tamely accept such demotion, and the attitude of his forces was uncertain, to say the least.
His own men would support him, of course; the others, Border mosstroopers in the main , might or might not.
But any new Warden might well have difficulty in taking over.
Fraser said that the new Warden then must be sent south well supplied with sufficient men to convince Dunbar's people.
Ramsay agreed, but suggested a refinement.
If Dunbar could be lulled first into a false sense of security, it might all go more satisfactorily.
The main issue was the defence of Berwick town and port, without which King Edward could not risk a major advance into Scotland by land.
Transfer Sir Alexander Seton, whom they could trust, from being Keeper of the royal castle of Berwick to being Governor of Berwick  town.
So that Dunbar would be in no position to hand it over to the enemy.
And appoint Dunbar himself in Seton's place, to the castle-keepership.
Shut up therein, he would be detached from his Warden's forces and unable gravely to endanger the town, for the castle was outside the strong walls.
Then appoint a deputy to take over the command of the Warden's duties and forces — possibly Sir Simon himself.
Would not that help to solve some of the problems?
Even the earls present hailed this as an excellent plan, and Fraser was there and then appointed Deputy Warden of the Marches.
In the heady talk thereafter, Ramsay for one was very much aware of the lack of any particular tactics being put forward; all was generalities, and high-flown ones at that, almost as though the battle was already won.
Presently he felt bound to pour some cold water on all this optimism.
‘Suppose Edward does gain Berwick, my lords, and advances northwards — what then? or even decides to leave the town untaken behind him, but surrounded, as he might?’
That was met by stares, almost glares, as though he had voiced the unthinkable.
What did he think the Scots army would be doing meantime?
Standing by, idle?
They would attack the attackers.
Cross over into England and assail Edward from the rear.
Blockade the port.
Starve the English host.
He nodded.
‘But still, Edward may advance.
He can field a much greater army than we can.
I think that we shall not beat him in set battle, the Bruce taught us that, surely…
‘Bannockburn, man!
Bannockburn,’ he was interrupted.
‘King Robert, my lords, never wanted to fight at Bannockburn.
Only his rash brother, the Lord Edward, forced him to it,’ and he glanced over at the Earl of Carrick, the said Lord Edward Bruce's second son, who had now deemed it judicious to desert the Balliol cause.
‘Bruce ever used the land to fight for him.
I say that we should do the same, if need be.’
‘Yes, yes, Sir Alexander,’ the Regent said.
‘But how?
At Berwick?’
‘Not at Berwick, no.
I see little choice there, other than stout walls and stouter hearts.
But, if Edward moves north, there is hope.
On the march.
There is the close country just north of Coldinghame Muir, at Pease Dean and Bilsdean, between Berwick and Dunbar.
There a host must string out.
And there is no avoiding it.
There a hidden few could hold up thousands.
Then cut them up into gobbets, isolate the leaders…’,
‘Very well.
We shall remember that, my friend.
But hope that it may not be necessary, that Edward will never get so far.
Now, my lords, as to numbers.
You, my lord of Ross, how many can you raise?
And how soon get them here from your northern lands…?’
The remainder of the Council was concerned with such matters.
Ramsay went off to try to recruit more men in his part of Lothian.
He was soon recalled to Edinburgh.
The Regent desired him, as proposer of the scheme, and as having already served with the Earl of Dunbar, to accompany Sir Simon Fraser down to the Earl's camp near Berwick, there to help that man inform Dunbar of the decisions made and to assist in convincing him to take over the keepership of Berwick Castle.
Ramsay was less than delighted with the task, but consoled himself with the thought that at least the journey south would take them by Dunbar Castle again, and a call thereat would be possible.
Unfortunately Dunbar was nothing like a full day's ride from Dalwolsey, barely twenty miles, and by fair roads; and Fraser, a grizzled veteran, was scarcely the man to try to involve in an unnecessary overnight stop in the interests of romance, however chivalric.
But at least a call could be justified, as advisable to inform the Countess of the situation vis-à-vis her husband.
So, much sooner than he could have hoped, Ramsay came seeking admission at the castle guardhouse once more, glad to see work already in progress on excavating the new outer ditch, and masons busy on reinforcing the parapets and towers, Agnes herself superintending.
Their welcome was warm, even without the Earl Johnnie, Mariot's quieter than her sister's but no less kindly.
In front of Fraser, Ramsay himself had to be more restrained than he would have wished, but at least Agnes's cheerful kisses allowed him to bestow a like greeting on her sister, Fraser looking on somewhat askance.
Over a hasty but adequate meal, the situation and plans  were discussed, Black Agnes approving heartily, almost gleefully, indeed going so far as to add an improvement of her own.
Knowing her husband, if he could be led to believe that the royal castle of Berwick might be alienated from the crown and actually given to him for his services, he would be the more apt to accede to the arrangement, being a man of acquisitive mind.
Mariot capped this by suggesting that, since the Earl Patrick would presumably intend to yield that castle should Berwick town fall to King Edward, he could expect a greater reward from that monarch if the castle was nominally his own, not just a crown possession.
Ramsay asked Fraser if he thought that they could risk assuming the Regent's agreement to this, and grinning, that man averred that Sir Archie Douglas would agree to anything that spared him trouble.
When they presently rode away from Dunbar Castle, Fraser's attitude towards female participation in affairs had risen noticeably.
A parting invitation from the Countess that, when he had finished his business at Berwick, Sandy Ramsay might come back and help supervise the sinking of the proposed booms in the sea, the timber for which was already being felled, was cordially supported by Mariot.
They had learned that the Earl Patrick had his base meantime at Holywell Haugh near Horndean, eight miles west of Berwick, a convenient location to encamp a standing force and to dominate the East March and the main ford of Tweed thereabouts, opposite Norham.
It was here that, at the Competition for the Crown forty-two years before, Edward the First of England had met the Scots magnates and set in motion the actions which ultimately led to the Wars of Independence.
Thither the emissaries now rode, through the Merse, another thirty or so miles.
It would not be true to say that they were well received at Holywell Haugh that evening.
for not only was the Earl Patrick suspicious of anyone coming from the regency, but he happened at this juncture to be consoling himself with a local lady, in the absence of marital comforts.
They did not in fact achieve an interview that night.
They had time to assess the composition and probable loyalties of the force gathered there in the riverside haugh next morning, before the Earl Patrick would see them.
it was very much a composite host, consisting of the Earl's own feudal manpower, the levies  required by the crown, for the support of the Warden, from Border lairds, and bands of assorted mosstroopers belonging to various clans who found it profitable and expedient to ally themselves with the most powerful figure in South-East Scotland, the assembly at Holywell Haugh amounting to about three thousand.
How many of these would actually and actively support an English attack on Scotland because Dunbar did, was the question.
His own men would, of course; but the others were more doubtful.
Some might well be Balliol supporters and go along with the Earl for that reason.
Ramsay and Fraser reckoned that perhaps one-third might desert Dunbar when it came to the crunch.
But if the Earl was detached from them, in Berwick Castle, and Fraser took over the Warden's duties here, then the proportion would probably increase.
When eventually they saw Dunbar, he was hardly forthcoming, being especially suspicious of Ramsay, whom he had heard had been visiting Dunbar Castle, and wanting to know why.
Ramsay explained that his lordship's goodbrother, the Earl of Moray, had desired to see his sister the Countess whilst in the vicinity, as was but natural; and while there, they had learned that the defences of the castle were being strengthened, in view of possible attack by the English, and they had offered such small help as they could in this excellent work in the realm's interest.
That was all.
Dunbar could scarcely take exception to that, and changed the subject.
What did they want with him now?
Fraser and Ramsay had agreed that, since it was all the latter's idea and the former was a man of action rather than words, Ramsay should do most of the talking.
‘My lord,’ he said, ‘the Regent, in this present coil, with English invasion threatening, has a task for you.
An important task, in the realm's defence.
None could do it better than you, and…’
‘Task, sirrah!’ the Earl interrupted.
‘What task may the Douglas ask of me, Dunbar and March?
What task dare he ask?’
‘Since he speaks in the name of the King's Grace, my lord, he can command .
But you he asks .
He desires that you take over the keepership of the royal castle of Berwick.’
Dunbar stared.
‘None can know better than your lordship the importance  of Berwick Castle,’ Ramsay went on.
‘Sir Alexander Seton is an excellent knight, but it is felt that a greater figure in the kingdom should hold this royal stronghold, in the King's name.
Who better than one of the foremost earls of Scotland, at the very gateway to his own territories of the Merse and Lothian?’
‘Perhaps so, Ramsay.
But I have other responsibilities.
I am Chief Warden of all the Marches.’
‘To be sure.
But as such when you have to face King Edward's assault, it would be with an armed host, offering battle.
Your potent force spurring you on.’
Ramsay picked his words with care, for he had rehearsed this more than once.
‘It would be clash and strife.
Whereas, from Berwick Castle you could speak to Edward.
Send an emissary, or yourself approach him under a flag of truce.
Parley.
Delay.
Offer terms.
Act the ambassador rather than the captain of cavalry.
Which lesser men can do.’
‘So!
Here we have it!
Has the Douglas aught for me to offer Edward?’
‘Yes.’
Ramsay was more careful still.
‘Edward, we are informed, tires of the man Balliol, who has failed him.
Offer a treaty, if he will disclaim Balliol and his pretensions to the Scots throne.
Offer peace and friendship, all outstanding issues to be discussed…’
‘What is there in this for Edward Plantagenet?’
That was the nub of it, of course.
‘No great deal, perhaps, my lord, save to spare him a costly war.
And to retain his own sister's position as Scotland's Queen, which Balliol dismisses.
And he could gain much at a peace conference, without having to fight for it.
For ourselves, it could do much also.
Give us time.
And get rid of the usurper.’
That was the essence of it, Dunbar's known contempt and resentment for Balliol.
‘In Berwick Castle you would hold the key to much,’ Fraser put in.
‘And I would act your Deputy Warden here.’
The Earl looked from one to the other, stroking his chin, weighing, assessing.
They had baited their trap shrewdly.
‘When?’ he demanded.
Ramsay could scarcely disguise his sigh of relief.
‘So soon as may be, my lord.
Who knows when Edward may march?’
‘And Seton?’
‘He will move out.
Down to Berwick town, where he will serve meantime as governor.’
‘And Berwick Castle could be yours, thereafter,’ Fraser added, for good measure, to clinch matters.
Ramsay had hoped not to have to bring this forward if it could be avoided.
But now the thing was out and he had to make the best of it.
‘Berwick is a royal castle,’ he said.
‘A crown possession.
But, if this notable service is rendered by your lordship, it could be recommended that the Earls of Dunbar and March could be made hereditary Keepers.
Or even that it could be transferred to your ownership.’
And heaven forgive him that invention!
The other licked his thin lips.
‘I will consider the matter,’ he said, and rose.
They retired, hopefully, but Ramsay slightly apprehensive over what they had done.
That evening at supper Dunbar came to them and abruptly, without preamble, announced that he would take over the keepership of Berwick Castle forthwith.
Let them see that Seton was ejected.
It was as simple as that.
Next morning, with no sign of the Earl, they rode on to Berwick.
Sir Alexander Seton was not in the least upset about being transferred down to the town.
He had never asked to be Keeper of the castle in the first place, and being a man actively inclined, now that his wound from the Kinghorn affray was healed, found the confines of the castle irksome.
The town and port would offer him much more scope, its preparation for defence, the training of its citizenry for siege conditions, its provisioning and the control of its shipping.
He was confident that he, in the town, could resist any efforts of Dunbar in the castle to prevail against them — that is, providing the castle's cannon and mangonels were removed first and transferred to the town's walls and bastions, particularly to the port area.
This was agreed, although Ramsay suggested that one or two of the smaller pieces should be left, to allay any suspicions of Dunbar.
The Earl would no doubt be bringing his own personal troops with him, so Seton could take most of the present garrison down with him.
That man did not delay.
The very next day the business was  commenced, the artillery being the first to be moved, Ramsay and Fraser helping to superintend.
The townsfolk of Berwick were agog, and not a little apprehensive.
Three days later, on a fine April morning, Sir Simon Fraser rode off back to Holywell Haugh, to take over the Warden's duties, as Deputy.
Ramsay remained in Berwick, in the Governor's House, meantime, reluctant to leave until he saw Dunbar duly installed in the castle.
He was much impressed by the strength, circumstance and indeed amenities of Scotland's foremost port.
Edward the First had sacked the town in 1296, as an example to the rest of the country of what to expect if his take-over was opposed; but thereafter that megalomaniac prince had found it useful as a staging-point for his occupation of the northern kingdom.
So he had not destroyed most of the buildings, along with their inhabitants, had even erected more and improved the walls and defences.
Moreover, after Bannockburn, Bruce had actively encouraged the recovery of his war-shattered country by inviting Low Country merchants, wool-brokers, shippers and the like, Flemings in particular, to settle here; and they had brought much wealth and trade to the town, many having built fine houses as well as their mills, maltings, breweries and warehouses, John Crabb one of these.
With a population of almost a score of thousands, the place was a notable monument to the values of industry and initiative.
Seton wasted no time in setting his men, and many of the citizens, to work of another kind, particularly digging new ditches to keep artillery at a distance.
The port and town occupied an already strong position on the north side of the Tweed where it entered the sea, thus protected on two sides by water.
Any land attack had to be from the west and north, entailing a prior crossing of Tweed, here quite wide.
The area to be ditched therefore was comparatively limited, and part overlooked by the castle.
Three days after Fraser's departure a large new flag bearing the arms of Dunbar and March, a white lion on red, flew from the castle's topmost tower, indicative that the Earl had arrived.
Indeed he further signalled his presence by sending down a messenger to order Seton to appear before him and inform what he was doing in Berwick town.
This arrogant summons Seton ignored, for as acting Governor of Berwick  he was in no way subordinate to the castle's Keeper, and held his appointment directly from the Regent.
But Ramsay, concerned at this display of Dunbar's attitude, decided that he ought to stay on a little longer at Berwick, in Seton's support.
Very quickly, however, such preoccupations were swallowed up in vastly greater ones.
Information arrived from deep in Northumberland that King Edward was already on the move northwards, earlier than anticipated, having left Newcastle the day before at the head of a great army estimated at sixty thousand, well equipped with cannon and siege-engines.
This would inevitably be slow-moving, but it was only seventy miles from Berwick, so that they must expect him before the town within the week.
He had left his young Queen at Bamborough apparently.
This news set Berwick in a stir of even greater activity, especially when, that same afternoon, a fleet of ships appeared off the mouth of Tweed, coming from the south, and turned in towards the port.
Seton and Ramsay hurried down to the outer walls and bastions above the harbour wharves and quays, where most of the castle cannon had been positioned, ordering the garrison troops to man the guns.
It was all a very sudden call to action.
There were ten ships bearing down on Berwick.
There were more than that number tied up in the harbour, although most of these were smaller, and all traders.
‘Should these not get out, before the English bottle them up?’
Ramsay asked.
‘The enemy will be stronger, but these could at least harry their flanks.
Like light cavalry.’
‘I think not — even if we had time,’ Seton said.
‘The English will have larger cannon than these merchanters carry, and could sink them before they could get within range.
But we , I think, have heavier pieces here than they can have on the enemy ships.
These from the castle will be more powerful, with longer range than any that can be carried on shipboard.
So, we let them come into the harbour approaches, the narrowing river-mouth, where they must bunch and slow to avoid running aground on the sand-bars, then pound them from here while still they cannot reach us effectively.
Our shipping out there would but distract and scatter them.’
‘What difference in range?
I know little of cannon.’
‘No great difference, but sufficient, I think.
And pray!
Ours, two hundred to two hundred and fifty yards; theirs, one fifty yards, no more.
Or so I hope.
Also, we shoot heavier balls, which is almost as important.’
So they waited, cannon primed, crews eager, leaders anxious.
Seton's forecast proved accurate in the first part, at least.
The approaching fleet, now seen to be wearing banners showing the Leopards of England, did slow down and bunch together as they approached the harbour entrance, to negotiate the fairly narrow channel.
Their cannon were very evident, as they closed, crews lining the bulwarks.
Still Seton waited, calculating distance, gunners impatient at their dozen cannon, touch-ropes steeped in saltpetre smoking, fizzing, ready.
As it happened, it was the enemy who opened fire first, the leading ship suddenly letting off a ragged salvo from its starboard guns, in flame and smoke, as demonstration and warning presumably.
Instinctively all on the walls and ramparts ducked, even Seton, who then cursed himself for a fool.
However, although one or two balls did reach the land and even struck masonry, these were spent shot and did no real damage, the rest throwing up spouts of water harmlessly.
Nodding, Seton gave the awaited signal to fire.
Ramsay, even then, was scarcely ready for the deafening noise and percussion as the Scots artillery opened up, shaking the very walls, battering the senses and enveloping all in clouds of choking smoke.
Ears ringing, he recovered himself and turned to peer through the reek.
When it cleared sufficiently to see, it was to reveal a dire sight.
The gunners had been ordered to aim at the first two vessels, and at a bare two hundred yards' range they could scarcely miss.
Some cannon-balls may have gone through between the masts, but clearly most had not.
Masts, sails and cordage were down in tangled confusion, the proud ships suddenly mere lumbering hulks of wreckage emitting the screams of injured men.
Some shots undoubtedly had hit the hulls also, but the effect of these was not so evident to the onlookers.
‘Aim lower!’
Seton shouted.
‘The same two ships.
The water-line.
And quickly!
Fire on, fast as you can…’
Now the remainder of the English ships were opening fire; but these, behind, were still further out of range, and bunched as they were, some obstructed others.
Their cannonade, although impressive, was quite ineffective.
Individually now and in no order, depending on how swiftly crews could reload, prime and fire, the Scots gunners worked their pieces, aiming lower, those two leading vessels taking terrible punishment.
Utterly out of control now, these could not even fire back, for their port-side cannon could not be brought to bear.
Sails and rigging trailing over the side, and bows noticeably down, the first ship swung broadside on to the current of the river, and into its flank the second crashed, both drifting towards the pole-marked shallows of the sand-banks.
‘Now, the next two!’
Seton commanded.
‘With God's help we shall block that channel!’
That was indeed what happened.
In that narrow passage of navigable water, the clutter of ships had no room to manoeuvre.
And with an east wind behind them they could not abruptly halt.
Into the first two drifting hulks the next craft collided.
And in the minutes which followed, this pattern was repeated.
And all the while the Scots cannon thundered destruction.
It was the twin problems of overheating and running out of powder and ball which brought that one-sided battle to a close, to Seton's disgust.
But by that time four of the enemy ships were wrecks, one was aground and two of the remainder sufficiently damaged to make it doubtful whether they would ever reach their home ports — which was most evidently the hope of the survivors, as they went through the difficult, desperate business of turning in the confined space and heading back out to sea.
Elated, the Scots leaders gave orders for boats and crews from the harbour to put out, to deal with the wrecked and stranded vessels and their people.
There was no lack of volunteers for this duty.
This initial success heartened all at Berwick.
So much so that a group of shipmasters and merchants came to Seton to suggest that a retaliatory gesture would be in order.
Let them show the enemy that they were not the only ones who could attack by sea; and show also that the Scots could do it in less blundering fashion.
A series of raids on northern English  coasts and havens would be a salutary lesson, after this enemy defeat.
Seton and Ramsay were in favour, especially as this might well have a delaying effect on invasion moves.
So the next two days were spent in readying and arming a mixed squadron of available craft, merchanters all, but every one necessarily accustomed to using defensive artillery to protect themselves from the English pirates who infested the Norse Sea.
John Crabb would have captained it all, had he not been captured; but other shipmen were eager to lead.
Just before they sailed, word reached Berwick from Sir Simon Fraser that Edward Balliol had crossed the Border in strength, in the Middle March, by the Note o' the Gate pass, and installed himself in his old base of Roxburgh Castle.
Fraser would endeavour to contain him there.
Clearly this was a move in concert with the main English thrust.
It would have the effect of largely preoccupying the Warden's forces, unfortunately.
That main thrust was not long in developing thereafter.
Forward scouts came back to inform that the English might had reached Cheswick, a mere six miles to the south, and its vanguard would be before Berwick in a few hours.
Orders were issued for the cattle and geese to be driven in from the commons, the gates to be shut, the walls and bastions manned and all preparations for siege put into immediate operation.
Ramsay was in two minds as to whether it was wise to allow himself to be bottled up in the town when his place arguably was with the Regent; but he decided that he might possibly play a more useful part here as Seton's assistant — and he ought to be able to escape by boat, at night, if necessary.
It was a strange experience to wait in that embattled and enclosed town, amongst the tense thousands.
In mid-afternoon the first glints of steel in the spring sunshine began to appear on the high ground of Scremerston Brae, and soon the long hill down to sea-level was covered in a vast tide of men and horses, armour gleaming, banners waving, under a faint haze of steam rising from thousands of beasts long ridden, muting the colours of plumed helmets, heraldic surcoats, painted shields and horse-trappings.
On they came, ever more appearing over the crest of the ridge, the might of England on the move, the first major and  full-scale invasion of Scotland since Bannockburn.
Watching, even Seton was silent.
As the van drew nearer, the cluster of flags and pennons at the very front, under an enormous standard of the Leopards of Plantagenet, indicated the presence of King Edward the Third himself, although it was too far yet to identify individuals.
The approaching host could not head directly for the town because of the suddenly-widening river-mouth, having to swing off somewhat to the left, westwards, to reach the Spittal or Town ford, the nearest crossing, whose natural shallows had been improved by an underwater causeway of stone slabs.
But that causeway had had deep holes dug in it by the defenders these last days, and the intervening stretches strewn with caltrops, four-pronged iron spikes such as Bruce had used with such effect at Bannockburn, and which the many smiths of Berwick had been set to forging for the last weeks.
That ford was going to make but a difficult crossing.
Quickly the English found it so, and considerable confusion developed there as the foremost horses stumbled and floundered and oncoming ranks piled up with the pressure of thousands behind.
But this was a well-led and disciplined army, and blown trumpets and busy outriders soon restored order.
The Spittal ford was abandoned and the van turned still further west.
There were other fords.
The next one was the Castle ford, so named because it lay directly under the castle rock, although almost two hundred feet below.
As they watched the enemy approach this, Seton and Ramsay nodded grimly.
It was entirely within range of even the smaller cannon left in the castle, although depressing the muzzles sufficiently downwards would mean that only the far side of the ford would be bombardable.
When the enemy front ranks reached there, and the first horsemen rode warily in to try this ford, no cannon-fire developed from above.
‘As we thought!’
Seton commented.
‘Dunbar shows his true colours!’
The Castle ford was out of range of the town's artillery.
The English host was able to cross unhindered, although it would take a long time to do so in its entirety.
Berwick was a slantwise town, sloping up northwards from the harbour area, its outer walls halfway up to the castle.
But there was a quite large terraced space between, and it was up to this that the enemy van, with the Leopard standard, wound its way.
It could never have reached there, and settled, of course, had the castle guns opened fire.
Ditches old and new kept the new arrivals from too close an approach to the massive town walls, but, to be sure, this also applied in reverse; the enemy were just out of range of Berwick's cannon.
Nevertheless, Seton and his lieutenants, watching from the parapet of the main North Gate, decided that a warning salvo would do no harm, and show Edward that they were not all like the Earl of Dunbar.
They had brought most of the pieces up from the harbour defences, not anticipating another seaborne assault meantime.
These now crashed out a defiant discharge.
Hostilities had commenced.
Although the balls fell harmlessly short, the enemy pressed back.
The English artillery was not yet forward, being oxen-drawn and therefore the slowest-moving section of the army.
So there was no response, save yells.
That is, until a large white flag was hoisted and a party of resplendent heralds beneath it, these proceeding to pick their way heedfully in and out of the ditches, towards the North Gate.
The embassage had a trumpeter, and he blew a resounding flourish.
When he had finished, a voice hailed.
‘I am Montague, Earl of Salisbury, and speak in the name of the most illustrious Edward, by God's grace King of England, France, Ireland and Wales, and Lord Paramount of Scotland.
His Majesty demands to know why this cannonade is fired against his royal person and by whose orders?’
‘I know of no Lord Paramount of Scotland save His Grace David the Second, King of Scots.’
Seton shouted back.
‘I am Sir Alexander Seton of that Ilk, Governor of this town and port, and the cannon are fired on my command and with the authority of King David's Regent.’
‘You are insolent, sir, as well as misinformed!’ came back.
‘The child David Bruce is no longer King.
Therefore can have no Regent and you no authority.
King Edward is now overlord of this northern kingdom.’
‘Not yet, he is not!’
Seton declared strongly.
‘So back and tell your Edward so, my lord.’
‘You are foolish as well as insolent, sirrah.’
Salisbury returned.
‘But His Majesty is patient and merciful.
Open these gates to him, and your folly will be overlooked and peace will prevail.
Remain obdurate and you will hang for your presumption, and many others with you.
And this town will be spoiled.’
‘Only when Edward Plantagenet has taken it!
He will need more than your loud voice, Englishman!’
‘Then you are warned, fool…’
Seton halted further profitless talk and sent the emissaries hurrying back with a single cannon-shot above their heads.
Thereafter it was something of anticlimax.
Nothing happened meantime, at least that was evident from the town.
The English columns kept arriving, but of course only a small proportion of the great host could move up to occupy that terrace position.
Even the area down at the riverside would not hold them all, so that the legions had to make various other encampments, scattered wherever there was suitable ground.
Next day, still awaiting the arrival of the artillery, the English were not idle.
They set to work cutting down trees and brushwood, far and near, to drag up to the terrace, to fill in the ditches — or at least, the two outer ones, for when they came to the inner ones it was promptly demonstrated that they were within range of the defending cannon.
After this infilling, the enemy demolished cottages, barns and the like to provide stone and rubble to top the rest firmly, all done in businesslike fashion.
The defenders could only watch.
The artillery began to arrive the following day, large and small, but none, so far as the Scots could see, more powerful than their own.
These were dragged laboriously up to the terrace, and there ranged along the line of the filled-in ditches.
They did not proceed to open fire however — no doubt because the heavy cannon-balls were yet to come.
It took two more days for these to appear, in a lengthy convoy of ox-drawn sledges which could only move painfully slowly.
But once the first of these did arrive, Edward Plantagenet lost no time in testing their quality.
From just beyond the outermost ditch, he opened up with his largest pieces.
It was much the same situation as with the ship attack.
Despite all the sound and fury, the balls either fell short or were so feeble at long range as to strike only dust from the town walling.
The next step, of course, was to push the cannon nearer, over the first filled-in trench.
This brought them fully forty yards closer.
This time balls did strike the walls, some going over the top, but no real damage was done.
Seton deliberately waited, anticipating that they would come nearer still.
They did.
Then he ordered his gunners to fire, before the enemy could do so.
And now these were well within range.
He urged his men to aim at the cannon themselves; but this was difficult to do with such clumsy pieces, with considerable trial and error involved.
But certain hits were registered, casualties created amongst the English gunners, and what was almost as important, great holes and craters made in the infilled ditches.
The enemy cannoneers withdrew; but not all their pieces were able to do so.
Later, with the gaps in the outer ditches filled up again, a second and similar attempt was made, with the same results.
It appeared to be stalemate.
Edward tried something different.
That night he set his people to work in the darkness, filling holes in the trenches and moving the cannon forwards again.
But this could not be done without noise, especially the last, and hearing it the defenders lit first torches and then large beacons along the walls and opened up with their guns.
Aim was doubtful but sufficient to send the attackers hurrying back.
Orders were given for the fires to be kept alight each night.
So it became a siege of attrition, as the days and nights went by.
The English did try rushing tactics, sending dismounted men to reach the walls by sheer weight of numbers.
But this was unsuccessful also, for the casualties were unacceptable, and though some did reach the masonry, over all the ditches, few burdened with ladders and scaling-ropes managed to do so, and these were easily repulsed by the defenders on the wall-tops.
Arrows, crossbow-bolts and throwing-spears flew, but the enemy were much the more vulnerable, and the attempt failed.
Berwick was well placed to withstand siege for a time; but two score thousand people take a deal of feeding, and provisions began to grow short despite severe rationing.
They might have been supplied by sea, but the English had more ships than that first fleet driven off, and presently many vessels appeared at the mouth of Tweed, not to attempt attack this time but to patrol up and down, blockading the harbour.
What had happened to the Berwick raiding squadron was not to be known; but the chance of any of its craft being able to penetrate the blockade, even by night, was minimal.
There was another and more immediate danger than slow starvation: supplies of ball and powder running out.
As the daily cannonading went on, this shortage grew ever more dire.
It was only a question of time — unless help arrived.
King Edward must have guessed this, or possibly some English sympathiser had slipped out of the town by night in a small boat undetected, which was quite possible, and informed him of the situation.
For on the tenth day he sent forward another deputation under the flag of truce to declare that he knew well of the shortages in the beleaguered town and that they would soon be in desperate straits.
The besieged could not win.
They had put up a sufficiently worthy defence and could yield with honour.
He was a merciful prince and desired no unnecessary bloodshed.
He was willing, if they gave him a suitable hostage to ensure their good faith, to allow Berwick ten more days of siege, whereafter, if they were not relieved by the so-called Regent, they must surrender.
He would allow them half a day to consider this generous offer, otherwise the fullest attacks would continue.
Seton, Ramsay and the other Scots leaders did their considering.
They had not a great deal of choice.
Powder and shot would not last another ten days of cannon-fire exchange, nor anything like it; and by then food would be exhausted however drastic the rationing.
Was the Regent Douglas never coming?
Ramsay decided and declared that he had been mistaken in staying on in Berwick thus long.
He should have gone days ago and alerted the Regent to the situation, to come and relieve the town.
He must know of the siege, but presumably did not realise the urgency of their need.
He was no soldier and lacked experienced military advisers.
He, Ramsay, should leave that night, by boat.
If he could get up to Dunbar Castle, he could borrow a good horse there and be in Edinburgh five hours later.
This was accepted as advisable — even though, if the Regent and his army were still at Edinburgh, it would demand every effort to get them down here in time.
But Ramsay might meet them on the way.
Before darkness fell, and the attempt could be made, Edward's heralds came back for their answer.
And proof that an informant had indeed reached Edward from the town was provided by the fact that the emissaries now demanded that  the required hostage should be none other than Seton's own son, a young man whom he had brought with him to Berwick on his first military venture, unfortunate a start as this had turned out to be.
When Ramsay took his leave that night, Seton had not decided whether or not to comply.
His son admittedly would almost certainly be in less danger as a hostage than if he remained in the town.
And the father had the well-being of thousands to consider.
It was proved that night that it was not difficult to escape out of Berwick, however hard it might be to enter it.
Beacons were kept ablaze along the walls protecting the harbour and adjacent coastline in case of any infiltration attempt by boat, from the English ships out there for instance; but so far nothing such appeared to have been attempted.
But by failing to light two of the beacons that night, a four-oared fishing coble was able to slip out, unseen save by the immediate guards.
Ramsay's parting with Seton was reluctant.
He felt, somehow, as though he was deserting; and he had grown much to admire the older man.
But he would be befriending him, and all others here, better by going than by staying.
Clinging as close inshore as the rocks and reefs of that dangerous coast would allow, the four fishermen rowed him northwards.
Strangely, it seemed less dark out on the water than on land.
The sea was not rough, but there was quite a heavy swell, and the noise of this breaking on the reefs and skerries to their left was daunting to the uninitiated.
But the oarsmen, chanting a low, endless rowing-song to their slow rhythmic strokes, seemed unconcerned, used to infinitely worse conditions than this.
It was slightly over thirty sea miles from Berwick to Dunbar, a very long row, much too far for any one night, whatever the conditions.
They could keep up between four and five miles in each hour only for so long, for even strong and accustomed muscles tired.
Fifteen miles north, they put into St Abbs haven, under the mighty headland of that name, just before dawn, and went ashore for a few hours' rest in a hay barn.
The fishermen knew some of their fellows at St Abbs and felt in no danger here.
Indeed they were given a meal, more substantial than any they had been able to enjoy at Berwick for a while, before they set off again.
The next fifteen or so miles were easier, not so much because it was daylight but because, once past that towering headland, they were rowing west by north and the wind and tide were now behind them.
By mid-forenoon they could see Dunbar's towers ahead; and by noontide they were under the outer castle-bridge, with Ramsay shouting up his name to the watch and asking for the Countess Agnes.
His reception by the sisters was heart-warming, and there was regret all round that he could not stay any time, that haste was vital.
The young women had heard that Berwick was besieged and that the English army was none so far off, but they did not know the details, nor of course that Ramsay had been involved.
They were concerned to learn of conditions in the town and well pleased to hear that the Earl Patrick was now Keeper of the royal castle of Berwick.
They said that no English forward scouts had been reported anywhere in this vicinity; nor had the Earl made any direct contact with them.
It took much will-power for the man to drag himself away, presently, on one of Dunbar's best horses, but consoled and heartened by receiving the best kiss, on parting, that had yet come from Mariot Randolph.
Thereafter it was just a case of hard riding the thirty miles through green Lothian, by Hailes and Haddington and Musselburgh, for Edinburgh, which he reached before nightfall.
He went, knowing that the fishermen were being sent back to Berwick with a boatload of provisions, and even some powder and ball, from Dunbar, with offers of more.
Ramsay found the Regent Douglas installed in Edinburgh Castle, with a host of lords and chiefs, including no fewer than six earls, a most illustrious company, waiting there while their forces massed and were added to on the adjacent Burgh Muir.
Ramsay was perhaps less respectful towards this lofty assemblage than a young knight ought to have been, in his concern for the Berwick situation.
Not that the Regent himself was in any way offended by the new arrival's immediacy and frank speaking.
Indeed he was next to apologetic, declaring that levies from the furthest corners of the land were still on their way, and that the greater the army the better.
He had had little idea of the dire straits prevailing at Berwick nor that time had all but run out.
With young Moray's and the Steward's help, Ramsay  persuaded him not to wait any longer for the arrival of the Earl of Sutherland's and the Ross levies, but to march for the Border forthwith.
Even so, it was a couple of days more before the great host, now estimated at between fifty and sixty thousand men, set off southwards from the Burgh Muir of Edinburgh for Lauderdale and the Tweed.
The army moved down Tweed steadily, scouts well ahead, aware that King Edward would be informed of its presence by now.
Or at least its mounted divisions did for, as usual, it had left its slow foot, the majority inevitably, far behind, speed being so important for Berwick.
There were only two days left until the expiry of the English ultimatum — be relieved or surrender.
Even so, they amounted to some ten thousand men, a gallant and glittering array of knightly chivalry and armoured strength.
They reached the great river at Old Melrose, at the foot of Lauderdale, and followed it down to Kelso, where they had made contact with Sir Simon Fraser, who was not exactly besieging Balliol in Roxburgh Castle but containing him there, with the Warden's force, to prevent him joining Edward Plantagenet at Berwick.
Fraser, impatient at so inactive a role, persuaded the Regent to relieve him and appoint a replacement Deputy Warden, and now rode on with the main cavalry host.
They reached Gainslaw, not much more than three miles from Berwick, and Ramsay for one was becoming agitated.
Strategy and tactics ought to be preoccupying the leadership rather than this simple advance.
In all the galaxy of great lords his comparatively junior status restricted him from proffering advice and suggestions.
He missed the vehement assurance of Will Douglas.
But, a little further, where Whiteadder joined Tweed, and with the nearest of the English encampments liable to come into view within the next mile or so, he could no longer restrain himself.
He spurred forward to Moray's side, urging him to bring him to the Regent, earls or none.
‘My lord,’ he exclaimed, ‘the English forces are divided into a number of camps around Berwick, for the land offers no single place sufficiently large.
The nearest is not far ahead — or was, when I left the town.’
‘So you told us last night, Ramsay,’ the Earl of Strathearn observed dismissively.
‘And so much the better.
We shall roll them up the more readily, one by one,’
‘My lords, it will not be so easy as that, I swear.
The English King is no fool He must know that we are approaching.
He has more men than have we, even if not all mounted.
We can only approach them on a narrow front, because of this river valley's construction.
He could chop us up into flitters.’
‘Tough flitters!’ the Earl of Ross interjected.
‘Perhaps, my lord.
But broken up, nevertheless.’
‘What do you suggest, Ramsay?’ the Regent asked.
‘You know the position here.’
First, that we cross Tweed.
Most of the English are on this side of the river, naturally, since they besiege Berwick.
Therefore put the Tweed between Edward's main array and ourselves…’
‘But then, man, how can we attack them?’
Strathearn interrupted.
‘The river between.’
‘Is that what we should be aiming to do, here?’
Ramsay put to them.
‘To attack them?
What have we come for, in haste?
To relieve Berwick town, within the time set by Edward.
The English will be expecting us.
They have a greater host waiting.
Much cannon.
Let them do the attacking.
Across Tweed.
Which gives us the advantage, and keeps us out of range of their artillery.’
‘Ramsay is right,’ Sir Simon Fraser, who had come up, agreed.
‘Edward cannot sit there, besieging the town, with us here.
He will have to turn on us.
So have him do it from across the river.
We have no cannon.
And no foot here.’
Fraser's friend, Sir William Keith, Knight Marischal of Scotland, supported that.
‘Very well,’ Douglas acceded.
‘Where shall we cross?’
‘There is a ford around the next great bend of the river, at the Yair or Yarrow, where the Berwickers net the salmon.
A spit of sand and gravel, brought down by this Whiteadder, makes shallows there.
Cross that, my lord.
It is not like to be guarded, with English on both sides of it.
Then on down the far bank, to assail the English camp at the Spittal.
Leaving our own guard on that side…’
No better plan being put forward, this was decided upon, the prospect of assailing this Spittal encampment appealing.
Forward scouts reported that the enemy were massing at two points ahead, at their large camp below the castle hill and also nearer the town, but that the Yair ford itself was not guarded.
It might be something of a race, then, once the Scots were in sight and it was perceived that they were going to cross, with ten thousand horsemen to get over.
Word was passed down the long column to close up, and to be ready to make a dash for the ford.
In the event, it went well enough, and the period when they were especially vulnerable passed without assault.
Fortunately the Yair ford was a wide one, so many horsemen could take it abreast.
Rounding the great bend opposite East Ord, they suddenly came into view of the English forces massing over a mile ahead.
But these did not move forward at this stage, although they were as close to the Yair as were the Scots.
Still they waited, as the Scots came on at a canter.
Even when the foremost ranks reached the ford-end and without pause turned in, to splash across the two hundred yards or so of shallows, there was no immediate change, the enemy obviously taken by surprise.
Half the Scots were over before the English decided to come on, but by then it was too late to effect a halt to the crossing.
Some crossbow-bolts were shot, but at extreme range these proved harmless.
On the south side of Tweed, the Regent left Fraser with some five hundred men, to prevent an enemy crossing behind them.
Then, with only a few hundred yards separating them now from their foes, they set off seawards.
Now there was another hazard to counter, the final Town or Spittal ford.
Since this was under the cannon of the town, at least on the Scots side of the river, it was unlikely to be guarded.
But the English encampment at the Spittal could close it, on the south side.
Ramsay himself took a detachment and raced ahead therefore, knowing the position.
The Spittal camp was round another major bend of the river, the last one, and not actually in sight.
So the possibility was that the leadership there, if any, would not be fully aware  of what had just developed.
At any rate, Ramsay reached the Town ford relieved to find no one there.
At the riverside, he turned and waved from the saddle towards the town walls and bastions, urging his men to cheer.
An answering cheer came over to them, thin but prolonged.
But now there was a competing outcry sounding from around the bend of the river.
Presumably the English at the Spittal realised that something was amiss and were coming to see what.
Before anyone appeared, however, the Regent arrived in force.
At Ramsay's shouted message, the Scots chivalry formed up from column into as wide a line abreast as the terrain would allow, and wasting no time, advanced at the trot.
Once round the bend, they were confronted with the sight of a mass of men hurrying towards them, a few hundred yards off, some mounted but most afoot, in no sort of order, spread and strung out over perhaps quarter of a mile of gently-rising ground, with the monkish buildings and its township behind, as well as the tented encampment.
It was all, to be sure, a gift from the gods of war.
Trumpets blared the Scots order to charge.
What developed was a massacre rather than any battle, as disciplined and prepared thousands bore down upon a scattered, unready and largely leaderless crowd, which could have had no idea that any enemy were on this side of the river.
The English had no time to take any defensive measures, to form up into squares or hedgehogs, or even to present any unified front, before they were ridden down, trampled on, sworded, speared and completely overwhelmed.
Many towards the rear bolted, but they had to bolt fast indeed to remain ahead of that thundering charge; and the river hemmed them in on their right.
It was all over in bloody, yelling minutes, and the Scots swept on into the encampment itself.
No resistance developed there, nor could.
Reining up, the Regent found himself master of the southern approaches to Berwick, and cutting off Edward of England from his own territories and sources of supply.
Satisfaction, even glee at this initial success was, however, soon succeeded by doubts about what to do next.
Taking over the monastic premises, there and then a hurried council of war was called.
What would Edward's reaction be?
He still outnumbered them  perhaps five to one.
Most certainly he would not take this initial set-back passively.
The first priority, it was agreed, was to hold the fords strongly, not only the two nearby but others some way up Tweed, to prevent their flank being turned.
The next was to effect the relief of Berwick town, their immediate objective.
But then, what?
If Edward could not get at them here without the hazards of the river-crossing, neither could they get at him.
No satisfactory answer to this problem was forthcoming meantime, but at least the situation gave them time for the main Scots foot army to come up.
Messengers were despatched to inform its leaders, and to instruct them to cross Tweed early on, even at Kelso, and to advance up the south side.
On the subject of Berwick's relief there was some debate.
What in fact was meant by relief?
Could the arrival of this Scots army outside the walls be so considered?
Some held that it could.
Others, including Ramsay, declared otherwise.
They would have to enter the town, and make their entry apparent to the besiegers, make it clear that the siege could be withstood for long yet, a new spirit of defiance engendered in the defenders.
This was accepted; but Ramsay argued against a further proposal, namely that a new and more senior Governor be appointed to supersede Seton, with added authority.
He claimed that this was not necessary, that Seton was an excellent commander and had put up a splendid defence.
But some argued that a new and more resounding voice to address Edward would be more effective; also, sadly, that Seton's will to resist could well be weakened by having his son the hostage.
Suppose the English refused to release that youth under some pretext, the father would be much constrained.
This argument carried the day, despite Ramsay's protests, and it was decided to send Keith, the Knight Marischal, as one of the major officers of state, to head the relieving party and to take over the governorship meantime.
They would cross at the Town ford, under cover of the defending cannon, and be admitted at the South Gate.
Ramsay would accompany Keith.
There was no point in delay, nor any in waiting until darkness; the relief should be seen by the English to be effected and effective.
So the encampment and the monastic township was scoured for foodstuffs and provisioning for the besieged — unfortunately no powder and ball was found — and  this loaded on to horses.
Leading a long convoy of these, Keith and Ramsay rode to the ford and over, under the Knight Marischal's great banner, with a mounted escort, trumpets blowing, to draw maximum attention.
Before they left, they heard the Regent declaring that if Edward Plantagenet sat tight and did not attempt any attack across Tweed, then he might lead the Scots force raiding deep into Northumberland, even as far as Bamborough where Edward's young Queen was known to be installed.
That ought to fetch him.
To rousing cheers from the town walls, the relieving contingent came to the South Gate, which was ceremoniously thrown open to receive them, Seton himself there to welcome Ramsay with open arms.
Burdens unloaded, the escort was sent back, horses and extra mouths to feed being undesired.
The gates clanged shut again, Berwick succoured, after a fashion, with a day to go.
Seton did not appear to resent being replaced in the governorship; indeed he might even have been somewhat relieved, for it was a grievous responsibility in present circumstances and he had borne it sufficiently long.
He knew and was on good terms with Keith, and that man emphasised that it was only a temporary arrangement.
The point about his vulnerability over his son was not mentioned specifically; but they learned that in fact that youth was not the only hostage, for Edward had subsequently demanded that a selection of the citizenry be yielded up also, including some mere children.
Next morning, the trumpets were blown at the North Gate and the Knight Marischal's banner hoisted, with shouted demands for King Edward to appear.
That monarch was undoubtedly comfortably ensconced up in Berwick Castle, but after some delay the Earl of Salisbury did arrive, with heralds, and was informed that he could advance safely to near the walling.
‘I am Sir William Keith, Knight Marischal of Scotland,’ Keith called.
‘Now Governor of this town, in the name of His Grace David, King of Scots, and his Regent.
I have relieved this town, with men and provisions, within the time agreed between your King and Sir Alexander Seton, former Governor.
I now require the return of the hostages and the retiral of all English forces from Scottish soil.
See you to it.’
There was no response to that stirring announcement.
Salisbury listened, turned to the heralds in discussion, and then without further remark went back over the ditches.
It was all something of an anticlimax.
Thereafter the Scots waited for an answer.
None came.
No unusual activity was evident in the English lines.
Hours passed, and nothing happened, no reply, no deputation, no attack.
The same inactivity seemed to apply on the wider front, with the two armies static, no assault on the fords, where opposing guardians stared at each other across two hundred yards of water.
By nightfall there was nothing to report, as the beacons were lit.
The next day, there was some development but only on the Scots side.
The first companies of the infantry began to appear along the south side of the river, making a brave show, however weary with forced marching.
By mid-day they had arrived by their thousands.
Was this what Edward had been waiting for?
To learn the extent of the threat?
Then there was another development.
After substituting strong infantry guards at the fords, in place of the cavalry-men, almost the entire Scots mounted force formed up and rode off, in companies, southwards, up the long hill of Scremerston Brae, to disappear eventually over the ridge into deeper Northumberland.
Advisedly or otherwise, the Regent Douglas was doing as he had part-proposed.
What Edward Plantagenet thought of that the folk in Berwick could only guess.
But they got an inkling presently.
In mid-afternoon, Salisbury was back under his white flag.
He announced that the so-called Scots Regent and his main force had clearly abandoned Berwick to its fate, and had insolently chosen to invade England.
The fact that Sir William Keith and a handful of others had surreptitiously managed to enter the town could by no means be claimed to be a relief and succour for the besieged.
Therefore, the agreed time of respite now being overpast, King Edward demanded immediate surrender, as by that agreement.
This peculiar interpretation of events shook the defenders.
But Keith replied stoutly that this was folly, and worse, shame.
Berwick had been relieved in time.
Succour and provisions had been brought in.
Much of the Scots army  remained nearby.
The town would nowise surrender.
Tell King Edward so.
Salisbury retired, but was back again within the hour.
The King's Majesty was wrath, he declared.
The Scots, as ever, were guilty of major duplicity.
Berwick was still besieged and would fall.
Surrender now, or the hostages would be hanged.
This dire threat, of course, gave them pause.
But surely it was only a threat?
No Christian prince would do such a thing to innocent hostages?
Keith looked at Seton, who stood nearby.
After a moment or two, that man nodded grimly.
‘No surrender,’ he said.
The Knight Marischal shouted back that since it was unthinkable that any such deed would be carried out, and a disgrace to the knightly code that it was so much as suggested, there would be no yielding up of the town.
That was final.
That night Berwick seethed with the dread question — was it indeed only a threat?
In the morning there came an ominous indication, although it still could be but threat.
Men advanced with beams of timber to the edge of the outermost ditch and there proceeded to erect a gibbet.
When the hammering stopped and they withdrew, it was noted that a rope hung from the cross-beam.
But only one.
Then a resplendent party came forward, some mounted, under the Leopard standard of England.
On one of the horses was a slight figure, bound and blindfolded.
This horse was led to the gibbet by two other riders, and the dangling noose put round the youth, Thomas Seton's neck.
Thereafter, as the rest stood by, Salisbury advanced nearer.
This is your last chance, obdurate Scots! he called.
‘Yield not, and the hostage hangs.
And thereafter Berwick will be sacked.’
It was a desperate moment.
Everywhere men held their breaths.
Above the North Gate, all eyes turned on Sir Alexander Seton, Keith's and Ramsay's included.
Seton stood as though carved in stone.
He said no word.
‘Well, man — well?’
Keith got out hoarsely.
Seton moistened his lips.
‘So be it.
And God have mercy on my soul!
His , my son's, is safe.
No…no surrender!’
Something like a moan came from the crowd of watchers.
Turning away, Keith raised his voice.
‘If you do this, the Englishman, Edward Plantagenet's name will stink in the nostrils of all Christendom.
As his grandsire's stank!
Berwick does not surrender to threats.’
Salisbury shrugged and went back.
They had not long to wait to discover whether Edward was in earnest or not.
Hardly had Salisbury reached the others when the two men who sat their mounts on either side of the bound youth reined forward, taking the victim's beast with them.
Jerked out of the saddle by the rope, Thomas Seton was left dangling in the air, swinging and twitching grotesquely.
A great cry compounded of rage, sorrow, hatred and vituperation went up from the town walls as the colourful company under the Plantagenet Leopards turned and rode back towards the castle, leaving the slight jerking figure to its dance of death.
Sir Alexander Seton stumbled away, a stricken man.
None dared approach him closely, although Alexander Ramsay did follow him heedfully some way behind.
Edward gave them only until the following morning.
Then his heralds appeared again.
Did Berwick now surrender?
Or were the remaining hostages to be hanged?
They were given one day to decide.
The body of Thomas Seton still hung from the gibbet.
Now the town was in turmoil indeed.
No longer could the hanging be seen as a threat; it was now a promise.
If the English would execute the son of Sir Alexander Seton, a noted Scots knight, would they hesitate over ordinary townsfolk?
The citizens of Berwick were not prepared to wait and see.
They had withstood siege, hunger and deprivation.
This was too much.
The merchants and better sort sent deputations to the Governor, and the common folk mobbed him and his lieutenants in the streets.
He must yield.
Keith conferred with his colleagues, Ramsay included.
He had a certain number of men-at-arms in the town, who could, probably, contain a revolt of the townsfolk, at least for a little while.
But would that be justified?
Or effective for long?
If determined, the thousands must prevail and let in the enemy.
None could disagree.
Ramsay it was who suggested temporising.
After all, they still had certain cards to play.
The Scots infantry army still sat there just across Tweed.
And the Regent at his raiding could not be far away.
Edward might be  seeming to ignore these, but in fact he must be concerned.
If the Regent and the cavalry could be brought back, and urged to make some sort of attack, or at least the threat of attack, Edward would have other things to think about than hanging hostages.
Time therefore was needed.
Edward had agreed to a time-limit before.
He would not give them as long, probably, but he might allow a day or two.
Sir Alexander Gray, who had come with Keith, said that a promise to yield within a definite period, say four days, unless relieved by the Regent, might well be accepted, and save the hostages.
Keep the townsfolk quiet meantime.
This was agreed.
So next day when the heralds returned, Keith made such offer, adding that he must be allowed to inform the Regent of this for it to be effective.
Perhaps Edward indeed was reluctant to embark on that wholesale hanging; or may merely have assessed that this way he would force the Scots army into a rash and costly attack which he could repulse, and then get Berwick's surrender.
At any rate, Salisbury came back to announce that his magnanimous prince had made this, his final decision.
The town had the period asked for.
By then it must be relieved effectively and beyond doubt, or his English army defeated in the field;, otherwise full and unqualified surrender.
By relief it was stipulated that at least two hundred armed men must be seen to have entered the town, with due provisioning.
An emissary would be permitted to leave Berwick to apprise the so-called Regent of this arrangement.
So the thing was settled.
Keith himself decided to go and try to find Douglas, and to explain it all.
He hoped that he could do so quickly.
The news was relayed to the restive citizens that they had a few days' respite.
Keith left, with a small escort, by the South Gate and the Town ford.
In the event, the Berwickers were given hope and encouragement sooner than they could have anticipated.
Presumably Keith had found the Regent not far away, for only the day following the great cavalry host appeared over the lip of Scremerston Brae once more, to descend to the Spittal.
New heart became evident in the town.
This was further enhanced later in the day, when, towards  dusk, the entire Scots army, horse and foot, was seen to be on the move westwards, back along Tweedside.
At the Yair ford, in mass, they turned to cross, the English guards there prudently withdrawing to a discreet distance, while trumpets sounded in all the enemy encampments.
Presumably the Regent had waited until almost darkness, so as to hide the Scots movements once across the river.
The watchers from Berwick's walls presently could see them no more, in an overcast early summer night.
But there was a sufficiency of stir and flaming torches amongst the nearby English positions.
The morning revealed a different scene.
For the first time in weeks there was no mass of English soldiery on the terrace area, nor in the other visible encampments, although the tentage was still there, only a few enemy troops remaining between castle and town.
Nor was there now any sign of the Scots.
The centre of gravity had at last moved away from Berwick.
No relief attempt was in evidence.
So the Regent had apparently decided upon Edward's second alternative — challenge in the field.
Although most there cheered, Ramsay was more apprehensive, knowing his Regent and those young earls.
They waited there, in Berwick, in a strange state of enforced inaction and suspense.
No sounds of battle came to them, no indication that destiny was being decided not far off.
It might not be, of course.
The Regent might have decided on a strategic retiral, for instance, to lure Edward northwards or westwards into a position favourable to the Scots, perhaps even as far up Tweed as the Kelso area, where the Warden's force could be used to help defeat him.
By early evening, however, the first intimations of developments began to appear, in the shape of English units returning.
And, ominously, these displayed no hint of defeat nor dejection; on the contrary.
And when, towards the July gloaming, the royal-standard party arrived back and proceeded up to Berwick Castle with, even at a distance, an air of triumph unmistakable, the watchers' hearts sank.
Whatever had happened, English spirits were high, and Berwick was still besieged.
No heralds, however, came down to inform the town.
Information came otherwise.
After dark, a small fishing boat from Burnmouth slipped into the harbour, with two  passengers aboard, one none other than Sir William Keith, the Marischal, wounded, the other his own esquire.
Carried up to the Governor's House, in much physical pain, his mental pain proved to be more dire.
In fits and starts he told Seton, Ramsay, Gray and others the sorry tale.
It was disaster again, entire, appalling.
The Regent had led his army round to the north of Berwick, to the vicinity of Halidon Hill, about three miles north-west of the town, and between that hill and Mordington had halted, in quite a strong position, with marshy ground in front.
In the early morning the English host had appeared.
They did not attack but took up their stance on Halidon itself, covering that hill.
And there, a mile apart, the two armies sat and looked at each other.
Ramsay all but groaned, guessing the rest.
Those proud young Scottish earls could not sit there for long.
Against the urgent advice of Keith, Fraser and other veterans, they decided that the English were afraid to put it to the test; but they were not.
They persuaded the Regent to advance to the attack.
So they left their strong position, and in four great divisions under Douglas himself, Ross, Moray and the Steward, rode down to cross that marsh and to assault the hill.
Halidon was no great mount, a mere five hundred feet high, but it was sufficiently steep on that west side, after the slow plodding through the bog, to greatly slow down and disperse the advance.
Had the infantry been thrown in first, it might have succeeded, giving the cavalry time to regroup and adopt some outflanking tactics.
But no, the knightly chivalry had to lead, and lead they did to utter and complete defeat.
The enemy bowmen showered them with arrows, to break up any semblance of order; and the English horsed might, charging downhill, everywhere overwhelmed the Scots leadership by sheer weight and impetus.
The Regent himself was one of the first to fall.
All around, the other Scots lords went down like bowled skittles.
The cavalry were toppled back on their own infantry, most of whom were never engaged.
Groups did manage to stand fast, and to fight bravely, but not for long, with the English foot descending upon them in their thousands.
Keith saw most of the leadership slain.
Four earls, no five — Ross, Lennox, Strathearn, Sutherland and Carrick — fell.
But still greater losses were Sir Simon Fraser, Sir Alexander Lindsay, Sir John the Graham and the two  uncles of the Steward, Sir James and Sir John Stewart.
He himself, wounded, had been led off that bloody hill by his own esquire.
‘Dupplin Muir again!’
Ramsay exclaimed, beating fist on table.
‘Oh, the folly of it!
The purblind folly of men who would never learn!
Bruce and Wallace taught their fathers how to fight the English might.
And the sons throw all away in prideful stupidity!’
‘The Regent is dead, then?’
Gray said.
‘We have no Regent again?’
‘Aye.
The first to fall.
He was not the man for the task, once Will Douglas was lost to him.’
‘And Moray?
And the Steward?’
Ramsay demanded.
‘I know not.
I did not see them.
Nor heard of them.
Their divisions were some way apart.
But — Fraser was with Moray, and fell.’
Grim-faced, Keith's hearers eyed each other.
Later that sorry night, Ramsay came to Keith's room, where he lay awake in pain.
‘What now, at Berwick?’ he asked.
The Governor shook his head.
‘I have no choice, now.
The agreement was to yield if not relieved, or the English beaten in the field.
As Governor here, I can only surrender the town.’
Ramsay nodded.
‘So I judged.
A sore duty.
But…you will not require me , for that?
Nor Seton?
Nor Gray?’
‘No-o-o.
You would leave?
If you could?’
‘Aye.
Surely that is my duty.
To continue the fight, not to become a prisoner of the English.
I can do nothing here now.
I have left this town once already, and can seek to do so again.
By boat, as you came in.
By night.
This night, or it will be too late.’
‘As you will,’ Keith said wearily.
‘Would that I could go with you.
But my place is here, to gain the best terms I can for this unhappy town.
I fear, I fear…’
A couple of hours later the same Burnmouth boat which had brought the Marischal in picked its secret way out of Berwick harbour, with the three knights as passengers.
Nor was it alone.
Other small craft were leaving the stricken town, the news having got round, and its consequences all too clearly perceived.
Many were seeking to get out while they could, so many indeed that Ramsay feared that they must be  seen by the blockading English ships lying off, for the July night was less dark than he could have wished.
But if any were intercepted, the Burnmouth coble was not, hugging the shoreline, however hazardous its reefs and skerries, under the loom of the land.
They were off Burnmouth by sunrise, where the rowers rested awhile, for Ramsay had bargained with the fishermen to take them onward to Dunbar, in a repetition of the previous escape.
The passengers made a dispirited trio as they approached Dunbar Castle.
Seton had hardly spoken to any since his son's death; Gray was never loquacious; and Ramsay not only again felt something like guilt at deserting Berwick in its hour of need, but did not relish having to tell the Randolph sisters the terrible news and the possibility that their brother might be one of the casualties.
However, when presently the knights were admitted to the castle, it was to find Moray and the High Steward themselves therein.
They had, apparently, ridden in around dawn, after a hectic escape from the battlefield's carnage, the Steward's right arm in a sling.
Great was the friends' relief at seeing each other, free men still, and warm Ramsay's reception from the two young women.
But it was not the time for lingering or relaxation.
It would not be long before the English were at Dunbar, now that Southern Scotland lay wide open to their advance.
Earl Patrick might well bring Edward himself here — who had paid for the improved defences.
Dunbar, all agreed, would be a good place to get out of, since it was impossible, despite these improved defences, that it could be held against its own lord and the whole might of England's king.
Black Agnes would leave along with her brother and sister, having no wish to co-operate in the treachery of her peculiar husband nor to act hostess to Edward Plantagenet.
They had in fact been preparing to leave when Ramsay and the others arrived.
Moray and Robert Stewart had similar tales to tell of the poor leadership and rash foolishness at Halidon Hill, although being themselves young and inexperienced they did not see it in quite the same terms as had the veteran Keith.
They could add some illustrious names to the toll of the slain; the list seemed to leave few of the great names of Scotland surviving.
But at least they were more hopeful  about casualties amongst the rank and file, especially the foot.
The majority of these had probably escaped back across the marsh, they thought; indeed many had never been engaged.
Where they all were now, who could tell, their own levies included?
Making for home as swiftly and inconspicuously as possible, no doubt.
It was the cavalry and the knightly host which had taken the beating.
Incidentally they revealed that the Northumberland raiding, as well as failing to draw Edward from Berwick's walls, had not achieved very much.
A few villages burned and manors sacked, that was all.
They had not got as far as Bamburgh, being warned by scouts of an English reinforcement army from Newcastle on the march northwards, which could have caused complications.
In mid-afternoon they left Dunbar Castle, well mounted and quite a sizeable company — for Moray and the Steward had managed to extract a group of their horsed men from the débâcle and ridden directly here.
It was unlikely that any English advance-parties would in fact have got thus far as yet, but they went prepared.
They followed the River Tyne westward, by Hailes and Haddington.
At this last, Seton left them, to make for his own castle near Cockenzie, with his terrible news.
And at Musselburgh it was Ramsay's turn to say farewell, much as he was tempted to agree to the Randolphs' urgings and proceed with them over Forth to Doune of Menteith, so much more secure in present circumstances than would be Dalwolsey; for nothing was surer than that the English would be up to Lothian and Edinburgh before long, and Dalwolsey not far off their path.
But he owed it to his brother and his own people to go warn and prepare them; also he hoped that some of his retainers and tenants, from whom he had been detached since Berwick, might have survived Halidon and would win home.
So, much as he would have liked to ride for Perthshire with his friends, in especial Mariot, he left them, to turn up Eskside, but promising to come to Doune before long.
There would have to be some sort of Council meeting, anyway, held somewhere out of Edward's reach, to try to cope with the situation.
It might well be near Doune.
Gray went on with the others meantime; his lands lay in Angus, north of Tay.