

Paul Manville strolled unhurriedly through the VIP disembarkation area of Washington airport.
He flashed his security pass under the eyes of the two armed guards posted beside the exit door.
The nearest guard glanced at it, then ushered him through with a curt nod of his head.
Manville stopped dead in his tracks, whirling to confront the guard.
He thrust the pass directly under the man's nose.
‘Read it, man, don't just glance at it.
I could have just bought the goddamned thing out of a coin machine in the men's john.’
The guard bristled, momentarily, then took in Manville's security status.
Cowed, he stiffened his stance, his eyes slightly downcast.
‘Sorry, sir.’
He studied the security card in greater detail, noting that Paul Henry James Manville was a member of that small elite within the CIA who enjoyed the privilege of a top-security ‘Q’ classification.
That gave him priority access to The White House, the Pentagon, and all CIA personnel up to and including the top man himself.
Manville was a very important cookie indeed.
The guard scanned the colour photograph on the pass more carefully, checking it against the listed physical description and the man himself.
Age: 57.
Height: 5′ 11″.
Weight: 168 lbs.
Hair: Fair and greying.
Eyes: Blue.
It all checked, but the guard was taking no chances now, not in view of Manville's openly aggressive attitude.
‘May I see your left hand, please sir?’
‘Certainly, soldier.’
With a thin smile crossing his lips, Manville extended his hand, palm downwards.
The guard examined it in close detail, checking off the listed physical peculiarities.
They were both there: the three-inch diagonal scar near the wrist and the permanent multiple fracture of the third finger, which gave it a twisted, arthritic appearance.
Hoping that Manville would be satisfied, the guard  dropped his hand and executed a smart salute.
‘Thank you, sir.
You are cleared to pass.’
Manville returned the salute and pocketed his security card.
He felt better now, reassured about his status.
After all, he was a serving liaison officer between the CIA and the White House, even if he had been little more than a sleeper for several years.
Manville moved out through the exit, summoning a Yellow Cab from the nearby rank.
One moved smoothly into position, its driver leaning back over his seat to unlock the rear door.
‘Where d'ya wanna go, bub?’ he called through the open window.
Manville scowled at him.
‘Levitt Electrical Building,’ he snapped, climbing into the cab.
‘Where?’
The driver's face creased into a perplexed frown.
‘Levitt Electrical Building,’ Manville repeated, settling back into his seat.
‘Corner of Seventh on Lincoln.’
The driver's frown disappeared, to be replaced with a roguish, knowing grin.
‘Oh, you mean Spy House.
Why the hell didn't you say so?’
He slipped the cab into gear and eased away from the kerb.
Manville nearly choked on the small cheroot he was in the process of lighting up.
‘Are you crazy or something?
Don't you realize you could get 99 years in a Federal pen for shooting your mouth off like that?’
The driver shrugged carelessly, talking over his shoulder.
‘Listen, buddy…
I got three kids, a 28 thousand buck mortgage and alimony payments to make to my ex-wife.
So send me to Sing-Sing…
I could do with 99 years of government-subsidized living.’
It was not a line of conversation Manville wished to pursue.
He lapsed into a sullen silence as the cab left the confines of the airport terminal and cruised up the turnpike onto the freeway.
The attitude of the airport guard, and the careless banter of the cab driver were both a sign of the times and the rot which seemed to have set in.
It was symptomatic of a system going soft, falling apart at the seams.
There was too much  freedom, too much spare information and too many underground, potentially subversive media only too willing to spread it around.
Watergate hadn't helped, of course.
It had been like kicking the hell out of a two-hole outhouse; a lot of shit had gotten out and the stink rode free on the four winds.
Security was shot to hell.
Every mother's son personally knew his friendly local CIA agent who lived round the block.
Kids bought short-wave radios at junk stores and then got their kicks bugging police patrol cars.
To a layman, it might all seem mildly amusing.
To an operative of Manville's status, it was a tragedy.
Levitt Electrical Corporation House had stood as a cover for over eight years.
The fictitious company even got quoted on the Stock Exchange.
Now every goddamned taxi-cab driver in town knew the building was a CIA administration centre.
Manville brooded morosely on this topic as the driver manipulated his four-wheeled war chariot in between the busy traffic of the four-lane highway.
He was taking his bloody life in his hands just taking a cab for six or seven city blocks.
Sometimes, he longed for the good old days.
The cab pulled up alongside the destination.
Manville glanced over the driver's shoulder, reading the meter.
The fare was seven-fifty.
Manville poked a ten-dollar bill through the driver's window as he alighted, keeping his palm extended for the full change.
The cab-driver couldn't resist one last wisecrack.
He held the note up to the light, pretending to scrutinize it carefully.
‘This ain't bugged, is it?’
Manville ignored the jibe.
Snatching the change which was finally proffered, he pocketed it without a word and turned on his heel.
Behind him, the driver muttered something predictable, then moved off.
Turning again, Manville made a mental note of the cab's licence number, more out of habit than anything else.
He moved across the pavement towards the building, glancing at his wrist as he did so.
His meeting had been timed for three o'clock.
It was just over one and a half minutes before that hour.
Manville waited, finishing his cigar.
His digital watch and the clock on the wall of the administration  building foyer tallied at three precisely when Manville finally strolled in through the glass swing doors and headed for the reception desk.
Inside the building, at least, security was still strictly observed, and the cover story maintained.
The young receptionist gave no hint of recognition, even though she had seen him at least a dozen times before.
She merely smiled sweetly.
‘Good afternoon, sir.
Can I help you?’
Manville nodded.
‘I have an appointment with Mr. Abraham.
My name is Elliot,’ he said quietly, using the agreed code names.
The receptionist smiled again.
‘Would that be Mr. D. Abraham, or Mr. J. Abraham?’
‘Whichever is in the best position to help me,’ Manville responded.
‘It's in connection with overseas retail outlets.’
The elaborate game continued.
The receptionist gestured across the foyer towards the twin elevators.
‘Fourth floor,’ she murmured.
Manville chose the left-hand elevator.
The one on the right went only to sealed-off sections of corridor on each floor, where any interlopers who had managed to get that far would be fobbed off with further charades designed to conceal the true function of the building.
Inside, he stood stiffly under the ceiling light, aware that he was being fully scanned by concealed video cameras and metal detection equipment.
The elevator rose smoothly, then came to a stop.
The twin doors sighed open, and Manville stepped slowly out into the corridor.
Two guards, both armed with machine-pistols, stood stiffly to attention either side of him.
One of them moved slowly in, deftly reaching into Manville's jacket and removing the shoulder-holstered automatic that the detectors had pinpointed.
‘Security pass please, sir.’
Manville nodded, producing his pass from his inside pocket.
The guard scrutinized it carefully before handing it back.
‘Thank you, sir.
Will you perform function S4 please?’
‘Certainly.’
Manville turned back to the elevator, placing his right palm flat against the opaque plastic panel built into  the wall beside the doors.
In a matter of seconds, his fingerprints had been photographed and checked by computer against the central memory banks.
A small green bulb concealed behind the panel flashed on momentarily.
‘Thank you, sir.’
The guard returned Manville's gun and saluted briskly.
‘Go ahead, sir.
You are expected.’
Manville returned the salute.
It was not obligatory, since he was, officially, a civilian.
However, he regarded it as a mark of respect and discipline, and old habits died hard.
He moved down the corridor and around the corner, where two more armed guards stood, alert, against either wall.
Neither challenged him, and no salute was offered.
Manville passed them, stopping outside a plain door.
He rapped twice with the back of his knuckles.
‘Come in.’
As the voice boomed out, the door opened automatically, on an electronic security lock.
Manville paused to straighten his tie before stepping through.
Inside, the office was spacious, but without any trace of ostentation.
A plain, functional heavy-duty carpet led across to a large and uncluttered teak desk.
Behind it sat a man whose physical appearance was out of all keeping with his professional stature.
Franklin Hayman's thin, wiry body was overshadowed by the large desk, even though he was seated on a swivel chair which had been adjusted to its maximum height.
His narrow shoulders had a permanent forward-drooping hunch, with the result that clothes seemed to hang off him in shapeless folds.
Even the most expensive and well-cut suit took on the appearance of a cheap off-the-peg item from a Hong Kong department store.
To top this unprepossessing appearance was a thin, scrawny neck which seemed only just to support the weight of his head.
His face, with its wrinkled, pallid complexion, looked for all the world like that of a nervous squirrel monkey.
But Franklin Hayman was small in size only.
He was in fact one of the most important and influential men in Washington, feared and respected by Senators, Congressmen and the Military.
His close-set eyes daily reviewed documents  which would otherwise only be seen by perhaps half a dozen people — up to and including the President himself.
As organizational head of all CIA operations on the North American continent, Hayman literally had greater power than heads of State or European monarchy.
The lives of men could be snuffed out at one snap of his gnarled fingers — and frequently were.
Manville knew all this, and treated the man accordingly.
Even in terms of his own quite awesome power he was nothing but an underling in relation to his superior.
When Hayman gave orders, Manville jumped.
It was as simple as that.
But first, before the orders, true democracy had to be trotted out on the desk in front of the two men like a child's board game, the dice tossed and a couple of moves played.
As ever when they met, they exchanged warm, friendly smiles, which supposed an equality both knew to be spurious, and intimated chumminess which belied the invariable gravity of their discussions and business together.
After the smiles, a brief exchange of harmless banter.
‘Hope to hell this is important, Franklin…hauling me in off my vacation this way.’
‘Where were you?’
‘Skiing in Aspen.’
‘Yeah?
Snow good?’
‘Fair.
Too many ski bums about, though.
Christ, there seem to be more of 'em every season.’
‘Well, sorry about that, Paul.
Good to see you again, anyway.’
‘Yeah.
You too.’
Manville extended his hand across the desk, making the penultimate move of the game.
The two men shook hands perfunctorily, then Hayman settled back into his chair and his face became instantly serious.
‘Want to get down to business?’
Manville asked after a slight pause.
Hayman nodded.
He reached across his desk to a small black metal box and triggered a switch.
A red light flashed on, but there was no apparent sound.
Both of them knew, however, that the scrambler equipment was now emitting a powerful high-frequency signal which would effectively blot out  their subsequent conversation from any known form of electronic surveillance.
The meeting was for real now.
Both men looked grim.
‘Trouble?’
Manville asked.
‘Problems,’ Hayman conceded.
‘Our job is to prevent them escalating into trouble.’
He broke off to open his desk drawer and pull out a red card-file, sliding it across the surface of the desk towards Manville.
The legend TOP SECRET.
FOR YOUR EYES ONLY stood out prominently.
Manville brushed the folder with his fingertips, looking up questioningly.
Hayman nodded briefly.
‘Study it,’ he said.
Only with that official invitation did Manville open the file and pull out its contents.
He took in the headlines.
INTELLIGENCE REPORT QUA/2779024/H9.
SOURCE: Herat, Afghanistan.
(via Internal USSR unit K.165.)
SUBJECT: Combat aircraft Mikoyan MiG 25.
(NATO Codename: FOXBAT)
Manville looked up, slightly puzzled.
‘This is old stuff, Hayman.
I thought we wrote off the Foxbat some time ago.
Our intelligence concluded that it was nowhere near comparison with our new Tomcat, didn't it?’
Hayman grunted.
‘Old stuff…but a new twist,’ he muttered.
‘We did originally conclude that the MiG 25 posed no real threat to our air defences, but it would appear there have been some new developments.
We know, for instance, that large-scale grounding of Foxbats has occurred on all major Red Air Force bases over the last few months.
The question is, why?
Logically, it would make sense to assume that the aircraft failed to come up to the standards of performance and aggressive capability which the Soviets expected of it.
The trouble is, we now know that they are being re-issued…and we have cause to think that they might have undergone quite extensive modifications.
Read on and you'll see what I mean.’
Manville returned his eyes to the report, digesting it carefully.
Finally he lowered the papers on to the desk and whistled through his teeth in astonishment, and more than a  little dismay.
‘Do you accept such a vastly improved performance?’ he asked Hayman.
Hayman shrugged.
‘I don't know,’ he answered frankly.
‘But the Soviets must have done something, that's for sure.
We know that the projected new Ilyushin Y-type fighter aircraft isn't due to come into full-scale production much before the early 1980S…perhaps two more years before they are in full service with trained pilots and maintenance crews.
That leaves the USSR with a pretty nasty gap to fill up, and the Foxbat was the best they had.
It makes sense that they would really have gone to town on the modifications.’
Manville laughed nervously.
‘Yes, sure…but a maximum speed in excess of Mach 4.5?
That's incredible.’
‘Sure, by our current standards of technology,’ Hayman agreed ‘The original Foxbat had a maximum airspeed of fractionally over Mach 3, and a probable operational ceiling of around 125,000 feet.
That second fact, by the way, is based on an observed test which created a new world altitude record, 119,000 feet, some seven months ago.
If, as this report suggests, they have replaced many of the main fuselage and wing members with titanium, rather than steel geometry, then we are dealing with a much lighter aircraft.
It would only take a marginally improved thrust to give the aircraft a vastly improved ground-to-air time, a higher ceiling and a greatly boosted top airspeed.’
‘Jesus!’
Manville was stunned.
‘But at that speed, and that height, the bloody thing could outrun a missile, for Christ's sake.
We would have absolutely no defence against it.’
‘Exactly,’ Hayman said.
‘There is, however, another rather nasty conclusion to be drawn from those performance figures.
If they are accurate, the new Foxbats can not only evade our missiles, they can attain the very top level of the stratosphere, and maintain a speed which is only marginally sub-orbital.
That puts them within missile range of our satellites, threatening the entire SAMOS system.
The Russians would have absolute superiority over not only the air, but space as well.
Not a pleasant thought, you'll agree.’
‘Jesus,’ Manville said again, shuddering slightly.
‘So that's our problem.’
‘There's more, I'm afraid,’ Hayman said apologetically.
He produced another file.
‘This is a quite separate intelligence report on a new, lightweight air-to-air missile the Russians are known to have developed recently.
If they have been fitted to these new Foxbats, then the aircraft would have a potential complement of 6 to 8 AAMs in place of the current 4…on top of its two wing-mounted 23mm electric cannon.
That's a pretty formidable flying machine.
Cutting back on missiles and fitting wing fuel reserve tanks instead would increase its range to well over 2000 miles.
Finally, to make the position even worse, the Foxbat is probably also fitted out with a sophisticated anti-missile ejection pod and all conventional radar-blinding devices and tracking jammers.
We wouldn't see it coming, we couldn't shoot it down when we did and we couldn't even chase the fucking thing home after it had hit us.
Now read both these reports again, put them together, and tell me what you think.’
Manville picked up the second folder, sighing heavily.
There was a tight feeling in his gut.
Manville studied the material again for several minutes, saying nothing.
Finally, he riffled the thin sheaf of papers together with his fingertips and slid them back inside the security folder, which he handed back to Hayman.
‘Well?
What's your opinion?’
Hayman asked, as he carefully placed the folder back in his desk drawer and double-locked it.
Manville sniffed thoughtfully.
‘Impressive,’ he muttered.
‘Very impressive…if they're genuine, that is.
What do the experts say?’
Hayman snorted in disgust.
‘So who has experts any more?
Certainly not in the Aero-Space industry, that's for sure.
In this age of specialization, what we got is a lot of brilliant mechanics working four to five years behind theoretic technology, and a few abstracted theorists working out in the unknown and each disagreeing with the other.’
Manville shrugged.
‘No general consensus, then?’
‘Totally inconclusive.
Lockheed say no way, at least three years away from even the drawing board stage.
NASA says yes, highly probable for a prototype to be flying tests, but doubtful to be operational for two years.
British sources say they already have the potential power-unit and are half-convinced that the French may already be quite advanced in the aero-dynamics of the bodyshell.
Sometime in the next two to five years they would expect to get together and do what they did with Concorde.
Take your pick.’
‘Yeah.’
Manville laughed, without humour.
‘Point taken.
As layman to layman…what's your gut reaction?’
‘About the same as your instinctive reaction…guarded doubt.
But there's that damned word if to contend with.
Small word…with massive implications.’
‘It could be a red herring,’ Manville pointed out.
‘Deliberately falsified information…to send us off on a wasteful course of negative research.
How about the source?
Reliable?’
Hayman nodded.
‘Usually highly so,’ he confirmed.
‘We received a three-year projection on the Soyuz programme from the same cell…and that proved to be 100%.
There's no real reason to assume anything has changed.’
Manville shook his head dubiously.
‘I find that a shade inconclusive.
Around that time, we were sharing a lot of material to work toward the Apollo link-up.
I would have thought the Russians just about got ahead on a points average with that one.’
Hayman waved the objection aside.
‘Nevertheless, I don't think we can afford to ignore it.
A contingency plan, at very least, pending any further information.’
‘A spy plane?’
Manville suggested.
‘We've come a long way since the U.2 fiasco.’
Hayman shook his head.
‘If that report is anywhere near accurate, they could knock anything we have at present clear out of the sky.
Anyway, the situation is delicate right now.
We can't afford to be caught making what they would take as an act of aggression.’
‘I take it none of our satellites can gather any evidence?’
‘The Russians are too clever for that.
Any bases where these little babies are operating are going to be way off our orbital paths.
They track every piece of hardware we got up there…just as we keep tabs on theirs.’
Manville looked bewildered.
‘What, then?
We have no agents who could get close to something this big?’
‘Mohammed and the mountain,’ Hayman murmured, cryptically.
‘We can't get to it…so we bring it to us.’
Manville took a deep breath, to let the implications of Hayman's words sink in.
When they did, he whistled at the sheer audacity of the plan.
‘It's the only chance we have,’ Hayman went on.
‘Somehow, we have to persuade one of their pilots to defect, bringing the plane with him.
That way, we can strip the thing down to its last nut and bolt.
We could jump our own technology ahead two to five years…at a conservative estimate.’
‘You'll never get official clearance,’ Manville said flatly.
Hayman's eyes bored into his, ice-cold.
‘I don't have to.
You're the link-man.
That's your job.’
There was a long silence.
Finally, Manville spoke.
‘Is that official?’
Hayman nodded.
‘It's official…as of now.
You're on active assignment, Manville.
I want full Pentagon and White House clearance in two months maximum.
Meantime, we'll be getting down to the fine details.’
He broke off to unlock another drawer, pulling out a sealed buff envelope.
‘Here's your official brief.
The operation will be code-named ‘CUCKOO’.
You appreciate the humour, I hope?’
Manville accepted the sealed orders, grinning wryly.
‘Very apt,’ he agreed.
‘We get a foreign bird to fly into our nest and lay the biggest egg of all time.
Let's just hope we don't get any of that egg on our faces.’
‘We do…and heads will roll,’ Hayman warned.
He was deadly serious.
‘You know it, Paul…we can't afford to foul up on this one.’
‘It's not going to be easy getting clearance,’ Manville pointed out.
‘There will be a lot of nervous opposition, I can  tell you now.
Detente is a highly delicate subject right now…and we've been getting some bad press lately.’
‘Yeah.’
Hayman's monkey-like face twisted into a vicious scowl just thinking about it.
‘Those hallucinogenics experiments certainly stirred up a lot of shit.’
‘And the Cuban comedy show,’ Manville reminded him.
‘Exploding clam shells, for Chrissakes!
The dumb bastard who dreamed that one up should have been strung up by his balls.’
‘He was,’ Hayman muttered.
‘Is that it?’
Manville asked, after a few moments of silence.
Hayman stood, extending his hand over the desk.
‘That's it,’ he confirmed.
‘The best of luck, Paul.’
They shook hands.
‘I'm going to need it,’ Manville grunted.
LEVITT ELEC CO PERSONAL ABRAHAM
CUCKOO LP. 86003
INTERIM REPORT I. CODED TRANSMISSION.
CHANNEL ONE.
MESSAGE BEGINS STOP PRIMARY CONTACT ESTABLISHED LEADING ORNITHOLOGIST STOP DOUBT EXPRESSED AS TO MIGRATORY HABITS OF SPECIES STOP INITIAL REACTION NEGATIVE STOP THUR 1630 EST STOP MANVILLE APD/3700925/WP MESSAGE ENDS
Manville checked over his copy of the coded telex transmission before shredding it, unable to repress a bitter smile.
He had never thought of himself as a master of the understatement, but his message to Hayman was something of a gem.
‘Initial reaction negative’, indeed.
It was true only if one accepted varying degrees of an absolute.
What Ennis, the Presidential advisor, had actually said was: ‘Manville, have you got fuckin' rocks in your head or something?’
Belatedly, Manville realized that going in cold, straight to the top, had been a serious tactical error.
Rejected at that level, he was back to square one, at a disadvantage.
Now it would be a question of building up contacts again, putting up a case which would percolate up through the echelons of power, hopefully gathering momentum and authenticity as it did so.
If that happened, Ennis might conceivably be by-passed, or at least overruled.
Manville pored through his list of contacts, seeking the most likely allies.
What he really needed on his side was some good old-fashioned redneck backing; a few influential voices bellowing the Battle Hymn of the Republic and waving the Star-Spangled Banner in tightly clenched fists.
The old shock tactics didn't work so well anymore; the days of JFK and gunboats to Cuba were long gone.
Detente, the cold peace, had started with the crack of a rifle in downtown Dallas, and  the echoes could still be heard in the corridors of the White House.
The Military were backed up against a wall and disorientated.
Lacking the backing zeal of the last American hero, pulled out from Nam licking their wounds, they were like de-gutted bayonet dummies, crumpled paper tigers.
There was a feeling of helpless impotence which permeated up through the ranks from GI to Supreme Command.
Then SALT.
Another body-blow, another betrayal.
Defence cuts, NATO falling apart at the seams as a near-bankrupt Great Britain trimmed her commitment back below the survival level and the other European allies stopped considering the quality of their defensive and offensive hardware and began worrying about sharing out the contracts amongst the EEC brotherhood instead.
It had begun to look as though the Western powers had embraced the premise that no-one kicks a cringing dog.
Manville pulled himself together with a mental jolt.
He was overreacting, for God's sake.
One little rejection, the first suggestion of a problem, and he started to go to pieces, blame everyone except himself.
It was getting to be more than just a bad habit; it was beginning to become an established part of his personality.
‘On active assignment,’ Hayman had told him.
Hell!
What was so bloody active about being an overblown messenger boy?
Being out in the field…that was active.
Logically extending a lifetime of military service in the defence of his country with a direct, positive approach.
Not being afraid to do what needed to be done, without a moment's hesitation or doubt.
Knowing the personal satisfaction of keeping body and mind wholly alert and fit, obeying no other master than his own conscience.
Body and mind…there was a bitter joke indeed.
Some body, when it could no longer be persuaded to ski down a mountainside.
A simple traverse…past the glacier then a quick christie round the moguls and a straight parallel run to the bottom Instead of which…what?
Knees buckling, legs trembling like jelly, an undignified scramble down the ice on his ass and two days in a bar throwing down Bourbon.
All the time getting worse.
The crack-up of personal confidence, the sheer bloody hell of facing every simple decision as a major crisis.
Empty, impotent, gutless.
Burying it all under a thick shell of bluster, bullying, slavish adherence to protocol and discipline.
No way back now, of course.
For Manville, there could never be another Dien-Bien-Phu, another Hill 24, another Czechoslovakia or Berlin Wall.
Shit!
They'd as good as killed him when they'd taken him out of the field.
Co-ordinator, indeed.
How the hell did a man stop being an agent and suddenly become a civil servant?
How did a man stay a man when the one prop which supported him was knocked away?
Worse…who could he tell, what could he say?
How does a man even try to explain that he is falling apart because he doesn't kill people any more?
Recognizing the all-too familiar symptoms, Manville fought against the gathering depression before it took too firm a hold on him.
There was still a job to do, and although it might not seem much in comparison to the past, it was all he had left.
He returned to his contact lists, abandoning the military personnel and concentrating upon purely political figures.
There were at least three Senators he could count on for verbal support, if nothing more.
Willing support, that was.
Marked off with a red asterisk were five more names…two other Senators and three Congressmen…whose apparent support for virtually anything was guaranteed by Manville's knowledge of their private indiscretions.
That was all part of the job — dig the dirt and then turn it into pure gold.
Manville's silence came dearly.
Eight voices then, and precious little else.
It still wasn't enough to get past Dwight Ennis.
What Manville needed was an argument with gut-weight, real pull.
If only there was some backing evidence for the Foxbat report.
With corroborating material, he could get people moving as though they had ramjets stuffed up their backsides.
It was a delicious, childish image.
Manville toyed with it for a few moments, imagining the corridors of the Pentagon  and White House alive with zooming figures, grey-flannel covered asses farting tongues of flame.
Chasing Foxbat, going into orbit.
Orbit.
Faint bells rang, tumblers clicked.
Again, Manville felt a slight sense of marvel at the processes of his own brain, his devious but quite unconscious way of running ahead of his own thoughts and frequently alighting on off-beat answers.
It was a peculiar form of lateral thinking, inspired by instinct.
In the past, the facility had rarely let him down.
When it did, he covered up with bluff, and only rarely carne unstuck.
The key to the whole business was not politics or national defence.
It was more basic America than either of those two republican bastions.
Money.
That was the secret, the magic word which would open all the doors.
The sacred, almighty dollar, the solid bedrock of American administration, ever since Manhattan island was bought for a handful of beads.
Manville concentrated, putting it all together in his head.
If the reports on Foxbat were accurate, the aircraft represented the next five years of technology.
Five years of research, countless billions of public dollars.
From this solid standpoint, Manville looked back.
Over the previous five years, where had the greatest money flowed freely?
Not in urban development, not in city slum clearance, not in social welfare.
Straight up, out of the atmosphere and into orbit — that was where the most staggering sums of money had gone.
The space programme; NASA.
The small step for man had fired the American blood as no other single conquest had ever done.
Belittle that, and you hit every patriotic American below the belt.
Manville grinned to himself.
It was the only place to punch.
And punch he would.
NASA was the immediate target.
One known and accepted fact provided the argumentative weight he had needed, and could now build upon.
The Mikoyan Mig-25 had established the all-time altitude record of just under 120,000 feet.
Play on that, stress the suggestion in the new report that the improved craft was now on the verge of orbital flight, and it presented a real threat to the  past achievements and the future development of all aero-space research.
Foxbat could swipe satellites from the skies like irritant flies; take the Russians leap-frogging ahead of the planned space shuttle programme.
And wipe out the expenditure of thousands of billions of dollars.
Money was the key, sure enough.
Cape Canaveral was the lock in which to turn it.
Colonel Mark Woodrow Harris, USAF, eyed Manville across his desk, through black-framed, slightly tinted spectacles.
He tapped one finger, reflectively, on the Foxbat report.
When he eventually spoke, his voice was guarded, with a deliberate note of scepticism, despite the sporadic friendship the two men had shared over the years.
‘Why have you come to me, Paul?’
Manville shrugged.
There was no point in attempting to cover up.
Harris was too shrewd.
‘I need some help…somebody with a bit of heavy armoury to back me up.’
‘You've already been to the Pentagon and the White House.’
It was a statement rather than a question.
‘Of course.’
Manville made no attempt at denial.
‘And they weren't interested?’
‘Interest isn't enough these days, Mark.
You know how things are.
Too many people sitting on the fence, exercising nothing but their asses.
Dwight Ennis thinks this one is too hot to handle, under the present circumstances.’
‘Maybe he just doesn't believe this report,’ Harris murmured.
‘No, perhaps he doesn't.
I'm not sure I do myself.
However, I don't think it's worth taking a chance…do you?’
Harris tapped the report once again.
‘For what it's worth, I think this is wildly over-optimistic.
I can't really go along with these performance figures — not given our last intelligence reports on the MiG projects into the 80's.’
‘An unexpected technological breakthrough?
Something we haven't stumbled on yet?
A damned sight more research money and facilities, perhaps?’
Manville suggested.
Harris shook his head dubiously.
‘They'd need all three, and then some.
I'll go along with some radical improvement to the turbo-ram-jet engine concept; perhaps a boost in top speed up to Mach 3.5, even 4 at a stretch of the imagination.
But this sub-orbital capacity…no, I can't see it at all.
Any winged craft has got to do better than Mach 5 to get into space.
We know the MiG-2s already set a ceiling record of 120,000 feet.
Even supposing they could have pushed that up to 150,000,160…we're still way off track.’
‘Some new form of rocket booster…detachable and expendable before re-entry?’
‘Or have the Ruskies finally invented the sky hook?’
Harris put in.
It was a joke, not meant cruelly.
‘You don't wear the rocket theory, then?’
Harris smiled gently, shaking his head.
‘I don't want to sound patronizing, Paul, but you're talking about a fuel-load/ power ratio which is just not feasible.
In strictly layman's terms, the amount of additional engine-weight and fuel that any supersonic aircraft could get off the ground would give a few minutes of sub-orbital time, if that.
It just wouldn't be worth it.’
‘Wouldn't it?’
Manville challenged.
‘Just think how much hardware we have up there, Mark.’
He jabbed his thumb at the ceiling to reinforce his point.
‘Supposing a couple of minutes is all these birds need?
A small squadron could make a series of relay runs, each programmed for a few specific targets.
In a matter of minutes, the Russians could completely destroy our entire SAMOS system of spy satellites.
We'd be blind and virtually defenceless overnight.’
Doubt flickered across Harris' face for the first time.
He considered Manville's objection seriously for some moments.
Manville saw his temporary advantage, and seized it.
‘It wouldn't be just the SAMOS system, either,’ he added.
‘I don't know exactly what we have up there, or what stuff we are likely to be sending up in the next few years…but I'll take side bets on orbital weapons, either ready or in the pipe-line.’
Harris glared at him angrily.
‘You know orbital weapons are specifically banned under the SALT agreement,’ he snapped curtly.
Manville grinned, pleased to see that he had the man rattled.
‘Come on, Mark…don't try to bullshit me.
I may  be a layman in terms of aero-space, but I know my own country and I know military thinking.
Just suppose such unspeakable treachery had been committed in Uncle Sam's fair name.
It would be a trifle embarrassing, to say the least, if these airplanes gave the Russians the capacity to take a little look-see.’
Harris continued to look both angry and worried.
‘You're treading on highly dangerous ground,’ he warned.
Manville took the hint.
‘All right, let's leave that.
Take a few facts.
Our major aero-space effort over the next decade is the space-shuttle system…right?’
‘Right,’ Harris agreed, grudgingly.
‘Then given the limited orbital performance of Foxbat, we face both observation and sabotage…still right?’
Harris was not quite ready to capitulate.
He fought back bravely to regain the initiative of the argument.
‘But this ‘orbital performance’.
I don't think we can accept it.’
Manville was not going to be put off now.
He smelled victory.
‘You're going back on the defensive, Mark.
We have already agreed that limited orbital time is feasible, and would have a purpose.
That makes it a real, live possibility, and one which cannot be ignored, surely?’
Harris shook his head again, but now without real conviction.
‘No, there are other factors — other hangups besides the fuel and weight problem.
Even if a human pilot could get those birds up there, he'd be flying on a kiss and a promise.
A winged craft isn't like a rocket, or a satellite.
It still depends on flow-patterns, even when the air is so thin as to be almost negligible.
Variable wing geometry would cut the dangers down a little…but there are still CATs up there which could tear anything like a conventional aircraft apart.’
‘CAT?’
Manville had not heard the term before.
‘Clear Air Turbulence,’ Harris explained.
‘You cannot see it, you cannot measure it by instrumentation, but there are incredibly powerful air currents up in the stratosphere which can move at anything up to 300 mph.
Imagine a craft slipping in to one of those in excess of Mach 5 and it would fold up like a paper dart in a wind-tunnel.
Add the dangers of  meteorite strike, burn-up on re-entry, compression blow-out, half a dozen other things…and each one of those planes and pilots might stand a one in ten chance of completing a three-minute mission and returning safely to base.’
Manville dismissed the entire string of objections with a bitter laugh.
‘No contest, Mark.
You're putting up candles in the wind now.
Since when did men matter?
If we're talking about World War III, even you and I won't get a look in.
For the fifteen minutes it'll take, the computers will be completely in charge.
A dozen flying machines and their pilots would be no more than a blip on a piece of magnetic tape.
Infinitely expendable — and infinitely worth sacrifice, under the circumstances.’
Harris sighed heavily.
‘My Christ, you're a cynical bastard, aren't you?’
Manville dismissed the words with an easy shrug.
They weren't really meant as an insult.
‘I'm a realist,’ he said flatly.
‘In my job, it's a prerequisite.’
He lolled back in his chair to light a cigar, displaying the carefree indifference of a man who knows he has won the day.
Eyeing Harris covertly above the flame of his lighter, he said: ‘Well?
Do I get your backing or do I not?’
Harris evaded a direct answer.
‘I can't guarantee anything, of course…’
‘Understood.
But you'll pressure the right people?’
Harris nodded.
‘Then I should think we're in business,’ Manville said confidently.
‘I'll wire HQ to open up phase two.’
‘Is that wise, at this stage?’
Harris queried.
‘I've told you…no guarantees.’
‘I have every confidence in you,’ Manville assured him.
‘Besides, it'll give Hayman something to get started on…find the right man.’
‘Will he, do you think?’
Manville laughed without humour.
‘That's his problem.
The main thing as far as I'm concerned is getting official approval.’
Harris was silent for a few moments, regarding Manville  quizzically.
‘You're really pushing this one, aren't you, Paul.
Why?’
With some surprise, Manville answered.
‘I always push, Mark.
Whatever it takes to get the job done.’
‘No, not like this.
This is something special.
I can tell.’
Still, Manville struggled to deny it.
He didn't fully understand why he had personalized this particular project as much as he had.
‘Nothing special.
I just don't like failure.’
Suddenly, Mark Harris understood.
‘I didn't realize you'd ever faced it,’ he said, quietly.
Lt. Mikhail Vologsky stared again at the buff-coloured application form, so meticulously filled out, and so callously rejected.
It had been returned to him almost exactly as he had sent it, with no covering letter or word of explanation.
The powers-that-were did not believe in explanation.
It pre-supposed question, active investigation into things which should not concern the individual.
The buff application form differed in only one important way from the half-dozen Vologsky had sent in the past.
This time, there was an added touch of colour upon it.
Beneath the black-printed legend he had become accustomed to, there was a further, even curter message, in official red ink.
In black — THIS APPLICATION HAS BEEN REFUSED.
In red, the colour of warning and danger — MATTER TERMINATED.
Vologsky seized the form, crumpling it into a ball in his palm.
In a gesture of helpless fury, he hurled it across the room.
Seeking solace, he stood and crossed the cramped living area of his two-roomed apartment and snatched up a bottle of Krepkaya, drawing the cork with his teeth.
Spitting it on to the floor, he raised the half-empty bottle to his lips and drank down the fiery vodka in great gulps, as if to drown the useless curses which rose in his throat.
The burning spirit failed to cauterize the icy chill of rejection in his stomach, or disguise the bitter taste of ultimate failure in his mouth.
Still, it helped a little, numbing-his anger until it was no more than a controlled resentment.
Vologsky finished the bottle off and slammed it down upon the table.
He walked to the small, single window and pushed it open, gazing up and outward into the night, at the friends he could never meet.
Pinholes in the sky, he had called them when he was a small child.
Now, as a man, he knew every prick of light by name, could identify each constellation and its individual component  stars.
In his head, he could recall the exact distance, in light-years and kilometres, of at least half a dozen of them, and even work out the travelling time from Earth at the equivalent speeds of tram, train…or rocket.
The vodka completed its insidious work.
The anger had turned to resentment, and now the resentment was replaced by maudlin self-pity.
The bright images of individual stars elongated and blurred into melting crystalline shapes as bitter tears pricked in Vologsky's eyes.
He turned away from the window abruptly, pulling himself together.
It was difficult to accept that a dream was finished for ever.
The past rejections he had been able to live with; there was always the hope that one day, sooner or later, there would be a vacancy for him within the Russian Space Programme.
Vologsky had constantly reassured himself that the repeated refusals were simply because his applications happened to be made at an inopportune moment.
By the law of averages, one such application must finally succeed.
Now, he was denied even that slim hope.
The curt red stamp on the returned application was a clear statement that any further correspondence would be regarded by the authorities with extreme displeasure.
Anger flared again to fill the void.
Why had they rejected him?
They had absolutely no right, no possible justification.
From any rational viewpoint, he was supremely qualified to train as a cosmonaut.
At the age of 28, Mikhail Vologsky was at his peak, both physically and mentally.
He was superbly fit, with the stamina of an athlete.
His small but powerful 5' 8’ frame was ideally suited to the cramped conditions of a space capsule, his body weight pared down to the absolute minimum for his build.
He had repeatedly demonstrated that he had a greater tolerance of G-forces than most other men; Vologsky could take a full three minutes longer in the centrifuge chamber than any other member of his squadron.
Under conditions where lesser men blacked out into unconsciousness, Vologsky could stay awake, alert, and able to manipulate delicate controls.
Mentally, he had a general IQ which was three points short  of the genius level, and in the specialized field of mathematics, was far above it.
From the age of six onward, Vologsky had been able to apply almost total recall to figures of any sort.
He had a natural affinity with numbers, and could work out complicated equations in his head at four or five times the average human rate.
On top of all these attributes, he was a superb pilot.
Given his abilities and his natural desire to go into space, it should have been a logical extension of his career to graduate from the Air Force into the Space Programme.
Yet he had been rejected.
Not once, but six separate times…and now he had been warned off for good.
There had to be some reason why, some factor strong enough to outweigh all his obvious qualifications.
It could not be political.
Although he lacked any deep personal convictions, Vologsky had always trod the path of least resistance, done the right things at the right times.
In his student days, he had been careful never to become involved in any radical movements, had joined the Komosol at the age of sixteen and become a card-carrying Party member before his 21st birthday.
There was nothing in his past which could conceivably cast any doubts upon his convictions or patriotism.
In his career, he had made satisfactory, if not spectacular, progress, was always suitably deferential to his superiors and fully conscious of the disciplines and limitations imposed by a military life.
Vologsky's sole transgression against the State and the system was his continued belief in the existence of God.
He dared to be a Christian, in a country which had supplanted religion with a political ideal, discouraging worship without actually suppressing it forcibly.
For an average man, a religious commitment would mean the faintest question mark against his character.
In Vologsky's case, as an elitist member of the armed forces, it might well be considered a serious crime.
Yet he could not believe that the KGB could have discovered his one small secret.
Vologsky was a Christian in his mind, it was a deep, inner conviction which he guarded jealously.
He had always been careful and discreet.
He never attended any public ceremonies, where the ever-vigilant eyes of the KGB could pick him out and identify him.
He kept no symbols of his religion to give him away to his comrades.
He needed no Bible to remind him of the life of Christ, and if ever he felt the need for a symbol upon which to concentrate his devotions, he satisfied himself by making the sign of the cross with his fingers.
When Vologsky prayed, he did it in silence and solitude.
Given that his secret was safe, what else could there be?
What was it about him which prevented the realization of his ambition?
As so many times before, Vologsky carne to the end of the mental games he played with himself, dismissed the last hopeful excuse for his rejection and came face to face with the lonely bitterness of reality.
He knew, in his heart, the words which were doubtless stamped upon his private file.
‘Psychologically Undesirable’.
The very essence of his character was against him, creating doubts and rumours which would always stand in his way.
Mikhail Vologsky was essentially a loner, in both the physical and spiritual sense.
He had no family, no sweetheart, no real friends.
Both his parents had died when he was only 15.
The soulless, impersonal State had reared him since then, putting him through higher education and choosing his career for him.
His adolescence and young manhood had occurred in a vacuum.
As he grew to manhood, Vologsky had accepted that state of being as both normal and even desirable.
Without relationships, a man could be a fortress within himself, dedicated to a career and a dream.
The dream was the stars.
The need to go into space, an extension of the comforting vacuum.
The military life had suited him perfectly, for within the confines of an Air Force Base, he could have companions without forming friendships.
He was surrounded by other people yet able to detach himself.
Taking orders without question removed the need to make decisions or involve himself with external matters.
Vologsky's personal fortress had never come under attack.
He was an island, self-contained and impregnable.
Such detachment could not, of course, go unnoticed.
It inevitably gave rise to speculation amongst his companions.
They could not understand a man who chose privacy rather than the comfort of comradeship and shared pleasures; who read books on mathematics and astronomy rather than drink in the mess with his fellow-officers.
Nor could they understand a young, good-looking man who appeared to have no interest in girls.
He kept no pin-up on his locker, he was never seen writing a letter of any sort, let alone a love-missive.
Vologsky shunned the ribald laughter of his fellows as they boasted about their sexual conquests.
He could not join in the telling of smutty jokes or the foraging expeditions for willing females.
Somewhere along the line, misunderstanding had bred resentment, and malice had crept in.
Vologsky himself became the butt for smutty jokes and innuendoes.
Rumours were born and spread.
Mikhail Vologsky was a strange one, a homosexual.
Vologsky slammed his fist down upon the table as the injustice of it all descended upon him again.
He felt the resentment building up in waves of pressure which threatened to burst his head open like an over-inflated balloon.
Everything was so unfair, so bitterly frustrating.
In the rigid and uncompromising structure of a society which constantly looked for negative, rather than positive factors, the faintest rumour was elevated to probable truth and doubt became a definite accusation.
The whole system was tainted with a self-destructive weakness, for in striving for absolute standardization, it rejected the individual and automatically branded him a second-class citizen.
In Vologsky's case, the very qualities which should have promoted him as a supremely efficient and dedicated cosmonaut turned and worked against him.
Somewhere, on a secret KGB file, a series of question marks stood against Vologsky's name and service record.
Without the slightest shred of evidence, those nebulous question marks stood out like warning beacons.
Mikhail Vologsky was not a typical young Russian.
He did not get drunk with  his colleagues, he did not share their dedication, even their ambitions.
It seemed likely that his desire to get into space was a personal one, rather than a blind urge to serve his motherland.
He might, conceivably, be indoctrinated with an obsolete religious belief, and he shunned company, including that of girls.
Resignedly, Vologsky faced the facts.
The State had classified and rejected him.
While the question marks remained, he would never be accepted as a cosmonaut.
While he wished to become a cosmonaut, the question marks would never be investigated from a positive standpoint.
He was boxed in by the final stupidity of total bureaucracy, reduced to a mere cypher in a computer which had been programmed to ignore him.
LEVITT ELEC CO PERSONAL ABRAHAM
CUCKOO LP. 86003
INTERIM REPORT TWO CODED TRANSMISSION CHANNEL ONE.
MESSAGE BEGINS STOP EGG NOW LAID AND INCUBATING NICELY STOP EXPECT HATCHING IN FEW WEEKS STOP SUGGEST YOU CONTACT AVIARY AND BEGIN SELECTING SPECIMEN STOP TUES 1100 EST STOP MANVILLE APD/ 3700925/WP MESSAGE ENDS
This time, Manville severely underestimated the speed of the positive reaction which followed his approach to NASA.
Just three days after he returned to Washington, Hayman sent for him again.
He was beaming with satisfaction as Manville was escorted into his office.
He leapt to his feet, extending a hand as Manville approached the desk.
‘Congratulations, Paul.
You've done a fine job.
I received official go-ahead this morning.
You surely must have put the fear of God into someone.’
In contrast to his superior, Manville looked glum, morose.
He merely grunted, nodding his head.
‘You'll want to get back to Aspen and your skiing now, I suppose?’
Hayman said.
‘Not really.
I thought there might be more for me to do on this project.’
Hayman's eyes narrowed, quizzically.
‘More, Paul?
You've completed an excellent assignment.
You've cleared official sanction for Operation Cuckoo to go ahead.
What more could you expect to do?’
Manville fidgeted nervously, chewing at his bottom lip.
Suddenly, he made up his mind, and threw the nervousness aside.
He stood, leaning forward to place his palms flat on  Hayman's desk, staring down upon the still seated man.
‘Let me go live on this one, Franklin.
Let me follow it through.’
Hayman sat back in his chair, staring deep into Manville's eyes and noted the intensity of feeling flashing in them.
‘Please,’ Manville pushed.
‘You know I can do it, Franklin.
You know what a damned good agent I was — still am.’
Hayman sighed uncertainly.
‘It's been six years, Paul.
You've been out of the field for six years.
Everything has changed…people, contacts, methods.’
Manville refused to be put off by the objections.
‘Nothing changes that much in this business.
I can soon pick up on the current contacts, get a good team together.’
‘No real need,’ Hayman muttered.
Manville's obvious enthusiasm was getting through to him.
‘We have the ideal man right on the spot.
Georgi Kirov…remember him?’
The name triggered off old memories.
Manville let them flood back, smiling wistfully.
‘Sure, I remember him.
The last time we worked together was in Prague, late Spring of ‘68…just before the Czechoslovakian balloon went up.
Christ!
Is that old fox still alive?’
Hayman also smiled.
‘Alive and kicking.
He's a good man.’
‘The best,’ Manville agreed.
He couldn't resist putting in a plug for himself.
‘You see…you can't beat a veteran when it comes to the crunch.’
‘Maybe…but veterans deserve a bit of R and R. Why this sudden desire to get back into the action?’
Manville sat down again, taking time to relax and frame his words carefully.
‘It's not sudden,’ he said, finally.
‘And I don't really think you need to ask why.
We went through the mill together, Franklin.
We both know how it was.
The only difference between us is that you have a wife and three kids.
They are the only reasons you content yourself sitting behind that desk now.
All I ever had was the job.
It's all I've got now.’
Hayman nodded thoughtfully.
‘Yeah, I guess I get a yen for the old days every now and again,’ he admitted.’
A family helps quell it.’
Manville played up the empathy he had established.
‘It  probably sounds like a B-movie cliche, but I married my country…and I still want to serve her.
Being a messenger boy just isn't where it's at.
It's not enough.’
‘I can't send you over the wall, you realize that?’
Manville shrugged.
He was willing to compromise.
‘OK.
I accept that.
Maybe I am a little bit past the fully active phase.
But you could give me this project, put me in charge of the entire operation — and let me see it through.
I can liaise with Kirov and any of his boys.
He trusts me, we got on well in the old days.
We're both pros.’
Hayman thought deeply for a long while before making up his mind.
‘All right, Paul…you've got it.
There's one thing, though…’
‘Give it to me straight,’ Manville insisted.
‘There's no room for friendship or personal favours in this business, you know that,’ Hayman continued.
‘I'm turning this project over to you purely because it is my personal opinion that you can do it.
Understand?’
‘Of course.’
Manville nodded.
‘If that opinion proves to be wrong, I don't carry any cans.
The buck stops firmly with you.
Do I make myself clear?’
Manville smiled wryly.
‘Very,’ he murmured.
‘But you don't have to play coy with me, Franklin.
I remember the old rules, the important ones.
I foul up, and I'm expendable — right?’
Hayman didn't bother to confirm the fact.
It was enough that both men understood the facts of the situation, and each other.
Opening his desk drawer, he drew out the current Operation Cuckoo folder, and in a calm, businesslike voice, got straight down to it.
‘I'd better  apprise you of the situation to date.
As of now, this operation is phase two status, active.
Kirov has already supplied us with a list of the elite Soviet squadrons equipped with the modified Foxbats.
There aren't many, as you might expect.
We are going to have to choose our bird from a very short list of names, none of whom are known to us, or have any political or  ideological weaknesses to play upon.’
Manville shrugged.
‘We could hardly expect to find a crack  Soviet pilot who is an open dissident.
Politics probably won't be the right carrot, in this case.
Knowing the way Kirov works, it might not even be a carrot.
As a back-up system, the big stick always had a lot going for it.
Kirov was always a master at inveigling innocents on to the wrong side of the system.
If he can't lure our bird out with a promise, he'll drive him out with a threat.’
‘Push or pull — who cares so long as the job gets done,’ Hayman put in.
‘It should be a plus factor that you know Kirov's methods, though.’
‘Sounds like we'll need all the help we can get.
I assume that you have already made some sort of shortlist from the names supplied?
Mind if I take a look?’
Hayman pushed the folder across the desk.
‘Go ahead.
It's your baby now.’
He paused while Manville opened the folder and drew out a typed list of names.
When he had had time to scan it, Hayman spoke again.
‘You will notice that there are virtually no service records or personal details.
I am making the assumption that Kirov will be able to fill in some of the blanks once we come up with a workable number…probably no more than three.
From the very limited data we have there, you'll see I have marked off five possibles with an asterisk.’
Manville checked the five marked names.
‘I'd cut that to three at once,’ he said confidently.
He pushed the list over the desk, turning it so that Hayman could read it.
He stabbed out two names with his forefinger.
‘We can cancel those two for a start.’
Hayman stared at him in bewilderment.
‘Why?
You don't know anything about either man.’
Manville grinned.
‘I know enough,’ he murmured, secretively.
Hayman shook his head.
He was lost.
‘Both born in the Ukraine, you'll notice,’ Manville explained after a few seconds.
‘Intractable bastards, the Ukrainians.
Bloody breeding ground for KGB men and members of the Politburo.’
‘A generalization?’
Hayman queried, sceptically.
‘An observation…from bitter experience.’
Manville was adamant.
‘I wouldn't trust one of those bastards further than I could throw him.
A Latvian, yes.
They're solid, dependable people, with a sense of humour.
The best bet of all would be a Georgian.
Natural rebels, backed up with the guts it takes to buck the system.
Kirov comes from Georgia, you'll notice.
Completely different outlook from other Soviets.
More Mediterranean than Russian in temperament.
And the women — they're something else!
Smouldering, dark-eyed beauties, wine in their bloodstreams.’
‘Personal experience?’
Hayman asked, lightheartedly.
Manville's face clouded over as he remembered.
‘Yes, once,’ he murmured distantly.
‘East Berlin, ‘49.’
Hayman leered suggestively.
‘One of the perks of the business?
Seduction in the name of the flag?’
Manville smiled sadly, almost forgivingly.
‘No, it was more than that.
I nearly defected for her, did you know that?
God, I was a hopelessly romantic bastard in those days.’
Hayman was intrigued.
‘What happened to her?’
Manville's brief memory exploded.
‘She was shot by the KGB,’ he said flatly.
It was obvious that the matter was closed, yet for some reason, Hayman felt compelled to say something, add some note of sympathy.
‘I never knew.’
Manville shrugged.
‘There are some things that never do get written into reports.’
He broke off, picking up the list of pilots once again.
‘Can I study this in depth for a few hours?’
‘Sure.
You'll want an office.
I'll have one placed at your disposal.’
‘Thanks,’ Manville said.
Who is the link-man to Kirov, by the way?’
‘There's no direct link,’ Hayman told him.
‘Kirov is too important to us to take any chances.
It's a three-man chain to make contact.
You need only know the first, who is Alex Raneleigh, based in Brussels.
It leaves a four to six day delay in communication, unfortunately, but it protects Kirov's cover.
In the case of an extreme emergency, a red alert, there is a method of getting a brief coded message to him directly  via Voice of America.
At exactly 2100 hours their time on Tuesdays and Thursdays, the DJ will relay any short coded messages in the dedication for the first record he plays on the ‘Lovers Overseas’ programme.
If you need to use that facility, and I emphasize that it is for emergency use only, your contact at Voice of America is Felix Klamin.’
Manville nodded approvingly.
‘Sounds like a nice tight little set-up.’
‘It is.
And I want it to stay that way.
Good people like Georgi Kirov are bloody hard to come by.
He is not one of our ‘expendables’.’
Manville rose to his feet, nodding understandingly.
‘I won't forget it.’
He began to move towards the door.
‘Shall I see your secretary about that office?’
‘Sure,’ Hayman answered.
‘Tell her to set up Room 403, for full scrambler equipment, and external telephone and telex communication connected into the central processor for monitoring.
Any hassles, get her to buzz me back for clearance.
Tell her you want that office fully operational by 0900 tomorrow morning.’
‘Right.’
Manville opened the door, pausing in the portal to look back.
‘And thanks, Franklin,’ he added.
Hayman snorted ironically.
‘For what?
Posting you back to the Alamo?’
Manville smiled in return.
With a faint shrug, he walked out, closing the door firmly behind him.
As the man's footsteps receded down the corridor, all traces of humour left Hayman's face.
He snatched up the green telephone on his desk and punched out an internal number.
The receiver gave out two faint clicks as the call was bypassed into the central monitoring system before being shunted through to the appropriate department.
‘Internal security,’ a voice muttered finally, ‘John Collins speaking.
Yes, sir?’
‘Job for you,’ Hayman snapped.
‘Top priority, immediate action.
Paul Manville is active again.
I want a full counter-security surveillance mounted on him at once.
I want his home and office bugged this afternoon.
But do it discreetly.
I've  allocated him to Room 403, with instructions for all communications systems to be channelled through the central processor.
However, I'd like an individual monitor plugged in as well.
When you've done that, I want his file removed from the records department and brought fully up to date for the ‘active’ unit.
Also please instruct records to make up a current personal dossier on Manville and all his known contacts.
You got all that?’
‘Yes sir.
I'll get onto it right away.’
‘Good.’
Hayman slammed the receiver back into its cradle and relaxed, knowing that he had done all which needed to be done.
He felt no sense of guilt in the betrayal of personal confidence.
As he had made a special point of emphasizing; there was absolutely no room for friendship or personal favours in this business.
Manville did not regard his surveillance as a betrayal of trust, either.
He both expected and accepted it as a matter of course.
Forewarned by his intimate knowledge of Hayman's standard tactics, Manville identified his tail less than three minutes after leaving the Levitt Electrical Building.
The knowledge that he was being followed sent a shiver of excitement through him, quickly followed by a flash of the old bravado, which had more than once, in the past, bordered on the foolhardy.
He changed taxis twice within three blocks, keeping a careful eye on the black Plymouth sedan which cruised sedately along behind both vehicles.
At one point, when the cab driver crashed a late amber light, Manville thought he had shaken off his pursuer, only to identify the vehicle a few moments later as it re-emerged from another side-street.
Manville nodded to himself with satisfaction.
The tail was good, but how good?
It seemed like an excellent opportunity to put himself to the test, see if his reflexes were as finely honed as they had been in the old days.
He leaned forward in his seat, tapping the cab driver lightly on the shoulder.
‘An extra ten on the fare if you'll do me a favour.’
The driver spoke over his shoulder.
‘Sure, buddy, what can I do for you?’
‘Take the next turn right,’ Manville told him.
‘As soon as you get round the corner, put your foot down for a couple of blocks.
When I yell, take the first available right again, drop me off quick and then keep right on going as fast as you like.
Don't stop or pick up another fare for at least another five blocks after you drop me.
Got that?’
The driver nodded.
‘I got it.
You want to pay me now?
The fare's six bucks dead.’
He reached back over his shoulder for the money.
Manville peeled off a twenty, tucking it into the man's palm.
‘Keep the change,’ he said generously.
‘Now, let's go.’
Manville glanced back at the black sedan as the taxi surged forward.
Caught off guard for a few moments, the gap between the two cars widened noticeably, before the cab screeched around a right-hand bend, losing it altogether.
The cab hit nearly sixty on the long stretch to the next set of lights.
Luckily, they were green.
The driver shot over the intersection and kept his speed.
‘Now,’ Manville yelled, reaching for the door handle.
The cab swerved in towards the kerb with a squeal of brakes.
Manville threw himself out, calling out as he did so.
‘Now get going.’
He dashed into the nearest shop doorway at the cab took off from the kerb again and accelerated away down the street.
Seconds later, when the Plymouth came screaming around the bend, Manville was safely observing it from the inside of a record store window.
He felt another little thrill as the car slowed and pulled in towards the kerb.
They were a good team, all right.
The old gag hadn't fooled them for a minute.
Manville saw the passenger jump out of the car and slam the door.
Losing no more than five seconds, the sedan shot away again in pursuit of the cab.
From his safe view point, Manville observed the pursuing agent closely.
He was young, maybe no more than 25.
Manville didn't recognize him.
It figured.
Hayman would be unlikely to choose anyone known personally to his prey.
The young man looked carefully from side to side.
Manville shrank back behind a display rack for a moment as his eyes moved towards the store window.
Peering out a few seconds later, Manville saw him turn and begin to stroll down the street.
He crossed the sales floor quickly, snatching up a large paper sack displaying the emblem of the store, and slipping a quarter to the girl clerk.
Hurrying to the door, Manville held the sack up so that it half obscured his face and walked briskly after the young agent.
Fifteen yards down the street, the man had come to an uncertain halt, his eyes searching both sides of the street for a glimpse of his prey.
He never even saw Manville coming.
Manville jabbed his knuckles in the man's back as he stepped up behind him.
‘Freeze,’ he hissed.
‘This is a .44 Magnum.’
The young man stiffened.
Manville lowered the paper sack and placed one hand on the man's shoulder, spinning him round.
‘You just got terminated, son,’ he said.
The agent looked into Manville's eyes sheepishly, saying nothing.
‘What's your name?’
Manville asked him.
There was no answer.
Manville shrugged carelessly.
‘OK, keep it to yourself.
I can check with Hayman in the morning.
You're for the high jump.’
The young agent decided there was no further point in trying to bluff.
‘You gonna put me on the carpet?’
Manville nodded.
‘Yep.
I'm going to recommend that you are taken off duty immediately and sent back for a three-month intensive retraining schedule,’
‘That's pretty rough.’
Manville smiled indulgently.
‘Not half as rough as being dead, son.’
He turned away and walked across the street.
There was a new spring in his step, a feeling of youthful zest stirring his muscles.
Manville felt good all over, in total control of himself and any possible situation which could arise.
It had been a long time since he had felt like that.
Too damned long.
Manville had pruned Hayman's original shortlist of five to just two names, and added a third of his own choosing from the original dossier.
The name meant virtually nothing to him, and a casual observer might easily have suspected that Manville had picked it out completely at random.
Only two facts were known about the pilot at that stage; his age, 28, and his birthplace, Tbilisi.
Manville was playing a wild hunch.
He had picked out the only Georgian-born individual purely on the strength of his personal feelings.
He jotted the three names down on a slip of paper with a gesture of finality and picked up the internal telephone, stabbing out the number for the code-room.
‘Give me the chief cryptographer,’ he said softly, as a woman answered the call.
There was a brief pause, before Emmet came on the line.
‘Yeah?’
‘This is Paul Manville, in 403.
I want to send a telex to Alex Raneleigh in Brussels.
What's his current code, please?’
‘Hold on,’ Emmet muttered.
Over the receiver, Manville heard the faint rustling of paper.
‘Here you are…code 15.
You want to draft out the message, or have me do it?’
‘Thanks.
I'll do it,’ Manville said firmly, hanging up.
He reached into his desk and pulled out a current code manual.
Laboriously, he began the complicated procedure of transcribing his intended message into apparently meaningless symbols.
Two hours later, when he had finished, Manville began to double-check it, by re-translating it all back into English.
He was damned if he was going to code the easy way, using the computer.
Manville only trusted himself, and to hell with the extra time manual effort consumed.
The message checked perfectly.
He studied the English copy for a few more moments before dropping it into the shredder.
ORIGIN PAUL MANVILLE, LEVITT ELECTRICAL.
DESTINATION BRUSSELS FOR EYES OF ALEX RANELEIGH ONLY.
INSTRUCTIONS FORWARD REQUEST FOR FULL DETAILS OF FOLLOWING SOVIET AIR FORCE PILOTS TO GEORGI KIROV.
ONE DMITRI PASSK, BORN KIEV 1943.
TWO NICOLAS SOLVETIOV, BORN LENINGRAD 1946.
THREE MIKHAIL VOLOGSKY, BORN TBILISI 1949.
REQUEST URGENT REPLY IN CODE SIX
Satisfied, Manville picked up the coded copy and headed towards the despatch room.
Once the message was on the wire, he had little else to do except sit back and wait for a few days.
Perhaps a quick trip back to Aspen was on the cards, after all.
Feeling the way he did, there was no bloody mountain on God's Earth which could daunt him now.
LEVITT ELEC CO PERSONAL MANVILLE
CUCKOO LP 86003
ORIGIN BRUSSELS STOP RANELEIGH
MESSAGE BEGINS STOP RE INSTRUCTIONS FROM AVIARY REGARDING THREE SPECIMENS STOP FIRST CHOICE UNSUITABLE AS HAS SECURE NEST AND TWO FLEDGELINGS STOP CHOICE TWO POSSIBILITY BUT KNOWN TO FLY CLOSELY WITH FLOCK STOP CHOICE THREE SEEMS HIGHLY PROMISING AS LONE BIRD WITH POSSIBLE MIGRATORY TENDENCIES STOP GROUND BAIT BEING LAID STOP WILL ADVISE LATER WITH FULL OBSERVATION REPORT STOP MESSAGE ENDS STOP MON 0800 GMT
Manville could not help himself gloating slightly as he digested the essence of the message.
His hunch had been right after all.
His own choice, Mikhail Vologsky, had proved to be the most promising candidate of the three.
It seemed to be a good omen.
Manville thrust the telex aside and turned his full attention to the more detailed report which had followed the preparatory message just four days later.
The speed and efficiency with which it had been delivered was impressive, and suggested strongly that Kirov had also worked largely upon intuition.
He had provided merely skimpy further details of the first two pilots, dedicating his greatest effort to building up a detailed profile of Mikhail Vologsky.
Dmitri Passk was a non-runner, with a wife and two children to hold him firmly to his homeland.
To attempt defection would be to sign their death warrants, and no man could be expected to do that.
Nicolas Solvetiov, the second choice, had no known family ties but was known to be a strong party man who toed the line.
He did not appear to be the type which could be persuaded to turn traitor.
Vologsky, however, was a very different  bird indeed.
Manville re-read his personal dossier with mounting enthusiasm.
Vologsky emerged from the mass of details as an almost archetypal defector.
He was young, brilliant and alone.
He had no parents, wife and children…not even a girl-friend who could be used as a weapon of enslavery against him.
He did not even appear to get on well with his colleagues.
He was a man who was isolated in his world, to such a degree that his immediate environment probably hardly mattered to him.
A man such as Mikhail Vologsky would be equally relaxed in Moscow or New York, Leningrad or Los Angeles.
His record appeared flawless, yet there was an inconsistency which grated harshly, leaving room for a lot of speculation.
Given his period of service, and his unblemished record, Vologsky should have risen well above his present rank of lieutenant, yet he had not.
It suggested that there was something about the man, some unknown factor which made him slightly suspect in the eyes of the authorities.
The powers-that-be were obviously a shade disenchanted with Lt. Vologsky.
It followed, logically, that he might easily reciprocate those vague doubts.
In terms of the job he had to do, Vologsky was a natural.
He was a superb pilot, with a singular, agile mind.
If any flier could steal a Foxbat and fly it to the West, Vologsky could.
But would he?
That, was the six-million-dollar question.
And what would be necessary to ‘persuade’ him?
If every man had his price, what was Vologsky's?
Manville thought back to his earlier conversation with Hayman, the discussion of the relative merits of the carrot and the stick.
Perhaps a combination of both?
Either way, it was Kirov's problem.
Manville had every faith in the Russian's ability to dig out the vital weakness in Vologsky's make-up which would turn him into a traitor.
All he needed was the go-ahead.
Accordingly, Manville took out his code manual and began preparing an official sanction for despatch to Brussels.
The elongated, slightly oval hummock could hardly be called a grave, more a burial mound.
What lay beneath it was totally unimportant, having lost all relevance to the world when the worms, the termites and the bacteria had converted the last shred of flesh into dust and left the dry bones to crumble.
Nevertheless, Alexai Ybreska gazed upon the weed-festooned mound with a beam of satisfaction.
To him, it represented life, not death.
A good life, at that.
Another successful task accomplished meant a further two thousand American dollars deposited in his Tel Aviv bank account, waiting for when he finally obtained his exit visa and could flee to the new homeland.
Kneeling, Ybreska carefully rubbed the $oil at either end of the grave, making sure there was no buried stone or marker which would identify it.
There was nothing.
The site was perfect in every way.
Ybreska glanced around at the crumbling ruins of the old, derelict church.
At night, perhaps, a few peasants might find their way here, congregating for worship like nocturnal pilgrims.
By day, the area was completely deserted.
The fields surrounding the churchyard had long ago been relieved from private ownership and lumped together into one huge collective farm.
The few small cottages which had once made up the village community had been bulldozed into the ground and their occupants moved into the grey and faceless high-rise apartment blocks of the new urban development.
Any farm workers who came near the site in the course of their daily work were too busy to lift their eyes from the soil to take in the surrounding landscape, or individual figures moving within it.
Yes, the grave would do nicely, Ybreska decided again.
He need look no further.
His Washington contacts would be pleased with him.
Find us a grave, they had instructed, Neglected, about ten  to twelve years old and completely anonymous.
In a quiet place, no more than ten miles from Tbilisi.
Find that, and wait for further instructions.
Ybreska had never thought of himself as an agent, or a spy.
Besides the fact that he was a Jew, he never even considered himself a dissident.
He did not want to betray Russia, or even abandon her, for any ideological reasons.
It was much simpler than that.
At an early age, Ybreska had seen through the myth and realized that money was the sole power which kept the Earth turning.
With it, life was good; without it, a struggle.
There was no need to struggle.
He thought again of the bank account in Tel Aviv, manipulating figures in his head and converting them into possessions and acquisitions.
It was a deliciously decadent daydream which stirred the blood, sending adrenalin pumping through his system.
With one last glance around him, Ybreska confirmed the fact that he was alone and unobserved, and stood up, wiping the faint smears of dirt from his hands.
He began to walk away from the burial ground, his heart surging with excitement.
It was all so easy, and so worthwhile.
Ybreska laughed, suddenly, the words of a popular Western song breaking on his lips.
Ybreska vaulted over the low, crumbling wall surrounding the old churchyard on to the rough pitted track which led towards Tbilisi.
A couple of hours' leisurely stroll would get him to the Georgian capital shortly before dusk fell.
He would meet Kirov and report his success.
Well before the evening really got under way, he would have a couple of hundred roubles in his pocket, to be converted into a night of vodka-drinking and celebration.
Despite these optimistic thoughts, and his excitement, Ybreska stopped singing abruptly as he began to walk along the track.
Such as it was, it constituted a public place, and he could no longer guarantee himself the seclusion and privacy of the deserted churchyard.
One did not sing forbidden songs, in English, in a public place.
Silent now, Ybreska fell into a carefully measured pace, without even realizing the strange irony of his suddenly  changed mood.
It was not in his nature to reflect overmuch on things.
He chose not to investigate the possibility that there might, after all, be other reasons why he wished to quit his homeland.
Georgi Kirov was waiting for him at the appointed place and time.
He stepped out from the dimly-lit doorway of a sidewalk cafe to greet Ybreska with no more than a curt nod of his head.
Falling into step together, the two men walked slowly and silently down Rustaveli Avenue, towards the open plaza where they could talk freely.
The plaza was a place for nocturnal meetings, although the majority were of a far simpler, far older kind than two men planning international espionage.
Young lovers strolled quietly beneath the trees, or sat together on the few wooden benches, daring to snatch the odd, discreet kiss or embrace.
Kirov and Ybreska walked among them, still saying nothing.
They were just two friends, enjoying the cool evening air, perhaps walking up a thirst before repairing to a beer hall.
Finally, when Kirov was sure that there was no one within earshot, he stopped, producing a packet of cheap Polish cigarettes from his pocket and offering them to Ybreska.
‘Smoke?’
Ybreska accepted gratefully.
‘Thank you.’
Kirov returned the packet to his pocket without extracting one for himself.
He produced a box of matches, scraping one into flame and cupping his hand around it as he offered his companion a light.
In the flickering illumination of the match, Kirov's lips moved.
‘You have had a successful day, Alexai Ybreska?’
He saw the excited, childish smile on the younger man's face and knew the answer.
‘The site you have found…it is perfectly suitable to our purpose?’
‘Perfectly,’ Ybreska assured him.
‘It is exactly what you asked for.’
'You are sure there is no marker…no signs that the grave has been tended in recent months?’
Ybreska shook his head.
‘No one has been there for years, I would swear it.’
‘Good.’
Kirov nodded with satisfaction.
‘Tell me the exact location, please.’
He continued nodding thoughtfully as Ybreska detailed the site.
‘Yes, it sounds ideal.
You have done well, Alexai Ybreska.’
‘And the money?’
Ybreska blurted out.
‘The two thousand American dollars?
It will be paid immediately?
Any day now, I shall obtain my visa.’
‘It will be paid at once.
I shall authorize it myself tonight.
You know that I always keep my word.’
‘Of course, Georgi Kirov,’ Ybreska whispered deferentially.
He paused for a moment before speaking again, when his voice took on a slightly wheedling tone.
‘But a few roubles now, eh?
On account?’
In the darkness, Ybreska could not see the sneer which curled his companion's lips as he answered.
‘Three hundred roubles, it is all that I can spare.’
‘That will be excellent,’ Ybreska murmured, hardly able to suppress his excitement.
He had not expected that much for such a simple task.
He heard the faint rustle of paper, then Kirov grasped his wrist and pressed a bundle of folded money into his palm.
‘Go now, Alexai Ybreska.
Do not attempt to contact me.
If there is another errand you can run, I shall get in touch with you again.’
‘Of course.’
Ybreska pocketed the money and began to move away.
He looked back, briefly, but Kirov had already melted away into the darkness.
Kirov gathered phlegm in his mouth as he strode away, spitting it onto the ground as a gesture of the disgust he felt.
He despised the little Jew for his grasping, mercenary manner, despised himself for having to use such trash.
In complete contrast to Ybreska, Kirov was a man of deep political and ideological convictions.
He loathed the repressive State and the system which it supported.
His heart cried out for his countrymen, forced to live grey, drab existences in a land  where there was no freedom and little truth, but so much potential beauty.
He was an activist by total commitment, and a professional.
He was an agent, not of the capitalist West, but of the spirit of human freedom.
His brief anger passed, and a wistful smile crossed his swarthy face.
No, it was not really disgust he felt for people like Alexai Ybreska; it was pity.
The system created them, forced their greed upon them.
They were helpless little flies stuck fast to a sticky trap from which there was no escape.
People like Ybreska were too afraid to have a commitment, even to openly express doubts.
Ybreska would not ever think of his little errands as subversive acts.
To him, they were something of an adventure, a small knock at the system which gave him the illusion of individual importance.
The minor tasks which Ybreska performed were of no real significance to him, merely a means of making a little extra money na levo — on the side.
But there was one more, all-important reason to feel pity for Alexai Ybreska.
Thus far, Kirov had received only a vague brief about his current project.
His limited activities to date had been confined to an uncommitted setting-up operation.
It was merely a process of putting out delicate feelers, testing the winds and establishing a rough but workable scenario to contain the plot.
Everything he had done was just window-dressing, unimportant in itself.
If and when the word came from Washington to advance Operation Cuckoo into the second, active stage however, things would be very different indeed.
It would immediately become a project of prime importance, far too serious to leave any loose ends hanging free.
Kirov knew only one way to work efficiently and safely — to always cover his tracks carefully behind him.
It was a question of survival, both of himself and the operation.
Once the project swung into motion, Alexai Ybreska became one of those loose ends, potentially dangerous, and therefore expendable.
At that point, Kirov knew that he would be forced to eliminate the little man, without a moment's hesitation.
Even if he did not do so by personal  choice, the execution would doubtless be ordered from Washington as a matter of course.
But such thoughts were negative, non-productive.
Kirov dismissed Ybreska from his mind as he strolled leisurely through the streets.
In place of the pathetic, unimportant little Jew, Kirov focussed upon the main character of the plot, the pilot, Mikhail Vologsky.
Now there was a man worthy of thought, deliberation.
It was not only the pilot's importance.
He was an enigma, a challenge, a man-shaped outline of a jigsaw puzzle, to be filled in piece by piece until a complete portrait could be seen.
Without that, Kirov was fumbling in the dark, Operation Cuckoo was only an abstracted idea.
Kirov assessed the scant information he had managed to accumulate over the last few weeks.
It was not much.
He knew Vologsky's age, his birthplace and the fact that both his parents had died under vaguely mysterious circumstances in the mid-sixties.
Hence the unmarked grave; still part of the window dressing.
Vologsky himself had no knowledge of exactly how his parents had died, or where their bodies lay.
The grave was Kirov's first contact point; a seed from which casual conversation and perhaps sympathy might be persuaded to grow.
Show a man his lost mother's grave, and you invoked deep emotional forces which could be played upon, manipulated.
Kirov had already prepared that preliminary, and it remained alone, and somewhat nebulous.
He needed more, several important pieces of the jigsaw puzzle before trying to establish direct contact.
Vologsky's political affiliations were unknown; like many young men, he was a Party member, yet did he carry the card out of conviction or as a means to an untroubled life and career?
That was of the utmost importance, and had to be answered quickly.
Vologsky's career itself posed further questions.
Had he chosen a military life through love of the Motherland, or had he been channelled into it by the State that had reared him?
Was he committed to the role of protector, or did he just love flying?
He was a Georgian by birth; did he, then, share the fierce nationalistic  pride of his fellow-countrymen, or had his orphanage moulded him into one of the bland, rootless vegetables who regarded themselves as Soviet citizens?
So many questions.
And no easy way to discover the answers.
When it came to assembling facts and details, the system was a formidable obstacle.
Russia was an information vacuum, in which questions were positively discouraged.
To extract a telephone number, one had to furnish the full name, address, exact age and birthplace of the subscriber in question.
To learn the departure time of a train, one had to pay 10 kopecks and consult a public information booth.
Frequently, Kirov wondered if his Western contacts had the faintest conception of how difficult his work was, under the vastly different circumstances which prevailed in the two societies.
Immersed in his thoughts, Kirov reached his small tailor's shop without realizing it.
Unlocking the door, he walked through the darkened workroom and slowly.
climbed the two flights of stairs which led to his cramped living area above.
Pausing outside his living room door, he switched on the hall light and crouched down on his knees.
He examined the bottom of the door carefully.
Three inches in from the portal, Kirov's keen eyes picked out the single human hair which he had fixed, with a smear of soapstone, between the door and the bare wooden floor.
It was still in place, a sure sign that the door had not been opened while he was out.
His home remained inviolate; his cover stood undetected.
He entered the room, crossing to the telephone.
He picked up the receiver and carefully unscrewed the ear — and mouth pieces, peering inside.
Replacing them both, he upended the main body of the telephone cradle and took a small screw-driver from a nearby drawer.
He removed the base plate of the telephone and examined the instrument's innards.
The telephone was just as it should be, with no bugging device to turn his private conversations into public knowledge.
It did not, of course, preclude a wire-tap upon the instrument, but then Kirov was too professional to use the telephone for anything  but legitimate business or private conversation anyway.
These simple precautions observed, Kirov relaxed and sat down on the edge of his small cot, smiling with relief.
Another day had passed in which he had remained safe and untroubled by the authorities.
It was a milestone in his life.
Every night was a milestone, and had been for the past fifteen years.
Day to day.
It was the only way a man in his lonely and dangerous profession could live.
Sooner or later, he knew, would come the tramp of heavy feet up the bare wooden stairs, the harsh pounding on the door and the imperious, loathsome voice of the KGB.
Then it would be over.
Death or the camps.
One and the same thing, really.
But not tonight.
Maybe tomorrow, or the day after that.
Maybe never, Kirov dared to reflect, in a rare moment of optimism.
Perhaps this operation would be the last, perhaps his Western masters would finally decide that the old workhorse had given his best and deserved to be put out in rich pastures.
And then…who could tell?
A comfortable little dacha in the peace of the countryside, perhaps, or a manipulated exit visa, a chance to get over the border and over the wall?
A dreamy smile crept over Kirov's face as he thought of Vologsky again.
How easy it could be for him — to simply sit in the cockpit of his Foxbat and fly to freedom.
A man would have to be an idiot to turn down such a chance.
Feeling hopeful rather than confident, Kirov lay back on his cot and fell into a deep sleep.
The Foxbat was barely cruising at 700 knots, at an altitude of 50,000 feet.
It was well over 2000 miles from home base, with no hope of returning there direct.
The aircraft was set on automatic pilot, leaving Vologsky little more than a passenger for the time being.
With the relaxed detachment of a man who has an implicit trust in his technology, Vologsky cast his eyes over the bewildering array of instruments which made up the control panel, taking note of the few facts he actually needed to know.
The fuel gauge read a little over half full.
Allowing for a 12% margin of error, that gave him something between eleven and thirteen hundred miles of flight at his present subsonic speed.
If he needed to gain a lot of altitude, or make a run for it, that figure could be more than halved.
The chronometer confirmed his flying time since the aerial refuelling over Omsk, tallying with the covered distance on the on-board computer.
It was also a reminder that it was nearly time to seek out his last visual co-ordinate and prepare to take over manual control of the aircraft once again.
Vologsky looked out of the cockpit at the sprawling terrain below.
He had a clear picture, for there was virtually no cloud cover, with only a few wispy strips of cirrus streaked like vapour trails against the reddish-brown groundscape.
It was an uninspiring view.
The vast tracts of sterile desert land were broken only by irregular patches of short, dry grasses or rough scrubland.
Vologsky was over some of the most useless and unwanted land in the world, where there was no rural life and many thousands of miles separated the few townships.
He smiled thinly, reflecting upon the scenery beneath.
Useless and unwanted it might be, but that did not interfere with its importance.
The majority of the vast Kazakhstan region was a no man's land, but it formed a deep buffer zone between the populated areas of the North-Western USSR and  the Mongolian deserts which gave way to the Chinese border.
It had to be constantly and carefully monitored, for if and when Chinese aggression ever carne in earnest, that was where the tanks and the missile launchers would be concentrated.
Such was Vologsky's mission today; to overfly the very Sino-Soviet border at Alma-Ata then cruise along the Sin-kiang border as far as the Turfan Depression taking photographic, radar and infra-red records.
The Foxbat's infra-red scanners, probing ahead, picked up Vologsky's visual co-ordinate first, identifying it as a large cold patch in the centre of the surrounding wasteland.
Vologsky adjusted himself in his flight couch, flexing his fingers before he gripped the control yoke again and prepared to switch the aircraft back to manual control.
Reaching to the control panel, he flipped the auto-pilot to the off position.
There was no sign, other than the winking of a small green light, that the aircraft that reverted to his control.
Easing forward on the yoke, Vologsky tested the change of control, putting the Foxbat into a gentle dive and taking it down to just over 45,000 feet.
Ahead, and slightly to his left, he saw the patch of blue against the desert and knew that he was perfectly on course.
Moments later, as Lake Balkhash slipped away below him, Vologsky made a minor adjustment and set the Foxbat on a course which would take it directly over the home missile bases at Alma-Ata.
With that destination a good thirty minutes of flying time away, Vologsky climbed to 60,000 feet and snapped on the auto-pilot once again.
He set about using the time to run a complete check on his detection and recording equipment.
A shrill bleep from the missile detection system gave him a brief forewarning that his aircraft was being scanned by radar tracking devices.
The system, automatically self-arming, clicked into frenzied activity, locating and cross-checking the radar sources and seeking out the placement of active missiles within an area of several square miles.
Fed through the on-board computer, the data was assembled and correlated in secants.
He was being scanned by his own people, and he had  been identified.
Accepting that the contact was friendly, the detection system shut itself down.
Vologsky took over control again, knowing that he must be within twenty miles of the outer warning ring around Alma-Ata.
To be completely safe, he activated his automatic call-signal which would be picked up on the ground.
It ensured that no trigger-happy missile controller would fail to observe the safety precautions and attempt a little target practice.
Moments later, Vologsky received a two-tone pulse signal over his headphones, followed by a brief message.
‘You are acknowledged, Timberwolf Seven.
You are clear to fly over the inner ring defence system.’
Vologsky punched out a sequence on the computer panel, which automatically locked him in to the local frequency.
‘Message received, Alma-Ata.
Am now breaking contact.’
He flipped the two switches which plunged the aircraft into total radio silence.
He was really on his own now, and in less than two minutes he would be flying over hostile territory.
As the last of the concrete missile silos of Alma-Ata slipped away beneath him, Vologsky made his final preparations for the mission proper.
He activated the aircraft's radar scrambling unit, switched on the moving map display and set the detection and recording equipment for fully automatic sequence.
The actual mechanics of the operation would take care of themselves.
All Vologsky had to do now was to fly the Foxbat across the Chinese border and bring her out safely again.
He smiled grimly at the thought.
All I It was a small word, but one with a wealth of meaning.
Thirteen per cent, the figure was.
Every pilot in his squadron knew it by heart.
The surveillance missions were frequent and regular.
Out of every hundred aircraft which ventured over the border, eighty-seven returned safely.
The rest were written off to the Chinese, who did not take kindly to violation of their air-space.
Vologsky squirmed in his flight couch, adjusting his position.
He took several deep breaths, preparing his mind and body for the disorientating shocks of passing through the  sound-gate and going supersonic.
He fixed his eyes firmly on the Mach-counter as he began to throttle up.
The needle crept steadily up to Mach .99 and hung there for several seconds.
Vologsky kept the power steady as he coped with the familiar, yet always unnerving, transition from sub-to supersonic flight.
The vague red haze swam over his eyes for a moment, then cleared.
The loose skin of Vologsky's cheeks and lower chin quivered under the increasing pull of the G-force and his entire body seemed to take on a couple of stone in extra weight.
The numbing effect of complete spatial disorientation blurred his mind momentarily before it struggled to compensate.
He was ready.
Vologsky throttled up gently, and the Foxbat shuddered through the sound-gate.
There were two minor shock-waves from the nose of the craft, rippling through the cockpit before being shrugged off by the surging momentum of the sleek fuselage.
Then, as the Mach-counter needle jumped over the centre position, Vologsky felt the last of the physiological discomforts as his body seemed to become suddenly weightless, oddly detached from his brain and reality.
The brief, irrational mental jolts quickly followed.
The plane was no longer controllable, flight was a scientific impossibility — it felt like a submarine ploughing through thick oil, rather than an aircraft knifing through  rarefied air.
At Mach 1.2, the Foxbat finally sloughed off the world of sound with a dull, ominous rumble, and Vologsky surged with new enthusiasm and excitement, happy to be in perfect control of one of the fastest flying machines in the world.
Accelerating up to Mach I.8, he took the Foxbat over the Mongolian border and began the first of his two runs down the Sinkiang-Uighur plateau.
So he was one of the eighty-seven I Vologsky congratulated himself as he streaked back across the border, his mission completed.
He flipped the radio switches on again and transmitted his call signal to the base at Alma-Ata.
His headphones crackled into life.
‘Welcome home, Timberwolf Seven.’
‘Good to be back,’ Vologsky acknowledged.
He was jubilant, in an unusually chatty mood.
‘I'd still rather be up here than down there, though.
You lads really are sitting in the middle of a hornet's nest.’
The radio operator's voice came back, shaken and uncertain.
‘You are on open transmission, Timberwolf Seven.’
The warning tone cut through Vologsky's ebullience.
He had suddenly made a serious error.
Any reference, however vague, to the Chinese arms build-up along the border was top secret, and highly delicate.
The Alma-Ata operator was nervous and embarrassed merely overhearing Vologsky's verbal faux pas.
Vologsky snapped off transmission abruptly.
With luck, the call might not have been monitored.
If the radio operator kept his mouth shut, the transgression might not get to the ears of his superiors.
He set a course for Omsk and cut in the automatic pilot, settling back to cope with the chain of niggling worries that his blunder had triggered off.
The arms build-up itself was very worrying indeed.
Vologsky had not monitored all his automatic recording, but he had seen enough to know that things were really serious.
The Chinese were massing huge displacements of heavy tanks and artillery all along the border.
The regular border clashes were rapidly escalating towards a full-scale offensive.
The missiles would come next; and from then on it would be a far lower percentage of surveillance aircraft which returned safely.
It was not a happy thought.
In Vologsky's squadron, each individual pilot fell due for such a flight every twelve days on the rota system.
But twelve days was a long time.
Too long to brood and worry about vague possibilities.
Vologsky forced himself to relax, shutting the matter from his mind.
There were more optimistic things in the immediate future.
After a ground refuelling at Omsk, he would have a two-hour rest period before flying on to his home base at Kharkov.
After debriefing, he was due for two full days of leave.
That was something to look forward to.
Georgi Kirov packed the small Moskvich van carefully.
Spreading a plastic dust-proof sheet on the floor of the vehicle, he lay two new rolls of fine Czechoslovakian serge cloth side by side, covering them with brown paper.
On top, he placed two more rolls of cheaper, coarser home-produced material and an oilskin pouch containing the tools of his trade — finely-honed shears, measuring tapes and a selection of threads and stainless steel needles, carefully graded in size.
A manual of current patterns and an album of stock materials completed the transportable tailoring business, and Kirov was ready to travel again.
Over the years, tailoring had proved a superb cover, and Kirov's specially cultivated clientele the source of much useful information.
Carefully, painstakingly, he had built up the travelling side of his business, to cater for the elite in the hierarchy of State power.
The small shop in Tbilisi was only a base, from which to order cloths and make tax returns.
Kirov did little actual business there, for he had deliberately priced himself well outside the common market.
Few ordinary citizens could afford to pay the 300 roubles which Kirov had set as a starting price for the most basic of suits.
Instead, he had directed his talents to bolstering the vanity of the military and the higher-paid members of the Civil service.
High-ranking officers were only too willing to pay vastly inflated prices for a little judicious alteration and improvement to their standard uniforms.
They would happily pay out princely sums for completely new garments made from superior imported cloths.
Important members of the KGB, the Politburo and the GRU walked about  resplendent in clothes finely tailored by Georgi Kirov.
Business was spread by word of mouth, a favour extended as bait for a favour to be returned.
It worked out well.
Kirov not only got to travel freely within military establishments and top security complexes, he was known and  respected by important public figures.
It offered a certain degree of protection.
Now, Kirov was putting all these advantages to work.
Hopefully, they would provide him with the opportunity to make contact with the pilot Vologsky.
He was on his way to the Red Air Force base at Kharkov, one of the main defences of Moscow and its environs.
That contact was now necessary and pressing, for Operation Cuckoo had advanced into its final stage.
Before preparing to drive off, Kirov returned to the shop and took one vital tool of his trade from its secret hiding place.
Shielding the small .32 revolver beneath his armpit, he ducked behind cover of the van's open rear doors and secreted the gun in a small concealed trap cut into the vehicle's floor.
Now he was fully prepared for both aspects of his profession.
Before leaving for Kharkov, there was the matter of Alexai Ybreska to conclude.
Ybreska waited impatiently near the abandoned churchyard for Kirov to arrive.
He paced the dusty road somewhat nervously, yet hardly able to contain the soaring enthusiasm in his heart.
He had news…news which would doubtless upset Georgi Kirov, and he feared the man's negative reaction.
Still, the aspect of that news which affected himself was uppermost in his mind, threatening to swamp such minor worries.
In the distance, Ybreska saw a vehicle approaching, throwing up huge dust-clouds as it bumped along the rutted track.
He glanced at his watch.
It could only be Kirov.
The man was always exactly on time.
Taking a few deep breaths to prepare himself for the encounter, Ybreska stepped into the middle of the road to meet his contact.
Kirov brought the Moskvich to a halt, recognizing Ybreska from a distance.
He peered out through the windscreen and side-windows, scouring the surrounding countryside.
It seemed to be completely deserted.
Calmly and methodically, Kirov climbed from the driving seat and skirted round to the back of the van, opening the rear door.
He took the revolver  from its hiding place, quickly checking that all the chambers were full, and slipping off the safety catch.
Satisfied that the gun was ready for immediate use, Kirov transferred it discreetly to his jacket pocket before turning and walking towards the waiting figure of Ybreska.
A loose end, Kirov reminded himself as he came close to the man.
Nothing more.
Identity did not matter, humanity was a side-issue, with no real relevance to the matter at hand.
Nevertheless, Kirov could not stop himself staring at Ybreska's face and feeling the sense of overwhelming pity once again.
He did not enjoy killing.
The gap between the two men had closed to a matter of a few yards.
Kirov's eyes continued to scan Ybreska's face, trying to probe the strange mixture of expressions which it displayed openly.
Ybreska seemed both excited ant worried at the same time.
He appeared jumpy and ill at ease, ready to blurt something out at any moment.
Perhaps the man was excited because he saw the chance of making more money, Kirov rejected, in the hope that reminding himself of the mercenary side of the Jew's character might make his job a little easier.
Casually, Kirov dipped his hand into the pocket, encountering the cold hardness of the gun.
They were face to face now.
Ybreska's lips trembled.
He stuttered out what he had to say.
‘Forgive me, Georgi Kirov…but I think I must disappoint you.
'I can undertake no more little errands for you.’
‘No, you cannot undertake any more errands,’ Kirov repeated, in a cold, dull voice.
His fingers curled around the butt of the gun, taking up a gentle purchase on the trigger.
‘Still, it is of no consequence now.’
The decision expressed, Ybreska could no longer restrain the happiness and excitement which welled up inside him.
The small obstacle which he had feared appeared to have been a groundless worry.
Kirov did not seem unduly disappointed that he could no longer help him.
Ybreska reached out with both arms to embrace Kirov by the shoulders, his face wreathed in a rapturous smile.
Kirov stepped back smartly, his senses alerted.
His finger tightened on the trigger.
His hand began to lift gently and slowly from his pocket.
Ybreska's extended hands embraced only empty air as Kirov moved back out of his reach, but it didn't matter.
His news was too important, too wonderful to be contained for a single instant longer.
‘It came, Kirov, it finally came,’ he screamed out exultantly.
‘My exit visa.
In only three days I shall be free to leave for Israel.’
Compassion hit Kirov in the gut, a cold, sharp feel of twisting steel.
It mingled, clashed with the equally cold sense of duty, the detached knowledge of what had to be done.
Kirov's eyes bored into the bright, expanded pupils of his comrade, seeing the joy of life and living which they rejected, and feeling the icy coldness of death which he bore to extinguish it.
There was a moment of terrible confusion and doubt, in which Kirov's body was frozen and immobile.
Then his hand began to move again, clearing his pocket
It emerged empty, to dangle listlessly at his side.
Knowing nothing, Ybreska continued to babble on excitedly.
‘Just imagine, Kirov, after all these years.
I can hardly believe my luck!‘
Kirov exhaled a long, shuddering breath.
‘You are lucky indeed, Ybreska.
How lucky, you will never know.’
‘So you see, I am happy, yet I regret that I can no longer be of any assistance to you,’ Ybreska murmured, ‘deferentially.
‘I told you…it is of no consequence.
You will be leaving Tbilisi soon?’
Ybreska nodded happily.
‘I leave for Odessa this very night My ship will sail in two or three days.’
Kirov found the speed of the man's departure something of a consolation.
He appeared to risk very little by letting him live.
‘I wish you every happiness in your new homeland, Alexai Ybreska,’ he murmured, with genuine warmth.
With that, he turned away and walked towards the waiting van.
Ybreska watched it depart in a swirling dust-cloud.
There was only one small patch of disappointment in his vista of  happiness.
He had expected some final pay-off, a terminal settling of accounts for services rendered.
Kirov the tailor put a last quick tuck in position and stepped back to appraise his workmanship.
He spoke through a mouthful of pins.
What do you think, Major?’
Major Tzann posed like a peacock, inspecting himself in a nearby mirror.
‘A little more shaping at the waist, perhaps?’
He could not fault the appearance of the almost-finished uniform, and he understood nothing of the tailor's craft.
Still, it kept civilians and lower ratings in their place to affect a certain degree of criticism.
Kirov nodded humbly, used to such posturings.
‘Perhaps you are right,’ he muttered.
‘It is not easy to hang a fine suit from shoulders so broad and straight as yours, Major.’
A slight smile of pride crossed Tzann's face at the discreet flattery.
‘It is a problem which has been remarked upon before,’ he lied.
Kirov crouched at his side, removing a couple of pins and replacing them in exactly the same position.
‘There now, is that better?’
‘Yes, much,’ Tzann retorted ‘I think you have it now.’
‘Good.’
Kirov stood, moving back a couple of paces.
‘Perhaps if you could be so good as to slip the jacket off, Major, we might complete the hanging of the trousers?’
‘Of course.’
Tzann divested himself of the jacket.
‘And then?
You can complete the uniform quickly?’
Kirov spread his hands, affecting a faint shrug.
‘A matter of two days at most.
Then I can deliver the finished uniform when I come this way again…perhaps in a week or so?’
Tzann clucked his tongue with mild exasperation.
‘It is not possible before then?’
‘The Major is in a hurry?’
Kirov enquired.
Tzann saw another opportunity to assert himself.
‘It is simply that I expected better service,’ he snapped.
‘I have an important function to attend in a few days’ time.
A matter of the utmost importance, you understand?’
‘Of course, Major,’ Kirov murmured deferentially.
‘Then  perhaps you could make a small room available to me for a few hours?
I have with me everything I require.
I would be happy to finish the uniform here before returning to Tbilisi.’
Major Tzann thought for a few seconds.
‘Yes, that would be possible.
I will arrange for a spare office to be placed at your disposal.’
‘Thank you,’ Kirov said.
He dropped to his knees, busying himself with adjusting the drop of the trousers from Tzann's inside leg and fighting the irrational and childish desire to jab a pin into his testicles.
‘Do you know Tbilisi, Major?’ he enquired, conversationally.
‘I have been there,’ Tzann said, off-hand.
He was a Muscovite.
‘A dreary little place, if I remember correctly.
Typically Georgian, like the people.
Surly, and far too fond of their drink.’
‘But fine pilots sometimes, eh?’
Kirov enquired, slyly.
Tzann took the bait.
‘Pilots?’
Kirov chuckled.
‘I am proud to say that one of our comrades is in this very squadron.
Mikhail Vologsky…you would know him, of course?
He is a fine young officer, I understand?
A lieutenant, I believe, unless he has been promoted.
It is some time since I heard news of him.
I was a close friend of his parents, you know.
Both dead now, alas.
A tragic accident some years ago.’
‘Vologsky?’
Tzann appeared to ponder, as though the name of a junior officer meant little to him.
Actually, he knew Lt. Vologsky well.
A typical Georgian, and no mistake.
Strange fellow, quite disliked by his comrades.
‘Yes, I have heard of him.
He is still a lieutenant, and quite unlikely to rise much higher.’
A sudden joke, at Vologsky's expense, occurred to Major Tzann, and he voiced it.
‘A great tragedy, in his case.
He had great dreams of rising very much higher indeed.
Into space, in fact.’
Tzann laughed nastily at the bitter witticism, inviting Kirov to join in, manoeuvring him into a betrayal of his countryman.
Kirov went along with it, laughing with apparent gusto.
‘Hopelessly ambitious, obviously,’ he put in.
‘It is only the  cream of our young manhood who can aspire to be one of our glorious cosmonauts.
That is why we lead the world.’
‘Indeed,’ Tzann murmured.
‘No, I'm afraid your Lt. Vologsky did not measure up at all.
Odd fellow altogether.’
‘Ah, well,’ Kirov sighed.
‘It is so often the case, Major.
Parents have such high hopes for their offspring and then they grow up to be a big disappointment.
Still, perhaps I shall get a chance to at least pass my regards to young Mikhail while I am here.’
‘I doubt it,’ Tzann said.
‘He is due for immediate leave, I seem to remember.’
He cut off sharply, aware that the statement had negated his earlier pretence of hardly knowing the young pilot.
‘Really?’
Kirov was not going to let go now.
He had learned some very important new facts, and it was now even more imperative that he make contact with Vologsky while the chance presented itself.
‘Then it is possible that he will be planning to spend some time in Tbilisi.
I might be able to offer him a lift.
The journey by train is not a pleasant one.’
He paused, allowing a slightly abject look to creep into his eyes.
‘I wonder…if I could presume, Major…to ask if you might ask one of his fellow officers if he is still on the base?
Perhaps they could tell him where I will be working.’
‘I'll see what I can do,’ Tzann grunted.
Kirov straightened, smiling slightly.
Well, that seems to take care of that,’ he said, regarding the superb hang of the trousers.
‘Now if the Major would be so good as to arrange a workroom, I can have the suit finished in a couple of hours.’
‘Yes, of course.
Wait outside please,’ Tzann snapped.
It would not be dignified to remove his trousers in front of the tailor.
He gestured abruptly to the door, dismissing the man.
Kirov moved towards it, smiling deferentially.
‘Thank you, Major Tzann.
You have been most considerate and co-operative,’ he muttered.
‘Most co-operative.’
There was a gentle tap on the door.
Kirov glanced up from his sewing, calling softly: ‘Come in.’
The door opened.
Kirov looked at the young Lieutenant  who stood framed in the portal, regarding him uncertainly.
‘There was some kind of message…something about a man from Tbilisi…?’
It was time for direct, positive action.
Kirov ran across the room, beaming with pleasure.
He embraced Vologsky in a bear-hug, then stepped back, as though admiring him.
‘Can it possibly be young Mikhail?
Such a strong, fine young man.
The years have been kind to you.’
Vologsky's dark eyes reflected his puzzlement.
He could not understand the familiarity of the elderly stranger, who gazed at him with the pride of a long-lost brother.
Kirov left no time for the surprise to breed doubt, and then mistrust.
Acting with the flair of a seasoned thespian, he forced tears into his eyes as he spoke again, in a quavering voice.
‘I would have hardly recognized you, Mikhail…such a man you have become.
God knows, dear Kataya would have been so proud of you.’
Vologsky flinched visibly at the mention of his dead mother's name.
His lips trembled.
‘You speak of my mother…yet I do not know you…’
Kirov allowed his face to fall, smitten with hurt and disappointment.
‘Can it be that you do not remember me, Mikhail?’ he pleaded.
‘I who used to push you upon the swings in the Lenin Plaza?’
Kirov took a couple steps back, keeping up the look of rejection before allowing his face to clear.
‘But of course, it is a long time.
I have grown old…these time-ravaged features of mine are lined and disfigured with the years.
You were no more than a boy the last time I saw you…twelve, thirteen at the most.
Leonid never brought you to the house after the troubles began.’
The dropping of his father's christian name rocked Vologsky anew.
He spoke in a hushed, awed whisper.
‘You were a friend of my parents?’
The tears pricked in Kirov's eyes again.
He laughed bitterly.
‘A friend, Mikhail?
Ah yes, a friend indeed.
Can it really be that you do not remember?’
Vologsky was tormented beyond endurance.
He struggled to remember the sad old man, picture him as a part of his  half-forgot-ten childhood.
It seemed callous to hurt him so, and a terrible rejection of his dead parents to have forgotten a friend who had obviously loved them both very much.
His mouth twitched uncontrollably, tom by conflicting emotions.
‘Forgive me,’ he managed to mutter weakly.
‘As you say…the years make strange changes in us all.’
Kirov nodded weakly.
‘But never mind, Mikhail.
It is so good to see you anyway.’
He fell silent, continuing to regard the young pilot with deep fondness.
Vologsky spoke again, uncertainly.
‘You spoke of my father…before the troubles began.
I do not understand.’
A look of terror flashed across Kirov's face, the terror of having committed an indiscretion.
He pressed a finger to his lips urgently, shaking his head.
‘A slip of the tongue,’ he blurted out, in a shaken voice.
‘It was the excitement of seeing you again so unexpectedly.’
Vologsky was puzzled even more, but he took the hint.
Somehow, the old man had let out a dangerous secret, one which could not be discussed in a room on an Air Force base.
It seemed to concern his father and the stranger, and as such, must be of the most terrible importance.
Containing his curiosity for the moment, Vologsky smiled and adopted a more casual tone of voice.
‘You are busy.
Perhaps I should come back later, when you have finished your work.
We might take a walk together.’
Kirov nodded, smiling.
To any Russian, the phrase ‘taking a walk’ had a second, more important meaning.
It meant the freedom to talk freely, discuss matters which could not be voiced within four walls.
In Russia, most walls had ears.
On a military base, they could have eyes as well.
‘I will be finished in a matter of half an hour, Mikhail,’ Kirov murmured.
‘Then I shall be driving back to  Tbilisi .
I thought you might care to join me, spend your precious leave in the place of your birth.’
Vologsky did not hesitate to even consider the matter.
He nodded enthusiastically.
‘That would be a wonderful idea,’ he said.
‘It will take me a while to get my travel permit stamped.
Then I will be free to go.
Perhaps I should rejoin you here when you have finished?’
‘These troubles you spoke of…what did you mean?’
Vologsky asked, when the Kharkov air-base was many miles behind them.
Kirov looked across at his passenger, an uncertain flicker in his eyes.
‘It is not easy for me to talk of such things to you,’ he murmured, a trifle hesitantly.
‘I do not know what sort of a man you have become, Mikhail, and you say that you do not remember me.
The matter crosses delicate and dangerous ground, and it might be better for us both if it remained unexplored.’
Vologsky hastened to reassure him.
‘Please forgive me for not remembering you, Georgi Kirov.
As you say, I was little more than a boy.
But the fact that you were a close and dear friend to my parents gives us a close bond, nevertheless.
I give you my sworn word as my father's son that I would never betray any trust you placed in me.’
‘Ah.’
Kirov nodded abstractedly.
‘I trusted Leonid with my life, Mikhail.
I can do no more for his memory than to extend that same faith to his son.’
Kirov broke off to slip the Moskvich out of gear, allowing the van to cruise to a halt by the roadside.
He switched off the engine, then turned in the driving seat to face Vologsky.
‘Do you know how and why your parents died, Mikhail?’
Vologsky shrugged.
‘It was always a little vague.
An accident…a factory explosion,’ he murmured.
‘There were many deaths.’
Kirov smiled wistfully.
‘Yes, it is as I thought,’ he mused.
‘The truth was kept from you…perhaps for your own protection.
Maybe it would do you no service to face it now.’
Vologsky reached out, gripping his arm.
‘I have the right to know how my mother and father died.’
Kirov paused for a while, appearing to think deeply.
Finally, he sighed heavily and continued speaking.
‘Your parents’ death was no accident, Mikhail.
They were shot down in cold blood with their friends, by the KGB.’
Vologsky was stunned.
‘Murdered?
Why?’
‘Your father was a brave man,’ Kirov went on.
‘He dared to feel, as many of us did, that the people of Georgia were receiving a bad deal from the Kremlin.
We produced much wealth, a great deal of food…yet the peasants starved, the State coffers were poured upon the people of Moscow, Leningrad, the Siberian wastelands.
We were a group…
I suppose you would call us dissidents.
We had vague, idealistic dreams of obtaining strength and prosperity for our Georgian homeland.
Alas, the Kremlin did not like it.
We were marked for extermination, like so many rats.
They hunted us, infiltrated us, and turned friend against friend.
Finally, the KGB assassinated a dozen members of our group as a warning to the others.
Your mother and father were among them.’
Vologsky sat, shaking, in silence.
Several minutes passed.
Kirov said nothing, content to sit back and let the full impact of his well-constructed lie sink in.
Finally, Vologsky spoke, with a quaver in his voice.
‘Were you there, Georgi Kirov?
Did you see my parents die?’
Kirov nodded sadly.
‘Yes, I saw them die, Mikhail.
More than that…
I buried them.’
Vologsky suddenly exploded into action.
He almost threw himself across the van, grasping Kirov firmly by both shoulders.
His voice rose in a shout.
‘You know where my parents are buried?’
Kirov nodded.
‘An unmarked grave, I'm afraid.
It had to be that way.
But in consecrated ground, at least,’ he added, as a consolation.
‘They had a priest?’
Vologsky queried.
‘They received the last rites and a blessing?’
Kirov smiled thinly, nodding gently.
‘They went to their maker blessed,’ he murmured.
‘It was the least I could do for them.’
Vologsky's turbulent emotions broke at last.
He hugged the old tailor to him, kissing his cheek while the tears rolled from his eyes.
‘God bless you in turn, Georgi Kirov,’ he sobbed.
‘I am forever in your debt.’
Kirov detached Vologsky's arms from around his neck.
He  shook his head slowly.
‘You owe me nothing, Mikhail.
It is I who owed them everything.
Your mother and father died without betraying me.
Doing so might well have saved them.’
‘Will you take me…to the grave?’
Vologsky asked.
‘Of course,’ Kirov murmured gently.
‘It is only a few miles outside Tbilisi.
We will stop there on the way and I will leave you for a while to pay your respects.’
He started the van's engine again.
Vologsky fell back weakly into his seat as the vehicle lurched into motion.
He felt drained, absolutely shattered by the enormity of all he had learned.
He could not talk any more.
There was already too much to be assimilated, considered.
Kirov was happy with the silence.
It gave him relief from the tension of sharing the young man's terrible anguish.
He felt some shame in digging up long-dead ghosts to torment Vologsky, and a sense of moral wrong in telling him such a bundle of blasphemous untruths.
But Kirov felt a certain pride in the efficiency of his work; and the end it would achieve.
The entire plot had worked even better than he had dared to hope.
It was lucky for him that Vologsky was such a sensitive, highly emotional individual.
Confident that he was well on the way to final success, Kirov drove silently towards the abandoned churchyard.
LEVITT ELEC CO PERSONAL MANVILLE
CUCKOO LP 86003
ORIGIN BRUSSELS STOP RANELEIGH
MESSAGE BEGINS STOP BIRD IN HAND STOP AVIARY CONFIRMS SPECIMEN IDEAL BUT WILL REQUIRE SOME WEEKS FOR TRAINING PRIOR TO MIGRATION STOP SUGGEST YOU BEGIN FEATHERING NEST IN SUITABLE HABITAT TO FACILITATE LAYING OF EGG STOP SPECIES OBSERVED TO LIMIT MIGRATORY FLIGHTS TO 2000 MILES WITHOUT REST FOR FEEDING STOP THIS FIGURE NOT ALLOWING FOR ATTACKS FROM PREDATORS SO MUST BE CONSIDERED ABSOLUTE MAXIMUM STOP PLEASE ADVISE SOONEST STOP MESSAGE ENDS STOP WED 0900 GMT
LEVITT ELEC CO PERSONAL MANVILLE
CUCKOO LP 86003
ORIGIN ANKARA TURKEY STOP ANDERSEN
MESSAGE BEGINS STOP ORNITHOLOGY REPORT SUGGESTS SWEDEN DENMARK AND FINLAND TOO COLD AT PRESENT TO OFFER SAFE REFUGE FOR MIGRATING SPECIMEN STOP THERE COULD BE A WARM NEST HERE HOWEVER AND AM INVESTIGATING STOP HOWEVER NESTING MATERIALS EXPENSIVE HERE SO WILL NEED CLEARANCE FOR APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS STOP SUGGEST 250000 WOULD SET UP THRIVING BIRD PROTECTION SOCIETY STOP PLEASE CONFIRM THIS COURSE STOP MESSAGE ENDS STOP FRI 1730 GMT
Manville put the contents of the two messages together and congratulated himself that things seemed to be going so well.
Georgi Kirov was not a man to be overtly optimistic.
If he considered Vologsky to be an ideal choice, then he could have  few doubts about his ability to persuade the pilot to defect.
Manville opened his desk drawer and pulled out a large-scale world map and spread it out.
Setting a pair of compasses to measure a distance of exactly 2000 miles, he fixed the point squarely on the Russian township of Kharkov and inscribed a full circle.
Within that pencilled circle lay the theatre of operations.
Allowing for a margin of error in fuel reserves, and for a certain degree of defensive manoeuvring to avoid missile sites and aircraft intercepts, 2000 miles was the maximum distance the Foxbat could cover without re-fuelling.
The eventual landfall of the aircraft could only be within that limited area.
It was a pity that none of the Scandinavian allies were willing to co-operate with the scheme.
Finland would have been an ideal landing site.
Still, Manville could easily understand the unwillingness.
The Finns were not the most adventurous of people under any circumstances, and courting trouble with the Russians was a highly dubious enterprise.
When an ant shares a common border with an elephant, it makes a lot of sense for the insect to stay well clear of the animal's footsteps.
Turkey would do as an alternative.
In some respects, it was a safer bet.
The fugitive plane would be headed directly away from the massive missile defence systems which ringed Moscow and Leningrad.
Once over the Black Sea, the aircraft would hopefully quickly get out of range of most of the land-based missile sites, and the only danger would come from the Soviet Navy.
Current intelligence suggested that there were only two missile-bearing submarines of the Juliette class operating in the area, although there was no information as to their exact complement of SAMs.
As far as surface craft went, upwards of five Kara or Kresta II cruisers could be deployed, armed with SA-N-3 systems for Goblet missiles.
It was a formidable threat, but not insurmountable.
If the reports on the Foxbat's speed and defence capabilities were anywhere near correct, the aircraft should be able to evade any naval attempts to bring it down without much trouble.
The more he considered all the aspects of the matter, the  more Manville came around to the view that Turkey was the best possible choice of all.
The fact that certain palms would have to be greased to the tune of $250,000 was a minor matter.
The sum was chicken feed, and the more governmental corruption that went on there, the better.
It kept them busy.
Turkey it would be, then.
The word was go.
Manville unlocked his security drawer, took out the master file for Operation Cuckoo and stamped CONDITION RED on its cover.
The single, simple action was all it took to move what had once been just a concept into the final stage of action.
All that remained was to issue specific orders for action to Kirov in Russia and Phil Andersen in Turkey.
Manville busied himself preparing the messages for despatch.
ORIGIN PAUL MANVILLE, LEVITT ELECTRICAL.
DESTINATION BRUSSELS FOR EYES OF ALEX RANELEIGH ONLY.
OPERATION CUCKOO CONFIRMED ACTIVE.
FORWARD OFFICIAL CLEARANCE TO AVIARY.
EXACT NESTING SITE TO BE CONFIRMED LATER THROUGH EMERGENCY RADIO CHANNEL.
CONFIRM IN CODE SIX.
ORIGIN PAUL MANVILLE, LEVITT ELECTRICAL.
DESTINATION TELFAX COMPONENTS LTD, ANKARA, TURKEY.
PERSONAL PHIL ANDERSEN.
CONFIRM NEST BUILDING PROJECT.
FUNDS BEING TRANSFERRED FROM SPECIAL SERVICES DEPT.
CONFIRM WHEN AGREED YOUR END.
TIMING TO BE FIXED LATER.
They were ready.
‘Space, Mikhail?
That is a very strange ambition for a young man.
Cold, lonely, unknown.
When I was your age, the moon and the stars were things to kiss a sweetheart under, not crawl about on in cumbersome suits and strange machinery.’
‘You mock me, Georgi Kirov,’ Vologsky muttered, but it vas said in a friendly, chiding voice rather than as a rebuke.
It was their third meeting.
Major Tzann had been highly impressed with his new uniform.
He had persuaded two fellow-officers to follow his example and take Kirov as their personal tailor.
It gave Kirov the ideal opportunity to return to the Kharkov air-base and, of course, to see Vologsky.
Vologsky had never seen a need to question Kirov's authenticity, or to probe him for details of his mother and father.
Almost without question, he had accepted Kirov as something like an uncle.
Vologsky's need to feel that he was not alone in the world had lain dormant for a long time.
Nevertheless, Kirov had discreetly continued to drop vague references, recall some fictitious anecdote concerning Vologsky's parents.
Kirov played a subtle, but insidious game, never heavy-handed.
The bond between the two men had been established quickly, but was being strengthened with slow, deliberate precision.
Now, Kirov had moved into a secondary stage, manipulating every conversation so that apparently casual words left just the subtlest hint of something else unsaid, yet implicitly suggested.
The current discussion of Vologsky's ambition was no exception.
Kirov took up the conversation again.
‘You're living in the wrong country, that's the trouble,’ he said, grinning broadly as he spoke.
Vologsky's face clouded for a second.
Even as a joke, such a slur was indelicate, to say the least.
‘To go into space,’ Kirov added, quickly.
‘It is only the Americans who continue to waste their time and money sending  their expensive toys beyond the stars, collecting useless rocks from the moon.
We Russians have our feet firmly on the ground.
We chose to opt out of that pointless race to nowhere.’
Vologsky shrugged.
‘Perhaps you are right.
I still think that there are valid scientific reasons for continued exploration, however.’
Kirov laughed.
‘You seek to justify, Mikhail.
I think all you would-be spacemen are just little boys at heart, wanting to play an elaborate game.
Perhaps you should go to America.
There all the men remain little boys until their dying day.’
‘Now you are mocking me,’ Vologsky murmured, with a slightly embarrassed smile.
‘No.’
Kirov became serious, adroitly changing the course of the conversation.
‘Perhaps I mock the world in general, if I mock at all .
Often I reflect that we live in crazy times, Mikhail, under crazy circumstances.’
‘Crazy?’
Vologsky prompted.
Kirov smiled sadly.
‘Do you not think it insane that Man shrinks from his Maker?
That now, when perhaps we need Him most of all, we allow ourselves to be weaned away from He who gave us life?
Our churches and cathedrals rot while we build dams and factories to worship as objects.
Instead of the inspired word of priests, we listen to the advice of party leaders, masters of war.
It is not right, Mikhail, that we should be driven from our roots in this way.
A man should be free to believe in what he knows to be good, or right.
How can there be freedom, when people such as your father and mother are murdered for believing in something?’
Vologsky was stunned.
He could only murmur, weakly.
‘I had no idea…’
Kirov laughed, a little bitterly.
‘That I was a dissident?
A heretic?
Ah, well, if that is a label they have to place upon me, then perhaps I should wear it with pride.
I feel only that we have taken a wrong direction somewhere, and are blindly stumbling on because our leaders blindfold us.
I do not think it wrong for a man to open his eyes, look around him and consider that there might be other roads upon which to travel.’
He broke off, squinting at Vologsky.
‘I shock you?’
Vologsky shook his head slowly.
‘Surprise me, perhaps.
But no, I am not shocked.
Since I learned about my parents, my thoughts have been troubled also.
It is easy to hate the blind arrogance of power, when it destroys that which is loved.’
As he spoke, Vologsky glanced about him nervously, yet with a strange, enigmatic smile on his lips.
It was as if he had released some dark and terrible secret which had been boiling within him.
By releasing it into the world, he relieved himself and taunted the fates to punish him.
It was, essentially, the delight of a child exercising his powers of defiance, flexing his latent powers of adulthood.
Kirov noticed it, and he had to control his elation.
His calculated gamble had paid off.
By opening himself, he had forged another bond, which drew Vologsky out of his safe, ordered shell and-exposed him to the ravages of unrestrained speculation.
By forcing the man to admit hate for one tiny part of the system, Kirov opened the mental floodgates for doubts about the whole to pour in.
Kirov fell silent, knowing that he had said enough for the time being.
The two men continued to stroll leisurely around the perimeter fence which separated the living quarters and parade grounds of the air-base from the restricted areas of the hangars and control tower.
After a while, Vologsky spoke again, hesitantly.
‘Can I ask you a personal question?’ he said to his companion.
Kirov's eyes twinkled.
‘You can ask, but I might not be free to give you a truthful answer.’
‘This Georgian movement…which my father and mother died for…is it still active?’
‘Perhaps.
Who knows?’
Kirov answered, defensively.
Again, he aimed to draw Vologsky further out into dangerous territory.
‘I think you know.’
Vologsky committed himself with the flat statement.
‘Ah.’
It was Kirov's turn to be enigmatic.
He nodded to himself, saying nothing.
‘You refuse to answer me?’
Vologsky pressed.
Kirov shrugged.
‘I told you, I might be free to answer you truthfully.
As I said earlier, under the circumstances which prevail, no one is really free.’
Vologsky was too deeply enmeshed now to be put off by Kirov's vague evasions.
Doggedly, he pursued the matter.
‘But surely, if the movement still exists, I ought to know more about it?
I would owe that to my father…to try and understand something which he believed in enough to die for?’
Kirov regarded him sadly.
‘It is not enough, Mikhail.
A sense of guilt, of filial duty, that is a whim, not a commitment.’
Vologsky bristled with indignation.
‘You insult me, Georgi Kirov.’
Kirov looked apologetic.
‘I am sorry, Mikhail.
It was not intended.’
He stopped dead in his stride, regarding the younger man closely.
‘Surely you must realize that I have placed myself in a difficult position?
I have said far more than I should have already today.
I embarrass us both.’
‘Yes.’
Vologsky's brief anger subsided.
‘I also realize that I am presuming upon you.
I have no right to tax you with such indelicate questions.’
Kirov spread his hands in a gesture of frustration.
‘Right, Mikhail?
Every man has the right to question, to demand truths.
In this case, you perhaps have more right than anyone.
If it were purely up to me, I might well feel disposed to tell you everything you wanted to know.’
Vologsky stared at Kirov in puzzlement, thinking deeply.
Finally, he spoke.
‘I cannot quite understand, Georgi Kirov.
You seem oddly ambivalent in your attitude.
I sense that you neither wish to drop this matter, or to pursue it.
If I persist in pressing it, I am not sure whether I anger or please you.’
Kirov smiled.
‘You are a very perceptive young man, Mikhail.
I am only too well aware of this ambivalence.
Unfortunately, there is little I can do about it.
It is not a question of you and I. Others are involved.
I cannot speak for them.’
The answer failed to satisfy Vologsky.
He became increasingly agitated.
‘Which, then?’ he demanded petulantly.
‘Do you play with my feelings?’
Kirov's face was a study in sympathy.
He played his difficult role superbly.
‘Mikhail…we are still comparative strangers, but I would have hoped you already knew me better than that.
I would not dream of toying with you.
It is not my way.
It is just that, for a normally cautious man, I feel dangerously out of my depth in this situation.
You make me say things which should remain unsaid, you pressure me on an emotional level which I find difficult to control.
There is so much of your father in you, Mikhail…it is like finding an old and dusty mirror in the attic and finding that it reflects only the past.’
‘Words.
Meaningless images clothed in words.
I am my father's son yet you will not trust me.
I ask only a simple question, which does not entrap you in any way.
Does the movement still exist?’
Kirov sighed deeply, appearing to give in against his will.
‘Yes, it exists,’ he murmured.
‘Now, are you satisfied?’
‘For the moment,’ Vologsky answered.
‘I thank you, Georgi Kirov, for your help.
I will not presume upon your friendship any further.
The subject is closed.’
‘Is it?’
Kirov had the look of a man hopelessly trapped in a maze.
‘I read your thoughts, Mikhail.
You intend to investigate further on your own.’
Vologsky did not attempt to deny it.
He merely retreated to a defensive, defiant position.
‘And if I did?’
Desperation showed in Kirov's expression.
‘It would be dangerous.
You could well place us both in peril.’
He broke off to gesticulate hopelessly with his hands, expressing final despair.
‘There, you see.
You have trapped me completely.
Yes, I am still deeply concerned with the movement.
I am still an activist.
Now you know.’
Vologsky spoke slowly and thoughtfully.
‘I do wish to know more about it.
Will you help?’
The reply came as a whisper.
‘Yes, I will do what I can.
For your father's sake.
But it will not be up to me alone.
You may have to do something to help yourself.’
‘Such as?’
‘A gesture.
A token…of commitment,’ Kirov murmured  vaguely.
‘Those involved have needed to become secretive, for protection.
No stranger, even the son of a dead leader, would be admitted to a meeting without some tangible proof of his loyalty.’
Vologsky was puzzled.
‘Proof?
What proof can there be of a man's feelings?
Loyalty, belief — it is all in a man's own mind.
There is no way to display it.’
Kirov shook his head.
‘There are ways,’ he said, mysteriously.
There was no going back now.
‘Explain,’ Vologsky demanded.
He failed to recognize, or understand, the subtle change in emphasis which had taken place.
Now he danced to Kirov's tune, without knowing the steps.
Kirov was brutally frank now.
A man who has given away his greatest secret cannot afford further pretence.
‘A man would have to supply some sort of evidence that he was not a slave to the State, a spy of the KGB.
To gain admittance to the movement, he would have to commit some act which would make him as vulnerable as those already involved.
A guilt shared is a mutual bond of trust — or mistrust.
Each party has a weapon against the other, so that betrayal invokes immediate revenge.
Thus both are protected.
Do you understand?’
Vologsky nodded.
‘Yes, of course.
But what could I provide?
I know nothing of the movement, I have no guilty secrets to reveal.’
Kirov shrugged.
‘Some information, perhaps?’ he suggested casually.
‘The movement can always use secret information, to bring pressures to bear, to embarrass the authorities.
Military information is always particularly valuable.’
Vologsky's face fell.
Up to that point, he had hardly realized just how deeply he was involving himself.
‘Treason?’ he breathed, his lips trembling slightly.
Kirov shrugged the fear off.
‘Oh, nothing serious of course,’ he murmured.
‘We are all working for the same country, after all.
It is not treason we are involved in.
It is working for Russia, a better Russia, in which the state of Georgia plays a  rich and useful part.
Anyway, it was just a suggestion.
Foolish, perhaps.’
‘No.’
Vologsky rallied himself.
‘What sort of information do you suppose might be acceptable?’
‘Something not terribly important?
Something that you just happen to know because of your profession?’
Kirov suggested.
‘For instance, you fly regular missions near the border, do you not?’
Vologsky tensed up again.
To confirm the fact was a serious security breach in itself.
Kirov stepped up the pressure.
‘Now see how our roles are reversed, Mikhail.
You pressed me to condemn myself, yet you fear to confirm something which we both know.’
‘Yes, I'm sorry.
We all overfly the border at regular intervals.
But if that is generally known, surely it has no value?’
‘There are many rumours in the cities,’ Kirov went on.
‘Stories of vast Chinese armament build-ups.
If they are true, some details would be very valuable indeed.
Do you not think that the people deserve to know what threatens them on their very doorstep?
Have we not the right to fear for our homeland as well as to fight and die for it?’
Vologsky considered this for several minutes.
Finally, he nodded.
‘I will do it.
My next mission is in four days time.
I will make notes, and pass them on to you.’
Kirov smiled, again seeming to dismiss the entire thing as a silly, childish game.
‘There, you see, it is as easy as that.
Just an exchange of trusts, a gesture…nothing more.
I will make contact with the movement and get permission for you to attend the next meeting.’
‘Thank you, Georgi Kirov,’ Vologsky said quietly.
It was like complimenting an assassin for the professional way in which he slides a stiletto under one's ribs and into the heart.
‘Ah, Paul.
Come in and sit down.’
Hayman welcomed Manville into his office, crossing it to the drinks cabinet.
‘Drink?’
Manville nodded.
‘Rye on the rocks.’
Hayman fixed the drink, handed it to Manville and then sat down behind his desk with a chunky tumbler half-filled with Scotch.
He raised it to the air.
‘Cheers.’
‘Down the hatch.’
Manville took a good gulp and appraised his superior over the rim of the glass.
Hayman was beaming.
To Manville it meant only one thing.
Something was up.
He waited, silently, to find out what it was.
‘Thought it might be as good a time as any to chew the fat, talk over the current status of Cuckoo,’ Hayman started, casually enough.
‘How is friend Kirov making out?’
Manville permitted himself a smile.
‘Fine, couldn't be better,’ he enthused.
‘No hitches so far, and he's even come up with a little bonus on the side.
The crafty old devil has not only got his bird eating out of his hand, he's managed to dig some up-to-date data on the border build-up out of him.
I take it you've studied that report?’
Hayman nodded, and his smile began to fade.
This is it, Manville thought.
Here comes the cruncher.
‘It ties in pretty well with our own satellite observation reports,’ Hayman muttered.
‘taken all together, it gives us a pretty good overall picture.’
His face was grave now.
‘It looks like one hell of a mess, Paul.’
Manville was surprised.
‘You think it's serious this time?’
Hayman nodded.
‘This could be the big one.
The Chinks have got everything bar the pea-shooters piled up.
If this thing breaks, it isn't going to be one of those simple little border clashes.
This could be a full-scale offensive.
The works.’
Manville grinned.
‘Why sound so grim about?
Best thing that could happen, the way I see it.
Let the bastards shoot it  out.
With a bit of luck they'll wipe each other off the face of Asia.’
‘Oh, sure,’ Hayman agreed.
‘It's our little party I'm worried about.’
It struck Manville with no irony that Hayman had dismissed the two largest nations on the face of the earth to focus his attentions on just one man and an airplane.
He was used to such priorities.
‘I don't see the problem,’ he said quietly.
‘How does it affect Operation Cuckoo?’
Hayman's monkey-like face screwed into a frown.
‘We've got to get our bird out of there before the balloon goes up.
If we want that Foxbat, we have to have it before the Chinks blow the last one out of the sky.
These reports indicate they've got more bloody AAMs than we ever dreamed of.
They've been bloody inscrutable alright.
Jesus Christ, those bastards have been busy in the armaments factories.’
Manville whistled through his teeth.
‘That bad, eh?’
‘That bad,’ Hayman confessed with a curt nod.
‘The damned Soviets won't know what the hell hit them.
They could be fighting a ground war within a month.’
Manville shrugged.
‘Kinda sorts out our problem anyway, doesn't it?
Their air-strike capability would be knocked out for years.
We'd have more than enough time to catch up, even overtake them.’
‘That's hardly the point.’
The statement was a veiled reprimand.
‘I promised to deliver the goods.
I don't like to renege on a contract.
How soon could Kirov get his bird off the ground, do you think?’
‘One month.
Two, perhaps.
It might even be less.
Without any direct contact, it's difficult to know what state the negotiations are in.
Hayman thumped his clenched fist down on the desk.
‘It's too long, dammit.
This bloody border war could flare up any day now.
Get through to Kirov, ask him if he can advance the project.
I want that bird flying in a couple of weeks or less.’
‘All right.’
Manville agreed without real conviction.
‘While we're on the subject…what about Kirov, after this operation?
He'll be finished, you realize that?
He's had too much  contact with the pilot to stay under cover.
The KGB will be onto him like a shit.’
Hayman didn't seem unduly worried.
‘It'll be worth it — if we get that plane.
Kirov's done his best work for us, anyway.’
‘That's not what I meant,’ Manville said flatly.
‘Do we have any contingency plans to get him out?’
‘What do you suggest — we send a taxi?’
Hayman asked sarcastically.
‘Kirov's a pro, he knows the risks.
If he can get clear of Russia, maybe we can pick him up.
Prague, maybe, or preferably Berlin.
Short of that, there's not much we can do.’
‘No, I guess not.’
Manville's brief concern for the Russian agent evaporated.
He stood, pushing his chair back.
‘OK, I'll get on to it straight away, see what I can do.’
He began to move towards the door.
‘Keep me informed,’ Hayman barked after him.
‘Sure.’
Manville walked out, closing the door behind him.
ORIGIN PAUL MANVILLE, LEVITT ELECTRICAL.
DESTINATION BRUSSELS FOR EYES OF ALEX RANELEIGH ONLY.
CUCKOO NOW ON PRIORITY ADVANCE.
INFORM AVIARY MIGRATION NOW IMPERATIVE IN THREE WEEKS.
ALSO INSTRUCT AVIARY TO LISTEN FOR BIRDSONG ON REGULAR CHANNEL.
AVIARY TO CLOSE IMMEDIATELY BIRD TARES WING.
SUGGEST TRANSFER TO WILDLIFE SANCTUARY PENDING COLLECTION.
AFTER BIRDSONG DISMANTLE EXISTING COMMUNICATIONS CHANNEL AND RETURN TO HOME NEST IMMEDIATELY.
CONFIRM IN CODE SIX.
Manville perused the cryptic message with satisfaction.
It said all that needed to be said in a clear enough manner.
Kirov was to advance Vologsky's flight to early July.
His exact instructions would be fed direct to him through the disc-jockey on Voice of America.
Then all Kirov had to do was run for cover and wait.
Alex Raneleigh's job was also terminated.
With Operation Cuckoo brought to a conclusion, the entire three-man link to Georgi Kirov was as useless and obsolete  as the old agent himself.
It would be severed at once, leaving no trail for the KGB to follow.
Returning from the despatch room, Manville started the second half of his emergency plan.
Using the scrambled security telephone, he dialled the program controller at the Voice of America broadcasting headquarters.
‘Hello, Felix?
It's Paul Manville, from Levitt Electrical.
Listen, Felix…
I want to get a dedication on your overseas channel.
Nest Thursday…’
Kirov's fingers trembled as he adjusted the fine-tuning dial of his radio set.
They trembled not from fear, but from anger and resentment which had built up rapidly in the 24 hours since he had heard the ridiculous order from Washington.
They had absolutely no right to meddle with his plans in this way.
They must be mad that they should expect such a delicate business as his preparation of Vologsky to be speeded up as though it was a crude operation on a factory bench.
There was no way in which he could turn a young man's allegiance completely against his motherland in just three weeks.
It was senseless.
Kirov checked his watch carefully as he tuned the set to Voice of America.
It was about two minutes before 2100 hours.
The message would be contained in the dedication which the announcer read out before playing his first record, with perhaps some added information in the words of the song itself.
The brief jingle of the station's call-sign sounded, quickly interrupted by the announcer's voice.
Kirov placed his ear close to the loudspeaker.
‘This is Voice of America, broadcasting to the world.
It's Lovers Overseas…your chance to send your love, and a song, to those dear ones who are far away.
And our first request tonight is for Mr. and Mrs. Levitt, whose son is serving overseas in the Air Force.
They say they are looking forward to seeing him soon, and that he will be safely with them to sit down at the table and enjoy the feast of the next Thanksgiving dinner.
The request is for a real blast from the past…that lovely old Peter, Paul and Mary folk song…
The Cuckoo.’
Kirov listened attentively to the first few bars.
‘Oh the cuckoo…she's a pretty bird…she warbles as she flies.
She never…says cuckoo…‘til the fourth day in  July.
Now I've played cards…
In England…
I've played cards, in Spain…’
Kirov snapped the radio off.
What message there was had already been delivered.
He spun the radio tuner at random, to leave no evidence for prying eyes that he had been listening to a foreign station.
Then he turned his attention to the small tape-recorder, which had faithfully copied the brief transmission.
Kirov's anger dissipated somewhat as he played the recording over a couple of times.
He could not resist a faint smile creeping over his face.
Paul Manville had to be given his due — he could not have chosen a more apt record to convey his message.
It was clear enough.
Vologsky was to be ready to fly on or about July the fourth.
As far as his destination was concerned, the clue had to be in the dedication.
The thanksgiving dinner, the feast…that was it, of course.
What did the Americans have as the main part of a thanksgiving dinner?
A turkey.
So that was to be the landing place, on July 4th.
Kirov stripped the tape from its spool and carefully incinerated it.
He sat down to concentrate.
Was it possible, after all, that Vologsky could be primed to defect in less than a month?
It was not likely that he could be enticed in that time, that was for sure.
Therefore, he had to be driven.
But what could be strong enough to drive a man from his homeland, to face terrible dangers in the skies?
Maybe not even the fear of death itself.
Kirov mulled over what he knew of the man thus far.
Vologsky did not appear to be a strong individual — yet he wanted to go into space, so he could not be a physical coward.
Then what would motivate him?
Fear of disgrace, shame, ridicule?
The bleak prospect of the labour camps, slavery in Siberia?
Torture, perhaps, either physical or mental?
The KGB were masters in both, from the crude use of the rubber hose to the sophisticated and mind-shattering techniques of the Black Room, the Sonic Disorientation Chamber, or a half-dozen other brain-washing methods.
Kirov turned the brief list over in his mind, and a degree  of optimism returned.
There was enough in the way of threats to drive even the strongest, bravest man.
Given the right crime to answer for, Vologsky might well not fear death itself, but he would certainly fear to continue living.
In Russia, at least.
But that could wait until the following day.
Kirov had other problems on his mind.
His own survival, mainly.
He had still to plan his own escape route, find a way to get out of the country himself.
It might not be as easy as plotting Vologsky's defection — and Kirov had only just reminded himself of a few of the terrors which he could face if he failed.
In the cold, objective light of morning, the issues were even clearer.
The main thing was, purely and simply, the matter of survival.
Kirov understood that fully now, along with all the implications.
Already, he knew that his chances of living through the next four or five weeks had been severely curtailed.
Fate was strongly biased against him.
Only with incredible luck, against all the odds, could he reasonably hope to make a safe exit from Russian soil and reach safe ground from which the Americans might be able to extricate him in one piece.
That slim chance in itself depended wholly upon his persuading Vologsky to fly the Foxbat out of Russia.
Failure to bring about the defection would mean certain imprisonment, possibly death, for if he did not bring matters to a successful conclusion, Manville and his colleagues would not make the slightest attempt to help him.
They might, conceivably, even speed up his demise by informing upon him, for the CIA had little use for a failed agent whose cover was blown.
There was a third possibility, which also promised only death.
If Kirov chose, he could drop Vologsky, and Operation Cuckoo, like a hot brick.
Then it would be purely a matter of waiting for the assassin's bullet to strike home, or a carefully planned accident to take place.
Kirov was under no illusions about his Western puppet-masters.
They dealt in results, and nothing else.
Positive or negative — results were all that mattered.
Kirov was a rat caught in a trap of his own making, and time was running out.
He needed to summon all the devious cunning with which nature had endowed him if he were to escape.
He considered the matter coldly.
His original plan had been largely dependent on much more time to play with, and involved a much closer personal interplay between himself and the young pilot.
Within the confines of a shorter timescale, it lost much of its effectiveness.
Still, it was not quite valueless.
It could still be modified for use, provided it was backed up with some new, stronger coercion.
Kirov racked his brains, plunging to the bottom of his mental barrel without squeamishness.
It was no time for niceties.
The answer came, finally.
Kirov could not repress a slightly bitter, ironic smile as he thought about it.
One of the oldest ploys in the business.
Techniques of interrogation and espionage improved and became more sophisticated every day — yet still the old methods remained as effective as they ever had.
He took out the slim dossier on Mikhail Vologsky which he had been able to put together over the past few weeks.
From it, Kirov drew out a slim sheaf of black and white photographs of the young pilot, and a single sheet of personal notes which he had compiled from their conversations.
They had conversed intimately.
Kirov had opened himself up so that the younger man would trust him enough to confide his deepest thoughts.
He had provided a father-confessor figure to absolve the youngster's sins and absorb his phobias.
From the many small things he had learned, one above all now seemed important.
Vologsky feared that there were certain unfounded and unsavoury rumours circulating about his sexual proclivities.
It would be Kirov's job to turn those rumours into reality, provide evidence which would damn him forever.
Kirov sorted through the photographs, choosing two or three which seemed to most suit his purpose.
There was one posed beside the grave, offering a clear full-face shot of the young man.
Kirov stared at it carefully before finally rejecting it.
The expression on Vologsky's face was too serious and pensive for what he had in mind.
Kirov chose another snap which  he had taken at a pavement cafe in Tbilisi, bringing his final selection to four.
Slipping them into a plain buff envelope, he transferred it to the inside pocket of his jacket and prepared to go out.
Boris Zhukov's photographic studio was a converted attic on the fourth floor of a cycle repair factory on Chukovsky Avenue.
Kirov glanced about him cautiously.
No one appeared to be observing him.
Quickly, he ducked through the unadorned side door of the building and began climbing the four flights of rickety wooden stairs.
At the top was a faded blue-painted door with the single word, Studio, emblazoned upon it in plain black lettering.
Kirov rapped gently.
‘A few moments, please.
I am in the darkroom,’ called a voice from inside.
Kirov waited patiently for several minutes before the door created open and Zhukov's bearded face peered round the jamb.
Underneath the black hair, the man's fleshy lips curled into a grimace which passed for a smile.
‘Kirov I You have come on business, I hope?’
‘Of course,’ Kirov snapped, vaguely resenting the implication that he might make a purely social call upon the photographer.
Considering his own, highly dubious profession, Kirov had his own set of moral values.
He found aspects of Zhukov's business highly distasteful, even though he had come expressly to use them.
‘You'd better come in,’ Zhukov murmured.
He opened the door, peering out over Kirov's shoulder ant glancing furtively down the empty stairway.
Satisfied that Kirov was alone, Zhukov led the way into his tiny studio.
Kirov glanced casually at a pair of tripod cameras and an umbrella floodlight.
It was doubtful if the equipment had been used for years.
Zhukov had long since realized that there was little money in photographic portraiture and had turned his talents to other, more profitable sidelines.
Kirov had used his services before, to produce false papers, touch up prints or produce blow-ups from microfilm.
Besides these nefarious activities, however, Zhukov was also a pornographer.
Today, Kirov intended to call upon this facility for the first time.
Zhukov pulled a bottle of Polish White Spirit from a shelf.
‘A drink, comrade?’
Kirov shook his head.
‘I would rather you did not indulge yourself either, Zhukov.
The job I have for you will entail a clear eye and a steady hand.’
‘Ah.’
Zhukov clucked his tongue in a gesture of regret and replaced the cork in the bottle, returning it to the shelf.
His brown eyes twinkled excitedly.
‘A faked exit visa?
A change of identity card?’
‘Nothing so simple.
I want you to doctor a photograph for me,’ Kirov said.
Zhukov nodded.
‘That could be tricky…and expensive, of course.’
‘Of course.
If you produce what I want, you will not find me ungenerous,’ Kirov assured the man.
He produced the snapshots of Vologsky and held them under Zhukov's nose.
‘I want this man in a very special kind of photograph,’ he muttered.
Zhukov took the four snaps, examining them closely.
A crafty grin spread across his face.
Suggestively, he tapped his forefinger on Vologsky's torso.
In each photograph, the pilot was in uniform.
‘This might be a lot more tricky than I had first supposed.
And very, very expensive.
As you know, comrade, I usually cater to a civilian clientele.’
Kirov suppressed his growing disgust.
‘Name your price,’ he snapped curtly.
Zhukov fenced with him.
‘That will depend…on what exactly it is you want,’ he muttered vaguely.
Kirov explained in detail.
When he had finished, an obscene leer lurked beneath the black beard.
‘I could not possibly consider such a commission for less than five hundred roubles.’
Kirov was not disposed to haggle.
‘You shall have it.’
‘In advance,’ Zhukov added, extending his palm.
‘Plus another hundred roubles for expenses.
I shall have to hire models, purchase some special materials.’
Silently, Kirov peeled off sis hundred roubles and placed  the money in Zhukov's hand.
‘How soon can you deliver?’
Zhukov considered for a moment.
‘Say three days?’ he suggested.
‘Say two,’ Kirov said.
The photographer nodded.
‘Two days, then.’
He chuckled.
‘You will call for the photograph, of course?
Not quite the thing to send through the mail, is it?’
Stony-faced, Kirov replied.
‘I will call, Zhukov.
In two days.
I expect your very best work.’
Zhukov waved the money in the air.
‘You shall have it.
Here the customer always gets exactly what he pays for.’
He gestured towards the bottle once again.
‘That drink, now?’
‘No, thank you,’ Kirov said, firmly but politely.
He turned smartly on his heel and walked to the door.
‘There, what do you think?’
Zhukov said proudly, handing a postcard-sized photograph to Kirov.
‘It's a splendid fake.
You couldn't tell it from the real thing.’
Kirov looked at the photo, his nose wrinkling slightly in disgust.
‘Well, well?
Is it not worth every kopeck?’
Zhukov demanded excitedly.
‘Did I not tell you it would be my very best work?’
Kirov found it difficult to enthuse over the photograph, mainly because of the subject matter.
However, the technique was undeniably first-class.
‘Not bad,’ he murmured.
‘Not bad?’
Zhukov snorted in annoyance.
‘It is a masterpiece, I tell you.
I am an artist.
No other photographer in Georgia could produce a fake as good as that.’
‘Yes, you have done well.’
Kirov realized that he was going to be pestered by the man until he made some sort of complimentary comment.
The concession did not have the desired effect, however!
‘It was not easy, I can tell you that,’ Zhukov went on.
‘Those snaps you gave me — they were not much good, very difficult to work with.
I had to get the angles just right, fiddle about with the perspective and the reduction to get a perfect match.
And the hours I spent with the airbrush…ah, five hundred roubles was chicken feed for the work I put in.’
Kirov forced himself to examine the faked photograph in detail, his keen eye searching for the slightest flaw.
He had to admit to himself that Zhukov had executed a most professional job.
Even knowing what he did, Kirov found it difficult to see how the optical illusion had been managed.
The photograph depicted two naked men, engaged in one of the most nauseating of homosexual acts.
One of them was unmistakeably Mikhail Vologsky.
Zhukov had posed the photograph with two of his ‘models’, then meticulously superimposed  the face of Mikhail Vologsky upon one of them before touching up and re-photographing the composite.
More judicious air-brushing, and a slightly blurring effect, and the fake was complete.
Pictorial evidence that Vologsky was a sexual pervert — enough to get him court-martialled, out of the Service, reviled by his fellows, and possibly imprisoned.
To add an even more damning touch, Zhukov had draped an airforce uniform over the edge of the bed, and superimposed Vologsky's personal insignia upon it.
It was a job of the utmost precision, and even a large-scale blow-up might not reveal that it was not genuine.
Kirov averted his eyes from the photograph abruptly.
Thinking of the young man, and his quiet, idealistic manner, he felt a slight twinge of shame.
Fighting it, Kirov reminded himself that he was involved in a matter of life and death.
His life and death.
He turned back to face Zhukov.
‘You have a negative, I take it?’
A slight frown of disappointment passed over the photographer's face.
He had been hoping that Kirov would not demand the negative of the composite.
As an exercise in pornography, Zhukov had been rather pleased with the original pose.
He had been expecting to sell quite a few additional copies of it to those customers of his who appreciated such things.
Kirov noted the look, and correctly identified the thoughts behind it.
He held out his hand.
Scowling, Zhukov produced a strip of film negative and handed it to him.
Kirov held it up to the light, studying it.
It was the correct negative.
It would not be past Zhukov's greed and cunning to try and fob him off with the wrong pie e of film.
As Kirov transferred it to his pocket, a further thought struck him.
It was more than possible that Zhukov had already taken off more prints for himself.
He could not risk having such highly dangerous spares in circulation.
This worry strengthened Kirov's earlier misgivings about Zhukov.
The man was another one of those loose ends, potentially a direct link to himself.
Unlike Alexai Ybreska, Zhukov was not disappearing out of the country in a hurry.
Kirov studied the photographic print again, suddenly muttering a faint curse.
‘Damn it, Zhukov, there's a flaw in this picture.’
‘A flaw?
Never,’ Zhukov said vehemently.
‘Boris Zhukov never produces work with flaws.’
Despite his protestation, he moved across the studio to inspect the photograph closely.
‘There, you see?’
Kirov said quietly, pointing to the face of Vologsky.
‘Can you see that slight join?’
Zhukov snatched the photograph, bringing it close to his eyes.
Kirov stepped back a pace, and in one swift movement delivered a vicious chop to the back of the photographer's neck.
Zhukov dropped like a stone.
Kirov stooped over his crumpled form, retrieving the photograph from between his fingers and tucking it safely into his inside pocket.
Checking Zhukov's pulse, he satisfied himself that the man would be senseless for at least another five minutes, then walked smartly into the darkroom, switching on the red safety light.
In the hellish glow, Kirov's eyes roamed the shelves, seeking out a bottle of chemical poison with which to arrange a fatal accident.
There was nothing.
The bottles of developing fluid and fixer were harmless enough, treated with the care that a trained photographer would be sure to take.
Something else then.
Kirov scanned the small darkroom from floor to ceiling.
His eyes finally settled on the old stoneware sink in which Zhukov did his fixing.
The edge of it was chipped and scratched with years of wear and misuse.
At one corner, a large chunk had been knocked out completely, leaving a nasty, jagged edge.
Kirov felt it with his fingertips and rapped his knuckles against the main body of the sink unit.
It was as solid as rock.
He returned outside and began to drag the unconscious Zhukov into the darkroom.
With considerable difficulty, Kirov managed to hoist the photographer to his feet, supporting his dead-weight by his arm-pits.
Carefully, Kirov adjusted his position, his eyes focused on that cracked sink-edge.
When he was sure that Zhukov was in the right position, Kirov let him go.
His aim was perfect.
The limp body collapsed backwards, the base of Zhukov's skull striking the edge of the sink with a vicious crack.
Kirov dropped to his knees, gingerly placing his ear over the man's heart.
It was still beating, but with a fluttery, irregular rhythm.
From the back of his head, blood flowed copiously, appearing a deep maroon colour under the glow of the red light.
Kirov straightened, nodding to himself.
From the rate of flow, Zhukov would be dead from loss of blood long before he regained consciousness.
Returning his attention to the shelves, Kirov chose a large glass bottle of hypo and, skirting Zhukov's body, retreated to the door.
From there, he lobbed the bottle to the tiled floor beneath the sink unit, where it smashed into pieces, releasing its contents to flow over the floor.
The accident was set.
When Zhukov's body was eventually found, the cause of his death would be obvious.
He had dropped the bottle of liquid, and then his feet had slipped on the treacherous tiled floor.
He had fallen badly, his head smashing against the chipped sink with enough force to crack his skull like a breakfast egg.
Kirov took only a few more minutes to search the small studio from top to bottom.
There were no prints of the compromising fake photograph.
When he had convinced himself of this, and made sure that there was no other evidence which could lead the authorities to him, Kirov made his discreet departure.
Kirov arrived at the agreed meeting place as he always did, at the exact specified time.
He ran his eyes over the figures seated at the tables outside the pavement café and a twinge of fear ran through him.
Vologsky was not there.
He had failed to keep the appointment.
Something had gone terribly wrong.
Kirov steeled his body against the rush of adrenalin which pumped into it, reminding himself that the trains into Tbilisi were notoriously unpunctual.
Perhaps the pilot had been delayed, or had experienced some difficulty in finding a taxi at the station.
Calmer now, Kirov searched the tables again.
Vologsky was seated near the cafe door, at a small table for three.
Kirov had missed him at first glance, understandably, for-the young pilot was clad in a pair of light grey slacks and a faintly-patterned blue sports shirt.
It was the first time that Kirov had ever seen him out of uniform.
Kirov walked straight towards the table.
Glancing up, Vologsky recognized him and his handsome, olive-skinned face creased into a welcoming smile.
He lifted his glass of rich, red Georgian wine from the table, raising it in the air in a gesture of greeting
‘Georgi!
You'll join me in a glass of wine?
Just the thing for a glorious day like this.’
Kirov's face was grim and impassive.
He refused the offer with a curt shake of his head, speaking in a clipped whisper.
‘Drink up, Mikhail.
We must walk, and talk privately.’
A slight flicker of uncertainty showed in Vologsky's brown eyes.
He had been in an ebullient mood, enjoying the superb weather and the lazy, carefree atmosphere which pervaded the busy cafe.
Now, Kirov had suddenly injected a chilling air of despondency into that pleasant ambience.
He lifted his glass to his lips, draining it at a gulp.
Dropping a handful of loose  coins on to the table, he set the empty glass down and rose to his feet.
Silently, Kirov moved away from the table and began to walk slowly down the street.
Vologsky fell into step beside him, the residue of his good mood still urging him to draw Kirov into it, share its benefits.
‘I was very fortunate to get away.
For some reason, all leave is being cancelled in three days from now.
It was only because mine was overdue that they did not cancel my pass.’
Vologsky talked openly, not even realizing any more that he was breaking security by such talk.
Having committed himself by revealing defence secrets, such freedom of speech seemed a trivial matter.
Kirov remained silent.
Vologsky increased his pace, momentarily, gaining a few feet so that he could look back at Kirov's grim face.
Falling back into step beside him, Vologsky threw his arm around Kirov's shoulder, hugging him gently.
He spoke in a sympathetic yet cheering voice.
‘Hey, old friend.
You seem unusually morose today.
Is something troubling you?
Tell me about it, get it off your chest.
It will make you feel better.’
Kirov stopped, suddenly, turning to face across the street.
‘Yes, we must talk.
But not yet, not here.’
Kirov stepped into the street and began crossing towards the open park on the opposite side.
Vologsky followed him across the street and into the park.
Silently, they walked past dozens of sprawled figures basking in the early afternoon sun until they came to a fairly quiet and deserted stretch of grass, beneath a plane tree.
‘Now, old friend.
What is on your mind?
What is the trouble?’
Vologsky urged, still only slightly concerned.
He could not conceive that anything really serious could be worrying his friend.
Kirov half-turned, so that he faced Vologsky squarely.
The icy fear which showed in the older man's eyes cut through Vologsky's mild concern like a knife, chilling him to the bone.
Kirov's voice trembled as he spoke.
‘Mikhail…
I feel like an assassin.
I could tear my own heart out.’
Vologsky's mouth dropped open.
‘What is this talk, Georgi?
What has happened?’
Kirov buried his face in his hands, as though he were about to burst into uncontrollable tears.
In a muffled voice, he said: ‘It is terrible, Mikhail, unthinkable.
I have placed you in the gravest danger.
I feel so wretched, so helpless…’
His anguished voice tailed off, to intensify the effect.
Vologsky felt the first tremblings of real fear creeping into his own body.
In a dead, fiat voice, he said: ‘What has happened?’
Kirov took in breath, waving his hands wildly in the air, gesturing utter distraction.
‘There was a meeting, of the movement…four nights ago.
Someone must have betrayed us.
There was a raid by the KGB…it was terrible, tragic.’
Re paused again.
The tension snapped Vologsky's last reserves.
With something fast approaching anger, he gripped Kirov by the shoulders, shaking him.
‘Go on.’
Kirov's head was bowed in shame and despondency.
Collecting himself a little, he continued in a quiet voice.
‘It happened after I had left.
They came in with guns at the ready, expecting trouble.
Two of our people were shot and killed outright, five more wounded.
Only a couple escaped, the rest were herded up like pigs and dragged to headquarters for interrogation.
God only knows what the KGB will do to them, poor wretches.’
‘You spoke of my being in danger — what has all this to do with me?’
Vologsky demanded.
‘Your notes — those you made of your last reconnaissance flight…
I had taken them to the meeting.
Everything was seized…they are in the hands of the KGB.’
‘Oh my God.’
Vologsky's whole body shuddered.
The spectre of the Lubyanka Prison loaned up, closely followed by even more terrifying images.
The labour camps, temperatures of 50 degrees below zero, a lifetime condemned to stare out over thousands of miles of the bleak, barren permafrost, where blindness eventually came as a minor blessing.
These were the alternatives to a quick, merciful death.
Against such chilling prospects, Vologsky's mind rebelled in a frenetic search for hope.
‘Those notes — they did not bear my name.
They could have come from anyone, anywhere.’
Kirov shook his bowed head.
‘You underestimate the efficiency of the KGB, Mikhail.
They will scratch at scabs, pick them until they bleed.
They do not give up.
They investigate, interrogate, sift every scrap of evidence until they narrow down the field.
It might take them weeks, maybe months, but they will eventually track those notes back to you, somehow.’
Vologsky could not, would not, accept his fate.
‘But there would be no proof,’ he protested.
‘I was careful.
I made those notes in crude capital letters.
They could not identify my writing.
They might suspect — but they could prove nothing.’
Even as he spoke, Vologsky was well aware of the hollow ring to his words.
The KGB did not need proof; suspicion was more than enough.
He fell silent, brooding, trying to come to terms with his fear.
Kirov spoke quietly, his voice choked by irregular sobs.
‘Try to forgive me, Mikhail.
It is all my fault.
I wish now that I had never spoken to you.’
Even in his own troubled mind, Vologsky dredged up sympathy for the old man.
‘There is nothing to forgive.
It is done.
No one is to blame except myself.
I chose to involve myself in matters best left alone.
I forced you to help me.’
‘Help you?’
Kirov laughed bitterly.
‘That was the last thing I did for you, Mikhail.
But perhaps I can help you now.
There is a way out for you, an escape.’
‘Escape?
How?’
Vologsky grasped desperately at the floating straw.
‘You can get out of the country before they come for you.
You have the means at your disposal.
You are lucky, Mikhail…you have the skill, and the aircraft, to fly to freedom and safety.’
Vologsky could only stare blankly at his companion, his mind reeling from this new and unexpected shock.
‘Defect, you mean?’ he hissed, finally.
Kirov shrugged.
‘A word,’ he muttered.
‘A meaningless  word.
Freedom…safety…those are the words you must bear in mind now, Mikhail.
All other thoughts are negative, self-destructive.’
Vologsky's brain swam in total confusion and turmoil.
He could not even begin to believe the conversation his mouth indulged in, independent of his mind.
‘This is impossible,’ he muttered under his breath.
‘No, not impossible,’ Kirov urged.
‘Unusual, perhaps.
Unlikely — but not impossible.
You can do it, Mikhail, and I can help you.’
‘You?
How?’
Vologsky was like a mindless simpleton, hearing without understanding, open to suggestion.
‘I have friends, important friends,’ Kirov went on.
‘I can arrange for you to fly to Turkey, where the Americans will meet you and take you to safety.
They will grant you asylum, Mikhail — in exchange for your aircraft and your knowledge of it.
The Americans need the Foxbat.
They will pay any price to get it.
You could be a free man — rich, admired.’
‘Admired?’
Vologsky seized on the last word, his brain snapping awake again.
‘Who can admire a traitor?’
His eyes opened wide, and suddenly he could see Kirov in a new light.
Realization dawned suddenly.
He fell back a step, as though Kirov carried some terrible contagious disease.
‘You!…you are a spy…’
The pretence was over.
There was no longer any need for Kirov to keep up his act, play the elaborate game.
Kirov shrugged, carelessly.
‘Another meaningless word.
I am a man, like yourself, Mikhail.
A man who believes in life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness…you recognize those words?’
Still numbed, Vologsky could only shake his head dumbly.
‘American declaration of Independence,’ Kirov murmured.
‘Now there is a word I savour.
Independence.
Men living free to make the best of their lives on their own initiative.
Without harassment, without secret police, faceless bureaucrats, permits and papers, forms, prohibitions, repressions.
So I believe in all that, Mikhail Vologsky, and I see a Russia which has none of it.
Yes then, if you wish to call me a spy, then that is  what I am.
But not a traitor.
It is not possible to be a traitor to the human spirit.’
Vologsky stood stiffly, still keeping his distance.
‘You have what you believe in, Georgi Kirov.
I will not presume to deny your right to feel as you do.
But do not expect me to understand, let alone share, your views.
I will take my leave of you now.’
Vologsky began to move away.
Kirov's arm snaked out, grasping the young man's elbow.
‘Think, Mikhail,’ he urged.
‘Think of what you have to lose.
All you have to do is to fly that aircraft to Turkey.
There, freedom awaits you; perhaps even more.
You could achieve your greatest ambition, Mikhail — space, the stars.
The Americans would welcome a pilot of your skill and experience.
They would find a place for you in the Space program.
I have already mentioned it to my American contacts, and received assurances…’
‘I need no more assurances from you,’ Vologsky said coldly.
‘Now please let me go.’
Kirov only gripped his arm even more tightly.
‘Why will you not consider it?’ he pleaded.
Vologsky tensed himself, then jerked his arm free.
He took a deep breath and gazed squarely into Kirov's eyes.
‘A man has one God, and one country.
He can do no more than to respect and serve them both.l
‘You are a fool, Vologsky,’ Kirov spat, his patience suddenly exhausted.
‘Your God would not thank you for throwing away your life.
Your country will destroy you without a qualm.’
The insult, and the reversion to Vologsky's surname, snapped the last thread of the bond which had existed between the two men.
Strangely, it also sliced through the air of unreality which had been preventing Vologsky from facing the real issues.
He was suddenly much calmer, coldly aware of his true position.
There was no need to leave now; he could stay and talk the matter out He took a few moments to arrange his thoughts, make a few educated guesses and assess the full extent of the plot which had been built around him.
‘You have spun me a whole tissue of lies, of course,’ Vologsky said finally.
There was no anger in his voice, only a detached and impassive acceptance of the facts.
‘You did not know my parents…there was no Georgian movement.
This entire charade was designed to entice me to defect?’
Kirov nodded silently, sensing that, after all, there might be a point of breakthrough.
‘Very well,’ Vologsky went on.
‘Now let me see if I have an accurate picture of the situation to date.
If I am to live, I must defect with my aircraft.
If I refuse, you and your colleagues will make sure that those notes of mine find their way to the KGB, and I will be exposed as a traitor.
Is that a reasonable assessment of the facts?’
Kirov nodded again.
‘There is more,’ he murmured.
‘Tape recordings of our conversation — and this, of course.’
He produced the pornographic photo, handing it to Vologsky.
‘There are several copies.
If you fail to do what is required of you, prints will be sent to the KGB, to Major Tzann and one of your co-pilots at the base.
There is no way out for you, other than to take the course we offer.’
Vologsky glanced at the photograph, his features stiffening into a mask as he tried to repress his disgust.
‘I see,’ he muttered through clenched teeth, handing the photograph back to Kirov.
‘It is simple then.
I must choose whether to live or die?’
‘Essentially, yes,’ Kirov agreed.
Vologsky was silent and thoughtful for a long while.
Finally, a sad, resigned smile curled his lips.
‘I am 28 years of age.
There is a lot of living ahead of me.
I do not wish to be a martyr.
I choose to live, of course.
You seem to have what you want, Comrade Kirov.’
‘Good.
It is settled then.’
Kirov appeared a little surprised that it had all gone so smoothly.
‘You must make your move at the first available opportunity.
Exactly when you fly will be up to you, but it must be before July the fourth.
Here are the instructions you will need, a suggested flight path, and your radio signal to contact Ankara landing control.
You must not make contact until you are over your border.’
Kirov produced  a small sealed envelope, handing it to the pilot.
‘Good luck,’ he added, hesitantly.
Vologsky sucked up a mouthful of saliva, and spat full in Kirov's face.
‘For everything you have done for me,’ he said contemptuously, spinning on one heel and striding away, without looking back.
Kirov stood and watched Vologsky depart, the spittle running slowly down the side of his face to drip from his chin.
It was a long time before he pulled out his handkerchief and wiped his face.
It did not make him feel any cleaner.
It was a little after ten-forty-five as Manville walked in to his office, in a foul mood.
It had been one of those bloody-minded mornings, when everything went wrong and even inanimate objects seemed to have banded together in a conspiracy against him.
Firstly the electric alarm clock had fused sometime during the night, failing to rouse him at his usual eight am.
Hurrying to make up time, Manville had cut himself shaving, and the cluttered bathroom medicine cabinet had stubbornly refused to yield up the secret whereabouts of the styptic pencil.
The wound had been deep, and resisted all efforts to stop it bleeding.
It was nearly fifteen minutes before Manville dared put on his clean shirt.
The coffee percolator appeared to be on a go-slow, and the grill had incinerated his toast with a savage glee.
With a bloody chin and an empty stomach, Manville had left his apartment already fuming, only to discover that vandals had been at work on his car during the night.
With a sinking knowledge of the inevitable, Manville accepted the fact that one spare wheel and a set of spanners would not cope with three slashed tires and a shattered windshield.
Even if he had been able to fix the damage, Manville had no desire to drive through the streets of Washington with the slogan ‘Fuck U Honkies’ sprayed in bright red aerosol paint on the ice-blue hood of the Ford.
Entering his office, Manville saw that the tribulations of the morning were still not over.
Propped up against his telephone was a fresh inter-departmental memo.
It read, simply: ‘REPORT TO ME FIRST THING — HAYMAN.’
Hayman glanced up as Manville walked in.
‘You're late,’ he muttered peevishly.
Manville's pent-up anger got the better of him.
‘I didn't know I was supposed to be keeping office-boy hours.’
Hayman let it pass with a stony glare.
‘Seen the morning papers?’
Manville shook his head.
I was in a rush.’
‘Here.’
Hayman tossed a copy of the Washington Post across his desk.
Manville looked at the headline.
‘KREMLIN ON THE HOT LINE — President Leaves for Moscow Immediately.’
He dropped the newspaper without reading further.
‘Well?’
What does it mean?’
‘It means we got trouble, that's what it means,’ Hayman grunted.
‘I had a Q-notice in by this morning's mail.
There's an immediate freeze on all anti-USSR activities, retroactive to 2400 hours last night.
Complete shut-down, pending new diplomatic moves.’
‘Cuckoo?’
Manville asked.
Hayman nodded.
‘Cuckoo.
It's dead.
Overnight, our little bird has joined the goddamned dodo.’
Manville flopped down in a chair without being asked.
‘Christ!
What's up?’
‘The Russians seem to be over-reacting to the yellow peril,’ Hayman observed laconically.
‘If it's possible to put the fear of God into a nation of atheistic bastards, then the Chinks appear to have done it.
Suddenly, the Kremlin is falling over itself to get close to Uncle Sam.
Trade missions, diplomatic niceties, hurried journeys between here and Moscow, the lot.
It's all hands across the waters and let's be buddies.
Most of the NATO countries are getting the same treatment.’
‘Great,’ Manville muttered without enthusiasm.
‘So we get a complete shut-down?’
Hayman shrugged.
‘The gist of the message seems to be ‘don't rock the boat’.
Operation Cuckoo was a bit on the hairy side to start with.
Now it's positively provocative.
Get the lid slammed on it as quick as you like.’
Manville was silent for several moments.
When he spoke again, it was in little more than a whisper.
‘I'm afraid it's not possible.’
‘What the hell do you mean, it's not possible?’
Hayman  demanded angrily.
‘That's a direct order, for Chrissakes.
From the top.
So cut the bullshit, Manville, just get on with it.’
‘I meant what I said.
It's not possible,’ Manville repeated.
‘I followed your specific orders and advanced the schedule by several weeks.
For safety, I dismantled the link to Kirov and gave the final go-ahead.
Operation Cuckoo is happening, right now…and there's no way it can be stopped.’
Hayman's voice was cold.
‘Are you telling me that you relinquished all control over the project?’
‘On your specific orders,’ Manville repeated, knowing what was coming but trying to wriggle out anyway.
Hayman stood, slowly.
He waved a shaking finger in Manville's direction.
‘Now you just hold it right there, Manville.
I told you before, the buck stops firmly with you.
You asked for Operation Cuckoo to be your personal responsibility and I gave it to you.
So don't come back at me with any crap about my specific orders.
I gave you guidelines, and that's all.
If you've fouled up, you're on your own.’
Manville fought against a rising anger.
Hayman was right, despite the apparent unfairness of the situation.
That was the system.
When you were at the top, it was known as delegation of responsibility.
Lower down the chain it was plain and simple buck-passing.
‘All right, so it's my head on the block,’ Manville conceded.
‘How hard is the chopper likely to fall?’
‘Bloody hard,’ Hayman assured shim.
‘You're going to have to bloody jump to get yourself clear of this one.’
‘Suggestions?’
Hayman paused before answering.
With a very deliberate gesture, he switched off the recording system which taped all normal office conversations.
‘Off the record?’
Manville nodded.
‘Of course.’
‘Have you got anyone on the spot who could hit Kirov?
Take him out before he makes a run for safe ground?’
Manville shook his head.
‘Nobody big enough, and anyway, it might already be too late for that.’
‘A leak to the Soviet authorities, then,’ Hayman suggested.
‘Arrange for Kirov to be pulled in by the KGB.
Would he keep his mouth shut under interrogation, do you think?’
Manville shrugged.
‘Who knows?
Kirov's a good man, but how good would he shave to be?
God only knows what those bastards would do to sum.
The chances that he would blow everything are too high to risk.’
‘We'd deny any part in it, of course,’ Hayman added.
‘You've already dismantled the link to Kirov, so there's no way the authorities could prove he hadn't acted on his own initiative.
I'd give you all the cover I could, of course.’
It was the last few words which tipped the balance.
Quite suddenly, Manville recognized the conversational charade for what it was.
Both Hayman's suggestions were too loose and half-baked for a man of his devious cunning to consider seriously for a moment.
So it was a snow-job, a cover-up.
An attempt to lull him into a false sense of security.
Manville stood up, abruptly.
‘You're being too bloody helpful, Hayman,’ she snapped.
Hayman flashed him a cold glance, nodding thoughtfully.
‘yeah,’ he muttered.
They both knew the score.
‘How long?’
Manville asked.
‘Forty eight hours.
That's all I can give you.’
‘Then I'd better get my ass into gear.
It might not be too late to get a direct order through to Kirov on the radio.
I'll try that first.’
‘You do that,’ Hayman said.
There seemed no point in affecting friendliness any longer.
Hayman listened to Manville's footsteps fading away town the corridor outside.
As silence fell, he snatched up the green telephone and stabbed out the number of the Internal Security department.
‘Collins?
Got a priority one for you.
Paul Manville.
He's a potential embarrassment.
Remove him…at once.’
‘Yes sir.’
The reply was coldly efficient.
The line clicked, and went dead.
Hayman dropped the receiver back into its cradle and lolled back in his chair, sighing to himself.
It was a bloody  business, but the rules were the rules.
Everything in strict priority; the country first and personal survival second.
The country dictated that Operation Cuckoo be abandoned.
Personal survival entailed preparing for the possibility that it couldn't be stopped.
Manville had to be the fall-guy.
Hayman knew he couldn't afford to have the man around to answer to a Congressional enquiry if the shit hit the fan.
End of story.
Lying to Manville about the 48 hours grace hardly seemed to matter, in that context.
There was Voice of America, and there was Leon Phasenko, based in Moscow.
Manville tried both, hopeful counter-measures rather than effective action.
Even if Kirov was still listening out for radio contact, he was unlikely still to be in direct touch with the pilot.
Phasenko was a cell-link, a contact man only.
He had never been used for a hit, and it was unlikely that he could get from Moscow to Tbilisi anyway.
With those last two straws cast upon the water, there was nothing more Manville could do except wait and hope.
Operation Cuckoo might already be a non-runner; diplomacy could break down suddenly, restoring the status quo.
At five pm, still counting on over 40 safe hours, Manville left his office.
The condemned man had failed to eat a hearty breakfast, and lunch had consisted of two tacos and three cups of coffee.
There was little point, Manville decided, on a man eating on an empty stomach.
He went straight to the nearest bar, where he remained until just after midnight.
Through an alcoholic haze, Manville saw the dark blue Dodge pull away from the opposite kerb and cruise towards him.
It moved slowly, its headlights dimmed.
Like a cat, Manville thought, his mind only half-awake.
A big, fat alley-cat, prowling, on the hunt.
The realization that he was the mouse came instinctively, quickly followed by the slightly ludicrous observation that someone had made a gigantic balls-up.
Hayman had given him 48 hours.
Some bloody fool had slipped up on orders, taken off half-cocked.
‘Oh Jesus!
Sweet fucking Jesus Christ!’
A cold shiver rose up from Manville's feet to his head, jerking the blasphemy from his mouth.
A sob rose in his throat, blending with an incredulous, nervous giggle framed by his lips.
Self-pity had no place in his predicament Anger and sheer instinct took over as Manville suddenly knew , deep inside himself, the exact name and nature of the game.
It was survival.
He was sober in an instant, his years of training coming back to him as though no time had passed at all.
Survival, at all costs.
It was possible.
It had to be possible.
Manville's mind raced, running over the possibilities.
So Hayman had betrayed him, sent the liquidators in.
What else?
The answer came quickly, from Manville's deep knowledge of his adversary.
Nothing.
Hayman had implicit trust in his hit-men, especially against someone he regarded as an old, rusty, washed-up veteran.
Hayman would have sent out the single team, confident that they would handle the job quickly and efficiently.
All Paul Manville had to do was to get out of this immediate mess.
Then further possibilities for his continued survival would be open to him.
His security status would guarantee him a priority flight on virtually any civil or military aircraft He could be out of the country in less than an hour, headed anywhere in the world.
Then one day, soon, he would be back.
‘You bastard, Hayman,’ Manville screamed out to the empty, darkened streets.
Then he was down on the sidewalk, rolling into the shadows for cover and tugging his automatic from its shoulder holster at the same time.
The Dodge mounted the kerb, headlights suddenly stabbing out on full beam.
The car stopped, and all four doors Sew open simultaneously.
Half-blinded by the glare, Manville picked out two black shapes moving towards him and brought his gun up quickly, thumbing off the safety catch.
He squeezed off three shots at the nearest.
Above the crack of the automatic, he heard a thin squeal of pain and sensed, rather than actually saw, a man topple sideways into the gutter.
A searing fire of elation bathed him suddenly, driving away the last vestiges of fear.
Manville remembered now, what it had all been about, why he had needed so desperately to return to this, at least once before he died.
It was all part of him again.
Him against them, life against death…total commitment, both mental and physical.
It was the supreme test
Manville was aware of his back slamming against a wall.
He curled his body up into a ball, presenting the smallest possible target.
He was deep in shadow now, protected from the direct glare of the car headlights by the stone portal of a doorway.
He held his automatic out sideways, away from his body so that they could not aim in on its flash, and fired two shots at the left-hand headlight of the Dodge.
There was a crash of breaking glass and the cat went blind in one eye.
Rolling to a new position, Manville took the other headlight.
His position was already improved by at least a 100 per cent.
He had the first kill, and everyone was equally handicapped.
They had counted on the shadowy street to mask the approach of the car.
Now the dim light gave Manville a very slight edge, for he was in cover and his adversaries were not.
The only protection they had was the car itself.
Manville straightened slowly, keeping his back pressed flat against the wall.
Gingerly, he began slipping his jacket off his left shoulder, then transferred the automatic to his left hand and pulled the coat off completely.
Grasping it in his left hand again, he resumed a grip on his gun.
Inching his way to the very corner of his protecting doorway, he tossed the jacket out towards the car, then moved out behind it.
Two flashes lit the air for a split second.
Manville aimed directly below one of them.
Before ducking back into cover, he was rewarded by a clear sight of a man falling back behind the Dodge, Manville's bullet buried in his stomach.
He pressed himself back once more against the wall, panting with excitement.
Two down, then — and two to go.
All four doors of the car had opened, so it was a four-man team.
He was another 100 per cent up on the odds.
It got better by the minute.
Manville held his breath, listening, waiting, thinking.
They would try a rush next, he predicted.
One man to come out of cover, to draw his fire, while the remaining operative pumped out enough shots to virtually guarantee a hit.
It was a good trick, but only if the victim didn't know how it worked.
A smile sprang to Manville's-lips.
He had been performing that little number when these kids were wetting their diapers.
As with everything, there was a solid counter-measure.
You simply resisted your natural temptation to worry about the man breaking cover, and took the hit-man before he took you.
Convinced that the ploy was about to be put into operation, Manville concentrated his attention on the hood of the Dodge, just above the offside wheel.
There came the faint scuffle of moving feet, and a dark shape moved out from the rear of the car.
Manville resisted the temptation to shift focus.
Exactly as expected, the shape of the second man emerged suddenly above the car's hood, ready to pump bullets towards Manville's gun-flashes.
He never had the chance.
A micro-second after he saw the first flash, the bullet which had come from it was embedding itself in his skull.
Following through in a single smooth action, Manville threw himself to the ground and rolled out of the doorway on to the sidewalk.
The fourth man, caught without cover, had no chance at all.
Manville loosed three shots up at him, two of the slugs finding a mark in his chest.
With a horrible gurgle, the man toppled backwards to lay across the trunk of the car, finally slithering down it into the gutter.
Manville held his breath, listening intently for the faintest sound of life.
There was nothing.
Nevertheless, he remained crouched on the ground for several seconds before dragging himself to his feet.
He stood upright, looking from side to side in wonder.
He could hardly believe that he had done it.
Against odds of four to one, he had come through alive.
Jesus, that had to prove something about the old standards.
Now it was time to get the hell out of the area before half a dozen screaming squad cars came to find out what all the shooting was about.
Manville tucked his automatic back into  his shoulder holster and bent to the sidewalk to pick up his discarded jacket.
Too late, from the very top of his eyes, he saw the prone body laying in the gutter begin to move, and the black muzzle of the gun only a matter of inches from his face.
Manville knew then that Hayman had been right in writing him off as a washed-up veteran.
One of the oldest tricks in the book and he had completely overlooked it.
Standard night-fighting technique in group tactics.
Right at the beginning of a gun-fight, one man feigns a hit, screams, and goes down.
He stays down, just in case the target manages to take out all his colleagues.
Then, when it is all over…
Out of the darkness there came a single brilliant flash.
Manville hardly felt the entry of the .38 slug as it chewed into his body just below the bottom rib, burning upwards at an angle through his lung.
Manville was dead long before the heavy iron chains fastened around his ankles dragged his body to the bottom of the Potomac River.
Kirov's face bore the unmistakable look of a man who has deliberately walked into a cage of lions and emerged again unscathed.
Surprise fought for supremacy over sheer relief, the final result hardly strong enough to chase away the last vestiges of fear.
He leaned back against the wall of the KGB building, his knees weak and trembling.
Two hours spent inside those drab grey walls had been like a life sentence.
Yet, the desperate ploy had worked.
Kirov dipped his hand into his pocket, pulling out the freshly stamped papers and looking at them in amazement.
The gamble had worked, when a dozen different things could have gone so terribly wrong.
He could have failed to get a personal interview with the one man with whom he had some sort of contact.
His request could have been investigated more thoroughly, his premises subjected to a search and inventory which would have revealed his blatant lie.
Any one of thirty officials inside the building might have noticed his trembling body, or the tiny beads of sweat pricking his brow, and taken him aside for interrogation.
But none of these things had happened.
Kirov had found Pevrolensky with some free time, had put his case openly, and it had been treated sympathetically, without any detailed investigation.
Against all the odds, he carried freshly-stamped papers which enabled him to cross into Czechoslovakia to purchase some new rolls of cloth.
The offer of a free suit to Pevrolensky clinched the deal, and a shared vodka had set the seal on their minor piece of blat.
‘Ty mne i ya tebe ,’ people said, a knowing smile on their faces.
You scratch my back and I'll scratch yours.
It was the essential corruption of an under-privileged people.
It worked on all levels.
Kirov kissed the papers before tucking them safely back in his pocket.
Once in Prague, he would be comparatively safe.
There were connections there, safe houses where he could  hole up for a week or more, while his American friends made arrangements to get him out of the country and into free Europe.
There was no need to go back to the shop.
Before leaving, Kirov had destroyed what little incriminating paperwork there was.
It had seemed a natural precaution.
The single remaining piece of evidence which linked Kirov the tailor to Kirov the dissident activist was in his pocket, sealed within a plain brown, un-addressed envelope.
Soon, it too would be out of his hands, leaving no trail.
Pushing himself away from the walls of the KGB building, Kirov walked in the direction of the Post Office.
He purchased a stamp from the counter clerk, licked it and affixed it to the envelope.
Then, crossing to 8 quiet comer, he wrote Major Tzann's name and the address of the Kharkov airbase in crude block letters.
Peeling the stiffness of the obscene photograph through the thin envelope.
Kirov held it by one comer, wiped it with his sleeve, and dropped it into the post box.
His last task was completed.
Vologsky had no way to back out now.
The cuckoo had to fly to a new nest, or perish.
Kirov walked down the street towards the car park with a renewed strength in his step.
His knees were no longer weak, and his old legs felt like those of a 30-year-old once again.
He was walking towards a new life, a kind of freedom which had only been an idealistic daydream for nearly sixty years.
Long before the incriminating photograph turned up on Major Tzann's desk, he would be over the Czech border and awaiting the transport which would convey him to Germany, and thence to the United States.
Only retirement, and verdant Mid-Western pastures, lay in front of the old work-horse now,
Vologsky sat in the cockpit of the Foxbat, vaguely aware that his mind and body were strangely uncoordinated.
Physically, he was stiff and tense, the muscles in his back and shoulders resisting the comforting embrace of the padded flight couch.
There was a dull pain in his lower jaw, from hours of teeth-clenching, and the fingers of his right hand flexed and unflexed spasmodically, like those of an elderly arthritic.
Despite all this, his mind was dull, dead, vacuous.
His brain functioned, but on a detached, robotic level.
The vital senses, sight, hearing, touch, responded perfectly.
Yet all incoming data was rejected as soon as it had been acted upon.
Apart from pure reflex, there was no memory, no thought, no feeling.
Vologsky was like a zombie, existing on the outermost fringe of sentient life.
The state had persisted for over three days now.
Ever since Kirov had dropped his bombshell, Vologsky had reeled from the shock, his brain free-wheeling in a limbo which offered no thread of reality to latch on to.
At a single stroke of fate, Mikhail Vologsky was nothing, with only uncertainty to look forward to.
He was, to all intents and purposes, homeless, stateless — a non-person.
His entire past was cut away from him as though he, and the world he had known, had never even existed.
Without the past, there could be no future, and the present had absolutely no relevance.
Life was a continuous thread; snap it, and mindless instinct remained, with no direction or purpose.
There was not even a sense of anger, or regret.
They were only too positive emotions, requiring far more depth of concentration than Vologsky was capable of summoning
His eyes and ears picked out a flashing red light, an insistent warning bleep.
Vologsky's inner robot acknowledged that the missile detection apparatus was functioning, and took the appropriate action.
He leaned sideways, looking  out of the opened perspex canopy of the plane.
Below him, half hidden by the bulging air-intake on the port side of the aircraft, a mechanic tinkered with the complicated electronic innards of the Foxbat, through a small inspection hatch.
He ducked down, looking up at Vologsky from a crouch.
‘Detection system?’
Vologsky gave him a thumbs-up sign.
The mechanic gave a satisfied nod, and began screwing the inspection plate back into place.
Finished, he stepped back from the aircraft.
He called up to Vologsky.
‘That's it, then.
All systems are functioning perfectly.
You could fly this bucket to the moon and back.’
He flashed Vologsky a grin which was not returned, then shrugged, turned and walked back across the tarmac towards the administration buildings.
Strange, moody bastard, Vologsky.
Always had been.
Automatically, Vologsky completed his pre-flight check, finishing with a pre-programmed check-test on the on-board computer.
Predictably, the program ran through cleanly.
Vologsky erased the visual print-out and switched off all auxiliary power.
The Foxbat was ready to fly.
Vologsky glanced at his watch.
There was over an hour to go before the final briefing.
Only then would he know his destination.
And maybe change it, if he got the chance.
Everything had happened without warning.
The call for the entire squadron to scramble for a major transferral had come at 0.700 hours.
Instantly, the Kharkov base had become a hive of frenetic activity, preparing to swarm.
In the mess, speculation had buzzed about in hushed whispers, knowing, secretive nods.
Most of it had passed over Vologsky's head.
He neither knew, nor really cared, what was going on around him.
He just went with it, unresisting and unquestioning.
Nothing seemed to matter all that much.
The scramble might be a training exercise, or it might not.
Either way, Vologsky had no choice but to obey blindly.
It was all he had left to bind him to reality.
He was still, for the moment, a military man.
Therefore, he followed orders.
He was a pilot.
It was his simple function to fly aircraft.
Major Tzann followed orders too.
His higher position in the chain of authority made very little difference, really.
If the air-base were to be likened to a hive, then he was a drone rather than a worker.
That was the only difference between him and the pilots and the mechanics below him.
They all went about their duties mindlessly, vaguely aware of a higher power which directed their efforts, but largely in ignorance of its direction and purpose.
Tzann toyed with the sealed official envelope containing the briefing orders.
Tentatively, he ran his thumbnail over the thick seal, exerting a careful pressure which made an indentation in it without actually cracking it open.
It was like a childish dare, a game of bravado.
The orders were to be opened at 0.100 hours, and not a minute before.
Normal human curiosity flexed under the strain, but would not take on the forces of discipline in open combat.
Tzann thrust the sealed orders to one side, on top of a small pile of unopened mail.
There were other matters to attend to.
Serious matters.
The extremely disquieting matter of Lt. Vologsky, for instance.
Tzann flipped a switch on his intercom.
‘Put out a general call for Lt. Vologsky at once,’ he snapped.
‘He is to report here to my office immediately.’
Vologsky lay back in the flight couch, his body quiescent but just short of the point of relaxation.
The cockpit hood was open; the sun played upon his swarthy face.
The only sounds he registered were the faint rumblings of hangar doors and the occasional roar of powerful engines as his fellow-pilots tested their jets.
To a casual observer, he was at peace, yet the tension in his body remained only just dormant, simmering uneasily below explosion point.
‘Vologsky!
Wake up, Vologsky.
Major Tzann wants to see you in his office, right away.’
Vologsky was alert immediately, the tensions now on the surface, his nerve-endings tingling with anticipation and fear.
This was it, the confrontation-point which he had been dreading  for the best part of a week.
In an instant, all the deadness, the withdrawal was wiped away, leaving his mind clear to operate with the precision of a surgeon's scalpel.
The inner robot switched off, leaving the conscious man to cope with real problems, the immediacy of living.
Pumping adrenalin lent a shrill, neurotic edge to his voice as he answered.
‘Tzann?
Do you know what he wants with me?’
The messenger shook his head, grinning roguishly.
‘No, but I don't think he wants to give you a Hero of the Motherland medal.
Sounds like you're in trouble, Vologsky.’
Still grinning, he turned and began to walk away.
The photograph.
In his mind's eye, Vologsky could see Major Tzann seated at his desk, holding it between trembling fingers.
He could imagine the man's eyes, filled with loathing and disgust, unable to register the full extent of the blazing fury which lurked beneath.
When that fury finally broke through, the hand of retribution would come down with the strongest power in the world behind it.
Vologsky wanted to flee then, at that moment.
Snap the cockpit hood into place, gun the mighty engines of the Foxbat into life, taxi towards the nearest runway and let her go.
Streaking down the tarmac, against the wind.
Reaching take-off speed, rotating the aircraft into flight altitude and leaving the ground, his motherland, Major Tzann and his fury behind.
Arrowing into the sky, blasting the thin air behind him into a long trail of ionized particles, cracking the air and land below with the plane's supersonic footprint, outflying anything or anybody they sent up in his wake.
In less than two hours he could be free, safe and looking forward to a future.
It was impossible, of course.
Vologsky made no move to close the hood, or warm up the aircraft's engines.
An unscheduled take-off would be reported immediately; he would stand little chance of clearing the vicinity of the base itself.
More important, perhaps, he was in normal uniform, which grounded him as surely as if he had been chained to the nearest hangar door.
Without his pressurized flying suit, the supreme aerial technology of the MiG was useless, utterly wasted.
Vologsky might as well try to take off and escape in a hot air balloon.
Without the suit, supersonic flight was an impossibility, high-speed evasive action out of the question.
Long before he could goad the aircraft to anywhere near its optimum ceiling, Vologsky would be frozen, evacuated or crushed to death.
The feeling of deadness returned to him, damping down the fear.
Stiffly, like some crude automaton, Vologsky clambered from the plane's cockpit, dropped to the ground and began to march towards Major Tzann's quarters.
‘You wanted to see me, sir?’
Vologsky stood in front of Tzann's desk, stiffly to attention.
Upon entering, he had braced himself and executed a formal salute.
Major Tzann had given no sign, either physically or verbally, that he could relax.
Tzann fixed him with a stern, cold gaze.
It was meant to be intimidating, and it served that purpose well.
He was silent for a long time.
Delay itself was another powerfully disorientating factor.
Finally, Major Tzann spoke, his lips hardly moving.
‘You know why you are here, of course?’
The years of formal drill and training came to Vologsky's assistance.
His body remained stiff and taut, even though he wanted to tremble violently.
He masked the fear in his eyes with the vacant, subservient glaze which became second nature to military personnel.
‘No sir,’ Vologsky lied, vaguely surprised that his voice came out strong and low-pitched instead of quavering and shrill.
Major Tzann frowned slightly.
Without taking his eyes from the young pilot's, he slid his hand across his desk until his fingers encountered a brown, official-looking envelope.
Grasping it, Major Tzann raised the envelope in the air, brandishing it like a talisman.
Coldly, he said: ‘I received this today, Lieutenant Vologsky.
I find the contents very disquieting, to say the least.
It concerns your quite  unforgivable behaviour, of course.’
Still Vologsky remained rigid, his blank face giving nothing  away.
Cold was spreading up through his body from his feet, like a creeping gangrene.
Surprisingly, it helped rather than threatened his self-control.
Faint annoyance began to show on Major Tzann's face.
His heavy-handed tactics usually had their desired effect in reducing men to quivering wrecks.
It seemed that Vologsky had more resistance than most.
Major Tzann could not help regarding it as something of a personal affront, an act of mute insubordination.
He tried the ploy of self-incrimination one more time.
‘You know what I am talking about, of course?’
Vologsky licked dry lips.
‘No, sir.’
Major Tzann glared angrily, then forced himself to relax.
He dropped the envelope back on to his desk, drawing in a deep breath.
‘Very well, Lieutenant.
It would seem that your general behaviour and sense of discipline has become so lax and sloppy that you do not even remember serious breaches of conduct.
Allow me to remind you.
Some weeks ago, during the course of a top-security reconnaissance mission, you committed a serious breach of discipline and security by voicing certain dangerous comments over an open radio transmission.
You remember now, Vologsky?’
Vologsky wanted to relax, let out his breath and break into nervous laughter.
So that was what it was all about!
The stupid business with the radio controller at Alma-Ata.
In contrast to what he had been fearing, it was a trivial matter.
With a great effort, he remained still and silent.
‘You do not attempt to deny these charges, I see,’ Major Tzann said icily.
Vologsky kept his face grave, but the surging relief inside him made it impossible to inject quite the right note of abject apology into his voice.
‘No, sir.’
Major Tzann could not help but pick up on the missing contriteness.
He glowered angrily.
‘Perhaps you do not fully realize the gravity of your actions.
Lieutenant?’
Vologsky bowed his head slightly.
‘On the contrary, Major.
I realize that my unconsidered remarks were dangerously indiscreet.’
‘Indiscreet?’
Tzann bellowed.
‘At the very least, Lieutenant, you committed an act of crass stupidity.
If any hostile power monitored that transmission, it could well be regarded as a major breach of national security.
Treason, Vologsky…do I make my point clear?’
Vologsky lowered his voice to a whisper.
‘Yes, sir.’
The assumed humility seemed to have a soothing effect upon Major Tzann.
The faintest shadow of a smile flickered across his lips, quickly controlled.
‘The matter has not, as yet, been reported to the Soviet Supreme Command.
It was passed on to me, as your commanding officer, to take whatever steps I felt necessary.
The entire episode might have gone unnoticed had there not been a routine monitoring of the base communications tapes last week.
I will not make a snap decision, Lieutenant.
This matter is of the gravest concern to me, and to the good name of this unit.
My eventual decision may very well depend upon your behaviour over the next few weeks.
Do I make myself absolutely clear?’
Vologsky nodded faintly.
‘Perfectly clear, sir.’
It was obvious that Major Tzann had blown the matter up purely for his benefit.
He would not risk bringing himself and the Kharkov base into disrepute by pursuing the matter any further.
The concealed threat was meaningless.
‘Very well.’
Tzann was sure that he had made his point.
He pressed home one more turn of the knife, just for effect.
‘I shall, of course, consider some form of punishment, Lieutenant.
Normally, I would have withdrawn all future leave for some considerable time, but under the circumstances, such action is impossible.
Therefore, I shall consider it and inform you of my decision when you return to this base.’
‘Return, sir?’
Vologsky blurted out the question without thinking.
Major Tzann looked temporarily sheepish.
He had made an unfortunate slip of the tongue himself.
He covered up, hastily.
‘Of course, Lieutenant, you will already have realized that this morning's scramble is no exercise.
The entire squadron is being transferred, temporarily.
Your exact destination will be announced at the briefing.’
‘Of course, sir.’
Vologsky saluted again.
‘Will there be anything more, sir?’
Tzann shook his head.
‘Not for the moment, Lieutenant.
‘You are dismissed.’
‘Yes, sir.’
Vologsky clicked his heels together, executed a perfect swivel and marched towards the door.
After he had left, Major Tzann turned his attention back to the pile of papers and correspondence on his desk.
He sifted, somewhat peeved, through the remaining unopened mail.
There was rather a lot of it, and he had enough work already, dealing with a mass transfer of pilots and ground staff.
Idly, Tzann picked up another brown envelope, addressed to him in crudely fashioned capitals.
He toyed with the envelope for a couple of seconds, then thrust it back to the bottom of the pile.
The letter was obviously unofficial, probably some cranky rubbish from a relative or a sweetheart of one of the men in his squadron.
He would not bother himself with it now.
It could wait until later.
Glancing at his watch, Major Tzann noted that it was almost time for the briefing.