

Changes in the Desert
A YEAR CAME AND a year went and another began to tick its way into the clock of time.
It was a year in which the emphasis of my life changed.
Imperceptibly, slowly but definitely the eyes of my mind focussed more and more on that eye in the desert, Al Ain.
The Second Son had sweated through an orgy of study and entered the university of our choice.
In term time he spent nearly every weekend with us in London, sleeping in a small room which overlooked the garden, a room which we'd previously used as a dressing room.
Occasionally he brought Hassan or a new found friend with him but usually he was on his own, relishing being ‘at home’.
He made friends easily though he occasionally collected the odd hanger-on who I felt sure was only waiting for a Sheikhly hand-out.
Outside of their own milieu, Arabs seem to have a penchant for choosing the hustler as confidant, or the shyster as business companion.
In those early oil years they were easy marks and millions, perhaps billions, were lost in the pockets of the sleazy where the pounds and dollars grew in a muddy climate.
I disdained the half-baked friends he chose, encouraged the good ones, pushed him into buying the right shoes and jackets, T-shirts and jeans, explained endlessly the use of ‘could I’ and ‘may I’instead of‘give me’and ‘I want’, the right way to make tea, the right way to use a fork and knife.
He was a medieval prince.
I was an American-born British mother.
It was a weird combination.
Intelligent, quick, his studies were never a problem.
Once he'd mastered  sufficient English to use it without thinking, he surged forward, but his handwriting never improved.
There were awkward times as well as good times, and subjects on which we could never agree.
I hated it when he bribed rather than tipped, left without saying goodbye or arrived without saying hello, all perfectly acceptable in his world, but not in mine.
‘It is my home here?’
‘Yes.’
‘Then I come and go as home.’
‘No.’
‘Why not?’
‘It is not our way.’
‘Oh.’
We learned.
I learned.
He learned.
God knows who learned the most.
But the learning wound cords around us both and a strange half son and mother, half friend and friend relationship was made.
We had long talks together, usually over breakfasts of pancakes with maple syrup.
I must have made thousands over those university years, much to the annoyance of my own family, as I'd rarely made the effort for them.
I suppose I'd wanted to lure the boy into an acceptance of our ways and if pancakes were the bait, I'd use it.
I desperately wanted him to see the right ‘way to go’.
Spice cake, too, was made more frequently in my kitchen than ever before.
It ran a close second to pancakes on the list of his favourite foods.
Like all boys of his age, including my own son, he never seemed to get enough to eat, and yet in spite of the bread, pancakes and cake he remained thin and hard with muscle.
Perhaps this was due to his near passion for exercise.
It was as though he thought keeping fit would compensate for the image of the decadent Arab which was reflected in most of the press.
The stories startled him and stung him.
No matter how I tried to explain, he couldn't see how the odd fifty pound note or bottle of whisky he spread around contributed to that image.
‘They're just presents,’ he'd say.
‘They're nothing.’
And I'd try all over again to explain the Western way of life.
Sometimes I'd stamp my foot and cry in a completely feminine burst of frustration and he'd stand bewildered, pleading ignorance and apologising.
Sometimes he'd throw up his hands and storm out of the front door, returning to my apologies and his apologies and yet another spice cake.
Rough or smooth, it didn't matter for the bond that grew between us was strong.
It was made even stronger by my visits to his home and my increasing understanding of his own way of life.
Every holiday he'd fly back to the Gulf to be with his family, to put his feet on the familiar sandy soil of his own land, and every holiday he'd want me to go with him.
It wasn't always possible, but when the long winter vacations of his university came, it was hard, if not impossible to resist.
‘Come.
Come soon.
It's a good time.
We go to the desert.’
His calls were repeated at increasingly frequent intervals.
‘Come.
Come.
You know it is possible.
Everything is good here.
My mother invites you.’
His voice strained like a young stallion on a halter.
He knew his mark.
He knew me well.
He knew the temptation he was offering me.
The winter of his second year of university he began to do some special research on the Gulf for a project he'd been assigned.
His time in Abu Dhabi would be longer than usual.
‘Come.
Everyone is waiting for you.’
Eventually I gave in, just as both of us knew I would.
Besides, I argued with myself, the trip would work out well.
My husband was going out to Qatar, that pear drop of moonscape pitted with rich oases and edged with ancient trading posts, the Emirate that had refused at the last moment to join Sheikh Zayed's dream of unity.
Canny and careful, the Qataris had watched Abu Dhabi grow like a hot-house flower, but decided themselves to follow the path of the tortoise.
My husband had many friends there and they sometimes called on him for his help and advice.
We could travel together as far as Doha and I would go on alone to Abu Dhabi.
‘You will meet me?’
I asked the Second Son.
‘What do you think, Mrs Tea Cup?
Of course I will meet you.’
So I packed once more, stuffing my cases with presents which taxed the imagination.
Presents from returning travellers or presents for your hostess are as much a sign of manners to the hareem as they are to us.
The seemingly endless lengths of costly fabric which the masked ladies bought when they were in London were almost entirely presents for family and friends.
I couldn't possibly compete in those stakes, so I racked my brain to think of small things which they might like.
Sewing baskets, manicure sets, perfume bottles, all sorts of ornaments, soaps, shampoos and creams were packed into my cases with the skill of a Chinese puzzle maker.
It was a battle of weight versus cost, a battle which, to my husband's dismay, I usually lost and we would have to pay over the odds to have my cases stowed in the hold of the Jumbo.
The flight that winter was a quiet one, a good one.
The plane slipped  easily down out of the night sky on to the Doha runway.
I watched as my dear man made his way across the tarmac to the small Doha airport.
There was an hour of cleaning and a change of crew before we finally lifted off for the short leg down to Abu Dhabi.
The final landing after the long journey was welcome.
There's always that sense of relief when the wheels touch down evenly and the plane taxies to its last stop.
From my window I saw a tan Mercedes sports car pull up to the moving steps which were being fitted into place.
Three young Arabs got out and stood quietly talking together.
I recognised the Second Son.
Through the years that I'd known him, I'd watched him grow in mind and body and now felt a twinge of pride that he had grown so well.
Gathering my things, I moved out of the plane and on to the stairs.
As I stepped down the steep treads I heard the too loud click of shoe leather on metal.
I was already in that other world where unnecessary noise is taboo and loud voices are undignified.
We greeted each other with the warmth that people have when they enjoy each other, and my passport and luggage tickets were taken by one of his friends who moved off toward the airport building.
Hassan, who was usually with him in Abu Dhabi as well as England, manoeuvred into the rear seat of the Mercedes and I took my place beside the young son who had long since graduated into a licensed driver.
We drove off into a gentle January night.
The air was like a child's kiss, cool and sweet.
‘How is your mother?’
I asked.
‘Well, thanks be to God.’
‘And your grandmother and father and brothers and sisters?’
‘Well, all well, thanks be to God.’
‘And where are they now?’
‘Waiting for you, Mrs Tea Cup.
We will go tomorrow.’
His face turned briefly to me, smiling broadly.
It was a handsome face, thin to the point of gaunt, quiet and still, but with the stillness of a parked Maserati.
He now had the neatly trimmed beard which his father expected his sons to adopt as they grew to manhood.
His hair was closely cropped, giving no concessions to the fashionable long-haired male coiffures which he had once enjoyed.
It was covered with the white crocheted cap demanded of his tradition.
This was topped by the long white scarf and plain black, double twist crown.
The simplicity and white purity of this costume were gradually being adopted by all Arab men working on the peninsula whether they were Egyptian, Palestinian or Lebanese.
It seemed that by donning the white kandora, they were declaring allegiance to the country  of their patron Sheikhs.
It was a loose patronage and a loose allegiance, but it was there, nevertheless.
We drove on toward the city.
It had continued to expand and change.
Everything was taller; the trees, the bushes, the flowers and the buildings.
‘You will find change,’ said my young driver.
‘Yes, there are many new buildings.’
‘Of course, but not Abu Dhabi.
You will find changes in the desert.’
My heart missed a beat.
Some things needed to change, but some needed to remain the same and I usually found myself in this place pulling at the forces of change as a child might pull at the reins of a runaway horse.
Uselessly.
‘What changes?’
‘You will see,’ he smiled again.
The following day he arrived to collect me from the hotel where I had spent the night.
He was early as usual.
Arabs always seem to be either in a great hurry or without any sense of time at all.
He had a new Range Rover.
It was dark green with the inevitable thin layer of dust.
The seats, I thanked God, were now wonderfully comfortable, a great improvement over the hard utility of previous models.
Hassan and two other young men were in the back, with some boxes of food and a pile of neatly laundered men's wezaar.
My suitcase was stowed and I climbed in, drawing my long skirts around me.
We drove out of the city on the now four-laned highway, passing the airport and driving over the bridge where I silently saluted the ancient tower standing in the tide-water below, the place where the Sheikha had fallen from her camel.
Beyond the bridge were more signs of building.
The new refinery was expanding.
I remembered the black tents I had seen on this same spot on my first visit.
Where were they now?
Stored and forgotten, or out in the deep desert beyond?
A few miles further on we turned abruptly off the highway and the Range Rover sped into the desert leaving landmarks behind.
This was a new way.
A ‘short cut’.
Hassan seemed a bit wary and doubtful.
‘Are you sure you know the way?’ he asked.
‘Of course,’ answered the Second Son.
‘Anyway, we have the radio if we get lost,’ he added, laughing.
The boy was driving like the wind when suddenly we hit something.
It might have been a rock, a rill of sand, who knows, but the car took off.
Head-dresses flew in all directions.
There were shrieks of laughter and I felt a thousand bruises rising.
The laundered clothes had fallen every which way and my cases were in a jumbled heap in the back, but we didn't stop.
The car went racing on while the friends tried to tidy up the mess.
Later we were forced to stop.
Quite suddenly we had driven into soft, damp sand, grey and treacherous.
Sinking sands are everywhere in this area.
Sucked into their vortexes are camels, sheep, goats and too many men, women and children to remember.
They are the nightmares never forgotten, the reminder that the earth will have all our bones one day.
We were on the edge of such a pit.
The boys eased themselves carefully out of the back of the car and pulled out some of the stores with care.
I was told to stay where I was while slowly, slowly with delicate patience, the young son tried to inch the two embedded wheels out of the stuff.
Hassan and the Omanis put their shoulders against the tail-board, Hassan cursing as he moved too close to the edge of the pit.
They shouted commands to each other, the Second Son speaking to the engine as he might to his horse, commanding, urging, praising.
I felt the sinking whir of the back wheel as it dug its own grave.
Hassan's curses grew louder, ringing out over the sounds of the engine.
The Second Son shouted to him to pray instead of cursing and we might get somewhere.
He moved the gears down once again and once again and spoke to the engine, ‘Come my beauty, come, come.
Take us home, my love.’
Imperceptibly we moved.
Slowly, slowly, at the pace of a snail, both front wheels gained traction and in a matter of minutes, of seconds, the recalcitrant back wheel gave up its suicidal spinning and followed the others on to firm ground, if sand can ever be called firm.
We carried on in a more sober mood, each repeating his own prayers.
At such a moment God is never to be forgotten.
The whole incident made the short cut longer than the long cut but in time we reached the approach to the camp, much to the relief of Hassan who seemed to have less and less faith in the Second Son's navigation.
There at last was the fire burning hot, high and welcoming.
There at last were the now familiar figures moving back and forth across the sand.
And there were changes.
Yes, there were changes.
Many changes.
Though I'd visited the family in Al Ain and Abu Dhabi, it had been two years since I'd been to their camp on the Gulf.
A new water tower stood sentinel and only two or three tents were scattered outside the perimeter of a newly erected wire fence.
Inside the fence were six palm-frond houses identical to those which were once used in the old Abu Dhabi.
I saw these invitingly cool and comfortable, old-fashioned homes for the first time.
The children were the first to greet me, their brown eyes looking up, asking silently and then audibly for presents, knowing that my cases must  hold something for each of them, if only a ribbon or a sweet.
They were shooed away by the Sheikha, who rebuked them for being naughty and greeted me almost in the same breath.
‘Marhaba, Marhaba , Um Yusef, welcome.’
The Second Son threw his arms about her, disturbing both her veils and mask.
He winked at me with a slight shake of his head.
I caught the message which in effect meant, ‘Please, no word to my mother about our adventure.’
She rebuked him for being so long.
He said it wasn't long and that she worried for nothing and I changed the subject.
‘The houses!’
I exclaimed.
She smiled and took the bait.
‘You see them now?
You have never seen before?
Yes, my husband wanted them exactly as the old ones.
Everything is the same except they have electricity and water.
Come, I will show you.’
We walked to a house at the far end of the fenced area.
Half shyly, half proudly she opened a pair of narrow, carved wood double doors and I went inside.
It was cool and dark, a beautifully built long-house with decoratively carved wooden uprights, carved cross beams and a dormer roof.
The walls were made of stripped palm fronds, closely woven and tied with hemp to the wooden uprights.
The roof was split palm lath, tied and pinned as thatch, then covered with a finely woven matting which made it quite weather-proof.
The walls were lined with another fine matting woven in a large diamond design of red and green.
The floor was the beaten and smoothed sand of the desert covered in layers of mats and overlaid with fine carpets.
Cushions, the large hard Arabian cushions, stood neatly along the back wall.
At one end of the house, a separate small room was sectioned off.
It had traditionally been used for stores and dressing.
Now this little room was subdivided into a dressing area and a cement-floored shower.
A palliasse had been laid for me and in a corner were the rolled palliasses of others.
‘Who?’
I asked the Sheikha.
She named the same two hand-maids who had been with me on my first visit.
Selma and her friend Nadia.
I had known them now for some time and smiled at the thought of their good company.
‘Rest,’ she said and made her way to the door.
‘I must pray and will see you at lunch.’
She stood a moment in the sun, pulling her veils around her in one swift movement.
‘This is your home.
Welcome.
God keep your life,’ she said and moved serenely toward her own house.
Closing the doors against the brilliant light, I padded about, exploring  each nook, forgetting the drive, forgetting the pit, the danger, the desert traps.
Running my hands over the matting, fascinated by the craftsmanship, I searched vainly for nails.
There must have been some, but I couldn't find any.
Every wooden join was tongue and groove reinforced with knotted rope.
It was a house made as they once made their ships and I wondered how many would now learn either craft.
The big ocean-going booms with their kite sails were becoming as rare as square-rigged schooners or clipper ships.
There were small motor-powered jalboots which hugged the coast, fishing or cargo hopping, but they rarely lifted sail, plying in and out of the Emirates using the region's cheap petrol.
Freighters, tankers and a modern fishing fleet trafficked the old sea lanes.
As for the old houses, there were none in the immediate area that I knew of, other than these which had been built as a nostalgic memento, as a reminder, as a gift both to himself and his family from a man who must have known innately that in discarding the past his people were in danger of losing their touchstone.
How long would these areesh , these palm-frond houses be wanted, I wondered.
Were they just another novelty?
How long were they meant to withstand the pressures of wind and weather, and the galloping growth of all things bright and buyable?
I heard a light knock on the door.
My cases were brought in and stacked against the wall.
They were closely followed by the children who settled down to wait for their treasure trove.
Is there a child in the world who doesn't hope for presents from a returning traveller?
A returning traveller.
That was a startling thought.
Was I now so enmeshed in this world that the role of visitor had changed?
How many times had I heard, ‘This is your home,’‘These are your sons,’‘You are my sister,’‘They are your daughters’?
At first out of courtesy, but then, almost imperceptibly, as a declaration, a statement which carried with it inevitable responsibilities, inevitable pain, inevitable joy.
I laughed silently as I sat against a hard cushion in the palm-frond house looking at the brown eyes around me.
What strange quirk of the heart made me feel so much a part of the life of this place?
God only knew.
I wondered for a moment at the intricate patterns of life.
Then a familiar feeling of peace and warmth surrounded me.
I felt comfortable and at home and began to search my cases for chocolates and ribbons and toys.
Walking to the Island
THE FOLLOWING DAY dawned clear and cold.
Half awake, I lay listening to the silence.
During the night the wind had risen, skating sand over sand to build drifts against the windward side of the house.
It died as suddenly as it had risen.
Nadia and Selma lay sleeping quietly, their black hair tumbling out of their braids.
Selma snored gently in the weight of her sleep.
Her round, hospitable face was totally relaxed, the face of a child.
Nadia slept as she worked.
Neatly.
A sharp, heavy knock sent Nadia scrambling out into the cold half-light of the early morning.
It was our shovelful of hot coals for the brazier.
Grumbling in Urdu while the bearer joked, she soon had him out of the door, motioned me to sleep on, and leapt into her own blankets for another half hour of rest.
I buried myself deeper in the warmth of my own blanket and slept again.
The clink of cup against saucer woke me.
Selma was pouring my morning tea.
‘Good morning — you are sleeping well, eh?
It is good.
Breakfast soon, Bibi.’
We drank tea together.
It was hot and thickly sweet from a new tin of condensed milk.
After a short, complicated conversation in our melange of languages, she left me to battle with my clothes and the shower, returning only to tell me to come to the house of Sheikha Grandmother.
The women's meals were always served in the home of Sheikha Grandmother whether that home was a tent, an areesh , a bungalow, or, as it eventually proved, a palace.
She was the titular head of our hareem.
The men ate in a large tent outside the perimeter of the fence.
The fire beside the storage tent and cook-house was still burning and trays were being carried to tents and houses when I made my way across the sand wrapped in shawls against the cold.
It would be another two hours before the sun rode high and hot.
‘Peace be with you,’ I said, kicking off my shoes as I crossed the threshold of Sheikha Grandmother's house.
‘And with you, peace,’ the women replied softly.
I went first to Sheikha Grandmother to make my good morning, then greeted all the others in turn.
The Eldest Son's young wife was there.
They had married the previous summer.
At long last the large new house in the Al Ain compound would be occupied.
A shy, thin, very beautiful young girl, she was already pregnant.
The Eldest Son had his own areesh, his own palm-frond house where his bride sat buried in her shyness while the Sheikha's daughter did her best to make her smile.
Her smile was that of a half-child, half-woman.
It was wholly lovely.
I sat beside her and we waited for those who had not yet arrived.
The tray with its conical basket ‘hat’ covering the food was in the centre of our circle but no-one would consider starting until we were all together.
I had grown used to these meal gatherings, to the formal greetings.
Whatever the time of day, entering a room or joining a group demanded a blessing.
‘God's peace be with you all.’
As for the children, ‘Hi, Mom’ would be as startling as a bikini.
Every morning and every afternoon after siestas, the children and young people were expected to greet their mothers, grandmothers and aunts with a kiss in the centre of the forehead.
For fathers, grandfathers and uncles there was the nose kiss.
This strange greeting is used in this particular part of Arabia and parts of Oman, not the northern Gulf nor the inland deserts of Saudi Arabia.
Hands at the sides, nose quickly touches nose one to three times.
Men greet their friends this way, women greet their women friends.
‘Where did this come from?
Why?’
I had asked.
‘Perhaps it is because the nose is the first part of you to come forward.
And you can be dignified still.
An embrace is more intimate,’ was the answer.
Who knows?
One thing is sure.
It is an ancient form of recognition that civilisation drowns.
Here in the Abu Dhabi/Al Ain area it was both a statement and a signature used only by those whose lives were rooted in the place.
As we sat waiting, each wrapped in her own morning thoughts, a small three-year-old girl came quietly through the door, dragging a piece of black veiling behind her.
It was Amina, one of the Sheikha's foster daughters.
Intensely shy but always wanting to be good, she went round the ‘table’, kissing each one of us and hoping for a hug in return.
The veil was her security blanket.
She was never without it.
The second foster daughter soon followed, coming in with a bound.
Miriam was five and about as different from Amina as possible.
Extroverted, quick and full of enthusiasm, she hopped about the carpet without a word of greeting to anyone.
No-one scolded her.
Scoldings were reserved for more serious offences.
Although many children were fostered, especially girls, few were adopted.
True adoption is rare.
Adoptive children should nurse at the breast of one of the immediate family in order to have the freedom of the family when they are adult.
They are then accepted as true brothers or sisters.
Marriage between a blood son and an adopted daughter who had nursed at the same breast would be incestuous,haram — forbidden.
Miriam had been an orphaned refugee child brought from the Lebanon at the Sheikha's request.
Amina had been orphaned in the Emirates.
Both were kissed and cuddled and bandied about like special toys.
In most of the hareems there were usually two or more of these little girls.
Sheikhas were always looking for homeless orphans to take under their wing.
There was one wonderful story of a little Pakistani girl of some four to five years who accidentally wandered on to the edge of the Abu Dhabi-Dubai road.
A Sheikha passing in her stretched Mercedes saw the child and picked her up.
The little girl seemed to have been abandoned, so the Sheikha took her home, cared for her and made all the necessary preparations to keep her.
Only when the police and parents advertised the child's disappearance was the mistake discovered and the child returned to her family.
In any event, that is the story.
Miriam and Amina were not foundlings.
A careful search had been made for two orphaned children whom the Sheikha could foster and love as her own.
These two lucky little girls were chosen.
They were being brought up with the same affection the Sheikha gave her own daughter.
All these little girls ate their meals in the Sheikha's majlis with their nurses — in the nursery, so to speak.
They wouldn't join the grown-ups for a good many years, though the Sheikha's daughter had been my meal companion before I myself had been accepted by the ‘grown-ups,.
Once the little ones had left the room, I shifted my position on the floor and sat cross-legged, trying to cover the soles of my feet with my skirt.
It is as rude as spitting to turn the soles of your feet toward anyone, so stretching your legs in front of you becomes nearly impossible.
Leg cramp, therefore, is always imminent.
This, plus the fact that sitting tahat — down on the  carpet — is no excuse to lounge, makes it a problem for me.
You are supposed to sit up with a straight back.
In fact the back should be straight at all times.
My back with its two slipped discs sometimes ached unmercifully.
Indeed one of my more embarrassing moments was when a child was told not to sit like Um Yusef.
In Arabic, of course, thinking I didn't understand.
Shame.
Shame on me.
When the Sheikha finally arrived we all rose to greet her.
We always rose to greet each other.
They did it easily.
I was always getting my feet caught on my hems.
Breakfast was my favourite meal as it was the easiest for me to eat.
I had become quite skilled with harees, that glutinous porridge of lamb and cracked wheat which I had met at my first meal bedu style.
Bilaleet was less enjoyable for me as I couldn't get used to sweet vermicelli, but then I never liked rice pudding either.
My real favourite became mahala , a very thin pancake about twelve to eighteen inches across which is torn into pieces with the fingers and dipped into a mixture of honey and butter.
Delicious.
Then there were the hot, spiced, yeast buns with their shine of sugar on top.
Oh yes.
Breakfast was always a pleasure.
After nibbling away at piece after piece of mahala and making a large hole in the harees dish, I said my Alhamdulillah — Thanks be to God.
‘No, no.
This is not enough.
You must eat more.’
I shook my head and was saved from further entreaties by the arrival once again of the children who all wanted choice titbits from the grownups, ‘table’, kisses and praise.
The washing bowl with its kettle was passed.
Coffee was served and we sat sipping cup after cup.
‘Will you walk today, Um Yusef?’
The Sheikha turned to me as she spoke.
She knew that I loved to walk along the inlet with the children, looking for shells or pebbles or a wild flower.
I hesitated, for I already had a plan but wasn't sure whether it would be acceptable.
‘I would like to walk across the inlet to the island,’ I said.
‘Walk?
Through the water?’
There was consternation on the one hand.
‘It is surely too cold.’
‘It is too deep.’
‘You will get wet.’
There was laughter on the other hand.
‘I'd like to see Maha walk.’
Shrieks of alarm from Maha, a divorcee from Qatar who often visited in those days.
‘She'd never make it.’
‘Never.’
‘The fish would eat her.’
This last from Hussa, the Sheikha's great friend and lady-in-waiting.
Hussa was a large, enveloping woman with a large, enveloping sense of humour; she walked with the rolling gait of a shore-bound sailor and her veils had such a haphazard permanence, you felt they were an outgrowth of her personality rather than a covering.
When camping, she generally wore an old-fashioned dress with little or no decoration.
Her jewellery consisted of a sound gold watch and a fine turquoise ring.
Nothing else.
Her hands were strong, her body was strong.
She knew everyone and was always in the know, always had some news.
She was a catalyst.
The daughter of an ocean-going boom's captain, Hussa understood and loved all things relating to the sea.
When we walked along the shore with the children trailing us, she would name the shells, the fish and the scrub grass.
She marked the paths of birds and insects, pointed to the homes of lizards and carried a fishing line which she would occasionally cast, watching for the rough bobbin to lurch, winding in a small, flat saafi fish which danced on the hook until she released it and tossed it back.
Yes, Hussa would walk with me.
‘We'll put the children in the boat and pull them across,’ I said.
‘We can pull Maha too if she is afraid to walk.’
Maha was a lushly beautiful woman who had left the husband who had been arranged for her.
She cut her masks daringly until there was little left of them.
She had dancing eyes and a full figure.
There was little doubt that she would marry again and hopefully it would prove a more comfortable arrangement.
‘She will walk,’ said Hussa.
‘I will go in the boat,’ said Maha.
‘She will walk,’ said Hussa.
So it was decided.
‘Will you come?’
I asked the Sheikha.
‘No.
Another time.
I have much work.’
Her eyes smiled, and I knew it was true.
I knew, too, that she felt such an excursion would be just a little too unconventional for one of her position.
We set out for the inlet, pulling a shrieking Maha, surrounded by the usual bevy of children and urged on by the boys, maids and especially the Youngest Son, who was always ready to tease and laugh.
It was only a few yards to the water.
The sun shone somewhere between warm and hot.
At the water's edge a rowing boat was beached.
The tide was ebbing.
We gathered round the boat with all the sense of adventure of Drake  rounding the Horn.
The children began to jump in and out of the boat, arranging and re-arranging themselves.
Maha tried to join them but was cast out and good-humouredly began to push the loaded craft into the water.
‘I'll pull the children in the boat.
You pull Maha,’ said Hussa.
‘Pick up your dress so it won't get wet,’ I said to Maha.
She gingerly lifted her skirt to reveal perhaps twelve inches of heavily embroidered, ankle-tight white pantaloons.
Hussa didn't bother.
She plunged forward, skirts dragging, heaving on the tow rope.
At its deepest I reckoned the water might be waist high.
The whole inlet couldn't have been more than fifty yards across, but to Maha it was at least a mile wide, as deep as the ocean, wet and cold.
To add to her worries the sandy bottom was thickly covered by myriads of minute creatures in their delicate shells.
I took her by the hand and stepped into the water.
She was game so step by step, her eyes growing bigger, her shrieks louder, we inched our way across.
Lifting our skirts higher and higher to avoid the water we carefully dropped them as it became shallow again.
As we reached the shore of the island Maha threw her hands in the air, clasping them in a boxer's sign of victory.
With her veils damp, her mask awry and her skirts bedraggled, she danced a little jig.
‘Thanks be to God.
I crossed,’ she shouted.
Hussa had beached the boat and the children made off in every direction to explore.
Maha followed them but Hussa and I threw ourselves face down on the warm, white sand, both of us smiling at the success of the project.
This was the same island we had visited on my first trip.
On its Gulf side, the collection of flotsam and jetsam could still be found.
To reach it other than by boat or wading in low tide would have taken an hour's drive, so it was not often visited by the women.
They rarely ventured more than ankle deep into the inlet.
Hussa was the exception.
She could swim, read the signs of the sea, forecast the weather.
She was a fund of knowledge in a thousand unexpected ways.
After resting and lazing for nearly an hour, after the children had slid down enough dunes, chased enough birds, fallen in the water enough times, we returned in much the same way as we started out, except this time Maha leapt into the boat and would not move.
With gunnels close to the water, much shouting and sharp warnings to sit still, Hussa and I dragged the boat back home.
It had been an adventure.
The Djinn and the Slave of the Devil
THE MORNING CLOUDS had withered and disappeared.
The distant winter sun still held enough heat to dry the sky of every shred of moisture.
It was siesta time, that full-stop in the day which divides the long morning from the long evening.
I never could sleep in the middle of the day, so as usual I took a sketch pad and sat sketching and making notes with my back against the wall of my house.
It was calm and still, that rare sort of peace that feeds the soul.
But it didn't last long.
The children were up first.
They always found me no matter where I hid.
As they demanded sketches of themselves, I drew first one and then another.
Any sort of likeness would bring choruses of ‘Good, good’, ‘Again, Mrs Tea Cup, again.’
I'm a poor artist and only draw to make notes, but in this company everything was flatteringly good.
Around four o'clock I packed up my books and went into my house to wash and change.
A little mirror had been hung on the wall of the dressing area.
It looked rather like a closed  triptych .
Two doors shut the glass away when it was not in use, as if to remind me that too much self-admiration was unacceptable.
I could just see my face in it.
Mirrors were still very dubious household items.
It was not seemly to look at oneself and although every lady had her hand minor tucked into her personal box, mirrors on the wall were still not quite nice, still slightly risqué.
Turning on the shower, I let the water run over me.
The cement floor was cold underfoot and the water colder, so I washed quickly and jumped  out on to the carpet, gratefully rubbing myself with a towel which the Sheikha had given me.
I was sure the  triptych mirror was one of her own treasures and I opened it carefully to see myself as I brushed my hair and applied a quick dab of lipstick, the red paint which marked me as a Westerner as surely as my blue eyes and blondish hair.
They never used lipstick.
It was not only unnecessary but slightly scandalous.
Pulling on a sweater and wrapping my long kilt around me, I made my way towards Sheikha Grandmother's house.
We greeted each other for the afternoon, but before I could sit down she took hold of the fabric of my kilt and gently fingered it.
‘Wool?’ she asked.
Her eyes were keen and direct.
A wool skirt was a strange thing to one whose life had been spent battling the sun.
‘Yes, wool,’ I answered and tried to explain the idea of tartan, the ‘tribes’of Scotland with their foreign names.
‘And they play the pipes, just as the Arab plays them with a bag holding air,’ I added.
That fact didn't surprise her.
We all expect others to be like ourselves.
But wool skirts — that was strange.
‘It is good,’ she said, as she held the cloth and told me to sit.
Ordering coffee she then pointed to my pullover and shook her finger.
I knew she didn't like my roll-neck pullover.
Polyester cardigans were sometimes worn over their silks on a cold night, but pullovers were rather rough and for children, not for ladies.
It suddenly occurred to me that just as I wanted the boys to dress according to Western ideas when they were in London, so the Sheikha and Sheikha Grandmother would like me to dress according to their ideas of fashion when I was with them.
I never wore the roll-neck out there again and as the years passed I was gradually given a large wardrobe of beautiful traditional dresses, which I wore with comfort and delight, each dress reminding me of the giver.
Having drunk my first afternoon coffee with Sheikha Grandmother I went to greet the Sheikha.
She had settled on a carpet which had been unrolled on the sand in front of her house and the family had gathered around her.
She liked to be outside, liked to watch the day waxing or waning, liked to be where she could see her household moving about.
It was quiet.
Relaxed.
Coffee was poured again.
Smoke ruse in a thick spiral from the oil-perfumed sandalwood smouldering in an incense pot.
A second thermos was passed with hot camels' milk, yellow with saffron and heavily sweet.
The men of the family began to join us.
The Sheikh with his now tall  sons wore their long grey and brown winter kandoras.
On their heads were checked winter head scarves twisted into turbans that showed by the particular shape the area from which they came.
Al Ain.
The tassels of the head scarves spilt down the sides of their faces.
It is a handsome style, now sadly relegated to holidays in the desert or hunting excursions.
The Eldest Son joined the family.
He was on holiday from his university in Jordan; he had yet to finish his studies even though he was now married.
Heavier than the others, excitable, he reacted to any given situation with sudden outbursts of what he then felt was a Sheikhly authoritarianism.
Underneath the prickly exterior, however, was an inherently sweet character with a deep interest in history and the machinations of international politics.
We would have long, complicated discussions whenever the days allowed a stretch of time between us.
He, too, was blessed with that sense of humour which seemed indigenous to them all.
As we sat together in front of the Sheikha's areesh the conversation began to move back and forth, gathering speed and laughter.
Tales were told of trips abroad and their social pitfalls.
The hopeless English or French of one or another was mimicked while stories of European or Asian drivers, hotel waiters or doctors were traded.
They mocked each other mercilessly, made a comedy of the simplest incident and drew the world into their pantomime.
‘And so they don't know which button to push in the lift,’ laughed the Youngest Son.
‘First up, then down.
Then up and up and down and down.
Hussa got out the della and began to pour coffee.
Up, down, up, down.’
Once the sense of the ridiculous had begun it was like waves gathering into a crescendo.
Animals, birds, insects, people were all pulled into the joke of life.
The laughter rolled up until we were weak and weeping, and the sky turned pink, and the air began to cool.
Suddenly the tempo changed.
Two spirals of dust had appeared on the distant horizon.
‘Who?’ asked the Sheikh and rose to get a better look.
His eyes had long been trained to see deep into the flat light of the desert.
‘The trucks with the stores,’ said the Second Son.
‘Yes, but three are coming.’
I could still see nothing but the spirals of desert dust.
‘Your sister?’ asked the Sheikha.
‘No, not that car.’
‘Who comes to the desert then?’ asked the Eldest Son.
‘It is a holiday.
Anyone might come,’ said the Second Son.
Anyone might, anyone could, anyone would be welcome for a time or  half a time.
The trucks eventually swung into the camp's orbit and moved off to unload stores.
A car pulled up to the fence.
Two women shook themselves out.
‘It is Halema bint Mohammed.
She said she might come,, said the Sheikha softly and went to greet her.
A bundle of black walked toward her, round, bobbing, and bubbling with good cheer.
She was accompanied by a dark, well-dressed woman.
As she had no mask, she was no doubt a hand-maid-cum-companion to the cheerful bundle.
Only women who are indigenous to the area wear masks, so she was a foreign Arab — probably a Sudanese or Somali.
The women exchanged their multiple greetings, quickly and quietly, rattling off the familiar courtesy phrases, nodding and gesturing with their hands — small gestures.
‘God's peace be on you and all with you,’ said the black bundle.
‘And God's peace on you and all with you,’ we all answered.
‘How are you all?’
‘Well, praise be to God.’
‘How are you,sir, tawil omrak ’ asked the bundle of the Sheikh, ‘and your mother and sisters and aunts?’
Here a long list of everyone by name.
‘Well, praise be to God,’ answered the Sheikh.
Interspersed throughout the conversation the Sheikha added, ‘Welcome, welcome.’
We had all risen to greet them.
The men, after more formal greetings, moved off to their majlis tent.
The circle of women had grown beyond the immediate family.
If the men didn't move off, the woman visitor would have had to remain completely veiled as well as masked.
For friends such as Hussa and Maha who had spent a lifetime with the family such formalities scarcely mattered any more.
But for real visitors it was a must.
Once the men had left, the hareem settled down on the carpet once again.
Now the welcome greetings continued.
These greetings are always positive, for with these women all life is of God: whatever trials or disasters are endured, they must be God-sent so all is well.
Not for them our Western confidences: ‘How are you?’
‘Awful, I've got a lousy headache’ or ‘My uncle just died’or ‘Suzie's got a cold.’
All news on greeting is good.
Even if a daughter or son or husband were seriously ill, the answer to ‘How are you all?’ would be ‘Well, praise be to God,, thus giving all into God's hands, and relying on his wisdom and mercy.
Like the Biblical Shunamite woman, whose faith in God was such that when her only son died she answered the prophet Elisha's question ‘Is all well with  the child?’ with ‘It is well’, so these women answer ‘All is well’when humanly all is a disaster.
Halema, however, had no sad news to share.
The coffee thermos and cups were fetched, the incense came again but this time it was passed more slowly, so that everyone could enjoy the sweet-smelling smoke to a greater extent.
Halema moved the pot down her dress, then folded it inside her cloak, waiting for the smoke to rise.
Her companion did the same, but the Sheikha in her usual way lifted her veil and with a graceful inward movement of her wrist held the pot under her arm, first one side then the other, her neck arching above the rising smoke.
The pot went again to Halema, who pulled up her skirt, revealing blue pantaloons trimmed with four or five inches of the requisite silver and gold thread at the ankle.
She placed the pot between her legs, knees drawn up, then pulled her skirts down carefully and her cloak on top of it all.
I watched and waited.
Soon the smoke began to leak through her clothes until the ensuing fog convinced me as always that she would set herself alight.
She looked like a little black chattering chimney pot, for as the smoke rose up through her veils she kept up a constant conversation.
Periodically she turned to me and spoke to me like a teacher to a beloved but dull-witted child.
‘Shoo hada ?’ she'd say pointing to her nose or chin or mouth or leg or wrist.
‘What's this?’
When the Arabic word would come roughly out of my mouth she'd correct and correct —‘La, la ’—‘No, no’— and would carefully mouth the right pronunciation.
Right at least according to this area.
She sat steaming away, telling her news.
It was a holiday.
She wanted to see Sheikha Grandmother.
She wanted to see the palm houses which she had heard the Sheikh had built.
The news of this or that Abu Dhabi family was given.
Some I knew, some I didn't.
The talk began to waft over me, Halema's guttural Arabic being too quick and too difficult for me to catch.
I covered myself in myself and became the observer, an easy role to assume after years of struggling with their throaty language and its local eccentricities, its dialects and apposite linguistic twists and turns.
Years of the language battle seemed to have given me an inner eye.
If you are lost in language you must find other roads to understanding.
So I put my own invisible veils over me and began to watch.
Halema was a black-covered dumpling, delicious and rich, perhaps not in money, but certainly in the joy of life.
She was a traditionalist — her jewellery gave no concessions to modern fashion.
Not for her the shops of the Boulevard or Bond Street.
She was content in her own city.
She was  either divorced or widowed.
One sensed the aloneness, and would she be roaming the desert if there were a husband to worry about?
She was a member of this or an allied tribe.
Sheikha Grandmother, whom she wanted to visit, was a renowned figure, but such a trip would not be made for one outside the tribe circle.
She was filled with an inner energy.
Her small hands flew like gold-ringed birds as she told the news, rocking back and forth with laughter at one of her own jokes.
Red hair escaped from under her veil.
Red with henna.
White hair is sign of great age, a sign that one no longer really cares about appearance.
When her veils eventually parted a waft of smoke engulfed her and she laughed again, a deep-throated, jolly laugh.
You could see her whole body shaking and I remembered Clement Moore's The Night Before Christmas ; ‘a right jolly old elf…with a little round belly that shook when he laughed like a bowlful of jelly.’
As I watched, the sun dropped toward the horizon gathering momentum as it fell.
Almost at a signal, though none was given, the women rose.
‘Sulleh , Um Yusef.
I go to pray.’
Halema handed the incense pot to one of the maids, and the women moved off in a wave of black veiling.
The Sheikha gave me a questioning look and I answered, ‘I will stay here.’
The twilight began to move in around me, that strange half-light which sometimes gives way to an afterglow.
All the beauty that ought to be but rarely is, all the promises of perfection are caught in a few moments of that iridescent light.
An exquisite unreality catches the earth, or perhaps it is the ultimate reality.
They say — the records say, that twilight is a moment equal only to pre-dawn in its tenuous hold on life.
More lives begin and end in those pre-dawn or pre-night moments than at any other period in our twenty-four hour cycle.
Islam covers these arcs of time in a blanket of prayer.
Certainly in the desert at dawn and dusk it is impossible to ignore the need to relate to an intelligence, to a protective power beyond oneself.
In the shimmering half-light, even the earth seems to breathe.
Inevitably, consciously, I added my own prayers to their paeons of praise.
That evening, long after the dark had finally driven even me inside, I mentioned the beauty of the twilight.
‘Ah,’ said Halema, with her eyes laughing, ‘she does not know how she is protected by our prayers from Boudariah.’
Boudariah, the slave of the Devil, the evil spirit of the sea.
I had heard of this spirit creature.
‘They say that he is very tall and very thin, but no-one  is really sure,’ I said.
‘Is that right?
Do you know?’
She looked at me and laughed.
‘Who knows?
Who knows?
But do you believe?’
‘I only know that there is more that I do not know than that I know,, I answered.
Halema seemed satisfied with my answer and the talk turned to the lives of such spirits and then to the djinn.
It is said that these underground beings, djinn, rise in the half light of pre-dawn and in the twilight.
Are they mind creatures, hallucinations or semi-realities?
Is it belief that gives them reality?
If we disbelieve do they cease to exist?
Or is the carefully structured Arabian djinn world a remnant of some extension of communication which we once knew how to use and control but have now lost?
All of us have our underworld and nether world creatures with whom we carry on some inner conversation.
On black nights in Cornwall the piskies fairly leap out of the twisted holly trees and granite stones and I rush inside, grateful for the light, the fire, the warmth of a human voice.
Cornwall.
Our family's heart home where the sea smashes against cliffs in winter, and the sun pulls life out of its rich earth in summer.
The piskies could be anywhere.
In the hedges, under milk churns, by the stone stiles.
Anywhere.
And what of hobgoblins, gnomes and the little people of Ireland?
What of fairies?
What of Zeus himself and Medusa, the Cyrenes and Orpheus?
Halema settled herself more comfortably, adjusted her veils and began to question me.
‘You know of the djinn?
What do you know?’
I explained that before I came to Arabia the only djinn or genie that I knew was Aladdin's genie of the lamp.
‘You know of Ah-lah-deen?
How do you know?’
‘She reads of him,’ said Hussa.
‘And of Sindebahd.’
These characters have become so much a part of our own childhood that we almost forget their origin.
‘Tell me, Halema, is Boudariah a djinn or a devil?
What is the difference between djinn and devil?’
I asked.
She looked surprised at my ignorance.
‘Devils are not djinn.
Djinn are not devils.
One is one.
Other is other.’
‘You mean djinn or we say genie as in our story of Aladdin?’
‘Whose story of Ahlahdeen?’
A slight lift of the eyes and no doubt eyebrows which were hidden under the mask.
Then a quiet laugh.
I was chastened.
‘Forgive me,’ I said.
‘Your story.
But it is such a famous story that we all mistake it for our own.’
‘It belongs to the world,’ said the Sheikha, not wishing to see me embarrassed.
‘You mistake the story for the realities,’ said Halema.
‘Djinn are real.’
She saw the moment of disbelief in my eyes.
‘Come, Um Yusef, you believe in God?
Yes, of course you do.
Then you must believe in djinn for they are written in the Qur'an.’
The finer points of the differences between being a Christian and a Muslim were rarely discussed between us.
For them it was enough that 1, a Westerner from a God-forgotten, immoral country, believed and made some attempt to practise.
On my part I would not presume to disturb their faith.
‘Tell me,’ I said.
Halema began to describe the life of the desert djinn who people the underworld.
They have a complete society, I was told.
A family life.
Homes.
They marry, have children and die.
Some go to Paradise, some to Hell.
There are black djinn and white djinn.
They have been known both to help and to hurt the desert people.
They can guide you or confuse you.
When they rise at dawn and in the twilight people should not be abroad, but at their prayers indoors.
Four elements protect you from them.
Fire, steel, salt and the Qur'an, but the Qur'an, of course, is considered the most important.
‘And they hate electricity,’ Hussa added.
I suspected this was the reason compounds and camps always had rings of protective lights.
Djinn are of another dimension but can take possession of all living things.
Sometimes they are in trees, sometimes in animals and sometimes they take control of a human.
When this happens the human is capable of extraordinary acts.
They will do things that ordinarily would injure them, and yet they are not injured; superhuman acts, from lifting enormous weights to self-wounding.
At twilight it is most important to be kind to animals, to refrain from throwing anything on the ground, from riding either horse or camel over the desert, for you might injure a rising djinn and they are vengeful spirits.
‘Now you know of the djinn.’
said Halema.
‘Yes, you know.
But you do not believe.
Come, I will tell you of Aisha.
She knew Aisha?’
Halema turned to the Sheikha who said that I had known her well.
Aisha had been both a tribal companion to the Sheikha and a ‘nanny’ to her children.
She had been a wet-nurse for the Sheikha's youngest child, her daughter.
A kind woman, she had had three children of her own and a heart as large as her ample body.
I had visited her often in the London  hospital where vain efforts were made to stop the spread of cancer.
She had been stone deaf, as well.
‘Can't anything be done for her deafness, at least?’
I had asked, ‘Surely some hearing aid or something?’
‘No, nothing,’ was the answer.
‘She has seen the best specialists in Europe.’
As the wind began to rise outside the palm house, Halema told the story of Aisha's deafness.
It had happened when Aisha was first married.
She had been cooking rice for supper.
Not realising that the afternoon hours had passed, she had gone out and thrown the boiling rice water on the ground.
It was just twilight.
The following morning she was struck with a heavy fever and by the end of the day she was stone deaf.
There was no damage to her eardrums, no apparent cause other than the fever.
‘She threw the rice water on the djinn,’ said Halema.
‘It was a strong curse.
The djinn will always pay you back.
They will always take revenge.
You must always be careful.’
As she spoke, the women listened carefully, interjecting a soft prayer or injunction to praise God.
They watched me even more carefully, their eyes expressionless, waiting.
They waited for my comments, waited to see whether I would condemn their beliefs or laugh.
They waited for the moment when I might put myself beyond their pale.
‘Aisha was a good woman,’ I said.
‘A kind woman.’
‘Thanks be to God,’ they answered.
‘She died as she lived, with patience and courage,’ I went on, for I knew more was expected of me.
‘I believe that only God could have saved her, but for some reason — perhaps her fear or our fear for her — we could not realise His mercy.’
‘Thanks be to God, this is true.’
‘Praise God who has created all things.’
‘Praise Him.
Thank Him.’
All was in God's hands.
All of my life, all of theirs.
We were breathing together again and there were no barriers of disbelief between us.
The Sheikha called for coffee and some sweet to be brought.
An enamel pot arrived and we dipped our fingers in the sweet, gelatinous stuff.
Then I turned again to Halema.
‘But what of Boudariah?’
‘Ah,’ she said, handing back her coffee cup with a shake to Selma, who was never far away.
Adding a quiet ‘Thanks be to God’, she turned to Shama.
‘You tell her of Boudariah, Shama, for of this you know much.’
Shama was the mother of Hussa.
She was an ageless woman, this widow of a sea-captain.
She sat with a lame leg tucked under her.
It was the result of a fall from a camel on her way to Mecca.
In the days to come she would tell me the story, she would teach me many things.
How to watch the stars, how to number the days for the planting of dates and how to forecast the weather.
I never knew her young, but she has never grown older in the years since I began to sit with this hareem.
Boudariah, she began, slowly repeating his name as she settled herself more comfortably and tugged at her long, old-fashioned mask.
Her voice was deep and low.
A contralto.
‘He comes out of the darkness.
He is not a djinn.
His spirit is black.
He is the slave of darkness, of the evil one, of the Devil himself.
The Devil is not a djinn, Um Yusef, but is as with you.
The whole of the bad.
The one who takes you and makes you do the wicked thing.
Boudariah is his slave.’
As she spoke, the wind rose again and the brazier burned hot.
We warmed our hands as though a sudden chill had come upon us at the mention of his name.
Shama continued.
‘Off the coast of Ras Al Khaimah and off the coast of Muscat, too, the Slave of the Devil has been known to catch a boat by the middle, break it — break its back and pull it down and down until all is gone.
Nothing seen and no-one found.
Never and never.
This is true, for we know some travellers who were on such a ship.
A great ship.
They were going from Ras Al Khaimah to India.
There was no wind.
No storm.
It was calm.
Boudariah caught the boat and sank it.
This time, thanks be to God, some were saved to tell the news.
‘I tell you, if anyone went near the beach in those days before everything became new — if anyone went near the beach at night, the Slave would come from the deep sea and make a light.
The light would pull you.
You go toward the light, always toward the light.
Then Boudariah takes you, kills you and throws your body on the beach.’
The Sheikha caught my eye and shook her head as if to say, ‘This is all very old and not for today.’
She often seemed to worry that they would appear strange to me and out of key with the age.
It saddened me.
I answered her look with as much affection in my own expression as I could muster and added, ‘But I want to hear, my lady,tawil omrich .
I want to hear, my friend.’
Halema began to speak again.
‘Here is a strange story for you, Um Yusef.
A story of Boudariah which is not so very old, I will tell you, but I think you will not believe.’
‘Tell me, God willing,’ I said.
‘I will tell you now that the Slave can take the shape of a human.
Some djinn are like this.
It makes difficulties.
But when the Slave takes a human form it is always a bad thing.’
Her voice was strong and clear, that of a true storyteller.
Nothing disturbed its cadences as she spoke, except the low accompaniment of the Sheikha's schoolgirl daughter, who translated gently and continually for me.
Only this and the hissing of the wind.
‘There was a man.
He lived in Abu Dhabi,’ began Halema.
‘A good man.
A straight man and a good fisherman.
Fish come up from the deep sea in the early morning and the early evening.
You know this?’
I nodded.
‘You know this,’ she repeated and then went on.
‘This man — Ali — had a cousin named Ahmed.
They like to walk together and to fish together.
Ali and Ahmed made a time to meet on the beach to fish.
But they were careless.
Careless of the sunset.
They like fishing more than their prayers perhaps.’
She leaned back and waggled her forefinger to show her disapproval.
Then she continued.
‘That evening Ali made careful arrangements with Ahmed.
He said he does not want to be late returning home.
Perhaps his wife was ready to deliver a child, perhaps his mother was ill.
Who knows?
But we know the arrangements were exact.
The meeting should be at a place far down the beach.
Far from houses.
Fish come in quiet places.
You know this?’
Again I nodded and she said, ‘Ah.
You know this.’
Then the story went on.
‘Ali came, but he sees Ahmed there before him.
Then he sees Ahmed start to walk away from him.
Not come to him.
Away from him.
This is strange, you understand.
Strange.
Why does he do this?
Ali called, ‘Ahmed.
Ahmed.
Stop.
We fish here.
It is good here.'’
But Ahmed only walks faster.
‘Ahmed.
Ahmed.
Stop.
Don't go running like this.
It is good here.
Not up there, '’ Ali shouts.
Then he runs to catch his cousin.
Ahmed turns and smiles and runs faster.
Now both run on the beach.
‘‘Stop.
Stop joking.
Ahmed.
Stop this joke.'’
shouts Ali.
He sucks air for breath.
But Ahmed laughs and runs straight into the sea.
Far, far he goes until he goes under the sea.
‘Ali follows.
He follows in the water until the sea is all around him.
He calls and calls his cousin but nothing.
He cries.
Tears come down.
Salt tears.
Salt as the sea.
But he can go no more.
Ali cannot swim.
Cannot.
So he cries and he goes back to the beach.
He falls down on the sand.
He lies looking at the waves touch the land, crying for his cousin.
‘Then he hears a voice.
It says, ‘Ali.
What are you doing there?
You told me to meet you further back.'’
It is his cousin Ahmed coming.
He comes  late.
He had slept all through the sunset prayer.
Through the time of meeting.
Now the sun had gone leaving only this dangerous light.
What you call it?’
Halema looked at me.
I answered, ‘Afterglow.’
She tried it in English, then returned to her story.
‘I ask you then, who had been on the beach?
I tell you it was Boudariah, the Slave of the Devil.
He had taken the shape of Ahmed.
Ali was saved by someone's prayers.
Now, how many have died from fright?
How many pulled into the sea?
No-one knows.
But this story is true.’
Murmurs of ‘Praise God’ went around the circle.
Halema looked at me.
The Sheikha again said that it was a story from the days past but Halema did not say another word.
Only her eyes spoke and her words stayed, ‘But this story is true.’
Had Ali and Ahmed been her cousins?
I could not ask.
That night in my areesh, wrapped warmly in my blankets, the wind rose again and began to make odd wind sounds as it pushed through the fencing.
The water in the inlet beat roughly against the shore.
I shivered, looked at Selma and Nadia sleeping quietly and felt grateful for their company.
The Mercy Plane with Gold Taps
HALEMA STAYED FOR three days, just long enough for her round figure bobbing up and down the beach to become familiar, long enough for the affection she exuded to be returned tenfold.
When she left, we all stood around her car to wave her off.
Setting out into the desert was still regarded as important.
It was not a casual departure which warranted little attention.
Water bottles and coffee dellas were stowed on the back seat.
She got in the car with as much ceremony as if she were mounting a camel.
Settling herself, settling her skirts, her veils and her abaya, she motioned to her companion to get in, gave a nod to her black driver and with a quick firm ‘Ma'salaama ’(goodbye) and an even quicker ‘Bismallah ’(in the name of God), the doors were resoundingly shut and she was off.
No waving.
No looking back.
They never look back.
I have not seen her from that day to this.
Our own days in the palm-frond houses seemed to dwindle as quickly as sand through a sieve.
I knew the hareem would soon return to Al Ain.
The caravan of cars and trucks would move up the highway, the women driven by sons, all of whom were now old enough to take the wheel, the Sheikh driving his mother and wife.
The cars would pass and re-pass each other in a game of motorway weaving, the sons manoeuvring their powerful Mercedes around each other until the women eventually objected or they themselves tired of the sport.
I would not be a part of the caravan that year.
Word had come that my husband had arrived in Abu Dhabi.
‘He is there,’ said the Sheikh one morning.
‘Now you will leave us.’
He held out his hand to me, palm up.
I slapped mine into his and we both laughed.
His hand was dry, fine-boned and strong.
The Sheikha joined us and we sat together while arrangements were made for me to leave.
‘She will come to Al Ain when her husband goes?
This is for sure,’ asked the Sheikha.
‘She must,’ said Sheikha Grandmother who was walking towards us, leaning on her granddaughter.
‘She will,’ said the Sheikh, rising to greet his mother and kissing her on the forehead, the kiss of respect, of the younger for the elder.
That afternoon I left for Abu Dhabi with the promise that I would indeed see them in Al Ain in a week's time.
I knew that on this trip my husband would go on to Oman and Cairo before returning home.
I would stay on in Al Ain, making my own way to London in time for his return.
We met at the Hilton.
He looked tanned and well and our room was comfortable and quiet.
It was extraordinary moving from one environment to another, from the desert to that very modern hotel.
That very morning I'd wakened in my khama.
I'd sat on my palliasse writing notes, watching Selma plait her hair, trying to decide when to get up and walk down the inlet far enough to be out of sight in order to go to the loo.
I'd dressed in my long dress, eaten breakfast bedu fashion, discussed the children's health with the Sheikha over coffee — the Youngest Son had had far too many headaches and his usual teasing and joking hadn't been seen for days.
She thought she might try a purge.
I thought a cup of sweet English tea or warm camels' milk and clove and a sleep, and certainly not to take the wheel of one of the cars on their way to Al Ain.
Now, in the afternoon of the same day, I was resting in a perfectly made bed after a hot bath in a perfectly designed bathroom.
I was discussing business contracts with my husband and waiting for a call from my own children who would rock with laughter if I prescribed a dose of warm camels' milk and clove for a poor stomach and headache.
Like a chameleon, I absorbed and reflected the place where I was.
My clothes and conversation changed according to environment and companion.
It was almost automatic.
Almost, but not quite.
My mind, my inner eye needed more time.
It needed time for reflection before reflecting was possible.
I found myself wanting longer and longer times of quiet, longer arcs of contemplation.
I had begun to rise earlier and earlier, sometimes watching the sun lift itself off the horizon, first red, then yellow, then white.
Then I'd remember the hareem at their dawn prayers, standing, bowing, kneeling, bowing down their heads to the flat surface of their prayer mats.
Up and down and over and over, again and again and I'd marvel at the bulk of prayer they made in any one day.
For me peace and prayer melt into one attitude and as my life grew ever more complex, I needed, in direct ratio, ever more peace.
Whether in London, Abu Dhabi or Al Ain, in a hotel or in the desert I searched for times of quiet as a starving man searches for food.
I found them in those dawn hours.
That week in Abu Dhabi my days were spent beside the pool under a shade umbrella, with my books and notes at my side.
Around the pool the hotel guests sunbathed religiously, oiling their sleek bodies in order to achieve deeper and deeper tones of tan.
I had already learned to relish shade and arranged my umbrella continually in order to be under its protection.
Sand-coloured bastion walls rose around the pool, hiding us from the desert world outside.
In the mornings my husband walked the endless corridors of oil power, hoping for patience to overcome impatience.
By one o'clock he'd be staggered by the reels of shiny new bureaucratic red tape and return to the hotel fort where we would lunch by the pool, talk, plan, watch, and he would slowly recuperate.
The evenings were filled with dinners given for us or by us and then the night would become day again and the same pattern repeat itself.
The week passed quickly.
Far too quickly and when he left for Oman, I felt that aching void which, after decades of marriage, never lessened when he and I separated to travel alone.
After he had gone, I packed my own cases, checked the drawers and cupboards of our room and called for a porter.
In the lobby, I braved the stares of the milling guests, for I was in long skirts again and long skirts on a Western woman at ten in the morning were a bit peculiar, even in that centre for strangers in a strange land.
I waited, sitting as quietly and unobtrusively as possible on the low backless benches in front of the ground-floor lobby windows.
It was a short wait.
The tan Mercedes sports slipped up to the main door.
The Second Son had come for me.
My bags were stowed and we set off.
‘How is everything?
How is your mother?’
‘She is well.’
He said nothing more.
His face was still.
‘And your father and your brothers?
They are well?’
‘Thanks be to God.’
‘What is the plan?
Who goes with us today?’
‘My mother is here.
In my father's house.
She asks will you go there.
Maybe we stay a few days.
You can sleep in my room.
They make it for you,’ he said with the same lack of expression.
I knew his father had a small villa in Abu Dhabi.
We had stopped there once or twice, but as yet I had never been inside.
‘I hope it is not a problem.
I could stay in the hotel,’ I said.
‘No, no,’ he said quickly.
Now a slow smile.
‘You are one of us now.
My mother would not like this.’
‘I hope all is well with her,’ I said, longing for a little break in the atmosphere, a little news.
‘She is perfectly well,’ he said.
Then a pause.
‘But my brother is a little sick.’
Ah.
Now the news.
‘A little sick?
How sick?
Your young brother?
What's the matter?’
I knew it must be something more than flu.
They usually ignored colds and flu, dragging themselves around with fevers and allied aches.
‘It must be something difficult for your mother to stay in Abu Dhabi,’ I said.
‘Have the children gone back?’
‘Yes, they went with my grandmother and Hussa, and the others.’
‘And your young brother?’
‘He is not so good,’ he answered.
‘He wasn't very well in the desert last week,’ I said, remembering his headaches.
‘He sicks up blood,’ said the Second Son.
‘It is nothing.
The doctor thinks maybe malaria.’
‘Malaria!’
I knew this plague of the tropics had found its way to Abu Dhabi.
The fast expansion of the place had brought its inevitable curses.
‘Don't worry, Mrs Tea Cup.
We go there.
He will be all right.
There are many doctors here.
One came.
My father looks for another.
We go there.’
For my liking we couldn't ‘go there’ fast enough.
The car swung off the Corniche and within minutes we arrived.
A dusty sentinel's box held a bedouin guard who saluted us as we drove into the parking area.
Opening the car door, the boy took my hand to lead me towards one side of a three-sided, bungalow-styled villa.
We went up a few steps and into a small majlis which was nearly choked by deep couches pushed against its walls.
What space there had been was taken up by two glass-topped tables.
The Sheikha rose from one of the couches to greet me.
From another the Youngest Son began to struggle to his feet.
‘Lie down, my son.
Lie down,’ I said and he eased himself back on to the couch.
His forehead was tightly wound round with a torn piece of an old checked head-scarf in an effort to ease his headache.
His face was the colour  of café au lait left standing overnight.
There were pain lines around his mouth.
I sat beside him and took his hand.
It was too dry, too hot.
‘I am sick, my English mother.
Can you believe it?
I am sick.’
His eyes closed as much in anger as in pain.
He hated illness, hated it with an inner anger as though sickness were a devil attacking his life, his plans for his future, his energy.
‘Hush,’ I said.
‘We all have these problems at some time.
Anger is not the weapon to use when battling with them.
Rest.’
I turned to his mother, whose lips were continually moving in silent prayer.
Through the Second Son I asked as many questions as I thought sensible and it didn't sound like any malaria I had ever heard of.
The boy was bleeding inside somewhere.
He had no cough.
It wasn't his lungs.
He was passing blood and sicking it up.
The door opened and the Sheikh stood there with two of his men.
The Sheikha covered her mask with her veils.
I rose, as did the Second Son.
The Sheikh motioned us to sit down, left his men outside, and picked up the phone on the table.
He was strained with worry.
He had been trying to reach the doctor they used but the man was out.
Infuriated, he looked at me with a hard, steady stare.
His eyes were totally unyielding, the eyes of the Arab ready to do battle with me, with any man, with the wind or the devil.
‘What you think?’ he said in English.
Each word was distinctly, carefully and sharply spoken.
I sat forward and stared back at him with all the strength of my pioneering ancestors.
‘You want to know what I think?’
I asked.
‘Send to the hospital and bring the head doctor here.
The top one.
Bring him.’
He picked up the phone and started to dial again.
Perhaps ten, perhaps fifteen, perhaps twenty minutes passed.
I don't remember.
I only remember the interminable dialling and re-dialling, and the short sharp commands given by the Sheikh.
I remember the boy rose once to go to the bathroom, his thin, adolescent frame weaving in pain.
I remember his brother catching him and helping him.
At last the Sheikh put down the phone, looked at me and said, ‘He comes.’
Then he rose and stalked to the door.
Turning to give his wife a look of gentleness and a few words of encouragement, he opened the door, his men fell in behind him and they left.
It was perhaps half an hour to an hour later that the Sheikh's Mercedes drew into the parking lot and a man got out.
He was short, stocky and had short-cropped, almost Afro hair which was greying slightly.
He wore glasses  and a Western suit and moved with the authority of a man of his profession.
This was the doctor, the top medical man of the area.
He was already used to being called out by the Sheikhs for the slightest problem.
His expression was a mixture of resignation and annoyance.
The Second Son opened the majlis door, greeted the doctor and called a servant to send for his father.
When the doctor saw me sitting beside the boy a puzzled look crossed his face.
He greeted the Sheikha formally; she apologised for troubling him and explained the problem.
Then he turned to me.
Before he could speak I introduced myself as a friend of the family.
He spoke perfect English, which was a relief.
He was a Syrian and there is no question that he knew what he was about.
After a cursory examination, he turned to me and said that we must get the boy to hospital quickly.
I felt a surge of shock rise in my throat and mentally commanded it to recede.
The Sheikha was completely veiled but, I knew her eyes would have turned black with distress.
They would have been the only outward sign of strain as her voice continued to keep its same even tenor, its same quiet courtesy.
The Sheikh arrived while the doctor was on the telephone to the hospital.
Cars were called, engines revved, the Sheikha ordered coffee and water for the cars.
Then the Sheikh went over to his Youngest Son, spoke a word of blessing and lifted that tall boy in his arms as though he were a small child.
He carried him easily, placing him gently on the front seat of his car.
The Sheikha and I got in the back while the Sheikh took the wheel.
The Second Son drove the doctor.
The Sheikh's men followed in yet another car.
But the vivid memory, the unforgettable picture, is of the tall son carried in his father's arms, carried so easily, so gently.
A perforated ulcer was diagnosed.
A perforated ulcer in a boy of not yet sixteen.
What volcano of emotion must have been boiling inside that youngster under his teasing and laughing, under his occasionally expressionless face?
Now he lay exhausted, angry and restless in a vast bed, jogging his arm and pulling at the drip which a nurse kept watching and adjusting.
The bed was far too low for ease of nursing and so large that its cotton sheets didn't fit.
They slithered about on a plastic mattress cover, bunching up under the boy every time he moved.
The bed was in a large room, in a large suite, in a large bungalow.
The whole hospital was made up of various bungalows which surrounded one newly built principal building.
The Sheikha settled herself in the dressing room, determined not to be  too far away from her son at any time.
Hussa and the boy's sister soon arrived from Al Ain and installed themselves in the adjoining bedrooms.
I continued to stay in the Second Son's bedroom in the villa.
Within hours, the paraphernalia of their lives began to appear.
Coffee thermoses, incense pots, boxes of fruit, trays to serve it on, suitcases, prayer mats.
Selma arrived escorting two braziers, one to keep the coffee pots hot and another for hot coals for the incense pots.
A young prince was ill.
He would be surrounded by his family and court just as Henry VIII might have been.
The only difference was the ambience of a twentieth-century Arabian hospital.
The Sheikh sat on one of the large couches in a bay window opposite the bed and watched and waited, his pearl prayer beads going round and round through his fingers.
The Second Son walked in and out with various friends.
They stood in groups around the bed smiling and talking, joking gently as though their words were necessary medicine.
The Sheikha, her veils over her mask, went from room to room injecting order into confusion.
The braziers were placed in adjoining bedrooms and promptly lit.
Nurses and doctors, oblivious to the scene around them, came and went with pills and potions, drips and plasma.
Two days later the boy's condition slowly began to stabilise, but the activity around him had increased measurably.
Shama had joined us along with the Sheikha's mother, a tall, fine-boned woman with compassionate, intelligent eyes.
They added their prayers to those of the other women.
Hareem prayer mats were spread next to the braziers and the women began petitioning God for the health of the boy.
They set about their prayers with a will, always, of course, adding the final coda that His will be done.
Sometimes after their formal prayers, which were said a minimum of five times a day, they continued to sit with their feet in front of them while they carried on long conversations with God.
Informal though respectful chats.
‘Thy will be done of course but meantime…’
The soles of their feet were near black with henna.
Their nails were painted with henna and the palms of their hands striped with it.
At night the Sheikha slept in that great plot of a bed with her son in her arms, trying to keep him quiet, allaying his fears and anger.
I wondered briefly what a British nursing sister would have said, but the act of motherly comfort may well have made up for the lack of quiet during the day.
Four days on, I sat with the Sheikha's brother, the boy's uncle, on the bay-window couch.
I did not know the uncle well, but he knew my husband.
‘He is in London now?’ asked the uncle.
‘Yes,, I answered.
‘He arrives there today.’
‘That is good.’
He, too, was tall, taller than my husband, which put him over six feet.
He had a neat beard and moved almost laconically.
But there was nothing laconic about his mind, which was known to tick over like a well-oiled clock.
We sat together, watching the Youngest Son drift in and out of a drug-induced sleep.
A large group of his young friends had just left.
‘He needs peace,’ I said, despairingly.
‘Yes, but the road from Al Ain is filled with more visitors.
It is our way.’
He looked at me kindly.
‘Surely you know this.’
‘God willing, I am learning,’ I answered with some sadness.
‘Don't worry,’ he said.
‘His father is arranging for him to go to London.
Then it will be better.’
He saw my relief.
‘You will go with them?’
Again the statement made in the tone of a query.
No grammatical change.
No concession to the question.
In this case both uncle and I knew that the answer would be ‘yes’.
‘Sheikh Zayed is loaning them his private plane.
They will leave tomorrow, I believe,’ said the uncle.
‘You will be ready?’
‘I will be ready,’ I answered.
When they move, they move.
I had heard of the many mercy missions of the ruler's private planes.
They were often used for one or another of the Sheikh families, or for some accident victim who could not get to a specialist hospital in any other way.
That night I packed, ordered the cook to prepare some chicken soup for the journey and to find some cows' milk.
The following morning I rose early, dressed and asked for a driver to take me and my suitcase to the hospital.
The Second Son had gone to Al Ain the previous night on errands for his mother.
When we reached the hospital, four cars and a Land Rover were drawn up at the bungalow.
Cases were being loaded and mine was unceremoniously tossed in with the rest.
There was no ambulance.
The boy had refused this show of illness and the Sheikh had agreed.
An Omani doctor had been assigned to accompany us to London.
He couldn't speak Arabic, as he'd been brought up in Zanzibar.
Instead he gave orders to everyone in Swahili.
His English was reserved for me and he kept shouting at me and pleading with me to check that ‘all equipment’ and ‘my suitcase — the brown one, you know’were all safely stowed.
I think he thought I was a nurse or hospital official.
We never got it straight but he was a good MD.
At final count there were eleven black-veiled ladies in the hospital suite and three gentlemen.
All relatives, all there to wave us off.
Smoke from  smouldering sandalwood permeated everything.
With sudden inspiration and at the last moment, I stripped the big bed of its blanket and pillows and stuffed them on top of the suitcases.
Needless to say, things were forgotten.
Both the milk and the chicken soup were left behind.
A pity, as both would have been a godsend.
When the Second Son drove up with a whoosh, I ran over to him and after kissing him both hello and goodbye, told him to call my husband in London.
‘Call him.
Don't forget.
There must be an ambulance to meet us.
Don't forget.
No-one has ordered the ambulance.
Tell him to check the hospital.
Don't forget, my son.
Remember your brother.’
The Youngest Son walked to his father's Mercedes with the Sheikh on one side and the uncle on the other.
I got in the back seat with the doctor.
The Sheikh drove.
In the following car were the Sheikha, her daughter, Hussa and Selma who were to accompany us to London.
Behind them came two of the Sheikh's men and a Pakistani male nurse.
We drove in cavalcade to the airport, through the runway gates and up to a Grummond II Gulf Stream, one of the larger of the executive jets of that time.
We were met with cool efficiency by the English crew and I shall never forget my relief at the sight of them.
They had been on stand-by since 10.00 a.m. and it was now after one o'clock, but they were as crisp and well-tailored as if they'd just stepped on to the plane.
A handsome lot.
A pilot, co-pilot, engineer cum navigator and stewardess.
Eleven of us boarded.
The Youngest Son, pale and drawn, but smiling and trying to tease, walked up the steps with a drip of sodium, sucrose and potassium attached to his left arm.
The doctor had fixed it in place in the car, as we waited for the luggage to be stowed.
We lay the boy on a couch in a sort of majlis area toward the rear of the plane.
I wrapped him in the big blanket we'd brought as he was already shivering.
The doctor fixed the drip to the bulkhead with adhesive tape.
The male nurse was totally overwhelmed by his job and by his new trousers which, being a couple of sizes too large, kept threatening to drop to half-mast.
Poor fellow.
Throughout the trip my feelings toward him varied from fury at his incompetence to humour and pity.
The plane was elegant.
Simple but elegant.
It was the first and last time I was to fly on one of its mercy missions.
It had pale green upholstery with matching carpets and teak tables.
The only signs of opulence were the gold kleenex boxes and the gold fittings in the loos.
The jet was small compared to commercial aircraft and to the new, private 747s sported by the oil Sheikhs today, but it was large enough to  have three separate compartments.
The Sheikh, the doctor and his men adopted the forward section.
They drank coffee and played cards throughout the long haul to London, only interrupting their concentration for the Sheikh's frequent visits aft to watch over his son.
The Sheikha, her daughter, Hussa and Selma occupied the second section.
Coffee was on the go there as well but I noticed that the Sheikha never drank a drop.
Her prayer beads were constantly moving and a steady stream of soft petitions to Allah were just audible.
The third section was the majlis.
Two long couches faced each other.
The boy was stretched out on one and the male nurse took the other.
For half the trip I sat on the floor of the plane, holding the boy's hand, watching the drip.
The other half I sat in the Sheikha's section trying to be as inconspicuous as possible.
It was a strange trip.
All of our attention was focussed on the boy.
When we weren't actually nursing him, we were upholding him with prayers — either Muslim or Christian.
Another haemorrhage at 25,000 feet would have been disastrous.
After about five hours we dropped down on Athens in a soft rain.
The plane was too small to make London in one jump.
The Sheikha got up and stood in the door, thanking God and declaring it a fine day.
The boy turned toward her and smiled.
‘Will it be fine for me?’ he asked.
‘God willing, my heart,’ she answered.
The Sheikh and his men stretched their legs while we refuelled.
The only sign he ever gave that anything was amiss in his family was the number of times he got out his thumbnail-sized pipe for the comfort of the single puff it gave him.
He, too, was addicted to the powerful Oman tobacco.
His eyes revealed nothing.
His straight back and determined walk were commanding.
He paced back and forth on the tarmac, occasionally stopping to talk to his men.
Eventually we took off again, this time into the cloud-spattered European sky and finally arrived at Heathrow well past dark.
Suddenly it was like living out a Grade B TV movie.
There were the spotlights, the ambulance, the cars, the officials.
There were the sirens, the waiting clinic, the waiting surgeon, the green-gowned theatre nurses and all the alarming accoutrements of modern medicine.
To the boy's worried parents the whole scene which ended in the exclusivity of an intensive care unit must have been a Faustian nightmare.
Where was he?
Why couldn't they be with him?
Why wasn't he in a suite?
Who could stay with him?
His exhausted mother was finally persuaded to rest in a hotel.
His father, once satisfied that the intensive care nurses were doing their best, left his own men to watch over them as they watched over the boy while he, too, was persuaded to rest.
Remarkably, by the time the boy reached London, contrary to the general prognosis, the ulcer had healed sufficiently to avoid any major surgery.
With the aid of one of those minute cameras with which specialists investigate physical disorders internally, they discovered that he was healing, and healing well.
Though it would be some time before he was released from hospital, he was already better and we were all able to relax with relief.
Throughout the long days of his recovery, the Youngest Son was never left alone.
His mother or his father or one of the group was always with him.
I took my turns as well.
The Second Son, on his return to London and to his university, spent his week-ends beside his brother.
Every night someone slept in a chair-cum-bed provided by the hospital.
There was a night nurse and a day nurse but these were not the same as either ‘family’ or ‘friend’.
The hospital was the Wellington, built to cater for an ever-growing Arab clientele and its special needs.
So nothing was said.
All was understood.
On the British part, the staff regarded Arab customs as weird and slightly annoying.
On the Arab part, they regarded the British as unfeeling, as cold as the weather but clever and efficient.
As usual I watched and wondered and defended one side to the other.
Each day the boy improved.
Each day he gained strength and with and longed to toss himself in the sea.
‘I must go home,’ he shouted.
‘My lessons.
My work.
I must go home.’
It would be several years before he was truly fit.
The massive amount of blood that had been dripped into his veins brought its legacy of jaundice, followed by a seemingly endless skin irritation, something akin to prickly heat.
It was largely his own determination to be rid of the tag of illness that brought eventual healing.
When the London doctors finally granted him his freedom, he bolted like a child let out of school.
They left within two days of his release, leaving me tired, dazed, relieved and waiting for the Second Son to come ‘home’ for yet another week-end.
Words and Music
WITHIN WEEKS OF the family returning to Abu Dhabi, the spring ‘vac’ had begun and the Second Son was off again with the ever-faithful Hassan.
As usual I drove them to Heathrow and as usual we parked in the Terminal 3 car park.
We then made our way to the Gulf Air desk for first class passengers.
This time they were overburdened with luggage which was far too heavy for even the lenient Gulf Air to overlook.
‘They will let me through,’ he said as he watched the cases and boxes being weighed.
‘I'm not going to pay for all this.
It's not mine.’
He was acting as courier for some of his family's purchases earlier in the year.
‘How will you do it?’
I asked suspiciously.
‘Never mind.’
‘A bribe?’
‘Maybe a present.’
‘It's all the same, my son, all the same and it does you no good in the end.’
I never saw him pay anyone.
Perhaps I missed it.
Perhaps it was his manners and his words.
Authoritative, expecting obedience, quick and then the slow smile.
‘After all, it's our airline.
Not theirs,’ he said nodding in the direction of the British staff who then managed Gulf Air, and we walked toward the departure gate.
Hassan followed silently.
I looked toward him for some answer to my  curiosity but his eyes were expressionless.
‘You will come next week, then?’ the Second Son asked.
‘No,, I answered.
‘It is Easter.
I will be at least ten days.’
‘They wait for you,’ he answered.
‘I will wait for you.
I will meet you.’
‘God willing,’ I answered and kissed the boy goodbye.
Hassan now smiled his wide smile of understanding and genuine friendship, and they walked through the gate.
I spent Easter in Cornwall with all our family.
It was a late Easter and the daffodils, or ‘lilies’ as the Cornish call them, were in full bloom.
The hedgerows had begun to burgeon with violets, primroses, wild garlic and early pink campion.
Our elder daughter, a budding journalist, had her birthday a few days after Easter Day, so we seemed to be stuffed with Simnel cake and birthday cake and chocolate eggs.
Long walks by the sea were needed to shake it all down and shake off the pounds that could so easily accumulate.
We are a family that enjoys each other, relishing each day we're able to spend together.
That particular spring our son brought home a dark-haired, dark-eyed, lively lady who would become a third daughter, moulding into the family clan as though born part of it.
It was a holiday of celebrations, but all celebrations must end.
We all had our separate ways to go.
My husband to Tunis, our son to Saudi Arabia, the girls to London and I turned my face toward Abu Dhabi and the pains of collecting money that was owed to our business.
The Second Son did indeed meet me as always, but this time I stayed once again in his bedroom in his father's Abu Dhabi villa, and this time I ate my meals with the Sheikh, his men and his two eldest sons.
It was a strange experience and I felt out of place, like the old duck out of water.
They were all kind, all courteous and the Sheikh seemed delighted, ordering special fish and salads and making his sons translate for him.
His English was scanty and his Arabic hard for me to catch.
He spoke very quickly.
Mercifully, I was able to complete all I had to do within a very few days and I wondered whether the Sheikh had put a few words in the right ears.
Hassan escorted and drove me wherever I needed to go and acted as general red-tape cutter by referring to me as the English Sheikha, friend of this or that Sheikh.
It's wonderful what a little name dropping will do.
Money was quickly traced.
Each evening the Second Son would lift his head from his books to ask how it was going, adding a ‘hurry up’ to Hassan as his mother was waiting in Al Ain.
When the last telex was sent and the last cheque banked, we almost  threw our things into suitcases, loaded them into the sports car, said our goodbyes to Hassan who was off to see his own family, and set out.
The drive to Al Ain was a pantomime.
There were four of us.
The two Omani brothers had joined us, their head scarves twisted into the flat turbans of their own country.
We slipped along the now four-lane Al Ain highway, winding in and out of the sections which were still in the process of being built.
I watched the Second Son as he drove.
His thin face had recently assumed a look of severity and responsibility.
When this imperceptible metamorphosis took place, it would not be long before another marriage was arranged.
It was like the change of seasons.
Inevitable.
Now he was still single and there was time for a little madness.
He had a passionate love of music and in another world at another time might have made a fine musician, but there, held in that place at that moment, there were other plans, other duties, other paths.
Now he held the wheel in his long-fingered brown hands, tossed a tambourine in my lap and marked a beat: ‘Wahida, wahida, wahida ’—‘One, one, one.’
From the narrow seat behind there was a sudden thunder of sound as the two Omanis began playing drums.
One was of beaten metal, a sort of aluminium alloy with a modern fitted skin.
The other was brown-painted pottery, its skin held down by strings.
It gave a sharp, light tone to the modern drum's bass.
The fingers of the Omanis were quick and their hands firm.
As they played, their dark eyes flashed with all the hidden mystery of their own mountain country.
Admonished and instructed by turns, I occasionally had the tambourine snatched away from me by the Second Son, who would rap it sharply against the wheel.
We sang and drummed our way to Al Ain in an explosion of sound which riveted cars as we passed them.
Now and then friends were sighted and passed.
They would hail us, waving their arms to the beat, as we thumped and bumped our way along the highway.
When we neared Al Ain I saw once again the Hazhal Bush, those massive waves of red sand hundreds of feet high which had once protected the oasis from marauders.
The Sheikh had crossed them by camel as a boy; then as a young man with a wife and small children, including the boy at my side, he had camped overnight on one side of the range waiting for the engines of his jeeps to cool before grinding inch by inch, around and over.
We were through in minutes.
Al Ain seemed to be moving to meet us.
Houses were being built ever further down the road which now completely bypassed the old fort.
‘Main Street’ had a plethora of new shops.
Indian and Pakistani shopkeepers stood  in doorways, waiting to sell bolts of cloth, household pots and pans, fridges and cookers, videos and TVs.
We passed a new supermarket, a miniature imitation of the American drive-in, and then some large furniture shops whose massive suites of heavy, over-stuffed couches and chairs filled the windows like obese pashas waiting for ladies to settle in their laps.
The old general store had gone but the shade thorn tree was still there, bewildered by its surround of concrete pavement.
Trees and bushes had been planted everywhere.
We veered to the right.
‘My God,’ I breathed.
A Wimpy Bar stared at me.
Armageddon.
‘Al humberger’ had joined ‘les chips’, ‘Coke’and ‘7-Up’as powerful contenders in the international stakes for one world.
Since the arms merchants were busy separating us, the odds seemed a bit uneven, but who knows?
After one more roundabout and one more tune, we drove through the compound gates, drawing up to the house with ringing ears and a mild sense of both exhaustion and satisfaction.
The Youngest Son waited to greet us, and what a contrast from the last time I saw him.
When he'd left London his face had had the pinched, strained look, the hollow eyes that long illness seem to give.
Now his eyes were bright and he stood straight and strong, the whole incident having been relegated in his mind to the unimportant, the not-to-be-remembered.
‘Mrs Tea Cup,’ he said.
‘Welcome.
Welcome back to Al Ain.’
He greeted his brother nose to nose, welcomed the Omanis and took my hand to lead me up the steps of the family bungalow.
On the porch outside the front door, I kicked off my sandals and pushed them to one side where they joined an already substantial pile of varying styles and sizes.
You could generally tell who was at home by glancing at the sandals.
Inside all was cool, calm and welcoming.
The Sheikha rose to greet us.
Her sons kissed her on the forehead.
I kissed her on the cheek.
Her gentle ‘welcomes’ and those of the women around her were like balm on my thudding head.
I began to abandon my Western habits and within minutes crossed the bridge into the Sheikha's world, self-contained, unhurried, conscious of movement, aware of sound, small sips of fragrant coffee as against gulps of hot tea.
The boys, the drums, the tambourines, the highway disappeared.
I was enfolded in the women's world.
We talked, exchanging our news.
When the Sheikha heard that her son had kept me beating the tambourine all the way to Al Ain she was horrified and no amount of pleading on my part helped.
Such antics were taboo to the women, especially the Sheikhas.
Playing any instrument was taboo, but playing it along a public highway — shocking.
It was not my tambourine-playing that worried her, however.
With her generosity of spirit, she always forgave my sliding back and forth across the East-West or male-female barriers.
She was upset because I had not been allowed to rest on the drive.
She knew too well that my afternoon times of quiet were often cut short by a ‘jam session’.
Her sons would often invite me to some remote corner where we hoped against hope that we would not disturb the siesta of the compound, though we were rarely successful.
The drums made a thundering noise.
What's more, the boys sang at the top of their lungs — old songs, new songs, songs in the tradition of the place.
That afternoon was to be no exception.
After a large lunch in the women's majlis, I had just settled myself to do a little reading when there was a knock at my door.
‘You coming, Mrs Tea Cup?’ asked the Second Son.
‘Na'am — yes.’
I couldn't resist.
We found a space in a hopefully distant room.
One by one the Youngest Son, and the Omani friends arrived, drawn by the urgent invitation of the drums.
I was placed in a good watching position and given instructions on how to clap my hands.
‘Like this.
Together.
Hard.
Make the hollow places come together.
Not clapping.
Not just clapping.’
The Second Son showed me how to make the hollow of one palm meet the other.
There was suddenly another sound.
Sharp.
Loud.
Different.
‘Good, good,’ he said.
So I graduated from watcher to player and clapped as the sons and the Omani drummers played and sang.
When I first heard Arabic music I was fascinated, then tormented.
Now, hopefully, I have reached the beginning of appreciation.
Penetrating, complex and totally different in structure, it pulls the single line of melody up and down and spins it out to leave you dangling in some sort of musical nirvana.
While our music has become thick with harmony, theirs twists and weaves the solo voice or instrument into intricate patterns searching for some impossible horizon of sound.
It was the sons who tried to train my ear.
In our afternoon sessions they would explain the differences between folk music from the Gulf or from the Levant, between the good and the mediocre, the great and the awful.
‘Listen, Mrs Tea Cup, listen,’ the Second Son would say as he slotted yet another tape into the nearest stereo or tape machine, whether in the car or the family room or the garden.
‘Watch him, watch him,’ the Youngest Son would say, pulling me around to see a TV video of a lute player, or a religious song celebration with long lines of men chanting Islamic verses in a sort of mouth music  with hand-clapping accompaniment.
The music that we beat out in the afternoons was their music, the music of the place, sea shanties and sand-sea shanties.
But poems set to music were the ultimate challenge; love poems or poems of great events; deeds of valour, victories, tragedies.
Epic poems.
When I first knew them in those early London days, I'd often find the Second Son picking out some phrase on the piano in our living room.
His younger brother would say a verse and then they'd put it together.
Over and over the one phrase would go.
Never two notes together.
Just single notes.
They would never get more than a phrase completed before an argument would break out as to the merit of either the words or the music.
The younger boy's passion for the poetry of his own place was as real as the older one's passion for music.
His fascination for words would often keep him awake at night as the poetry of the place is a kind of Rubik's cube which can become obsessive.
Though the Youngest Son had an essentially scientific mind and was impatient with the finer points of literature, his pleasure in puzzling over poetry was never ending.
Getting him out of bed in the mornings in time for school became a real problem for his family when he'd been up most of the night with pencil and note book.
As for our music sessions and lessons, they went on intermittently for several years until eventually the drums were abandoned, put away for the sake of both higher education and marriage.
But if the day is fine and still and I am alone, I can hear somewhere in myself the sound of the hollow-ended drums, the clapping, the tambourine, the young voices singing, laughing.
I can see them in my mind's eye rising and dancing slowly around the room, their bodies undulating in a controlled exuberance as if lifted out of the world of motor cars, rockets and computerised mentalities into some universal heartbeat, some rhythm of the day, of the night, of the sea, of life.
The Woman from Oman
THERE WAS A knock on my bedroom door and it opened.
A new maid from Sri Lanka came in with my English morning tea which the Sheikha always sent.
The Sri Lankan's bare feet moved silently across the carpet.
‘Good morning,’ she said in her schoolgirl English.
‘Good morning and thank you,’ I answered, mouthing the words carefully.
We talked for a while in English, grateful for the ease of communication.
At that moment her Arabic was even poorer than mine, for she was new to the household, but on my next visit she would be rattling away in this throaty language and I would be struggling as usual.
Why is it that Eastern peoples acquire languages so easily while we in the West make such heavy weather of it?
Padding out as silently as she came, she left me to the early morning quiet.
Stretching my feet to the end of my bed I felt the tightening of the sheets.
They were flowered sheets, brightly flowered sheets which sometimes slipped about on the plastic mattress cover which had never been removed.
The bed was tucked modestly into a corner of the room.
In fact all the furniture hugged the walls as if frightened to put its feet on the carpet.
A long, rather stark couch held neat piles of clean kandoras and white head scarves which were laid there daily.
These would disappear by evening, the boys having collected them, for this was the ‘boys’ house'.
It had been built ostensibly as a future home for a son and his future wife, but  tastes and pocket books had changed.
The house had become a kind of bolt hole for a clutch of growing and maturing sons.
There were three rooms in the bungalow.
One held a pool table, another seemed a jumble of drums, school books, volley balls and footballs.
The pool table was the only piece of furniture in those two rooms.
The third room was my bedroom.
I looked around it, recording my impressions.
There was the stark, pale yellow couch.
There was my bed with a wooden chair beside it and there was a small chest of drawers on top of which were a pile of Arabian newspapers, a few snapshots and two or three bottles of cologne.
My suitcases were stacked against the wall along with those of the boys which contained the rest of their clothes.
They never seemed to use the drawers of the chest, so sometimes I confiscated them.
In those days they had very few clothes.
They needed very few.
A pile of white kandoras, a pile of head scarves, a pile of wezaar, an extra black braided circlet, a few underpants and an extra pair of sandals.
When they began to travel abroad they invested in a couple of suits and a jacket which they passed around each other.
The Second Son had his university uniform of jeans and T-shirts, but these were always left in England.
These days whenever I visited, the sons vacated this house, rolling up their palliasses and sleeping in the family majlis.
I don't believe the little bed was ever used by anyone but me.
It was undoubtedly bought for me.
How easily we accept everything, expect everything.
That first visit when I stayed at the Al Ain Hilton seemed in the dim past.
Now it would be unthinkable for me to stay anywhere but with the family.
I stretched again, feeling content and at peace, and watched the curtains lift in a light breeze.
I had opened my window in the night.
I liked the night air but the night watchman didn't like the open window.
He'd come around and poke his hand through the outside wrought-iron grill, trying to close it.
Eventually he'd give up and walk away, his grey beard moving up and down as he mumbled to himself, the words spilling out of his almost toothless mouth.
Kicking back the covers, I let my feet touch the carpet, put on the white and blue striped kaftan which my journalist daughter had made for me and walked to the window overlooking the central court.
A Baluchistan gardener was working there, his voluminous turban perched like a cushion on top of his head, his baggy cotton ‘jodhpurs’ tan with dust.
He was trailing a long, thick, green hose.
Water belched out as he drenched each tree, pouring the costly stuff into the deep trench which circled their trunks.
Beyond the court, beyond the wall with its globes of protecting lights, I could see the bulbous tower of the family mosque.
Once upon a time  muezzins had had to climb such towers to call the people to prayer, the little round room at the top giving resonance, enlarging the human voice.
Now they used a microphone and loudspeaker system and the mechanically multiplied sound echoed off walls.
The bedroom door pushed quietly open.
Amina and Miriam crept in, clutching each other 's hands.
Their long, black hair, still damp from washing, was tightly braided and tied with pieces of torn white cloth.
‘Hello, Mrs Tea Cup,’ said Miriam in her singsong little girl's voice.
‘Good morning,’ said Amina, rolling the ‘r’around with her tongue.
Then, falling into each other 's arms, they tumbled about laughing at their own precocious English.
The big red and white polka-dots of their identical dresses made a tangle of colour on the floor.
I'd seen a lot of that splashy material.
It must have been bought by the bolt, for it kept showing up all year in pantaloons and children's dresses, or on servants.
Amina and Miriam were continually wandering from house to house in the compound, searching for something new to amuse themselves.
Sometimes they were to be found in a corner, solemnly talking to a rather battered doll whose arms and legs were always popping off, waiting to be clipped on by a passing ‘brother’ who was inevitably obliging.
Now they untangled themselves to watch as I layered face cream on to my face and hands in the endless battle to save my skin from drying up altogether.
The jars of Cornish hand cream, with their pictures of St Michael's Mount, looked incongruous somehow.
The children opened each jar and sampled them all.
Cologne was sprayed about and lipsticks swished up and down.
‘Me, me,’ they cried, pointing to their lips.
I dabbed a little on each puckered mouth to further shouts of laughter and much dancing about the room.
The door opened again, this time with a gentle touch, and the young Sri Lankan maid came in.
She caught sight of the children and, in a sudden paroxysm of words, tried to admonish them in her own language interspersed with Arabic, while announcing breakfast to me in English.
Grabbing the children by their arms, the three of them left in a welter of confused sounds and I began to dress.
There was no time to linger.
It was Friday — the Muslim holy day, the equivalent of our Sunday — and visitors would be expected.
A quick shower in the bright pink bathroom with its already peeling tiles, more cream, a fast selection of long skirt and blouse, a final comb through my hair, and I walked out into the sun.
The young wife of the Eldest Son emerged slowly from her own home.
She was heavily veiled and masked to walk the few yards to the women's  dining majlis, which was, of course, in the house of Sheikha Grandmother.
As slim as a reed and as shy as a bird with the eyes of a gazelle, were all the aspects of beauty once described to me by the Youngest Son as most desirable in a woman.
This young girl usually had all these qualities, though now, in the last months of her pregnancy, she was hardly as slim as a reed.
‘Sabah el khair — Morning of dawn,’ she called softly.
‘Sabah el nur — Morning of light,’ I replied.
The words echoed in the court.
We walked carefully together, clicking our sandals on the cement drive.
I wore my dark glasses even for these few moments, as my blue eyes were always straining in the brilliant light.
Known as ‘Um Yusef's burgah ’(Um Yusef's mask), they were always getting lost and being found by some kind soul who returned them to me.
We reached the bungalow of Sheikha Grandmother, crossed the porch and pushed open the carved wooden doors of the dining room.
Kicking off our sandals we walked barefoot into the air-conditioned cool of the big room.
The thick carpet felt comfortable.
There was no furniture in the room other than a cupboard in the far corner in which were kept special foods such as plates of dates selected from the great storehouse or the enamel pots poured full of the sweet of the area.
Sometimes the ghee (clarified butter) which was offered to pour over the plain rice was kept there along with big spoons for dishing up.
The windows were curtained in heavy velvet.
In the hottest months these curtains would be tightly shut in one more effort to get away from the heat and glare.
Above us hung new crystal chandeliers announcing the growing wealth of the place.
Breakfast was laid on the floor at the near end of the room.
The tray this morning was about three feet in diameter, an average family size, and would have been carried across the court from the cook house on the head of one of the maids.
Its size indicated that no extra visitors were expected.
We sat cross-legged on the floor, our skirts splaying out around us.
We waited for the Sheikha.
We could see her as she proceeded from her house.
First she stopped at the coffee house to see if all was ready, then she stopped to speak to one of the servants.
She stopped to catch a child by the hand and whisper some word which was rewarded with a kiss, then caught the corner of her veil to cover her already masked face as the chief driver came towards her for a quick answer to a query, always given and received after the words of greeting and queries as to health had been exchanged.
She moved nearer, her silks and veils rustling about her, and we all watched with the same affection that she invoked from family and friends alike.
As she came into the room we rose to greet her.
She greeted me.
‘Marhaba , Um Yusef, my English — no English,’ she apologised as always.
‘And I have no Arabic,’ I answered as always.
She motioned to me to sit beside her and we settled into our limited verbal exchanges.
Our friendship is a triumph of overcoming every known barrier.
The things we have in common have outweighed the problems of communication, culture and education.
Love of family, of children, of life itself; love of God, though she is a devout Muslim and I am a Christian; shared curiosity, and genuine pleasure in each other 's company.
All these links have bridged quite unbelievable distances.
As it was the Muslim holy day, the tray seemed more loaded than usual.
I knew I would eat too much and mentally planned to restrict myself at lunch, which would be equally difficult.
Being Friday, we would have something delicious.
There was a new cook and he was determined to impress.
Perhaps it would be one of the Sheikh's favourite dishes.
Men speak very little when they eat.
They down the food quickly and fairly unceremoniously.
Women take more time, talk easily and still adhere to the strict rules of manners.
The most vital rule, the rule never to be broken, the rule which marks the true Arab and lifts him above the morass of intrigue and materiality which now dominates his world and indeed ours, is the rule of hospitality.
‘In the hospitality of the Arabs is kinship and assurance in their insecure countries,’ wrote Charles Doughty in the nineteenth century.
Hospitality, he said, was ‘the piety of the Arab life…the sanctity of the Arabian religion’.
I was certainly a subject of the generous hospitality of this family, but I was not alone.
There were others.
Many others.
That Friday morning as we sat enjoying each other 's company and the fresh bread and pancakes, I was to see the rule practised once again.
We felt, rather than saw, someone arrive.
I looked up, a mouthful of harees waiting on my fingers.
A figure stood in the door, silhouetted against the light.
She had no sandals and walked barefoot.
‘Peace be with you.’
‘And peace be with you — welcome, welcome,’ said the Sheikha.
The figure moved into the room, closing the doors behind her.
She slipped a small bag off her shoulder and, leaving it by the wall, sat a little way off.
The heat of the sun seemed absorbed into her black veil which was ragged and dusty.
Underneath she wore a traditional dress, high-necked with small hand-made buttons but without decoration.
Heavy silver bracelets were on her wrists and two similar ones on her ankles.
But it was her burgah, her mask, which was startling.
It covered her face from the top of her forehead to the bottom of her chin.
It was made of a  dark blue, rough, woven cloth and left only two small oval slits for the eyes.
Those eyes were bright and lively and her voice was young and eager.
I had seen the women of this tribe only once before.
They came from the edge of the desert, between Muscat and Salalah in Oman, hundreds of miles to the south.
She was a Wahiba, a true bedu.
The Eldest Son's wife had gone quickly to fetch her a glass of tepid water, which she drank carefully, tipping her mask back fractionally to accommodate the glass.
‘Welcome, welcome,’ repeated Sheikha Grandmother, and motioned the guest to come to the tray, arranging bread and pancakes for her, bringing the honey butter and harees nearer and urging her to eat.
Her simple, dusty clothes made a sharp contrast with the rich fabrics around her.
The wash basin was brought, with its tea-pot-like jug.
Again the Eldest Son's wife served her, pouring water over her hands as she lathered the soap, the dirty water dropping through the perforated lid of the basin.
Then, thanking God, she began to tuck in hungrily with the rest of us and was plied with questions.
‘What's the news, Sayeeda?’
They addressed her as if she was the equivalent of a Sheikha.
Her extended family group was camping in the Buraimi, in that part of the oasis which belonged to Oman.
Had they walked from the South?
Yes, they had walked and sometimes ridden as well.
They were here to buy and sell.
They would stay for a few months and go back.
All the while she talked, she gesticulated with one small, thin hand and with the other tore off bits of bread, dipping them in the honey butter and tilting them under her mask into her mouth.
Her eyes were continually smiling.
Her poverty could not detract from her enormous dignity and presence.
She completely fascinated me.
No-one moved until she had quite satisfied herself.
The straw ‘hat’ was put on the tray once again, a maid was called and the tray lifted on to her head.
The wash basin was passed again for us to wash, the soap and warm water carrying away the grease from our hands.
Kleenex was handed round so that we could dry our hands and we settled together for coffee.
The Eldest Son's wife took the della and poured.
After several rounds, Sheikha Grandmother rose to leave, the other women rising with her.
Knowing that I wanted to speak to the bedu woman to learn more of her life, the Sheikha signalled me to stay while they moved out of the dining room, pulling their veils over their masks.
There were now just the two of us left in the dining room.
We sat and  stared at each other, Sayeeda and 1.
I could see she was smiling and I marvelled once again at how much the eyes can say.
Then she apologised for her mask, which was indeed extraordinary, and said it was the custom of her people.
I said I understood this, but did not add that I had been told of the beauty of these women and their attention to make-up, of their fine skin and care for the traditional in their clothes and way of life.
We began to ‘talk’, though my ‘kitchen Arabic’ was only good enough to ply her with questions and to catch perhaps half of the answers.
How I wished that one of the English-speaking sons or the Sheikha's daughter was with us.
She told me of her children, of how life had changed in Oman once the old Sultan had gone and the new Sultan began to rule, of the Sultan's mother who was ‘covered in gold from her neck to her waist’ and who lived in a palace in the city of Salalah.
‘I have seen her,’ she said.
‘I have been there.’
She chatted away, her hands illustrating her words.
They had come up to the Buraimi for the men to look for better opportunities.
They would work and trade a little and then go back, but after the summer, as it would soon be too hot to go far.
‘But it's too cold in here,’ she said, nodding to the already whirring air conditioner.
‘Not good for the bedu but it's good for a rest.’
She told me about the Sheikhas of Al Ain, which were good and which were not truly hospitable or kind.
‘This Sheikha is one of the very truest, so very good,’ she said and I agreed wholeheartedly.
An hour quickly passed in this nodding and talking.
Then she rose to leave, picking up her bag.
She adjusted her veils and put the little bag over her shoulder.
It was hand woven of sheep's wool and dyed the same deep indigo colour as her mask.
Mysterious indigo with its connotations of protection was a substance and colour full of symbolism in the distant places of Arabia.
It carried a quality bordering on the magical.
Even the modern masks of the Gulf hareems had their indigo linings which left little tell-tale purplish marks on the noses of the women who wore them.
Sayeeda's indigo-dyed satchel with its colourful, patterned shoulder strap looked like a carry-all.
Out of it she drew a little distaff, much as we would draw out a pair of knitting needles.
It was threaded in such a way as to twirl and twist hand-spun wool into a twisted string which would then be used for the saddle bags she made.
She adjusted the loose threads in one hand and held the distaff in the other.
As she bade me goodbye and began to walk down the drive, she used her left leg while walking to set the distaff twirling.
Every third pace the left knee bent, the leg rose and she slapped the distaff against it in a kind  of walking dance.
The distaff whirled, twisting the threads.
Her bare feet were silent on the drive.
The rhythm of her walk never faltered.
She never wasted a gesture or a movement.
She never looked back.
It was Sayeeda who gave me an insatiable desire to open the doors of Oman, doors which were locked to most foreigners and needed a special key.
In time, I found that key and discovered another world, a world full of mystery, beauty and the rare wealth of a dozen cultures bound together in an ancient empire.
One Morning and the Man in the Moon
FRIDAY PASSED AND Saturday arrived with its Monday feeling.
It would be another week before the men returned for their ‘week-end’.
The Youngest Son would stay with us in Al Ain, catching up on his studies in order to graduate with his class from secondary school, but it would be a week before the Sheikh and his elder sons drew up in their big Mercedes and brought that filling of the house that always comes when men are at home, the heavy laughter, the smell of pipe smoke, screeches of excitement from the children as they are tossed high in the air.
On Friday afternoons the road to Abu Dhabi moaned with the traffic of returning Sheikhs, would-be Sheikhs, expatriates and the new merchants.
They returned for their week of work in Abu Dhabi, a few with their families, but most without, for the women preferred Al Ain.
The air was dry, the atmosphere pure, the scenes more familiar.
Al Ain was an island of stability in their oil-overturned life.
The Second Son had returned to the coast with his father in order to fly to Doha to see a friend who went to the same university in England.
A Qatari son of a Qatari Sheikh who had many falcons.
No other temptation was needed.
For the hareem it was another Saturday.
Another sabat or seventh day.
As with the Hebrews, Sunday is the first day of the week.
This would be a quiet day.
No special holidays were on the calendar.
No marriages.
No babies expected.
Yes.
It would be a quiet day.
I walked over to the Sheikha's house.
As it was unusually cool for the  time of year, two great carpets had been unrolled on the porch and a smattering of cushions rested invitingly against the wall.
The coffee della and a stack of cups waited fur someone — anyone.
The women began to congregate and we rose to greet each other, even though we'd met at breakfast less than an hour ago.
Hussa arrived with her mother and while Shama eased herself on to the carpet and settled against a cushion, Hussa picked up one of the newspapers which a driver brought from the village each morning.
She carefully digested the headlines and then read only the news that interested her.
News of the Sheikhs, where they were going and where they had been.
She was always sceptical about international news and found it difficult to trust the reports.
Who could blame her?
Shama meanwhile had begun to sift through a small sheaf of numbered pages.
She was always busy with these pages, working out the correct day for planting date trees, for pollinating or foretelling the week when the pods would burst and the golden maidenhair would tumble out into the sun, each hair holding the promise of a cluster of dates.
Shama's systems seemed enormously complex to me.
They involved the cycles of the moon, the positioning of certain stars and a numerology which may have had its roots in Zoroaster.
But she was relied on to be correct, so no-one disturbed her as she worked, her arthritic hands holding a stubby pencil, her long, old-fashioned mask covering her mouth as she murmured to herself.
The little children moved up and down the court playing their own private games.
It always surprised me how few toys were actually used, even though there were cupboards full of them; toys which indulgent fathers or uncles or stepfathers brought home from trips abroad or from some new shop in Abu Dhabi.
Sometimes a toy car would have its moment of glory, but it would soon be forgotten.
Other games went on and on.
‘Five stones’ was a favourite and a collection of good smooth pebbles of the right size and weight was a treasure, something like a really champion conker.
The children hid little caches of five stones in the most unlikely places, like reserves of nuts a squirrel would hide.
The game was played like ‘jacks’ without a ball.
I sat watching the children, sipping coffee and trying to pick out words from one of Hussa's newspapers.
When I deciphered one I would announce it to all and sundry.
The women would look up and congratulate me and encourage me to ‘go on, go on, you can, you can’.
Looking up from the paper, I saw Sheikha Grandmother moving slowly toward us, on Selma's arm.
Thin and tiny in stature, her back was as straight as an arrow, but her legs often pained her in the cooler winter and spring  weather.
Thus she used a stout stick which was nearly twice her height to walk across the court, or she leaned on the arm of the nearest grandchild or servant.
We rose to greet her and then settled back into place like so many fluttering pigeons.
Cups were rinsed and coffee handed round again.
She turned to me and asked if I had spoken to my husband today, was he well, and the children.
‘All well, thanks be to God,’ I answered.
‘My children wait for me in London, I will have to leave soon.’
‘But not yet, not yet.
You must stay a while.
It is too small, this visit.’
She looked at me with an elegance of expression that is difficult to describe.
Authority and humility?
Her extraordinarily beautiful and intelligent eyes were always carefully lined with kohl.
She was the true head of our hareem and her word was law.
She would never travel abroad other than to Mecca or Medina, the holy cities of Islam.
The world beyond seemed to her to be filled with treachery; treachery to the spirit, abandonment of principle.
She would not take up the cudgels of such a battle.
Not now.
So she remained in her place and someone always had to remain with her.
The Sheikha herself usually chose this role, thus limiting her own travel.
Sheikha Grandmother's mind was now almost wholly concentrated upon the Qur'an, its words and their inner meanings.
Day after day she could be seen sitting cross-legged on the carpet in front of her house, a pair of silver-rimmed spectacles perched across her mask, a copy of the Qur'an or a book of the Hadith on her lap, oblivious to the movements of the household.
Then she would close the book, rise with difficulty and take a slow, often painful walk to join her daughter-in-law, the Sheikha.
Settling again, she would observe the scene, rarely entering into the conversation, still held in her own thoughts.
After perhaps a quarter of an hour she would rise again and return to her books, as though satisfied that all was in its place.
It was she and her friends who kept this small area as an oasis of tradition.
The other Emirates up and down the coast, even Abu Dhabi itself, were crumbling, slipping.
Men, trapped by their own wealth, were caught in the economics of billions, lost in some bankers’ monopoly game.
Women were hungry for a new life away from the heat, from the cloister, hungry for education, hungry for travel.
But they had no-one to explain the uses of what they learned and knowledge of itself could easily overbalance a carefully structured society.
The weight of the new wealth drew maggots that frightened Sheikha  Grandmother.
They were everywhere, slowly inching their way across the desert.
She spent her time building the only defences she knew.
Traditionalism, manners, morality, a conservatism coupled with massive bricks of prayer.
The bastions would stand during her lifetime, but she would soon be a great-grandmother.
Such a tiny little woman, I thought as I watched her, imagining her building and repairing her mental walls, her endless labour.
Such a tiny woman.
A rustle behind us broke the silence.
The Sheikha had come to join us, her veils and silks carrying their aromas of attar of roses and jasmine and musk.
She greeted us all in her various roles of mother, friend, daughter-in-law, mother-in-law and mistress of the house, bringing with her an air of reality and practicality.
She was followed by the Sri Lankan who held a pile of cloth.
She settled herself on the carpet and the fine cotton was stacked beside her.
She ordered the coffee della to be passed yet again and began to work.
She was making serwal — pantaloons, the jodhpur-like underpants worn by the women and children which tie at the waist, fasten at the ankle and are loose, cool and comfortable.
Laying a piece of liberally flowered cotton in front of her she hand-spanned it, her long fingers measuring the size needed.
Then she took up the cloth, worked at the edge a moment and tore it neatly along the weave.
Neither measuring tape nor scissors were needed here.
She knew the hand span necessary for each member of the hareem and piles of measured cloth began to rise beside her.
Needle and thread were brought and they were rapidly basted into shape.
Pair after pair of serwal were made ready for the tailor's sewing machine.
Eventually they would return, plainly finished at the ankle for the children and young girls, heavily embroidered for the ladies.
At one time the ladies of the area did all the embroidery themselves.
Now it was left to Indian and Pakistani seamstresses.
As the Sheikha worked, her smiling eyes caught mine and she said, ‘Come, Um Yusef, you must learn,’ and she tore a bit of cloth into a four-inch square.
‘You must learn to make buttons for my mother.’
Sheikha Grandmother would have nothing but hand-made buttons for her traditional dresses.
The Sheikha usually made them for her.
Now I sat beside her and watched as the cloth was folded and refolded until it became a nubin.
Then the Sheikha took her needle and drove it up through the middle of the quarter-inch nub, anchoring the fabric.
She showed me how to cover the cloth with an embroidery stitch which finally created a small, neat, round button.
The trick was to get them all  the same size.
Mine varied from too large to too small but I was encouraged by the laughter of the women around me and their urging me on with ‘good, good’ or ‘work, work’.
I sat absorbed in my button-making, warmed by the winter sun and content to let the quiet conversation move around me.
Then, like a break in the rhythm of a fugue, I heard the Sheikha say ‘Um Hamed’, and looking up saw Um Hamed and two of the women of her hareem walking through the court toward us.
It was a special moment, a rare occasion to see them walking.
These days the ladies will ride if only for a few hundred yards.
Um Hamed came through the court, covered in her black veils which brushed against climbing bougainvillaea blossoms, sending down showers of petals.
We rose to greet her and her companions with delighted cries of welcome, mingled with congratulations for her walk.
‘But it is such an easy walk on such a cool day,’ laughed Um Hamed, lifting her veil off her face and adjusting her mask so that it settled properly on her nose.
We agreed that it was indeed a fine day — a perfect day.
The wind had changed, bringing strangely cool, fresh air to the oases.
It was a day like those searched for by Northerners in the south of France or the Greek islands.
Hot enough to embrace you — not hot enough to bake you.
Another carpet was called for and our circle expanded.
Fresh coffee and fruit were ordered and soon the sound of the big brass pestle pounding the cardamom and coffee beans in the brass mortar rang around the court, announcing that we had visitors, come and make them welcome.
I had not seen Um Hamed since those frightening days when the Youngest Son was in hospital.
We greeted each other with affection.
She was always the same.
Always welcoming, always beautiful, always that charming voice.
I asked about her daughter and her son and husband.
Was he better?
Would she come to London this summer?
She in turn asked why I hadn't been to visit her.
Would I come that very evening or soon?
The Youngest Son would bring me.
‘God willing,’ I answered.
The chatter and gossip began to run among us.
The serwal were admired and my own efforts at button-making were applauded.
I felt like an eight-year-old showing her work in class.
The tray of fruit arrived.
There were dates and a delicious bowl of freshly made cottage cheese.
We talked and ate, exchanging news and views.
Someone had gone to Germany, someone had returned from London, someone was in hospital, someone was to be married.
Then the talk turned to the West and I found myself at the centre of  questions.
‘But why do they wear so few clothes?
Why do they kiss on television?’
‘And more.’
‘Yes and more.
It is very rude.
I have to close it off.’
‘And why do they speak so roughly to their husbands and why do they have so few manners?
You are not like this to Abu Yusef?
Surely not.’
‘No, surely not, surely not,’ all agreed while I sat silent.
‘They do not visit and do not know their neighbours.
They do not know who lives beside them.
How can they live like that?’
‘Once, when shopping in London with my friends and daughters, one young man comes and stares at me.
It is very rude to stare.
And they look and look all the time.
It is very uncomfortable.’
‘In London I go from the room to the car quickly.’
‘I only go to small shops now.
Not the big ones.’
‘Ha.
Let them stare.
It is they who are rude.
Not you.’
‘What I do not understand is where is the water?
There is nowhere to get water if you are thirsty.
I always take a bottle of water in the car for the children.’
I tried to answer and explain our ways, but it was difficult.
Only if I used the example of all mankind's progress towards Paradise was there any meeting of minds.
I remembered John Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress and, after explaining the story briefly, said that we all went through a Slough of Despond at some time, but God led us out.
So it was with customs which were not correct.
With prayer we would be brought out of them.
‘This is true, this is true.
Thanks be to God,’ they answered.
Then Hussa began a startling conversation.
‘Tell me, Um Yusef, they say a man walked on the moon.
What do you think of this?’
I replied that I had watched my television all day when the first man stepped on the moon.
I thought it was the greatest adventure of our age.
‘Ha, you can't believe this, Um Yusef,’ she said.
‘It is of course a trick.’
And all the others nodded their agreement.
‘A trick?
No indeed.
You have seen the pictures.
You have seen the television pictures and heard the words of the men from space.
It is true, my friend,’ I explained.
‘Now, Um Yusef, you know it is very easy to make stories.
Look at all the nonsense on the television.
It is all made up.
This is made up too.
The moon.
What nonsense.
Next you will tell me they are sending aeroplanes to the stars, just like to London.’
I looked to the Sheikha for help.
Her eyes were busy with her sewing.
She did not look up.
What did she believe, I wondered?
All agreed that it was a trick and that it was very silly of the people who made it.
Their arguments were faultless and after a few moments I felt myself drowning in doubt, drowning in the time trap surrounding the area.
Had Neil Armstrong really walked on the moon or was it a magnificent hoax?
I shook my head and felt enormously grateful when the topic of conversation changed.
‘They say that the English cannot stay with their child or friend or family in the hospital.
Is this true?
That only at certain times you can see them?
Why is this?
It is so cruel.
Who will comfort them and watch over them?’
The conversation turned to illness and the old days.
‘Today, everyone is sick.
We had no malaria before.’
‘It is brought by the workers.’
‘Before when you were sick — which was not often — you got well or you died.
God's hand is in all things.
His will be done.’
‘His will be done.
Praise God.
Thanks be to God.’
‘Today there is much sickness all the time.
Colds and stomach and much cancer.
We had this before, but not so much.’
‘I do not trust these doctors and all these pills.
I do not see them at all.
How do they know what they say is true?
What are these strange drugs?
I think they know less than they think.
It is all look, look, look.
Pictures, blood, injection, and do they cure you?
No.’
‘They cure some.’
‘Some.
But the worst still die.’
‘As before.’
‘As before.’
‘What happened before when you were sick?’
I asked.
‘How sick?
A little sick or badly sick, sick with something you can catch or not catch?’
The Sheikha looked up.
‘Well, Um Yusef,’ she said, putting down her sewing, ‘first, of course, you must pray, for prayer to God makes the mind quiet, reminds you that your life is in His hands and that all is well, truly, thanks be to Him.
When the mind is quiet of course the body is quiet and whatever illness you have can be healed more easily.’
She put down her needle and thread and went on, her voice calm with conviction, ‘Of course we do not know what God plans for us, so we must be ready to accept His will in all things, but sometimes prayer alone will heal the one who is ill and this is the best way.’
‘It is, it is, praise God.
May His name be praised,’ chorused the ladies around me.
‘In the old days,’ said Hussa, ‘if you had a bad thing like the smallpox, or something others could catch, you were put far away from people in a small hut where things were brought to you and left for you.
Sometimes such poor people died, but sometimes they lived.
It was all in God's hands.’
‘But we were not sick so much,’ said the Sheikha.
‘We ate very little.
Sometimes only dried fish and dates and a little rice.
Many things can be made from dates.
Sweet things, drinks, cakes, many things.
We were glad to have this food.
And were very well eating it.
And there are desert bushes which give green things in the spring.
You have eaten them, Um Yusef?
Yes, of course.
Here with us.
So delicious, eh?
And the milk of the camel or the goat.
Yoghurt.’
She picked up her sewing.
‘One day I will show you how these things are made.’
Her eyes smiled a promise.
‘Praise God.’
‘His name be praised.’
The talk went on and the fruit tray became a pile of peelings, the cottage cheese bowl emptied and all was removed.
Our visitors rose, said their farewells and walked off across the court again.
They moved slowly, their black veils floating around them.
The children continued their playing.
The tumbling pigeons rose up and tumbled down, their white wings bright in the sunlight.
The Sheikha looked up to the sun.
‘It is time to pray.
Wait here while I pray.’
‘Yes, you go to pray.
I will stay here,’ I answered.
Shama, who was lifting herself up on her lame legs, turned with a puzzled expression.
Then a broad smile crossed her face.
‘That is what Umbarak would say to Zayed.
‘You go to pray.
I stay here.'’
Umbarak said that.’
And she moved off to her own prayers.
Umbarak — Wilfred Thesiger — rode with Zayed long before the days of oil.
I was to hear his name again and again.
How had Shama known him?
Where had she heard him say these things?
I knew I must talk with her again, but at that moment I was content to have used the words of the last of the great desert explorers.
I sat watching as the sun reached its zenith and the muezzin began to call the people to prayers.
The sound echoed out of the mosque towers across the town.
The morning was over.
Sand Storms and Desert Ice
EACH DAY ROSE and fell in the same quiet pattern.
Each day was blessed with the same strangely cool weather, until one evening the clear sky suddenly filled with haze and the new moon faded out of sight as though sailing out of orbit into oblivion.
That night I did not open my window to the usually sweet night air but kept it tight shut against the threatening darkness.
I closed the curtains, went to bed, pulled the blanket high over my head and slept peacefully until I heard through layers of consciousness that unforgettable sound, the voice of the wind.
The voice of the wind is as different in the desert as the language of the people.
I am used to the wind's deep-throated shouts as it tears at the corners of our cottage in Cornwall, as it cracks branches and sweeps up leaves.
I know its London shrieks and shuffles as it rushes through road canyons and around the sharp edges of tall buildings.
But in the desert it gives a strange moaning sound, low and sensual, accompanied by the singing of the sand as it skates across itself.
The moans and songs lie low and gentle, then rise to a wild screaming force of sound as though all the ghosts of time had gathered themselves into one great, explosive cry.
They deafen you.
If the wind catches you in its path it will blind you.
Once it reaches its zenith you can neither see, hear nor stand.
If the dry desert storm rises in the day and you are inside, protected by walls of concrete and windows framed in steel, you watch as the sun changes white to red and slowly fades into nothing.
Distant walls disappear in a fog  of dust as dense to the eye as the black fogs of old London.
Slowly you realise your house is drowning in dust.
The concrete and steel begin to leak.
The dust penetrates all man's modern inventions, so strong, so carefully sealed.
Soon small eddies appear.
Thin layers rise on tables and shelves.
Windows have frostings of dust — inside.
You begin to taste it, bite it, breathe it, and as in England your heart whispers a quick, deep prayer for all those men caught in gales on the sea, so in the desert your prayers rush to those caught in the sand sea.
Quick phone calls are made to sons and husbands who are planning to drive home.
‘Don't start.
The storm is here.
Wait.
Wait.’
To drive through the storm would be an invitation to suicide.
Even in a light wind, a dust-misted day, windscreen wipers and headlights must be turned on, the clink-clonk of the wipers brushing off dust, not rain.
In a storm it is madness to move.
I woke that morning with grit between my teeth.
I tasted the storm before I saw it.
Through the haze of early half-waking I knew that the dust was everywhere.
The screaming, shouting wind, the sand fog would obliterate all sight of trees, walls, houses, cars.
I put my head under the blanket, but it was no use.
The whole house trembled, shuddered, leaked.
‘I must go home tomorrow,’ I thought.
‘How in God's heaven will I get down to the coast in this mess?’
It could last for an hour or a day or days, rising and falling.
I poked my head out.
The pillow had an almost imperceptible film of dust.
I threw back the blanket and walked to the window.
Beyond the porch steps nothing could be seen but a cream-coloured, whirling fog of dust.
I stood watching the dust frostings rise on the inside of the window panes.
I listened to the storm.
They say that typhoons on the South China Seas are the worst, lifting and cracking the backs of freighters like discarded toys.
Then there are those who will tell you that the winter storms sucking through the Magellan Straits are the most deadly.
Others talk of blizzards, of cyclones and hurricanes, howling and thrashing, winding themselves up before blowing themselves out.
I was in a hurricane once.
I was a child.
The air pressure forced me to my knees and I watched while the wind screwed great oak trees out of the earth and then dropped them in a mess of green leaves and splintered wood.
Every winter the gales of Cornwall lift granite slabs off sea walls and toss them willy-nilly on to the nearest road.
The stone walls of our cottage groan and shudder as if tired of battling with the centuries of wind.
We're used to that, though.
We're used to the sharp cracks of lightning and the belch  of thunder issuing from the belly of the sky.
Rain, fog and mist are the acceptable accoutrements of northern gales.
But dust?
No.
This crying, this wailing, this mass of thick air gathered from thousand upon thousand square miles of nothingness, scooped up, pushed and banked against every object which has the temerity to stand up from the surface of the earth; this was weird, oppressive, invasive.
I watched and waited.
It continued.
I went into the bathroom.
My feet made neat tracks on the tiles.
I washed, letting the water rush around the sides of the bath, letting it clean as much as possible along with myself.
It was a losing battle, but I tried.
I knew that eventually I would have to walk into that screaming cloud.
The pattern of the day must continue.
I could stay in the house and be marked as frightened, or I could do battle with the elements, making my way to the family as usual.
I dressed and then went to my suitcase, searching for an old, black veil.
I found it folded in a corner, still heavy with the perfume of the Sheikha who had given it to me.
I wound it around my head so that it covered all but my eyes.
An Indian shawl went around my shoulders and I started toward the door.
A sudden, mindless, stomach-twisting invasion of fear slowed my steps.
The fear of the intangible.
My hand went to the handle of the front door but without my touching it, the handle moved and the door crashed open.
Now the wind was inside, whipping my veils and skirts around me, picking up folds of cloth and dropping them, slamming inner doors.
Half closing my eyes, I turned and backed on to the porch.
Heaving and struggling I managed to close the door, but it kept opening again, weakened by its storm-fractured clasp.
My back strained against the wind.
I clung to the door, my hands fisted round the useless handle.
Before a prayer had formed itself, a young brown hand covered mine and I looked round to see the turbaned head of the Youngest Son, his face half covered by his head-scarf, his eyes laughing, his whole figure straight against the storm as though he and it had made some truce.
He reached inside the door, found the key and locked both it and the house against the invasion.
He took my hand.
The storm parted in front of us.
We walked to his mother's house.
Once inside he pulled his scarf away from his face, the laughter welling up inside him.
He put his arms around me in the bear-hug of a joyous boy who had suddenly become a man.
‘Come, Mrs Tea Cup, you must not be afraid of the storm.
It comes.
It goes.
It is a big noise for nothing.’
He drew me into the family circle, laughing, telling his mother of my  struggles, of the broken door, but when I started to take my veil off he wouldn't have it and insisted that I keep it on.
‘Now you are truly one of us.
You must put on kohl.
Why not?
Why are your eyes pale like this?
Eh?
It is a good idea, my mother.
Um Yusef should wear kohl and the shayla.
Then she will be an Al Ain woman and can stay here.’
He stood beside his mother, hugging and kissing her, teasing us all.
The microscopic grit was in everything.
In the coffee, on our hands, edging forward from the corners of the room.
Sometimes the whole house would shake, then lie quiet again, keeping sentinel for this small group of humans.
We sat and drank our gritted coffee, sewed and read.
Prayers were said.
Men servants came and went, pushing against the wind, their faces bound Berber fashion, leaving only a gap for the eyes.
Food was brought, gritty with dust.
The phone rang at regular intervals.
Queries as to the state of the storm, queries as to safety.
Always the answer, ‘No, don't come.
It is still very bad.
We are well.
Don't move.’
The Sheikh phoned.
Then the Eldest Son, then an uncle, a great-uncle, then the Sheikh again.
Sometimes the Youngest Son would speak, standing in some automatic obeisance when he heard his father's voice.
Sometimes the daughter with a gentle, half-frightened tone.
‘Yes, my father.
Yes, it is very bad.
No.
I am not afraid.
My brother is here.
My mother is here.
All are in the house.’
Towards the late afternoon, exhausted by its own violence, it began to die slowly and soon the ‘great noise for nothing’ became a gasping puff, The doors were opened and we stared at the drifts of dust which had banked against houses and cars in much the same way that snow drifts against walls and trees.
Everything, every object natural or man-made, had its film of dust and there was no prospect of rain to wash it clean.
It would take days to sweep the stuff away, weeks for the green to grow green again, for the dust to settle and become earth.
In the evening, Hussa and Shama walked over from their house which is battened against the front wall of the compound.
We talked of the storm and other storms they had known.
Rubbing her lame leg, Shama began to speak in her slow, rolling voice.
‘I have seen worse storms than this.
More quick to come.
More strong.
More quick to go.
Like the anger of the devil.’
‘Where?’
I asked, ‘Here?
Where?’
‘Oh, here, there,’ she pointed her hands at some unknown place beyond the walls.
I told her of the storms I had known as a child in America, of the sea lifting the paving stones in Penzance, of the ice storms in New England where each twig, each leaf is coated in ice, and of how, when the sun shines, it is as though the world were crystallised, as though nature were encapsulated in a diamond.
‘This I will never see.
Not now,’ said Shama.
She seemed disappointed that there was some area of life, some vision she could not experience.
She must have been nearly seventy.
Her round of days seemed to me to be a drone-like existence, moving from house to compound, compound to house.
Yet to her each new day had some new fascination.
Now, as though solaced by the memory she said, ‘I have known times when the water went to ice.
Yes.
This happened.
It happened when I went to Mecca.’
‘Ice?’
I said.
‘In the desert?
Ice?
In Mecca?’
‘No, no.
On the way.
Going.
It was cold.
Very cold in the night.
The water went to ice in the water bag.
You have seen them?
These skins that hold water?
No?’ she asked.
‘Never,, I said.
‘I have some even now,, she answered.
‘I will show you.
Tomorrow when I come.
We used them long ago.
In the past.
All is changed now.
Now it is aeroplane.
Then only camel.’
‘When did you go to Mecca this way?’
I asked.
‘Were there many of you altogether?
When was this?’
‘Long ago.
In the past.
We were few, not so many.
Ten camel maybe.
Five men maybe and that time…’ she counted on her fingers, naming long remembered names, ‘Three women.
Yes, three women.’
She described how they had carried their water in those sheepskins, which they call jerbah .
Many things were carried in them.
Small skins were for milk, camels’ milk or goats' milk which they got from bedu camps along the way.
Old skins were used to carry dates, the sweet, sugar-running, dried Al Ain dates packed down tight.
There were skins for flour, for rice, and small leather bags for salt.
‘Did you have a tent for the night?’
I had always imagined that they would put up and take down tents.
A stupid idea, when you think about it.
Bedu tents are huge, complicated structures.
Movable homes.
Travelling was travelling.
The object then was as it is today, to get from one place to the next as swiftly as possible.
Bedu travelled fast and light.
‘Tent?’ asked Shama.
‘Tent?’
She laughed.
‘No, Um Yusef.
No.
There was no time for this.
We were always going, going, going.’
‘Did you ride?’
‘Ride?
Yes, I ride.
Up high.
On top.
And I walk.
I walk.
Slowly, slowly we get there.’
‘At night it was cold?
Where was this when the water froze?’
I asked.
‘In the mountains.
In the morning we have to wait for the sun to turn it to water.
It took a long time, the waiting.’
‘It must have been so very cold in the night.
Did you have blankets?
What did you sleep on?’
I asked.
‘This thing that goes over the camel.
We had no blankets.
Just this cover for the camel.’
‘Weren't you cold?’
‘Cold?
No.
We were sleeping.’
It was one of those answers that they give sometimes.
Answers that leave you hanging in mid-air.
As Shama talked, Hussa added a reminder here and there as though they were stories which she had heard many times before.
The Sheikha's daughter sat with us, pouring coffee, translating the words I couldn't understand, her quiet voice occasionally breaking into laughter at my questions, my curiosity.
‘Why?
Why do you want to know these things?’ she asked.
‘We must know about each other,, I answered.
It seemed a right time, a right moment to ask Shama another question which had been haunting me.
I reminded her that she had mentioned Wilfred Thesiger.
‘You said before, another time, before, you had heard Umbarak speak.
Did you know Umbarak?’
‘Umbarak with all bedu.
Umbarak stay with Zayed.
He sits with him.
He hunts with him.’
Suddenly she burst into laughter, her arthritic hands waving in the air.
‘They made bread.
He and Zayed.
They put it under the fire.
It went to dust, black dust, very sandy.
Then they mix it.
Mix this black dust with oil and eat it.
Umbarak and Zayed.
Umbarak, he made it.
They ate it.’
She bent over to show me how they tried to eat this dust.
Then she pointed to me.
‘When Zayed and his friends go to pray, Umbarak say, ‘You go to pray — I stay here.'’
You say this, same as Umbarak.’
She shook with laughter again.
When I told her that Umbarak was still alive and sometimes visited London, she asked, ‘Why does he not come to sit with Zayed?’
I told her that he came once but he didn't like the new Al Ain.
‘They say that he said he would never come again.
I heard this.’
I told her.
‘Perhaps he sits with Zayed in London,’ she said.
‘Perhaps,’ I agreed but in my heart I doubted it.
There were days when my husband and my son, too, had sat with Zayed.
When it was easy to reach this man whose spirit was born out of the best of the desert traditions.
Today he is surrounded by a court.
I told Shama of the years that Thesiger had spent in Iraq with the Marsh Arabs and then in Iran, that now he had a small house in Kenya deep in the country where he could get away from the towns.
I told her all that I had read of him.
‘He should sit with Zayed,’ she answered.
I said he was over seventy now.
‘This is not so old today.
Many live past eighty.
He should come again,’ and her eyes looked into what was past.
‘They liked it better then,’ said the young daughter.
The following morning as I was packing to leave, Shama came limping to the house with a jerbah for me to see.
Made of the whole sheepskin, the legs were tied with rings of woven palm leaf.
It was sewn with coarse grass and carefully mended with leather patches stitched on with the same coarse grass.
A cloth was tied to one end.
It was filled there, at the neck end.
‘Life has changed, Shama,’ I said looking at the Japanese thermos on the chair by my bed and the round box of Danish biscuits which I had been given ‘in case you are hungry in the night’.
I looked at her steadily and said again, ‘Life has changed.’
She watched me from behind her long old-fashioned mask.
‘Yes,’ she said and held her sheepskin in both hands as though willing some part of the past to remain in the present.
I hen, saying goodbye and wishing me well on my journey, she limped out of the house, down the steps and off down the drive.
I left for Abu Dhabi that afternoon.
The streets of Al Ain and the highway were still half covered in drifts of sand.
Every few hundred yards teams of Baluchistan workers were sweeping it away, sweeping it back towards the desert which suddenly seemed everywhere.
One felt the enormity of that dry wilderness and the puny, brassy efforts of man.
If left to itself the road would disappear in three months.
The new houses, the markets would crumble in the wind and the sun and there would be little left to remind man of this strange blip of civilisation in the path of the patiently creeping sand.
Another Babylon, another Leptus Magna, another Petra?
Within hours I was flying over it.
I thought of Shama and her camels, her sheepskin water carriers, her dates and camels' milk.
She had needed nothing but some rough grazing, a few wells and the hospitality of the bedu to get her across.
To make our aeroplanes and fly them we need steel mills, oil wells, an army of designers, technicians, engineers and financiers, pilots, mechanics, caterers and stewards.
She took weeks, we took hours.
But we both arrived at our destination.
It was only a matter of time.
The question was and always will be, what shall we do with the time we have saved?
A Bride for a Prince
‘YOU MUST COME.
The wedding will be very soon now.’
The voice of the Second Son was pleading and urgent.
I could imagine him sprawled on the floor of the pool room in the boys' house, a long, lean figure in a white kandora unbuttoned at the neck, around him three or four young men waiting to play football, to drive, to beat the drums or follow him wherever he wanted to go.
It was summer.
He was at home.
Studies were over for a few months.
There would be one more year of work before he finally achieved his degree, a hard year, a work-filled year, but nothing could or would postpone marriage plans.
If the time was deemed to be right, if the prospective bride had accepted and the parents had chosen a time, he would be married, that was sure.
Now his voice was coming over five thousand miles of air and five hundred years of diverse progress.
He was in his world.
I was in mine.
‘Where are you?
You must come.
You must come now.
It is arranged.
The marriage is arranged.
We have signed.
I will be married next winter.
You promised to help me.
Where are you?
When will you come?
Tomorrow?
Next week?’
They had signed.
This boy, this youngster, this barely grown-up Arab ‘son’ was indeed to be married.
We had talked about it, of course.
They always talked about it.
Their dreams of love and marriage are hopelessly romantic, still holding the touch  of Camelot or Juliet or Melisande.
He would not see his bride before the wedding night so all sorts of pictures could float in the mind.
It was all a matter of trust.
Trust in parents, trust in the hearsay of family and friends.
The young people lived in hope and waited with great expectations.
After all, it is a small society.
Gossip is perpetual.
Reputations for beauty, grace, wit, intelligence or for strength, humour, kindness, honesty are made early or never made at all.
Everyone knows everyone.
‘When are you coming?
I will meet your plane.’
‘Is it all right with your mother?
Does she expect me?’
I asked.
‘She is not here.
No-one is here, but she will be glad if you come just the same.’
The idea of staying in a near empty compound in midsummer was scarcely inviting.
‘Where are they all?’
I asked, postponing the decision.
‘Away,’ came the enigmatic reply and I knew I would learn nothing more until I arrived.
‘Is everything all right?’
I asked.
‘Everything is perfect.
When are you coming?
There is much to do and you promised.’
I had promised, so I must go.
A promise must be kept.
A promise is the ultimate seal in that sandy world.
It is said that Arabs have no compunction about reneging on a deal, that they will blow hot and cold, use the phrase ‘God willing’ to suit their own purpose, say ‘yes’when they mean ‘no’and generally confuse their more direct Western counterparts.
Written business contracts can be searched for minute loopholes in the small print, for the Arab is most certainly a past master at the game of delay.
The exception to this sharp dealing is the word of honour.
To break this is to break the code, so it is rarely given.
Once given it is as good as a seal.
Better.
Those who break their word are considered lower than the dust.
I was now bound both by their code and by my own.
My promise had been made long ago.
It had been made at one of those long, heart-searching breakfast conversations over pancakes and imported Vermont maple syrup.
‘When they choose one for me, when it does happen, you will help me, Mrs Tea Cup.
This is for sure?
I have your promise?
Your word?’
I agreed.
I made my promise.
Now I must keep it.
He was on the airport tarmac waiting for me, his Mercedes sports drawn up to the foot of the mobile steps.
As thin as ever without an ounce of excess fat, he had the long face and gaunt look of the true desert Arab.
His two Omani friends were with him, their smiles wordless expressions of  hospitality.
I stepped out of the plane and into the Arabian summer heat.
It was a tangible experience.
You felt, tasted and swallowed it in an effort to breathe.
It was like a suffocating embrace.
The car with its whirring air conditioning was like an oxygen mask.
How had they lived in this suffocation before air conditioning?
How had they moved?
How had they worked?
I turned to look at the young man beside me, his long fingered hands resting on the steering wheel.
In the unblinking black eyes were a thousand upon a thousand years of survival.
No need for the fetish of sunglasses.
The eyes had been bred for the glare, the body for the heat.
We drove down the tarmac and out of the airport gates.
He gave a quick, curt nod to the soldiers on duty and turned on to the Al Ain road.
He drove as he always drove in those days, well, but far too fast.
‘Welcome.’
‘Thank you.’
He enquired for my family and I for his.
‘Your mother?
Where is she?’
I asked.
‘She has gone to Germany with my sister,’ he answered.
‘And your brothers?’
‘The eldest in Jordan.
The youngest with them.’
‘How is your young brother?’
I asked.
‘Is he well?
Quite well?’
‘He is good.
Except sometimes he still itches.’
‘When did they leave?’
I asked.
‘A little while ago.’
It is quite hopeless to expect any news which they are either not ready nor sufficiently interested to share.
You just have to wait and catch your moment or piece things together as best you can.
We drove on in silence.
I bided my time but patience was still not a part of my nature no matter how continually I courted it.
So I asked again.
‘Is everything all right?
Is your mother well?’
He glanced at me, saw the discomfort in my expression and started to laugh.
‘Of course they are well.
It is only to see the dentist and escape the heat.
They don't like it so well as London.
No-one of them speaks German.
But they were told the doctors were good.’
I could imagine the language confusion, the blank looks behind the masks.
‘And your grandmother?’
‘She is perfectly well.
She is staying with my aunt because my mother is not here.
She does not like my mother to go, but my sister's teeth ached  and you know the dentists here.’
He gave an expression of agony and groaned, then grinned adding, ‘There is a maid left there’.
He waved in the direction of Al Ain.
‘She will look after you.
And you won't have to eat my cooking.
Others are there.’
N ow, at last, the news was shared and I felt comfortable.
Why hadn't he said so in the first place?
Why did they always cloak everything, if not with seven veils, at least with one?
‘Thanks be to God,’ I said and settled back to enjoy the drive.
The road was clear, his hands were steady.
Neither of us said very much.
We were both busy with our thoughts.
The only sounds were the clean, well-tuned engine and a tape of the famous Lebanese singer Farouz singing ‘My Country’.
Dear God.
Her country.
Shattered, exploded, tormented.
A battlefield for every devilish emotion known to man.
Though I didn't know it at the time, Lebanon was suffering only the hors d'oeuvre of the devil's dinner.
I shut my mind to the apocalypse and opened it to the complexities of marriage on the lower Gulf.
‘Congratulations.
Congratulations.
Everything is arranged?’
‘Yes, it is arranged,’ he answered with a wide smile.
A marriage has been arranged.
We used the same phrase once.
It had a Victorian charm to us, an Emily Post nicety.
To them it still had meaning.
While hot-eyed youngsters in the West drift ed about like aimless butterflies on summer days, hoping for the long-imagined mate to materialise, in this place the search was cool-eyed and planned with the precision of a military campaign.
The Second Son's bride-to-be had been carefully chosen.
She was from the hareem of Um Hamed, a large and powerful hareem dominated by Um Hamed's mother-in-law.
Um Hamed was the wife of one of four sons.
There were four daughters-in-law in their hareem, all from important Sheikh families.
The little bride was therefore a distant cousin.
Marrying a cousin was very much to be desired.
Marrying a first cousin was considered the best possible arrangement.
They seemed oblivious to the genetic dangers this could engender.
‘I think your bride is very young.
Has she finished school?’
I asked.
‘No.
She stops to marry me,’ he said and laughed aloud.
She's only fourteen, I decided and spoke my thoughts aloud, saying, ‘She's so young.’
‘Not so very.
Not so very.
You know her.
I think you know her.
Anyway you know all about her, for I have told you.
And you have seen her.
Surely you remember her?
They say she is very clever and will keep my house well.
This is more important than a long nose, don't you think?’
‘I think it is much more important,’ I said laughing.
I remembered the girl.
She had been little more than a child when I first saw her, but no-one could forget her beautiful, lively eyes.
‘She is very attractive,’ I went on.
‘She carries her own beauty.
Such a girl would be much admired in the West and we would think her very beautiful indeed.’
‘Oh?’ he said and drove on in silence again.
I had first seen her in the desert when I went for my first ‘bedu’ breakfast and the prospective bridegroom's brother had played fox in the hen coop.
She couldn't have been more than ten then and by our standards would be scarcely more than a child now.
I had seen her a few times since and remembered her lively face, her large, intelligent eyes which were always looking here, looking there as if one moment's rest would deny her some crumb of life.
I remembered her laugh.
Such a laugh was made for very few.
It rose like a peal of music heard from a distance on a clear night.
You went toward it, irresistibly drawn, laughing without reason.
Yes, I remembered her.
‘Yes,’ I said breaking the silence, remembering the laugh.
‘We would think her very beautiful.’
‘They say she is a very good housekeeper and I want a very good housekeeper because my house will be perfect.
You will help me to make it perfect?’
It was both a question and a statement and we both smiled, for we both knew the answer.
‘Who told you she was a good housekeeper?
Did they send a searching woman for you?’
I asked.
‘A searching woman?’ repeated the boy.
‘Well, they sent Hussa.
You know my mother would send Hussa.
It is only polite.
It is correct.
Besides I want to know how she has grown.
Hussa is a good searcher.’
‘It seems so strange when it is all settled,’ I said.
‘It is the way.
My mother cannot go.
Suppose she is grown up bad.
This is very embarrassing.
There must be somebody.’
There must be somebody.
Yes, I supposed there must be somebody.
The searching woman had a unique role to play in these affairs.
She was the eyes and ears of the Sheikha.
Not a marriage broker.
Certainly not.
Nothing so barefaced as that.
The searching woman was a sort of subtle investigator, a visiting ‘friend’ who observed and reported.
A spy?
Well, yes.
It must be admitted.
A sort of known and often welcome spy.
I settled back in my seat, resting my head against the sheepskin, wondering at the strange minuet of their lives, the complexities of their dance of life.
I had watched a marriage campaign once.
Not for this boy.
Not for this son of a Sheikh.
For Hamed, the eldest son of Um Hamed, who found himself on the shelf quite unexpectedly and yet was ready to marry.
It was extraordinary.
No NATO general could have organised the strategy so well, for what general can recognise and know by name over a thousand of his troops — even when masked?
What general could detail their lineage for at least two generations, name their children and describe their children's abilities and characters?
Do they have trusted lieutenants to go into the field armed with such information?
Believe me, the CIA, the KGB, Mossad, MI6 are all a lot of coarse novices relying on schoolboy cruelties and inaccurate hearsay compared to the knowledge and sophistication of the hareem information system.
Furthermore, the system is not only trustworthy but all information is absolutely sacrosanct.
No-one ‘outside’ would ever know a thing.
No-one would ever defect.
‘Do you remember last year when your cousin Hamed was looking for a bride?’
I asked.
‘With Hamed it was a real search.’
‘Poor Hamed,’ he answered.
‘But they are always looking.
Always planning.
If it doesn't go this way, then it will go that way.
Um Hamed had a lot of planning.
You know that very well.
You know them very well, now.
Better than 1.’
Better than him?
Never.
All I could do was pile up small bits of information hoping it would make an understandable structure one day.
There had been weeks of discussion about finding a wife for Hamed.
Whenever we visited Um Hamed or Um Hamed visited us, conversation inevitably turned to the latest news of a prospective bride.
His mother and the Sheikha were in constant conference.
Others came with suggestions.
Grandmothers were consulted.
Family histories remembered.
Finally, after weeks of debating the merits, advantages and availability of this or that young daughter, a decision was made to send the searching woman, Um Hamed's first lieutenant, who would investigate two possibilities more thoroughly.
The great advantage in these campaigns is to have the best possible first lieutenant.
Of course everyone knows to which general she belongs, but it is her eyes, her ears and her discernment that have to be relied upon.
Girl ‘A’ was discarded.
She was too tall (taller than the boy by a couple of inches, it was judged), too old (‘They lie about her age.
She is older.
Her face and hands say she is older’) and she had been ‘out’ and that was the final blow.
As she was from a neighbouring Emirate which had a far less critical attitude toward the participation of women in education, Girl ‘A’, it was discovered, had taught in an infant school after finishing her own  schooling.
Thus her face had been seen beyond the borders of her home, classroom or relatives' houses.
She had been ‘out’.
Not acceptable in the establishment hareems of Al Ain.
Girl ‘B’ became the target and the game began once more and in earnest.
The searcher made a casual visit.
She asked to see the daughter of the house.
Daughter was sent for.
There was a flurry.
Sorry.
Daughter was not available.
She was studying.
Next visit she was praying.
On a third visit she was visiting her grandmother.
The searcher returned another day and another and all this was a good sign.
It showed that they were not anxious, that they knew they had a treasure.
The more the searcher asked to see the daughter, the more the daughter was hidden until that planned moment of ‘chance’ arrived when all was revealed, and all was, as my young Sheikh would have said, ‘perfectly well’.
The fathers met after considerable visiting by members of the hareems, and a proposal of marriage was made.
They told me that the girl's father had been as coy as any nineteenth-century English maiden.
He demurred, he asked for time to think, to consult his wife, to put the proposal to his daughter.
I turned to my driver.
‘You remember how shy the father of Moseh was when Hamed's father put the proposal?
Was it the same with your father and your cousin's father?
Surely not.’
‘Surely yes,’ he answered.
‘They have to ask her just the same?’
‘Of course.
She might say ‘no'’ even if it was planned a long time.
This happened to my brother.
The first girl said it would be like marrying her brother so she would not.
She was a cousin, too.
Not the same one as mine.
Another,’ and he named the girl whom I knew.
‘Well, that's a revelation.
She's not married yet,’ I said.
‘No, but she will be when she finishes her work.
She is studying for a degree,’ he said.
‘Not in a real university.
By the mail.’
‘Good for her!’
I exclaimed and applauded inwardly.
‘Maybe,’ he said laconically.
‘But maybe she will go outside the tribe.’
A Sowaidi should only marry a Sowaidi, a Mansoori should only marry a Mansoori.
And if there weren't enough Mansoori boys of the right age for Mansoori girls then the answer was either spinsterhood or a long wait to become the second wife of an older man.
Sheikh families bypass the rule, as do others, but not often.
Once the two fathers had signed, once they had seen their names written in the register of marriages, it was irrevocable.
That contract would be the  bride's deed, her licence, her legal proof of marriage in all future transactions.
She would not change her name.
She would not wear a wedding ring.
Only the contract identified her position.
It was binding.
It could be signed as soon as the fathers agreed the match or as late as the wedding night itself, just as long as it was signed before the consummation.
My young Sheikh's father had signed.
Next came the wedding.
I knew it would be an elaborate fantasy, a courtship, a serenade.
It would be all the courting that the bride would know.
I began to think about the changes the coming wedding would bring.
But not before I saw the speedometer register over 100 mph and decided to fasten my seat belt.
‘Are you afraid?’
The young Sheikh smiled.
‘No.
Cautious.’
He teased me a bit but slowed down to 85 mph.
The Farous' lament came to an end and the boy punched the tape out of its slot.
Fumbling with a collection of tapes which were jumbled around the gear lever, he called out to the boys behind to ask where they had put a tape of a classic poem set to music.
The friends had been remarkably quiet throughout the drive.
I turned to look at them.
Their dark faces were wreathed in smiles but there was a certain stillness in the eyes.
One of them reached over to search out the right tape and handed it to his Sheikh.
‘Soon he will be a husband and then a man of family and all will be serious,’ I said.
‘This is for sure,’ they answered, looking at each other .
‘No more drums in the afternoon.’
‘No more.’
Their eyes were expressionless.
‘There is still time before I am captured,’ said the prospective bridegroom as he put the new tape into the slot and began to tap his hands against the wheel.
The road had been widened over the years.
A centre island had been built to divide the oncoming and ongoing traffic.
It was planted with mile upon mile of hibiscus bushes.
The long yellow stamens of their red flowers spit out into the hot air, searching for the least drop of moisture.
An intricate watering system would eventually replace the army of Baluchistan gardeners who tended not only the road islands but the roundabouts and the young plantations of trees struggling for life under the condemnation of the sun.
There was a marvellous audacity about a ruler who had decided to enter the lists and joust against the elements.
King Canute had tried and failed, but he didn't have Zayed's oily gold.
The cost would be immeasurable, but there would be green on either side of Zayed's desert highway in his lifetime.
as if in answer to unspoken thoughts, the boy broke in.
‘My grandfather had a dream long ago.
Long, long ago,’ he said.
‘Back before the oil.’
He made it seem an aeon.
Perhaps it was.
‘He dreamed one night that the way from Al Ain to Abu Dhabi would be green with branches of trees coming over to give shade.
He said this dream would become real.
And my grandmother said that it would happen.
Now you see the beginning.
It will happen.
It will be so.’
I imagined his grandfather leading his tribe as it migrated from Al Ain to Abu Dhabi, then on to the Liwa and beyond towards Qatar.
I imagined his grandmother riding high on the camel's hump, her veils creating her own tent.
To dream of cool and shade was to dream of paradise.
‘Your grandmother must have been very young and very brave when she married,’ I said.
‘Very young.
They were all brave, I think, for everything was difficult.’
‘Younger than your bride?’
‘Younger.
Much younger.
Mine is not so young.
Not really, Mrs Tea Cup.
Not so very.
She has been to school.’
His grandmother might have married at thirteen, perhaps even twelve.
This child might be fifteen by the time the marriage took place.
The marriage age was rising with education.
Rising slowly.
A good housekeeper was she?
She would have to be with this boy.
He liked everything in its place, wanted his kandoras or suffras, T-shirts or slacks pristine and neatly folded.
He hated a mess and would want the tidiest house.
I made a mental effort to visualise his new house, to create some mind picture, but gave up after a few seconds.
The images were too much of a jumble because new houses on the Gulf are a fantasy that have to be seen to be believed.
Uninhibited by any tradition of building, they have taken off in a confused conglomeration of tile, cement, plastics, marble and paint that would have taxed the imagination of Disney.
Architects with small and large reputations have contrived a scene of staggering proportions.
I closed my eyes against the sun and against the confusion of my thoughts.
I was tired.
It is a long way from London to Al Ain.
The tape played endlessly, winding its bodiless sound around the brain.
I half slept, then woke as we sped by the rest house where we had stopped for juice on that first visit to Al Ain.
We passed with never a backward look and arrived in Al Ain in well under three hours.
Our bottle of water, that remnant of respect for the old days, lay untouched on the seat.
Swinging around a newly installed roundabout, we drove towards the family compound.
There the new bride house erupted in ornate concrete  splendour.
It dwarfed the modest bungalows of the rest of the family.
It was not seemly for the Second Son to outshine the father in this way and I knew instinctively that before a year had passed there would be more building in the compound.
The car came to an abrupt halt.
‘What do you think of it?’ he asked.
‘Splendid,’ I answered.
‘Come.
Come and see.’
I took a deep breath of cool air before diving into the blast of heat and walking the few steps to the house.
So many dreams had gone into that house, so many hopes.
It had been planned and planned again, drawn on the backs of kleenex boxes, on torn pages from old copy books, on old football posters and the margins of newspapers.
It had been paced off in the sand as he announced the dimensions to the architect.
‘This room for me here, the kitchen here, the back door here.’
His brown legs had marched along kicking stones out of the way.
Now it was reality.
I walked up broad marble steps to a wide front porch screened by pre-cast fretted tiles.
A large double door of panelled wood opened into a house which had remarkable balance and grace.
We went inside.
The young Sheikh went through room after room, helping me over some unfinished bit of floor, speaking quickly and sharply to the building foreman, moving the placing of some light fitting.
He turned constantly to me, watching for signs of approval or disapproval.
We inspected everything, from the plumbing arrangements to the cornices and architraves, entirely ‘new’ ideas which he had gleaned from his trips to Europe.
From foundations to roof it had taken only five months to reach this stage of construction.
‘What do you think?
Is it good?’
‘It is perfect, a perfect house.’
‘It must be the most beautiful house.
The best in Al Ain.’
He hesitated.
‘You think she will like it?’
It was a tentative moment.
Too much concern would be un-Sheikhly, but he was young, filled with hopes, with possible and impossible dreams.
‘Yes,’ I said, without hesitation.
‘She will like it very well.’
The house would be his gift to his bride, the ultimate statement of his protection and that of his family.
It would be completely furnished, down to the last teaspoon.
The cupboards would be filled with linens, the beds made, the kitchen equipped with pots, pans, kettle and toaster, the ashtrays in place in the majlis, books on the shelves and a row of tapes and videos waiting to be played.
It would be the realised dream of a little girl who  received a perfect dolls’ house and then found herself truly able to walk into it.
Every picture, every plate, hers.
I sat on an upturned box, feeling the sweat beginning to trickle down my back.
The air conditioning was not yet in place.
I sat and began to count the cost in dirhams, then dollars, then pounds to the boy's father.
In their world it is not the father of the bride who digs into his pocket to pay for the wedding.
It is the father of the groom.
The cost rises with the status of the family until at Sheikh level a marriage involves a fortune — small or large — depending upon the size of the Sheikh's ‘box’.
The ‘box’?
In the days before the oil men invaded the skin of their earth, the ‘box’ was truly an Arab's treasure box studded with nail-heads, bolted and locked to secure a man's wealth.
Today the word ‘box’ can mean anything from a development bank — Al Sandook Al Naqd (‘the box of money’, translated literally)— to a reference to a Sheikh's largesse.
‘He never once put his hand into his box all the years that I served him,’ meaning he never gave me a gift of money, a bonus for service above and beyond the call of time.
In this instance, I knew the young man's father would have to dig deep into his box before the marriage was finally consummated and the bride brought home.
But his ‘box’ was large.
It would not constitute an insurmountable problem.
It would be discussed with his men of business, arranged, an allowance made.
The Sheikha would know what she could spend on gifts for her prospective daughter-in-law; the son would be given a budget for his bride house.
There was no strain.
In Al Ain, in this little patch of paradise blossoming lushly from the fertiliser of a world petroleum market, there was no problem.
If marriages were made on a bed of gold, here not one would fail, and in this case noblesse oblige .
Largesse, largesse.
I knew it would be a grand affair.
Even so, I don't believe I was prepared for the facts.
For the months of preparation, for the finalising of the engagement, for the week of wedding ‘fantasies’, the great feasts and fabulous gifts.
No.
I definitely was not prepared.
We walked to the boy's mother's house where I would stay while we worked on the bride house.
The compound seemed deserted without the women and children.
Although a skeleton staff had been left behind to keep the houses dusted and secure and though there were more of us in the compound than the average Western home would see in a month, there was an air of loneliness, an awful stillness as though the heart had been removed from the body.
Our days were filled with long interviews with the architect, the plumber, the electrician and the foreman builder.
Work began at dawn, taking advantage of the hours before the sun grilled the earth and the earth in turn reflected its own massive heat.
It was all an oven to me.
All twenty-four hours.
I could not distinguish between the nuances of temperature, only the change in light.
It was either white hot or black hot.
The white hot burned.
The black hot suffocated.
The men worked steadily on, taking long breaks at the height of the day.
There was no union to be consulted, no time and a half or double time to be considered.
The enormous pool of poverty in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh or Baluchistan made such social evolutions impossible.
These men were grateful to be working at all, fearful that one foot out of place would end the cash flow that eventually found its way into some remote village on the other side of the Straits of Hormuz.
It seemed bizarre to be instructing a Baluch builder in the niceties of a fitted kitchen when the man would never have seen one, would never use one.
It seemed bizarre to select a washing machine and an electric cooker for the use of some prospective young maid who was still sitting with her family in a Karachi or Lahore back street.
I tried again and again to explain that an electric cooker needed a more powerful circuit than other equipment, but no-one would accept such an idea.
If it worked on thirteen amps, that was all the proof needed.
Three years and near a thousand fuses later it was changed to gas.
The balance of electricity was a mystery yet to be solved.
Overloading circuits was a national pastime.
Often at night that hot summer the new overburdened power plants would give up and die.
Having kept too many new air-conditioning units going all day, they would be suddenly burdened by the lights of the night and would switch off, blacking out the whole town.
We would sit in the majlis shocked by the sudden blackness, held in the sudden quiet.
No AC to beat our eardrums.
The peace was like balm.
The moonlight welcome.
Then the suffocating cloud, the heat would move in, weighing down the air and we would go outside hoping to be able to breathe more easily.
Carpets and cushions would be ordered and we would sit in the hot stillness, our voices quiet, the half-English, half-Arabic clear on the heavy air.
Sometimes a little Indian maid would sit beside me, a lonely ghost left behind by the household.
The young Sheikh and his friends would stretch themselves on the carpet around us, their white kandoras in the half-light of night making a scene of extraordinary beauty.
Eventually they would change into shorts and T-shirts and set off to run two or more miles around the outskirts of town.
‘Why, my son, why?’
I would ask.
‘Why in this heat?’
‘We must keep in condition.’
He would smile and move off at a steady pace, his friends with him.
In condition?
In condition for what?
The tormenting life of the desert was over for him and his family.
They would be protected from the heat by each new technological invention for creating a fridge in an oven.
They would drive the fastest, most perfectly balanced cars, fly in the fastest planes, live cushioned by every facility purchasable by great wealth.
In condition for what?
What was he getting ready to battle?
Was it a last stand against total urbanisation?
Was he taking up the gauntlet against the subtle yet inevitable erosion such wealth would bring to the culture of his people?
Or was some other vision haunting him?
As the years passed, I would watch his passion for adhering to the bedu principle remove him further and further from the society around him.
His total disinterest in the machinations of money bewildered his brothers, his father and extended family.
And yet, the circle of men around him grew.
A strange circle — not all of one tribe or one nation, but ever-present, as though rubbing up against him would give them some strength.
Through it all his mother quietly and continually supported him and as the years passed we all began to realise that there were unforeseen, unimagined battles inexorably growing everywhere.
We were all being pushed towards an unseen precipice.
Had some inner clock warned that young Sheikh to ‘come out and be separate’ from the subtle softening of the new wealth?
That summer I could only think he was mad as he set off around the town and I dozed in the dark heat and stillness of the garden.
Fasting and Feasting in the Tide of Heat
RAMADAN ARRIVED WITH the inevitability of time.
It arrived with its promises of thirst and hunger allied to discipline and prayer.
A battle between the senses and the spirit.
Our own son had practised Ramadan on one of his trips to the Middle East ‘just to see if I could do it’.
He is always ready for a challenge.
He told me that the first three days were an agony, thirst being the greatest torture, then slowly the body reversed its patterns and you got used to it.
The fast is for ‘a certain number of days’ in the ninth month of the Islamic year, the month in which the Qur'an was revealed to the Prophet Mohamed.
As the Islamic calendar has fewer days than the Gregorian and there is no allowance for the imperceptible tilt of our spinning world, their months are twenty-nine or thirty days long, never thirty-one.
Therefore their months seem to drift backwards through the seasons.
An Arab can never know the exact date of his birth according to our calendar, for if he was born on 12th January, that day in the Muslim calendar might be 12th January of the previous year by the time he was twenty or twenty-one, owing to the shorter months.
A birthday is a movable feast as the round of years is wholly unrelated to the seasons.
Indeed, the passage of years is unmarked and unsung.
Birthdays were once non-events.
Now they are for small children to celebrate occasionally.
Time is, as always, irrelevant.
Ramadan too moves backwards through the seasons, through the years, the period of the days depending upon the cycles of the moon.
From dawn to dusk, from the moment that the ‘thread of day breaks the  blackness of night’ until the sun is once again eclipsed by the horizon the fast is kept.
When the first day arrived, I watched the eyes of the boys grow darker.
By mid-afternoon hunger and thirst had begun to plague them.
Restless and dry-mouthed, they drove to the market to shop for odds and ends of food and drink as though the act of purchasing Pepsi Cola and crisps would somehow equate with eating and drinking them.
Returning, they piled their purchases against the wall of the family majlis ‘for the evening’.
A final sortie was made to the hotel for a large bowl of ‘Bon Ali’, a hot bread pudding.
Steaming and giving off tormenting aromas, it sat on top of the television, waiting for Al Iftar, the call to break fast.
I was famished.
One of the unwritten rules of non-Muslims who work or travel in Muslim countries is that you don't eat or drink in front of your fasting friends.
I was continually with them.
I had eaten little or nothing most of the day.
As we sat waiting for the last half-hour to grind away, the young Sheikh lifted the phone and telephoned his grandmother — his mother's mother, not Sheikha Grandmother, who was still on her visit to her daughter.
‘Have you a small bowl of harees for Um Yusef?’ he asked, after explaining when and how I had arrived, that he, and his family, and I and all the household were quite well.
I could hear her scolding him for not having contacted her sooner, not having brought me to see her, asking whether I was safe, was someone with me, who was looking after me.
He made monosyllabic replies and then repeated his request for a small bowl of harees.
Within twenty minutes a car drove up to the family majlis and began to unload a meal for us all.
Harees was there along with a haunch of lamb, rice of various kinds, date mixtures, a lamb stew gently spiced, two thermos of fresh, cardamom-flavoured coffee and one of orange juice and a row of neat little red jellies, each carefully decorated and each in its own glass cup.
I knew that Ramadan was a time for sharing and that shared feasts were not unusual, but the Sheikha's mother had surpassed herself.
The fact that it had been brought to the family majlis was out of deference to me.
At that moment in time, in that place, with all the women away, I would eat in the family majlis.
I could eat alone or the young son and his friends could join me, but I could not eat in the Sheikh's great majlis with the other men of the household.
Not in Al Ain.
A point of no return had been reached.
How or when, I don't know.
It arrived imperceptibly.
Somehow, step by precarious step, I had been drawn over the invisible divide and was  now truly a part of the family hareem.
Therefore I was bound by certain of its manners and rules.
Not firmly bound.
I was free to move back and forth.
It took an almost superhuman intuition to know when it was right and proper to cross the divide.
I made mistakes and sweated over them, but tried on the whole to err on the side of caution.
One thing was certain.
In Al Ain I could not eat in the men's majlis.
It was, in fact, never suggested, never a decision I had to think about.
That summer the maternal grandmother's gift of a Ramadan feast was brought without question to the family majlis, and the young Sheikh, his friends and I sat together for those last painful moments of the first day of Ramadan.
We sat impatiently waiting, staring at the television like cats staring at a mousehole.
The young Sheikh kept grumbling that the TV was wrong.
‘My watch is correct.
They are late.
Always late,’ he said.
Finally the call sounded.
The ‘Allahu Akhbar’ was heard from every tower, on every wireless, on every television.
‘Thanks be to God’ was breathed through the air of the desert.
Prayers were said, water was poured down parched throats, dates were devoured and the first Ramadan feast began.
‘Bismallah.
Imshi, Imshi .
In the name of God.
Let's go.
Let's go.’
Breaking the fast had a sort of Thanksgiving Day quality about it, or a Harvest Supper.
We sat cross-legged around the food, eating and eating until the meal was decimated.
The Bon Ali, the jellies, the harees, the lamb were a jumbled mess in front of us.
When the Indian maid and the house-boy were finally called to remove it all, we were satiated.
I leaned back against the cushions feeling too full.
The boys went off to say more prayers.
It is impossible for a non-Muslim to appreciate Ramadan.
We watch bewildered as they turn night into day, criss-cross between self-denial and celebration.
We resent the grinding down of business which is conducted at a snail's pace for twenty-eight days.
Everything continues to operate after a fashion.
Work carries on, but physically everything moves in slow-motion, like a cine-camera with insufficient power.
Yet the spirit burns brighter.
There is a friendliness, a companionship and general concern.
Does man really need some battle to bring out his best qualities?
An unpalatable thought.
We sat up late that night and other nights that hot summer in Al Ain, and the strain of Ramadan soon began to show in my young Sheikh's face.
Lack of sleep, food bolted too quickly, the heat and the night jogging gave him a dark-eyed expression of endurance.
I longed for the emotional and  social cushion of the hareem which would have softened the impact of the days.
One English woman and a pint-sized Indian maid were quite useless.
Sometimes when the afternoon tide of heat reached its high mark, we would go over to the hotel.
It had grown less incongruous as the town grew towards it.
Even though I still imagined prehistoric fish swimming through its pergolas, the whole place now seemed almost natural, like a well-planned country club.
We would cross the marble floor of the lobby to reach the pool in the garden beyond.
There the young Sheikh would swim back and forth, back and forth, in a controlled frenzy.
Thin and weary, he would come out and drop exhausted in a chair beside me, his chest heaving.
‘Too weak.
Ramadan,’ he would say and close his eyes as the hot air dried him in seconds and I retreated even further under the wilting greenery.
The heat had gradually become an expected body blow which was endurable with certain rules.
Don't move too quickly, hug the shade, breathe quietly.
Though I'd learned that the black abaya dropped the temperature by degrees, and though I'd worn both veil and coat at various odd times, such as in storms, or in the desert heat, the sight of a European woman in such an outfit on an ordinary day in a compound or town would be more than anyone, including myself, could take.
Long skirts in the middle of the day were acceptable when walking through the halls of Al Ain or Abu Dhabi hotels, but a blue-eyed English woman in black veils and coat?
No.
I didn't have the courage.
So when we walked from the pool to the car I felt the whole impact of the sun.
‘Next time, I'll bring a hat,’ I said to myself.
I always said it and always forgot.
The Sheikha's mother telephoned often to ensure that we were comfortable.
Phone calls came continually from the hareem in Europe and from the Sheikh, but the family majlis was like an empty cup waiting to be filled.
It was the first Ramadan the hareem had spent away from home and would be the last for many, many years.
‘It is unnatural,’ said the Sheikha when we met some months later.
She explained that Ramadan was a time of reunion, of coming together to withstand the fast during the day and to share support during the night.
‘It is a time to show God's care for us to each other,’ she said.
She said that it was a time for prayer and especially for prayers of protection against evil of any kind and, sending for her holy book, quoted me the following passage:
O you who believe.
Fasting is prescribed for you as it was prescribed for those  before you, so that you may guard (against evil) Surrah 11, 183
I saw an example of the results of prayerful fasting when I visited Um Hamed one Ramadan a few years later.
For a long time her hands, especially the tips of her fingers, had been covered in dreadful wart-like sores.
One Ramadan day she had the sores; the following day they had disappeared.
The skin of her hands was like that of a child.
‘How?’
I asked.
‘Allah,’ she answered.
‘Prayer to Allah is always best, always the perfect way.
In the hareem, prayer is as necessary to life as air to breathing, but in Ramadan it reaches to that depth of spirit where the inexplicable lies.
It pulls out miracles small and large.
The Dower House and the Dower
I DID NOT STAY to see the Eid — the Eid Al Iftr, that great feast of the breaking of the fast, the days of celebration when everyone dresses in new clothes as though the sackcloth of fasting has lifted and life has renewed itself once again.
Leaving the heat and the nearly finished bridehouse, I returned to soak up the last of a cool, green English summer.
Yet before the leaves had left the trees, I returned to Al Ain.
The bride house had to be finished.
It had to be furnished, decorated, equipped.
‘But surely your mother would like to do these things for you?’
I said on one of the many phone calls clogging the satellite links between the Gulf and London.
‘No.
She wants you to do it.
You can shop.
She cannot.
And you promised.’
I had promised thinking it would be easy to order everything in England and ship it out.
But there was no time.
The Arab world is much like war.
All hurry up and wait, hurry up and wait.
This was a hurry up time.
The wedding was only three months away.
So I returned.
‘You will fix this house, Um Yusef?’ the Sheikha asked as we sat in the family majlis, the small children tumbling over her lap like puppies, pushing themselves up for kisses, or simply basking on the warmth of her body.
‘Surely this is for you,’ I answered.
‘It is a thing you would enjoy.’
She threw her head back both in laughter and to avoid a bump from one  of the children.
I could see again her broad smile under her burgah.
She quieted the children, offered me another coffee, then said, ‘Come, Um Yusef.
You know our ways.
There is now so much work for me.
And you can go here and there.’
I knew their ways.
I knew her husband was away on one of the seemingly endless ‘summit, conferences governments of the world, and especially the Arab governments, invent to try to keep our human condition in existence.
While he was away her duties and responsibilities toward the household increased inevitably, and with the wedding growing nearer, she did indeed have ‘much work’.
It was true that she would not enter a shop in her own country.
Everything had to be brought to her.
Catalogues of furniture, samples of carpets, of curtaining.
She bought from pictures, hoping things would match.
They rarely did.
Drivers were sent for this or that and returned with something else.
Sons would volunteer and rush off to the village to bring back a ‘set of couches’, proudly waiting for the praise which she would generously give, though they might not be quite what she expected.
‘I will help you, provided you approve what we buy,’ I said.
She agreed, so we began.
Furnishing the house was like a game of hunt the thimble, for the days of the fine shops in Abu Dhabi's Hamdan Street or in Dubai were yet to come.
The furniture stores in the area at that time sold styles which were a cross between Blackpool and back street Soho.
The beds had to be seen to be believed.
I shall never forget one which was proudly displayed in a dusty shop in Abu Dhabi.
It had everything conceivable attached to it.
Equipment was crammed into every corner.
Television, cameras, telephones, flashing lights, mirrors, a round, fur-covered mattress.
It was upholstered in red velvet.
‘One night on that, my son, and you are in danger of electrocution,’ I said to the young Sheikh as the unctuous Asian salesman waited.
‘You think so, eh?’ said the prospective bridegroom.
‘I think it is lovely — very perfect,’ and he took my hand to lead me out, rattling off some Arabic which was too fast for me to catch but not too fast for the friends with him.
They burst into laughter and we piled once again into his car for another search.
We must have driven several thousand miles back and forth between Al Ain, Abu Dhabi and Dubai.
Every warehouse, every shop, every market in the area was visited.
Rumours of something new would send us rolling down the ever widening highways.
Crates were opened, back rooms of small shops were searched, new rolls of carpeting unpacked.
The boy ransacked his father's stores for old guns, shields and spears which we hung in the entrance hall.
A fine old wooden chest covered with intricate brass, nail-head designs was discovered, cleaned and placed in the hall.
It created a flurry of disapproval among the women.
‘It's too old, Um Yusef.’
‘Have you seen the old sandook Um Yusef put in the entrance?
We don't like these old things.
That poor time is past.’
‘You can't leave that old thing in the entrance, Sheikh.
People will think we are poor.’
But slowly they began to reminisce.
‘I had one like that when I married.’
‘Mine was bigger, of course, and much more beautiful.’
‘Look inside, Um Yusef, this is where the perfume was kept and the sandalwood.
And I had a little silver box for my jewels.’
‘And the dresses here and the abaya here.
My abaya had more gold then than now.’
Eventually they got used to it and allowed it to stay.
Today a chest like this costs a small fortune if you can find one.
As the rooms filled, the Sheikha came to give her approval, to suggest a need or bring some treasure.
Her personal wedding gift to her son was a magnificent carpet which was spread in the small majlis, a room in the tahat or sitting down tradition with cushions lining the walls.
His father brought home his own gift of another fine example of the natural, undyed wool carpets of Tunisia.
These were their personal gifts to him, but the bride dower, without which there would be no wedding, plus the week of celebrations were a family affair.
They were a display of one family's ability to look after the treasure of another family, treasure as represented by one carefully protected, carefully prepared girl.
Steeped in the Qur'an and its disciplines, filled from early childhood with tribal traditions, with the manners and morals of her heritage, she was indeed like the green pod of the date palm, a promising treasure, and a valuable asset.
She had left school now, relinquishing her top place to the number two in the class.
She left without a murmur although she had only a year and a half to go to complete her secondary education.
In the West, she would no doubt have gone on to pass ‘A’ levels or the baccalaureate with enough marks to ensure a place at university and then perhaps a career in law or medicine, banking or politics.
She had the neat, clipped mind of the good student.
In Arabia she would obey the wishes of her father and marry at barely fifteen.
She would be a mother at sixteen.
Extraordinary?
Not in their life.
Did the prospect of such an early marriage, of leaving school and cutting off her education disappoint the Al Ain bride-to-be?
Was she unhappy?
Not at all.
Indeed she had an air of conspiratorial joy.
Her generous, rather humorous mouth and heavily fringed eyes held a scarcely hidden excitement.
She was the centre of attention — like all brides.
Her mind was filled with all sorts of romantic images — like all brides.
The fact that she hadn't seen her prospective husband since she was ten was neither here nor there.
She had known him then and she knew his reputation now.
He was handsome, she was told.
In fact, she knew it, for a picture of him had been smuggled to her.
This smuggling of pictures is done by some close friend or relative.
The women turn a blind eye.
The picture is kept secretly and shown only to those who have a close heart and mouth.
Now they each had a picture which they examined and re-examined, trying to breathe life into the two-dimensional image.
Her mind was filled with fears and hopes, the principal one being the same for her as for him.
Would they ‘go together’?
Here was the gamble.
Here was the game of chance in a society forbidden such games.
Would each have the patience to continue the play, the will to make it work for them?
Would they be willing to lose a little as well as win a little as the days added up to years?
The odds are scarcely different in their world from ours.
Even though the custom of parental arrangement seems so strange, so disaster prone, to them it is the only way.
For the girls it is an unassailable tradition.
If a girl married without her parents' consent, she would risk abandonment by family and tribe.
In some parts of Muslim society she would be in danger of her life.
In Al Ain, where the women have their own unique, independent spirit, there is little temptation to break the bounds, especially among the Sheikh families.
They are secure in their roles and the young are generally simply marking time until they step into the marriage shoes waiting for them.
Among the tribes there are exceptions.
I know girls who vow they will never marry.
Their devotion is to education.
They will not move out of the tradition in manner or moral, but will only marry higher education and will search for some way to use it.
Often brilliant, they live in a  rarefied atmosphere of books, bewildering their parents and grandparents whose plans for such daughters have to be abandoned.
Could they be forced to marry?
It has been known, but parents who do such a thing are as disliked as they would be in any society, and such marriages are often barren.
The  girl is eventually divorced and will return to her parents and her first love.
These are the exceptions, the rare exceptions, for the contract of marriage is still the passport to distaff power and still greatly desired.
The fact that the bride and groom are usually wedded long before they are bedded is considered the height of wisdom.
What good businessman would hand over even the engagement dower without signing and sealing a contract?
Cold?
Calculating?
Remember that a fortune can be represented in these brides and they themselves are very conscious of their own value.
It is at the handing over of the engagement dower that the mothers finally meet face to face — or burgah to burgah.
Not that they haven't known each other usually for years, but such formality has its necessary place, for there are again the exceptions.
There are instances when tribal nation will marry outside tribal nation, when a Baniyas will marry an Al Thani, or an Awamir will marry a Manasir.
The mothers may not have met in years, if at all, in spite of their knowing each other 's family history.
Therefore this first formal meeting of the mothers is most important.
It sets the standard, welcomes the bride into a new hareem and displays the promise of wealth the groom and his family have to offer.
The mother of the groom may also ask to see the bride and she will be taken off to a remote room in the bride's house, away from the eyes of other members of her hareem, for the bride is in strict purdah for the coming wedding.
Before these meetings of the mothers, there will have been a party at the home of the groom.
A party for women who are close friends and relatives of both mothers.
Though I missed the engagement party of my young Sheikh, I attended another a few years later.
It was a happy affair.
Long rolls of oil cloth had been laid on the floor of the women's dining majlis the previous night.
There was room for about fifty women sitting comfortably on either side of the cloth.
Plates of fruit and bowls of fresh dates edged the ‘table’, boxes of kleenex were placed conveniently every few feet along the carpet.
‘Napkins,’ laughed a young wife to me the following day.
She had helped to prepare the table.
By ten o'clock on the day of the party the ‘table’ was loaded with food.
Round bowls full of thareed were interspersed with platters of whole mashwi lambs.
There were bowls of harees, of bilaleet and platters of the big, round, paper-thin mahala pancakes.
Stacks of cinnamon bread, bowls of butter and honey, glasses of buttermilk.
It was a breakfast to end all breakfasts.
The hareems, including ours, started to arrive about 9.30 and we drifted  into the women's majlis dressed in our best.
The glint of diamanté or pearl-embroidered dresses could be seen under black veils.
I watched as my veiled friends chatted busily to each other or rose to greet some relative, touching burgah to burgah, then fluttered down again like so many birds of paradise.
Coffee was passed.
The smoke of a dozen incense pots filled the room.
Perfume was offered, the long gold dipsticks wiped on veils and thumbs, skirts and wrists.
Glasses of fresh orange juice appeared on trays and then more coffee.
Finally the last expected guest had arrived.
Then came the procession.
Down through the garden came servants and foster daughters carrying the cases of engagement presents and the engagement jewels.
They ulayed the whole way, that strange, high, trembling sound filling the compound and filling the heart with an eerie excitement.
They arrived with a flourish, laid the cases on the floor, opened them and dragged them around the room to be oh'd and ah'd over by the guests.
The engagement jewels were displayed in a case of red velvet, a magnificent set of rubies.
Beside them was a thick wad of thin notes.
At a guess the bundle was about six inches deep.
I didn't look at the denomination but there was no doubt it would have been high.
Other cases held length after length of cloth which would he worked into dresses, over-dresses and the embroidered underpants of the bride's trousseau.
After this grand display, we all drifted towards the breakfast ‘table’, and as at any good party, the guests sat at table for a considerable time.
Then back to the majlis for coffee again, and home in time for noon prayers.
The hostess's work, however, had only begun.
The remains of the feast, which were considerable, were then packed into bowls and on to trays, covered with foil and distributed to another thirty or so houses.
The drivers piled them into cars and drove off to return shortly for another load.
If those who have been to Arab feasts ever wonder what happens to all that food and ‘tut-tut’ over the waste, forget it.
Not an ounce is wasted.
Everyone in the immediate area gets a present of fond and the following day other little presents of cake or Arabic sweet are often sent in return as a thank you.
Shortly after the breakfast party, perhaps the same evening, perhaps the next morning, the bridegroom's mother would make her way to the home of the bride carrying the first load of treasure.
In the past, the engagement jewels were often bracelets.
For the wealthy there were gold bracelets weighed by the market gold merchants and purchased according to weight and the going price of gold, not according to design.
For the less wealthy, there were silver bracelets, often wrought and hammered from the large, heavy, Maria Theresa silver dollars which once flooded the area.
These  Austrian coins first entered trade in the mid-eighteenth century.
Beautifully designed and minted, the silver pieces were used as the preferred exchange in southern Arabia and down the East African coast until as recently as the 1970s.
They often found their way around the Gulf, worked out of recognition, into coffee pots, jewel boxes and jewellery.
Jewellery has always been the Arabian woman's cash box.
They are her insurance, her financial independence, so they are worn in abundance, discussed without shame, admired or discarded, and sold.
Imitation jewellery is regarded with disdain.
Better coined silver than imitation gold.
Better no pearls than imitation pearls.
Many believe that because foreign women wear ‘fashion’ jewellery they have no knowledge of precious stones, true gold or silver.
Jewels are a woman's deposit account.
The engagement jewellery of our bride was to be a set of emeralds.
The necklace, bracelet, ring and earrings were displayed in a tan chamois leather box.
They had been selected from a pile of ‘sets’ which the Second Son had gleaned from the finest merchants in Abu Dhabi and brought to the Sheikha.
She had examined each one carefully, discarding then re-examining until she was satisfied that the gift was rich enough without being ostentatious, that the stones, the colours, were right for the girl.
This set would be just a taste of what was to come in the wedding dower, a tantalising taste of the jewels that would eventually be showered on the bride.
At the Second Son's ‘engagement party’, the gifts were handed from mother to mother with complete joy and satisfaction.
This was a match carefully made.
This was a match that had a chance.
There are other stories.
Sad stories of fathers making fortunes out of their pretty daughters by marrying them off to antiquated old men again and again as their husbands wither and die, leaving them with fortune after fortune.
Because the dower is always settled on the bride and her family either in kind or in cash or both, it has inevitably led to the stigma of ‘selling and buying’, to stories of a girl going to the highest bidder.
Avarice is one of our more disgusting human failings.
No nation has a monopoly on it.
What needs to be understood here is the norm.
The abnormal can be left, for news of it will inevitably rise like a suppurating boil.
In Al Ain, as everywhere, fathers normally look for the happiness of their children and hope for a compatible, genial match.
If love eventually grows, so much the better.
To us the whole process is upside down.
To us the flood of romantic love should be searched for and found before marriage.
In Arabia they throw the dice in the other direction.
The match is made first.
Two unknowns are cast together.
Once her engagement was announced, our bride began to wear very sober dresses, black relieved by the smallest pattern.
If she went out it was at night and she would arrange her veils so that they covered her face four times.
Her veil and abaya, far heavier than normal, seemed to turn her whole figure into a sort of black pillar which, unless it moved, had neither front nor back.
She entered a cocoon from which a butterfly would emerge on the wedding night.
The month before the wedding, she was not only in complete purdah, but was involved in one long beauty session as well.
A blue powder was dusted inside the jodhpur-like underwear.
Another orange powder was dusted over the upper part of the body.
These were to soften and whiten the skin.
Her hair was heavily oiled, perfumed and washed again and again in a henna mixture.
Henna patterns were made on her hands.
The soles of her feet were dyed with henna, making a brown sandal.
As well as powdering herself with the same orange and blue skin-whitening powders which her mother and grandmother had used, our bride asked maids and foreign Arab friends to search out modern creams and perfumes to be tried and kept, tried and discarded.
Most of her purdah days were spent in these beauty treatments, perfuming and powdering.
Other days were spent in cleaning and decorating the bedroom where she would receive her bridegroom.
The young women of the hareem, her foster sisters, cousins and young aunts scurried around her much as they do in any society, running errands, advising, gossiping.
Dresses made from the gifts of cloth were designed by the bride and her mother and worked swiftly by a local tailor.
As the tailor never saw his subject, it always amazed me how well the dresses fitted.
Measurements were taken and delivered along with a very roughly drawn sketch.
Back would come a creation which could, in some instances, be worn with impunity in front of the most discerning fashion couturier.
All this currying and caring for the body, for its clothing and for the marriage room went on day after day until the wedding night finally arrived.
Only then would the bride wash off her many powders and oils with the help of her mother.
She would be dressed in a new cotton serwal with its inches of gold and silver thread at the ankle.
Her dress, heavily embroidered in traditional design, would be overlaid by an equally ornate thoab or over-dress.
A bridal cap of gold would be placed on her head, its intricately woven strands of gold dripping down her back as though the weaver had spilled the threads of his loom.
These were wound in and out of her long hair.
Around her neck would be placed a bib of gold which reached to her waist.
There would be gold wrist and ankle bracelets and a gold ring for  each finger and toe, each claiming its own traditional design.
She would shimmer and sparkle.
She would be a gold-wrapped parcel, hard and shining on the outside, soft and tempting on the inside.
Over all, layer after layer of black veil would be placed, so that the bridegroom would have to unwrap his treasure bit by bit.
In most areas of the Arab world these complex and costly fashions have now been replaced by the white, Western bridal dress.
The bride parades in a creation from Frankfurt, London or New York.
The veil, the train, the imitation orange blossom are all there and are to me wholly incongruous.
Perhaps in the hotels of Cairo or Beirut these Christian customs are not so out of place.
But in the desert, a white bridal gown, born out of a Christian church procession, looks strange indeed.
I knew that such modern ideas would not be countenanced in this establishment hareem of Al Ain, however.
There, at that time, the traditions would still be meticulously followed.
The bride might have been educated, might have travelled, might speak English well, but she would wear gold and henna, she would dress and look the part of an Al Ain bride.