

The application of counselling skills to older people
The skills of counselling
Counselling is the art of communication, but a very special kind of communication.
We have seen that it is communication with another person who is experiencing some kind of emotional trouble, or acting under stress in some way.
It seeks to allow individuals the freedom to explore, express and to ‘feel’ their feelings in safety.
It seeks to assist individuals in the process of defining their own problems and difficulties, in increasing their personal knowledge of self.
It seeks to help individuals to measure their problems against the social realities, and to find their own resolution to their particular dilemmas.
The skills of counselling are concerned with enabling this communication process, whilst at the same time dealing perceptively with the problems that the counsellee faces.
The counselling relationship , non-threatening, non-disapproving, empathetic, genuine.
Listening , and establishing a relaxed, non-threatening atmosphere.
Assisting self-expression .
Interpreting what we hear.
Building a working hypothesis .
Focusing on difficult areas.
Challenging .
Facilitating decision-making .
Avoiding giving advice .
Establishing a relaxed and non-threatening atmosphere
The first meeting with a counsellee should be as relaxed as possible.
The counsellor should seek to be as warm, supportive and caring as possible.
The early conversation should be light and inconsequential.
A cup of tea, or similar, is always a good relaxing agent, always to be offered or accepted depending on the venue.
Sitting comfortably is also important, and preferably as close as possible, facing each other.
The counsellor should be as relaxed as possible.
Signs of tension are easily transmitted and can quickly put the counsellee on edge, wondering what is to come.
This is particularly important when the counsellor is known to have authority and power to make important decisions affecting the life of the counsellee, or even where the counsellee is reliant upon the support or care provided by the counsellor.
It is always wise for the counsellor to be aware of any possible worries that the counsellee might have about the meeting, and have ready some words of reassurance about the purpose of their meeting.
Where such worries exist the inconsequential chatter must not be allowed to continue too long.
It becomes important for the counsellor to move on to the main reasons for the meeting, and to begin the process as openly and honestly as possible.
This is where the counsellor can briefly outline the agendas, leaving the counsellee in little doubt as to his or her intentions.
It is the responsibility of the counsellor to move into the difficult area of feelings, and to do so as gently as possible.
Again, the counsellor should have prepared the ground thoroughly before the meeting starts, outlining the main areas of concern, and how they are to be introduced.
Moving carefully into the main reason for the meeting is a crucial skill.
It is important that the counsellor is able quickly to focus the meeting upon the concerns, interests and feelings of the counsellee.
Assurance that you are primarily interested in how they feel, what they want, and what they want to do is important in this respect.
This is an invaluable early strategy for outlining the purpose of the meeting, and perhaps the possibility of a series of meetings.
Listening
Perhaps the most fundamental skill which helps counselling to transcend other forms of communication is listening.
Unfortunately, the ability to listen to the problems of another person is not a universal human trait.
Most of us have tendencies to pass information outwards rather than to allow it inwards.
Politicians manipulate, entrepreneurs exploit, teachers disseminate information, priests sermonize, bosses of all kinds give orders, even friends give  advice.
It is perhaps strange that, whilst we pride ourselves on our commitment to individual freedom and self-expression, listening to the problems of other people, and responding appropriately to their needs as expressed, is less common.
All of us, to some degree and in our own way, are ready to lecture and opinionize, but too few to listen.
Sad to say, professional groups are little better, and possibly slightly worse, than average.
Mayer and Timms (1970), in a noteworthy social work text, found that there existed a massive level of misunderstanding between client and social worker concerning individual need.
Clients would arrive with specific problems, often of a financial nature, but what they received was questioning directed at matters that seemed entirely irrelevant to the needs they were presenting.
Clients who needed money would become upset at what they considered inappropriate questioning, but this would suggest to the workers that they had touched a sensitive point, confirming some personal theory that it was not really money that the clients required.
My more recent experience would suggest that matters have not improved significantly from this early social work text, especially concerning social work with elderly people.
Listening is the real starting point of the counselling process.
To arrive there the counsellor has to stop talking, and in order to stop talking, answerable and leading questions are required.
Assisting the listening process
To listen without saying anything does not encourage anyone to talk, or to continue talking.
The counsellor needs to give continual reassurance of interest and concern.
This can be achieved in a variety of ways — non-verbal communications such as gestures of understanding and approval or facial expressions which mirror the expressed emotions of the counsellee, and reassuring touches of support and encouragement.
To this can be added simple verbal interjections such as, ‘Yes, I see’, ‘I understand’.
‘That must have been awful’.
Reflecting back is also a useful technique.
Instead of asking a question, the counsellor picks on a sentence or phrase used by the counsellee with the purpose of bringing further responses or clarification.
There are also times when we need to ensure that we understand what is being said, and this can be done by asking simple questions or making comments which help elucidate or develop what the counsellee is saying, such as, ‘So you think that…’, or ‘You mean that…‘, or even ‘I'm not sure that I follow what you mean…
’. At the same time, this confirms to the counsellees that you are interested in the way they are thinking and feeling, and that you are making every effort to see their point of view.
Certain questions can also help counsellees to describe their feelings in  more depth.
‘Tell me more about how this made you feel’, and ‘What did you do when you felt like that’, give counsellees permission, and perhaps a feeling of safety, to talk further about themselves.
This kind of encouragement becomes increasingly necessary as more difficult ‘problem’ areas are discussed.
It gives counsellees ‘permission’ to talk about difficult areas, and indicates that we are willing to listen to all the emotion that they may harbour, but which they felt no-one else wished to know about.
The choice of words
The counsellor must also be aware of the words that are being used, and the possible impact that they may have, or the possibility for misunderstanding that may arise from them.
Tyler (1969) outlines some of the problems.
‘Still another difficulty has to do with the specific words the counsellor uses.
The one thing he wishes not to do is to arouse defensive attitudes.
Certain ways of putting things are more likely than others to affect people adversely.
Words like coward, stupid or effeminate should probably never be used unless the client has used that very word himself.
It is as feasible to say, ‘You can't bring yourself to attempt it’ as ‘You haven't the courage to try’.
Either is an expression of a painful emotional attitude, but the second is much more likely than the first to arouse defensiveness.
Much the same rules apply here as in ordinary tactful conversation.
This does not mean that reality should be watered down or glossed over.
Counselling differs from most conversation in that problem areas and unpleasant facts are faced, not ignored or side-tracked.
They need not, however, be presented brutally.
Yet on the other hand, for the counsellor to be too conscious of saying the right thing at the right time in every situation represents a state of mind that can only hamper the counselling process.
It can end in silence, this being considered preferable to choosing an incorrect word or phrase, and this is clearly nonsense.
What needs to be remembered is that even when the ‘wrong’ word or phrase is used, in error, it can be rectified.
‘Why have you reacted so strongly to a word which I intended so innocently?’
‘Who has said this, or called you this before?’
The existence of a good counselling relationship will overcome such mishaps, as long as they are not too frequent or too insensitive.
Interpreting what we hear
The ability to listen whilst another person talks does not merely entail being aware of the words spoken to us.
The counsellor has to be able to extract from  the words being used the feelings and meanings which often lie just beneath the surface.
The words people use are too often interpreted literally to signify little more than their immediate and most rational translation.
Thus, when we are told that everything is ‘OK’ we prefer to believe that this is so, although what people say can often contain far deeper and more subtle feelings and personal emotions.
Older people, perhaps more than most others, will often express certain feelings, such as contentment or resignation, when they do not represent their real emotions.
Indeed, words can be used which will often hide the very feelings which are at the root of the individual's problems, and which represent the reality of their emotional lives.
Such human behaviour may be confusing, and it would be easier if people would say what they meant.
The fact is, however, that we do not always do so.
Even the rules of social politeness, which suggest that we should not burden others with our problems, will lead us all to respond to enquiries after our health with an automatic ‘Very well, thank you’ when often we may be feeling poorly or even downright miserable.
These daily lies of politeness are compounded when we face major difficulties and problems.
Our disingenuous responses have many functions.
In part they avoid the need to talk of difficult subjects.
They say to others what we believe they want to hear, or refrain from saying what we believe they do not want to hear.
They hide from others the pain we are feeling.
It is these functions that the counsellor has to overcome.
We have to encourage counsellees that talking about the issues which worry them might be helpful.
We have to assure counsellees that we are prepared to listen to their difficulties.
We have to demonstrate that we are aware of their feeling of pain, and that we are interested in talking to them about it.
In this sense, the counsellor has to be a mind-reader, but the problem of ‘reading’ the true feelings of the individual can be made easier by two factors.
The first is the relationship; as we have seen, people are only prepared to talk openly to those who they feel are genuinely concerned, and who have both the time and the interest to understand.
This can be augmented through the skill of matching what is being said to the known personal circumstances of the counsellee.
In other words, the counsellor must seek the real feelings of the counsellee through careful listening to what is being said, how it is being said, and how this appears to relate to the real situation.
Therefore, the art of good listening is perceptive, involving a degree of interpretation of what is being said, the reasons it is being said, and how what is being said relates to the realities of the situation.
Building a hypothesis
Counsellors will by this stage start to form their own views about what they are hearing.
Indeed, the beginning of the counselling task is the process of gaining understanding and insight into the life situation of the counsellees.
This should take into account a wide variety of factors, their interests and aptitudes, their feelings, their relationships with others, their strengths and weaknesses, their medical condition, their past life, the effect of significant life events, and the way they view their future prospects.
Links and connections will begin to be made between the way counsellees think or feel and the way they behave.
Patterns of behaviour will emerge which will indicate that the individual reacts to similar situations in similar ways.
Soon, a comprehensive and coherent picture of the counsellee will start to build up.
Such a hypothesis attempts to describe a whole person, and not to separate certain aspects of an individual's life for special attention.
It should recognize, and try to make sense of, the inter-connectedness of our lives.
Yet, having done this, it should pay particular attention to the emotions rather than to the ‘facts’, or the rationalizations and justifications we all tend to use in order to shroud our feelings, especially in times of stress.
‘What the counsellor does is to concentrate on how the client feels about the incidents or facts he is reporting rather than on the facts themselves, and then to respond to what appears to be the most significant part of each complex sequence…
Counselling is concerned with strain rather than with the facts.
(Tyler, 1969)
This means that the ‘fact’ that an individual has become an ‘old person’, or suffers from regular illness or pain, or has become dependent upon others, whilst an important part of our understanding, is less important than how these facts make the individual feel.
It is largely how an individual ‘feels’, their self-image, which determines the quality and nature of their social performance.
Recognizing the internalized self-image of the counsellee is an important perceptual skill in arriving at a working hypothesis.
Self-image, its origins, its present restrictive function and its future debilitative consequences are important elements in an individual's life, and gaining an understanding of them is vital.
If counsellees are able to reach a better understanding of their own self-image, they can often overcome the social role into which they have been fixed, and develop newer, healthier ones.
In building a hypothesis, the counsellor may be assisted by the ‘personal construct’ theory of Kelly (1955).
It is not possible here to go into great detail about this complex theory.
But in short, Kelly suggests that an individual's social performance is determined not so much by external events, but by self-erected mental structures through which the individual sees life, interprets it, and decides how to respond.
According to their particular view of life, individuals always act in an orderly and predictable way.
Understanding an individual's particular viewpoint is therefore vital, and explains why the early stages of counselling are concerned primarily with listening.
It is clearly important that we understand the basic outlook of an individual, not because it is necessarily right, but because it determines the way that individual behaves.
We have, therefore, to understand the world as seen by the individual, shaped by a complex system of expectations which have been developed throughout a lifetime.
The individual's ‘personal construct’ ensures that reactions to particular situations occur in predictable patterns.
If we are to understand why older people do not respond to situations in more logical, less self-damaging ways, we must try to understand the system of prediction which the individual is using.
If elderly individuals see life through helpless, defeated eyes, where they become resigned to pain and disappointment, loneliness and despair, their reaction to new situations will not be positive.
Negative outcomes will in turn serve to confirm the correctness of the ‘negative’ view of life.
The counsellor must not only understand that this is the way the counsellee's life is predicted and determined, but has eventually to help the individual develop a more positive set of expectations.
These will, in turn, allow individuals to respond more positively to the problems they face.
Confirmation and clarification
Counselling requires a continuous process of confirmation, clarification and re-clarification to ensure that our hypothesis is a reasonable one.
Counselling empathy requires constant testing because we can never be certain that what we believe to be the feelings and attitudes of the counsellees are accurate.
Only the counsellees can be certain of this, and unfortunately they may often be quite unaware.
The difficulty that arises from this concerns the attempt to confirm and clarify a hypothesis about which the counsellee has little or no conscious knowledge.
The process of confirmation and clarification attempts to solve both problems.
By asking certain questions, the counsellor can ask the counsellee to consider certain propositions, and then together they can examine their validity.
Such questions might be, ‘Does the fact that you feel this way make you respond like this?’,
‘Can you see the similarity between the way you reacted to this situation, and the way you reacted to that?’,
‘Does the way you respond help the situation, or make it worse?’,
‘Can you think of another time when you have done this, or felt like this?’
In this way, both counsellor and counsellee can clarify, test out and refine the hypothesis, so that it more accurately reflects the actual feelings, situation, and state of mind of the counsellee.
Focusing on difficult areas
It is now clear that the counsellor is doing more than listening.
New concepts, new ideas, new connections are being introduced into the discussion which are presenting the counsellee with alternative pictures of reality.
Many of these are challenging and difficult for the counsellee to accept.
The counsellor is also to some extent directing the course of the discussions when making a selection from the many possible areas of interest.
This choice becomes progressively more difficult when the counsellor feels that ‘problem’ areas need to be opened up.
This is a difficult skill to develop, as evidenced by the rules of ‘social politeness’ which often run counter to what the counsellor wants to do.
We are taught not to focus on the more difficult aspects of what we know about other people.
To dwell upon the problem emotions of others is frowned upon as ‘morbid curiosity’, likely to lead only to highlighting and prolonging them, thereby causing unnecessary pain.
Yet often the only pain which is saved by social politeness is our own.
It is difficult to understand how personal problems can be resolved by refusing to talk about them.
Problems ‘forgotten’ are rarely actually put out of mind.
And strategies designed to bring out these problems do not cause distress themselves but merely bring out distress which is already present within the individual.
Focusing upon problem emotions means that the counsellor has to be able to pass back information to the counsellee.
Hopefully by this stage the counsellee will be sure of the counsellor's genuineness.
Yet the counsellor has to have the ability to focus on difficult and distressing areas in a way which is not threatening to the counsellee.
It should arise from concern and interest in the counsellee, not from a prurient self-interest or inquisitiveness on the part of the counsellor.
This can be achieved by regularly outlining why we feel that it is an important area to discuss.
To whatever extent counsellors choose the focus of the discussion, they should continue to see their task as one aimed at helping counsellees develop their own exposition of their situation, and their feelings about it.
All the skills of presenting as a ‘non-threatening’ person, and the techniques of assisting counsellees to talk are necessary here.
They can be essential if counsellees are to be encouraged to continue talking about the painful feelings they have about themselves and their lives, happy that they are being treated with dignity and respect.
Challenging
As counselling proceeds it does not always continue to be the sympathetic process of listening, support and approval.
Whilst the process of talking about feelings will often by itself lead counsellees to new insights into their own  lives, at other times this will not happen.
When such a situation arises, the counsellor may need to challenge the counsellee if any further progress is to be made.
Often, counsellees can use the counselling process as a social prop, and not one which leads to re-examination, change and growth.
This can be particularly true with ageing counsellees, who enjoy the company offered to them through counselling, and who perhaps are not committed to the idea of change ‘at their age’.
Challenging also refers to the need that sometimes arises to confront the counsellees with alternative understandings of the problems they face.
This will often happen when counsellees have placed blame on other people and not looked at their own contribution to their problems.
It may have become apparent to the counsellor that counsellees are ‘locked’ into feelings which are affecting the way they are leading their lives, but are apparently more content to hold on to the feelings than to resolve the difficulties which arise from them.
Many people, including elderly people, are quite content with their apparent misery.
The counsellor might be convinced of the existence of certain repeating cycles within the current relationships of the counsellee, which the counsellee appears either unwilling or unable to break.
Where it is necessary, and when it is appropriate, the counsellor sometimes has to embark upon a measured ‘confrontation’ with the counsellee over such matters.
Without this, it can be all too easy for the client to gain comfort and reassurance from a warm, accepting counsellor without making any progress in resolving his difficulties.
The client may recognize and identify his problems but come no nearer to finding solutions or resolution.
The counsellor who is in touch with her own feelings will soon become aware of the client who is ‘stuck’.
The counsellor may feel bored or irritated.
She will recognize that the client is repeating himself or demanding a particular reaction from her.
(Brearley and Birchley, 1986)
Confrontation with this sort of information is often an essential and necessary step in the counselling process.
People will often play games with their emotions, perhaps in the hope of gaining sympathy, or confirming their particular view of other people or of life generally.
The variety and extent of ‘the games people play’ with their emotional lives have been outlined by Berne (1968).
Such games can be played with the actor entirely unaware that they are doing so.
The way confrontation is handled should not be destructive to the counsellee.
Repetition of the same or similar ground can be stopped by a gentle reminder, followed by asking why it is that a particular story or incident is so important.
This itself helps to focus counselling upon potentially useful areas, whilst at the same time asking the counsellees to examine the particular ‘game’ they are playing.
Questions such as, ‘Do you feel that you might be doing this in order to produce this kind of feeling or situation?’, can lead counsellees to a re-examination of their motives.
The roles attributed to, and accepted by, the counsellee also have to be challenged.
Those who have accepted ideas about their worthlessness, their impotence or their badness will not usually be able to help themselves unless and until they are able to modify their self-image.
When a major confrontation is anticipated, counsellors should ensure that they have sufficient time available to pursue the matter fully, and at the end return to some reasonable level of mutual understanding.
Making decisions
Helping the counsellee to make decisions is the ultimate goal of the counselling process.
The skills of facilitating decision-making are discussed by Tyler (1969).
There are times when in order to proceed with his life, a person must make a decision.
It may be one that is large and far-reaching or it may appear relatively small and trivial but…(of) special significance for the person who makes it is that his choice will help to determine the pattern of his unique development over time.
Each life decision is to some extent irrevocable, since even if one goes back to the fork in the road and takes the other turning, he cannot eradicate the effects of the experience the first choice has brought him.
The ability of older people to develop and grow through making decisions is restricted by many of the attitudes of our ageist society.
In order to make decisions ageing people have to view the future in a way which allows them an active and influential part in their own lives.
There must exist the idea that new attitudes, new determinations, new approaches, new behaviours, fresh outlooks and new challenges are quite possible even in old age.
The counsellor has many problems to deal with in this respect.
Have elderly people any right to choose?
What influence can they expect to have over their own lives?
What value are they to anyone?
These and other questions have to be treated sensitively and honestly.
The skills of counsellors are ultimately judged by the extent to which they are successful in facilitating personal action by the counsellees in dealing with life problems.
The particular problem with many ageing people is that they do not recognize that they are capable, and have the energy to deal with their own problems and feelings.
They feel lacking in worth and value.
They feel that they have no future towards which to strive.
They feel unwanted.
All this leads to less activity rather than more, and the counsellor has to try to convince older people of the need for self-action.
The dangers of advice
The counsellor should never resort to the giving of advice.
It is often tempting to do so, especially when problem attitudes and behaviour begin to frustrate our attempts to obtain mutually beneficial change.
Counselling ends when advice is given.
To advise is to give an opinion about what another person should do, and should be avoided.
The counsellor will sometimes discover that the counsellee has certain ideas about the nature of the counselling role, and the counselling process generally.
This problem has to be addressed, especially when there is an assumption that our task is to solve the counsellee's problems.
This clearly has to be remedied by repeated reminders that change can only be brought about by the counsellee's efforts and that consequently, the only part that the counsellor can play is to help decide what is to be done, how, and when.
It is often in such situations, especially when the counselling relationship is good, that the counsellor's opinion is likely to be sought.
‘What would you do if you were in my position?’,
‘Why don't you tell me what to do?’, and similar questions, should always be passed back to the counsellee.
‘I am not you, so it's best that you decide; but we could talk over the options you have.’
Referring the problem back does not allow the counsellor to fall into a trap, for most people will normally do what they want to do, regardless of the best-intentioned advice.
Often, troubled individuals will take action based, however loosely, upon your advice and return in triumph to tell you that it was completely unsuccessful.
This is in turn used to confirm that their situation really is hopeless, and that even our support and help does not work.
It proves to them that it is their situation which defeats them, not themselves, and there is nothing that anyone can do about it.
Advice can also stop a different kind of counsellee from telling us what he or she wants to do, because this might mean disagreeing with us.
It can also lead to the efficacy of our advice becoming the burning issue of discussion.
So an essential skill of counselling is to avoid completely the giving of advice, and to allow counsellees to take what eventually must be their responsibility to arrive at their own decision, in their own time and in their own way.
Ultimately this also adds to the dignity and confidence of the counsellees, for when decisions are made and they work, individuals can themselves take the credit for their success rather than the counsellor.
The process of counselling
Counselling, as we have seen, seeks to involve troubled individuals in an experience of transformation or healing.
But how is such a process achieved?
What is the nature of the journey through which the counsellee has to pass?
Social distress — a restricted, inadequate or disturbed individual whose social performance is in some way leading to personal difficulties.
Self-expression allows individuals to explain their attitudes, outlook and feelings about their total situation.
The counsellor constructs a working hypothesis which attempts to see meaning and connections in the counsellee's social performance.
The working hypothesis is tested and refined through the process of discussion and questioning.
The development of self-awareness in which the counsellor transfers to the counsellees the meanings and connections in their social performance.
Decision-making , by considering alternative responses to their social, distress, leading to new forms of social performance.
The emergence of individuals who are more aware of their situation, and the problems they face, but are able to cope with the pressures, strains and disappointments that life entails.
Social distress
The counselling process starts with the troubled emotional lives of individuals, whose feelings of worthlessness, inadequacy, fear or vulnerability have affected their lives in serious and possibly damaging ways, and whose relationships with other important people have become difficult, unbearable or have broken down.
Their self-image, for a variety of reasons, will be extremely low.
It is not that such people are necessarily ‘inadequate’, but that they feel themselves to be inadequate.
These feelings are reinforced by dominant social ideas of individual pathology, that is, if something is going wrong in their lives it must be their own fault.
This is because they are inadequate, corrupt or lazy.
From such a viewpoint, everyone obtains from life what they work for, and in the end most people eventually obtain what they deserve.
This view of social distress has to be challenged, and a theory which emphasizes the social origins and nature of personal distress developed to replace it.
Sherman (1981) has developed a useful alternative theory which he called the ‘Social Breakdown Syndrome’, which involves a more comprehensive explanation than those which focus entirely upon individual pathology.
This has the advantage of combining many of the different factors that can interact to cause social and emotional demoralization in older people.
1
Precondition or  susceptibility to psychological breakdown.
2
Social labelling as ‘deficient’ or ‘incompetent’.
3
Induction into a sick or dependent role; atrophy of previous skills.
4
Self-identification as sick or inadequate.
Sherman describes this as the ‘vicious circle of increasing incompetence’.
The circle demonstrates that it is a combination of many factors acting upon each other which contributes towards a troubled personality.
What Sherman's circle perhaps does not emphasize sufficiently is the impact that dominant social ideology about the nature of old age has upon personal problems of older people at all levels of experience, emotional, social and financial.
If society generally under-values old age, is it any wonder that old people do not experience a sense of personal worth?
If society has no use for old people, is it any wonder that older people feel that their lives are without meaning?
So to a  considerable extent the individual, and the problems that ageing people experience generally, are structured by dominant social attitudes and values, and this element needs to be added to the circle.
1
The effects of dominant ideology upon self-image and social functioning.
2
A precondition or susceptibility to psychological breakdown.
3
Social labelling as ‘deficient’ or ‘incompetent’.
4
Induction into a sick or dependent role; atrophy of previous skills.
5
Self-identification as sick or inadequate.
It is into this cycle of social distress that the counselling process seeks to break.
The causes of social distress are not uniform.
Feelings and situations which some people cope with adequately can become quite unbearable for others.
Social distress arises directly from self-image.
Who do we believe ourselves to be?
What is our role, our value, our usefulness?
What is the meaning and purpose of our lives?
These enormous questions beset us all at various stages of life, but as we have seen they can be particularly problematical for older people.
The self-image of older people is closely linked with morale, which for many has sunk so low that they often do not wish to continue living.
They have had to accept the loss of many of their former social roles, the loss of status, a declining ability to lead entirely independent lives.
How is the individual to adjust?
It is when morale is very low that we find it difficult to cope with the problems and difficulties of life, and when counselling can become vitally important.
The counselling process focuses upon self-image, and ultimately aims at modifying it in a constructive way.
The task of the counsellor is to try to help ageing individuals modify their self-image so that it is more in line with reality.
It is important to stress that our self-image has the power to determine our attitudes and social behaviour.
The actualizing or formative tendency
All behaviour, no matter how apparently irrational or senseless it may seem, is logical and purposeful according to some particular viewpoint.
The counsellor may not be able to find the reason readily, or we may not like or agree  with what we find, but nevertheless the reason will exist.
The counsellor's task is to find these reasons within the emotional life of the individual.
From within these emotional origins, counselling maintains that all human behaviour is modifiable, and that this modification can come principally through an increased level of self-awareness.
This confidence reflects the essentially optimistic nature of the counselling process, perhaps best expressed through Rogers' (1951b) concept of the ‘actualizing’ or ‘formative’tendency, which he described as:
an underlying flow of movement towards constructive fulfillment of its inherent possibility, which resides in every organism.
The actualizing tendency rejects the explanations of individual pathology, of inherent badness, laziness or inadequacy.
In their place is the belief that human problems arise from the interaction of individual experience with unfavourable social and environmental conditions.
The ‘healthy’ personality, towards which the counselling process is aimed, is one which is able to react appropriately and continuously to circumstances.
It has to be able to cope with fluctuating events and changing personalities, and to do this involves a variety of social skills.
When successful the individual is able to maintain an equilibrium.
The failing individual is one who has become fixed, unable to react appropriately to the people and circumstances around him.
The actualizing tendency suggests that even these failing individuals are at all times capable of growth and development, so it is an essentially optimistic view of the human condition, and this is particularly important when working with older people.
Rogers (1951b) himself reflected on his own advancing years and, applying the actualizing tendency to the problems of ageing in a chapter which asked the question ‘Growing old: or older and growing?, he concluded that ‘I sense myself as older and growing’.
Such optimism about the human condition is very different from the dominant social stereotype of old age.
The most important element of this optimism is that the counselling approach implies that growth is a continuous process during which our potential capacities can be drawn upon and developed at any period of life, including old age.
This view is necessary for two reasons.
First, because the lives and experiences of many elderly people prove it is true; and second, because it would be important, even necessary, for the counsellor and the counsellee to believe it even if it were not true.
Self-expression
Counselling is often called a ‘talking cure’.
This is misleading because counselling is more than this, but it does provide one valuable element of the process.
Many people will have experienced the relief of being able to talk to another person about their feelings and difficulties.
It is at the heart of the old  saying ‘A trouble shared is a trouble halved’.
Often the counsellor of ageing people will experience this when, after talking with them for a short period, many of the pressures and worries appear to be visibly lifted from their shoulders.
They immediately brighten, become more animated and are often quite grateful that someone has taken the time to listen to them.
Such gratitude underlines the importance of merely giving older people our time, and listening to them.
The emotional release that is offered by self-expression has to be enabled by the creation of the right atmosphere.
We talk more openly and freely when we feel easy and relaxed.
Older people will not discuss their feelings unless they feel safe in doing so.
It is only the relationship that exists between the counsellee and the counsellor that will help in this respect.
The fact that we are doctors, priests, social workers will not necessarily be of any advantage to us, nor does it give us any right to expect intimate revelations.
Our status and position stand for nothing when compared with patience, tolerance and a willing ear.
Giving our time and devoting our attention to what they say is therefore crucially important in the process of counselling.
Yet in another way, enabling self-expression is often relatively easy.
Ageing people usually relish any opportunity they have to express their feelings.
Many feel that they have so few opportunities to do so.
Listening and self-expression are closely linked.
We should at this stage be as non-judgemental as possible about the things being expressed, however wrong, misguided or unjust they might appear to.
We should restrict ourselves to trying to understand, and then try to help them expand and develop what they want to say.
Wherever possible, the counsellor should try to elicit their feelings beyond the more superficial emotions of anger, hate and hostility to the deeper emotions which involve the sadnesses, disappointments, inadequacies and griefs they are experiencing.
The ‘superficial’ emotions are those often presented initially.
They can be real and strong, affecting the way we lead our lives.
Yet normally, the ‘angry’ emotions have their origin in deeper and often more significant upsets and disappointments.
Blocks
The process of counselling is not always smooth or straightforward.
We cannot assume, for example, that counsellees are going to be willing or able to immediately divulge the full nature of their feelings and difficulties.
Time is required, often to summon the courage necessary to talk about their real problems and difficulties.
Even when people appear willing to talk to us about their difficulties, it is not always the real problems that they will initially present.
The counsellor should not therefore take up the first issue raised by the counsellees which seems satisfactorily to explain their situation.
To jump too quickly on the  problems raised early in the counselling process may even prevent the real reasons coming to the surface.
They must naturally be pursued, but always giving counsellees the opportunity to move on to other, more crucial issues.
How quickly ‘the’ issues will be raised obviously depends on a number of factors — the difficulty of the issue, the ability of the counsellees to express their ideas, and the quality of the counselling relationship.
Other resistances or blocks to communication can be more than an initial reluctance to talk about the main issues.
Individuals often utilize these deeper blocks, consciously or unconsciously, in order to hide the ‘unpleasant’ truth from other people, and perhaps from themselves too.
Such blocks in older people might take the form of stubbornness, violence, confusion or depression.
Many ageing people hide behind the facade of ‘being all right’, and this is often one which is most difficult for the counsellor to penetrate (Scrutton, 1986).
Essentially, all these blocks to communication and self-expression are to do with feelings of inadequacy, and poor self-image.
It is important to understand the nature and origin of blocks and resistances.
In the very earliest stages of life, individuals react quite spontaneously to the stimuli which confront them.
Young babies have no knowledge of the social niceties which will thenceforward determine their social response.
Thereafter, children will be taught by parents, relations, friends and teachers what is expected of them, and what is considered to be appropriate and inappropriate behaviour.
Within this process of socialization, individuals will learn that some emotions and feelings are not acceptable; this may cover such areas as masturbation and sexual activity, crying (especially in boys), and the expression of the more ‘difficult’ emotions of anger and grief.
Often the result is that the child, and subsequently the adult, in order to avoid punishment, will suppress feelings which might in fact be quite normal and natural, and indeed necessary to the human condition.
Where this is so, people feel unable to express their pain and grief, their anger or fear; they will learn to be ashamed of the various ‘taboo’ feelings they have.
They have to be suppressed or displaced because they are associated with ‘wrong’ or evil', and perhaps also with pain and punishment.
Painful events in later life can also lead to the formation of blocks.
The work of Freud, and subsequent psychoanalysts, has indicated that when the pain of unexpressed feelings is not recognized or acknowledged, the subconscious mind ensures that such recognition never re-emerges at a conscious level, but it can nevertheless be a major subconscious influence on the social performance of the individual.
Clearly the identification of blocks represents an important area of work within the counselling process, and when successfully tackled can reveal a wealth of information, and the reason and meaning behind much previously misunderstood behaviour.
Yet the counsellor of older people has to realize that the blocks may not necessarily be those current in modern attitudes and beliefs.
They are likely to  be more closely related to past sexual and religious taboos which, because they are not as powerful in modern society, are not so immediately apparent to the younger counsellor.
The recognition of blocks within ageing counsellees is therefore an important skill, but like so many others in counselling it is a perceptual rather than a concrete skill.
The way in which particular individuals have reacted to a particular restraint, and how this in turn has affected their general social behaviour and attitudes, has no firm rules which can be laid down.
The threat posed by the counselling process
Self-expression can be a threatening process, bringing to the surface many deep-rooted fears and anxieties and uncovering hitherto denied emotions.
The skill of achieving it is closely connected with the counselling relationship, developing the mutual confidence and trust that is essential for real sharing.
Through the relationship, the counsellor is able to explore with the counsellee all the feelings, especially the negative feelings of inadequacy, guilt and worthlessness, which they harbour about themselves.
Within the safety of the relationship, the counsellee can be helped to examine the emotional origins, meanings and purposes of their behaviour.
They can examine the reasons why they have had to deny the existence of those feelings.
This is the part of the counselling process which many dislike because it necessarily creates stress and anxiety in the counsellee.
It seems to open up all the disturbing conflicts and inconsistencies which have been at the heart of their problems.
It seems to stir up emotions and rake over apparently quiescent turmoil.
As Rogers (1951a) says:
In the case of a radical re-organisation, the client may go through the most racking torment of pain, and a complete and chaotic confusion.
This suffering may be associated with rapidly changing configurations of personality, being a new person one day, and sinking back into the old self on the next, only to find that some minor episode puts the new organisation of self again in a position of regnancy.
This leads to accusations that counselling can actually create more problems than it resolves, indeed, that it can actually contribute to increasing people's problems.
As Rogers indicates, the accusation is based upon a measure of truth.
Where counselling is effective, it will produce a degree of pain.
Most processes of change are painful.
So why not leave the troubled individual alone?
Such accusations lie not with counselling, but with a kind of primitive logic which associates pain with whatever is most closely at hand.
Thus, when pain is seen to arise within the counselling process, counselling is thought to be the cause.
Such reasoning is faulty for two reasons.
First, it is unlikely that counselling actually creates distress not previously  present somewhere within the individual.
Counselling may reveal turmoil and bring it to the surface, but if it does, that turmoil will have existed long before the commencement of the counselling process.
Moreover, feelings lying dormant will have already produced an individual who is troubled, unhappy and anxious, and the individuals behaviour will already be moving him or her inexorably deeper into emotional and social despair.
Second, the process of increasing self-awareness is itself an essential prerequisite for emotional health.
Emotionally troubled people cannot be expected to deal with their emotions until they are able to understand what those emotions are, how they have arisen, and what can be done to overcome them.
Contradictions and dilemmas exist in the lives of every individual, but they become a problem only when we deny their existence, or fail to recognize and come to terms with them in our daily lives.
The journey through painful feelings is part of coming to terms with troubled emotions, and then devising a realistic strategy for emotional and social survival and the re-commencement of personal growth.
We should not avoid the chance of helping others because of some misguided sense of ‘doing harm’, but we do have to recognize that the counselling process might cause some temporary uncertainty and pain.
If the quality of the counselling relationship is good it should prove more than enough to handle the outcome, and if it then assists the individual towards a resolution of emotional troubles, the short-term distress has been worthwhile.
Increasing self-awareness
Whereas the primary objective of the counselling relationship is the development of the counsellor's understanding of the counsellee, the primary objective of the counselling process is the development of self-understanding, or self-awareness.
It is always surprising how little we, as individuals, understand of the emotional basis of our own social relationships and behaviour — about the way we present ourselves to other people, about aspects of our personality which others find attractive, and those which are not so attractive.
If we could all step back and watch ourselves in our daily lives, we might all learn a great deal— and with some effort, we could all no doubt be nicer, more attractive people.
Counselling seeks to present troubled individuals with a ‘mirror’ through which they can assess their social performance, and the reasons which lie behind its success or failure, its quality or lack of quality.
The counsellor, in a variety of ways, has to feed back to counsellees the impressions they give to others, and the way they ‘come across’ to other people.
Enabling self-expression allows counsellees to explain to us where they stand at the present time.
The picture they draw will use various materials gathered from the past, and how this has affected the way they currently feel.
Self-expression therefore represents a static picture.
It is not helpful in telling us why individuals are where they are, and it is unlikely to give us real clues about possible future developments.
Self-expression is essentially reflective rather than contemplative.
If there is to be change and development in a person's life, it can only come from within the individual.
It cannot be imposed from without.
Change which is imposed by some form of ‘authority’ or ‘expert’is rarely effective in the long run.
We have seen that giving advice is bad counselling, but it is also insufficient.
What the counsellor has to do is to provide counsellees with the necessary knowledge and information to enable them to bring about change in their own lives.
The counsellor has to be the enabler rather than the enforcer of change.
The working hypothesis reached by the counsellor has to be transferred to the counsellees, not through direct transmission, but by helping them achieve their own insights.
Helping counsellees achieve greater self-awareness involves many different areas and levels of understanding:
1
It means helping counsellees to recognize the situations, the events or the people that provoke stress, and how they react to the stress in their lives.
2
It means helping counsellees to understand how they have coped with such stress in the past, and the positive or negative results of such coping behaviour.
3
It means helping counsellees to look closely at their own emotions in order to decide whether they are necessary, or an on-going indulgence (on the basis that certain people enjoy the ‘benefits’ of sympathy and concern, so actually make use of their social distress) over which they could exercise more control if they wanted to do so.
4
It means helping counsellees to recognize their personal needs, and how these can best be fulfilled in their later years.
5
It means helping counsellees to make connections between their unfulfilled needs, their emotions, and their social performance.
6
It means helping counsellees to become aware of repeating patterns of relationships which have led to unhappy situations throughout their lives and recognizing the part they themselves play in bringing about these recurring patterns.
7
It means helping counsellees to look closely at their attitudes and beliefs, about themselves, about other people, and about life generally as an ageing person, in order to determine the effect these have on their lives, and upon the people close to them.
8
It means helping counsellees to make connections between what has occurred in the past, and how this affects what they are achieving or failing to achieve in the present.
9
It means helping individuals to understand the social factors which affect their ability to lead their lives, and in particular, the impact of dominant social values and ideas concerning old age.
10
It means helping counsellees to make connections between personal expectations and the dominant social expectations about old age, and in particular how these have restrained their ability to enjoy their old age.
11
It ultimately means helping counsellees to look at their current self-image, and deciding how this can be improved or modified, and what has to be done in order to do so.
Decision-making — modifying social performance
In the last resort, self-awareness requires the personal acceptance that responsibility for doing something about feelings or circumstances is a personal one, which cannot be effectively decided by other people.
Changing the patterns of our social performance can only take place from within our own selves, and through our own volition.
So whilst self-understanding is the vital ingredient of the counselling process, and whereas individuals might have developed significant insights into their own social performance, what individuals decide to do with these newly discovered insights is also of vital importance.
The most important factor that militates against changing our social performance is personal doubt.
Any decision in favour of change has to be allied with the ability and the confidence to change.
This is a bigger task than a momentary resolution, based upon the desire for change.
Many older people have accepted their depressed and unhappy status.
They have become defeatist.
They lack confidence in their ability to effect change or improve the quality of their lives.
There must first be the desire for personal change, and thereafter the confidence that change can take place.
Ageist attitudes often contribute to despondency.
Old people, we are led to assume, are too set in their ways, they are now too old to change.
When these feelings are internalized, ageing people too readily believe that they are what they are, and they are likely to remain that way.
Their feelings of hopelessness are confirmed by any assessment of prospects.
The question ‘Is change possible?’ is therefore an important one.
Is it possible to move out of grief or bereavement?
Is it possible to make more of our later lives?
If the answer is ‘no’ then it may be that counselling has not yet reached a sufficiently advanced stage in the process, and we may have to return to earlier stages.
Yet this is not necessarily the case.
Asking for change can be likened to persuading someone to climb a mountain.
Refusal does not necessarily indicate that the individual is incapable of doing so.
It might be that the individual does not see the value of climbing a mountain; or perhaps does not have the confidence to set about the task.
And many older people may be quite right in refusing the prospect of change — it may be in their best interests.
The counsellor has to be realistic in balancing the potential value of change against the personal costs that change might incur.
It might be that  they genuinely do not feel that they have the energy or even the interest to effect change in their lives.
If the answer is ‘yes, change is possible’, then certain choices have to be made about how individuals are going to tackle the problems which face them, and the counsellor will have a role in enabling counsellees to make those decisions.
The object of the decision is to arrive at responses which enable individuals to cope more adequately with their situation.
There are several stages through which coping behaviour can be developed.
1
Deciding upon the nature of the personal task that needs to be accomplished.
2
Discussing the available options open to the counsellee, with all the possible consequences and outcomes of each option.
3
The process of making a firm decision.
4
Deciding what is to be done, and who is to carry out the tasks involved.
There may be some limited involvement by the counsellor to prepare the way for the counsellee.
5
Supporting the counsellee through the process of change.
The goal — improving social and interpersonal relationships
So what do we want for the counsellees, or rather, what should they want for themselves?
The ultimate aim of the counselling process is to achieve significant improvement in the social and interpersonal relationships of the counsellee.
We are looking for individuals who are adaptable and flexible, who live in the real world of the present and can cope adequately with whatever problems and difficulties it presents.
We are looking for people who know their needs and wants, their likes and dislikes — but who are realistic about when they are likely and not likely to be fulfilled.
We are looking for individuals who are able to strive for satisfaction, but who are also able to defend and protect themselves from disappointments and setbacks.
Certainly, we are looking for individuals who can accept responsibility both for themselves and others, who can use their initiative to control events rather than drift aimlessly through life.
We are looking for individuals who feel reasonably content with their present lives, although perhaps with lots of unfinished business to complete.
We are looking for people who can accept that the past has passed and, whilst remembering it with fondness, can also look to the future and view what it might bring with a degree of optimism and hope.
The counselling process will never achieve such an ideal, but it is nonetheless a good objective for the counsellor to aim at.
Group counselling and older people
Counselling on a one-to-one basis can sometimes be a difficult process, not least because there is no more depressing aspect of old age than to be asked to contemplate personal problems in isolation.
For the more depressed and lonely people who have few if any outside contacts, counselling can appear to deepen the very feelings that it is seeking to alleviate, especially in the early stages.
Moreover, it is the social situation rather than the individual that is the source of counselling problems.
Attempts to help people in distress are less successful when treated in isolation from the social context in which they live.
Any work undertaken on an individual basis should always focus attention on the broader social context in which the individual lives.
The next two chapters concentrate on work which can include and involve individuals with groups of people within a social context.
Whilst individual counselling recognizes the uniqueness of human problems, group-based counselling recognizes shared problems.
The group process often opens areas that many individuals would normally not discuss.
Within the process of group interaction, attitudes become apparent, opinions are expressed, and behaviour is displayed, all quite spontaneously within normal social conversation and discussion.
Groups can provide the ‘social lubricant’ that one-to-one situations often lack.
The group is a microcosm of life, embracing the exchange of ideas and information, compromise, decision-making, making friends; and conversely the frustrations and antagonisms which build up between people.
Groups can help members express their needs and feelings more safely; but equally important is the learning and insight that can be gained by the counsellor into the feelings and behaviour of the individual.
Older people have many topics of conversation to share.
The ‘good old  days’ and childhood memories of their early years; money and the cost of living; illness and other physical ailments; their hopes and expectations for the future; loneliness; bereavement, loss and grief.
All these and much more are likely to be discussed, and in some respects are more profitably discussed in groups than on an individual basis.
Older people are often keen to form groups especially if they are lonely or isolated.
Groups for social activity
There are several levels of group operation, all of which can be useful in work with older people.
They can be valuable purely as a means of providing social companionship, activities of all descriptions, and intellectual stimulation.
There are many informal groups of older people whose purpose is to meet these very needs, groups organized by residential and day-care units, luncheon clubs, church-based groups, social clubs and many others.
They can help their members maintain a sense of belonging and personal worth, and also perhaps something to look forward to during the hours when they are alone.
All this provides an important service for the social and mental health of many older people.
Yet such groups are extremely limited in their scope.
Often they are organized by younger people who merely expect ageing members to be passive recipients of organized events.
Older people are expected to play little part in the running of the group, beyond perhaps a simple process of consultation.
Moreover, the aim of such groups often tacitly implies that there are no issues in old age beyond meeting simple basic needs such as companionship and leisure.
Both their establishment and function suggest an element of ageism — that older people themselves are not capable of organizing and deciding appropriate agendas.
They tend to deny that older people may have issues and agendas that they may wish to discuss, and they ignore the fact that many older people have the ability and interest to organize matters for themselves.
Certainly, insufficient attention is often paid to concepts of choice, self-expression and self-help.
Clearly, whilst such groups may fulfil a valuable and useful social purpose, they could offer much more.
Groups and social engagement
Person-to-person counselling can lead older people to question socially constructed ideas about old age, and encourage them to take a more direct and active part in a society of which they are still full members.
In this respect, the formation of groups of older people for counselling, and a host of related purposes, can be useful.
The opportunity provided by groups for individuals  to share their problems with other ageing people can help to recontextualize individual feelings of helplessness, and assist in refocusing their minds more positively on the prospects of the future.
It can help older people realize that they are not the only ones with problems, a belief which the isolated and depressive nature of personal circumstances can sometimes encourage.
It also helps them realize that there are other people who have similar problems and difficulties, and that they are not alone in their plight.
Often, such a realization arising from contact with other ageing people can alone be worth several face-to-face counselling sessions.
The counsellor is often able to observe the spark of insight and realization which can arise from contact with another troubled individual.
Such contact can often help individuals to move out of their own, often closed world of despair.
They can begin again to focus on another person outside themselves, and relate what others have to say to their own situation.
Often, they will begin to respond sympathetically, and with a concern that was once reserved for their own situation.
They may even come up with possible solutions to the problems faced that will be equally attributable to their own situation, although they may be quite unaware of this until their attention is drawn to it.
For groups to function at this level, opportunity has to be given for full social contact between members, and the emphasis has to be placed not on activity, but on group interaction.
Active or informal counselling through the use of groups
In addition to providing companionship and activity, groups can be used for informal counselling.
The inclusion of a counselling element into such groups is based on the understanding of their potential value in facilitating and enabling personal change, by helping group members understand their own thoughts and feelings, and in changing their coping behaviour to the situations in which they find themselves within the group.
Involving an individual in a group process can be a powerful method of helping older people.
The group can provide an opportunity for socialization, and for sharing problems and feelings with others who might be experiencing similar difficulties.
Groups can help members to discuss their feelings and needs more safely, and the mutual support given can help them develop new coping strategies for dealing with them.
Indeed, involvement in a group can sometimes be the only way to encourage more withdrawn people into a counselling situation, especially those people who feel too awkward or vulnerable in a one-to-one situation.
Ideas about not ‘burdening others’ with personal problems, that discussing them denotes some kind of ‘personal weakness’, are common within the older generations, especially when the prospective counsellee has a strong  sense of personal dignity and pride.
Sometimes, such defences can be almost impossible to break down on a person-to-person level.
Sherman (1981) outlines the value of group techniques of counselling:
…just hearing the problems of other group members is often very helpful.
The member finds that his or her own problems are not unique.
Also, by acting as  auxiliary counsellors for others, members of the group learn how to combat their own self-defeating attitudes and behaviour.
The fact that there are several persons in addition to the group leader who can reflect and provide feedback about such negative attitudes and behaviours makes it more likely that the individual member will take such information seriously and do something about it.
The force of group approval can be an important incentive in this regard.
Informal counselling implies that group members are not seated and asked to discuss a particular topic or situation.
The group is seen as a vehicle which creates social situations involving interactions between two or more people.
There are many situations of happiness and joy, tension and frustration that this can produce.
As these interactions occur, the issues and situations which arise can form the basis of small group discussions.
This is particularly useful when such situations relate to some of the more general problems faced by individual group members.
Informal groups should be organized on the basis of free self-expression if they are to be most helpful.
Their value is reduced if ‘difficult’ subjects are not discussed, or if difficult situations are not allowed to develop.
It is easy to stop squabbles and arguments in the interests of peace and harmony, yet to do so often prevents us from observing significant behaviour which can give the counsellor invaluable insight into how older people think and feel about themselves, other people and their situation.
In this way, groups can be used to open up many topics for discussion, which can then be used to reverse some of the sociological and psychological factors which contribute to senescence in our society.
Formal group counselling
Groups can be formed by bringing together two, three or more people who share similar problems and difficulties with the specific purpose of discussing those issues.
Such groups can also be formed around the issues and situations which arise from informal group settings.
Group size is important.
Anything over two constitutes a group, but sharing and transference are facilitated better with more people.
However, the group should not be too large as this can be threatening, and people may not feel sufficiently relaxed in a large group to make a contribution.
Groups of up to about eight allow an atmosphere in which it is easier to share views, and to ensure that group members can get to know each other.
Comfortable seating should be used, set out in a circle so that everyone can see each other.
This ensures good eye contact which is very important in promoting mutual trust and confidence between members.
The distance between seats should be carefully arranged so that they are not too remote from each other, but not so close that personal space is invaded.
The counsellor has responsibility for starting up the discussion.
It is always helpful to try to relax the group prior to commencement, perhaps with a cup of tea.
Introductions are important, and to say a few encouraging words about each individual can be helpful.
Group members can also be asked if they could give a small life history of themselves, although never without prior warning, and only if they are sufficiently confident to do so.
When this introduction is successfully achieved the topic can be introduced, and the counsellor should try to ensure that the group takes over most of the talking.
Throughout the discussion, the counsellor has several tasks.
1
Giving everyone an opportunity to contribute.
Some group members will inevitably be shy whilst others will tend to dominate the discussions.
The former will feel that they do not want to impose their views and problems on the others, whilst the latter will tend to see their problems or their viewpoint as essential.
Such situations have to be handled delicately, without putting down the more extrovert or putting too much pressure on the more introverted to make a contribution.
2
Ensuring mutual empathy within the group.
It is important that group members try to see the point of view of other individuals, and are willing to talk about their problems.
It is possible to see groups functioning in which individuals are intent on putting forward their own views without listening and sharing their problems with other members of the group.
To prevent this from happening, several approaches can be tried.
The group can be asked to respond to what one individual has just said; or it can focus discussion on one individual at a time; or the counsellor can ensure that the group discusses general or shared problems, or that it links and compares different problems faced by individuals within the group.
3
The leadership role.
There is a tendency for group leaders to interfere too much in the running of the group, often anxious about the group not going well, with too many silences, or not being sufficiently helpful.
This should be avoided.
Wherever possible the counsellor should leave the group to work out its own solutions, restricting his input to occasional clarification, keeping the group to the point and ensuring fairness.
There is also a role for the counsellor to introduce an ‘extra’ thought or dimension to the topic, perhaps involving a point of view which has not been considered by the group.
Where there is too cosy an agreement between the group, the counsellor can sometimes act as ‘devil's advocate’ by introducing a more controversial idea into the argument.
4
The use of games and exercises.
It is often helpful to group dynamics to introduce games and exercises into group discussion.
There are many texts outlining group games, often aimed towards children and young people.
But an excellent book by Ian Crosby and Jim Traynor (1985) relates specifically to older people, and explains how group exercises can be used to enhance and extend the learning potential of groups.
5
Life cycle group therapy.
Butler (1974) used groups of older people specifically for developing individual life histories, and using the sharing of these in a therapeutic group setting.
Certainly, such an idea combines and co-ordinates the value of the group and the value of reminiscence in a single setting.
Peer counselling
Groups of older people have the potential to develop as the vehicle for the counselling of older people by older people, offering mutual emotional support for group members in times of stress.
Certainly, it is arrogant ageism for younger people to assume that only they can help older people.
Older people have specific advantages in providing help and support for their peers.
There is often a shared pattern of experiences, beliefs and attitudes which have all arisen within their particular generation and which can never be fully shared by younger people.
There is no ‘generation gap’, and often none of the resistance that can exist about discussing their feelings with ‘youngsters’.
It is a similar attitude to that of children and adolescents who have their secret understandings and life-styles which are often, quite intentionally, separate from those of parents, teachers and others of the ‘older’ generation.
Counsellors who are younger than those they counsel must similarly allow that the feelings of older people can be based on quite different values and assumptions from their own.
In recognizing this, the younger counsellor should accept that the peers of an older counsellee might often provide something the counsellor can never offer.
It might be that they can discuss and compare life during the Great War, or in the 1920s and 1930s; or they might want to talk about how expectations, duties, responsibilities have changed since their childhood days.
Many topics may arise from such conversations, many happy and formative memories can be rekindled.
Or they may wish to discuss their present lives with each other, and compare how they cope with the problems and difficulties of being old.
New ways of coping can be shared, and solutions to problems can be found based on the values and ideas of their generation, not according to the views and attitudes of the modern world.
Self-help, and self-action groups
There is considerable evidence that older people are becoming less passive and more assertive in demanding their social and political rights.
Groups such as the Grey Panthers in the USA started the process.
Similar UK movements, both within and outside the trade union movement, are now working to improve the condition, status and quality of life of pensioners.
These organizations usually consist entirely of older people committed to fighting elderly issues directly.
They have been established in recognition of the fact that it is pointless to wait for public sympathy and a change of political will to improve the level of basic old age pensions, and the quality of life for older people generally.
Only by being more actively involved in identifying issues, organizing action, and thereby helping themselves by fighting for their own rights, can older people hope to improve matters.
This kind of group can be thought of as having only a minor role within counselling.
But when older people form groups with the intention of becoming involved, or rather re-involved, in the wider social context, they raise their own self-image and the status of older people generally by showing society that they are full citizens who have to be reckoned with.
They enable older people to be the givers rather than the receivers of help.
It also enables older people to challenge what is done for them, and to make provision more in line with their real needs.
These should be major counselling objectives, and encouraging an ageing person to be part of such a group would indeed constitute a major counselling success.
The campaigning or action group of committed older people may not be what many people expect from the counselling process, preferring acceptance and contentment rather than possible militancy as the outcome of help and support.
It is, after all, easier for us all if we know where our ‘old folk’ are and what they are doing.
We feel ‘responsible’(which really means that they are not or should not be responsible), and believe that they should be taking matters more easily, accepting their situation and peacefully ‘enjoying’ their last years of life.
Age integrated groups
There is an increasing social trend towards age segregation.
Retirement sections off the ‘elderly’ from the rest of the population.
Special old age concessions such as travel permits, cheap beef and butter, of which we are so often proud, emphasize that pensioners are to be treated differently.
Separate holidays for the young and the old can now be purchased.
Special forms of segregated sheltered housing, and ultimately the old person's residential home, ensure that older people are taught to feel that their lives are somehow  different and separate from other age-groups.
For some older people the establishment of groups for the elderly merely emphasizes age segregation.
Not every older person wants to be in the company of peers, or find it difficult to include younger people among their circle of friends.
Many older people prefer to be in groups which emphasize the common experiences and interests of young and old alike.
Such groups can lead to valuable exchanges of feelings and knowledge between the generations; many focus on particular interests, hobbies and pursuits, and where appropriate older people should be encouraged to join, and even take a lead in their running and organization.
The role of the counsellor
Whatever the relationship with the individual counsellee, the counsellor can perform many functions in relation to groups of older people.
The counsellor can be the ‘facilitator’ of group formation; or merely provide an opportunity for an individual to enter an already established group.
It is assumed here that the counsellor will play an active part in the formation of a group.
The primary task in the early stages of group formation is to create a safe environment which provides individuals with secure boundaries in which they are able to function.
Introductions are important, making each group member feel welcome.
Thereafter, the use of names is an important element in making everyone feel part of the group.
The purpose of the group meeting should be made clear from the start so that everyone knows what they are about, and what is expected of them.
The agenda of meetings should arise from the interests and concerns of the group.
No subject should be forbidden, and each individual should be encouraged to raise issues that are of current concern or interest.
Similarly, all feelings should be considered valid, despite the fact that they may upset other group members.
The group, and individual members of the group, will go through many experiences which the counsellor can use.
Observation is therefore very important.
As situations arise, the associated feelings can be discussed, enabling group members to share their sorrows, their grief and their loneliness with others who have experienced similar events.
Even the anticipation of future loss, and the way it can be handled, can be the subject of conversation.
The role of the counsellor can eventually become self-limiting when this level of sharing is attained, as the counselling becomes part of the process of group interaction.
The ability of the counsellor to be part of a group, fully involved and an interested party, but at the same time an ‘observer’, may appear to be more difficult than it really is.
Counsellors should try to limit their direct contributions, but ensure that important issues are fully discussed and that real feelings are expressed rather than avoided.
An agreed time for finishing each session can be an advantage, although this too must be flexibly interpreted.
It is important not to go on for too long, or to leave difficult business unfinished.
The major objective of the counsellor, especially the counsellor who actively seeks to combat ageism, is to encourage involvement.
It is important that the counsellor, observing the problems and deprivations within the group, does not fall into the trap of being more concerned with what he or she can do for the group than what the group can do for itself.
The strategy should be to enable the group, and its individual members, to discover their own strengths and weaknesses.
Group members should not only feel that they are contributing to the life of the group, but that their participation is important.
Encouraging self-help, self-motivation, self-action leads to feelings of purpose, relevance and  fulfilment , and these can in turn lead to new meaning in the life of the older individual.
The best possible outcome of the counselling process is where individuals actually begin to feel sufficiently confident to act on their own initiative, on their own behalf, and to follow the objectives that best match their own ideas about themselves and their lives.
In other words, to begin to defy the dictates of ageism, and to follow the philosophy of ‘I do, therefore I am’.
Counselling should help individuals to see what is possible in old age, and to strive towards achieving it in order to make their lives more complete and fulfilling.
Family counselling and older people
The importance attached to family relationships tends to increase with age.
As we approach our own death, children represent both ‘our’ future in terms of the family line, and an important element of what ‘we’have produced in the world.
Harmony with our children, even where harmony has not existed before, becomes an important element of our peace of mind.
Similarly, children often remain unaware of their debt to parents until too late, and then spend many years regretting their failure to show their gratitude when they were alive.
In the counselling process with older people, the importance of working with the family should not be underestimated.
Whilst many families spend a significant part of their lives together, and their needs are usually closely linked, individual members do not always share the same objectives in relation to each other.
Often these objectives are mutually incompatible and it is from such incompatibility, and the misunderstandings that arise from it, that many social and emotional problems experienced by older people arise.
Where the problems of older people relate to their family, it is often crucial to involve key members or even the entire family group in the counselling process.
Family counselling, or family therapy, began in the USA in the 1950s, underwent enormous expansion during the 1960s and is now a well developed technique with a sizeable literature devoted to it.
Normally the principal counsellee is a child; but there is no reason why the process cannot centre upon the problems of an older relative.
The methods and techniques which have been developed to cope with the child-rearing process seem to apply equally to families who are experiencing the difficulties and frustrations of caring for an ageing relative.
However, the task of transferring the central focus from the child to the older relative has not yet been attempted, and this chapter can perhaps be viewed as a small beginning to such a process.
Systems theory and family constructs
Systems theory developed in the 1940s as a explanation of human behaviour which took account of the important impact other people have on the individual.
It focuses on systems, such as the family, considering them to be an entity, a whole, rather than merely the result of a number of contributions from independent parts or individuals.
To reverse the same idea, individual behaviour is seen to be strongly influenced by the systems in which it functions.
Indeed, the whole is considered to constitute more than just the sum total of its parts.
The theory suggests that it is impossible to gain a significant understanding of an individual without first understanding the functioning of the systems within which the individual operates.
The family system is an open one which continually exchanges information, ideas and material with other systems.
The counsellor of older people may be bringing together several of these open family systems; the system formed by the older person, and the systems formed by one or more of their children.
This makes the counselling task even more difficult to interpret, but even within this complicated network of family systems, aspects of the wider, extended family unit will still be evident, perhaps comprising a number of separate systems which interact upon the way that the provision of care for older relatives is organized.
One task of the counsellor is to determine which members of the family are relevant to the processes which contribute to the problems being experienced — who to include and who to leave out.
Counselling within families is based on the idea that many of the problems and difficulties older individuals experience have both cause and effect within the family process.
The construct theory of Kelly (1955)(see pp. 61–2) has been applied to the family by Proctor (1981) who proposed a model of family functioning based upon shared constructs.
These constructs constrain the individual's view of the world, and whereas everyone is potentially able to make their own choices and decisions, they are restricted by the knowledge that to do so has an impact on other members of their family.
These constraints build into a complex family network, which forms patterns of expectations and choices that are shared by all members.
Shared family constructs enable individuals to organize their lives with some degree of predictability and certainty about the likely behaviour of other family members.
It produces a state of homeostasis, a mechanism which enables a system to remain in a stable state through time.
Each input or interaction upsets homeostasis, but the parts which make up the system are programmed to respond in such a way as to ensure a return to normality.
Homeostasis should not necessarily be seen as a fixed state which allows no  change, but one which allows change to occur in manageable stages thereby preserving a measure of continuity and security.
Family homeostasis can result in the system, and its individual parts, becoming stuck within patterns of behaviour which produce only failure, unhappiness and insecurity.
This occurs when individuals' act in a way they know is destined to be hurtful to other members of the family, who, in response, reciprocate with actions they know will cause even more distress.
Families which operate in this way might be expected to break up but they usually do not do so.
An example may be helpful.
When ageing parents become increasingly unable to look after themselves, a daughter may assume the main responsibility for caring for them.
Perhaps she resents the duty, feeling that other family members should do more, or that the parents do not show sufficient gratitude in return.
But by stepping into the role the daughter ensures homeostasis within the family.
Owing to what she sees as a lack of gratitude, she threatens to refuse to continue with the caring tasks.
The family now has a problem.
Perhaps the response of the ageing parents is to become ill, or demonstrate in some other way their dependency and distress.
The family combines to make the daughter feel guilty and re-assume her task.
Feeling threatened by family hostility, and in danger of being excluded from the family, the daughter re-assumes her caring role, albeit with increasing resentment.
This in turn makes the parents feel unhappy about being a burden, and not being loved and respected in the way they had expected.
This leads to further guilt, producing a network of family duties and expectations that cause considerable unhappiness and distress, but which produce homeostatic mechanisms which ensure that the situation continues.
This type of family construct can become entirely negative, leading to unhappiness on all sides.
The real issues are never discussed, nor do they have to be, for established patterns of family behaviour eventually ensure the  maintenance of the status quo, albeit an uncomfortable and unhappy one.
But it is important for the family counsellor to remember that even such negative family systems provide individuals with a basis for role allocation, and a security based on certainty and predictability, however unpalatable.
The social background: family care of the older relative
There is a popular perception that the modern family has become a problem, that increasingly the family renounces its former responsibilities towards the care and maintenance of older relatives.
Many argue that there is a major trend away from family-centred care towards state provision throughout the western world, and even in the more traditional oriental societies of Japan and  China, and that state provision further enables families to opt out of their former caring functions.
This is not a new idea.
Gray and Wilcock (1981) trace the attitude back to a Royal Commission on the Poor Law in 1909, but no doubt it is much older than this.
It is important to place this alleged trend in perspective.
Contrary to such perceptions, the family still remains the biggest single source of care for older people by a very substantial degree (Means, 1986).
It is therefore wrong to assume that there is a widespread move away from the family care of dependent older people.
Instead, this increasingly popular element of dominant ideology should not be seen as an expression of social concern for the well-being of older people, but examined for its wider social purpose.
By seeking to blame the family for the plight in which many older people find themselves, attention is distracted from the very real problems that structural social changes have placed on the family in providing such care.
These include the rise of the smaller nuclear family unit, smaller houses, earlier marriages, female employment and increased population mobility, all of which are encouraged and supported by a variety of social, fiscal and economic factors.
These factors contribute to the difficulties experienced by families in performing their caring functions, in turn increasing the likelihood of unfulfilled need and frustration developing within families over the care of older, dependent relatives.
These perceptions also serve to obscure the inadequacy of social provision which supports the army of people, usually female relations, who are expected to carry the burden of the caring role, often at considerable personal sacrifice.
The structure of modern social life merely exacerbates the problems faced by families.
Some carers will feel imprisoned by the demands made of them, and they will be torn between their desire to care for their older relatives and their own need to lead an independent life.
The balance between these two factors has no doubt always been difficult, but is perhaps especially so within the modern family.
The nature and origins of family difficulties
Problems between ageing parents and their now adult and independent ‘children’ will centre on the system of relationships and the patterns of interaction that have developed over many years.
The origins of many of these will be the unresolved issues in the process of children growing older, and growing away from their parents, problems which are the more usual subject of family therapy.
Clearly, the family process will have moved on and new issues will inevitably have entered the scene, and perhaps old ones will have become worse.
Moreover, this is likely to be the case regardless of whether the children now live independently or the family home is still shared, for in either case there will have been an almost complete role-reversal.
Those who were  formerly independent and dominant will have become dependent, and vice versa.
The role of carer and cared-for will have been reversed.
It is easy to underestimate the immense process of adjustment involved in this change.
Children find it difficult to come to terms with the responsibilities involved, and parents find it difficult to relinquish them.
Caring for dependent older people can, in any case, be a daunting task, particularly when problems of mental confusion and incontinence arise.
Carers cannot make decisions in their own lives without considering their needs.
They may often have to forego social evenings and holidays.
The sexual lives of carers are often severely handicapped, especially where the ageing relative lives within the home.
These problems, and those which surround the major role-reversal, frequently remain unconsidered and undiscussed within families, thereby enabling problems to grow until they reach the stage of ‘granny bashing’ or ‘granny dumping’when care is withdrawn, and even family breakdown occurs.
Family issues
Counselling issues between older people and their families often arise from these fundamental changes of power and status and the counsellor embarking on work with a family therefore needs to ask several key questions.
1
What is the nature and quality of family relationships between the two or — more generations?
2
How does the existing pattern of relationships and interaction within the family match the needs and expectations of the different generations?
3
What rights, duties and debts do the various individuals within the family feel they have towards each other?
How do these expectations match, and to what extent do individuals feel that family responsibilities are being fulfilled?
4
What patterns of dependence and independence have developed, and to what extent are these accepted or resisted by all parties, pointing to issues of unresolved stress and conflict within the family?
5
What was the nature of the former parental relationship with the children, and what impact do these former patterns of interaction have on current relationships, especially when children have left home and established their own families?
It is when family duties, responsibilities, roles and expectations are confused, uncertain or even mutually incompatible that problems within families arise.
No counsellor can assume that ‘good’ relationships either are or have been the norm within the family, and idealistic pictures of family life as a reciprocally loving, mutually committed and concerned relationship should be abandoned.
Family construct theory suggests that it would even be  wrong to assume that such ‘good’ family relationships are wanted by some families which actually rely upon ‘bad’family relationships.
The perception of change and development within families can also be affected by problems associated with ageist attitudes, particularly, when younger family members make the assumption that because their parents are growing older they, and the problems which surround their care, will remain forever unchanging (except by getting worse) and unchangeable.
This fatalistic ageism can be another reason for failing to discuss the problems and difficulties of caring for ageing relatives as they arise — there is no point, for there is no possibility of change taking place.
Developing self-awareness within the family
The primary task of the counselling process within families is to focus upon the different viewpoints of key members of the family group, how they differ from each other, and why stress in family relationships has developed.
The primary aim of family counselling is to facilitate and enhance the ability of individuals to examine their own needs and expectations, and to compare these in relation to the needs and expectations of other members of the family.
From such awareness it is possible to increase general family understanding of the main conflicts, misunderstandings and  incompatibilities that exist within their group.
The primary object of family counselling is to help negotiate new, mutually acceptable and agreed expectations, with each party being aware of what is expected of them, and how much they can reasonably expect from others.
The starting point is to get family members together, and embark upon discussions which seek to define and highlight family problems.
This demands not only the skills of counselling previously outlined, but the ability to referee and control the expression of different and conflicting attitudes, to give equal time and importance to everyone's point of view, and to encourage each member of the family not only to explain their own feelings, but to listen to each other.
The counsellor needs to be aware of the wishes and expectations of both old and young alike about the nature of the caring role within the family, and this is particularly so when families live separately.
Some older people want to be cared for by their children, others most definitely do not.
Some see state support, in all its guises, as a bonus, others as an intrusion.
Some will find it a welcome relief, others an indication of personal failure, and the cause of personal guilt.
The possible permutations of these feelings between any two individuals are endless.
Within families the complexity and inter-relatedness of expectation and need can appear to be a perplexing and entirely confusing maze.
Arising from these complex interactions can come a variety of feelings — guilt, disappointment, sorrow, anger, despair, frustration, depression and many more.
The counselling task is not only to understand what each individual is saying, but also to spot the differences, the possible areas of friction and incompatibility that exist within the family, and then to interpret and explain these to the family group.
The counsellor is helped in interpreting this complex situation by the generality of family behaviour.
The apparently small and isolated family incidents observed by the family counsellor are often typical examples of family interaction.
Walrund-Skinner (1977) describes the family therapy session as ‘a slice of real life’, providing the counsellor with a ‘re-enactment of the ongoing patterns of behaviour’, ‘a microcosmic expression of the family's continuous drama, enacted during the other 23 hours of the day, when the therapist is not with them’.
To extract generality from family behaviour is important to the family counsellor.
People do not usually alter their feelings, their behaviour or their interactions with others because of a particular situation, or the presence of the counsellor.
One apparently isolated incident can vividly illustrate a more generalized pattern of family life.
Impartiality and family power structures
Embarking on family counselling can subtly change the relationship between the counsellor and the older counsellee.
It is no longer a one-to-one relationship in which the counsellor concentrates exclusively upon the feelings and needs of a single person, for other people must now be considered.
This inevitably alters the nature and emphasis of the counselling relationship, which can often cause some difficulty if counsellees feel that their problems are now being ignored, and that ‘their’ counsellor is no longer‘on their side’.
Some prior preparation aimed at outlining the purpose of family meetings is useful, and the stance the counsellor plans to take should be clearly explained to the counsellee before the start of family meetings.
Counsellors have to be impartial.
Often they will enter a family situation where the focus of all difficulties lies with one person, perhaps the ageing parent who has become dependent upon the younger members of the family.
Even if the primary focus is the needs of an older person, the counsellor cannot afford to ‘take sides’, but should instead aim to help the whole family face up to and develop a wider understanding of the problems and difficulties that exist in old age, and in caring for older people.
In doing so, the counsellor has to look at the family dynamic with a particular emphasis on those factors which impinge upon the life of the ageing family member, but to be seen as anything other than impartial, particularly when there is jealousy and conflict within the family group, can lead to a lack of trust and the possible withdrawal of co-operation and participation by some family members.
There is perhaps one exception to the rule of impartiality.
All families have  their own power structure, and usually the position of the very young and the dependent elderly tend to be the least powerful.
They have least to offer the family in return for all the help and support they may need or expect in return.
There will also be status differences within the family based not only on age but also on sex, and the control of money and other resources.
Family negotiations can be delicate in this respect.
Family work, as in most social work, is often concerned with balancing the power of the strong with the rights of the weak.
Therefore, if the counsellor acts entirely impartially with regard to existing patterns of power and vulnerability in family meetings, the needs of the ageing relative may continue to receive inadequate attention and response.
However, if the counsellor seeks to support the position of the older person, care has to be taken over how the imbalance of power is handled.
The existence of power structures within the family cannot be ignored when it is clear that the power of one party is being used to the detriment of another.
The usual outcome is that the weaker, more dependent individuals are blamed for family problems.
Individual pathology is used to explain family ills whose origins are usually far more complex.
This outcome of family power politics has to be avoided.
The counsellor should try to achieve a more equitable balance by enabling the weaker individual to present feelings and needs as coherently and forcefully as possible, perhaps by clarifying and expanding on what is said.
The outcome may be to highlight the part played by more powerful family members in the problems of the family.
The neutrality of the counsellor, so necessary in order to develop mutual trust and confidence, has to be compromised in such a way that individuals are not annoyed or upset, or that members of the family begin to see the counsellor as partisan.
Developing awareness of individual need within the family is the objective, and failure occurs when the counsellor so upsets certain family members, particularly the more powerful, that he or she can no longer have any impact on the family dynamic.
Sensitivity to the family, and to the needs of individual members of it, allied with the confidence to tackle issues whilst maintaining an impartial stance, is the task the counsellor has to fulfil.
How such paradoxical objectives are handled will depend upon the individual counsellor.
Family therapy is not a precise skill with correct and incorrect approaches.
Different counsellors can use different methods in similar situations with equal success.
Counselling responses often have to be rapid, based on personal judgement rather than precise theoretical principles.
Indeed, the development of family therapy has been highly pragmatic in character, more involved in solving problems than adhering to particular dogmas.
The counsellor has to enter into the family dynamic, not intrusively, not demanding compliance with the wishes or even with the needs of the elderly counsellee, but to ensure that the feelings and needs of each member of the family, however weak, are heard.
Openness, honesty and the development of harmony and understanding
Once the family sessions have begun, the counsellor has to ensure that the family group is maintained, despite the many potentially explosive problems and difficulties that might need to be discussed.
This is another important paradox that has to be dealt with in family counselling.
There are many ways in which the need for openness and honesty can be harmonized with the need to maintain the family group, and to ensure that individuals within the family are not damaged.
The initial focus of family discussion is important.
Rather than starting with the current difficulties, it is often possible to begin with the history of the family, perhaps concentrating on more positive, happier times.
To do this is most helpful when there is, or at least has been, a genuine basis of care, love and mutual need within the relationship.
It enables the counsellor to remind the family that better times did once exist, and raises the prospect that they could exist again if the reasons for current difficulties can be understood.
From this more harmonious base the counsellor can attempt to move the family on to consider when family relationships began to falter, what the circumstances were, and how all parties felt about the issues at that time.
By adopting this ‘historical’ approach, misunderstandings can be traced back to their origins, and then linked and brought up to their current situation.
It can lead to a mutual re-affirmation of affection and concern between the parties which, throughout the discussions of more difficult issues, can serve as the basis to which the family can return if discussion becomes too heated and acrimonious.
Family counselling does not have to have a historical basis.
Indeed, some families will want to talk about the present, believing that what has occurred in the past is of little or no consequence.
It is equally possible to use the present as the starting point of work with the family.
Indeed, the very first piece of family self-revelation is the way they choose to sit together, for this can show the observant counsellor the existing pattern of alliances and tensions, as revealing as any words.
Thereafter, engaging the family in a discussion of the problems they face can quickly indicate the current nature of family relationships and interactions.
In family counselling, regardless of the starting point, difficult issues should be tackled rather than left because it is considered ‘kinder’ to do so.
There is no long-term advantage in avoiding contentious and divisive issues.
On the other hand, when the family atmosphere becomes particularly strained or difficult, the counsellor should attempt to bring the discussion around to a more harmonious matter.
Whatever the need for honesty, there is little point, and usually no advantage, in allowing discussions to continue on the basis of anger or mutual recrimination.
It will be helpful to consider a typical general  example, and then to illustrate how a balance between these two considerations can be achieved.
Family hostility often arises when the expectations of older people make quite unrealistic demands upon younger relatives.
The usual, if not the inevitable, result is that their expectations are regularly disappointed.
Whilst it might cause some obvious short-term distress to tell the older people that they have unrealistic expectations of their children, to fail to do so inevitably leads to more unhappiness in the longer term.
Similarly, younger relatives can come to the conclusion that whatever they do nothing is right or sufficient.
They begin to assume that their ageing parents are never satisfied, and may eventually conclude that it might be better to do nothing at all for them.
Therefore, in this situation any failure to tackle such issues may trade short-term distress for long-term breakdown in the relationship.
Obtaining frankness within families about the feelings and expectations they have of each other can be mutually beneficial.
Continuing with the above situation, when young carers do eventually withdraw their help and support from their ageing parent, they will almost inevitably feel guilty.
Whilst they may be able to rationalize what they have done, there is usually a strong element of disappointment about the broken relationship.
When families place elderly relatives into residential care, a similar feeling of guilt is often apparent.
Disclosure of personal feelings and attitudes within the family group is important.
It is better, especially in manipulative family situations, for individuals to talk directly to each other rather than relay messages through a third party.
Some people find this kind of face-to-face honesty difficult to cope with, especially if the individual feels in any way weak or threatened within the family group.
To avoid doing so, devious messages are often sent, perhaps attributing their feelings to mysterious ‘theys’ or ‘others’.
One method of overcoming this is to encourage family members to use ‘I’ positioning (Bowen, 1978) in which people are expected to use ‘I’statements when expressing attitudes and feelings.
Yet during family sessions, feelings can rise so quickly that very damaging statements can be made, which may be frank and honest but have a destructive meaning or impact that would not be intended in calmer and more reasonable moments.
If they are left entirely unqualified they can do more harm than good to family relationships.
‘I don't give a damn about you’, ‘You can go to hell’, ‘You were the worst father/mother/daughter/son that anyone could wish to have’, are typical of the kind of remarks that can be made.
A closer interpretation is necessary in family work, with the counsellor focusing on the statement rather than passing it off or trying to pretend that it was not said, seeking to analyse and ascertain what exactly was being said, why is was said, and what the real message might be.
In doing so, it is important that the counsellor tries to extract the feeling within the statement, which was real, rather than the literal meaning of the words, which may not have been.
This highlights one of the main differences of approach between normal communication within the family and the counselling process.
Within the family it is usually the words and their literal meaning which take primary importance.
In counselling it is the emotions behind the words that need to be pursued.
What is important is that the individual understands why someone feels strong enough to say ‘Go to hell’, and not merely to believe that this is an accurate statement of what that person desires.
Violent and damaging words are used to express feelings, not intentions.
The other person does not want the relationship to end, although this can be the outcome, but perhaps feels subjected to unreasonable demands or expectations, or is struggling with guilt or frustration, or feels neglected and unwanted.
It is the counsellor's task to try to move the discussion to these underlying meanings of words used in anger.
A similar technique often used in family counselling is ascribing ‘noble intentions’ to actions and behaviours which have caused friction and animosity between family members.
This involves developing explanations for particular actions or behaviours that have caused problems, expressed in terms that both parties can understand and recognize in more positive and acceptable ways.
For example, it is often possible to explain angry and hostile behaviour in terms of an individual's love and concern for the other rather than as a straightforward expression of hostility or hatred.
Such a technique can be a useful way of bringing two or more parties together when there have been serious misunderstandings which have led to conflict.
The family counsellor will always meet resistance.
It is a normal reaction to the pain and anxiety that discussing difficult issues will bring.
Keeping the entire family attending meetings can be a continuing problem, particularly if progress is slow, or problems are particularly intractable.
The refusal to attend meetings is one way that key individuals, who feel they have most to fear from change, have of undermining family work.
There is usually no way of enforcing attendance, so such threats have to be taken seriously, and perhaps worked through by paying special attention to their particular feelings and needs.
Another typical resistance is met when it becomes clear that despite everything that is being achieved in terms of family understanding and awareness, individuals are sticking rigidly to old patterns of interaction and behaviour.
The most recent trends in family therapy have tended to suggest that seeking merely to increase self- and family awareness may be insufficient to bring about effective change within the family dynamic.
They stress the importance of achieving structural change within families through the development of family tasks.
These more direct techniques have been developed to give the counsellor a more active role within the family, based on the idea that change is more effectively brought about through action rather than the development of self-awareness.
The setting of family tasks
The setting of tasks helps to focus the family's attention on the need for change, highlighting the importance of their own actions, and giving them meaningful and helpful activity to perform between family meetings.
Tasks can also help the family define in precise and concrete terms what can be done to improve their situation.
The attention of individual members can be drawn to small, practical ways in which they can change the dynamic processes within the family.
They enable powerful members to modify the impact they have within the family.
They also enable weaker members of the family to point out what is happening to them whilst it is actually happening.
How the tasks have been performed, and what members of the family feel about the ‘new’ way of doing things, can then become the starting point of the next family meeting, leading to new understandings being discussed and new, more subtle tasks being developed.
Family tasks are most appropriate within families which have become stuck in hurtful and damaging interactions, and who seem resistant to or incapable of change.
Their aim is to provoke change rather than to enhance awareness.
A few examples of some of the techniques which have been developed, and their relevance to work with older people, can briefly be described.
It is often possible to effect change by apparently recommending the continuation or intensification of interactions that are at the root of family problems.
Presented with this paradoxical technique the family is placed in a double-bind situation.
They can either accept the recommendation, admitting that they are in control of what they do and the situations they create, or more likely they will protest that to take such advice will worsen the situation.
An example of this occurred where a daughter's care for her dependent father was continually met with ingratitude and unkindness.
This made her feel that she was not doing enough, so she would increase the care she gave him, which in turn increased the unpleasant response.
All suggestions for changing this pattern were resisted.
Finally it was suggested that if her father continued to be unkind or unpleasant, the only way she could increase the level of care she provided would be to move away from her family and live with him.
This led to a heated family argument, the daughter not wanting to leave her family, the husband not wanting to lose his wife, and the father indicating that this was not what he intended.
For the first time this opened up an honest discussion of feelings, and started the process of constructing a new pattern of interaction.
Reframing procedures are attempts to place family problems in another, more manageable, context.
This technique has already been mentioned when talking of ascribing noble intentions.
Another example, using the technique of redefining the problem and using the above situation, may be for the counsellor to suggest that the intention of the father's behaviour was to place the daughter in an untenable position so as to break up her marriage.
This may  not be an accurate assessment of the family dynamic, but the re-labelling of the problem does enable the family to focus on a problem that might not otherwise be considered, the effect of one caring relationship on another.
Straightforward directions can also demonstrate the need for change.
In one situation, a younger daughter was being constantly criticized by her older sister for the way she cared for their mother.
The allegation was that she did not do enough to help her, and over a period of time this had made the carer extremely angry, and at the same time made their mother dissatisfied about the care she was receiving.
Although the older sister lived away, she travelled to stay with her sister occasionally and during one visit, after she made her allegations in a family meeting which she had joined, the counsellor asked her to take over the caring role for the final week of her stay so that her sister could actually see how it should be done.
This strategy enabled the various members of the family to see the difficulty of the younger daughter's task, and the part everyone played in making it worse.
There are also a number of tasks and activities which have been developed to illustrate the family dynamic — these include family choreography, role-playing, role-reversal, family drawing, charting, listing, and perhaps most well-known, family sculpting.
These are all techniques by which families can be helped to understand the way they interact together by practical, visual means.
Working with families can often appear to be a daunting task because the counsellor has to hold together so many different individuals at the same time.
However, it is often not as difficult as it appears, and the process can be fascinating and the results very worthwhile.
Reminiscence and the life review
We are all the products of our history, and the multitudinous influences of circumstance, events and people which fill our lives.
Psychology has concluded that the most formative period of life is childhood, and in particular the first five years of life.
Experiences in childhood form not only our earliest, but our most enduring and persistent perceptions of the world, our place within it and our relationships with other people.
The circumstances and experiences of life create ever more diversity and certainly by the time old age is reached, differences can be expected to be at their most extreme.
Whilst people of all ages reminisce, old age, not unnaturally, is a time when looking back at our lives, reviewing its failures and triumphs, its joys and sorrows, its pleasures and regrets, is of particular importance.
Yet this process has not always been seen as important or even helpful, for a variety of reasons.
Many pre-eminent people working with older people have considered reminiscence a mixed blessing, particularly for those whose past life experience seems to have lacked  fulfilment and purpose.
Reminiscence was perceived in the 1950s and 1960s to be an unwelcome symptom of mental deterioration, a failure to maintain contact with the realities of the present, and a potentially harmful process.
The idea that older people live in the past, that they are always talking about the ‘good old days’ is common, and reminiscence has often been devalued as merely the aimless meanderings of an increasingly decrepit mind.
This has a reciprocal impact.
Older people are inhibited about discussing the past because they sense that no-one is interested.
Klein et al (1965) found that many older people hesitated to talk about the past because they did not want to meet with rejection, and that many actually needed help and encouragement to reminisce.
For many older people this is perhaps a common experience, reflecting the dominant social  preoccupation with the present and future, and the dismissal of past experience as either uninteresting, irrelevant or unimportant.
Although these attitudes still persist, the general view has been transformed and reminiscence is now seen as a normal, if not essential, element of successfully growing old.
Norris (1986) points to five reasons for its importance.
First, reminiscence highlights older people's assets rather than their disabilities.
Second, it can enhance their feelings of self-worth and esteem.
Third, it can help older people recognize their individuality and identity.
Fourth, it can aid the process of life review, and fifth, it is an enjoyable and stimulating experience.
Given all these factors, reminiscence should be an extremely valuable counselling aid.
Even so, it is important to examine why there has not always been agreement on the value of reminiscence, and to place the value of reminiscence within the counselling process into perspective.
A review of recent research led Coleman (1986) to conclude that reminiscence therapy could not be said to stand on a very solid base, and that it is important not to make generalizations about the value of reminiscence to any particular individual.
Each person needs to be considered in his or her own unique way.
Research has divided people into ‘reminiscers’ and ‘non-reminiscers’, and then divided both groups again.
There are reminiscers who find the process helpful and supportive, and those who find it difficult or disturbing.
Amongst the non-reminiscers, some find that there is little point or purpose served in looking back at their lives, whilst others do not reminisce because they find it too depressing, often because of the contrast between their past and present life which they find too difficult to contemplate.
The problem that counsellors face is to determine whether reminiscence is a useful tool to use with an individual.
They will no doubt be helped in making this decision by counselling itself, and the empathy that should exist between counsellor and counsellee.
Clearly, with ‘reminiscers’, even those who find it difficult, there seems good reason for counsellors to make use of the process.
With ‘non-reminiscers’ there would appear to be less reason to dwell on the past, and it might be more useful to avoid it unless the counsellor feels that there is a particularly strong reason and purpose for doing so.
With these general rules in mind, counsellors should carefully assess the potential benefits of using reminiscence in their work with older people.
Empathy between generations
Early formative experiences are powerful factors in establishing personality.
For older individuals, these experiences took place in a world which was very different from the one in which we now live.
Most of the current generation of older people were born at a time when the motor car was an unusual sight on the streets, aeroplanes were rarely seen in the skies, telephones were rare, radio and television were many years from invention.
Further from common domestic experience, medicine had not discovered penicillin or antibiotics, and social and health insurance was an item of political discussion rather than practical reality.
As fundamental aspects of social life have changed, so have the perceptions of the nature of life, its problems, pleasures, responsibilities and duties.
When the younger counsellor shares these experiences with the older counsellee they are both doing far more than embarking on a process of recalling the past, they are sharing a common heritage which has been formative for the young as well as the old, although less directly so.
They are helping each other understand their different experiences of life, and their different views and attitudes towards it.
This should be particularly helpful for the younger counsellor who, if not aware of the potentially vast differences of life expectations between generations, will have difficulty in fully empathizing with the attitudes and feelings of older people.
With such understanding, the complaints and uncertainties older people have about the ‘modern’ world can be more fully appreciated and understood.
The sadness about change, the cynicism about so-called progress, the regret for passing values and customs can all be placed legitimately where they belong, within the context of the social realities older people knew and experienced when they were younger.
History as counselling
Autobiography and life history play an important part in our knowledge and understanding of past social life.
The great majority of such texts and records, forming the basis upon which history is understood, interpreted and taught in our society centre on the rich, the famous and the influential.
These are the people we believe have shaped and moulded history, and the society in which we now live.
Yet more recent understanding of historical study has moved the focus away from the centres of power and social influence, and towards the lives of ordinary people.
How did these people live their lives?
What were their main concerns, difficulties and problems?
How did the dominant social, economic and cultural forces affect the way they lived their lives?
To use a single but important example, it is the difference between looking at the Great War as an event which centred around the policies and machinations of politicians and generals, or one which impinged upon the lives of ordinary people.
Lloyd George and Kitchener have their biographies; yet those who experienced most directly the turmoil, disruption and loss of the war have their information locked within their memory.
Historians are increasingly realizing that if the experience of older people is not sought we are in danger of losing a unique individual insight into the times and events they report, and one which will die with them unless recorded (Thompson, 1978).
Both viewpoints are important in a historical context, but not in  counselling.
Most younger counsellors will have learnt about the war from texts, films and documentaries based essentially on the political view of history.
Conversely, most older counsellees will have experienced the war in entirely personal terms.
This being so, the experience of older people is not only an invaluable and irreplaceable source of history, it is an essential element of counselling empathy.
By concentrating on the value and significance of their experience, the counsellor will generate not only an important historical and social insight, particularly if a physical record is kept, but will learn about the impact of the war on the individual, that is, from the only perspective that has relevance to the counsellor.
In order to do so, the counsellor may have to ‘unlearn’ some of the more conventional understandings she or he might have about the nature of the war.
Reminiscence can provide the counsellor with an initial point of contact with the counsellee.
Taking the time to talk about the past, focusing on the experience of the counsellee in all its detail and complexity, can help to establish the counselling relationship.
At the same time it can reverse completely the power/information balance that can often be a problem in counselling.
The counsellee is the teacher and expert, the counsellor the pupil.
It can also help to emphasize to the counsellees the value and significance of their lives, and the part they have played in the history of their times.
The counsellor as ‘historian’ is perhaps an unusual view, but by travelling through an individual's life history, and especially when making a physical record through family albums, scrapbooks, memorabilia, and genealogies, the counsellor is in effect producing an important autobiography which serves both functions.
Life history as a source of insight into the individual
The importance of a ‘lifetime perspective’ on ageing is being increasingly recognized.
This perspective states that in order to understand an individual in later life, it is important to know something about his or her past experience.
Reminiscence can provide the counsellor with invaluable insight into the nature and quality of the counsellee's early formative years which can, to a large extent, determine the way people live their later lives.
Early experiences shape the way we face up to and deal with problems and crises; the way we cope with disappointments; the way we form relationships; the way we construct personal aims and objectives; the way we develop strategies for fulfilling needs and desires; and the way we build a system of social and moral values and attitudes.
It is these that provide our basis for living, life scripts upon which we base our responses to all new situations and circumstances.
And although such scripts are potentially modifiable, they more usually remain essentially intact throughout a lifetime.
General personality traits emerge from this, which will tell us whether we  are dealing with individuals who will tend to cope with problems optimistically or pessimistically; whether they are hopeful or depressive; whether they are extrovert or introvert, and so on.
It will tell us about the individuals' ability to make and maintain new relationships.
It will tell us about former hobbies and interests which may be important in future plans.
It provides us with information which can suggest not only how individuals came to be in their present position but the way they are likely to respond to new difficulties and choices.
The individuals' personal history, what they have done, who they have been, what has been important to them, makes them come ‘alive’, helping them emerge from the ‘elderly’ or ‘dependent’or ‘infirm’stereotypes.
Understanding individuals in the context of their past can help us understand the present-day person.
This is important when dealing with older people who in many cases are not now what they have been, making the counselling task different from that of any other age group.
Locating the origins of current problems
Older people often find it easier to talk of their childhood and early years than their current problems.
As reminiscence naturally proceeds from the past to the present, it can often give the counsellor an indication of where, and at what period, to focus attention in the search for the origins of the counsellee's particular mental state or circumstances.
There comes a point when reminiscence is blocked, or when there is resistance to proceeding further.
Such periods will often be found to correspond with times of particularly stressful social change for the individual.
The counsellor may often find that this period also coincides with the onset of a depressed or confused state of mind, suggesting that it is the problems and difficulties which occurred around this time that require counselling attention.
In such circumstances, the counsellor will often find that invaluable help and information can be obtained from relatives and friends, who may have been aware of the personal circumstances, but perhaps unaware of their full significance at the time.
The counsellor must also recognize that in returning to past experiences, there will be regrets and disappointments as well as joys and successes.
The life review may lead to unresolved and perhaps painful conflicts.
Some older people may be pre-occupied with these negative aspects of their lives, where the counsellor will be dealing with a lack of personal satisfaction and  fulfilment , failed relationships, unfulfilled hopes, and even perhaps with events that elicit feelings of disgrace and shame.
Reminiscence can be a means through which such matters can be re-examined and resolved.
If such unresolved conflicts are successfully addressed, if individuals can begin to forgive themselves for their failures and indiscretions, it can bring them a renewed meaning and significance for the remaining part of their lives.
Yet here the counsellor faces the problem of whether to delve into the  difficult past, or to leave it alone.
The decision rests on a balance between helping individuals to come to terms with what has happened in their lives at difficult times, risking the possibility of taking them back through stressful and disturbing memories, and leaving the past alone, risking the possibility that counsellees will never come to terms with what is disturbing them.
Such a decision should not be taken timidly.
The view that upsetting issues should be avoided is one that has already been addressed.
Providing counsellees can be coaxed into exploring these more sensitive areas, and counsellors feel that they have the time and the ability to cope with any resulting distress, then the eventual outcome can be, more often than not, extremely valuable.
Reminiscence can play an important part in ameliorating personal distress, and can be adapted when counselling older people through such matters as retirement, dependence, depression, ill-health, as well as coming to terms with bereavement and death.
This will be dealt with in more detail in the chapters relating to these subjects in Part 2.
The life review — making sense of our lives
Young people lead their lives with an eye on the future, and with a sense of the potential for further work or achievement.
Nothing is yet complete or whole.
It is only when we reach old age, whenever that is, that we can experience and reflect upon an almost entire life cycle.
An important objective in counselling is to help the older individual live for today rather than for an uncertain tomorrow.
Counselling should encourage reflection on the past, and use the life review as a positive, formative part of growing into old age.
When older people think of the past they are not just taking stock of their lives but trying to decide what to do with the time that they have left, and trying to do so in relation to concluding or making sense of what has gone before.
They are checking on the legacy they want to leave behind them.
This can be seen to coincide with the characteristics of an ‘ideal’ old age outlined by Erikson (1965)(see page 40–42), concerned with identity and generativity.
The life review can help to address the problems of the place of older people within existing social life.
As both personal acquaintances and known physical landmarks disappear, and their personal role and integration with society declines, older people experience a reducing familiarity with current social organization.
Their experience becomes increasingly alienated from the life they have known and loved.
The life review can provide a means of re-establishing and confirming individual involvement with current reality, and linking their past work and efforts with the social change that has occurred, for in a variety of subtle ways they will have been part of the changes and developments that they are witnessing.
The employment of counselling skills in the problems of old age
Introduction
The subject matters dealt with in Part 2 are artificially separated.
It is unlikely that the older counsellee will experience difficulties in just one and not other areas.
Indeed, problems in one area are likely to lead to difficulties in another.
Similarly, solutions to problems in one area will help resolve difficulties in others.
Nor can the counsellor set himself the task of dealing exclusively with one area.
People and their lives are whole, and need to be considered and treated as such.
The order and the organization of the chapters is sequential, in that they begin with the earlier problems of old age, taking a preventative stance, and move thereafter through to deeper, more pathological experiences of old age.
Each begins with a consideration of the nature of the area being discussed on the basis that greater understanding of the nature and origin of the problems of old age, dispelling some of the myths surrounding them, can help the counsellor in his task, and help the counsellee to prevent some of the more avoidable pitfalls of ageing.
Particular attention is paid to ageism, and the part counselling can play in combating its effects.
Counselling is concerned with maintaining the quality of life of older people for as long as possible.
It looks at the ageing process with optimism and hope rather than despair.
It does not seek to change physical laws, only to delay them.
Neither does it deny the ageing process, or the ultimate destination of life itself.
Part 2 begins with retirement, the time ‘old age’ is usually thought to start, and the problems that the loss of productive employment brings.
Then consideration is given to the importance of maintaining social involvement through keeping up personal relationships in old age.
After a special consideration of alcohol and older people, the next four chapters deal with perhaps the most important areas older people face, ill-health, dependence, depression  and mental confusion.
The unchanging inevitabilities, bereavement and personal death, are recognized in the final two chapters.
Clearly, whatever the problems it is important that they are dealt with as early as possible.
It is perhaps too idealistic to suggest that the process of ageing should be dealt with during childhood, but it is certainly during these years that the basis of ageism becomes rooted in us and thereafter affects the way we approach our own old age.
Problems which are ignored are generally made worse with time, and consequently take much longer to deal with effectively, and also require more confidence and expertise on the part of the counsellor.
However, the counsellor will have to work with older people whose lives have already been deeply affected by the problems of ageing, and this will require all the skills and insight of looking into individual feelings and attitudes already outlined in Part 1.
For counsellors to know the  limits of their competence is clearly important, and calling in specialist help is always something that should be done in good time.
But it is also emphasized that professional competence is not something that can or should be taken for granted, and that the intimate knowledge of the carer-counsellor can often be as useful as the most vaunted professional.
Preparation for retirement
Old age is considered by many to begin with retirement.
The ability to be ‘productive’ is a powerful element of individual status within our society; according to our particular scale of values, to work and contribute to the national wealth is the largest single contribution anyone can make to their society.
Therefore, retirement constitutes for many people the end of an important element of life.
This has not always been so.
Prior to the implementation of state pension schemes at the turn of this century, older workers did not retire.
They might often be forced, through declining health and strength, to take on low-paid and unskilled work, but for most people the idea of giving up work was not possible, short of the desire to risk starvation or enter the workhouse.
So the concept of retirement is still comparatively new, particularly amongst the poor.
In Britain, it has been estimated that 73 % of the male population over 65 were occupied in 1881, but by 1981 this had reduced to only 11 % (Johnson, 1985).
Moreover, the International Labour Office has found this to be an international trend (Townsend, 1981).
The reason for this increase in retirement is interesting to ponder.
Popularly, it is attributed to social philanthropy, and to successful campaigns to relieve people from the need to work in their old age.
They have earned their rest from work.
Retirement, in this sense, is considered to be a natural and inevitable period of peace and dignity, fully enabled and recognized by both law and social provision.
But there are less philanthropic reasons that can be forwarded for the growth of retirement.
Economic policy and retirement
Despite the seeming social compassion for ageing workers, it is important that the counsellor of retired and retiring people is able to see the reverse side of this apparent concern.
One view sees retirement as no more than a form of compulsory unemployment within an economy which can no longer offer full employment.
In many subtle ways, retirement is considered an increasing burden upon the rest of society, with retired people joining children in becoming major ‘consumers’ of resources but who, unlike children, have no future productive value.
They are seen increasingly as an economic liability.
Retirement is viewed in two quite distinct ways, with the ascendent viewpoint at any time depending upon the prevailing needs of the national economy.
Phillipson (1982) described these two views as they relate specifically to manpower policies.
One outcome of this process has been the emergence of older people as a reserve of labour.
In periods of slump, for example, they may be drawn out of the labour market more quickly than other groups (particularly unskilled and semi-skilled older workers); in periods of labour shortage, the justification for retiring and becoming a ‘non-producing consumer’ may be questioned as part of a campaign to call back or retain people in the labour force.
This correlation between retirement, idleness and economic liability is particularly damaging to retired people.
Old age becomes an economic burden on younger, more productive people.
In the 1950s, the elderly were described as ‘passengers’, threatening to pull down the standard of living enjoyed by society as a whole; they were a regressive element, dampening the ‘initiative of youth’, and playing a conservative role in social and political life.
In this period, the elderly experienced the tension of being ‘non-productive’ in a society which demanded that everyone should work and be productive.
(Phillipson, 1982)
The first attitude has been witnessed in the 1930s and during our more recent experience of high unemployment.
At these times, the scarcity of employment opportunities has led to the view that older people should give up their jobs in order that younger people can benefit from the experience of work.
Demands to bring forward the age of retirement come to the fore; for older people to continue working is seen to be selfish, depriving younger people of opportunity.
Different attitudes confront older people; they are seen to be too slow, too set in their work practices, or possessing skills which have become or will become redundant.
This disparity in social attitudes is certainly reflected in the ambivalent feelings held by retired people.
Whilst some welcome the opportunity of early retirement, others see it as an unwanted imposition on their lives.
Rather than a blessing, retirement becomes a period of crisis, depriving older people of the status and role of work.
Clearly the counsellor will come across both attitudes, with retiring people requiring counselling support both when they have to continue working when they would wish to retire, or when they have to stop working when they wish to continue.
Despite these views being diametrically opposed, both exist simultaneously in attitudes to retired people.
Either they are doing the work that younger people could and perhaps should be doing; or they are part of a growing population of retired people whose idleness is creating social and financial difficulties for the rest of the productive population.
To work is wrong.
To retire is wrong.
The result is that older people can be attacked from either direction regardless of what they decide to do.
Pressure to work and pressure to retire is placed on older people in proportions which can be both confusing and callous.
Counselling can play a vital part in helping retired, or retiring, elderly people to cope with the many dilemmas and pressures such attitudes place upon them.
Perhaps it is the results of such non-philanthropic attitudes that are more clearly seen than the actual attitudes themselves.
Retirement usually brings with it not only the loss of the largest single activity in which people have engaged, but also a massive drop in income, standard of living and social status.
Whilst this may appear an extreme and pessimistic view, it is the reality of retirement for many retired people.
The more palatable impression of retirement peacefully spent in the warmer climes of retirement homes on the south coast (or now the more exotic coastline of southern France and Spain) is available only to a privileged few.
For most people, retirement does not offer such vistas; for many it represents a grinding poverty, and the monotony of a life-style structured by the meagre levels of state pensions.
It is groups from such backgrounds that will have the greatest need of counselling.
Dominant social attitudes and individual need
Whilst counselling before and at the point of retirement is becoming more widely practised, these wider aspects are too rarely considered.
Yet when it is placed within the wider social and economic context, retirement counselling assumes a breadth and an importance that far transcends the encouragement of useful and meaningful interests and hobbies to fill the ‘idle’ hours of leisure.
Dominant social attitudes towards retirement place the personal needs of older people in a subservient position to the perceived social and economic interests of the wider society, and it is this that causes many older people problems, bringing into question their personal value and worth, and placing them under considerable social stress.
Counselling should place the needs of individuals, their situation, feelings and attitudes, into a position of primacy.
The effects of retirement can only be understood on an individual basis, its significance depending upon a personal  interpretation of the value and importance of work, and what the individual wants and expects from the rest of his or her life.
It is this subjective evaluation that determines whether retirement results in personal satisfaction or emotional stress.
Atchley (1976) proposed that retired individuals have a ‘hierarchy of goals’ which give rise to their expectations, their behaviour and their sense of well-being.
When the achievement of these goals is frustrated, for whatever reason, individuals have to make one of several choices.
Either they can maintain their expectations and seek new ways of meeting them.
Or they can modify or substitute new goals which are more readily obtainable.
The third outcome is to fail to reconcile the discrepancy between personal goals and achievement, and it is often this failure which leads to retirement becoming a problem.
The role of the counsellor is to help the individual in this process, first in understanding and determining his or her particular goals, making sure they are realistic or indeed, sufficiently ambitious; second, to help decide how best they can be achieved; and third, to help the individual come to terms with retirement, and to play a more active part in its outcome.
Only if this is done will older people be able to make choices and reach decisions about retirement which are appropriate to them, and which they can thereafter justify both to themselves and their social critics.
The social impact of retirement
However and wherever retirement counselling is undertaken, these wider implications of retirement, brought about largely by dominant social attitudes, cannot be ignored.
Indeed they should feature strongly in any retirement counselling programme.
It is the failure to do so that often makes such programmes both unrealistic and ineffective to participants both during and certainly after the event.
The development of retirement counselling in recent years has arisen from the significant numbers of retiring people who soon encounter severe personal problems.
This can happen even to those who have a positive attitude towards their retirement years.
The losses involved in retirement are often either not foreseen, or not recognized as a problem.
The experience often leads to depression and serious illness; indeed many people die shortly after retiring.
It is important to be aware of the various hazards of retirement so it can be understood and interpreted in terms of the individual's own feelings and priorities in life.
Despite this, the problems of retirement should be kept in perspective.
Recent analysis of the impact of retirement on personal adjustment suggests that it is less aversive than many have assumed.
Braithwaite and Gibson (1987), reviewing the literature, came to the conclusion that the belief that  retirement was a major crisis of old age was not substantiated.
This suggests that many older people will experience few problems as the result of retirement.
But some will, and it is at such times that counselling can play an important role.
1.
The loss of activity
Work will have usually occupied a considerable part of an individual's life prior to retirement.
The need to work for a living is widely recognized, but the necessity to do so may have often been bitterly resented by many people over the years.
This is particularly so for those involved in repetitive, unskilled manual labour.
Evenings, weekends and holidays would have become the ‘highlights’ of life, much treasured but all too brief.
The prospect of retirement appears to offer the ‘highlights’ of life on a permanent basis, and, at least from a distance, this can seem very alluring
Yet even those people who have regarded work purely as an economic activity will discover that the workplace, and/or work itself, has become a central feature of their lives.
Even the most monotonous work will have occupied the mind and body for long periods of the day.
Travel to and from work may have been combined with other activities, or with a knowledge of other activities going on around them.
Lack of thought about what is going to replace all this is a common mistake.
The problem is worse for people who have not used their spare, non-work time for ‘constructive’ purposes.
Constructive activity can be considered as that which provides the individual with an interest.
It usually has a definite purpose and a particular or planned outcome.
Its successful pursuit will usually lead to a sense of personal  fulfilment or pride.
Often, and particularly with those individuals who have spent long hours in heavy manual labour, there has perhaps not been the time or energy to develop such interests or hobbies.
More passive, less constructive activity with little or no end result, will have been the norm, like watching television or having a pint at the local pub.
Such pursuits might be sufficient for short periods, but by their very nature are an inherently inadequate base for full-time retirement.
The result is that retired people too often become bored, dissatisfied and unfulfilled.
They begin to look back rather than construct a future for themselves.
Perhaps work was not so bad after all.
Instead of seeking to replace work with constructive leisure, its loss becomes the subject of ‘grief’, made worse when the individual comes into contact with the retirement-idleness attitude within social life.
Alternative activity is an important factor in successful adaptation to retirement, and whilst counselling does not have a direct role in its provision, it should encourage the individual to seek it.
2.
The loss of social companionship
The place of work also provides us with a base for social interaction.
Working people probably spend more time in the company of their workmates than with their marriage partners, and almost certainly more than with other friends and relatives.
Most work situations provide people with a social network that is often taken entirely for granted, and which is missed only after retirement.
Companionship at work for many people is the most important single source of new friendships.
This becomes more important with increasing age, when people can expect to lose long-standing friends at an ever-increasing rate.
Retirement combines these two aspects of companionship, on the one hand an increasing rate of loss, and on the other, less social opportunity to replace them through the place of work.
3.
Loss of income
Whereas the counsellor can hope to point retired people towards new activities and new sources of friendship, the loss of income associated with retirement is a matter over which counselling can have little direct influence.
Old age and retirement have been associated with poverty throughout history.
Despite the political rhetoric of the modern welfare state, which has created popular images to the contrary, the reality is that the basic state retirement pension continues to provide an income between a third and a half of average earnings.
Rates are fixed according to officially designated subsistence needs which are much lower than net earnings during the period of paid employment.
The result is that poverty and retirement are usually close allies.
Townsend (1979) found that the risks of poverty were highest amongst older people, particularly those over 75 years.
Whilst social provision allows retired people to exist, there is little scope for them to grow or make full use of their later years.
The reality that many pensioners face is concerned with basic life-choices, such as choosing whether to spend their money on food or heating.
The absence of any prospect of being able to do more than survive on the finances available to them can be deeply depressing.
Those who live on basic pensions have little spare cash for the continuation or commencement of the leisure activities or social contacts discussed above.
For most pensioners their income excludes any social involvement which depends upon a significant level of expenditure.
4.
Health and retirement
Unemployment makes many people very unhappy, and has been found to have serious effects on both mental and physical health.
Depression and suicide are not uncommon.
Argyle (1987) concluded that the effects were worst for people who were committed to the work ethic.
Braithwaite and Gibson (1987) found that good health is one of the strongest factors correlated with the ease of adjustment to retirement.
Good health increases good adjustment to retirement, and enables the individual to take advantage of the opportunities it provides.
Conversely, good adjustment is more likely to ensure the maintenance of health during retirement.
The contrary also applies.
The failure to adjust to retirement can form the background to future poor health, and many other age-related problems.
This indicates that if the possible hazards of retirement are not adequately discussed, the seeds of ill-health, depression and other problems can be sown.
5.
The maintenance of social integration
The counsellor has to avoid the simplistic but often convenient idea that older people withdraw from social activities and friendships because they no longer want them, or because withdrawal is inherently part of the nature of old age.
Often, withdrawal is a straightforward but tragic response of older people to their inability to finance social integration.
Moreover, this enforced withdrawal from social integration can quickly cause the kind of demoralization so often associated with old age.
The economic difficulties of older people are probably a far stronger cause of demoralization than other factors more closely associated with elderly morale, such as illness and pain.
6.
Retirement and gender
There is a popular assumption that it is men rather than women who feel the full effects of retirement.
Even Simone de Beauvoir (1972) suggests this when she wrote:
…the elderly woman adapts herself to her stage better than her husband.
She is the person who runs the home, and in this her position is the same as that of the peasants and craftsmen of former times — for her, too, work and life merge into one another.
No decree from without suddenly cuts her activity short.
It does grow less from the time her grown-up children leave the home and this crisis, which often happens quite early in life, often disturbs her very badly; but still she does not see herself thrown into total idleness and her role of grandmother brings her fresh possibilities.
If such an assessment of the impact of retirement on women can be made by such an eminent female writer, it is perhaps not unnatural that the idea is very much part of our dominant social attitudes.
Yet women have been part of the world of paid employment for many years.
Indeed, poorer working women have never been able to leave it.
More recent changes in female employment, and the increasing ‘liberation’ of women from a life centred entirely around the home and the family, will make such an assessment increasingly outdated.
It is entirely wrong to assume that older women, who have been involved in employment during their lives, should experience retirement as any more or less significant than it is for older men.
7.
Retirement and social class
The different access that people from different social class origins have to resources in retirement is a major determinant of who can and who cannot provide for themselves in old age.
Professional, managerial and skilled workers will have had many advantages over semi-skilled and manual workers.
As already mentioned, it is likely that their life-styles will have involved more constructive and fulfilling leisure activities.
They are also likely to have more savings, extra pensions and insurance income which will enable them to maintain their life-style, their status and to pursue their interests without as much regard to cost.
And they are also likely to be healthier in old age, and have better access to good diet and medical assistance.
Post-retirement counselling
The counsellor will meet problems associated with retirement at many different stages.
Clearly it is better if some consideration is given to the potential hazards of retirement prior to the event.
Pre-retirement courses are becoming more common, organized by such bodies as the Pre-Retirement Association and the Workers Educational Association in conjunction with employers.
Phased retirement schemes are also now making a small, but important contribution.
People approaching retirement should be aware of the possibilities of putting pressure on their employers to provide such courses for their staff in association with these bodies.
However, the majority of people will still retire without any formal support, and it is likely that the counsellor will be involved with those who are experiencing problems in the post-retirement period.
The task at this stage will be to ascertain the feelings and problems which exist on an individual level, and to discuss them.
This may involve dealing with depression, disappointment and many other feelings that have arisen since retirement.
It may be necessary to get the individual to look at alternative ways of approaching  and coping with the circumstances of life without work, perhaps trying to ‘wipe the slate clean’ and start the process all over again, but with an increased awareness of the problems and difficulties that are involved.
Counselling should seek to present a positive view of retirement, but one which stresses the need for individual commitment and effort.
Too often retired people will say that retirement did not turn out to be as they had expected.
Often this arises from the absence of any realistic concept of the practical implications of retirement.
Most people recognize the negatives; that it represents the end of work, the end of paid employment, the end of having to rise early from bed.
Many retired people expect to slow down, expect their health to deteriorate; in fact, their expectations are so low they do little to make their lives full and interesting.
Retirement should be seen as the start of a new phase of life, not just the end of an old one.
The opportunities available to retired people should be stressed, particularly in the context of the need to maintain personal commitment, involvement and activity.
Weir (in Phillipson et al., 1986) distinguishes between reassurance, warning against ‘the bland, cosy suggestion that our troubles are all illusory and will melt away with little or no intervention on our part’, and encouragement in dealing with retired people.
Counselling has to be rooted in practical reality, with the dangers and opportunities of retirement being presented side by side, and with the understanding that personal decision and volition will determine a large part of the eventual outcome.
The maintenance of personal relationships
Human life is gregarious, the quality of our lives depending to no small degree upon the relationships we have with other people.
Social relationships are a major source of happiness, particularly those which come from marriages which are close, confiding and supportive.
No individual has the ability to live totally without other people.
Solitary confinement is recognized to be one of the most psychologically damaging punishments that can be imposed upon any individual and if, like Robinson Crusoe, we are subjected to an enforced exile, whilst some people will no doubt cope better than others, few will willingly choose isolation or loneliness as a favoured way of life.
Attachment theory
The need for humans to make strong social and emotional attachments to other people is strong.
Bowlby (1980) describes attachment behaviour as that which seeks to maintain strong affectional bonds.
This arises from strong and ongoing security and safety needs, and not just to fulfil certain biological needs such as food and sex, as others, such as Lorenz, have suggested.
Attachment behaviour develops in childhood and endures throughout life, usually directed towards a few specific individuals.
The presence of an attachment figure is considered to be vital to the emotional and social survival of the individual, and when attachments are threatened or removed in any way it can lead to intense forms of attachment behaviour, such as clinging, crying and extreme grief.
Yet old age within modern society appears to be closely associated with an increased experience of isolation.
Everywhere older people can be seen living  alone and, in many cases, apparently suffering the recognizable effects of solitary confinement — apathy, depression and ultimately self-neglect.
At certain times, such as periods of festivity or spells of excessively cold weather, this is recognized as a problem.
However, it is increasingly accepted as ‘the norm’, something that older people have to expect, a ‘natural’ element in the process of growing old.
What is more, current social work and health policy seeks to move away from institutionalized forms of care provided by elderly persons' homes and hospitals, concentrating instead on maintaining ageing people within their own homes.
Whilst these ‘community care’ policies are soundly based on principles which seek to maintain elderly independence, they can also lead to, and exacerbate, social isolation.
Aspects of social organization have contributed to the increasing isolation of older people.
The decline of the extended family network, and its replacement by smaller ‘nuclear’ family groups, has meant that valuable networks of support and care have to a considerable extent disappeared.
Moreover, traditional family networks not only offered the elderly relative a place, but one which gave them an important and respected role within the family group.
The rise of the nuclear family has created an expectation and desire for independence and privacy by younger members of the family, often quite separate from former family ties, and this can often leave little room for the care of older relatives.
However, whilst it is important to recognize this trend, we should not forget that the family unit still performs most of the caring functions for the majority of older people in modern society.
The change in family organization has been structurally confirmed by the size and design of modern housing.
Homes are now small, compact and designed principally for two adults and their children.
There is often no provision made, or considered adequate for elderly relatives without causing gross inconvenience to all parties.
Such inconvenience pre-disposes young and old alike to decline both the offer and acceptance of joint occupancy.
Increased social mobility has further added to the isolation of older people.
Not only do children live in separate houses, they often move many miles from their parents in order to follow work or careers, and the mutual support they could formerly give each other has been accordingly diminished.
Whilst not wishing to create visions of the past as a ‘Golden Age’(it was certainly not), it cannot be denied that the main social trends in family organization, particularly since the Industrial Revolution, have increasingly served to isolate ageing people.
This has led to feelings of abandonment in older people, and of considerable guilt in younger relatives.
In turn this has resulted in the need to develop explanations to justify why younger people have ceased looking after the needs of their elderly relatives.
The theory of disengagement
The loneliness many older people experience has been given respectability by certain social theories which either seek to give, or are interpreted as, an explanation for the isolation of older people.
The theory of ‘disengagement’ promulgated by Cummings and Henry (1961) has been popularly received in this way.
Disengagement is explained as the process by which older people gradually relinquish roles and activity within their society.
It arose from observations of old people who appeared to welcome and initiate increasing isolation as a release from the problems, pressures and difficulties of life.
Cummings and Henry interpreted this as a ‘natural’ process arising from the individual's loss of skill, energy and determination in coping with the pressures of mainstream social life.
Through disengagement, elderly people are believed to transfer their remaining time and energy to matters more restful and congenial — to reflection, reminiscence and rest.
These explanations and justifications for the loneliness and isolation of older people are socially attractive and emotionally convenient for those who feel some guilt about their situation.
Far from seeing the loss of elderly social roles and status as ‘a problem’, the theory presents it as a necessary social and psychological mechanism.
Disengagement is not something that should be avoided, but is part of the natural process of ageing which can be readily accepted.
The theory provides the younger relative with a convenient explanation for any guilt they may feel about their role with ageing relatives.
Rather than recognizing our feelings there is a tendency to submerge them beneath suitably comfortable ideas about the nature of old age, such as older relatives' diminishing needs, lower expectations and contentment with the loneliness and idleness of their lives.
The problem with disengagement theory is that it fails to ask whether such observable characteristics of older people are attributable, at least in part, to cultural expectations.
Is withdrawal initiated by the individuals, and their needs?
Or do the institutions of retirement, the social norms of limited activity and poverty, and expectations of ill-health and disability suggest to ageing people that they are expected to do so?
Certainly, older people learn to play the game according to the dominant social rules.
They do not wish to make demands.
They do not want to be heard to complain.
They do not want to put pressure on younger relatives who, after all, have their own lives to lead.
Some disengagement is clearly socially enforced, for example, when older people are obliged to retire from work against their wishes.
Yet there are more subtle factors.
Dominant social attitudes play a large part in suggesting to older people that ‘disengagement’ is what is expected of them — and ultimately it becomes what they themselves expect from old age.
To a considerable extent, older people have learnt to respond appropriately to the dominant social expectations of old age, but often entirely inappropriately to their own feelings and needs.
Whilst for  some the experience of ageing does bring with it a degree of social disengagement, it is far from being a ‘natural’ or inevitable event.
Disengagement is just one of many social theories which underlie what Phillipson and Walker (1986) call ‘Acquiescent Functionalism’—‘a body of thought about ageing which attributes the causes of most of the problems of old people to the natural consequences of physical decrescence and mental inflexibility or the failures of individual adjustment to ageing and retirement, instead of to contemporary developments of the state, the economy and social inequality’.
These factors are dismissed as inevitable or unalterable, or not considered at all.
But they make an important contribution to the problems of many older people.
The counsellor's task is to try to unravel these separate strands of cultural norms, social theory and individual need, and to discover the real feelings and needs of the older individual.
In doing so, the counsellor has to be careful not to be beguiled into believing the more comfortable initial reactions that many older people might present.
The counsellor should seek to question the assumptions made about elderly withdrawal by both the older individuals and their carers.
If such assumptions are correct, if ageing is an inevitable period of withdrawal from the social process, why should we intervene?
Such theories lead logically to leaving older people alone rather than attempting to improve the quality of their lives through continued social engagement.
The focus of counselling with older people should be to encourage continued engagement in the processes of socialization.
Old age generally involves the loss of two crucial social roles, highly regarded by dominant social values, and it is essentially the loss of these valued roles which associates increasing age with diminished social status and prestige, and with disengagement.
These are the loss of the productive, or work role considered in the previous chapter, and the loss of the nurturing, or parenting role.
The loss of the parental role
The loss of the parental role is of crucial importance in understanding the life and problems of many older people.
The crisis that many married couples face when their last child leaves home is well known.
For many people, much of the previous 20 to 30 years has been closely associated with the issues and problems of bringing up their children.
The growing independence of their children, at each successive stage, can be a matter of concern rather than joy for those who over-commit and over-identify their lives with the nurturing of dependent children.
When the children are gone, and no longer require parental help and support, how is their time to be filled?
And what of the marital relationship, how much meaning and importance does this still have for the partners?
A new life, with new relationships, has often to be found if this new stage of personal development is not to seem meaningless and  empty.
Many fail to make such a transition, and become embittered by their apparent abandonment by their children.
Many relationships begin to fail at this stage, and are often allowed to do so by default because the difficulties of living through this stage of life are insufficiently understood.
Counselling help and support at this stage can be vital to the way that individuals learn to face up to their lives as post-generation parents.
The counsellor can perform two functions; first, to help former parents accept and come to terms with their new situation, and second, to encourage them to fill their lives where necessary by developing different interests and pursuits.
The end of parenting is usually the first shedding of an important social role, and if a successful redirection in life can be achieved at this point, many of the problems and difficulties of later adjustments to old age can be more successfully faced.
The transition will demonstrate to individuals the importance and value of periodic re-direction in their lives.
It will help to make them more aware of their own personal needs, and the importance of dealing with those needs as former roles and responsibilities are shed.
However, this opportunity is often missed.
The end of the parenting role rarely corresponds with what we consider to be ‘old age’, or even an age when people require any particular help.
Indeed, the loss of the parenting role is often something that is noticed only by the parents themselves.
Other people are as likely to assume, and indeed make jokes about, how lucky they are to have so much spare time on their hands without the problems and responsibilities of children.
Unlike the problems which surround retirement from work, the loss of the parental role has not been widely discussed as a social issue, and certainly not in terms of the problems and difficulties it might bring in its wake.
Perhaps it is true that ‘life begins at 40’(or 50) for those who recognize the opportunities available to them after parenting ceases, and are prepared to take advantage of them.
If this is not the case, then opportunities are not only missed, but advancing years can be seen as synonymous with increasing loss, increasing isolation and increasing boredom.
This is often the life-attitude more obviously held by many older people who are in need of counselling support.
They see their lives as becoming progressively more empty and meaningless, and this essentially pessimistic outlook on their lives is reflected in all that they do, or perhaps more accurately, in all that they fail to do.
The loss of social involvement
Many older people will have failed to develop and maintain an adequate network of friends and social activities.
The origins of this failure may go back to early parenthood.
When young children have to be looked after it reduces the opportunities that parents have to take part in the social round.
Visits to the places where they once met their friends decline.
Friends also have  children so they no longer attend.
Social groups are thereby disbanded, and they are not necessarily reconstituted in other forms, or replaced by other groups.
The greater part of social life is involved with child-minding, in all its many forms, and staying within the family home.
There is nothing intrinsically wrong with this, but with life revolving almost exclusively around young children the potential for later social isolation is obvious.
More often than not, social disengagement will not have been intentional, and certainly not brought about simply by the process of ageing, but rather by a failure to maintain an adequate level of social life beyond that of being parents.
After many years, when children no longer need the same amount of time and attention from their parents, many find that their lives are no longer full of interesting social contacts and experiences.
They will have failed to maintain an adequate level of expectation about what life can be as non-parents.
This pessimism is only confirmed by many dominant social attitudes about the crucial importance of the parenting role, particularly for the mother.
Add to this the pessimism and fear of becoming old, and the result is too often that many older people can become non-participating social individuals, who feel increasingly isolated and cut off from all that is happening around them.
The counsellor has to discover to what extent these feelings are present within the individual, at what point such feelings have arisen in his life, and to persuade him to re-consider his real needs and feelings, as opposed to socially induced attitudes about the quality and extent of his involvement in social life.
The decline of the marital relationship
The marital relationship always undergoes considerable strain with the arrival of children.
The once exclusive partnership has to be shared, and this sharing can often unbalance even the closest of relationships.
Marriages are increasingly breaking up at or soon after this point.
Within some relationships, the two partners can begin to move in opposite directions.
The husband can feel abandoned, and expend more of his time and energy in his work.
It is quite common for the husband to assume that being the ‘bread-winner’ is his main or only contribution to family life.
However, this attitude can also represent a response to feelings of rejection by his wife who now has other things to occupy her, or an unwillingness to play a full part in the parental role.
The new mother will often throw herself into motherhood so fully that she forgets to give time to the marital relationship, which can suffer considerable damage as a result.
By the time the children have grown up, the marital relationship can be very empty, often extending little further than sharing the same house.
When the children leave home the problems of re-adjustment are considerable.
It is certainly not uncommon for counsellors of older people to find marriages which have followed this broad pattern of decline.
Rather than being long-standing  relationships which have been strong enough to stand ‘the test of time’, as we often assume, they are little more than empty shells which are no longer of any significant mutual support or value.
Often, partners can be depressed by the disinterest that each shows towards the other, and this indicates that such marriages have lost the ability to meet the needs of the individual for companionship.
Sexual relationships
The myth of declining sexual potency and need with increasing age is now being actively questioned.
Research indicates that ageing people continue to be sexually active, and that age itself does not undermine either the need or the capacity for sexual activity.
(See, for example, Thienhaus et al , 1986.)When sexual response in older people is reduced it has more to do with social factors such as the absence of a partner; health problems, particularly relating to cardiovascular disease, diabetes, multiple sclerosis and prostrate troubles; drug side-effects (many drugs prescribed to older people can have adverse effects on sexual functioning); and the intolerance of social attitudes towards sexual activity in older people, which consider sex to be the province of younger people and that older people make rather ridiculous lovers.
Masters and Johnson (1966) found that, apart from these social factors, there was no age limit for the enjoyment of and participation in sexual activity.
As far as women were concerned, they found that there was no significant loss in their capacity to enjoy sexual intercourse.
Yet women have very particular problems, with which the counsellor might have to contend.
The menopause is an experience which causes many women considerable anxiety.
Many of these anxieties arise because women do not understand and cannot control the physical changes which they experience at this time.
This has been reinforced by the idea that the menopause is a ‘deficiency disease’, indicated by the reduced level of oestrogen in the body.
This view, in its more extreme form, has described post-menopausal women as ‘castrates’(see Wilson and Wilson, 1963).
Small wonder that women worry about the menopause, and that their anxiety is then influenced by social factors such as attitudes about the sexual attractiveness of their ageing bodies, the changing status and role of women as children leave home, and the risk of loneliness and poverty if their marriages should fail as a result.
The prevailing view, however, is less extreme, seeing the menopause as a natural life event, and that the problems women experience in middle age stem from external social causes.
These causes include role strain or loss, devaluation associated with the loss of stereotypical sexual-youthful attractiveness and reproductive capability, economic disadvantage, or medical exploitation.
The  menopause may be a marker event, signalling to women that their social desirability is terminating.
(Berkun, 1986)
Women suffer from male-dominated ideas about sexual attractiveness, being brought up to conform to the idea that they should be sexually attractive to men, and that sexual attractiveness is associated with the youthful, attractive bodies of the pin-up.
Women lose this image of attractiveness with ageing, a process that men do not experience to the same degree.
But men are not entirely without their problems.
Masters and Johnson (1966) investigated the causes of impotence in older men, and found that it is caused as much by anxiety about possible physiological change as by the ageing process itself.
The fear of performance reflecting cultural stigmas directed toward erective inadequacy was that associated with problems of secondary impotence.
These fears were expressed, under interrogation, by every male study subject beyond 40 years of age…
Regardless of whether the individual male study subject had ever experienced an instance of erective difficulty, the probability that secondary impotence was associated directly with the ageing process was vocalised constantly.
The fallacy that secondary impotence is to be expected as the male ages is probably more firmly entrenched in our culture than any other misapprehension.
This would indicate that the expectation of impotence in old age can play an important role in actually bringing it about.
The disassociation of sexual activity from old age, despite these modern advances in our understanding, is still strong.
Dominant social ideology, reinforced by traditional Christian teaching, makes the assumption that sex is primarily for procreation and not recreation, and this places sex outside the moral boundaries of many older people, for whom there is still a strong and widely held link between sex and immorality, the belief that sex is wrong or indecent.
Closely connected with this is the idea that sexual activity and love are concerned with youth, and that it is somehow undesirable, or even an object of mild amusement, for ageing people to indulge.
Such attitudes can prevent older people fulfilling their sexual needs.
When marital relationships have declined, or have been lost altogether it becomes far easier for older people to suppress their sexual needs, to feel that they are unnatural and unwanted.
Sex can therefore remain a personal need, but the difficulties of fulfilling that need can lead to the acceptance of dominant ideas about the unacceptability of sex in old age.
This attitude can lead to older people believing that they cannot seek advice about their sexual needs and feelings.
Older people often give up sexual intercourse because it has become painful.
The rate and amount of vaginal lubrication does decrease with age.
Where this is the case, counselling can offer simple advice, such as the use of lubricating jellies.
Yet, sex is more than the act of sexual intercourse and penal  penetration.
It is close physical contact with another individual, involving touching, stroking and caressing, and mutual stimulation using both hands and mouth.
Sex therefore is ideally suited to fulfill the human need for close body contact.
Even physical disabilities caused by illnesses such as strokes and arthritis need not signal the end of sexual activity of this kind.
Indeed, much depression in older people, which is at the root of many illnesses, can be caused by the lack of this essential physical contact.
Perhaps we have again mistaken cause and effect in the nature of old age.
Even without a sexual partner other forms of sexual  fulfilment can be found.
Masturbation can be a source of considerable pleasure, once it is removed from traditional ideas about immorality, and its adverse effects on health.
It can help to relieve sexual tension when there is no other way this can be done.
Counselling can play an important role in enabling full and frank discussion of sexual matters.
Sex is a taboo subject for both young and old, and many of the restrictive and repressive attitudes might have to be overcome by both counsellor and counsellee.
Certainly, the counsellor should be able to discuss sensitively such topics as sexual feelings and need, masturbation, oral sex, etc., whenever it is relevant or necessary to do so.
Several tasks have to be undertaken.
The first is to ascertain whether the individual wishes to talk about sexual activity.
This can often be difficult to determine as attitudes towards openly discussing sexual matters have changed only in very recent times.
This may make it difficult for the counsellor to know whether, and to what extent, to pursue the issue.
Failure to talk about sexual needs may mean that the individual does not consider it to be a problem, or that he or she finds it embarrassing to discuss such matters.
Sex may not be a topic which the individual wants to discuss, and this feeling clearly has to be respected.
Many older people have never had a satisfactory sexual relationship, for a variety of reasons, and if this is so there is no reason to believe that the period of old age is likely to see new beginnings in this respect.
Moreover, many older people may feel too embarrassed or morally outraged to discuss the subject, especially with younger people, and if so, the subject is often best left alone.
Certainly, there would need to be sound reasons to pursue it under such circumstances.
When sexual matters are discussed, there may be a need to talk about feelings of shame and guilt.
What is ‘normal’ and what is ‘abnormal’sexual behaviour in older couples, or for individuals living alone, may be important issues.
Developing an understanding of sexual need lies at the heart of the counselling process.
Many ageing people need to understand and accept the changes in their sexuality in order to continue enjoying it to the full.
This is where counsellors can often take the opportunity of expressing some of their own thoughts, feelings and experiences as a means of legitimizing the subject for discussion.
Talking with their age peers may also be important, and small group counselling can be a useful means of both enabling elderly people to realize that  their sexual needs are not unusual, and putting them into contact with others who may have similar or even corresponding needs.
The maintenance of social relationships is a crucial element in counselling.
If older people can maintain reasonable social involvement, with satisfying contacts with other people, the quality of their life-styles can remain as fulfilling as at any other stage of their lives.
Counselling and health
The concept of health used in this chapter is not the narrow medicalized term meaning merely the absence of disease.
Good health is as much to do with being in good spirits, being happy and content, coping with the problems and difficulties of life, but enjoying life to the fullest extent possible.
So it is used here in the wider sense defined by the World Health Organization as a ‘complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity’.
It has often been observed that, whilst old age is not an illness, it does bring with it an increased susceptibility to illness and disease.
Yet because the old are seen to be more ill, more often than other age groups, illness and old age have become closely associated in our minds, leading to the belief that the old have to suffer and bear an unavoidable amount of pain and discomfort.
In turn, this can lead to an acceptance of physical ill-health that would not be tolerated by younger people.
Knowledge and the maintenance of health
Alongside income and social relationships, health is one of the three issues older people consider to be the most important in their lives (DHSS, 1983).
Yet, the medicalization of health within our society has left people generally unaware of what they can do to maintain their own health.
Moreover, conventional medicine has concentrated mainly on the treatment of chronic and acute illness, and until recent years the role of preventive medicine has suffered comparative neglect.
Older people are probably the largest consumer group of health provision, yet they are generally less informed about matters relating to their own health, and more deferential to medical authorities than any other group.
Gray (1982) has indicated that programmes of health education amongst older people ‘can make a significant contribution to the promotion of a healthy life’.
A Pensioners Link initiative in Barnet (Meade, 1986) has undertaken a local campaign to promote health activity for and with older people, with promising results.
It came to four main conclusions.
First, that health education sessions with older people had a significant impact on them.
Second, it highlighted the importance of active participation by elderly people themselves in all aspects of course planning.
Third, it pointed to the necessity for critical preventive work to be recognized as a priority.
And fourth, it recognized the need to challenge the traditional patterns of health education, with one-off talks on broad topics to groups of older people.
These findings indicate something of the importance of counselling in the health of older people, and this chapter outlines the way this might be achieved.
The prevention of ill-health, and to some extent the treatment of existing health problems, could improve if older people had more accurate and relevant information about the factors which contribute to good health.
Health and ageism
The general health of older people might be improved if they were able to rid themselves of the many ageist attitudes that surround the issue, and were able to feel more positive about their health prospects.
The attitude that ‘you must expect this at your age’ is something that is heard all too often.
Counselling should challenge such attitudes by encouraging older people to examine the myths that ‘elderly ailments’ are inevitable.
Gray (1982) states that the ‘good news’ about old age is that most enjoy a healthy life, untroubled by incontinence, dementia and other disorders that receive so much publicity.
It is nearly always possible to treat the diseases and disabilities that older people experience.
There is no reason why anyone should assume that disease in old age is untreatable, although we often do.
It is sometimes difficult to differentiate between illness and natural ageing processes.
This often provides the excuse for ageism, it being simpler to assume that the problem is old age rather than a treatable condition.
One significant difference is when an ‘illness’ has a starting date, or when the decline in energy or function can be pinpointed to a particular time.
If so, it is more likely to be disease rather than old age.
Chronic illness develops slowly.
Decline due to ageing is nearly always imperceptible, noted only when comparing present ability with that of many years past.
Ageist assumptions connecting old age with ill-health can often arise from the extreme social isolation and withdrawal experienced by many older people, the self-neglect that this can cause, and the illness that then arises from this neglect.
This chapter does not ask counsellors to pretend to be doctors, but to question whether ill-health is not more concerned with social/emotional factors, such as poor diet and lack of fitness, than with normal ageing.
The prevention of ill-health and the successful treatment of chronic and acute illness in older people could result if they felt more positive about their potential for good health in old age, and had access to relevant information.
Health and mental attitude
There is a strong connection between health and mental attitude.
This has been demonstrated in conventional medical circles in the study of psychosomatic illness and the placebo effect, and in certain alternative medical practices such as faith healing and yoga.
Argyle (1987) concluded that health is linked with happiness by preserving the immune system and encouraging good health habits.
Martin (1987) suggests a link between psychology and the immune system, based on the idea ‘that the brain influences the immune system and, therefore, our resistance to disease’.
He discovered that many studies had found small but statistically significant correlations between life events which had forced individuals to alter their life-style, such as bereavement, loss of job, etc., and the frequency, severity and duration of illness.
All this indicates that a positive mental attitude is as important to good health as a negative or resigned attitude is to illness and disease.
The links between the mind and health are not yet fully understood but there is sufficient evidence to suggest that physical illness is not a straightforward matter of bodily components breaking down or wearing out.
If we expect to be ill, the likelihood is that we will be.
Yet to acknowledge this is to recognize that our health is under our own personal control to an extent far greater than is currently accepted.
Given the ageism that abounds within our medicalized social attitudes, this is an understanding of crucial importance.
It suggests that matters of health should not be left entirely in the hands of the medical professionals, particularly if they share and perpetuate the dominant belief that good health is purely a ‘mechanical’ process which can be remedied by drugs and surgery.
The counsellor can clearly play an important part in challenging ageist assumptions about health, and in promoting more positive but realistic states of mind.
In particular, the counsellor can counter the belief that pain and illness are the natural and unavoidable consequences of growing old.
Older people can quickly become dispirited and depressed by chronic illness.
When they can see no end to it they begin to assume that their condition is ongoing and immutable.
This serves only to confirm and reinforce the illness.
It is important for older people to look more positively at their physical condition and, whilst accepting the reality of it, resist feelings about the hopelessness of recovery, or the inevitability of further decline.
It is  too easy to become resigned to what we feel to be inevitable.
Even stroke victims have some mobility so the message should be to use it, exercise it, find new and interesting things to do and try to get back as much mobility as possible.
Don't give up.
Good health is a combination of many factors, most of which reside within the individual.
Helping the older individual deal with such matters is therefore within the competence of the counsellor.
Social factors, such as the experience of loss, bereavement, depression, social isolation, lack of exercise and poor diet, can determine the way they think of themselves, their expectations of life, and ultimately their health.
Where counselling is able to discuss some of these feelings it can have a more positive potential effect on elderly health than the tranquillizers and sedatives which are too readily and too frequently dispensed for older people who are sick.
Health, exercise and fitness
Lack of fitness results from not keeping our muscles, organs and joints working.
Disease and lack of fitness are closely related — disease causes lack of exercise, but more importantly, lack of exercise increases susceptibility to disease.
Moreover, joints become stiff, muscles become weak and organs become progressively more inefficient.
Fitness arises from regular exercise.
This does not mean embarking on extremely vigorous pursuits, although people in their 70s and 80s still run marathons!
Walking, swimming, gardening and even general housework are all good exercise.
It is quite sufficient to do a little exercise, often.
What is important is to become breathless, to raise the heartbeat, to stretch all parts of the body.
There are three aspects of fitness.
Stamina relates to the efficiency of the heart and lungs and their ability to sustain effort without becoming tired and breathless.
Strength is concerned with the muscles and their ability to lift move and carry.
Suppleness is concerned with the muscles, ligaments and tendons and their capacity to allow freedom of movement.
All are important elements of life in old age, and in maintaining both independence and freedom from ill-health, yet older people often avoid taking exercise because of the widespread ageist assumption that it is dangerous for them to be too active.
To take light exercise is not usually dangerous, but if anyone is uncertain it might be wise to consult a doctor.
The importance of good nutrition
Good nutrition is a vital factor in good health, but is often a neglected area in the care of older people, especially those who live alone on low incomes.
Ageism intervenes here too with the common assumption that older people do not need as much food.
Again this has little foundation; the food requirements of elderly people are associated more closely with the level of individual activity than with chronological age.
What is certain is that inadequate diet can lead directly to ill-health.
A variety of factors has been associated with nutritional problems in old age (Davies, 1981; DHSS, 1979; Exton-Smith, 1971), and many of these are the legitimate subject of counselling.
Poverty can lead to inadequate diet for a number of reasons, notably an inability to purchase an adequate, balanced diet.
Older people who have fewer than eight main meals each week, or who go for long periods of the day without food, are considered to be especially at risk.
Personal neglect, perhaps arising from social isolation, loneliness or depression, can lead to elderly people who cannot be bothered to prepare good food, relying on quick and easy foods, thereby getting an unbalanced diet.
An inadequate knowledge of what constitutes a ‘good diet’, particularly regarding the essential protein, mineral and vitamin constituents of food, can also contribute to poor diet.
The diets of older people will often consist of foods favoured in their younger days, but which are now known to be deleterious to health.
Eating the wrong sorts of food, drinking insufficient milk and the virtual absence of fresh fruit and vegetables from the diet are common problems.
Illness is a major cause of loss of appetite, often compounding existing health problems.
Clearly, there is a circularity here which is often confused.
Poor health does lead to a loss of appetite but, perhaps more importantly, poor eating habits can play a major part in causing ill-health.
Physical disability or mental disturbance can lead to difficulties shopping for food, and in its preparation and cooking.
Poor dentition and the absence of teeth can affect both what is eaten and how well it is masticated and absorbed.
Alcoholism, smoking and the side-effects of drugs can all affect both the eating of food and the absorption of nutrients.
Smoking, for example, reduces the absorption of vitamin C.
Poor diet and elderly health
It has been found that the intake of nutrients in the diet declines markedly in old age, and whilst it is difficult to determine to what extent this is caused by, or is the cause of, increased physical disease, the connection with elderly health is known to be significant.
A fuller consideration of the relationship between nutritional factors and elderly health can be found elsewhere (Davies, 1981).
What follows is a consideration of a few vital food elements outlining their importance to the health of older people, and looking at the  effect that dietary deficiency might have on what have hitherto been considered normal factors in the ageing process.
1
Vitamin C deficiency can ultimately lead to scurvy, but in less extreme form can be the cause of listlessness, weakness and a general lack of energy.
The body becomes readily subject to bruising, sometimes spontaneously.
Wounds heal only slowly.
There is greater vulnerability to infection.
All these are symptoms of a simple dietary deficiency but often are mistaken for normal ageing processes.
Many older people have been found to have low levels of vitamin C, and by increasing the dietary intake the problems can be overcome.
Oranges and other citrus fruits and fresh vegetables are a ready source of vitamin C, although it is easily lost in the process of preparation and cooking.
Vitamin tablets are also available.
2
Vitamin D assists in transporting calcium to the bones, and a deficiency can cause both muscle weakness and bone disorders.
One effect of vitamin D deficiency is a loss of bone density and strength.
Again, such disorders can be mistaken for normal ageing, but can be readily rectified by eating liver, eggs and ‘fatty’ fish, although perhaps the best source is exposure to normal sunlight.
3
Potassium deficiency can also cause muscle weakness, but is perhaps more significantly linked with its effect on the mind, and in particular with both depression and mental confusion.
Although most foods contain potassium, especially potatoes and green vegetables, it has been shown that a high proportion of elderly people select a diet low in potassium (Davies, 1981).
An additional problem is that some drugs, notably diuretics which are commonly used with older people, cause a loss of potassium.
4
Calcium deficiency can lead to osteoporosis, common in older people, which resembles the loss of bone that appears to be a universal phenomenon of ageing (Exton-Smith, 1971).
Calcium is found most abundantly in milk.
The principles of good eating have arisen from many years of evidence and research.
There is now a reasonable level of agreement of what constitutes a ‘good diet’ and this has recently been outlined in the BBC Food and Health Campaign (Tudge, 1986; Rogers, 1986).
Foods to be avoided or reduced are those which are high in fat, such as fatty meats, sausages, pies, polyunsaturated margarines and oils; those high in sugar, as in many processed snacks, soft drinks and sweets; and those which have added salt, and other additives used extensively in processed foods.
A healthier diet is composed of natural foods, such as vegetables and fruit, lean meat and fish, dairy products which are low in fat such as skimmed or semi-skimmed milk, and those which are high in fibre such as wholemeal bread, brown rice and pasta, and potatoes.
Bad diet is now closely connected with most of the main illnesses associated with old age, and attention to these details may be very important.
If dietary deficiency seems to be a factor, the counsellor should be able to help the counsellee ascertain which factors in the diet might be contributing to poor health, perhaps in consultation with the books mentioned above, or with a nutritionist or dietitian.
Where this is the case there will be a need to remedy the deficiency as quickly as possible, and thereafter to seek to improve the individual's eating habits by careful discussion and support.
It is important to stress that ill-health in old age is not just the result of physical and mental wear and decline, or that the only effective action is to call for the doctor.
Good health resides in areas under more direct personal control, and those with time to investigate such matters as exercise and nutrition may be in a better position than a doctor to arrive at an accurate understanding.
Counselling sensitivity and insight can often be of more value than strictly medical knowledge.
Monitoring conventional medical practice
Conventional medical practice is generally held in high esteem by society and the medical profession represents one of the most powerful, high-status bodies in the country.
There is no doubt that many older people and their carers will look towards their doctors when illness and poor health intervene.
This is probably correct, but conventional medical wisdom need not be accepted entirely at face value.
Indeed, in my experience many doctors welcome, and benefit from, the interest and advice other informed people can give about their patients, this often enhancing the accuracy of their diagnosis.
Other people can also help by noting the more subtle effects, both beneficial and adverse, of treatment.
Modern medical practice, particularly with older people, has many shortcomings about which the counsellor needs to be aware.
Certainly it is not always correct to assume that older people are ‘safe’ in the hands of medical professionals.
There are many reasons for this, outlined here, but given in greater detail elsewhere (Illich, 1977; Thunhurst, 1982; Doyle, 1983).
As has been mentioned, medicine has traditionally been more concerned with treatment than prevention.
The modern obsession with transplantation takes precedence over finding the causes of organ disease.
The effects of stress in modern life-styles, the impact of environmental pollution, the benefits of simple dietary guidelines and the importance of exercise all take second place in terms of status, expenditure and publicity.
Many doctors reflect the ageist attitudes of the society in which they work, feeling that the medical problems of older people are a lower priority than their younger patients.
Consequently, they are often more hurried in their diagnosis, more likely to deal with symptoms than the underlying causes, resorting to palliatives rather than cures.
In extreme cases of ageist practice, certain forms of treatment might be refused purely on the basis of age, and on a cost-benefit assessment of treatment being ‘wasted’ on older people with a low life expectancy.
The iatrogenic (or drug-induced) effects of modern medical treatment are well known and understood by the medical profession, but less well known by the general public.
Drugs often produce effects far worse than the original problem for which they were prescribed.
The side-effects of some drugs regularly used by older people can lead to mental confusion, incontinence, diabetes, loss of mobility and balance, and even death.
The vulnerability of ageing people to iatrogenic  disease is greater than with any other age group.
They are more likely to be subject to polypharmacy and the harmful interactions of potent drugs.
Their reduced renal function makes the build-up of drugs within the body more likely, and their tolerance of high doses lower.
Forgetfulness may lead to unintentional self-overdosing.
Repeat  prescriptions , allied to the low priority given to older patients, can lead to drugs being prescribed for periods which are longer than those recommended as safe.
It has been estimated that as many as 10% of old people admitted to hospital are there as a direct result of drugs prescribed by their GP (Age Concern, 1977), and Phillipson (1982) suggests that much over-prescription of drugs is a conscious attempt to control the medical demands on the health service by older people.
Complete reliance upon medical professionals can therefore be dangerous.
As with all professions, medical and pharmacological competence cannot and should not be taken for granted, as evidenced by the frequency with which new drugs are introduced and then withdrawn from the market after proving to be harmful, even fatal in continued use.
The counsellor can play an important part in monitoring the quality, effectiveness and possible iatrogenic effects of medical treatment, and can do so without necessarily bringing into question medical authority or competence.
However, questioning the medical professional is a difficult and often a daunting task, given their present high social status.
Even other professional groups, such as social workers, have traditionally adopted a passive, even a subservient role, more usually limited to obtaining client acceptance of medical decisions, helping clients come to terms with them, and finding meaning and satisfaction with what has led to their current situation and state of health.
Yet, the intimate knowledge of the sick individual often places them in an ideal position to link illness with iatrogenesis, and the better doctors will see such insight as a welcome assistance rather than interference, and make full use of it.
This does not suggest that good medical advice and treatment is not often essential.
In stressing the social, psychological and nutritional factors which underlie elderly health, it is the dominance and exclusiveness of medical answers that need to be questioned.
Moreover, it is the doctor-counsellor as much as anyone else who needs to ask these questions, for often spending  time considering these aspects of ill-health might be more helpful than a prescription for drugs.
Links with alternative medical practice
The counsellor can also suggest the intervention of non-conventional or alternative medical practitioners, especially for those problems for which conventional medicine appears to have little or no answer.
This is particularly relevant to conditions such as arthritis, to which the traditional medical response is to prescribe pain-killers which, whilst relieving pain temporarily, do not pretend to treat the causes of the disease itself.
The subject of alternative medical care for older people has been entirely unexplored.
Given the claims that many alternative therapies make for the treatment of ‘incurable’ conditions, many of which are suffered mainly by older people, it is perhaps time for those responsible for the care of older people to investigate the potential of such treatments as homoeopathy, acupuncture, chiropractic, osteopathy, herbalism and many others.
I have had two experiences in which the mental health problems of older people have been successfully treated by a homeopath.
One was suffering from deep depression, the other believed he was beginning to lose control of his mind.
Both had conditions to which conventional medical practice had no solution (except for unacceptable levels of drug treatment and ECT), and both showed signs of considerable improvement within a week, the latter recovering control of his mind completely.
In situations where there seems to be little acceptable alternative, advice from an alternative practitioner can do little harm, and has potential for considerable good.
The counselling role with sick people
Counselling the ill is more difficult than counselling the well, not least because of their reduced ability to think clearly, to make judgements, to arrive at sound decisions, to determine on a course of action and generally to fight their own battles.
Much has been made of the need to question the impact of elderly medical care but it is clear that, unlike other areas of counselling, it is the counsellor who has to do this rather than the counsellee.
It is often less appropriate to involve counsellees to the same extent, and the counsellor may have to take more direct action in their interests, much in the way that any friend would do in similar situations.
In such circumstances, the counsellor is acting on behalf of the counsellees rather than directly according to their wishes.
Wherever possible, however, the counsellor must take into consideration what the counsellees might themselves have wanted had they been sufficiently well to have made the judgement themselves.
Where ill-health is concerned, the counsellor should seek to defend the interests of the individual, and not be subservient to the wishes and dictates of any other authority.
The counsellor should become fully acquainted with as much relevant knowledge and information in as many professional spheres as possible, and use that knowledge in an attempt to ensure that the best possible treatment and care for the counsellee is obtained.
This is not to set themselves up as nutritionists or as medical experts — but to use the knowledge available to them from every quarter sensibly, and to ensure that others are using their knowledge and expertise in the best interests of the counsellee.
Whilst this might appear to make the counsellor a ‘jack-of-all-trades’, a more positive interpretation is that the counsellor is in the privileged position of seeing the older individual as a whole or entire person.
This holistic outlook is extremely important, and potentially very powerful.
The counsellor's task is not just to understand only one facet of the counsellee's life, but to know something about the totality.
It enables the counsellor to focus upon the changes brought about by changing diet, medication, or social and psychological circumstance.
In this way the various inter-relationships between all the many factors which make up an individual's life can be seen as contributing to that individual's health, or ill-health.
This role gives the counsellor a threefold task.
1
The counsellor should seek to assess the various factors which might be contributing to the ill-health of the older individual.
2
The counsellor should discuss the significance of these factors with the counsellee.
3
The counsellor should help the counsellee decide on the most appropriate response to the main factors contributing to ill-health.
In situations where the mental state of older counsellees appears to be important, for example in depression, extreme social loss or grieving, and excessive emotional stress, counselling can be a means of determining the origins of this mental state, and seeking to help the individuals to face and come to terms with their feelings.
Even matters such as immobility may have emotional rather than medical origins.
In such cases, illness can leave not only a physical inability to cope, but an emotional fear of doing so.
The reluctance to resume walking after a series of falls, or the unwillingness to return home from hospital to an independent life are two examples of this.
Counselling can have a direct role in attempting to encourage and renew confidence, both through dialogue and through practical assistance and support.
Even conditions such as frailty can be assessed in this way.
What is the nature of frailty?
Is the loss of body weight the ‘natural’ consequence of old age?
Or is it an illness with nutritional deficiency at its root?
Even with physical illness or disease, the counsellor can play an important part by asking several questions.
Is the doctor treating the condition  rather than the symptoms?
Has the doctor diagnosed accurately or have ‘ageist’ considerations clouded medical judgement?
Is the prescribed medication or treatment safe, and what are the likely side-effects?
Is the current illness the consequence of side-effects from medication or treatment prescribed for former illnesses?
Are there safer or less extreme treatments which might be more effective?
These questions require some knowledge of medical treatments and their potential iatrogenic effects, and it is not the purpose of this book to go into this at any length.
A comprehensive outline of drug side-effects is available elsewhere (Blair, 1985; Turner and Volans, 1987; Parish, 1987).
You can also ask doctors for an old copy of the British National Formulary, and MIMS which they receive regularly, free of charge.
The aftermath of illness
The emotional and psychological impact of many illnesses, particularly those serious enough to leave the patient weakened or incapacitated, can be enormous.
This is particularly so when mobility, speech or hearing have been impaired, perhaps after a serious stroke.
Heart failure and illnesses such as pneumonia can be equally traumatic.
Some older people suffering from these and other major conditions can undergo a significant change in personality which can be distressing to people close to them.
Counselling can often deal with the personal anger, frustration and eventual depression caused by the losses such illness brings.
It should aim at helping individuals to assess the cost to their former life-style, and either to fight the consequences realistically, or to accept and come to terms with them, whichever seems to be the most appropriate.
It can further help individuals to re-assess what they are able to do in future.
and where necessary to find alternative ways of coping with the tasks of life.
Where the  disability is permanent, counselling can help individuals to decide how they are to maintain their social involvement in future, and obtain personal  fulfilment from their lives.
Where illness leads to loss of sight, speech or hearing it diminishes an individual's ability to make use of counselling assistance.
Too often, the loss of these senses results in older people being treated as if they were mentally impaired, with people talking to them as if they were slightly silly, or as if they had reverted to infancy.
There is nothing more annoying to older people, for their need and desire to communicate, at an adult level, is likely to be as strong as ever.
In such situations, counsellors have to be innovative.
For the deaf and  aphasic , they will need to employ pen and paper in addition to speech, and make more use of bodily and facial cues than might otherwise be necessary.
For the blind, more physical touch may be required.
In every case, the need for empathy and positive regard is greatly increased.
All these matters will be considered in more detail in the next chapter.
Recovery from illness is sometimes avoided by older people, particularly  when they feel lonely and neglected.
Being sick can bring with it a degree of sympathy and attention that is greatly valued by more isolated individuals, and they may believe that if their health improves they will lose out on the time and attention that is given to them on the basis of their illness.
The counsellor may therefore come across many older people who do not want to overcome their illnesses and disabilities.
If this is the case, an incentive to improved health might be for the counsellor to talk to them about ways and means of increasing their social contacts and involvement when they get better.
Alcohol and older people
In the USA, it has been estimated that approximately 10–15% of the general elderly population suffer from alcoholism — over two million elderly Americans (Price and Andrews, 1982).
There are few statistics relating to the extent of alcoholism and ageing people in this country.
Certainly, it has not as yet become an issue of widespread social concern, despite the increasing problem with younger age groups.
Yet, the incidence of alcoholism in the older population is said to be increasing too.
Certainly, it would seem reasonable to believe that a problem affecting society generally will also occur in an age group which, as we have seen, faces a multitude of social and emotional difficulties.
There is a popular view that if an older person has a drink, ‘it will do them no harm’.
This is not only untrue, it is probably less true than for any other age group.
Ageing livers and kidneys lose their ability to cope with alcohol, and older people are therefore more susceptible to its effects.
But this is not the only way that ageist attitudes patronize, and indeed endanger older people.
It is often said that alcohol is ‘the only little pleasure that old people have’, which may be true to an extent, but if drinking becomes a problem then it is for the individuals to decide how much of a pleasure drinking is, and whether they want help to stop.
Taking these ageist attitudes one stage further, Price and Andrews (1982) state that ‘diagnosed alcoholism frequently is not referred for alcoholic treatment because of health professionals’ beliefs that the alcoholic is too old to benefit from treatment'.
This is also entirely without foundation.
The cause of alcohol abuse
There are two types of ageing alcohol abuser; those whose drinking started in much earlier years, and those whose drinking habits have started or become excessive in old age.
The problem is that it is often difficult to determine how long an individual has been drinking.
Rosin and Glatt (1971) differentiated between primary factors which caused chronic, long-term alcohol abuse, chiefly pathological personality characteristics such as neuroticism, and what they called reactive factors which were particularly relevant for late-onset drinkers.
The latter are usually factors such as retirement, bereavement, loss, loneliness, depression, anxiety and other major life changes which cause disruption in older people's lives.
It has been found, for instance, that widowers comprised the largest proportion of late-onset elderly alcoholics.
This indicates that drinking is often a response to an  inability to cope with the many losses of old age.
It is used as a means of temporary escape from circumstances that the individual finds unbearable.
Alcohol serves to deaden feelings which the individual cannot manage, or wishes to avoid.
It is often, at least initially, a response to social distress, and in turn, this indicates that counselling responses to problems of excessive drinking should not concentrate on the drinking alone, which can be regarded as a symptom, but on the deeper underlying social and emotional causes which have given rise to it.
The physical effects of alcohol
Many people believe that alcohol is a stimulant because most drinkers seem to become more outgoing and friendly in social settings.
It is said to ‘cheer people up’.
The fact is, however, that alcohol depresses the nervous system, including the part of the brain which inhibits behaviour.
What many people believe to be stimulation is actually a loss of inhibition that normally controls their social behaviour.
The main ‘benefit’ of depressing the nervous system with alcohol is to dull the pain and losses associated with old age.
The benefits are transitory, wearing off as the alcohol is filtered out of the body.
As the underlying problems have not been tackled, more alcohol is required to continue dulling the pain, and consequently the desire to drink can become continuous.
There is also a belief that alcohol has certain other benefits.
It is popularly assumed that it has medicinal benefits, but there is no evidence whatever to support this, and much evidence to the contrary.
It is said to help people in sleeping, but whilst it may get people off to sleep more quickly it can lead to waking later at night.
Alcohol is also supposed to have a ‘warming up’ effect, when in fact alcohol actually speeds up the loss of body heat, and can aggravate the problems of hypothermia.
With prolonged heavy drinking, the effects of alcohol on health can be drastic.
Appetite is lessened, resulting in weight loss and dietary problems.
Absorption of vital minerals can be affected with many consequences to both physical and mental health, notably through vitamin deficiency.
It can lead to cirrhosis of the liver, hypocalcaemia (a deficiency of calcium in the blood) leading to osteoporosis, cardiomyopathy (a chronic disorder of the heart muscle), and many other disorders.
It can also lead to certain cancers, notably of the mouth, pharynx and oesophagus.
There is also the danger of alcohol causing unpleasant interactions with drugs commonly prescribed for older people.
If alcohol is taken with sleeping tablets and painkillers, excessive drowsiness can result, and severe stomach upsets can be caused when alcohol is taken with drugs used for arthritis.
These consequences of over-drinking are not confined only to those with a recognizable drink problem.
With older people, problems can result from continuing to drink the same amounts they became used to consuming when they were younger, then apparently without effect.
As the ageing body loses its ability to cope with alcohol, the amount that can be consumed has to be reduced.
Alcohol Concern (1987) suggests that older people who have been regular drinkers may need to reduce by half the quantity of alcohol they consume.
Detecting excessive alcohol use
The effects of alcohol on the social behaviour of older people can be severe because of their reduced kidney and liver functioning.
There is a loss of both physical and mental co-ordination, judgement is weakened, reaction times become slower, falls and accidents increase, sleep patterns are disturbed and sexual interest and performance declines.
Incontinence is another problem that can begin by excessive alcohol intake.
Alcohol can also lead to poor memory and an apparently confused state of mind which can then be wrongly interpreted as the onset of senile dementia.
Indeed, the symptoms of alcohol abuse are similar to those of Alzheimer's disease.
Similarly, the effects of alcohol abuse are often mistaken for depression, again because the physical and mental symptoms are similar.
The effects of alcohol abuse, seen as a major social problem at other ages, can unwittingly be accepted and dismissed as the outcome of ‘normal’ ageing.
Social distress and alcohol abuse
The fundamental causes of alcohol abuse are to be found within the social and emotional lives of the individuals, and it is not wise for the counsellor to view  alcohol abuse separately from these more basic causes.
Excessive drinking is often caused by negative self-images, which indicate to individuals that they are unable to cope with the stress and unhappiness existing in their lives.
Consequently, alcohol abuse should be dealt with not as a problem in itself, but as an individual's reaction to social distress.
The counsellor should first be alert to the possibility of heavy drinking amongst older people, and be aware that the symptoms of excessive drinking are often mistaken for signs of normal ageing.
This means that there is a need to search beyond what may at first appear to be a case of depression or senility.
When faced with these symptoms, and certainly before the diagnosis of depression or dementia is accepted, the counsellor should check whether an individual has an alcohol problem.
This is particularly important when it is felt that ageing people can no longer look after themselves at home and some form of residential care is suggested.
The task of discovering whether an ageing individual has a drink problem requires considerable tact and sensitivity.
Denial is a major factor in alcohol abuse, both over the amount the individual drinks, and whether it is a problem.
Many older people retain a strong sense of the social stigma attached to heavy drinking and may consequently be unable or unwilling easily to volunteer the information.
On the other hand the counsellor may be assisted by many physical signs which suggest that alcohol is a problem, such as finding lots of empty bottles around, or when an older person is found to be drinking at all times of the day, often alone and not as part of a social occasion.
The attitude of the counsellee
There are two important questions that need to be asked where alcohol abuse is suspected.
The first is whether counsellees recognizes their drinking to be a problem.
In this respect there is sometimes a need to dispel some of the myths which surround alcohol.
Many well-intentioned people, including some doctors, still recommend alcohol, albeit in moderation, for a variety of conditions and complaints, giving the impression that there might be positive advantages in a small drink, and tacitly suggesting that there are no dangers.
However guarded such advice might be, this reasoning is often expanded by lay people and used to justify increasingly heavy and more regular drinking.
Consequently, there may be a need to educate the older person, family and friends, and perhaps even the doctor, about the potentially harmful effects of alcohol within the ageing body.
‘Once given this information and guidance on how to drink more safely, many people manage to cut down without needing special treatment or counselling’(Alcohol Concern, 1987).
The reassurance and encouragement of the counsellor can often be sufficient for an older person in this situation.
Controlling the source of the drink is another important consideration, and this may involve persuading well-intentioned  friends and relatives to discontinue supporting and justifying their visits with alcoholic presents.
The second question is whether counsellees want to give up drinking, or at least to reduce the amount consumed.
Often they will not, which makes the situation more difficult for the counsellor to deal with.
Individuals may see alcohol as an acceptable way out of their problems.
They may be unwilling to face their feelings and emotions, preferring to drown them in continuous drinking.
When told about the consequences of excessive drinking, their attitude may be to welcome death as a more permanent solution to their problems.
When the counsellor faces this situation it is often more appropriate to leave the subject of drinking, and to try instead to focus on the nature of the social distress that the individuals are experiencing.
Often, the counsellor will need to assure them that it is acceptable for them to grieve over their loneliness, their losses and bereavements, and to explore their feelings about life generally.
It is often important to discuss their feelings and fears about their own death.
Often, all that is required is for individuals to feel that there is someone willing to be supportive and understanding of their feelings, willing to listen to their problems, and to discuss alternative strategies for coping with their social distress.
Planning withdrawal
Whatever the setting, the counsellor should stress that alcoholism is a curable condition, particularly when the social distress underlying the need for alcohol is openly discussed and the problems tackled.
In taking this positive stance, it is important that the counsellor tries to emphasize the personal strengths that are available to combat the problem, and not the weaknesses which led to the problem in the first place.
The establishment of specific, graded and realistically achievable goals for the elderly drinker is important, goals which will hopefully result in eventual abstinence.
It must be understood that such a programme of withdrawal requires a high level of support, from the counsellor, the counsellee's family and friends, and from any group to which the counsellee is attached.
In losing the ‘support’ of alcohol there may be a need to fill the gaps left in a person's life by the process of withdrawal.
New activities, new relationships and new supports may have to be found to re-engage the ageing individual with mainstream society.
Since most older people who have a drink problem tend to be lonely, retired and out of the mainstream of social life, some form of social group support may be helpful.
The group can consist either of other elderly people, or special groups for people of all ages with an alcohol problem.
Every effort should also be made to involve the family in giving support, particularly in breaking the pattern of denial that often surrounds cases of alcohol abuse.
Post-withdrawal support
There is also likely to be a continuing need for support after alcohol withdrawal has been successfully achieved.
Just as it was important to consider the problems of alcohol abuse  in conjunction with the underlying social distress, it is now important to realize that after the withdrawal from alcohol, those more fundamental problems will still exist.
Coping with life in old age without drink may require an entirely new and improved self-image.
Feelings of worthlessness, hopelessness, grief, lack of purpose and depression may still have to be dealt with, or the individual may again resort to an alcoholic solution.
Other drugs and older people
A very similar approach can be taken in the case of dependence on and abuse of other drugs.
The reasons, consequences and approach taken remain essentially similar, regardless of the type of drug used.
With older people, who have lived through the period when new ‘miracle’ allopathic drugs have appeared to offer a solution to all pain and ill-health, it is these prescribed rather than proscribed drugs that will be the main problem.
Their side-effects can be different from those of alcohol, and are considered in more detail in Chapter 15, but similarly they can be mistakenly classified and thereafter dismissed as part of the normal process of growing old.
Older people will often take drugs to relieve the pains and griefs of old age, rather than attempt to come to terms with them intellectually and emotionally.
As with alcohol, social acceptance encourages their use, and ageist attitudes about the depressing nature of old age permits their abuse.