

COMPETITION POLICY
THE THEORY OF COMPETITION POLICY
Competitive markets are essential if the market system is to operate effectively.
In a monopoly situation, the producer may be able to use his market power at the expense of the consumer, although the likelihood of this happening will be moderated if close substitutes for the product exist or if the monopolist fears entry of new, but similar, products into the market, attracted by high prices and the profits being made.
It is relatively rare for a firm to have an absolute monopoly of the market, but there are many instances where a small number of large firms dominate a market — this is called an oligopoly.
Such firms may act overtly (and illegally) or covertly (still illegally, but hard to detect) as if they were in a monopoly situation.
Agreements or understandings could cover price-fixing and/or sharing out the available work without resorting to competition (which would have resulted in lower prices).
In order for the agreement to stick, no single firm must break ranks, encouraged by the prospect of greater market share by lowering its price, or else a free-for-all may develop producing a competitive price, as if the market had been operating smoothly.
The operation of such a price-fixing agreement can be seen in the way that the price of oil has been fixed by the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) cartel.
High prices were maintained from 1974 onwards in the face of inelastic demand for oil from oil-importing countries, but an oil glut  in the 1980s put pressure on individual countries to reduce their prices in order to gain market share.
Despite attempts to prevent this by OPEC, the price of oil plummeted in 1986.
Even if there are no formal agreements to interfere with the market, implicit understandings may be reached, in which case the behaviour of the firms involved might, in practice, be the same as if a formal agreement had existed.
The smaller the number of large firms in an industry, ie the more concentrated it is, the more likely it is that the competitive process will be interfered with.
However, it must be pointed out that not all monopoly suppliers act against the public interest (eg it is not suggested even by the most ardent advocate of privatisation — refer to Chapter 3 — that the water supply or sewage disposal industries should provide competitive services to each household; the duplication of resources in these cases would be extremely wasteful to society), nor do all oligopolies abuse their position.
The actual concentration of an industry is hard to assess precisely and there are many different measures of it (eg if we say that the five firm concentration ratio is 85 per cent, this means that the largest five firms in the industry control 85 per cent of the market; a two firm concentration ratio of 100 per cent indicates that two firms completely dominate the market).
In view of the existence of highly concentrated industries, and if governments are concerned that large firms might abuse their powerful positions, two approaches may be adopted when formulating competition policy: the behaviour of the firm in the market may be considered and/or the structure of the market itself may be considered.
When viewing behaviour the firm is, in effect, given the benefit of the doubt and assumed to be operating in a competitive manner unless and until some cause for concern is expressed.
Any complaint concerning price-fixing or the adoption of other uncompetitive practices, such as the existence of measures designed to prevent other firms from entering the market, may be investigated.
In practice it is often hard to detect such anti-competitive behaviour.
The government's proposals on restrictive practices, published in a green paper during March 1988, prohibited all agreements between companies that distorted competition.
This was designed to replace the existing arrangements whereby restrictive agreements had to be registered centrally, and it thereby brought the UK into line with the EC.
The existing blanket exemptions, as applied, for example, to professional bodies, was to be ended.
The alternative approach to competition policy involves the government trying to influence the structure of the market in which the firm is operating — in other words, creating an environment in which a competitive structure, rather than a monopolistic or oligopolistic one, is more likely to exist.
Those who believe that it is important to consider the structure of the market rather than the behaviour of firms argue that it is far better to deal with problems before they arise.
If there is concern that the structure of an industry might lead to uncompetitive practices, then the following options are available:
(a)
break up large firms into smaller ones 
(b)
ensure easy access to the market for new firms
(c)
prevent firms from amalgamating (ie merging).
Breaking up large firms plays no significant part in UK competition policy although in the US the telecommunications company AT & T was split up into regional competitors.
In order to ensure easy access for new firms wishing to enter the market, the Restrictive Practices Court and the Office of Fair Trading try to ensure the absence of barriers to entry.
However, although it is possible to overcome many types of barrier, there will always be some that cannot be eliminated.
Entry into an industry with high fixed costs and economies of scale will always be difficult (eg aircraft construction).
Governments may adopt various industrial, regional and fiscal policies designed to increase the incentive to entrepreneurs to set up new businesses and possibly also to reduce the ‘red tape’ involved.
In view of the problems involved with breaking up large firms and the difficulties likely to be encountered in trying to control their behaviour, competition policy in the UK has tended to concentrate more on the preservation of a competitive market structure.
This has been done by ensuring easy access to the market for new firms, by a consideration of anti-competitive practices and by investigating some mergers, thereby preventing the emergence of monopolies.
These policies are carried out principally by two institutions — the Office of Fair Trading (OFT) and the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC).
The OFT was established by the Fair Trading Act (1973).
It acts as a watchdog in the market and observes and collects information on trading practices.
In particular, the Director General of Fair Trading (DGFT) has a brief to monitor monopolies, mergers and takeovers and restrictive trade practices.
The MMC (formally known as The Monopolies Commission) was established in 1948.
Its brief is to protect the ‘public interest’ by considering suspected anticompetitive behaviour of firms and to investigate proposed mergers.
The MMC is not able to initiate investigations itself; either the DGFT or the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry has to refer a case to it.
The MMC has no power to enforce its recommendations; action depends on the Secretary of State, if he wishes to follow up the recommendations.
Various criteria have been used to define the ‘public interest’, including the effect on competition, potential efficiency gains, employment implications, the effect on the regions etc.
What is ‘in the public interest’ and what is ‘against the public interest’(there may, of course, be actions which fall into neither category) has been interpreted differently at various times.
The remainder of this chapter is devoted to a discussion of mergers.
Economic theory tells us that there are three types of merger, although in practice it is sometimes hard to categorize a merger as a particular type.
A horizontal merger occurs when firms producing the same product (ie at the same stage of production) join together.
Such a merger may confer the benefits of size (economies of scale) on the combined firm.
This means that production may be achieved at lower ‘unit cost’(ie lower average cost).
This may be achieved either by spreading fixed costs or overheads (eg by sharing  research and development expenditure) or by rationalisation (ie cutting out inefficient production capacity).
On the other hand, a merger between two large firms will increase the concentration in the market and may, as a consequence, increase monopoly power.
Moreover, a merger may occur as a defensive measure, in which, for example, a firm, threatened by a dynamic fast-growing competitor, will attempt to merge with a third firm in order to eliminate the threat.
On the other hand a horizontal merger may be the best way to restructure an industry (see GEC/Plessey merger below), in order to enable British firms to face foreign competition more effectively.
A vertical merger occurs when two firms at different stages of the production process join together.
This occurs between a firm and either a supplier or an outlet.
Thus a car manufacturer might merge with its headlamp supplier and a brewer might acquire public houses.
(The 1989 Monopolies and Mergers Commission Report on the Brewing Industry concluded that the operation of ‘tied houses’ by the large brewers was contrary to the public interest and proposed a limit on the number of public houses that each brewer could own, although the Commission's proposals were significantly modified by the government.)
Such mergers do not necessarily confer great increases in market power to the firms involved and are often intended to guarantee supply of component parts or a secure outlet for sales.
The third type of merger is a conglomerate or diversified merger .
This occurs when firms operating in different industries amalgamate.
Although this is unlikely to affect market power, neither is it likely to confer the benefits of economies of scale, although the management of the predator company, may claim efficiency gains due to superior management techniques (refer to the section on conglomerates later in this chapter).
Such a merger may be viewed as an attempt to spread risks into different markets.
(Sometimes such a merger may be partially financed by selling off parts of the company — see later in the chapter.)
There are several different approaches which a government may adopt when deciding on its merger policy.
On the one hand there is the completely free market approach, which views mergers in a favourable light.
A merger may occur when a firm is operating inefficiently and new management will be installed with the aim of increasing efficiency and profitability.
Furthermore the threat of losing independence by means of a hostile merger (ie a takeover) is claimed to provide a spur for management to strive for greater efficiency.
(Although theoretically it is easy to distinguish between a merger and a takeover, in practice it is less so and the words are generally used interchangeably.)
On the other hand, there is the approach which views mergers as highly undesirable and which doubts the claims made about efficiency improvements made as a result of mergers.
The rising concentration of industry and the possible adverse effects on monopoly power are viewed as the factors of paramount importance.
Such views are held by economists who consider the beneficial effects of the threat of a takeover to be minimal when compared with the damaging effects of short termism.
This occurs when a firm continually has to ‘look over its shoulder’ and concentrate on short-term performance targets in order to try and maintain its share price, rather than planning for the  future.
In such a situation, investment generally, and research and development spending in particular, might suffer.
The third approach to merger policy is the cost-benefit approach.
This approach accepts that in any merger there will be certain benefits and certain disadvantages (ie costs) and that some sort of assessment has to be made in order to consider the overall impact.
Although the emphasis of policy changes with different governments, British merger policy has been based on the cost-benefit approach, although there are free market approach overtones.
Mergers are generally viewed favourably, except for a limited number deemed to be ‘against the public interest’.
In 1984 Norman Tebbit, the then Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, said: ‘I regard merger policy as an important part of the government's general policy of promoting competition within the economy in the interest of the consumer and efficiency and hence of growth and jobs.’
Tebbit clarified the position and laid down guidelines that the effect on competition should be the only criterion for deciding whether to block a proposed merger, although in practice this guideline was not always fully adhered to.
There are those who argue that the ‘burden of proof’ should be reversed and that companies wishing to merge should have to prove that the merger is ‘in the public interest’.
Thus all those mergers where the effect was neutral would not be allowed.
The alternative view is that merger policy, far from being too lax, is too tight and that companies should be encouraged to merge in order to be able to face foreign competition.
These issues are now considered by adopting a case-study approach.
THE NEED TO FACE FOREIGN Competition
A study of the bids by GEC for Plessey
A study of the GEC bid to takeover Plessey outlines clearly the conflict that can exist between maintaining competition in the domestic market and restructuring an industry to enable it to compete with foreign competition, by allowing rationalisation to occur and encouraging the combined group to exploit economies of scale.
The Monopolies and Mergers Commission did not allow the 1986 bid to proceed and rejected GEC's claims arguing that: ‘We do not consider that it is possible in the field of electronics to establish a direct link between company size and competitive performance’.
It was accepted, however, that the rationalisation of the two companies' development of the System X telephone exchanges would be an advantage.
Encouraged by the Labour government of 1964–70 and the attempt of the Industrial Reorganisation Corporation to restructure parts of British industry, GEC took over AEI and English Electric and successfully reorganised the ailing electronics industry during the 1960s by rationalisation, elimination of duplication and elimination of excess capacity.
GEC, under the guidance of Lord Weinstock, built itself up into the largest manufacturing employer in the UK, producing a wide range of products from telecommunications to defence electronics.
After various failures to takeover other companies, both in the UK  and abroad, and following criticisms for sitting on a ‘cash mountain’, GEC launched its £1.3 billion bid for Plessey in December 1985, partly as an attempt to counter criticism that the company had ‘lost its way’.
The Ministry of Defence argued strongly against the merger on the grounds that GEC and Plessey were the two largest suppliers of defence electronics in the UK.
Competition had recently played an increasing part in the MOD's procurement policy by the use of competitive tendering.
An increase in GEC's dominance in the market would cause damage to the UK defence industry.
‘There was a risk that merger would produce a company that would try to exploit the domestic defence market, buying up further competition in a bid for total domination’(MMC report).
British Telecom produced evidence which differed from that of the Ministry of Defence and which clearly highlighted the fundamental conflict of views which can occur in such a merger.
Like the MOD, BT cited GEC and Plessey as its two largest suppliers.
The UK telecommunications industry was fragmented and suffered because it was unable to reap economies of scale.
In addition research and development teams were widely dispersed.
Hence rationalisation made sense, but, in addition, it might be necessary to develop international partnerships as well .
BT conceded that, if a merger did not take place, the System X collaboration could also exist if either company purchased the other company's interests or if a joint company were set up.
(In fact, following the abortive takeover, GEC and Plessey announced in 1987 the formation of a joint company: GEC Plessey Telecommunications (GPT) to develop System X.) The fear was that if the two companies, both minnows in the international market (refer to Table 2.1) failed to pool their resources they would sink further down the list of world telecommunications manufacturers.
The MMC rejected GEC's claim that the merger would have created a   company which would have sustained the UK's position in world markets into the next century, and implied that GEC should rely more on organic growth (ie internal growth) than on growth by acquisitions.
Questions were also raised about the importance of the size of firm as a determinant of industrial performance.
On the other hand it can be argued that, by rejecting the bid, the MMC were more concerned to maintain the existence of competition (as measured by the number of firms in the market) rather than enhance the ability to compete (as claimed by those arguing that a merger would lower unit costs).
This latter attitude was summed up by Sir Michael Edwardes in a letter to the Financial Times (19 December 1986):
The decision to refer to the Monopolies Commission mergers like those suggested by United Biscuits and Imperial, Guinness and Distillers, and GEC and Plessey raises important strategic issues for Britain.
In all three cases the effect would have been to create merged units of a size able to compete with the many powerful US, European and Japanese companies now increasingly dominating the world scene; for example, the Leyland/Bedford trucks merger provides a scale that neither could achieve on its own.
It is a nonsense to inhibit that sort of synergy on the basis that together the merged units have a logically dominant position in the relatively small British market.
That type of ‘Little Englander’ policy displays an  ignorance of commercial reality which will cost us all a very high price in the longer term.
By being doctrinaire and parochial, it is easy to have a whole host of companies competing in the same home market; but how many will be effective (or even in business) in ten years' time?
Equally important, how many of them will be strong enough to avoid being taken over by foreign companies in the long run?
To trade in a heavyweight world market Britain must think big.
It needs an industrial strategy founded on commercial logic rather than shortsighted bureaucratic principles.
A review of Britain's policy on mergers is overdue.
(The proposed mergers between United Biscuits and Imperial and between Guinness and Distillers are referred to later in this chapter; the proposed Leyland/Bedford trucks merger is considered in Chapter 4.)
As a counter to this strongly argued view, it is worth mentioning that it assumes that ‘biggest is best’ and that the potential benefits of synergy will actually accrue.
The history of the British car industry (refer to Chapter 4), which has seen a whole series of mergers, is one example which shows that the potential benefits of mergers are not automatically secured.
However, GEC returned to the fray in November 1988, launching a joint bid for Plessey with Siemens of West Germany, which valued Plessey at £1.7 billion.
Although the bid was cleared by both the Monopolies and Mergers Commission and by the European Commission, GEC and Siemens were delayed by the need for detailed negotiating with the Ministry of Defence on various aspects.
The battle proved to be one of the most long-drawn-out takeovers ever, involving many twists and changes of fortune.
Plessey unsuccessfully attempted to put together a consortium takeover bid for the much larger GEC and there were abortive negotiations between the two companies for the sale to GEC of Plessey's stake in GPT.
GEC/Siemens raised their bid to £2 billion in August 1989 and this proved sufficient to end the long running battle.
However, whereas GEC/Siemens had originally proposed that their  joint bid would result in a series of joint ventures between them, it became increasingly clear subsequently that the bid was, according to Sir John Clark, Plessey's Chairman, ‘no more or less than a simple old-fashioned attempt to carve up one of the leading British electronics companies’ between GEC and Siemens'.
At the same time GEC was involved in forging links with other firms by means of establishing joint ventures.
The Plessey takeover coupled with these collaborative ventures has radically restructured Britain's electronics industry in the run up to the completion of the Single European Market in 1992.
A study of the bid by British airways for British Caledonian
When the recently privatised British Airways (BA) launched a takeover bid for Britain's second largest airline, British Caledonian, in July 1987 (shortly after the General Election) it used arguments similar to those put forward above by Sir Michael Edwardes to justify its action.
BA argued that it needed to acquire its smaller rival in order to be able to compete more effectively with the mega-airlines that had emerged, particularly in the US, during the previous two years.
THE TAKEOVER: LORD KING (CENTRE RIGHT), CHAIRMAN OF BRITISH AIRWAYS WITH THE CHAIRMAN OF BRITISH CALEDONIAN, SIR ADAM THOMSON (LEFT CENTRE)
There were five US airlines bigger than BA, although BA was the largest airline in Europe, and by far the largest in the UK.
This demonstrates the problems faced by any competition policy — which market should be   considered?
Lord King, the BA Chairman, talked of the need to create an airline which was ‘capable of taking on the world’ in an increasingly ‘global market place’(refer to Table 2.2).
There is undoubtedly considerable choice provided by airlines on many routes (especially inter-continental routes), but BA's already dominant position in the domestic market would be reinforced by a merger with British Caledonian (refer to Table 2.3).
The proposed merger called into question Britain's civil aviation policy of the previous twenty years.
The Edwards Committee report in 1969 supported the concept of a ‘second   force airline’ and ‘dual designation’of routes (ie having two British airlines on any given route) and led to the formation of British Caledonian, as a result of a merger of two small independent airlines.
British Caledonian had always reminded the general public in its advertising campaign that: ‘We never forget you have a choice’.
The 1984 White Paper on Civil Aviation supported the idea of a ‘sound and competitive multi-airline industry’.
However, there was no significant enforced reduction in BA's route network or market share (in favour of British Caledonian or other British airlines) prior to its privatisation.
This must have contributed eventually to the decision of the British Caledonian board reluctantly to consider a merger with the much larger BA.
The government referred the bid to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC) which allowed it to proceed, ruling that it was ‘not against the public interest’.
This ruling, in effect, accepted the reality of a global market place .
BA was, however, to be forced to give up some of British Caledonian's route network.
This was followed by an attempt to thwart the deal by Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS), which made a partial bid for 26 per cent of British Caledonian's shares in a proposed deal which also involved a complex financial restructuring package.
The key attraction of British Caledonian to SAS was that it was based in Gatwick airport — a key hub airport.
Great savings are possible in the airline industry from access to a ‘hub and spokes’ system of routes.
For similar reasons BA, a Heathrow-based airline, was also keen to establish itself at Gatwick, thereby making itself the dominant airline at Britain's two largest airports.
Faced with a competing predator, BA raised its bid to a knockout £250 million and this won the day.
During the takeover battle, questions were raised about the desirability of allowing a foreign airline to bid for a British airline, providing access to Britain's second largest ‘hub’.
The attitude to foreign takeovers is now considered by studying the contested takeover for Rowntree.
THE ATTITUDE TO FOREIGN BIDS
A study of the contested bid between Nestlé and Suchard for Rowntree
During April 1988, Suchard, the Swiss-based chocolate manufacturer, launched a dawn raid on Rowntree, the York-based company, quickly scooping up a stake of 14.9 per cent as a ‘strategic investment’, but claiming that it had no intention of launching a full-scale takeover bid.
In response to this, the Swiss conglomerate Nestlé, which is the largest food company in the world, launched a hostile cash bid for Rowntree, which valued the British company at £2.1 billion.
The then Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, Lord Young, decided that there were no grounds for referring the bid to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission; nor were there any grounds for referring the Suchard holding in Rowntree, which had, by that time, been increased to 29.9 per cent.
This, therefore, set the scene for a three-way takeover battle for the future of Rowntree.
Suchard responded with an offer of £2.32 billion, which was  countered by a further bid from Nestlé, valuing Rowntree at £2.55 billion.
This bid won the approval of the Rowntree Board, which had strenuously opposed the previous bids.
Suchard was unwilling to increase its bid and sold its 29.9 per cent stake to Nestlé, at a profit close to £200 million.
This gave rise to speculation that Suchard planned to use these funds to launch another takeover bid, possibly for Cadbury Schweppes.
The effect of contested takeover bids on a company's share price may be seen from the 139 per cent increase in the price of Rowntree's shares during the first six months of 1988 — the best performance of any share in the FT-SE 100 index.
The contested takeover for Rowntree came in the wake of a series of other moves in the European chocolate industry.
In particular, Nestlé and Suchard had been involved in a similar takeover battle for the ownership of Cote d'Or, the Belgian chocolate company, during 1987.
This produced a successful outcome for Suchard, in preference to the much larger Nestlé.
The bid for Rowntree was set in the context of a shift in consumer preference away from‘slab’ bars of chocolate towards ‘countline’products (individually wrapped chocolate snacks)— an area in which Rowntree had great strength.
Rowntree's leading brands included Kit Kat, Smarties, Yorkie and Quality Street and the bids for the company were based on a desire by the Swiss companies to own these brands and to market them globally.
It takes a great deal of time and money to establish a brand which explains why predators may be willing, when purchasing a company with strong brand identification , to pay far more than the stock market valuation of that company.
This appears to be an increasingly important trend.
The price paid includes a substantial amount for the goodwill that the brands yield.
Purchase of market share is seen to be less costly than establishing brands — and is quicker too.
The takeover battle produced an outcome, which was, at the time, the largest ever bid for a British based company by a foreign one.
But it also raised a number of important questions, which are now addressed:
1
How does the completion of the Single European Market in 1992 and the increasing globalisation of world markets affect takeover bids?
2
Does it matter that the relatively liberal capital laws in Britain allow British companies to be acquired by foreign ones, whereas the acquisition of foreign companies by British ones is more difficult?
3
Does the nationality of firms matter?
The bids for Rowntree may be seen as part of a growing trend towards globalisation in world markets.
just as the reduced level of import controls during the post Second World War period saw a substantial increase in world trade, so the increasingly liberal attitude to capital controls during the 1980s has seen a marked increase in cross-border investment — both to establish new factories and to engage in takeovers of existing firms.
Furthermore, the intention of the European Community to complete the Single European Market by 1992 was seen as an additional factor behind the bids from the two Swiss companies.
A liberalised single market, often referred to as ‘Fortress  Europe,, could well create obstacles to outsiders — and Switzerland is not a member of the EC.
Factors which affect the concentration of any particular industry are extremely complex.
There are some European industries (eg volume car production — see Chapter 4) which are already very concentrated and integrated on a European basis (both in terms of sales and location of production facilities).
There are others (eg insurance) which are neither concentrated nor integrated.
As far as the consumer goods industries are concerned, there are forces pushing for greater concentration and integration.
This is evident especially in the food and drinks industries, both of which have seen takeover activity during the 1980s.
The breakdown of traditional national markets, in terms of taste and fashion, coupled with the need to cope with a Europe without internal frontiers in 1992 have been the major stimuli towards growing internationalisation.
Companies with well-established brands, which are the best vehicles for such expansion, are likely to be increasingly few and far between — this explains the keen interest in and premium price paid for Rowntree.
When Lord Young, the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry (1987–9), decided not to refer the Nestlé bid for Rowntree to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC), he did so because the effect of the merger on competition would have been negligible.
Rowntree supplied 26 per cent of the UK chocolate confectionery market, second only to Cadbury with 30 per cent.
Suchard supplied 2 per cent and Nestlé 3 per cent.
Mars, Cadbury and Rowntree between them controlled about 80 per cent of the market, and so an addition of 2 or 3 per cent would be unlikely to affect the competitive position (refer to Table 2.4).
However, although the effects on market share in the short term were certainly negligible, it is possible to argue, from a dynamic perspective, that the removal of Rowntree from the market place as an independent supplier eliminated a potentially powerful long-term competitor in world markets for the Swiss firms.
This is of particular importance in an industry in which it is hard for new entrants to establish themselves, in view of the high costs of entry into the market.
During the takeover battle, it was suggested that Cadbury Schweppes should act as a white knight to Rowntree, in order to form a strong British company able to compete effectively with the Swiss.
However, this suggestion would have given the combined group a market share in excess of 50 per cent of the British market, which would have fallen foul of the MMC guidelines.
Various other objections to the Nestlé takeover of Rowntree were raised at the time.
Great play was made of the reciprocity argument.
This is based on the comparison between the relative ease with which foreign companies may bid for British ones, due to the liberal capital markets in Britain, whereas Swiss companies are less likely to be the subject of takeover bids from abroad due to the financial structure of Swiss companies.
However, it was argued that, if a foreign predator wishes to place a greater value on a British company than the stock market does, then that is to the benefit of shareholders.
Whether the interests of shareholders are the same as the interests of the workers, the company and the country (however ‘interests’ may be defined) is possibly another matter.
Such an argument also presupposes that the ‘market knows best’(where the term ‘market’ today often means a limited number of institutional fund managers, whose time horizons may be ‘short term’) and that the nationality of a firm ‘does not matter’.
These issues caused great controversy at the time of the takeover battle.
Critics of foreign ownership argue that British plants may become satellite plants or screwdriver plants, involved in the low value-added parts of the production process, providing jobs that are the first to disappear in times of difficulty.
This contrasts with the secure, skilled jobs provided in the ‘core activities’ of, for example, research and development and product planning.
These tend to be located close to the company's headquarters, which, for a foreign-owned multinational company, is unlikely to be in Britain.
This is known as the headquarters effect.
(The issue is viewed again in Chapter 4, where the effects of the creation of Japanese car plants in this country are considered.)
It is, however, worth mentioning that Nestlé subsequently established a special unit based in York responsible for developing the whole group's  worldwide confectionery business.
Sir Hector Laing, Chairman of United Biscuits, in a letter to The Times (2 June 1988) questioned:
Do we really want to go down in history as the generation which sold for a mess of pottage the finest British companies, which have successfully built brand names and franchises of high repute over a century or more…?
I do not believe the vast majority of people want to see British industry sold abroad for jam today.
However, those who criticize foreign inward investment are accused of  possessing a ‘Little Englander’ mentality, in an environment in which the nationality of companies is becoming ‘increasingly irrelevant in modern trading conditions’(Kenneth Clarke,Hansard , 8 June 1988).
Supporters of the free movement of capital believe it to be of benefit to all countries, as a means of creating a dynamic market structure and determining the optimal use of resources.
The free movement is particularly beneficial for Britain, which is itself a major overseas predator, particularly in the US, helping to  accumulate overseas assets, the earnings from which contribute to the balance of payments.
Lord Young argued that Britain was creating a ‘third empire’ by her overseas investment.
Hence any attempt at national chauvinism, by acting against foreign inward investment, would make it more difficult to argue in favour of British outward investment with foreign governments.
The growth of cross border mergers, the increasingly free capital movements and the completion of the Single European Market in 1992 all make it essential that an effective EC merger policy is devised.
Some countries have systems of self-regulation and others rely on legislation; but, in addition to this, there is the problem of definition of ‘market share’— should it refer to a particular count?’ or to the EC as a whole?
Some concern has also been expressed about the impact of conglomerate mergers on the economy and it is this issue which is addressed next.
A CHARTER FOR CONGLOMERATES?
Although British merger policy has lacked consistency and coherence, it has been based on the principle that mergers which are deemed to be ‘against the public interest’ should be prevented.
What is ‘against the public interest’ has, however, never been fully defined, although the emphasis placed on competition as a major theme of economic policy by the Conservative government means that only mergers which reduce competition per se are likely to be investigated.
On this basis it would seem that a conglomerate merger is unlikely to fall foul of the guidelines.
This has led to the claim that British merger policy has potentially represented a Charter for Conglomerates , although it should be noted that, as discussed in the next subsection, there has been a move away from diversification and conglomerates, especially after the Stock Market Crash of 1987.
Proposed mergers involving Britain's two largest conglomerate companies will be considered, in an attempt to highlight the issues raised.
A study of the contested bids by Hanson and United Biscuits for Imperial
An agreed merger was proposed in 1985 between Imperial Group, with interests in brewing, tobacco, food and restaurants and United Biscuits (UB), with interests in biscuits, snack foods, frozen foods and restaurants.
Imperial would benefit by reducing its dependence on the declining tobacco market and UB would gain access to Imperial's reserve of cash, necessary for further expansion.
Imperial and United Biscuits claimed that, although there was relatively little overlap between the two groups (except in crisps and snack  food), growth could be more rapid as a combined group as a result of concentrating on complementary activities (eg UB s products could be sold more extensively in Imperial's Courage pubs).
It was calculated that the merger could produce £30 million extra profits in 1988, by creating the proposed new ‘consumer goods group’.
According to Sir Hector Laing, Chairman of United Biscuits: ‘In a world where the large food companies are getting larger, backed by the cash resources of very rich large partners, it is not good enough to be a minnow: in order to compete internationally each company has to get bigger.’
This is similar to GEC's arguments for taking over Plessey and BA's arguments for taking over British Caledonian.
When presented in this way the proposed merger appears to be based on clear industrial logic, although it was considered by some to be partly a defensive move on the part of the companies involved (especially Imperial, which was hoping that, by increasing its own size, it would help to reduce the chance of an unwanted takeover from a third party).
However, the unwanted takeover bid for Imperial did materialise, as had been rumoured, from Hanson Trust (subsequently renamed Hanson), the largest conglomerate company in the UK, which also had substantial interests in the US.
Hanson had a wide range of manufacturing and retailing interests containing virtually no product overlap with Imperial.
Although the Hanson plans for Imperial were never fully spelled out, it was claimed that Hanson had great experience of digesting major acquisitions and also had the ability to rejuvenate ailing companies, transforming their profitability.
On the other hand, it was claimed that Hanson was only interested in short-term profits, rather than long-term investment and that the company was only capable of limited organic growth, thus forcing it to rely on ever larger takeover bids to sustain its expansion.
Faced with the two conflicting bids the Department of Trade and Industry decided that the agreed merger between Imperial and UB should be referred to the Monopolies and Merger Commission (MMC), as the combined company would hold over 40 per cent of the snack food market — this together with a similar share of the market held by Nabisco would create a duopolistic situation in the market.
However, the contested takeover of Imperial by Hanson was not referred to the MMC as it did not adversely affect competition or the ‘public interest’.
The difference of treatment for the two bids gave rise to criticism that the government's merger policy favoured conglomerates.
A revised merger proposal between UB and Imperial, which involved disposing of Imperial's Golden Wonder subsidiary, thus reducing market share in the snack foods market, was not referred to MMC and hence both bids were allowed to proceed.
After a closely fought battle Hanson won control of Imperial for £2.8 billion.
Hanson has been built up into one of Britain's leading companies over a period of twenty years based on an acquisition philosophy which involves a reduction in the acquired company's  bureaucracy , devolution of responsibility to local managers, a tight control of capital expenditure and a disposal of some of the peripheral assets which are not part of the company's ‘core activities’.
With the aim of keeping only the Imperial Tobacco and Imperial Foods divisions, Hanson within a short period of time sold Imperial's hotels and  restaurants interests to Trust House Forte (£190 million), Golden Wonder Crisps to Dalgety (£87 million) and Courage to the Australian company Elders IXL (£1.4 billion).
Thus almost £1.7 billion of the £2.8 billion spent on the Imperial takeover was recouped and yet the remaining assets yielded over half the Imperial profit!
This confirms Hanson's reputation for being able to spot cheap assets and sell off unwanted parts profitably, but it also gives rise to the charge that Hanson is involved in asset stripping.
On the day (19 September 1986) that Hanson sold Courage to Elders, the Financial Times leader ‘Reshuffling of Assets’(part of which is reproduced below) provided an interesting view of the company, which helps one to consider the effect of such conglomerates on the economy as a whole.
Hanson Trust has two main roles.
It is an industrial company, managing certain assets, and it is a trader in companies, redistributing assets from one owner to another.
In its first rôle, it has tended to concentrate on low-technology businesses which are managed with a close eye on reducing costs and generating cash.
Its record is entirely respectable, but there is no evidence to suggest that Hanson's skills are appropriate for the really difficult management problems like the rebuilding of the Rover Group or the strengthening of I.C.L. 's position in the world computer market.
To the extent that the U.K. needs more internationally competitive companies in research-intensive sectors, Hanson does not offer, or claim to offer, much of a contribution.
This is not to denigrate what Hanson does, but the limits to its managerial scope need to be recognised.
It is the second role which has recently come into greater prominence.
When it attacks companies like S.C.M.
and Imperial, it does so with the clear intention of keeping only part of the business for its own portfolio and selling the rest to the highest bidder.
The most obvious targets are the unwieldy conglomerates built up in the late 1960's and early 1970's which still represent an area of managerial weakness in the British (and U.S.) economy.
Thus Hanson's role in redeploying industrial assets can be helpful.
A study of the failed bid by BTR for Pilkington
In 1987 BTR launched a bid for Pilkington, the world's leading manufacturer of flat and safety glass, which presented the arguments about conglomerate mergers even more starkly than did the Hanson bid for Imperial.
BTR was Britain's second largest conglomerate which, like Hanson, had a reputation for spotting companies with undervalued assets.
After gaining control of a company, BTR would sell off unwanted divisions and then significantly improve the performance of those remaining.
Its share price and profitability improved dramatically during the 1980s (refer to Figure 2.1).
BTR had successfully mounted takeover bids for Thomas Tilling in 1983 and for Dunlop in 1985, improving the performances of each company after the merger by improvements in productivity.
Although the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry decided not to refer the bid for Pilkington to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, BTR abandoned its attempt to takeover the company, claiming that this had been motivated, not by adverse public reaction and the political storm created, but by Pilkington's better than expected profits forecast, which indicated that the likely price required to capture the company would be greater than BTR was willing to pay.
The BTR/Pilkington takeover battle focused attention on the guidelines for referral of bids to the MMC.
As BTR had no stake in the glass industry prior to the bid, the proposed merger did not qualify for referral on the competition yardstick.
Questions were also raised about the industrial impact of the merger.
The two companies were portrayed as representing totally contrasting management philosophies.
On the one hand, Pilkington was represented as a company committed to long term research and development, whereas BTR was seen as a company interested in quick profits, increasing efficiency by rationalisation (and job losses) and asset stripping.
This was contrasted with the ‘paternalism’ shown by Pilkington, an important employer in the north west of England, concerned to ‘buy local’and to protect the local and regional economy.
Certainly the local community expressed overwhelming opposition to the BTR bid.
BACK TO THE CORE
Although many firms do continue to diversify, there has been a growing mood against conglomerates and away from the notion that diversification was an automatic virtue and an inescapable trend, views which were accepted by most people in the 1960s and 1970s.
This has been replaced by a move which is  variously described as a return ‘back to basics’, an attempt to ‘focus on the core’ or ‘unbundling’.
This is made possible either by divestment of subsidiaries (ie a sale from one company to another) or by hostile takeovers from ‘break-up specialists’, who calculate that the value of the whole company as determined by the Stock Market, is less than the value of the sum of the parts.
The break-up specialist may have an interest in retaining certain parts of the company or he may wish to dispose of all of it to other companies.
Hanson, Britain's largest break-up specialist retains certain parts of the conglomerates which it has taken over, but has as a result itself became a conglomerate — as discussed in the previous subsection.
A study of the Hoylake bid for BAT
The £13 billion bid for BAT (formerly known as British American Tobacco) in 1989 was the largest bid ever involving a British company.
The bid was made by a consortium headed by Sir James Goldsmith through a specially created company called Hoylake.
THE HOYLAKE TRIO:(LEFT CENTRE) JACOB ROTHSCHILD, SIR JAMES GOLDSMITH AND KERRY PACKER
The background to this bid may be seen in BAT's attempt to diversify out of tobacco, which was a ‘mature’ industry with relatively limited growth prospects.
Diversification centred on three areas: retailing, paper and insurance.
This resulted in four different parts of BAT in totally unrelated areas, with relatively little scope for efficiency gains by economies of scale or synergy.
Furthermore, the Stock Market continued to value the diversified BAT as if it were a (lowly-rated) tobacco stock, despite its expensive acquisitions in other  fields.
However, reference to Figure 2.2 indicates that the BAT share price outperformed the market during the 1980s, although this outperformance was concentrated in the first half of the decade.
Hoylake's bid was intended to ‘unbundle’ BAT's tobacco core, disposing of the other divisions of the company and retaining the original tobacco interests.
Hoylake claimed that: ‘BAT's urge to conglomerate has diverted its attention from the traditional core business, tobacco towards ill-conceived diversification’.
The bid and the general shift in mood against diversification highlights a fundamental problem which faces a company which is based on one product with limited growth prospects.
Diversification may at the time appear to be the only way that the company can maintain its profits growth and defend the value of its shares.
(This can be seen most clearly in the case of a company involved in mining natural resources which are in finite supply.
In the long term, failure to diversify would mean that the company would disappear.)
Break-up bids are often financed by means of a leveraged buyout .
Shareholders of the company under attack are generally offered relatively little cash or equity, but instead high yielding bonds (referred to as ‘junk-bonds’).
This debt is settled when the company is ‘unbundled’ and parts are sold off.
During 1990 Hoylake withdrew its bid for BAT, partly because of problems encountered with the US regulatory authorities when it tried to arrange a buyer for BAT's US insurance business.
However, far more significant in explaining the failure of the bid was the decision of BAT to ‘unbundle’ itself by selling off its paper and retailing interests (refer to Figure 2.3).
Although its bid failed, Hoylake's objective of maximising shareholder value had been realised.
THE GUINNESS AFFAIR
The Guinness takeover of Distillers is studied, not just as an example of a keenly contested takeover, but also as it demonstrated what many saw as the unacceptable sides of takeover activity and the City of London.
Distillers, the Scotch whisky firm, when faced with an unwanted takeover bid from Argyll, the supermarket chain, in December 1985, attempted to merge with Guinness, using it as a white knight (ie a friendly rescuer) in an attempt to thwart this move.
Guinness, in addition to its traditional brewing interests, had acquired Bell's whisky after an acrimonious takeover battle in 1985.
As a consequence the bid for Distillers was referred to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission because the combined Guinness/Distillers share of the whisky market was in excess of 35 per cent, which was considered to confer too much market-power on the combined company.
The government was criticized for referring an agreed bid, while leaving a hostile bid free to proceed.
In addition, questions were again raised about the criteria used to judge whether or not a bid should be referred — the Guinness bid was referred on grounds of reduced competition, but, again, this allows companies in unrelated industries to make bids unhindered.
The Guinness bid was subsequently revamped to include the sale of a small number of minor whisky brands, which was designed to reduce the combined market share of Guinness and Distillers to below 25 per cent.
This second bid avoided reference to the MMC and thus the way was open for a contested takeover battle between Guinness and Argyll for control of Distillers.
According to the Argyll offer documents:
with Argyll's management and substantial experience in the food and drink markets, both nationally and internationally, we can restore Distillers to the pre-eminent position it once occupied at home and abroad, and that we have the opportunity to build Distillers and Argyll into Scotland's greatest company…based in Edinburgh and directed from there.
On the other hand Mr Ernest Saunders, Chief Executive of Guinness, claimed that: ‘The important thing is that we are going to create a major new international brands business in Britain — the first since Beecham's in the 1950s’.
Distillers claimed that ‘Argyll is unsuited for the stewardship of the Scotch whisky industry, because the majority of its business is as a UK discount supermarket operator’.
After an acrimonious and close battle, Guinness emerged narrowly as the victor.
Part of the reason for victory was that the value of the Guinness offer was higher than that of Argyll, aided by the rise of the Guinness share price before the offer closed.
(Although there is usually a cash offer for the shares of the company being taken over, a share alternative is generally on offer.
The predator company will offer x of its own shares in exchange for y shares of the target company and thus the value of the offer will depend on the relative share prices of the two companies.
Any increase in the share price of the predator company will therefore enhance the value of its offer).
In an attempt to sway Scottish shareholders of Distillers and to influence Scottish public opinion (which was anxious that a merger with Guinness might reduce Distillers' involvement in Scotland), Guinness promised during the campaign that the ‘largest part of our business will be Scottish-based’, that Scotland would be the ‘decision-making centre’ of the company and that Sir Thomas Risk, Governor of the Bank of Scotland, would be appointed as Non-Executive Chairman of the combined group.
However, in July 1986 Guinness announced that ‘it has not been possible to reach agreement with Sir Thomas Risk and he will not now be invited to join the board, nor therefore be nominated as Non-Executive Chairman’.
Furthermore, the company also seemed to be reneging on some of the assurances given to placate Scottish interests during the takeover battle.
Guinness was accused of bad faith, in particular for failing to adhere to promises made in the official offer documents.
In addition, there were fears that, if undertakings made during a takeover bid could be put aside subsequently, then there would be calls to replace the present takeover system, based to a great extent on a voluntary code of conduct and self-regulation, by a statutory system.
On the other hand, Risk was seen as being a possible focus for dissent on the Board, as someone who would interfere with hard decisions that might have to be made about Distillers, and who would, therefore, behave in a more executive role than had been envisaged, rather than as a figurehead.
Thus the decision not to appoint Risk could be seen as an attempt by the Board to carry  out its fiduciary duty to the shareholders (ie to act in their best interests).
In the end Saunders achieved overwhelming support when the issue was put to shareholders and he himself was confirmed as Chairman and Chief Executive and the new structure of the Board was accepted.
As has been explained previously, the value of the Guinness offer for Distillers depended on the relative share prices of the two shares and the Guinness share price proved to be strong during the final lap of the campaign.
However, this was achieved partly by the creation of a false market in Guinness shares.
Money, paid allegedly for takeover fees and consultancy advice, was channelled to various associates of Guinness for the purpose of buying Guinness shares, thereby increasing the share price — this is known as a share-support operation .
Amid the growing City scandal, Ernest Saunders temporarily stepped down as Chairman and Chief Executive of Guinness and was subsequently dismissed.
Saunders and three others were found guilty (in a trial in 1990) on charges of conspiracy, theft and false accounting.
In what became known as the ‘City trial of the century’, Saunders received the longest prison sentence of five years.
The Guinness Affair aroused serious public concern specifically about the government's competition policy, but more generally about self-regulation in the City, leading to calls for statutory framework.
COMMENT
The case studies considered in this chapter indicate how difficult it is to formulate a coherent policy for mergers.
In addition traditional views on the need to maintain competition within an economy have been influenced not only by the existence of large foreign companies, but also by the increasing globalisation of world trade and the completion of the Single European Market by 1992.
Attention has also focused on British merger policy which has operated in a self-regulatory framework, rather than a statutory one.
Furthermore, Britain's liberal capital market has allowed easier access for foreigners to British firms than vice versa and this has caused some to claim that British industry is vulnerable.
Privatisation
During the second term (1983–7) of the Conservative government privatisation became one of its main economic policies.
In order to understand privatisation fully, since it may be viewed as a reaction to what went before, it is necessary to consider the nationalisation and state enterprise of the post-war period.
The arguments for nationalisation, the performance of nationalised industries and the disenchantment that developed with them in some quarters are studied.
The meaning of ‘privatisation’ and arguments put forward in favour of it are then considered.
The chapter finishes with a section on ‘Privatisation in Practice,.
NATIONALISATION: DEVELOPMENT, PERFORMANCE AND DISENCHANTMENT
The state had been involved in the running of publicly-owned enterprises before the Second World War, but it was not until the post-war Labour governments of 1945 to 1951 that there was an attempt to extend public ownership to any significant degree.
The Labour government was elected at a time when Keynesian economics was moving towards being accepted as economic orthodoxy.
Keynesian policies were directed at ensuring full employment and involved government intervention in the running of the economy using demand management techniques (refer also to Chapter 1, page 13).
It was believed that this intervention would be aided if the state had control of certain key industries (eg coal, railways, gas, electricity distribution), which were crucial to post-war economic recovery and which were in such a rundown state that it was unlikely that sufficient private capital would materialise to rejuvenate them.
Many industries had suffered from a lack of investment during the depression in the 1930s and had been further weakened by the effects of the Second World War.
Thus nationalisation could assist the government's macroeconomic management and planning of the economy.
In addition the government would be more  able to pursue policies designed to rescue collapsing firms and to reduce regional disparities of income.
This was all the more important as many nationalised industries were operating in markets which were affected by long-term decline, where contraction and a low rate of return on capital were probably inevitable.
Thus the Labour government's nationalisation programme was intended also to facilitate post-war regional policy.
There are certain costs and benefits which are not taken into account by the price system.
Such costs and benefits (termed social costs and social benefits ) are external to the firm and are not measured in a firm's costs or revenue accounts.
A firm is often able to ignore the social costs imposed by pollution, congestion or noise associated with its operations.
However, it may also be unable to reap the benefits by charging the community for the advantages gained by improved amenities installed close to its factory (eg an approach road), which benefit local people.
In situations where the price system does not take into account all the costs and benefits to the whole community, nationalised industries operating in the ‘national interest’ were directed to take into account the externalities discussed above.
These arguments have been used to justify the continued operation of branch railway lines and low productivity coal pits, where the costs of closure to the local economy were deemed to be too high, even if the operations themselves were unviable.
Furthermore as nationalised industries were intended to operate in the ‘national interest’, it was claimed that this should lead to improved industrial relations, as the strife between labour and capital, associated with capitalist ownership, was reduced.
Labour was attempting to control what were known as the commanding heights of the economy.
In addition to the economic arguments put forward for nationalisation, there was also a strong political impetus, as the Labour party attempted to achieve a ‘fairer, more egalitarian’ society, in which social priorities and the ‘national interest’took precedence over the desire to maximise profits.
This policy was an attempt to satisfy Clause 4 of the Labour Party's Constitution, which committed the party to ‘the common ownership of the means of production, distribution and exchange, and the best possible system of popular administration and control of each industry or service’.
There were, in addition, further arguments put forward to support and justify the policy of nationalisation and public ownership.
In some industries, competition is considered to raise the costs of production rather than, as is usually expected, to reduce them.
This is because smaller competing firms lose the benefits of size — economies of scale — which would have accrued to a single, large firm.
This describes a situation in which a monopoly appears to be the best structure for an industry, and is called a natural monopoly.
Public utilities such as electricity, gas, water and telecommunications provided the best examples of what were considered to be natural monopolies, although when technological advances are made, certain industries formerly classed as natural monopolies may cease to be so (eg telecommunications).
The possibility that a natural monopoly under private ownership might abuse its dominant position led to arguments in favour of nationalisation and public ownership, so that the state could operate the nationalised industry in  the ‘public interest’.
The benefits of scale, coupled with the end of ‘wasteful’ competition (eg duplicated research and development expenditure) should also lead to a more efficient industry.
After the initial nationalisation programme carried out by the post-war Labour government, there was relatively little change in the frontiers between the state sector and the private sector.
Both the Conservative and Labour parties accepted the existence of a mixed economy (an economy with both private and public sectors) and a welfare state.
This period of time has been described as a period of consensus .
Although politicians at the time would certainly not have viewed it in the same light, with the benefit of hindsight, we can claim that, as both of the main political parties broadly supported Keynesian economics and the existence of the mixed economy, the differences between them were, in today's terms, relatively small.
This contrasts with Mrs Thatcher's Conservative government, which has rejected Keynesian economics and has questioned the whole role of the state and the very existence of the mixed economy.
The changes in the state sector before the 1980s have occurred in a relatively piecemeal fashion.
Rolls-Royce collapsed in 1971 under the strains of developing the RB211 aero engine, and was nationalised by Edward Heath's Conservative government, unwilling to see such an important part of British industry going bankrupt.
This happened despite the government's claims that it was injecting market discipline into the private sector by not ‘bailing out lame ducks’.
In 1975 the Labour government was equally unwilling to see British Leyland collapse and this company too was nationalised (see Chapter 4, page 63).
It would be true to say that, when the Conservatives were elected in 1979, the composition of the nationalised industry sector had certainly not been arrived at by any clear sets of principles or criteria.
Nationalised industries have been accused of inefficiency for a variety of reasons.
It is claimed that the lack of competition and market discipline induces a complacent attitude in both management and the workforce.
In addition the possible abuse of monopoly power in any nationalised industry which is a monopoly may also lead to inefficiency.
Such a firm will have little need to respond to consumer requirements, either in terms of the price of the product or its quality.
This will result in limited choice for the consumer and a lack of innovation (eg British Telecom phone equipment, which for many years was severely limited whilst it was part of the public sector).
Whether or not these criticisms of inefficiency are valid is extremely difficult to assess, and the situation is complicated by repeated political interference by governments of both parties in the pricing, investment and employment decisions of nationalised industries, thereby concealing their real performance.
The traditional theory of the firm assumes that profit maximisation is the objective of all firms and, on this basis, in competitive markets, high profits are a sign of success and efficiency.
Realistically, perfectly competitive markets rarely exist (ie there is some monopolistic tendency in most markets).
Furthermore, firms may set themselves several targets and not simply restrict themselves to the sole target of profit maximisation.
Therefore, even for a  private company, high profits do not necessarily imply efficiency.
(A further discussion of the possible efficiency gains from privatisation follows later in the chapter.)
The problems faced when assessing the performance of a nationalised industry are even more serious.
When established during the 1940s, nationalised industries were instructed to operate in the ‘public interest’ and to break even over a period of years.
It is, of course, possible for a monopoly, to break even at a whole series of different outcomes, at different pricing, output, employment and investment levels.
When taken with the latitude allowed by the instruction to ‘operate in the public interest’, it is easy to see that, with such imprecise targets, it was bound to be extremely difficult to assess the performance of nationalised industries.
Government interference, whether for political or economic reasons, is likely to make this assessment even more difficult.
In order to counter concern about the lack of guidance for nationalised industries, there were two government White Papers during the 1960s, which attempted to produce financial targets for nationalised industries and, at the same time, guidelines for pricing and investment decisions.
The attempts to improve the performances of nationalised industries were not allowed to run their course, because in the 1970s governments of both major parties used nationalised industries in order to achieve wider macroeconomic targets.
The increasing concern for inflation, felt during the 1970s, meant that governments restricted the price rises of nationalised industries in an attempt to moderate inflation in the economy as a whole.
During the latter part of the 1970s, cash limits, known as External Financing Limits (EFLs), were introduced as governments tried to control public spending.
Limits on the deficits of loss-making industries (eg British Rail) and profit targets for the profitable industries (eg British Gas) were set.
However, although an EFL appeared to set a clear target for a nationalised industry, it was not unambiguous.
Unlike in the private sector, borrowing for investment was treated in the same way as borrowing to finance current spending (on labour or raw materials).
Hence an EFL target may be achieved by cutting investment rather than improving efficiency by cutting costs.
Similarly in those nationalised industries which are monopolies, the EFL may be met simply by raising prices.
During the 1970s increasing concern was expressed about the performance of nationalised industries, many of which were monopolies, insulated from the pressures of the market and, therefore able to charge high prices.
In addition they were perceived to be inefficient, measured in terms of productivity, and also unprofitable, causing a drain on public finances.
The disenchantment with nationalised industries and moves by the Conservative government towards denationalisation, or ‘privatisation’, must be seen in this context.
THE MEANING OF PRIVATISATION
The term privatisation is a new one and is hard to define precisely.
There are three main strands to the policy of privatisation:
1
A transfer of ownership from the public sector to the private sector
This is achieved either through the sale of a public sector firm directly to a private sector firm or, more commonly, by the sale of at least 51 per cent of the shares in the company to the general public.
Although this could be termed denationalisation , the fact that it is not (instead the word ‘privatisation, is now more commonly used) is an indication of the extent of the change in thinking brought about by Thatcherism.
2
The provision of goods and services by the private sector, which were Previously supplied by the public sector
This is achieved when local authorities replace directly employed labour with a private sector firm (eg street cleaning, hospital laundry and catering services) and is known as contracting out .
It is hoped that, by putting the contract out to competitive tender, efficiency will rise and costs will fall.
Competitive tendering is a system whereby contracts are awarded to the supplier who offers the best deal.
Contracting out by local authorities has increased under the Conservative government — partly voluntarily and partly as a response to changes in the law requiring them to do so for certain activities.
However, opposition from Labour local authorities to privatisation measures, in principle, has been coupled, in practice, with a fear that job losses and a decline in the standard of services will occur as a result of contracting out.
3
Liberalisation or deregulation
This occurs when markets, previously served by the public sector monopolies and governed by regulations, are opened up to competition from the private sector.
(In fact the benefits of competition could be gained without the private sector acquiring public sector assets, ie competition could be created between different parts of the public sector.)
Liberalisation and deregulation measures are designed to stimulate competition, to improve the working of the market mechanism and to remove unnecessary regulations or controls.
Long distance coach travel was deregulated in 1979 and the results of competition were beneficial, in terms of reduced prices and a higher level of service on most routes.
The success of this measure led to the deregulation of local bus services in 1986, involving the break up of the National Bus Company and the introduction of private sector competition.
The effects have yet to be fully assessed, but there is some concern that, as bus companies are no longer allowed to engage in cross-subsidisation (ie direct profits from profitable routes towards subsidising unprofitable ones), unprofitable routes and evening and weekend services may be forced to close.
On the other hand, the service provided is more likely to be responsive to customer demand.
The most prominent aspect of privatisation, as practised by the Conservative government, has been the transfer of ownership of assets from the public sector to the private sector (as in definition 1), and it is the arguments for this that are now considered.
ARGUMENTS FOR PRIVATISATION
Improved efficiency and greater choice for the consumer
A company which has to satisfy its customers and compete to survive is more likely to be efficient, alert to innovation, and genuinely accountable to the public (1983 Conservative Election Manifesto).
Thus, using arguments which are, in effect, the same as the criticisms levelled against nationalised industries, it is claimed that privatisation leads to greater competition and efficiency, by exposing the privatised firms to market forces.
This responsiveness to consumer demand is also likely to lead to greater choice.
It is hoped that the managers, spurred on by the profit motive, will have an incentive to improve efficiency, as will the workforce, aware that the state will not be there to bail out loss-making enterprises.
Three aspects of efficiency are now considered.
1 ‘Product Market’ discipline
The increased discipline of competition in the product market (ie the market in which goods and services are sold) ensures that firms will be more responsive to consumer demand, providing better quality goods at lower prices than previously.
In addition, firms will be more able to respond to changes in demand by innovating and providing new products, once they are released from the bureaucratic requirements of state control.
How significant the product market discipline will be depends on the situation in that particular market.
In an industry in which there already exists a large number of competing firms, privatisation is unlikely to increase competition significantly.
There will be no effect on competition if a natural monopoly is privatised intact.
However, it is possible in both instances that efficiency may be improved, notwithstanding the reservations listed above, as a result of improved managerial decision making (see ‘Managerial Efficiency’ below).
It is generally accepted that privatisation will have the most favourable effect on competition when monopolies are broken up or when new competition is introduced.
On the other hand, it is also true to say that the benefits of scale may be lost (especially for a natural monopoly) and also that oligopolistic pricing may not always produce-a desirable outcome.
‘Capital market’ discipline
It is also hoped that the introduction of the capital market discipline, which is largely absent from nationalised industries (as previously mentioned), will help to improve efficiency of companies after privatisation in several ways:.
(a)
by providing the threat of bankruptcy, spurring both the management and workforce on to strive for improved productivity and greater efficiency.
However, for this to act as an effective discipline, the market must believe that the government would not rescue the firm if bankruptcy actually did occur.
Whether a government, even as market-orientated as Mrs Thatcher's Conservative government, would allow an important firm, such as British Gas, to collapse is debatable;
(b)
by creating a possible threat of takeover which, by forcing the management to take note of the company's share price, would force action to improve efficiency and profitability in the hope of raising the share price.
This assumes that companies will respond to a weakening share price by improving efficiency in the long term, rather than by making short-term savings which might help the company's performance in the short term (known as short termism), to the detriment of long-term performance.
(Refer also to Chapter 2, pages 24–5).
This threat of takeover may act as an effective discipline in some cases, although it is hard to prove.
However, even in an era of megamergers and leveraged buyouts , it is questionable whether large companies such as BT and British Gas are really likely to face predators.
Moreover, if the predator was foreign, it is debatable whether the government would be willing to allow the takeover to succeed — such sentiments were behind the enforced reduction of the Kuwaiti Investment Office's stake in BP in 1988;
(c)
by creating a need to satisfy the capital market (ie by making good profits) in order to gain access to funds for borrowing.
In a competitive situation, this would act as an effective discipline.
However, as has previously been stated, a natural monopoly, if privatised intact, may achieve high profits by exploiting its monopoly position, rather than by increasing its efficiency.
The performance of the industry might then satisfy the capital market, even though efficiency has not been raised.
3 Managerial efficiency
It has been argued that corporate efficiency in privatised industries has improved, not just by an exposure to market forces and an acceptance of the profit motive, but by the extra freedom given to managers.
(Critics argue that the most obvious signs of this freedom are the huge pay rises awarded by the directors of many privatised companies to themselves.
Refer to Table 3.1.)
Privatisation removes day-to-day government interference in corporate decision-making.
When in the state sector, firms may be subjected to the imposition of economic and social objectives and, in particular, interference in   pricing and investment decisions.
Privatisation removes these constraints and also allows managers to improve the speed of decision-making, essential in a rapidly changing market — decisions may now be made by managers rather than by lengthy referral to government departments.
Diversification into dynamic fast-growing industries is also made possible, as are moves to expand internationally.
In conclusion, there are wide-ranging claims made that privatisation improves efficiency, although critics argue that increasing competition has not played a sufficiently large part in the government's privatisation programme.
The behaviour of privatised industries will have to be studied over a number of years before it is possible to conclude whether the ownership of the company (ie private or public) or the market structure (ie competitive or monopolistic) is the major determinant of corporate behaviour.
If the latter is the more important, then privatisation of large nationalised industries intact will have little beneficial impact.
Other arguments for privatisation are now considered.
Wider share ownership
‘A free and independent society is one in which the ownership of property is spread as widely as possible’ according to the 1983 Conservative Election Manifesto.
The Conservative government has set out to achieve this by selling council houses and also by attempting to widen share ownership.
There has been a long-term decline in the number of private shareholders since the Second World War, matched by a rise in the importance of the institutional investor (eg insurance companies and pension funds).
The government has been keen to encourage employees to buy shares in their privatised companies, in an attempt to improve industrial relations and productivity and to eradicate the ‘them and us’ attitude in industry, by improving employee identification with their company.
Great effort has also been made to sell shares in privatised companies to the general public, many of whom have never owned shares before.
Favourable treatment has been given to the small shareholder, when allocating oversubscribed issues, in some of the privatisation issues.
However, although there has been a substantial rise in the number of private shareholders in the UK, many investors have sold their shares immediately after the purchase.
As most of the privatisation issues are sold at a discount, there is usually a substantial capital gain to be made.
If individuals restrict their share purchases to a limited number of privatised companies, selling soon after purchase, and not extending their purchases to other companies already quoted on the Stock Exchange, then the government's plan to widen share ownership and extend popular capitalism in any meaningful sense is open to doubt.
An article, critical of privatisation, in Marxism Today (January 1987) comments:
The idea of popular capitalism envisages a world where most people are active shareholders — it is vibrant, energetic, risky.
In contrast the style of shareholding encouraged by privatisation is secure, self-satisfied.
There is little accumulation  because many people sell the shares after the flotation, and most of those that hang on do not accumulate others.
There is little short-term risk because underpricing ensures a handsome short term profit.
In the longer run risk is minimised because BT and British Gas have been privatised as monopolies, with a secure position to generate profits.
As a consequence they are safe investments.
LAST MINUTE APPLICATIONS FOR SHARES IN BRITISH GAS, 3 DECEMBER 1986
Although it is certainly true that individuals can gain a false idea about the ease of making money on the Stock Market, there is also no doubt that privatisation has generated substantial interest in the Stock Market, much of it from new investors.
This interest was encouraged by the bull market which dominated   the Stock Market during the 1980s, until the Crash of October 1987.
The number of shareholders, as a percentage of the adult population, rose from 7 per cent in 1979 to 20 per cent in 1989 (see Figure 3.1).
By building up an army of individual shareholders the Conservatives may well have expected to gain political support.
The evidence for this is mixed, showing that a great number of those who bought shares were already Conservative supporters anyway.
Threats by the Labour party to renationalise privatised firms or to introduce ‘social ownership’ dented the share prices of privatised companies, whenever the Labour party appeared to be doing well in the opinion polls prior to the 1987 election.
However, in its 1989 Economic Policy Review Labour committed itself only to renationalising British Telecom and the water industry, as well as tightening regulations on privatised monopolies.
Budgetary benefits
A reduction in the role of the state in the running of the economy is, as has been outlined above, a major driving force behind the whole privatisation programme.
Yet, increasingly, arguments about the effects of privatisation on the state's finances, rather than discussion about the appropriate role of the state, have come to the fore as the revenue gained from asset sales has become sizeable.
The Medium Term Financial Strategy (MTFS) introduced in 1980 provided the basis of the government's monetarist economic strategy.
The strategy involved controlling the money supply and also achieving progressively smaller budget deficits, as measured by the public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR).
However, the government round it more difficult than expected to cut public expenditure and this, coupled with a desire to reduce taxation in order to increase incentives, meant that the PSBR targets could not be met without an extra source of revenue.
Asset sales helped to provide this.
Therefore the government was able to meet its borrowing target without resorting to raising taxation or cutting public expenditure (or, if these two options were politically unpalatable, abandoning the borrowing target).
The government treats asset receipts not as a means of financing the budget deficit, but instead as negative public expenditure .
This has the effect of reducing both public expenditure and the budget deficit below what they would otherwise have been.
Critics of privatisation extend their concern about the government's accounting procedures, seen as a ‘cooking of the books’, to the whole principle of selling assets (ie capital) to finance current spending.
This concern was voiced most publicly in November 1985 by Lord Stockton, the former Conservative Prime Minister, Harold Macmillan, who complained that selling off state assets was similar to a family ‘selling off its silver’, and questioned what would happen when none was left.
The government response was swift.
Peter Walker, the then Secretary of State for Energy, claimed:
The suggestion that privatisation is selling off the family silver is nonsense.
The reality is that both public and private sector companies are part of the nation's assets….
There is a great myth that the government, in conveying from the state to the people an asset, is selling the family silver.
It is not in fact selling the silver; it is transferring the silver from the politicians and civil servants to the family.
However, although the sale of a nationalised industry will provide a once-off boost for government finance, it should not be forgotten that the profits of the company, once privatised, will thereafter accrue to the private shareholders and not to the government, thereby reducing government revenues in the future.
(On the other hand, if the profit of the company rises after privatisation, whether due to efficiency gains or due to abuses of a natural monopoly position, the tax levied by the government on the company's profits might actually rise.)
Furthermore, once the profitable state enterprises have been sold, the state will be left with unprofitable ‘rump’, which will still require state funding, no longer offset by the profits made by other state enterprises.
It has been argued that, as newly privatised companies will be responsible for obtaining their investment from the market rather than from the government, the PSBR will fall.
This is certainly true, but it underlines what many consider has been the undue emphasis placed on the PSBR in the government's policy making.
Private borrowing is likely to rise by the same amount and may rise by even more if the privatised company is able to borrow freely from the market rather than relying on the government.
Hence overall borrowing for the country as a whole is unlikely to fall.
PRIVATISATION IN PRACTICE
The word privatisation was not mentioned in the 1979 Conservative Election Manifesto.
There were plans to ‘sell back to private ownership the recently nationalised aerospace and shipbuilding concerns, and to ‘sell shares in the National Freight Corporation to the general public’.
(In fact, shares were not offered to the public, but instead the management were offered the chance to organise a management buyout.)
In addition the powers of the National Enterprise Board, which operated various state-owned businesses, were to be restricted.
During its first term (1979–83) the government's main public sector policies involved achieving reductions in the public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) and improving the profitability of nationalised industries.
Although a number of companies were privatised (some were fully transferred to the private sector, whereas in other cases only a partial stake was sold), the scale of the programme and the sums of money raised were relatively small when compared to privatisation during the second and third terms.
The companies involved included BP, ICL, Ferranti, Fairey, British Aerospace, British Sugar, Cable & Wireless, Amersham International, Britoil, Associated British Ports and National Freight Corporation.
None of these companies was a natural monopoly and hence the concerns about competition, described above, did not apply, although there was opposition to the privatisation proposals from the Labour Party and the trade unions on grounds of principle.
Surprisingly, the 1983 Conservative Election Manifesto again failed to mention the word privatisation , but under a lengthy section on ‘the nationalised industries’ it was claimed:
reform of the nationalised industries is central to economic recovery…
We shall  transfer more state-owned businesses to independent ownership.
Our aim is that British Telecom, Rolls-Royce, British Airways and substantial parts of British Steel, of British Shipbuilders and British Leyland, as well as many as possible of Britain's airports, shall become private sector companies.
The plan was to sell £2 billion of assets per annum, but, as a result of the success of the British Telecom privatisation of December 1984, the figure to be raised was more than doubled (to £4.75 billion per annum )— by this time the revenue-raising implications of privatisation had become more apparent.
Privatisation during the second term of the Conservative government (1983 — 7) was dominated by the sell-off of monopolies and public utilities.
The sale to the public of 50 per cent of British Telecom (BT) in December 1984 was, at the time, the largest privatisation issue and it provided a major spur to the whole programme.
The sale was aimed particularly at small investors in accordance with the government's commitment to wider share-ownership and was preceded by heavy advertising.
In addition, potential shareholders were offered telephone vouchers or a bonus share issue if the shares were held for a period of three years, in order to try to prevent the immediate sale of shares after the issue.
Generous offers were also made to BT employees in order to encourage them to subscribe to shares in their own company.
In a further move to stimulate demand for the shares, only 50p of the £1.30 share price was required as an initial payment.
The huge interest generated in the share issue meant that on the first day of trading, the partially paid price of 50p immediately increased to 93p, which emphasised the extent of the undervaluation of the company; the share price subsequently increased by even more.
Although there was an attempt to introduce some competition for BT, this has been limited due to the natural monopoly position of parts of the telecommunications industry.
However, Mercury Communications was licensed as the sole competitor to BT under the 1981 Telecommunications Act, with the initial aim of providing a business communications system.
Thus BT has been provided with competition in part of the market, although the bulk of its services still face no competition.
The Office of Telecommunications (OFTEL) was created to act as the regulatory body for the telecommunications industry in order to ensure that BT did not abuse its dominant position.
In particular, the government imposed maximum permitted price rises on BT, in accordance with the formula (n — 3) per cent , where n is a measure of inflation, as measured by the Retail Price Index.
Thus, for example, for an inflation of 5 per cent , BT's prices were allowed to rise by 2 per cent .
This was an attempt to force BT to pass on productivity gains to the consumer.
The (n — 3) formula was fixed for a 5 year period of time and was subsequently tightened to (n — 4½) per cent, reflecting BT's high profits and the further likely gains in productivity expected.
However, although the overall price rise permitted has been fixed, this does not prevent BT from increasing different tariffs at different rates (provided it does not engage in Predatory pricing).
BT chose, however, to alter its charging structure, so that the domestic customer (previously subsidised by the business  user) paid relatively more, whereas business users (facing competition from Mercury) paid relatively less.
This, together with what was seen as its neglect of its social function as a provider of services (eg public phone boxes), led to public disquiet about the operation of BT.
However, the consumer has certainly gained by the liberalisation of the supply and maintenance of telephone equipment, introduced by the 1981 Telecommunications Act, which has resulted in lower prices, wider choice and improved products.
The British Gas flotation, in November 1986, raised almost £6 billion and, like the BT offer, was directed at the private shareholders.
The minimum investment was for 100 shares at a price of £1 per share, but, as the initial payment was only 50p per share, members of the public could become shareholders of British Gas for a down-payment as low as £50.
During the years prior to the flotation, British Gas had been forced by the government to sell both its North Sea oil interests and also its half share in the onshore Wytch Farm oilfield in Dorset.
However, Sir Denis Rooke, the Chairman of British Gas, successfully opposed moves to force it to sell off its showrooms and other component parts of the business.
The possibility of breaking up British Gas into competing units was also successfully opposed by Sir Denis, who argued that it was impossible to achieve competition in a natural monopoly.
Thus the monopoly was preserved intact and British Gas was privatised as a single entity, with no attempt to introduce competition (unlike BT where one competitor — albeit a small one — was introduced).
A regulatory body, OFGAS, was set up with similar responsibilities to OFTEL.
Amongst the other companies to have been privatised during the Conservative second term are Jaguar (1984), British Airways (1987) and Rolls-Royce (1987).
The privatisation of Jaguar, formerly part of British Leyland, was deemed to be a great success (although the company ran into difficulties later — refer to Chapter 4, page 76).
The 1987 Conservative Election Manifesto claimed:
In 1980 Jaguar made 14,000 cars a year, losing well over £3,000 on each car sold.
Now the company is hard put to keep up with overseas demand and last year sold over 40,000 cars, making a pre-tax profit of over £120m.
No monopoly issues were raised by this privatisation, nor were there any raised by the privatisation of Rolls-Royce.
Despite the fact that Rolls-Royce is the only UK aero engine manufacturer, international competition is intense.
However, monopoly questions were raised by the sale of British Airways (BA).
Although there were limited route transfers to British Caledonian before privatisation, BA was left as the dominant carrier and, at the time of privatisation, provided over three-quarters of British scheduled airline services.
British Caledonian (BCal), the ‘second force’ British airline, unable to compete effectively with its giant competitor, was forced to seek a merger with BA (as discussed in Chapter 2, pages 28–30).
Many observers believe that this outcome would not have happened if BA had not been privatised as such a dominant carrier in the UK, but others argue that this claim is irrelevant and that world competition is what matters; BA and BCal were both relatively small on the world stage, but might have been able to compete effectively in a merged form.
The privatisation of the British Airports Authority (BAA), postponed for several weeks by the 1987 election, also raised worries of monopoly — no attempt was made to privatise the airports controlled by the BAA as separate competing companies.
The arguments for promoting competition were rejected in favour of the argument that an integrated airports' policy was necessary and that this was best achieved by one company.
Critics supported this point of view, but argued that the public interest would have been best served by a company which had remained in the public sector.
The sale in October 1987 of the government's remaining 31.7 per cent shareholding in BP, Britain's largest company, showed that the purchase of shares in privatised companies need not always be the risk-free investment that its opponents allege.
The world stock market crash during the period of privatisation ensured that almost all of the BP stock was left with the underwriters.
In order to try and give the market some confidence the government organised a temporary ‘buy-back’ scheme, which provided, in effect, a minimum support price for the shares (only 2 per cent of the shares issued were in fact returned).
However the BP debacle was a major setback for the privatisation programme.
The privatisation of British Steel and Rover during 1988 were probably the privatisations which gave government ministers the most satisfaction, particularly in the aftermath of the disappointments of the BP flotation.
For many years both companies had been associated in the public's mind as loss-making nationalised industries.
Both companies were subjected to a drastic rationalisation programme.
As a result British Steel produced profits of over £400 million in the year 1987/88 and was privatised by means of a share sale to the general public.
Rover, although in a far healthier financial state than before, was not considered suitable for a similar sale of shares to the public.
However, the company was bought by British Aerospace (as described in Chapter 4, pages 72–4).
Thus, within a period of a year, two of the government's notorious former loss-makers had been privatised.
To this was added the promise to privatise British Coal if the Conservatives were re-elected for a fourth term.
The privatisation of water during 1989 created a great deal of controversy because the water industry probably provides the best example of a natural monopoly, and the likelihood of any competition is almost non-existent.
(This contrasts with the two large energy privatisations of gas and electricity where there are at least some areas of direct competition between the two industries — the privatisation of electricity is considered next.)
In addition, domestic water is generally charged at a flat-rate, which does not depend on consumption, and, in the absence of meters, there is no incentive for customers to conserve water — nor is there any indication to the consumer of the price of the water.
It was proposed initially that the ten water authorities should be privatised intact, but these proposals were abandoned.
The revised scheme proposed that the water authorities, now with only the functions of water supply and sewage disposal, should be privatised, but that a new National Rivers Authority should be created (in the public sector) to take over from the water authorities the regulatory functions of pollution control, water conservation, land drainage and flood protection, conservation, recreation, fisheries and navigation.
Thus  the government abandoned its earlier proposal to transfer to the new private sector companies the powers of regulation over river basin management, previously exercised by the water authorities.
The concept of an integrated river basin management approach , controlled by one authority in each area, was therefore destroyed by the proposals.
The need for proper regulation is greater in the water industry than in almost any other.
The problems of choosing an appropriate framework for any privatised natural monopoly have already been considered.
Any regulatory system will be judged not just by its ability to provide a ‘fair, rate of return for investors and ‘fair’ prices for consumers, but on its ability to avoid under-investment.
Vast sums of money will be needed to replace Victorian sewerage systems and, under pressure from environmentalists and the EC, to improve the quality of water.
The government's proposals for regulation of the water industry, announced in August 1989, provided a £4.9 billion debt write-off and an injection of new funds to the tune of £1 billion, referred to as a Green Dowry , to help pay for environmental improvements.
In addition, in order to fund the water industry's capital investment programme, a complex system of price regulation was announced.
This became known as the retail price index (RPI) plus K factor , where K varied for different water authorities between 3 per cent and 7 per cent.
The positive K factor was intended to allow water prices to rise by more than the rate of inflation, in order to help finance a £18.65 billion investment programme over ten years.
A consideration of the movement of the partly-paid share prices of the ten privatised water companies during the three days after the issue shows the size of the gains made and supports the view that the companies were undervalued (see Figure 3.2).
The electricity industry had always been considered to be a natural monopoly and plans to privatise it were preceded by lengthy discussions about the ideal structure for the industry.
These were designed to ensure that consumers were protected, but at the same time companies earned a fair rate of return on their investment.
Public concern about the privatisation of another energy supplier, British Gas, as a monopoly, coupled with a relatively weak regulatory framework, put pressure on ministers to ensure that this situation was not repeated.
As part of the state sector, the Central Electricity Generating Board (CEGB) owned and operated all the power stations in England and Wales and controlled the transmission grid.
Twelve area boards were responsible for distributing and selling the electricity to both industrial and domestic users.
The CEGB argued that the whole electricity industry should be ‘privatised intact’ and cited the benefits of an integrated generation and transmission system, based on the benefits of ‘tight margins of spare generating capacity (amongst the lowest in the industrial countries)’and ‘unified control in emergencies’.
The then Secretary of State for Energy, Cecil Parkinson, ruled out the creation of a private monopoly.
He also rejected the radical free market view, which proposed that each part of the electricity industry (generation, transmission and distribution) should be broken up into a large number of   competing companies.
This was partly due to the timescale involved (the commitment to privatise during the Conservatives' third term ruled out any complex break-up), but was also due to the problems involved with the nuclear industry.
It was felt that small companies would be less willing to take on the responsibilities of nuclear power plants.
The South of Scotland Electricity Board was, however, to be maintained after privatisation, as both a generator and distributor of power (ie as a regional integrated monopoly).
The details of the privatisation, announced in February 1988, involved the break-up of the CEGB into three parts — generation, transmission and distribution.
Two companies were to be formed from the CEGB's generating activities.
National Power was allocated 70 per cent of the power plant, but was given control of the nuclear programme.
PowerGen was created out of the remaining 30 per cent of the power plant, thereby forming a competitor to the dominant supplier.
In addition independent generating companies were to be encouraged to enter the market as competitors for the duopoly created.
Crucially, the CEGB was to lose the ownership of the national transmission grid.
This was to be jointly owned by twelve area distribution companies, which were to be created to take on the distribution role of the existing twelve area boards.
The control of the grid is vital to the operation of the electricity industry, and the decision was also seen as being a good indication of the.
government's views on competition in the industry.
If the grid had remained under the control of the generating companies, it would have meant that the  government had accepted the CEGB's view that an integrated network was the key to efficiency and lower prices.
Instead, by separating transmission from both generation and transmission, the government showed that it had rejected the dangers of efficiency losses due to fragmentation in favour of the potential benefits of competition.
The National Grid was to be responsible for ensuring that sufficient power was provided by the generating companies to the distribution companies at all times.
The demand for electricity is uneven throughout the day, involving certain periods of peak demand.
The National Grid was charged with adopting a ‘merit order’ of power stations, based on efficiency, in order to fix which power stations were to be used at which times.
This was seen as being a major spur to improving efficiency for the generating companies.
Despite the moves outlined above, the need for regulation in the electricity industry remains of crucial importance.
The construction of an appropriate regulatory framework is extremely complex and this has been borne out by the US experience.
At the time of writing, full proposals have yet to be announced.
It would be possible to institute a ‘retail price index minus x’ formula, designed to encourage efficiency and to ensure that productivity gains are passed on to the consumer.
The questions of whether to allow increases in the industry's import fuel bills to be passed on to the consumer and how to treat investment need to be addressed.
If the regulatory framework permits the transfer to customers of the whole cost of rising fuel bills, but makes no allowance for investment, generating companies would have an incentive to build the cheapest possible power plants, which are likely to be costly and inefficient in the use of fuel.
In an embarrassing retreat, the government was forced to withdraw the nuclear power stations from its proposed electricity privatisation during 1989, in a blow both to its privatisation and nuclear power programmes.
For years the economics of the nuclear power industry were concealed within the overall accounts of the public sector electricity industry.
However, during the run up to privatisation, it was established that the running costs of the nuclear power stations were higher than was previously believed and that, in addition, the costs of decommissioning these power stations and reprocessing the spent fuel were both high and uncertain.
The costs and risks involved indicated that it would have been very difficult to convince investors to invest in the generating company National Power if it had been responsible for the nuclear power stations, even though it had been given control of the majority of the generating capacity in order to compensate for this.
Nuclear Electric, a third generating company, was to be established to take control of the nuclear power stations and to remain in the public sector.
A list of privatisations between 1979 and 1990, together with the proceeds from privatisation, are contained in Table 3.2.
COMMENT
Privatisation has become a major plank of the Conservative government's programme.
Supporters argue that privatisation increases efficiency, widens   share ownership and increases consumer choice.
Opponents argue that it is a cynical way of both raising extra government revenues and also buying votes.
In addition, whenever a natural monopoly is transferred intact to the private sector, there is a danger that the consumer will suffer.
In order to meet this danger, the government has introduced a regulatory framework in some cases.
It is extremely difficult to provide a clear conclusion about the success of privatisation.
For example, British Telecom's service has received heavy criticism since privatisation; but how much of this failure to provide an ‘adequate, service is due to post-privatisation behaviour as opposed to decisions (perhaps inadequate investment) made beforehand?
However, if success can be measured by the number of governments in all   parts of the world now privatising their state-owned assets, then privatisation can be seen as a great success.
An Industrial Case Study: The Motor Industry
BACKGROUND
The motor industry has been chosen as a case study to consider various industrial issues that have affected the British economy during the period of Conservative government.
In order to do this, the background to this period is also briefly considered.
The chapter investigates:
(a)
the reasons for the decline of the British motor industry;
(b)
the government's response to the decline and prospects for the future;
(c)
the need to exploit economies of scale;
(d)
the role of foreign investment and the implications of foreign ownership (with particular reference to Japan);
(e)
the trend towards greater collaboration and cross-border mergers;
(f)
the privatisation of Leyland/Rover;
(g)
the implications of the EC completion of the Internal Market in 1992.
The British car industry
Encouraged by the Labour government's attempts to restructure parts of British manufacturing industry (see Chapter 2, pages 25–6 concerning the formation of GEC), the British Leyland Motor Corporation (BLMC) was formed in 1968 as a result of the merger of BMC and Leyland.
This followed a succession of smaller mergers during the previous decade as the once dominant, but then struggling, independent British car makers joined together in an attempt to gain economies of scale and to maintain their market share in the face of fierce international competition.
(In 1930 the combined UK market share obtained by Austin and Morris — later both to be parts of BLMC — was approximately 60 per cent.)
However, throughout the 1960s and 1970s the company was plagued by poor industrial relations and inadequate investment.
In addition there was no serious attempt to rationalise the model range; thus too many different, mainly outdated, models were produced and insufficient profit was generated to develop new products.
For many, the performance of the company epitomised the problems faced by British industry.
On the verge of bankruptcy in December 1974, Leyland approached the recently elected Labour government for assistance.
This was provided as a consequence of the Ryder Report, which recommended a substantial injection of public funds in April 1975.
At that time Mr Tony Benn was Industry Secretary and the Labour government was attempting to increase state involvement in private industry by means of the National Enterprise Board (NEB).
However, it became increasingly obvious during the next two years that the Ryder Report had been over optimistic about the market share of Leyland, and that even large injections of capital were insufficient to overcome the problems of poor labour relations, low productivity and entrenched attitudes.
Critics of the report saw it as an old-style socialist attempt to plan the future of an industry, without due regard to market forces.
Sir Michael Edwardes was appointed to the task of rescuing the company in 1977 and in the next five years attempted to reduce excessive centralisation in the company and to improve efficiency, which involved many plant closures and redundancies.
Although appointed under a Labour government, he was in every sense a Thatcherite manager.
The drive to increase productivity resulted in a series of conflicts with the unions as Sir Michael sought the right to manage.
He often went over the head of union officials, appealing directly to the workforce, and, to a great extent, the workforce accepted his proposals, thereby improving productivity and dramatically reducing the days lost through industrial disputes.
After unsuccessful attempts to merge or collaborate with Renault and certain other European manufacturers in 1978–9, Leyland announced proposals to collaborate with Honda in 1979.
The management of the company had concluded it was too small to survive on its own.
The European car industry
The European car industry has increasingly become dominated by a small number of large companies.
The main reason for this is that large production runs are necessary in order to cover the massive fixed costs involved in developing new cars or major components (eg engines and gearboxes).
Smaller companies, unable to compete effectively and unable to generate the profits necessary for future investment, have tended to stagnate, sometimes propped up by national governments.
Mergers and collaborative ventures with one of the larger companies have been common.
The ‘Big Six’ companies in Europe comprise General Motors (Opel/Vauxhall) and Ford (both US-owned multinationals), Fiat, Volkswagen, Renault and Peugeot.
No British-owned company is in this list, although General Motors, Ford and Peugeot have car assembly facilities in the UK.
At the other extreme a number of specialist car producers have come to dominate the luxury end of the car market.
The main companies  are Daimler-Benz, BMW, Porsche, Jaguar, Volvo and Saab.
In this sector of the market profits per car sold are generally considerably higher than in the mass-produced car market.
Companies such as Rover, Alfa-Romeo and Seat became increasingly caught in no man's land, insufficiently large to compete on effective terms with the Big Six and yet unable to gain a secure niche in the market which would enable them to compete with the luxury car makers.
(After a complex series of name changes, Rover had replaced Leyland as the name of the whole company.)
All three companies mentioned above were involved during 1986 in merger negotiations with one or other of the Big Six.
Such moves, some between private companies and others inspired by governments, can be seen as a further restructuring of the European car industry, faced with the increasing challenge of Japanese and other Far Eastern competition.
Both Alfa-Romeo and Seat found ‘European solutions’ to their problems with Fiat and Volkswagen respectively.
These solutions, together with the unsuccessful moves to sell various parts of Rover to US multinationals and Rover's subsequent return to the private sector, are considered later in the chapter.
West European car sales for 1989 indicate the gap between the production level of Rover and the Big Six:(see Table 4.1).
THE JAPANESE CONNECTION: A TROJAN HORSE?
The Japanese motor industry achieved spectacular export growth during the 1960s and 1970s, but has started to locate production facilities abroad in recent years.
This has been prompted by the increasing value of the yen, which has squeezed profit margins on cars exported, and also by the growing threat of  protectionism in many countries.
The UK negotiated a Voluntary Export Restraint (VER)(sometimes known as Voluntary Restraint Agreement — VRA) with Japan, limiting Japan's share of the UK market to 11 per cent and some other European countries (eg France and Italy) have even more stringent controls.
VERs are designed to protect the domestic car industry, but critics argue that consumers suffer, as some are prevented from buying the car of their choice, and that the prices of Japanese cars are higher than they would otherwise have been, thus raising Japanese profit margins (ie profit per car sold).
In the absence of keen pricing from the Japanese, the competitive element in the UK market is reduced and therefore car prices are generally higher than they would be if market forces were allowed to operate freely.
Japan's three largest car companies — Toyota, Nissan and Honda — have each announced plans to establish assembly plants in Britain, with Honda having a collaborative agreement and other close links with Rover (see Figure 4.1).
The effects of Japanese involvement in the British car industry are now considered.
Nissan and Toyota
Nissan, Japan's second largest car manufacturer, put forward proposals in 1981 to establish a plant capable of producing 200,000 cars a year by 1986.
However, after doubts had been expressed by certain of Nissan's executives, this proposal  was drastically scaled-down.
The factory which opened in 1986 at Washington, Tyne and Wear was capable of assembling 24,000 cars only and these were to be constructed from ‘kits’ imported from Japan.
The local content of those cars (where ‘local’ means ‘European’, not necessarily ‘British’) was approximately 20 per cent and only 500 jobs were created.
Under Phase 2 of the scheme, Nissan proposed to increase output to 100,000 cars a year by 1991, with local content rising above 60 per cent during 1988 and subsequently rising to 80 per cent.
As a result, an additional 2,200 jobs would follow.
Plans to start exporting the Nissan Bluebird to continental Europe were announced in 1988 and the production target was raised to 200,000 cars a year for 1992/93.
These plans were opposed by the French and Italians who questioned the ‘European credentials, of the cars.
The Nissan plant, although smaller than the one originally envisaged, was welcomed by the depressed North East of England.
Not only would jobs be provided directly, but there would also be additional employment generated in the components industry and in ancillary services.
Although the amount of employment created by Nissan was relatively small compared to the huge loss of manufacturing jobs caused by de-industrialisation in the North East, the investment was seen as a sign of hope, possibly leading to involvement by other Japanese companies.
A single-union agreement was negotiated with the Amalgamated Engineering Union (AEU), which effectively provided a no-strike deal for Nissan.
If negotiation fails to provide an agreement acceptable to both sides then a dispute is referred to pendulum arbitration.
In this case the arbitrator has to accept either the position of the management or that of the workforce — the purpose of such arbitration is to encourage moderation, by discouraging unrealistically high pay claims from the workforce and unrealistically low offers from the management, in the expectation that a traditional arbitrator would eventually ‘split the difference’ between the two positions.
In view of the high unemployment existing in the North East of England, Nissan has been able to select carefully whom to recruit.
Job flexibility was an important feature and was intended to reduce demarcation disputes (ie disputes about ‘who does what’) and add to the smooth running of the plant.
Concern has, however, been expressed about the overall impact of the Nissan plant on the rest of the motor industry and on the economy as a whole.
The effect of Japanese competition in some industries in the past has been to reduce drastically the size of those industries and in some cases (eg motor cycles) virtually eliminate the industries altogether.
Thus it is argued that, in order to provide protection for the UK car industry, the VER negotiated with the Japanese to limit car imports into the UK should be tightened and the Japanese should certainly not be allowed to establish production facilities in Britain, whereby the VER might be avoided.
However, assurances have been received that the level of the local content of the Nissan cars would rise to 80 per cent and this would appear to convert the existing ‘kit, assembly plant into a full scale production facility.
Nonetheless, there is still concern about exactly how the 80 per cent is to be measured.
If the  high technology components continue to be produced in Japan, there will be relatively little scope for research and development in the UK and the plant will remain a satellite or screwdriver plant.
Although the Nissan investment will undoubtedly create employment there is argument about the net employment effect — this involves a consideration of the jobs lost indirectly as a consequence of the establishment of the factory.
This analysis falls into two parts.
Firstly there are fears for the UK components industry and worries that, even when the 80 per cent‘local’(ie European) content has been reached, Nissan will be less willing to ‘buy British’ components than other established carmakers.
Secondly it is necessary to consider the effect on the other car-producing manufacturers in the UK.
This will depend whether (a) the Nissan cars are for export to the EC,(b) they are sold in the UK to customers who would otherwise have purchased an imported car or (c) they are sold in the UK to customers who would otherwise have bought a car produced in the UK by one of the other UK manufacturers.
In the first two cases ((a and (b)) there will be a beneficial effect on output, employment and balance of payments, whereas in the third case there will be no overall positive effect on any of those variables; it may even result in a negative effect if Nissan's components are ‘less British’ than those of other UK-based manufacturers.
Thus, if Nissan gains market share at the expense of cars which would have been manufactured in the UK anyway, problems may be caused for other companies, especially Rover which relies principally on the UK market for its sales.
These concerns clearly were not shared by Mrs Thatcher who welcomed the announcement of the second phase of the Washington development in September 1986: ‘This is good news for the North East and for Britain and makes Nissan a fully-fledged UK car manufacturer and a major exporter.’
When Toyota, Japan's largest  automotive group, announced in 1989 its intention to construct a plant at Burnaston, near Derby, the reaction to it was far more favourable than that received by Nissan eight years previously.
This was largely a result of the widely-perceived success of the Nissan plant.
The £700 million investment was the largest single investment by a Japanese company in Europe.
Plans were announced to produce 100,000 cars a year by 1995, rising to 200,000 cars a year by 1997/8.
The high subsidies offered by the UK government to Nissan and by other European governments to encourage Japanese investment gave rise to fears that the Europeans were engaging in ‘beggar-my-neighbour’ subsidy policies, which would benefit the Japanese and give them an unfair competitive advantage when compared to existing producers.
However, unlike Nissan, Toyota received no state aid towards its investment, as Derbyshire was not an eligible area.
Under 1989 EC guidelines, state aid provided to the motor industry has to be cleared by the European Commission and the generous level of aid provided to Nissan in Tyne and Wear would not have been available, had Toyota decided to invest there instead.
Shortly afterwards Toyota announced plans to establish an engine plant in Shotton, North Wales and this was seen as a further sign of confidence in the British economy.
Honda
Cooperation between Rover and Honda has become increasingly close since links were forged in 1979.
The initial agreement made was a licensing agreement whereby Rover (then known as BL) assembled the Honda Ballade from 1981 onwards with limited alterations and sold it as the Triumph Acclaim.
This served as a stop-gap measure intended to fill the gap in Rover's range before the introduction of the Maestro and Montego models.
The Acclaim proved so successful that production was continued after the introduction of these cars, although a restyled model was named the Rover 200 as part of Rover's plan to improve the image of the company by concentrating on fewer marques.
Whereas the Triumph Acclaim/Rover 200 was a Japanese car built under licence in the UK, the second venture between Rover and Honda involved the joint development of a luxury car.
The two models, the Rover 800 and the Honda Legend share basic design but have slightly different exteriors and interiors.
Further collaboration involved the joint development of a medium-sized car, the Rover 200/Honda Concerto, launched in 1989.
The deals announced allowed Rover to share research and development costs with Honda.
It was also hoped that Honda's management philosophy and production techniques would improve working practices at Rover.
There was lengthy speculation that Honda might take an equity stake (ie a shareholding) in Rover, but there appeared to be little enthusiasm for that from Honda.
It was hard to see what extra benefit would accrue to Honda from such a stake, especially when, in addition to the ventures already discussed, an agreement had been reached to assemble Honda cars in Rover factories on spare production lines in order to provide jobs for Rover workers.
In seemed that Honda was therefore able to get the benefits from the relationship between the companies, without becoming involved with the responsibilities of ownership.
In the light of this, the announcement in 1989 that Honda was to take a 20 per cent stake in Rover, was seen as a further cementing of ties between the two companies and a long term commitment to Rover's development by Honda.
Previously the possibility that Honda viewed the links as only short-term could not be ruled out.
At the same time, Honda announced a £300 million investment for an assembly plant at Swindon, capable of producing 100,000 cars a year by 1994.
This announcement meant that the three biggest Japanese car makers had all selected the UK as the site for their first European car assembly plant, in preparation for the completion of the Single European Market in 1992.
However, the UK willingness to accept inward investment by Japanese car firms has been criticised by other European car makers as an attempt to export unemployment to other countries.
Thus these plants can be seen as creating a ‘Trojan Horse’, whereby Japanese firms attempt to evade protectionist measures against imports from Japan by locating production facilities within the EC.
At the time of writing, doubt still exists over two important issues relating to Japanese cars.
Britain, France, Italy, Spain and Portugal all have different VERs — all negotiated bilaterally — on Japanese cars.
How these restrictions are to be  handled post-1992 has yet to be fixed.
This is of crucial importance, because restrictions on trade between EC countries will not be permitted post-1992; hence with the present system of VERs, Japanese cars would be imported into one EC country without a VER and then moved to another EC country with a VER.
Furthermore, it has yet to be decided whether or not Japanese cars produced in Britain should be part of an overall fixed limit.
Mr Calvert, President of Peugeot and highly critical of Britain's stance on Japanese investment, insisted: ‘Even if Nissan had 100 per cent local content as well as local design, they would go in the overall quota’.
The resolution of these issues is clearly crucial for the future of the Japanese car industry investment in Britain.
THE ROVER SELL-OFF
Returning Rover to the private sector had been an aim of the Conservative government for several years.
However, continuing financial uncertainty meant that privatisation by means of a share issue to the public was out of the question.
The government therefore turned to multinational companies as potential suitors for Rover.
When details of its plan to split up and sell off parts of Rover became public in 1986, however, the government faced a political storm.
It followed shortly after the ‘Westland Affair’— a dispute about whether Westland, a manufacturer of helicopters, should become involved with European or American collaboration which resulted in the resignations of two cabinet ministers (Leon Brittan and Michael Heseltine).
The government proposed (a) that Austin Rover cars should be sold to Ford,(b) that Leyland Vehicles (including Land Rover) should be sold to General Motors, which manufactured Bedford trucks in the UK and (c) that Leyland Bus should be sold to the other major UK-based bus manufacturer, the Laird Group.
Each part of these proposals is now considered.
The Austin Rover/ford proposal
Despite substantial state investment, drastic rationalisation, increased productivity and the agreement with Honda, Austin Rover had been unable to increase its market share or return to economic viability.
In an industry dominated by much larger producers who were able to benefit from economies of scale, the government therefore concluded that the sale to Ford was preferable to continued state subsidy and/or ever closer links with Honda.
Since Ford would dominate the UK car market, it was hoped that the company would have a major interest in ensuring that this market was successful and that this might involve the expansion of research and development in the UK.
Many objections were voiced against the proposed deal which caused such a storm that it was dropped within days of the news breaking.
It was not at all clear exactly what the proposed Austin Rover/Ford operation would entail.
Critics argued that it was merely an attempt by Ford to purchase market share in the UK and that rationalisation would inevitably cause massive job losses.
There was added concern that Ford would use its position to increase its tied  imports of cars — cars assembled overseas but indistinguishable from those assembled in Britain.
Concern was also expressed for the future of the British components industry if Ford showed less willingness to purchase British components than Austin Rover traditionally had done — thus any job losses could extend beyond the two firms engaged in the merger.
There were worries that the combined Austin Rover/Ford operation would develop merely into an assembly plant for cars designed abroad.
It was also feared that the British car industry would lose its research and development facilities, together with its high technology capability, with employees finishing up as ‘metal bashers’ for overseas companies, performing low ‘value added’jobs.
Such concerns have already been voiced earlier in this chapter when considering the impact of Japanese plants.
These arguments led critics to claim that the position the company found itself in underlined the flaws of Thatcherism, highlighted the weakness of the government's policy towards industry and emphasised the need for a clear industrial strategy (refer also to Chapter 1, pages 12–13).
It was argued that the government's policy towards Austin Rover could be viewed as an attempt to slim down the company through rationalisation and privatise parts as they became profitable (eg Jaguar), finishing up with an unprofitable rump which had very little chance of long-term viability on its own.
There was also concern that, as the combined market shares of the two companies approached 50 per cent, this could lead to an abuse of monopoly power.
Although there were many existing and potential foreign competitors in the car industry, car prices in Britain were already significantly higher than in other EC countries and such a dominant company could have made matters worse.
(The Monopolies and Mergers Commission announced in May 1990 that it was to investigate car pricing in Britain.)
Finally there were those who argued that it was essential to keep British control over at least part of the British car industry and that, after all the taxpayers money invested in Austin Rover, the company should not be turned over to Ford, a US multinational.
The Leyland Vehicles/General Motors proposal
The proposal to sell Leyland Vehicles including Land Rover to General Motors, manufacturer of Bedford trucks, caused as much disquiet as the mooted sale of Austin Rover to Ford and was eventually thwarted after much public argument, when General Motors withdrew from the deal.
Faced with a much reduced market for heavy trucks in Europe (including the UK) in the early part of the 1980s, talks were began between Leyland Vehicles and GM's Bedford Trucks in 1984 to see if there was scope for collaboration between the two companies.
Talks between GM and other European truck manufacturers had failed to produce the collaboration that GM wanted.
The benefits of a merger to GM would be to gain access to Leyland Vehicles' recently introduced product range, whereas Leyland Vehicles would have access to GM's financial muscle and foreign dealer network.
Although there would undoubtedly have been job losses after the merger, the proposal can be viewed as a relatively straightforward attempt to restructure and then rationalise an industry with excess capacity, with firms which were insufficiently large to  exploit economies of scale and thus unable to make a profit.
If this argument is accepted, some job losses in the short term would be preferable to both companies remaining in an unviable position with the possibility of complete closure for both in the long run.
The merger failed because, in the post-Westland environment it was seen as yet another sop to the United States, and more specifically, because GM insisted that Land Rover should be included in the package with Leyland Vehicles.
Critics argued that Land Rover was being offered as a sweetener to offset the lossmaking Leyland Trucks part of the business, whereas GM claimed that access to its US dealership network would be beneficial to Land Rover.
Despite assurances from GM that it would maintain the British content of Land Rover vehicles at existing levels, considerable unease was felt by many politicians.
After the news of the secret negotiations between the government, Leyland Vehicles and GM broke in February 1986, the government allowed alternative bids to be put in for the different parts of the firm.
Although there were several offers made for Land Rover, there were no serious contenders for Leyland Trucks.
Despite press speculation that GM might be offered a modified deal on Land Rover (49 per cent of the shares), the government eventually made it clear to GM that Land Rover was not part of the Leyland Vehicles deal, and as a result GM withdrew its offer.
The government subsequently decided not to accept any of the bids for Land Rover during April 1986 amid considerable political embarrassment.
When in August 1986 GM announced that it was merging its North American heavy truck operations with Volvo, under Volvo's control, the future of Bedford looked bleak.
It was in the context of this merger and GM's failure to find a partner for Bedford in the UK that it announced the ending of medium and heavy truck production in September 1986.
It would appear that this closure and the consequent employment effects can be attributed to the government's failure to sanction the deal with Leyland Vehicles earlier in the year, as a result of the political pressure imposed.
However, the position is not as simple as this because, if the merger had taken place, rationalisation and restructuring would have happened anyway and it is likely that certain plants in any combined GM/Leyland group would have closed.
Moreover, the lack of success of many previous mergers in the UK motor industry between struggling groups does not fill one with confidence for the long-term success of that proposed venture.
The government continued to explore other possibilities during 1987, engaging in talks with Paccar of the US, which owns the British lorry maker Foden, and DAF of the Netherlands, which already had a distribution deal with Leyland.
The European solution prevailed and a joint company, Leyland DAF, was formed, in which Rover had 40 per cent of the equity.
Both Leyland Trucks and Freight Rover, the profitable Sherpa Van subsidiary, were included in the deal.
The restructuring involved plant closures and the loss of 2,200 jobs, but it was hoped that the future of the firm would be more secure as part of a larger organisation, able to secure the benefits of DAF's distribution network in Europe.
A £750 million grant from the British government to ‘write-off  accumulated debt’ was cut by £70 million by the European Commission.
The deal fell foul of the Commission which, during the run up to the elimination of European trade barriers and the completion of the Internal Market in 1992, had begun to play an increasingly important role in competition policy.
EC rules ban subsidies which are likely to distort competition.
As a consequence of the write-off of debt by the government and the upturn in the European truck industry, the merger proved successful and was profitable from the start, with output at Leyland increasing.
The Leyland Bus/Laird Group proposal
After the initial failure to sell Austin Rover and Leyland Vehicles the government continued to negotiate for the sale of Leyland Bus, which was to have been sold to the Laird Group, the second largest UK bus manufacturer.
The demand for buses has dropped dramatically since the late 1970s and this process has been accelerated by the ending of both the bus grant and revenue support for bus services.
Furthermore, the deregulation of bus services has shifted demand away from traditional large buses towards smaller ones, the demand for which has been met to a great extent by importers.
The proposal was, however, rejected in favour of a management buyout which valued the company at £4 million in January 1987.
Thus the government rejected the argument that the best way to improve the long-run viability of the industry would be to restructure it by merging the two leading manufacturers.
Instead both firms were to compete in the market against one another and against foreign competition.
Yet in 1988, the management consortium sold the company to Volvo of Sweden for £15 million claiming that the business had been restructured during the previous two years, but that the ‘key to success in this business is to be a world player’.
Volvo promised to create extra work for the two plants and to provide ‘substantial investment’.
It is possible that the increase in the value of the company was justified, but it is also possible to understand accusations that this represented yet another privatised company sold at less than its real value.
The Rover/BAe deal
Despite signs of renewed interest from both Ford and Volkswagen (keen to re-establish itself as the largest car manufacturer in Europe), the British government announced in March 1988 that it intended to pursue a wholly British solution for the remaining parts of Rover by selling it to British Aerospace (BAe).
Although Rover had reported an operating profit of £27 million for 1987, after years of heavy losses, covered by government handouts, the chances of privatising the company by an issue of shares to the public still seemed remote.
The political storm generated in 1986 by the proposals to sell various parts of Rover to foreign competition had not been forgotten and the government was keen to avoid a repetition of this, particularly if unpopular rationalisation and plant closures were involved.
In those circumstances the only option open to a government, determined to return Rover to the private sector, was to sell it to a British company which was not involved in the car  industry.
When the BAe/Rover deal was first announced, surprise was expressed and questions were raised about the reasons for BAe's interest in Rover.
Bryan Gould, the Labour Trade and Industry spokesman, questioned: ‘Is this not a further example of the sort of conglomerate merger that has served British industry so ill in the past?’
The Chairman of Aerospatiale, the French aerospace group, commented that the proposed merger (together with that between Daimler Benz and Messerschmitt under consideration at the same time) risked setting a trend towards diversified national groupings, which would make the task of creating a European aerospace industry, capable of competing with the US, more difficult.
Questions were raised about the ‘industrial logic’ of a merger between an aerospace company and a car company, although there are several foreign combined aerospace/car groupings (eg General Motors, Daimler Benz, Fiat and Saab).
Indeed Saab has run an advertising campaign specifically linking the two activities in the hope of raising car sales, by transferring an up-market high-technology image from aeroplanes to cars.
The benefits of synergy or cross-fertilisation were claimed to be one of the main reasons for the link-up.
Professor Smith, Chairman of BAe, claimed that synergy existed between the two companies in terms of‘engineering technology, marketing, purchasing and quality standards’.
Others see little sign of overlap between the two and, moreover, claim that any benefits will take time to accrue.
The long-term nature of the potential benefits is, however, supported by Graham Day, Chairman of Rover: ‘This is long-term and strategic.
To spot the synergy you must focus on the manufacturing process, not the product.’
He also claimed ‘everyone is looking at new materials to bring down the weight of vehicles.’
BAe was keen to diversify, in order to protect itself from the cyclical swings of both civil and military aerospace manufacturing.
In addition, the Rover link would bring BAe into contact with Honda, a link which was welcomed by BAe, both in terms of potential collaboration in manufacturing and also as a means of facilitating sales in the Far East.
(As stated earlier in this chapter, Rover's links with Honda were further cemented when Honda acquired a 20 per cent stake in Rover.)
The Rover link gave BAe minority stakes in several companies previously hived off from Rover — in particular the 40 per cent stake in Leyland DAF.
(The flotation of Leyland DAF on the Stock Market in 1989 yielded BAe £100 million for the sale of part of its 40 per cent stake in the company; this compares with £150 million paid by BAe to the government for the whole of the Rover Group, including the Leyland DAF stake!)
It is hard to put a value on a company which has large assets and turnover, but which is barely profitable, and it could be that BAe found the price it had to pay for Rover just too good to refuse.
The terms agreed with the British government valued the company at £150 million, but there would be an £800 million cash injection by the government in order to wipe out ‘past indebtedness’.
However, this deal, like the Leyland DAF deal, fell foul of the European Commission's rules banning subsidies which are likely to distort competition, and the EC judged that £253 million should be reduced from the cash injection and that there should be no further government aid for Rover.
The revised deal was accepted by BAe.
The EC also insisted on a biannual monitoring of Rover's hitherto secret five-year corporate plan, in order to confirm that the money allocated for restructuring was being spent on that.
The plan involved proposals to reduce excess capacity and to transform Rover from being a volume car producer to a specialist producer in an ‘up-market move’ with the aim of increasing profit per car sold (see Figure 4.2).
The disclosure of these plans forced a premature announcement that two plants — Cowley South and Llanelli Pressings — were to be run down and closed in the early 1990s with the loss of about 3,400 jobs.
Although BAe was blamed, it was correct to point out that the corporate plan had been drawn up before the proposed merger.
Small comfort was gained from the fact that had a competitor taken over Rover instead, job losses might have been considerably greater.
RESTRUCTURING THE ITALIAN AND SPANISH CAR INDUSTRIES
In order to try and place the problems faced by the British car industry into an international perspective, the car industries of Italy and Spain are briefly considered.
In 1985 Ford failed in its attempt to merge its European car production facilities with those of Fiat, largely on the issue of which company would be dominant in the partnership.
The very fact that two of the Big Six European companies were even considering merging indicates the growing emphasis on scale in the car industry, and highlights the difficulties that a company such as Rover faces in the world market.
This abortive merger was followed for Ford in 1986 by the suspension of the preliminary discussions with the British  government on the sale of Austin Rover.
Twice thwarted Ford then turned its attention to the loss making, state-owned, Alfa Romeo company of Italy, in what was seen as a continuation of its battle with Fiat, which was also interested in acquiring Alfa Romeo.
Ford claimed that ‘an association with another company is not essential for Ford's continued success in Europe’.
However, the move was seen as one which would boost Ford's market share and which would also provide the company with a prestigious marque with a sporty image.
The Ford bid can, therefore, be seen as an attempt to establish Alfa in relation to Ford in the same way as the Audi cars complement the Volkswagen range.
Fiat countered by proposing to merge Alfa with its own Lancia subsidiary and claimed that: ‘Our aim is to create a company specialising in high performance prestige cars with the sporty, aggressive characteristics of Alfa and the luxurious comfort of Lancia; a company which can put itself and Fiat at the top of the European car market.’
On the face of it the motives of Ford and Fiat appeared to be similar, but the key difference was that Ford's share of the Italian car market was minimal, whereas Fiat's was in excess of 55 per cent.
Thus the merger of Fiat/Lancia and Alfa would increase Fiat's existing dominance of the Italian car market and be liable to lead to an increase in monopoly power.
Critics of Fiat therefore argued that its bid could be seen as a defensive move to improve its domestic position and, perhaps more importantly, to prevent a competitor from obtaining Italian production facilities, which in the long run could pose a threat to Fiat.
Although there was opposition to the Fiat-Alfa deal from some trade unionists who were concerned at the possible job losses caused by rationalisation after a merger, the Italian government was subjected to considerable political pressure of a nationalistic nature to support the Fiat bid — pressure similar to that which forced the British government to cancel the talks between Ford and Austin Rover — and eventually rejected the Ford overtures in favour of an ‘all Italian solution’.
Thus the Italian government increased the dominant position of Fiat and rejected the chance of increase competition in its home market.
The Spanish government too was faced with questions concerning the restructuring of the car industry during 1986.
(Spain joined the European Community together with Portugal in 1986.)
These questions arose largely as a consequence of EC membership, which necessitated a phased withdrawal of ‘protection’ from the Spanish home market.
The Spanish government, keen to maintain Spain's position as a major producer of small cars, made various agreements with Peugeot, Citroen and Renault to guarantee continuation of existing production capacity and sold loss-making state-owned Seat, the only Spanish-owned car company, to Volkswagen.
The Spanish car industry is dominated by five multinational companies: Peugeot/Citroen, Renault, Ford, General Motors and Volkswagen.
Spain is the fourth largest manufacturer of cars in the EC — ahead of the UK.
The strategy of the Spanish government (ie to encourage multinational firms to establish car plants in Spain) may be contrasted with the Italian government's approach, considered above.
THE DRIVE FOR QUALITY
The huge costs of model development and the increasingly competitive environment for luxury cars forced both Jaguar, privatised in 1984, and Saab to seek collaboration with other companies during 1989.
Jaguar initially favoured a deal with General Motors (GM), whereby the American company would acquire a partial stake in Jaguar — in other words Jaguar's independence would be maintained.
GM would provide funds which would have led to the joint development of a new product range.
However, Ford, GM's main US rival, launched a bid for Jaguar, which valued it at £1.6 billion.
Jaguar had felt itself to be protected from such a takeover by a golden share (a mechanism whereby the government provides protection from takeover to recently privatised companies for a finite period of time).
However, the government removed the golden share protection in response to the Ford bid, 14 months before it was due to expire, and the Ford offer was finally recommended to shareholders by the Jaguar board.
The removal of the golden share protection, followed by similar action when BP acquired Britoil in 1988, questioned the government's whole commitment to the concept of golden shares for recently privatised companies.
GM did not put in a counterbid, as it considered that the company was being overvalued.
When one notes that Jaguar's pre-tax profits for the first half of 1989 had slumped to £1.4 million, it is easy to see that a company valuation of £1.6 billion might be considered rather high.
However, the value of a company is based on more than just short-term profitability.
There are very few independent luxury car firms with the reputation of Jaguar, and volume manufacturers have found it hard to develop luxury cars of their own, considered to be competitive with specialists such as Daimler Benz and BMW.
In addition, the move may be seen as partly defensive — in order to prevent Jaguar from falling into the hands of one of Ford's competitors.
From Figure 4.3 it can be seen that shareholders of Jaguar have done very well since privatisation — especially as a result of the bid from Ford.
However, although the dramatic progress, in terms of productivity, made by Jaguar since privatisation is acknowledged, critics claim that it was bound to be a  takeover candidate before too long, as it was a small player in a market which was becoming increasingly concentrated.
Saab faced problems similar to those confronting Jaguar.
It too was involved in talks with Ford, GM and, in addition, Fiat.
A deal was struck with GM, in which GM acquired a 50 per cent stake in Saab for $600 million.
This deal provided GM with the entry to the luxury car market that it had sought — Saab was promised access to GM's resources and dealership network.
The option of a ‘Swedish solution’, by means of a merger with Volvo, was not seriously considered in view of the restructuring and job losses considered to be inevitable from the merger of two specialist car manufacturers.
Volvo itself, shortly after the Saab/GM deal, announced an extensive cooperation deal with Renault, accompanied by an exchange of equity stakes.
The link between the   two companies resulted in the creation of the world's largest bus and truck manufacturer, overtaking Daimler Benz of West Germany.
COMMENT
It is hard to say whether any conclusions may be draw for the British car industry by considering the car industries of other countries.
It might be argued that for years Britain unsuccessfully attempted the ‘Italian approach’, trying to establish an independent, strong domestic producer and that now an approach, in some respects similar to the ‘Spanish approach’(welcoming foreign investment) is being adopted.
This can be seen in the attitude adopted towards Nissan, Toyota and Honda, although the ‘national solution approach’ prevailed in the sale of Rover to British Aerospace rather than to a US multinational.
It is certainly true that the huge costs of new model development, including the cost of meeting higher environmental standards, have forced many European car manufacturers to collaborate or merge.
This process is being accelerated by the competition provided by Japanese firms.
The trade balance of the motor industry has been in deficit since 1982 and in 1989, at £6.55 billion, accounted for 28 per cent of the UK visible trade deficit of £23.1 billion.
From this it may be seen that the health of the motor industry is critical to the health of the British economy.
An examination of Figure 4.4 shows that it is expected that UK car production will increase in the next ten years (largely as a result of Japanese investment) and that consequently the share of car imports in the British market will decline, as will the motor industry trade deficit.
Whilst the Conservative government was delighted to have sold back to the private sector one of its most difficult privatisation candidates, the impact of recent changes in the car industry have yet to be fully assessed.
In a sense the  motor industry can be seen as a test case for the Thatcherite medicine for industry.
A Welfare State or Dependency Culture?
BACKGROUND
It is not surprising that, as a major part of public expenditure, the finances of the Welfare State should have received attention from a government, which has been keen to reduce the rate of growth of public expenditure and to limit the role of the state.
However, the concern with the cost and scope of the Welfare State has been ideological as well as purely economic.
Although many measures have been introduced, some of them extremely controversial, the basic structure of the Welfare State has remained intact and the Conservative government has appeared to be more reluctant to legislate in this area than in most others, content with modification rather than substantial revision.
The Welfare State was set up after the Second World War as a means of providing universal ‘freedom from want’, according to Sir William Beveridge, and ‘care from cradle to grave’ for the whole population according to Sir Winston Churchill.
The Welfare State includes the provision of health care by means of the National Health Service, state education and council housing.
Furthermore, an insurance against loss of income due to unemployment, old age or illness is provided by means of the social security system, which also provides support for those on low pay or in poverty.
The Welfare State was intended to eliminate want, waste, ignorance, disease and squalor , the ‘five giants, identified by Beveridge as barriers to both prosperity and participation in society.
Consideration is given in subsequent chapters to aspects of poverty, to health and to housing (Chapters 6, 7 and 8 respectively), but this chapter deals with the social security system and attempts to reform it.
The social security system was, at first, principally intended to support pensioners and, although the numbers have increased during the last forty years, the main increases in those claiming supplementary benefit (now   renamed income support , have been the unemployed and single parents (see Figure 5.1).
This point emphasises why it has been so difficult to control the overall cost of benefits, which depends on both the level of benefits provided and the number of people claiming them.
This will be affected not just by economic factors, but by demographic and social factors as well.
THE OPERATION OF THE WELFARE STATE
Many right-wing economists have criticised the big-spending programmes of the Welfare State which were rapidly built up, especially during the 1960s.
They argue that the tax burden required to finance the Welfare State has reduced incentives and thereby curbed initiative and enterprise, leading to an adverse effect on economic growth.
Many of the benefits of the Welfare State were provided at no direct cost to the consumer (ie they were free at the point of use) although, of course, the cost was met by the taxpayer.
(This concept is considered again when discussing the NHS — refer to Chapter 7, pages 90–7.)
These economists argue that, by being insulated from market forces, the consumer has no realistic assessment of cost and is therefore liable to overconsume.
If this is true, then the Welfare State may always have difficulty satisfying the expectations of the public, even though the resources devoted to it since its inception have increased rapidly.
Critics point out that poverty, homelessness and poor standards in both health and education still exist and that the only remedy offered by supporters of the Welfare State is to ‘spend more money’, with no assurance that demand will ever be met.
According to Charles Murray of the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research, it is essential to ‘move away from the language of entitlement’.
By providing welfare benefits, recipients may become less reliant on self-help and more dependent on the state, entering what has become known as a dependency culture or benefit culture.
This may lead to a cycle of dependency , from which it is hard to break loose.
This is likely to be particularly serious if either the poverty trap or the unemployment trap is encountered.
The poverty trap exists when a low paid worker receives a pay increase, but then, as a result of the higher income level attained, not only has to pay tax, but also loses various means-tested benefits previously received.
(‘Means-tested’ benefits are benefits which are not automatically given, but which are dependent on the recipient's income or wealth, ie his ‘means’.)
As a result, the individual may retain only a very small percentage of the extra income earned and, in some cases, may actually lose more than the extra income earned.
Hence, there may be little or no incentive for a low paid worker to strive for a higher income, whether by gaining promotion or by working overtime, if the welfare benefits previously received disappear rapidly as income rises.
Similarly, the unemployment trap exists when an unemployed worker, receiving benefit, may be less well off, or only marginally better off, in low-paid employment.
In both instances a worker, acting in his own self-interest, may choose to retain his benefits (by refusing extra pay or a job), thereby perpetuating his dependency on the Welfare State.
(See Chapter 6, pages 86–7 for details of the Conservative government's 1988 Welfare Reforms.)
This highlights the twin difficulties faced when investigating welfare economics: the problems of targeting and whether to apply means-testing or not.
It is not just a case of directing sufficient welfare benefits towards those in ‘need’ to induce a state of ‘well-being’(in which needs are satisfied).
‘Need’ does not end suddenly; instead there is a continuous spectrum between the two states.
If benefit ceases to be paid completely when an individual reaches a certain level of income, then there will be an anomaly at that point, as someone earning £1 less will still be eligible for the benefit.
This leads to the question of targeting, which has concerned the Conservative government in its social security reforms.
If benefits are targeted at those most in need as assessed by a means test, then the poverty and unemployment traps may be encountered.
However, if the benefits are spread more widely, then either the value of benefits per person will be diminished or an increase in the resources to fund the benefit will be necessary.
In the UK some benefits are automatic (eg child benefit, which is received by all families with children) and others are means-tested (eg family credit, which is received only by those families with low incomes).
Separate systems for income tax, national insurance and welfare benefits in Britain mean that people on low incomes may be required to pay income tax and national insurance contributions, whilst at the same time receiving welfare benefits.
An ideal programme to help those in poverty (which is probably impossible to attain in reality) may be defined as one which meets the needs of the people concerned, without adversely affecting their incentive to self-help, by which means the individuals might reduce or eliminate reliance (or dependency) on the state.
COMMENT
The Conservative government has attempted to replace what it sees as a dependency culture by an enterprise culture.
It has sought to do this by fostering popular capitalism in the hope of reintroducing the entrepreneurial streak into the British economy and revitalising British industry, through the introduction of incentives to both management and workforce.
Moves to return to management the right to manage, increasingly eroded by trade unions and governments during the post-war period, have been encouraged.
Popular capitalism necessitates a belief in the power of market forces, a reduction in the role of the state, an increasing reliance on self-help and moves towards extending the property-owning democracy.
The Conservative government has emphasized the notion of self-help .
It has stressed the need for personal and family responsibility within a framework of the local community or neighbourhood.
The role of the state was to be changed so that it would offer help in the last rather than in the first resort.
Critics of popular capitalism argue that it is a programme for increasing inequality and poverty.
To back this up they claim that a reliance on market forces has widened pay inequalities and also significantly increased unemployment.
Tax cuts have been directed primarily at the ‘better-off’ and welfare benefits have been restricted.
The long-term trend towards greater equality of income and wealth has been reversed under the Conservative governments of 1979 onwards and it is argued that this ‘strategy of inequality’(Child Poverty Action Group), which is seen as a direct consequence of the drive towards popular capitalism, has led to a major increase in poverty in the UK and to the possible emergence of an underclass , who lack any stake in popular capitalism and who are caught in the dependency culture.
The argument about equality is, of course, at the heart of economic/political debate.
Socialists believe in greater equality in society: ‘A more equal society will be a more prosperous society and a more peaceful society’(Roy Hattersley,Hansard 16 April, 1987), but they are criticised for favouring policies of distribution rather than production —‘Someone has to create wealth before the politicians fall to sharing that wealth out’(Kenneth Clarke,Hansard 6 April 1987).
Conservatives are less concerned about equality and more concerned with generating production and income, believing that the benefits will ‘trickle down’ through society to benefit all.
Poverty in the Midst of Plenty?
The Conservative government has been accused of presiding over an economy in which the benefits of economic growth have not been distributed fairly.
Furthermore, it has been argued that, during the Conservative terms of office, there has been an increase in the number of those living in poverty.
These points are now considered.
MEASUREMENT OF POVERTY
The most serious difficulty faced when trying to assess the extent of poverty in any society is to find a clear definition which is easily understood and universally accepted.
Whereas most people find it relatively easy, when faced with inflation or unemployment figures, to decide whether those economic problems are improving or getting worse, it is not so easy in the case of poverty, in the absence of a clear, widely accepted measure.
Some definitions of poverty have sought to define it in terms of absolute deprivation, where some measure is made of subsistence requirements based on physical needs.
This represents an attempt to assess a level of income below which it is impossible to ensure survival.
In a speech, shortly before leaving his position as Secretary of State for Social Security in 1989, John Moore claimed that poverty in the ‘old, absolute sense of hunger and want’ had been eliminated.
Certainly, if one compares living standards today with those experienced in this country one hundred years ago or, to make an even more stark comparison, with those experienced in many Less Developed Countries (LDCs) today, then it is true that poverty in the UK in the 1980s is relatively insignificant.
However, most definitions of poverty are based in terms of relative deprivation (ie deprivation relative to others in the community, rather than a comparison over time or between countries).
These measures present a rather different picture.
Such measures take into account society's expectations of  steadily rising standards of living, which also affect those living in poverty.
Thus according to the Child Poverty Action Group (CPAG)‘poverty is viewed in relation to a generally accepted standard of living in a particular society that goes beyond basic physical needs’ to include ‘broader social and cultural needs’as well.
More starkly, Fran Bennett, director of CPAG says: ‘Our contention is that you have to judge poverty by referring it to culture, society, and the times you live in, not just to what you need to avoid dying’.
The EC defines people in poverty as those whose ‘resources are so small as to exclude them from the minimum acceptable way of life of the member state in which they live’.
Many economists have used the supplementary benefit (SB) level (now renamed income support ) to define poverty.
However, a consideration of this measure reveals the problems faced when trying to assess the extent of poverty.
Any increase in the SB level increases the number of those eligible to claim benefit.
Hence any increase in the provision for those in poverty is likely to result in a perceived increase in the problem.
Although the SB level increased by 5 per cent in real terms between November 1978 and April 1987, this compares with an average increase of 14 per cent in real terms for personal disposable income.
As a result the SB level for a couple on the ordinary rate has fallen from 61 per cent of personal disposable income per capita in 1978 to 53 per cent in 1987.
The number claiming SB has risen over the same period from three million to just under five million (figures from CPAG).
The CPAG itself has chosen to define those earning less than 140 per cent of SB as ‘living in poverty or at the margins of poverty’.
ASPECTS OF POWER
Evidence produced in Social Trends 1987 (CSO), after studying the composition of the lowest income group, suggested that changes have occurred in the nature of poverty.
Significant increases in those claiming supplementary benefit were recorded from both the unemployed and from single-parent families, whereas the number of pensioners claiming had decreased (see Figure 5.1, page 80).
The number of those affected by poverty in any society will, however, be influenced not only by the level of unemployment, but also by what happens to the incomes of those on low pay.
In addition, government policies on taxation and welfare benefits will have a significant influence.
These aspects of poverty will now be considered.
Low Pay
During the period of the Conservative government there has been a marked growth in pay inequality.
If all incomes rise by the same percentage amount, then those at the lower end of the income scale will, of course, receive a lower extra sum of money compared to those at the higher end of the income scale.
In this case pay differentials and inequality in society would be unaltered.
However, the figures in Table 6.1 indicate that not only have the amounts of   extra income received by those on higher incomes been greater than those on lower incomes, but so too have been the percentages.
Between 1979 and 1989 those at the highest decile (ie those earning more than 90 per cent and less than 10 per cent of the population) increased their real income by 36.6 per cent whereas those at the lowest decile (ie those earning more than 10 per cent and less than 90 per cent of the population) who increased their real income by only 5.7 per cent.
Based on these figures it is clear that income inequality has increased and that the benefits of economic growth have not been evenly distributed.
Critics of the government have argued that, although the need for incentives throughout the economy has been stressed, at the lowest end of the income scale there is greater emphasis on the need for workers ‘to price themselves into employment’ by accepting less than the ‘going rate’of pay increases.
The fear of unemployment, the imposition of public sector cash limits and the reduction (and, in some cases, removal) of minimum wage protection provided to millions of low paid workers by Wages Councils has contributed to this.
It is correct to say that, under the Conservative government, pay inequalities have widened.
Whether or not these can be said to have caused an increase in poverty depends, of course, on the definition of poverty chosen, as has been described above.
However, there are also other factors which determine whether the low paid have slipped into poverty.
These include the government's policy on taxation and welfare benefits and are considered below.
Taxation and welfare benefits
The Conservative party was elected in 1979 on a promise to reduce the overall level of taxation and, in addition, to shift the burden of tax to some extent from income (direct tax) to expenditure (indirect tax).
Both policies are in accordance with the principle of allowing the individual to have control over more of his own income.
In the 1979 ‘Incentive Budget’, the basic rate of income tax was cut from 33 per cent to 30 per cent, whilst the top rate was cut from 83 per cent to 60 per cent .
At the same time the standard rate of VAT was raised from 8 per cent to 15 per cent.
The basic rate of income tax was then reduced from 30 per cent to  29 per cent in 1986 and, thereafter, to 27 per cent in 1987 and 25 per cent in 1988, thereby achieving the Chancellor's longstanding commitment.
In addition, the top rate of tax was reduced from 60 per cent to 40 per cent in the 1988 Budget and all intermediate tax rates were abolished.
Cuts in the rates of taxation may be justified in terms of improved incentives and (at the top rate of taxation) a reduction in the ‘brain drain' abroad.
However, no direct benefit accrues to individuals who do not pay taxation.
Further dispute centres on the ‘trickle-down’ effect of tax cuts.
Conservatives believe that tax cuts will lead to greater incentives and initiative, thereby creating an enterprise culture in which the benefits of growth will ultimately spread to everyone.
However, Dr Robert Runcie, the then Archbishop of Canterbury, claimed in the House of Lords (2 February, 1987) that ‘there is no automatic trickling down process that ensures that increased wealth will benefit the poor.’
Although statistics show that many benefits paid to the old, poor and unemployed have maintained their real value (ie kept pace with inflation) under the Conservative government during the 1980s, these calculations are based on the rate of inflation for the average person.
However, rising prices affect different groups in different ways.
The low-income groups and pensioners spend a higher proportion of their money on food and fuel, whose prices have risen by more than other items, and so the inflation index for these groups has risen faster than inflation for the average person.
An example of the way in which the government has ‘pared back welfare’ without affecting its actual structure, may be seen by considering the provision of pensions.
Although the state retirement pension remains linked to prices and, subject to the proviso noted above, retains its ‘real’ value, the commitment to raise pensions in line with earnings (in years when earnings rose by more than prices) was abolished in 1980.
Hence the position of those relying on pensions has deteriorated relative to those in employment with rising real incomes.
Although linking pensions to prices rather than incomes may not produce a great difference in one year, after twenty-five years, assuming incomes rise by 2  per cent per annum faster than prices, the price-linked pension will be worth only approximately 60 per cent of the earnings-linked pension.
Less than a month after the 1988 budget (providing tax cuts for all income earners, but especially for those on high income), the government's social security reforms came into force amid great controversy, with a revised scheme of welfare benefits.
The aims of the reform were: simplification, improved targeting of benefits and a reduction in the impact of both the unemployment trap and the poverty trap.
(The reforms were based on the principles discussed in Chapter 5, pages 80–1.)
The rules relating to means-tested benefits for housing benefit, family credit (family income supplement) and income support (supplementary benefit) were redesigned and simplified.
However, according to calculations produced by the policy Studies Institutes and noted in The Economist (12 March 1988)‘the overall impact of the reforms will simply be to redistribute from one group of the very poor to another’.
Two of the social security reforms proved to be particularly controversial.
Firstly, the rules which sharply reduced those eligible for housing benefit , thereby removing benefits from pensioners with limited savings, were opposed by many Conservative MPs.
Secondly, the Social Fund was introduced.
This
was designed to replace the former system of emergency grants for special needs for such items as cookers and clothing, which were dispensed under a variety of rules.
In its place the Social Fund removed the right to a grant and instituted instead a system of discretionary loans.
However, critics claimed that this scheme did not provide sufficient funds to those in real need.
The widespread unease with several of the measures proposed in the welfare reforms felt by many Conservative MPs, demonstrates how difficult it is for any government (even one with a large parliamentary majority) to reform the Welfare State.
Although great controversy was generated, the proposed reforms were really only dealing with the margins of the Welfare State rather than with any fundamental alterations in its structure.
An examination of Figure 6.1 reveals that, whilst each of the groups considered has gained over the period 1979 — 89 (due to the tax and benefit changes discussed above), the greatest gain was made by the richest tenth of the population.
At the same time there were large numbers of losers within the poorest groups.
THREE VIEWS ON POVERTY
Although more recent documents have been produced, a study of the main political parties' policies on tax, the social security system and poverty during the 1987 General Election campaign summarises clearly the different strands of opinion expressed during the 1980s.
In their Election manifestos both the Labour and Alliance parties produced specific programmes to deal with poverty:The Anti-Poverty Programme and Ending Poverty respectively.
The Conservative party did not have a programme as such, but included two  sections:Lower Taxes and Social Security — a fair deal for those in need , which addressed the same problems, albeit with different solutions.
Lower taxation coupled with lower inflation makes everyone better off…
It promotes a climate of enterprise and initiative.
This clearly sums up the Conservative attitude to taxation and, most importantly, it views the alleviation of poverty as part of an overall policy to improve prosperity for everyone.
It was hoped that people would not be made worse off by taking a job (the unemployment trap), nor would they lose money when their gross pay rose (the poverty trap), due to the loss of means-tested benefits in each case.
The Conservatives also promised to:
reform the tangled web of income-related benefits which had grown up piecemeal over forty years.
Success in social policy depends on growth in national prosperity.
Labour's economic failure led to damaging cuts in health care and benefits.
Our increasing economic strength means that resources for care have gown and are growing.
The Labour party promised in its Manifesto:
For the first two years in government we will concentrate resources on the essential tasks of combating unemployment and poverty…
The spread of poverty in the eight years has strained the whole nation, and widened misery and disadvantage amongst the old and young.
Much of it is the result of deliberate government policy.
As a first step pensions and child benefit were to be raised and long-term supplementary benefit extended to the long-term unemployed.
The recovery programme was to be paid for by reversing the tax gains made by the top 5 per cent of earners under the Conservatives, although specific details were not published, and by reversing the 2p cut in the basic rate of income tax proposed in the 1987 Conservative Budget.
The Labour party promised to introduce a ‘comprehensive strategy for ending low pay, notably by the introduction of a statutory national minimum wage’.
This, of course, runs counter to the Conservative view that workers should be allowed to ‘price themselves into employment’ by accepting wage cuts if necessary.
According to the SDP/Liberal Alliance Election Manifesto:
Poverty in Britain is getting worse.
The Conservatives' taxation and benefit policies have redistributed income from the poor to the rich.
The Alliance proposals for combating poverty fell into two parts.
Firstly, in proposals similar to those put forward by the Labour party, benefits for ‘pensioners, families with children, the unemployed, disabled and carers’ were to be raised.
Secondly, in proposals which caused considerable controversy between the two parties comprising the Alliance before the election, a radical ‘restructuring of the tax and benefits systems to create one integrated system’, intended to be simpler and fairer, was suggested.
COMMENT: THE MORAL HIGH GROUND
The Conservative government's policies on taxation and welfare have brought it into increasing conflict with the Church of England.
The Church has criticised the great emphasis placed on individualism rather than collectivism , and has complained about the government's over-reliance on market forces.
The Conservative emphasis on incentives, initiative and the spirit of enterprise may well improve average living standards, but there is a danger that not all people will participate in the general prosperity.
This gives rise to the danger of what has become known as the two-thirds, one-third society in which the majority obtains secure well-paid full-time ‘core’ jobs and the minority become ‘marginalised’, obtaining less well-paid, part-time, temporary, ‘peripheral’jobs and hovering on the verge of poverty.
Often concentrations of such people are located either in depressed regions or in run-down inner-city areas.
The Bishop of Gloucester claimed in June 1988 that ‘wealth gained regardless of the welfare of the rest of the community is difficult to justify’.
Dr Robert Runcie, the then Archbishop of Canterbury, claimed in October 1989 that Britain risked becoming a ‘Pharisee society’ of self-interest.
As discussed earlier in this chapter, the Conservatives counter with the argument that the generation of wealth is the pre-requisite for increasing social spending programmes.
They also claim that poverty is not alleviated by providing ever-increasing welfare benefits, but rather by providing an appropriate economic and social environment, in which individuals have the incentive and the ability to raise themselves out of poverty, without encountering the poverty or unemployment traps.
Health
BACKGROUND
The National Health Service (NHS) was created in 1948 as a service designed to provide every citizen in post-war Britain with ‘whatever medical treatment he requires, in whatever form he requires it’(Sir William Beveridge).
Aneurin Bevan who, as Minister of Health in the Labour government, pioneered the introduction of the NHS, claimed: ‘Medical treatment and care should be made available to rich and poor alike in accordance with medical need and by no other criteria.’
The NHS was created at a time of post-war reconstruction, when large sections of British industry were being nationalised by the Labour government.
This nationalisation was an attempt to achieve the socialist objective of common ownership of the means of production and also to facilitate government intervention in the running of the economy.
At the same time the Welfare State, designed to provide a safety net for those incapable of fending for themselves, was being rapidly expanded, and the NHS can be seen as its greatest and most enduring feature.
Britain was the first country to offer health care to the entire population free at the point of use.
The NHS, of course, did use resources and was not ‘free’ to the extent that it had to be funded.
However, it was funded from taxes collected by central government rather than from direct payments by members of the public in exchange for the medical services received.
The pioneers of the NHS accepted that it would initially be necessary to increase the resources devoted to the service, but that this would level off as medical needs were satisfied.
However, early budgets were rapidly broken as demand for medical services increased relentlessly and the need to make choices with scarce resources soon became apparent, thereby straining the original promise of the NHS that all medical needs should be met.
Yet, despite an increase of spending on health in the UK from 3¼ per cent of national income in 1948 to over 6 per cent(of a much larger national income) forty years later, it is alleged that the NHS is underfunded and periodically in a state of near collapse.
On the other hand despite the increase in funding during the last forty years, the UK spending on health as a proportion of national income is lower than that in most West European countries and considerably lower than in the USA (see Figure 7.1).
Higher spending need not of course necessarily imply an improvement in the standard of health care provided.
This will be affected not just by the amount of resources devoted to health, but also by the efficiency of the service.
Hence it is not possible to claim conclusively by observation of expenditure figures that   standards of health care today have improved compared to forty years ago, nor that the standards in the UK today are worse than those in other industrialised countries.
Table 7.1, which compares five countries, indicates that the US (the highest spender on health as a percentage of GDP) has the highest infant mortality rate and the second lowest life expectancy, whereas Sweden, another high-spending country, has the lowest infant mortality rate and the highest life expectancy.
This demonstrates the difficulties in proving that higher expenditure leads to better health.
The claim that the NHS is ‘underfunded’, despite the huge increase in resources devoted to it, will be examined in this chapter.
The NHS today
The Conservative government has been committed to increasing the role of market forces generally and reducing the role of the state in the economy.
This has been shown by its programme of privatising nationalised industries and by its desire to maintain a firm control on public expenditure.
There have also been moves to reduce reliance on the Welfare State and to change the dependency culture by increasing self-reliance (see Chapter 5).
The ‘Thatcher revolution’ has affected most areas of British life so it is perhaps surprising how little it seems to have impinged on the NHS.
Although there has been a radical management shake-up and there have been improvements in organisation and efficiency, the fundamental ethos of the NHS — provision of medical service free at the point of use — has remained unchanged.
Indeed in the Conservatives' 1987 Election Manifesto, there was ample support for the NHS and no mention of an enhanced role for the private sector.
It was claimed that money spent on the NHS between 1979 and 1987 had increased in real terms by a third, that more patients were receiving treatment than ever before and that the numbers of doctors, dentists and nurses had increased substantially.
When faced with complaints about hospitals, and especially about unacceptable waiting lists, the government made an emergency payment of £100 million for 1987/88 and commissioned a review of the NHS.
In order to make any meaningful assessment of whether the present tax-funded NHS is preferable to schemes involving greater private sector involvement, it is necessary to consider the meaning of the words: ‘underfunding’, ‘demand ’ and ‘efficiency ’and to answer the following questions:
1
How is it that, despite large increases of spending on the NHS in real terms, there are continuing claims about ‘underfunding’?
2
As there is no direct charge for health care, is demand really ‘infinite’?
If this is so, then however many resources are devoted to the NHS, demand will never be satisfied.
What is the nature of demand for health care and does it differ from demand for other services?
3
What is the meaning of ‘efficiency’ when applied to health care?
1 Funding and the NHS
Although the resources allocated to the NHS have increased in real terms, there are a number of factors working against this.
For example, the NHS is ‘labour intensive’ and 70 per cent of its costs are accounted for by wages.
Thus, if wages  in the NHS are linked to price increases (as measured by the Retail Price Index), real wages of NHS employees will be maintained, but they will fall behind the increases awarded to other workers, if earnings are rising faster than prices in the rest of the economy.
If, as is likely, NHS employees then seek and obtain wage increases in line with other increases in earnings, then a greater amount of resources will be needed to fund them.
However, at the same time there will be no increase in the standard of services provided.
Hence it may be said that ‘health service inflation’ has risen faster than inflation in the rest of the economy.
The funds of the NHS have been put under further strain, in addition to the pressures of rising demand, by a number of other factors.
The government has not always fully funded the nationally agreed pay awards, leaving health authorities to fund part of the increase from existing budgets.
Furthermore, during the 1980s there has also been shift of resources away from hospitals towards the family  practitioner services in order to build up ‘primary care’.
Problems with the hospital sector come most readily to the general public's attention, contributing to a belief that the NHS is underfunded , and this has been exacerbated in parts of the South East by moves to distribute resources away from London and the South East (based on the teaching hospitals) in favour of the regions.
(Note: ‘underfunding’, of course, is a word that only means something when ‘funding’(ie resources available) is matched against demand.
The nature of demand for health care is considered below.)
2 Demand for health care
The demand for health care has risen for many reasons.
As personal income and wealth rise, consumers increase their demand for most goods.
It is therefore not surprising that this should also be reflected in a rise in demand for health care.
Moreover, to a great extent the health service is a victim of its own success.
New technology has allowed doctors to perform previously unheard of operations such as hip replacements and open-heart surgery, thereby creating a demand which had not appeared before.
In addition, greater life-expectancy, for which better health care is partly responsible, has resulted in a greater number of old people, which has created further demands on the NHS.
Rising expectations about the standards of health can therefore be seen as fuelling further demand for health care.
In fact, in some ways it can be seen that the more capable the NHS is of meeting demand, the greater the demand is likely to be.
Health care is an unusual ‘commodity’ and the demand for it may not be particularly responsive to price.
The vast majority of consultations are handled by General  Practitioners (GPs), with no need for referral for expensive hospital treatment.
In those cases where the patient is referred to a hospital for further treatment, it is the doctor who makes the decision, as the patient will generally possess insufficient information.
Therefore it is, in effect, the doctor who is deciding on the level of demand .
Other demand is made purely by force of circumstances (eg after a car crash).
In both situations demand is determined not by price but by clinical judgement.
Demand for health care is clearly not ‘infinite’, but it is difficult to meet  rapidly rising demand in an affluent society.
This problem is not helped by the provision of health care free at the point of use, which prevents the patient from knowing the cost of the treatment.
In conclusion, the demand for health care differs from the demand for other services and its responsiveness to market forces is open to question.
3 Efficiency and health care
What is the meaning of efficiency , when applied to health care?
When considering the number of units of output produced per worker in a factory, it is relatively easy to consider efficiency over a period of time.
However, in health care the concept is more difficult to explain.
For example, a doctor may be able to see more patients each hour and he may be being more efficient by seeing more people in a fixed period of time.
However, he could achieve the same result by giving less attention to each patient.
Similarly the efficiency of a hospital should not be judged just by the number of operations completed, but perhaps also by the effectiveness of the operations.
Whilst the introduction of competition will undoubtedly benefit some aspects of efficiency, additional costs might also be incurred.
In particular the costs of administration involved in valuing various aspects of medical care (essential if a free market is to be created) might be considerable.
In addition, in order for the price mechanism to be an effective way of allocating resources, the consumer (ie the patient) must possess good information and it is doubtful whether this is so in most cases.
Critics of the government's drive for efficiency claim that it is motivated more by considerations of cost rather than of value for money or quality of service provided.
PROPOSALS FOR INCREASING RESOURCES DEVOTED TO THE NHS
Those supporting the continuation of an NHS based on its initial principles, funded centrally by tax finance, claim that any alternative system based on private health insurance would be bureaucratic, involving high administrative costs.
NHS costs may be kept under control because of both the NHS's ability to act as a bulk buyer of medicine supplies and the unlikelihood of competitive upward pressure on wage costs for health workers.
Moreover, patients are more likely to receive the ‘appropriate’ treatment from the NHS, whereas in private schemes, unnecessary treatment might be given, when doctors are paid a rate for the job.
Advocates of funding by tax finance therefore claim that ‘underfunding’ of the NHS may be remedied by increasing government expenditure on the service.
However, it would be fair to say that they do not have a long-term answer to the question: ‘What is the appropriate level of funding?’, except that of adding on an amount, based on the estimated shortfall, to existing expenditure.
It would also be possible, although it would contravene the fundamental principles of the NHS as originally conceived, to introduce charges for NHS treatment — for example, a small charge for every visit to a GP or a ‘hotel charge’ to cover the cost of food consumed in hospital as a means of raising additional funds.
The pressures of funding have already encouraged many  hospitals to generate revenue raising schemes from non-medical activities.
Such commercial schemes include cafeteria services and newsagents.
However, although there is clearly scope for raising revenue in this way, the amounts
likely to be raised (in the context of overall health spending) are likely to be fairly limited.
An alternative scheme for financing the NHS involves the removing of finance from general taxation and the introduction of a health stamp or hypothecated tax .
This ‘stamp’ would emphasise to users the cost of the health service since it would appear as a separate tax item on the pay slip, and would therefore increase in line with earnings and not prices.
There are many who believe that the NHS, by providing care free at the point of use, is facing an impossible task in which demand can never be satisfied.
Various schemes of reform have been proposed involving the private sector in an attempt to introduce market forces to some extent into health care.
These schemes may be divided into two: those advocating that the service provided by the NHS may best be improved by increasing its efficiency through the introduction of more commercial criteria; and those claiming that the greatest improvements would come from changing the funding arrangements by introducing some form of health insurance.
PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: IMPROVING THE EFFICIENCY OF THE NHS
Competitive tendering (see also Chapter 3, page 47) has already been introduced for many ancillary services (eg cleaning, catering) and has reduced costs, although some health authorities have found that quality of service has also suffered.
Competitive tendering could be extended to certain medical services as well.
Improvements could also be made to the management structure, with the introduction of more commercially-minded managers with clear financial objectives, in addition to the fiercely resisted management changes already made in the NHS.
What has attracted great attention recently are moves towards an internal market in the NHS, which would allow health authorities to buy and sell services to and from one another.
Not only would this permit the benefits of specialisation and economies of scale (ie lower average cost) to be felt, but would also avoid expensive duplication.
It could also be used as a means of overcoming excessively long waiting lists in some areas.
The service would still be free to patients and the financial transaction would take place between the two authorities.
However, most health authorities are not used to pricing their services on a commercial basis and an efficient allocation of resources would require costs to be calculated as a pre-condition.
Further moves could also be made towards increasing the two-way interaction between public and private health care sectors.
Such links do exist at the present time, but they are the exception rather than the norm.
The NHS could purchase services from the private sector in order to clear waiting lists for particular ailments or to obtain access to specialised equipment possibly not available in NHS hospitals.
Similarly the NHS could hire out spare capacity to the private sector (eg pay beds) and sell support services (eg X-rays).
PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: RADICAL SCHEMES BASED ON HEALTH INSURANCE
More radical moves to reform the NHS are based on a belief that individuals should take more responsibility for their health care and that this can be achieved by extending the choice of different suppliers of medical services.
There is, of course, already a private sector in this country (incorporating companies such as BUPA and PPP) and radical policies on the health service involve extending the health insurance principle in some way.
A large number of schemes have emerged from various right-wing ‘think-tanks’.
Tax relief on premiums paid to private insurance schemes could be introduced.
Subscribers to private schemes at present pay twice and tax relief would be a way of compensating subscribers for relieving pressure on the NHS.
However, the granting of additional tax relief runs against recent trends in fiscal policy, which has aimed to simplify the tax system, and, from an economic point of view, represents a deadweight cost , because those who are already members of private schemes have chosen to be so without the incentive of tax relief.
The purpose of tax relief would be to encourage more people to join private schemes, but this, in view of the deadweight cost, would be expensive.
Alternative schemes involve giving individuals vouchers, to be used as payment for health care, on condition that they opt out of the NHS.
This requires the individual to give up his right to free use of some or all NHS services and instead to look after his own health needs, either in the private sector or by paying the NHS.
There are certain problems with opting out.
For example, the private sector at present only provides a limited range of services and therefore no one would be able to opt out entirely from the NHS.
There would also be arguments concerning which ailments should be covered by the terms of private schemes.
However, the greatest problem is that those opting out would tend to be the relatively young, affluent, low-risk groups.
This would create a great strain on the NHS, which would be dominated by the high-risk groups who would not be particularly welcomed by the private insurance companies.
Such strains would be exacerbated if a trend developed in which young and middle-aged people opted out, only to return to the NHS when they were unable to afford the private premiums in later life.
The NHS relies on cross-subsidisation, not just between high-risk and low-risk groups but also for every individual between their low-risk years (young and middle aged) and high-risk years (old age).
The danger of allowing opting out would be that the NHS would finish up as a rump and would provide very much a second class service.
THE 1989 CONSERVATIVE NHS REFORM
The Conservative government's proposals to reform the health service published in the White Paper Working for Patients , were designed to improve the efficiency of the NHS and, at the same time, increase the patient's choice.
Conservative philosophy has relied on competition to improve efficiency in other areas of the economy and the same principles were applied to the NHS.
The criteria, whereby resources were to be allocated, were shifted from decisions based on assessment of need by doctors and managers towards outcomes based on competition and market forces.
This radical change of emphasis proved to be extremely unpopular with doctors both in primary care and the hospital service.
However, the fundamental nature of the NHS was maintained in the sense that it remained a service funded from general taxation, free at the point of use.
In order to stimulate competition, large hospitals were encouraged to become self-governing .
These hospitals would remain as part of the NHS, but would be given the freedom to run themselves.
Furthermore, district health authorities were obliged to become traders rather than simply suppliers of hospital services.
This means that, as part of an internal market, hospitals would trade with one another, with self-governing hospitals or with the private sector in order to provide their patients with the best treatment available.
In the primary care sector of the NHS, general practitioners (GPs) with large practices are to be offered the chance to control their own budgets and to buy hospital services on behalf of their patients.
In addition it was proposed that payment to GPs should be based far more on the size of the doctor's patient list, as this was seen as a good proxy for assessing how hard doctors work.
Although alternative plans to finance the NHS were rejected — ie the service continued to be funded from general taxation — tax relief was offered on health insurance premiums for retired people.
The 1989 NHS Reforms were greeted with great hostility by much of the medical profession, partly because they were seen as part of possible moves towards dismantling the NHS, but also because of the changed emphasis brought about by the consideration of terms such as: ‘efficiency’, ‘internal market’, and ‘payment by results’ in areas where the role of the market had previously been much less prominent.
Critics also considered that the emphasis on efficiency did not give sufficient importance to the quality of health care provided.
They also argued that, although the whole system of competition and pricing would possibly be appropriate for specific items of surgery based on short periods of acute illness, it ignored the nature of health care generally.
Health care cannot be conveniently packaged and priced into such things as health problems of the ‘elderly’ or ‘mentally ill’.
COMMENT
All countries are faced with the problem of how to respond to the rapidly growing demand for health care from their populations.
This is true whichever of the many varied methods of finance is used — all systems experience problems with managing resources.
This is partly because it is hard to identify true costs in any health system, but also because the market for health care does not operate as a normal market — particularly with respect to the nature of demand.
Any proposed alterations to a health care system have to weigh up the obligation of society to those who are old and sick against the preferences of those who wish to determine their own health care provision.
Housing
BACKGROUND
The main economic and social themes which have already been considered in many of the chapters of this book reappear as the dominant themes in any discussion on housing policy.
On the one hand, the Conservative government has sought to improve the workings of the market for housing by deregulation .
Allied to this is a belief in the primacy of the private sector and owner-occupation, together with a rebuttal of public-sector municipal spending (mostly associated with the 1960s), which is alleged to have ‘thrown money at problems,, without any consideration for the real housing needs of the people involved.
On the other hand, critics claim that the government has allocated too few resources to housing and has given too little emphasis to the needs of those ‘at the bottom of the pile’ in the housing market — the homeless and those on low incomes.
Critics also argue that this has been compounded by a policy which has unfairly favoured the private sector in preference to the public sector.
According to the 1983 Conservative Election Manifesto:
A free and independent society is one in which the ownership of property is spread as widely as possible…
Under this government the property-owning democracy is growing fast.
And the basic foundation of it is the family home.
From these statements it is clear where the emphasis of the Conservative government lies.
Families are to be encouraged to live in their own homes rather than to rely on the state (in the form of local authorities) for the provision of council housing.
The Right to Buy scheme, introduced by the government in 1980, gave council tenants the legal right to buy their homes, often at big discounts.
A   million homes were sold by the public sector to the private sector during the Conservative government's first two terms (1979–87)(see Figure 8.1).
This spread of home ownership may be seen as part of the drive towards establishing a capital-owning democracy or popular capitalism (refer to Chapter 5).
According to the 1987 Conservative Election Manifesto: ‘Home-ownership has been the great success story of housing policy in the last eight years.’
However, promises were made to shift the emphasis of policy during the Conservatives' third term towards reforming the private rented sector of the housing market.
The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors has stated that:
The principle aims of national housing policy should be to ensure that, as far as possible, every household shall be able to occupy a dwelling of a size, standard and location suitable to its needs, free from nuisance, harassment or arbitrary eviction and should have a free choice of tenure (ie freehold, leasehold or other).
There has been much criticism of the government's housing policy, much of it from organisations outside parliament.
By neglecting the public sector, the government is accused of lacking an effective long-term housing policy which will meet the needs of future generations.
The criticisms made are very similar to some of those made of the government's programme for privatising nationalised industries, namely, the government may have a clear policy on transferring firms from the public sector to the private sector, but lacks a real industrial policy.
Similarly the government may have a clear policy on transferring houses from the public sector to the private sector, but it lacks a real housing policy.
In other words, according to its critics, the Conservative government has been too concerned with ownership and not concerned enough with the quantity and quality of the housing stock.
Figure 8.2 shows that the decline of the private rented sector and the growth of owner-occupation have been long-term phenomena.
However, the decline in resources directed to the public sector and the encouragement of moves   towards owner-occupation under the Conservative government have prompted criticism that the three main forms of tenure (owner-occupation, private-rented and public-rented) are not treated even handedly.
These sentiments are summed up by comments from the Church report,Faith in the City :
The promotion of home ownership is a deliberate policy decision, encouraged directly by central government subsidy and indirectly by withdrawal of subsidy from local authority housing, and the pushing up of rents.
The cost of choice for the majority is the absence of choice for the minority who will never afford to buy,…‘the Right to Buy’ and growth of owner-occupation are effectively carried out on the backs of poor people.
Such sentiments have been strongly rejected by the Conservative government, which considers its drive towards popular capitalism to be open to all members of society.
The report further claims that:
One of the many misconceptions about housing finance is that home-owners are self-reliant, buying their houses with no resort to the state, while public sector tenants are the recipients of huge hand-outs.
These claims are now examined by considering the position of each sector in turn.
OWNER-OCCUPATION
An owner-occupier is allowed to claim tax relief on the interest paid on a loan to purchase his house (up to a maximum loan of £30,000).
This relief cost the Exchequer £1.1 billion in 1978/79, but is estimated to have reached £7 billion in 1989/90 (see Figure 8.3).
The existence of such substantial relief to owner-occupiers   produces a major vested interest which political parties will find hard to ignore, particularly as the ranks of the owner-occupiers are swelling all the time.
Mrs Thatcher pledged that the relief would remain for as long as she was Prime Minister and the opposition parties appear unwilling to commit themselves to abolishing it.
The existence of mortgage interest tax relief (MITR ), is now examined critically in view of its rapidly escalating cost.
(a)
MITR is effectively an open-ended tax relief, the cost of which will be determined by the number of people obtaining mortgages and the rate of interest prevailing.
This contrasts with the cash limits imposed on public sector housing subsidies and other government expenditure.
(b)
The system is of greater benefit to those with large mortgages than to those with small mortgages and, of course, is of no help at all to those without a mortgage.
Moreover, it is of greatest benefit to the top-rate taxpayers, as the relief granted is based on the taxpayer's marginal (ie highest) rate of taxation.
(Income tax is levied at a basic rate of 25 per cent and a higher rate of 40 per cent— correct as of 1990 budget.)
Thus, the relief may be termed ‘regressive’.
(c)
Some tax reformers have argued that the abolition of MITR and other tax reliefs, such as that provided for pension fund contributions, would allow further cuts in income tax to take place.
(The basic rate of income tax was cut from 33 per cent to 30 per cent in the 1979 Conservative Budget — the ‘Incentive Budget’— but further cuts were not made until 1986 when the rate was cut to 29 per cent, and thereafter to 27 per cent in 1987 and 25 per cent in 1988).
Others have argued that, whatever resources are available to housing, they could be used more effectively than is the case with the present system of MITR.
The Chancellor abolished tax relief on (new) Life Assurance Policies in the 1984 budget, but has made no move to abolish, or phase-out MITR — indeed speculation in some parts of the Conservative party before the 1987 Election centred not on whether there would be a reduction, but whether there would be an increase in the maximum level of relief permitted (the previous increase was in 1983, also a general election year).
However, in the 1988 Budget, the Chancellor abolished tax relief on home improvements and also limited tax relief to only one mortgage per home.
(Previously two or more people purchasing a property were each able to claim tax relief up to the £30,000 limit.)
No other changes were made to the structure of the system.
(d)
It has been shown above that those with larger mortgages and those on higher incomes benefit most from MITR, but one of the main arguments originally put forward to justify its existence was that it benefited first-time buyers, enabling them to purchase a house which would otherwise have been beyond their means.
However, there is no clear evidence that this is true.
It may even be possible that house prices have merely adjusted upwards to meet the extra spending power of those obtaining mortgages with tax relief attached.
This is likely to be the case not just for the first-time buyer, but also higher up the housing market.
If this argument is correct, then MITR merely boosts the capital value of all property rather than aiding first-time buyers.
(e)
There is no clear evidence that the MITR has helped to contribute to the nation's stock of housing.
(f)
Although it is difficult to measure accurately, a certain amount of money borrowed from the building society or bank, based on the security of the house, may be spent on general household expenditure to finance, for example, a new car or holiday.
If the mortgage is eligible for MITR the borrower is in fact taking advantage of subsidised credit.
(The Bank of England, in its Quarterly Bulletin (March 1985), has estimated that this ‘leakage’ from the housing market amounted to £7.26 billion in 1984.)
In conclusion, these arguments claim that the MITR is an expensive subsidy which distorts the market, is regressive in its effect, produces minimal help for first-time buyers and does little to enhance the housing stock.
However, the political problems of abolishing it outright would be huge and so some have  advocated phasing it out over a period of time.
For example, the ceiling for relief could be reduced from £30,000 to zero in ten equal steps over a ten-year period of time.
If even this measure were deemed politically unacceptable, then by maintaining the £30,000 limit over time, the real value of the relief would, of course, decline.
Assuming a constant rate of inflation of 5 per cent per annum, the real value of the relief would decline by a compounded figure of 39 per cent over 10 years and, if inflation were at a constant 10 per cent per annum , the corresponding decline would be 61 per cent .
In addition to the tax advantages gained from MITR, the owner-occupier gains from the tax system in two additional ways.
Firstly, no tax is levied on the capital gains realised on the sale of an owner-occupier's house.
(This applies to one house only.)
Thus the capital invested in house purchase is treated differently to other forms of investment.
It is true that since 1982 allowance has been made for inflation —indexation — when calculating capital gains generally (and gains made before 1982 are no longer eligible for any tax).
However, even if the price of the house rises by more than the rate of inflation (ie a real capital gain has been made) capital gains tax (CGT) is not levied.
Secondly, there is no tax levied on imputed income.
This represents a notional calculation of the benefit gained by living in one's own house or, in other words, the rent which one would consider paying for the use of the house.
This benefit is taxed in several other European countries, but was abolished in this country in 1963.
Figure 8.4 indicates that, although private sector construction increased steadily from the depths of the recession in 1981, the number of dwellings completed in 1988 was still below completions achieved during the 1960s.
This was the case despite the great shift towards preference for owner-occupation that had occurred subsequently and, as described above, a favourable tax regime towards such housing.
Although there has been some fluctuation in private sector figures, this is nothing compared with the dramatic decline shown in the public sector figures.
PUBLIC RENTED SECTOR
Local authorities constructed only 21,000 dwellings in 1988, compared with an average of 152,000 per annum during the 1960s.
It should be pointed out that the decline has not just been in evidence under the Conservative government, but was also apparent before 1979, although it has accelerated subsequently.
The main reason for the decline in housebuilding in the public sector is the strict control of local authorities' capital spending by the central government, as part of the government's attempt to control overall public expenditure.
Furthermore local authorities are also allowed to spend only 20 per cent of the money raised from the sale of council houses to tenants.
This limitation, of course, does not allow for full replacement of the council housing stock.
The decline in public sector housebuilding and the rise in council house rents, together with the transfer of many council houses to the private sector, has resulted in an increase in the number of homeless people, most of whom come from groups who are unable to afford to become owner-occupiers.
Local authorities have a statutory duty to provide accommodation for homeless households in ‘priority need’(eg households with dependent children or where a member of the household is vulnerable due to mental illness or old age).
In addition, however, they secure accommodation for some homeless households who do not fall within this category.
Numbers overall for those homeless have increased from 97,000 in 1984 to 135,000 in 1988.
LONDON'S HOMELESS
The rise in homelessness has given rise to a vast increase in the amount of bed  and breakfast accommodation used, particularly in the London area.
The expenditure required is borne by the local authorities and occurs because they do not have sufficient suitable housing in a state of good repair.
Local authorities claim that investment is needed not only to build new homes and replace dilapidated housing, but also to renovate deteriorating buildings, and thus improve the existing housing stock.
Investment is also needed to reduce the backlog of repairs.
The calculation of this amount is, again, extremely difficult, but estimates have ranged up to £35 billion (National Economic Development Council).
Based on the forecasts of the Labour government's Green Paper of 1977, 550,000 fewer houses were built during the period 1976–86 than were envisaged as being necessary in order to satisfy the anticipated need.
PRIVATE RENTED SECTOR
The private sector of rented accommodation has become a relatively minor part of the housing market and its long-term decline certainly stretches back to the First World War.
At that time about 90 per cent of households lived in privately-rented accommodation; the figure has since dropped to 8 per cent.
Thus individuals are only presented with a limited choice of tenure and, according to the Nationwide Building Society
the prime weakness of the UK housing market is the near absence of provision of private-renting which would meet the demands of lower income households, a very different situation to that which prevails in many European countries.
The reasons for the decline in this sector of the housing market may be seen in terms of simple demand and supply analysis: the letting of accommodation has become less desirable for landlords and other forms of tenure have become more attractive for potential tenants.
Rent control and security of tenure were first introduced in 1915 as a wartime measure to control rents and have remained ever since, albeit in amended forms.
It was intended that these measures should provide the tenant with a defence against the unscrupulous landlord, both in terms of protection against unfair eviction and also as a guarantee of ‘fair’ rents, especially for those on low incomes.
However, the attempts to improve the position of the tenant have interfered with the market mechanism, which has led to a decline in the supply of accommodation on offer.
Rent control leads to a decline in the rate of return on the rented accommodation, when compared to what could be earned if the capital value of the house were invested elsewhere.
Security of tenure also means that a landlord may be unable to regain his house, if he wishes to.
A residence with sitting tenants will sell at a discount to its open market value, so there is a strong disincentive for landlords to relet any accommodation which becomes vacant.
Whilst some of this housing stock may be left empty, other landlords may sell to the private sector (ie to individuals who wish to use the building as owner-occupiers).
At the same time, there is no incentive to construct new dwellings for the sector owing to the existence of controlled rents, below the market rate.
Furthermore a drop’ in maintenance spending is also likely as both  the landlord's means and incentive to spend money on the property are reduced.
There have also been cases of deliberate neglect of property in order to force tenants out of the building.
This has become known as Rachmanism after the exploits of an infamous landlord in the 1950s, following the 1957 Rent Act, which attempted to de-control private rented accommodation.
Thus there will be a decline in the quality of the housing stock available to this sector, and a corresponding increase in both empty houses and the number of those who are homeless.
For these reasons critics of rent control and security of tenure argue that, if the market mechanism were allowed to operate, the supply of rented accommodation would increase and its quality improve.
If this analysis is accepted, then it is clear that the attempt over a long period of time to protect the position of those living in privately rented accommodation has failed and has, in fact, made the position worse.
VARIOUS PROPOSALS ON HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS
The ‘Inquiry into British Housing’(1985), chaired by the Duke of Edinburgh, under the auspices of the National Federation of Housing Associations, was a report produced one hundred years after the ‘Royal Commission on the Housing of the Working Classes’, which inquired into housing provision in urban areas during the Industrial Revolution.
The report made a number of recommendations which ‘add up to proposals for restructuring the way we organise housing provision in this country’.
The report called for:
radical changes in the current fiscal arrangement, both between tenures and within tenures, and a sorting out of local government finance and housing subsidy assistance.
We are anxious to see the urgent problem tackled at once.
The report also recommended the introduction of a needs-related housing allowance which would be available to people based on their means and their housing requirements.
It would replace all
existing forms of personal support, that is, housing benefit for tenants, mortgage interest tax relief for owner-occupiers, and the housing ingredient in supplementary benefit.
This would create a fairer system in which those in need of help would gain the most and in which a fairer balance would be struck between different forms of tenure.
Secondly the establishment of a new basis for rents was recommended:.
‘Rents should be related to the capital value of the property, thereby reflecting its popularity in market terms’.
This is, in effect, recommending that most rents should rise in order to provide an inducement for landlords to relet empty property.
Also it was hoped that investors (eg pension funds) would put their money into property for letting, assured of a reasonable return.
The report points out that, in order for those on low incomes to be able to afford a rent based on the capital value of the property, the proposal for the creation of a housing allowance would be a  pre-requisite .
Similar conclusions were reached in Faith in the City .
The charity, Shelter, has produced various reports proposing that greater resources should be directed towards a public sector new housing programme of 100,000 units a year.
They have also highlighted the need for increased spending on repair, for improvement of existing public sector housing and also for greater public sector support for private sector improvements.
The Conservative government's 1988 housing reforms contained several proposals aimed at rejuvenating the private rented sector, after the years in which the promotion of home-ownership was at the forefront of housing policy.
Rent controls on all new lettings were to be lifted, in an attempt to allow landlords to charge a market rent, in the hope that this would increase the supply of rented accommodation.
In a further attempt to restrict the role of local authorities in housing, council house tenants were given the right to switch to an alternative landlord — either in the form of a housing association or an approved private sector landlord — in other words, they were allowed to opt out of local authority control.
In addition Housing Action Trusts were proposed in order to take over the operation of specific run-down council estates, with the intention of changing their tenure to the private sector or housing associations.
Critics argue that the proposals to raise rents will have relatively little effect on the supply of rented accommodation, as the balance of advantage is still tilted far too much in favour of owner-occupation.
However, the increase in rents will cause hardship to many on low incomes — all the more so after the £600 million cuts in housing benefit which formed part of the 1988 social security reforms (refer to Chapter 6, pages 86–7).
THE CONNECTION BETWEEN THE HOUSING MARKET AND THE REST OF THE ECONOMY
The wide disparity that has emerged between house prices in different regions provides a major obstacle to geographical mobility of labour.
People in regions with low house prices are usually unable to afford to purchase a house in a higher priced area, whereas those in the higher priced areas are unwilling to move out in view of the lower capital gains to be made.
The waiting list system for council housing also inhibits council tenants' mobility.
The provision made for those moving from region to region is limited and most have to rejoin the waiting list.
As discussed in Chapter 9, this is a feature of the North-South divide , where the problem of high house prices is particularly associated with the South East.
(Data for house prices is provided in that chapter.)
The shortage of land for development has caused the price of land to rise.
In order to increase the supply of land, and thereby moderate further upward moves in house prices, the government could allow (controversial) development in the green belt or could release public sector land not at present being used.
The housing market is characterised by an (irregular) cyclical pattern of house price movements.
To some extent this is due to the relative inelasticity of supply for housing.
New houses take time to complete and, hence, increases in demand for houses are reflected in an increase in the price of both existing and  new houses.
A limited supply of land for building in certain areas will contribute further to price rises.
However, the house price cycle may also be explained by the changing nature of the demand for housing, which is no longer just for consumption purposes (ie to provide a roof over one's head), but is also for investment reasons.
The (tax free) capital gains made by owner-occupiers generally far exceed any possible savings that they might make from their income.
The rising trend of house prices (albeit with a cyclical pattern) has, on occasions, given rise to an ‘upward sloping demand curve’.
This indicates an increase in demand for housing based on the expectation of future price rises.
During times when house prices are rising, house purchasers often feel that the upward trend will continue for ever.
This encourages first-time buyers into the market, believing that it is ‘now or never’, and also encourages existing home owners to ‘trade up’ to larger accommodation.
As long as property prices continue to increase, both will feel vindicated and will be able to point to capital gains (albeit paper gains) made.
The capital gains to be made exaggerate house price movements.
This is because capital gain on the whole value of the house accrues to the owner, whereas he only has to repay a relatively small proportion of the mortgage each year.
Thus the percentage gain on the investment made is likely to be large during periods of rapid house price increases.
Owner-occupation, or home-ownership, accounts for a greater proportion of the housing stock in the UK than in any other EC country.
The desire to own property has been advanced by the Conservative government's ‘Right to Buy’ scheme, but the moves towards home ownership have been accelerated by the benefits of mortgage interest tax relief and the absence of capital gains tax (as discussed earlier in the chapter) which mean that house purchase is perceived as being an attractive subsidised investment.
We now need to consider the effect of rapidly rising property prices on individual behaviour.
The effect is similar to a situation in which share prices rapidly increase — a bull market.
Rising property prices or share prices cause homeowners and shareholders to feel more wealthy — this is known as the wealth effect .
Individuals feel that they need to save less than before, as they have property or shares to ‘fall back on’, and as a consequence they raise consumption.
A falling savings ratio and rapidly rising consumer expenditure were certainly significant features of the second half of the 1980s.
For this reason fears have been expressed that rising house prices pose a major threat to price stability generally.
The consumer boom was fuelled not just by the falling savings ratio at a time when economic growth allowed incomes to rise strongly, but also by (a) tax cuts, especially in the budgets of 1987 and 1988 and (b) readily available credit — particularly in the aftermath of the deregulation of the City in 1986, known as Big Bang.
When the Stock Market crashed in October 1987, many economists thought that it would be followed by an end to the property boom and a downturn in the ‘real’ economy.
Monetary policy was eased in order to avoid a downturn or recession.
This helped to avoid a recession and the ‘real’ economy continued to grow strongly.
In addition property prices continued to boom, rising at a rate in excess of 20 per cent during 1988 (in some areas, the increase  was even more rapid; the rise in East Anglia was approximately 40 per cent).
However, the consumer boom caused a rapid deterioration in the current account of the balance of payments and an upturn in the rate of inflation.
Both exerted downward pressure on the sterling exchange rate.
Interest rates were raised in response to these problems (refer to Chapter 12)— bank base rates were raised in steps from 7½ per cent in May 1988 to 15 per cent in October 1989 — and mortgage rates followed the interest rate trend.
This put an end to the national house price explosion, although the effect varied significantly between regions.
Average prices decreased by 13.3 per cent in the South East during the twelve months prior to March 1990, whereas the corresponding figure for the North of England was an increase of 25.2 per cent.
Those areas which had shown the greatest price increasing during the boom tended to suffer most when the boom ended.
Although for long established homeowners, falling property prices represent merely a paper loss (likely to be relatively small compared to paper gains made in preceding years), those who bought at, or close to, the peak of the boom, will suffer an absolute drop in the price of their homes.
In particular, those who borrowed more than was perhaps prudent, based on the expectation of a continuing rise in the price of property, may find themselves facing the twin problems of a capital loss and higher mortgage repayments.
The attractions of home-ownership in times when property prices are falling and also when interest rates are high are that much less, and the Conservative government, which had strongly promoted home-ownership was faced with considerable public disquiet.
The increase in the cost of repaying mortgages (the greatest component of the average family's budget) caused a reduction in the amount of money available for general consumption and hence a reduction in living standards.
At the very time when householders were facing high mortgage repayments and declining house prices, the government introduced reforms to the local taxation system which imposed additional financial burdens on many people.
The changes made, discussed below, furthermore removed the only remaining form of ‘property tax’ in the UK.
A POLL TAX OR A ROOF TAX
The system of raising local authorities' revenue by means of the rating system (where the rateable value of property served as the basis for payment) had been unpopular for many years.
However, as there was no agreement on an alternative, the system survived.
During the 1980s, the Conservative government was able to make a great deal of political capital from the activities of high spending Labour councils, many of which were branded ‘Loony Left’ councils.
However, despite attempts to curb the spending power of various councils by rate-capping , local authority finances remained a thorn in the flesh of the government.
The rating system was criticised for being unaccountable — only householders paid rates and, moreover, local authorities relied on grants from central government for the majority of their funds.
This was very complicated  and, in the view of the Conservatives, allowed excessive local authority expenditure, without subjecting councils to local accountability.
The community charge , referred to by many people as the poll tax , was introduced when rates were abolished in April 1989 (Scotland) and in April 1990 (England and Wales).
The community charge was intended to be a simple and visible system of raising revenue in which the behaviour of profligate (assumed to be Labour) councils would be evident to the electorate.
Each adult would be liable to pay a flat-rate personal community charge.
This covered all adults over the age of eighteen (with certain limited exceptions) and was, therefore, more broadly based than rates, in an attempt to improve democratic accountability.
The flat-rate system of payment was, by definition, independent of the ability to pay and this caused great controversy.
(The previous attempt to introduce a poll tax in England provoked the Peasants' Revolt in the fourteenth century.)
As stated above, exceptions were introduced for those with very limited means, but these did not prevent a huge storm of protest at the time of the introduction of the new system.
(At the same time, the government reformed the rating system as it applied to companies by introducing a uniform business rate — set at the same rate throughout the country.)
It should, however, be pointed out that even after the introduction of the community charge, local authorities would still be raising only about one-quarter of their own revenue, the remainder coming from central government grant and the uniform business rate.
Although there were wide variations between local authorities, the government predicted that the average community charge for England and Wales for 1990/91 would be £278.
The outcome of £365 was significantly higher than predicted for two reasons.
Firstly, in the government's calculations, it had allowed only an increase of 4 per cent in the spending of local authorities over the expenditure under the last year of the rating system, whereas inflation turned out to be in excess of 7 per cent.
Hence an increase of 7 per cent would have been required to maintain the real level of spending.
Secondly many local authorities took the opportunity to raise expenditure, relying on the complexities of the system to confuse the electorate, by blaming high poll tax bills on the new system itself, and hence on the government, rather than on their own spending plans.
Faced with a public outcry at the levels of poll tax, the government announced plans in April 1990 to ‘charge cap’ twenty-one (mainly Labour) authorities.
However, this not only removed local accountability (the original motive for introducing the new system) but it also did not affect many areas of the country which were faced with high community charges.
In the short term, there are various measures that would be open to the government if it wished to reduce the impact of the community charge.
Widespread ‘charge capping’ would be possible, but would reduce accountability.
So too would proposals to transfer certain local authority services (eg education, fire, police) from local to central government responsibility.
Such a scheme would add to the central government's tax burden and also increase centralisation of power still further.
Increased grants from central to local government would allow councils to reduce poll tax demands.
However, there would be no guarantee that they would do so — they might use the money for  additional spending on services.
Moreover, such a trend would be counter to government action during the 1980s, when central government grants to local government were progressively reduced.
Another possibility open to the government would be to increase exemptions from the charge for those on low pay, but this would only really operate ‘at the margin'.
Various alternative schemes for raising local authority revenue have been proposed and are in operation in other countries.
Local authority revenue could be obtained through either a local income tax and/or a local sales tax — in other words, through methods similar to those used in raising central government revenues.
The old rating system was of course one form of property tax and various proposals based on the taxation of property, often referred to as a roof tax,have been put forward.
Taxation of property could be based on the capital value of the house, or its land or rateable value.
A great advantage is that taxation of property, which is geographically immobile, is easier to collect than a taxation on individuals, who may be mobile.
In addition, those who favour the return of a property tax point out (as described earlier in this chapter) that there are many financial advantages involved in purchasing a house and that a property tax might serve to dampen down the overheating of the housing market evident during much of the 1980s.
It should, however, be pointed out that there is a major difference between theoretical ideas and specific proposals.
The major opposition to the poll tax came to the fore only when people realised how much they would have to pay.
The theoretical proposal had been public for several years.
COMMENT
The Conservative government has encouraged moves towards owneroccupation, or home-ownership, in Britain.
It has obliged local authorities to sell off council houses and has reduced the importance given to municipal housing.
Critics claim this has contributed to a significant rise in homelessness and that the government's policy on tenure has not contributed much to housebuilding.
Some moves have been made to deregulate the private rented sector, but this still accounts for a relatively insignificant part of the housing stock.
Whilst cutting subsidies to the public sector, tax relief to the private sector has grown enormously.
This, together with easy access to credit after deregulation and the political drive towards owner-occupation under the Conservative government, has contributed to a house price boom.
This has given large capital gains to many people, but also a misleading picture about the ‘ease of making money’.
Often capital gains from unproductive assets have been easier to come by than profit from investment or from working.
In addition individuals' savings have been directed into house purchase, rather than into productive investment opportunities.
The political spin offs of a stagnant property market for the ‘party of home ownership’ have yet to be assessed.
The North-East Divide
WHAT IS THE ‘NORTH-SOUTH DIVIDE’?
The Conservative government under Mrs Thatcher has been accused of abandoning the One Nation style of Toryism and of widening the North-South divide .
During the 1980s the discussion about disparities of prosperity between different regions in the UK has focused increasingly on the issue of the North-South divide.
The popular conception of this phenomenon is that, if one divides the country into two, there are different characteristics appertaining to the two areas.
Prosperity is concentrated in the ‘South’, which is expanding fast, thereby creating rising real incomes and new employment, particularly in high-technology industries and the service sector.
On the other hand, the ‘North’ remains depressed, containing stagnant industries and high unemployment, with many areas in decline, particularly in the inner cities and the longstanding assisted areas.
However, before even considering the data and evidence required in a discussion of the North-South divide, there are two points which need to be made.
Firstly, it must be realised that, whatever data are used to measure the prosperity of a region, these will not represent the whole picture.
Decaying inner cities are to be found in the South as well as the North, and there are areas within the South in which high unemployment, deprivation and poverty exist.
Similarly, in the North there are prosperous areas within otherwise depressed regions.
Hence, if evidence is found to support the existence of a North-South divide, this must be seen in terms of measures of ‘averages’ for particular regions.
This leads to the second problem, which is concerned with the exact demarcation of the North-South boundary.
The South is generally understood  to include the South East and East Anglia.
Many studies also classify the South West, the East Midlands and the West Midlands as parts of the ‘South’.
The North on this basis comprises Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and the remaining areas of England (North England, Yorkshire and Humberside and the North West)(see Figure 9.1).
When considering the issue of the North-South divide, two questions need to be asked:
(a)
Does the divide exist?
(b)
Is the divide widening?
(This chapter studies only the phenomenon of the North-South divide and does not consider its causes.
Some of the possible explanations are given in Chapter 10 when regional disparities are studied.)
DOES THE NORTH-SOUTH DIVIDE EXIST?
Most economies contain regional disparities — claims about a North-South divide in Britain are contrasted with a South-North divide in Italy, where the South is relatively less prosperous than the North.
Whether or not the government could have intervened in the economy by adopting a more active regional policy , in order to reduce regional disparities and hence the North-South divide, is considered in Chapter 10.
So too is the argument that governments should do the reverse and intervene less in the running of the economy, relying instead on market forces.
There are several ways of considering the relative levels of prosperity in different regions.
These are considered below.
In column 2 of Table 9.1, the share of UK GDP accounted for by each region is recorded for 1988.
Column 1 in the same table considers the share of UK population accounted for by each region for the same year.
If the share of UK GDP accounted for by a particular region is equal to its share of UK population and, if this is true for all regions, then GDP is spread proportional to population throughout the country.
However, if the share of UK GDP accounted for by a particular region is higher than its share of UK population, then that region is relatively more prosperous than the average; conversely for a lower figure.
Table 9.1 indicates that the South East was the only region that had a higher share of GDP than would be expected from its population size.
The economy in the South East (representing 36.3 per cent of UK GDP) dominates the whole economy and its size is more than three times that of any other region (refer also to Figure 9.2).
GDP per head is then compared between regions.
A figure of more than 100 indicates that GDP per head in that region is higher than the UK average and, conversely, a figure lower than 100 indicates that the region's GDP per head is lower than the national average.
(It should be pointed out that, whereas the figures in columns 1 and 2 are percentages of the whole, so that the sum of the figures in each column is 100, the figures in column 3 are index numbers — comparing GDP per head in a region with UK GDP per head.)
A figure of 119.4 indicates that GDP per head in the South East was 19.4 per cent above the average in 1988.
Furthermore, the South East can be seen to have been the only region with a figure above the national average — all other regions were below the average (see also Figure 9.3).
Column 4 considers regional unemployment rates as a proportion of the working population.
The rate recorded for the South East was under half that recorded for the North of England.
Only four regions — the South East, the South West, East Anglia and the East Midlands — produced figures below the national average.
Long-term regional unemployment (measured here by those unemployed for more than three years) is often taken as a good indicator of how deep a region's problems may be.
When considering the long-term unemployed as a percentage of those unemployed, the same four regions, together with Wales and Scotland, produce figures below the national average.
(However, it should be pointed out that the Welsh and Scottish figures are  percentages of much higher unemployment rates and are, therefore, not as favourable as might at first seem).
An overall consideration of the data in Table 9.1 appears to indicate the existence in the South of an ‘inner core’ of prosperity (the South East) and an ‘outer periphery’(East Anglia, South West and East Midlands), compared with the relatively less prosperous regions of the North .
Figure 9.4 considers male average gross weekly earnings.
On this map the data is recorded by county and not by region.
However, a similar pattern to that described above appears.
(The high figure recorded for the Grampian area of Scotland is principally attributed to North Sea oil.)
The most publicised aspect of the North-South divide has been the wide disparity between house prices in different regions of the country.
Figures for the average price of a detached house in each region for 1988 are provided in   Table 9.1 (column 6) and indicate that houses in the South East are much more expensive than elsewhere in the country.
The difference in regional house prices acts as a major obstacle to mobility of labour.
Those wishing to move into the ‘South’ may be unable to afford to buy a house or may be able to buy only a much smaller house with the money raised from their existing dwelling.
There may also be a reluctance to move out of the South, in the fear that if house prices in the ‘North’ increase at a slower rate, it may be difficult to return to the ‘South’at a later date (refer also to Chapter 8, page 107).
HAS THE NORTH-SOUTH DIVIDE WIDENED?
Answering the question: ‘Has the North-South divide widened during the 1980s?’ is fraught with difficulties and, to some extent, the answer depends on which economic indicators are viewed and the way in which the calculations are interpreted.
In particular, conclusions are often drawn with reference to the word ‘percentage’, but often the question ‘percentage of what?’ is conveniently ignored.
The way in which different conclusions may be drawn from one hypothetical set of data is now shown below.
In absolute terms, region A suffers more from the rise in unemployment (5,000) than does region B (2,000).
However, this does not take into account the different sizes of the populations of working age between the regions.
When unemployment as a percentage of the population of working age is taken into account, region A shows an increase from 10 per cent to 12.5 per cent(a rise of 2.5 percentage points) and region B shows an increase from 20 per cent to 24 per cent (a rise of 4 percentage points).
On this basis the position of region B has deteriorated with respect to region A. On the other hand one may say that for Region A, between year 1 and year 2, unemployment increased by 25 per cent(expressed as a percentage of unemployment in year 1) and for region B, unemployment increased by 20 per cent (expressed as a percentage of unemployment in year 1).
This hypothetical situation illustrates some of the difficulties likely to be experienced when considering the North-South divide and shows why so many conflicting claims have been made about this question.
There are many different measures which could be chosen when trying to assess whether the North-South divide has widened.
We shall consider three:
(a)
The share of UK GDP accounted for by each region;
(b)
GDP per head in each region;
(c)
Regional unemployment.
The period of time studied is the ten year interval from 1978 until 1988. (1978 was the last full year before the Conservative General Election victory in 1979.)
Table 9.2 (columns 1 and 2) indicates that the share of UK GDP accounted for by the South East, the South West, East Anglia, the East Midlands and Northern Ireland increased between 1978 and 1988.
(Again care with the figures is necessary — subtraction of column 1 from column 2 would be meaningless as the figures are percentages of different amounts.
Hence column 3 merely registers whether an increase or decrease was observed between 1978 and 1988.)
Columns 4 and 5 show that GDP per head compared with UK GDP per head rose between 1978 and 1988 in all of the five regions listed above except the East Midlands.
(It should be pointed out that, if a region's GDP per head declines as a proportion of UK GDP, it does not necessarily imply that the region's GDP per head has declined in absolute terms, but only in comparison with that of the UK.)
Thirdly, changes in unemployment are now considered.
The rate of unemployment as a percentage of the working population is recorded for both 1980 and 1988 (columns 1 and 2) for each region (refer also to note section on Table 9.3).
The difference between the two figures is calculated for each region.
It can be seen that, whilst all regions reflected the higher national unemployment rate, some regions fared better than others.
The South East, the South West, East Anglia and the East Midlands were again the regions showing increases less than the national average for unemployment as a percentage of the working population.
However, when considering the increase in unemployment in each region as a percentage of the rate of unemployment in that region in 1980, different results are produced.
Lower than average increases are recorded in the South West, East Anglia, the West Midlands and the North.
(The South East produces an above-average figure because the 1980 unemployment rate was low; even a small increase will therefore appear large proportionately.)
It is clear, therefore, that a conclusion about whether the North-South divide has widened is more difficult to draw from a consideration of unemployment figures than from GDP figures.
Any firm conclusions would require much more lengthy analysis than is possible in this book.
The regional differences in house prices have been considered earlier in this chapter (and in Table 9.1, column 6).
However, it is clear that the divergence between the North and the South has widened during the period 1981 — 7 (see Figure 9.5).
Nevertheless, it is only fair to say that this marks a period of ‘boom’ in house prices.
Following the end of the boom in 1988, prices fell fastest in regions which had shown the highest increases previously.
One might expect that differences in the level of regional income and employment would be accompanied by a migration of labour into the more prosperous regions.
However, the evidence shows that, although there is a drift to the South (see Figure 9.6), there is relatively little migration between regions when compared with movement within the regions themselves.
There are many  factors which might explain this immobility, of which one certainly is the regional variation of house prices considered above.
POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS
The North-South divide may also be observed when considering the political map of Britain after the 1987 General Election (see Figure 9.7) when previous  regional electoral trends were reinforced.
Even when compared with the 1983 landslide victory, the Conservative share of the vote increased in the South East (including Greater London), East Anglia, West Midlands and East Midlands, and registered only a marginal decline in the South West (albeit with a share of  the vote still in excess of 50 per cent).
The Conservatives made particularly large losses in Scotland.
The effect of the first past the post electoral system exaggerated trends in regional voting patterns, leaving Labour with one seat only in each of the South East (excluding Greater London), South West and East Anglia — out of 108, 45 and 20 respectively.
Conversely the Conservatives gained only ten seats in Scotland and eight seats in the North of England out of 72 and 36 respectively.
The political fortunes of the Conservative party, based on the evidence of the 1987 General Election, are increasingly regionally-based and reflect to some extent the economic fortunes of the different regions.
COMMENT
This chapter has studied the phenomenon known as the North-South divide .
For reasons given in the text, all figures should be treated carefully.
There are certainly divergences in prosperity apparent between the different regions of the country, with the South East clearly the dominant region, both in terms of its size and economic performance.
However, the question: ‘Has the North-South divide widened under the Conservative government?’ is a difficult one to answer — a limited amount of data has been presented, but the evidence over the ten-year period studied is not conclusive.
The following chapter considers the various policies which have been proposed to deal with regional imbalances and is then followed by a study of inner cities.