

SUMMARY
Diarrhoea is a debilitating and potentially fatal symptom of disease characterised by a loss of fluid and ions from the body in watery stool.
Oral rehydration therapy is an inexpensive treatment designed to replace the lost fluid and ions, thereby reducing the morbidity and mortality associated with diarrhoea.
Bangladesh is a developing country with a high incidence of diarrhoeal diseases.
In 1979, the National Oral Rehydration Programme began its task of manufacturing packets of Oral Rehydration Salts for distribution throughout Bangladesh.
The programme was of limited value to the people of Bangladesh owing to its failing to be able to cope with a poor infrastructure and a large population.
In 1980, the Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee began its task of teaching one person in every household, by word of mouth, about a home-made oral rehydration solution.
This programme experienced several problems, resulting in dangerously high sodium ion concentrations in home-made solutions and low usage rates of the solution by those who had been taught about it.
Successive revisions of the programme have improved the popularity and safety of the solution, although some problems still remain.
It is concluded that the programme conducted by the Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee was more appropriate for the people of Bangladesh than the National Oral Rehydration Programme.
INTRODUCTION
Diarrhoea is a common symptom of disease throughout the Developing World.
In Asia, Africa and Latin America, there are an estimated 3–5,000,000,000 episodes of diarrhoea annually.
As a result, between five and ten million people die each year from this debilitating and potentially fatal symptom.
The treatment of diarrhoeal diseases therefore forms a subject which is relevant to a great many people throughout the world.
This paper introduces a form of treatment which can help those suffering from diarrhoea, and consequently this treatment has the potential for saving many lives.
The attempts made in a developing country to promote this treatment are described.
Reasons for the successes and failures of these attempts are discussed in the light of the principle that in order for a treatment to be widely used, it must be inexpensive, freely available and acceptable to the population that it is designed to help.
The paper serves to illustrate some of the fundamental problems that may be encountered by organisations which aim to introduce new technology to developing countries, in spite of the fact that the technology in question is aimed at improving the quality of life of the inhabitants.
DIARRHOEA AND ORAL REHYDRATION THERAPY
Up until the mid twentieth century, the obvious (and copious) loss of fluid from the body via the gastrointestinal tract had led to the assumption that diarrhoeal diseases rendered the alimentary canal completely incapable of performing its proper function of absorbing ingested fluid and nutrients.
Treatments varied from the use of opium (to reduce gut motility and relieve pain), to the use of purgatives and salt-water emetics to ‘flush out’ the offending organism.
Some found bathing the patient in a bath of nitric acid to be efficacious!
Each day, 7–10 litres of water enter the small intestine.
This water is not only derived from the food that we eat and the fluid that we drink: much of it comes from the multitude of secretions which enter the gut lumen.
Hence salivary, gastric, pancreatic and intestinal secretions all contribute to the large volume of fluid which daily enters the gut lumen.
The water acts as a solvent for the digestive enzymes secreted into the gut.
However, such secretions also contain important ions which are essential for the normal functioning of the body.
Pancreatic juice for example contains a high concentration of sodium ions, and variable concentrations of chloride and bicarbonate ions.
Such ions are also found in our food.
These vital ions must be reabsorbed by the gut wall, as must the fluid and nutrients in the lumen.
This process occurs readily in the healthy gut: the products of digestion (monosaccharides, amino acids, fatty acids, glycerol, etc.) are absorbed as well as the ions, with water following by osmosis.
Sodium ions for example are reabsorbed by several different mechanisms at the surface of the gut epithelium; two such mechanisms are the coupled uptake of sodium ions and chloride ions, and the coupled uptake of sodium ions and glucose.
The absorption of water from the gut lumen is an osmotic consequence of such processes.
The result is that, of the 7–10 litres entering the gut, only about 100ml of water leave the healthy gut daily in the faeces.
WHAT IS DIARRHOEA?
Diarrhoea is characterised by a failure of the gut to reabsorb the majority of the fluid and ions from its lumen.
The fluid and ions are lost as watery stool.
If they are not replaced, then the victim will become hypovolaemic (having a lower than normal total blood volume) and may die from the consequent reduction in circulating blood supply to the vital organs.
The main source of information concerning the development and treatment of diarrhoea comes from studies of cholera.
The organism Vibrio cholerae produces an enterotoxin which has been shown to inhibit the absorption of sodium and chloride ions (via the coupled uptake mechanism mentioned above) at the apical surface of the gut epithelium.
At the same time the enterotoxin also promotes a net secretion of chloride ions into the gut lumen from the epithelial cells.
The consequent build up of osmotically active particles within the gut lumen inhibits water reabsorption by the gut wall.
Some of the excess chloride ions in the lumen are exchanged for bicarbonate ions at the surface of the epithelium.
The result is a massive loss of water, sodium ions, chloride ions and bicarbonate ions, causing the patient to become dehydrated and acidotic (acidosis being an increase in the acidity of the blood).
The acidosis causes hyperkalaemia (a raised concentration of potassium ions in the blood), with a resulting loss in total body potassium via the kidneys.
Other diarrhoea-causing bacteria seem to operate on the same principle as cholera enterotoxin ie. by blocking sodium and chloride ion reabsorption and causing chloride ion secretion into the gut lumen.
Certain strains of Escherichia coli (E. coli ), for example are responsible for causing ‘Traveller's Diarrhoea’.
Studies have shown that the heat-labile exotoxin (known as LT) produced by pathogenic E. coli acts in the same way as the cholera enterotoxin.
In 1832 Dr Thomas Latta described a treatment for cholera which was designed to bypass the ailing gut and reverse the characteristic dehydration associated with the disease.
He intravenously infused a solution of saline and alkali (sodium bicarbonate) into his patients.
He had some success, but many of his patients died, probably as a result of infections consequent upon the introduction of non-sterile fluids into the circulation.
During the next 100 years, there was little progress in the treatment of diarrhoea, and the main source for debate was the precise composition of the intravenously administered fluids.
Darrow and Govan were the first to identify with any certainty which ions were lost in diarrhoea and the quantities involved, thereby enabling them to state accurately the required make-up of an intravenous infusion aimed at replacing lost nutrients.
They also suggested that the solution might be administered orally after 24 hours of intravenous treatment.
THE DISCOVERY OF ORAL REHYDRATION THERAPY
The mode of action of the toxins described above leaves a loophole which can be taken advantage of.
Although the coupled uptake of sodium ions and chloride ions is inhibited by the toxins, coupled uptake of sodium ions and glucose has been shown to remain fully operative.
Hence, the addition of glucose to an aqueous solution of sodium, chloride, bicarbonate and potassium ions allows absorption of sodium ions and glucose, and a consequent osmotic uptake of water which pulls along the other ions by ‘solvent drag’.
This is the principle by which Oral Rehydration Therapy (ORT) aims to replace the ions and water lost during diarrhoea.
The discovery in 1958 that sodium uptake and glucose uptake are coupled at the luminal surface of the intestine marked a turning point in the oral administration of electrolyte solutions.
In 1964, Phillips proposed that the addition of glucose to a properly balanced electrolyte solution would result in an oral treatment regimen which might replace the requirement for intravenous fluids altogether.
The effectiveness of an oral glucose/electrolyte solution for the treatment of acute infectious diarrhoea was demonstrated by Hirschhorn et al.in 1972 when 52 Apache children were successfully treated (using a minimum of intra-venous fluids).
Since then, Oral Rehydration Therapy, as the treatment has become known, has received growing support from organisations such as the World Health Organisation (WHO) and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF).
There are many different ‘recipes’ for oral rehydration solutions in the current literature.
They are all, however, designed to work by the same physiological principles, and on this basis they have common components.
They all contain a source of sodium ions and chloride ions, mainly in the form of common salt.
Many of them contain basic (alkaline) salts, such as sodium bicarbonate or trisodium citrate.
These basic salts aim to reverse the acidosis characteristic of diarrhoea, which is caused by excessive loss of bicarbonate in the stool.
Many contain potassium salts to counteract the loss of potassium ions from the body during diarrhoea.
Finally, of course, there must be a substance such as glucose, which can activate the sodium cotransport systems in the gut epithelium — the systems upon which the principle of ORT relies.
There is no consensus on what the relative concentrations of the components should be, however WHO and UNICEF have agreed on a standard formula which they recommend.
This standard formula is known as Oral Rehydration Salts (ORS).
The composition of this formula is given in Table 1.
The concentrations of the components in this standard formula (using sodium bicarbonate rather than trisodium citrate as the basic salt) are given in Table 2.
Behind the relatively simple physiological basis of oral rehydration therapy lurks a hidden danger.
So long as the ingested solution of electrolytes is hypotonic (possessing an osmotic activity below that of blood plasma) or isotonic (equal to blood plasma in osmotic activity), then ORT performs the required task of promoting electrolyte and fluid transport from the gut lumen to the blood.
At first glance, it would seem logical to add as much salt and glucose to the solution as possible in order to speed up the rehydration process.
If however the solution is too concentrated then it becomes hypertonic (possessing an osmotic activity above that of blood plasma) and, as a consequence, dangerous.
If a hypertonic solution is introduced into the gut lumen, then osmosis dictates that water will tend to be drawn into the lumen from the surrounding gut wall (and hence from the blood perfusing the tissues of the gut).
Thus, such a solution would exacerbate the dehydrating conditions created by the diarrhoea — the very conditions which the oral rehydration solution, at the correct concentration, is designed to relieve.
It will be seen later on, when discussing the use of home-made oral rehydration solutions, that the chief source for concern is the concentration of sodium ions in the solution.
This chapter has dealt with the mechanism of a debilitating and often fatal symptom of disease, namely diarrhoea.
An effective treatment for reversing the effects of that symptom has also been described.
In the next chapter, an area of the world is introduced in which diarrhoea remains a common illness.
The area concerned continues to be in desperate need of the benefits of Oral Rehydration Therapy.
BANGLADESH — A COUNTRY IN NEED
Bangladesh (formerly East Pakistan) is a developing country in South East Asia covering 55,598 square miles of land.
In 1981 Bangladesh's estimated population of 90,630,000 people meant that it was ranked as the eighth largest country in the world (by population), and the fifth largest developing country.
This gave an average population density of over 1600 inhabitants per square mile in 1981.
A consequence of the overpopulation has been the high incidence of malnutrition and communicable diseases found in Bangladesh.
Bangladesh is gifted with a rich supply of water which drains via many rivers into the Bay of Bengal (see Figure 1).
Between June and September, the rivers swell with melted snow from the Himalayas.
The resulting floods cover more than one third of the countryside, and the silt-laden water renders the land beneath and around it very fertile and capable of supporting a large agricultural population.
The floods, however, also carry along the waste and detritus of a large population.
The use of local ponds and streams as sewers results in an unavoidable spread of very unhealthy water when the floods come.
The constant and inevitable contact between the population and the water results in a public health problem on a massive scale.
The unhygienic situation described above has been more than enough reason for diarrhoeal diseases to become widespread.
It has been estimated that diarrhoeal illness is responsible for 250,000 deaths each year in Bangladesh.
Of course the incidence of nonfatal cases of debilitating diarrhoea is much higher.
If a patient suffering from cholera were to be treated with intravenous sterile solutions, he/she would require an average of 10 litres of the solution (plus antibiotics) during the course of the treatment.
In Bangladesh, at the beginning of the 1970s, one litre of the solution (when it was available) cost between 30 and 60 Taka (1 Taka = approx. 2.9 pence, in 1981).
Hence between 300 and 600 Taka were required to pay for the full treatment.
Since the average family income in Bangladesh was only 200 Taka per month, the intra-venous therapy was prohibitively expensive.
Thus there was a demand for a cheaper alternative to intra-venous therapy.
The answer to many of the problems of Bangladesh was, of course, better sanitation and birth control.
An effort was made to clean up the water supplies, thereby helping to reduce the transmission of water-borne agents of disease: between 1972 and 1990, almost 1 million handpump tubewells were installed in Bangladesh.
A family planning association was set up by the Government in 1972, and the Government's First Five Year Plan proposed the promotion of several different types of birth control.
However, the overpopulation problem remains today, with the United Nations predicting a population of 151 million in the year 2000 and 235 million in the year 2025.
The worrying situation described above (characteristic of many developing countries) paved the way for humanitarian action.
It became recognised that the suffering experienced by the people of Bangladesh as a result of the high incidence of diarrhoeal diseases could be relieved, at least partially, by Oral Rehydration Therapy.
The rest of this dissertation relates the various attempts made since 1979 to promote to the people of Bangladesh the idea that drinking an oral electrolyte solution is an effective method of replacing the fluids and minerals lost during diarrhoea.
THE NATIONAL ORAL REHYDRATION PROGRAMME
The previous chapter introduced Bangladesh as an overpopulated developing country with a high incidence of diarrhoeal diseases.
This chapter describes the efforts of an organisation which attempted to implement Oral Rehydration Therapy on a national scale, with the intention of reducing the morbidity and mortality caused by diarrhoea.
It is seen that the programme was only of small benefit to the people of Bangladesh, owing to its inability to cope with the conditions of this developing country.
In March 1979, a National Oral Rehydration Programme (NORP) was established in Bangladesh.
The programme received financial assistance from UNICEF and it was intended that it should perform three basic tasks:
i)
To set up and run four units for the production of Oral Rehydration Salt (ORS) packets, based on the World Health Organisation recipe described in Chapter 1.
ii)
To train health staff in the Government-run Upazila Health Complexes (an Upazila being an administrative area containing approximately 200,000 people) and to organise a group of village-based volunteers who would make ORS available to any of the villagers on a 24 hour-a-day basis.
iii)
To distribute the ORS packets to the Upazila Health Complexes.
In 1981 NORP was taken over by the Bangladeshi Government, so that the funding that NORP had until then received directly from UNICEF was now channelled through the Government.
At the same time NORP ceased its training of health staff and relinquished the responsibility of distributing the ORS packets to the Upazila Health Complexes.
This left NORP with the sole task of producing enough ORS packets to satisfy demand.
The four ORS production units, which were established in Rangpur, Jessore, Comilla and Dhaka (see Figure 1), were essentially cottage industries.
Each packet of ORS produced had contents enough for 1 litre of solution.
The polythene packet consisted of 3 compartments, the upper one containing an instruction leaflet, the middle one containing sodium bicarbonate and the lower one containing a mixture of sugar, sodium chloride and potassium chloride.
By separating the sodium bicarbonate from the other components, the shelf-life of the packets was prolonged.
The World Health Organisation's recipe for ORS included an alternative basic salt, namely trisodium citrate, which may be used in place of the sodium bicarbonate (as given in Table 1).
It was recognised that use of trisodium citrate would remove the need for the separate salt compartments, but its use was ruled out on the grounds that trisodium citrate was five times more expensive than sodium bicarbonate.
The ORS packets produced in the production units were either placed in storage or taken to the Upazila Health Complexes.
At the Health Complexes they would be distributed to the inpatient and outpatient departments and also to field workers whose job it was to distribute the packets to anyone who required them in his/her village.
AN ASSESSMENT OF NORP
Facts found in an evaluation, conducted in 1985 by the International Centre for Diarrhoeal Diseases Research, Bangladesh, revealed five reasons why the National Oral Rehydration Programme ought to be seen as an inappropriate and inefficient method of promoting oral rehydration therapy to the people of Bangladesh: Firstly, it was estimated that, based on numbers of reported cases of diarrhoea, 184 million packets of ORS were needed annually by the Bangladeshi population (1985 figure).
Since production of ORS sachets during 1984 totalled only 9.4 million, there was a huge mismatch between supply and demand.
There was also evidence to suggest that 35% of the total number of packets reaching the Upazila Health Complexes were not distributed; a proportion was kept as buffer stock, the rest was wasted (ie. its shelf-life was allowed to expire).
A second reason why the programme should be regarded as inappropriate and inefficient is that poor storage conditions led to wasting of raw materials (sugar, salt, etc.) in the ORS production units.
Thirdly, the Upazila Health Complexes were not given funds for the collecting of the ORS packets from the storage centres, thereby reducing the incentive for the Health Complexes to use the stores to their full potential.
Fourthly, the field workers were given only a few packets of ORS for distribution among the villagers.
It would seem that these few packets were handed out mainly to the neighbours of the field workers rather than to those villagers who actually needed the ORS.
A final reason providing grounds upon which to criticise the programme was that the network of field workers did not cover all of the rural population of Bangladesh.
In retrospect, it can be seen that NORP was a poorly planned venture which failed to take account of the poor infrastructure of Bangladesh and the vastness of the problem that it was meant to tackle.
The government-run NORP is still in operation today, however the observation that this programme is not mentioned in much of the post-1985 literature on oral rehydration therapy in Bangladesh, suggests that it has been of limited value to the people of Bangladesh.
The next chapter introduces another organisation which also sought to introduce oral rehydration therapy to the people of Bangladesh, but in a way which was meant to take account of some of the problems which the planners of NORP had overlooked.
THE BANGLADESH RURAL ADVANCEMENT COMMITTEE
This chapter introduces the concept of appropriate technology and discusses how this concept relates to the use of pre-packaged oral rehydration salts in Bangladesh.
The chapter goes on to describe the way in which a non-governmental organisation attempted to introduce Oral Rehydration Therapy to Bangladesh as an appropriate technology by trying to avoid the problems associated with the pre-packaged salts.
There are probably many examples of instances in which Western technology has come up with a good idea which has the capability of helping the hundreds of millions of people in the Developing World.
Too often, however, such ideas may fail to have the desired effect because they are found to be ‘inappropriate’ in some way.
‘Appropriate’ technology might usefully be defined as an idea which is of benefit to the people of developing countries, and which meets the following criteria:
1)
It must be implemented in an effective way, ie. all people who need to benefit from the idea must have easy access to it.
2)
It must be affordable to those who are responsible for financing it (for example, the government or the local people).
An expensive remedy is useless to poor countries.
In some instances the idea may be implemented by the local people from locally found, inexpensive raw materials.
3)
It must not conflict with the cultural beliefs of the people.
Any such conflict may result in the rejection of the idea by those who need to benefit from it.
In Bangladesh, Oral Rehydration Therapy was in danger of falling into the trap of being inappropriate for the people that it was intended to help.
The pre-packaged Oral Rehydration Salts distributed by the various heath organisations were not easily available in most rural areas, conflicting with the first criterion for appropriate technology (listed above).
Furthermore, the packets were too costly for the average people to buy, conflicting with the second criterion.
The Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee (BRAC) is a non-governmental organisation which was set up in February 1972, after the Liberation War of 1971.
Its task was to organise relief and rehabilitation efforts for the victims of that war who had lost their homes, fishing boats, cattle and other means of production in the north-east of Bangladesh.
Since that time, BRAC has grown into a country-wide development organisation, remaining independent of the government, and striving to improve the quality of life for the people of Bangladesh.
BRAC currently receives funds from a number of organisations, including Oxfam, UNICEF and the Swiss Development Cooperation.
At the end of the 1970s BRAC developed an oral rehydration solution that was safe, effective, cheap, and simple to make from ingredients found in most Bangladeshi households.
This ‘lobon-gur’ solution (LGS) was prepared by taking ‘half a seer’of tube well or boiled water and adding to it one three-finger pinch of ‘lobon’(exactly up to the first crease of the index finger) and two four-finger scoops of ‘gur’, then stirring well.
‘Lobon’ is Bengali for common table salt (mainly sodium chloride).
‘Gur’ is unrefined sugar (a kind of molasses) which is locally available and consists mainly of sucrose, with a significant amount of potassium salts.
‘Half a seer’ is a local measurement of volume, equal to 467ml.
Although it was Church who originally proposed the use of ‘pinches’ and ‘scoops’for measuring out the components of salt-sugar solutions for the purpose of oral rehydration, it was BRAC which adapted this method for use by the people of Bangladesh.
BRAC'S APPROACH TO EDUCATING THE POPULATION
The lobon-gur solution described above was a prototype used by BRAC in the late 1970s in a pilot programme which lasted 12 months.
In this pilot phase, teams of Oral Replacement Workers taught mothers in nearly 60,000 households about the lobon-gur mixture in a ten point message called ‘Ten Points to Remember’.
This message included details concerning the characteristics of diarrhoea (eg. mechanisms of transmission) and how to make and administer the prototype lobon-gur solution.
The results of the pilot programme (based on the ability of the mothers to recall what they had been taught two weeks previously) were so promising that BRAC launched a programme to teach the method of preparing LGS to every household in the country over a period of about ten years.
The programme, known as the Oral Therapy Extension Programme (OTEP), involved sending teams of Oral Replacement Workers to visit all the villages in certain Thanas.
Each Worker would then individually teach the mothers of the households (on a one to one basis) about the lobon-gur solution.
The programme was to be carried out in phases.
Phase 1 started in July 1980 and lasted 3 years, during which 2.5 million households were visited.
The lobon-gur mixture taught to the mothers was a revised version of the pilot LGS, which consisted of a three finger pinch (up to the first crease) of lobon and one fistful of gur in half a seer of drinking water, the only change being that the gur was measured as one fistful rather than two four-finger scoops.
The reason behind this change was that, during the pilot programme, some mothers had been confusing ‘one pinch’ of lobon and ‘two scoops’of gur and had instead used two pinches of lobon and one scoop of gur, thereby making a dangerous hypertonic solution.
The pilot programme's ‘Ten Points to Remember’ were revised and became ‘Seven Points to Remember’, which the Worker would talk about with the mother.
The reduction in the number of Points to Remember came as a result of observations that the rural mothers found it difficult to remember all of the Ten Points.
Each lesson, conducted by the visiting Oral Replacement Worker, would last about 25–35 minutes during which time the mother herself would make up some lobon-gur mixture according to the instructions of the Worker.
An essential part of BRAC's oral therapy programme was the reinforcement and monitoring of the message conveyed by the Oral Replacement Workers about the lobon-gur solution.
A month after the visits of the Workers, a second group known as ‘programme monitors’ would visit a random 5% of households.
One of the aims of the programme monitors was to assess the ability of the mothers to recall the Seven Points to Remember and the composition of LGS.
Further details concerning their important role are given in the next chapter.
Thus, from the beginning of the 1980s, BRAC attempted to bring appropriate technology to the people of Bangladesh.
Note that BRAC's programme started shortly after (and ran concurrently with) the NORP programme described in Chapter 3.
By devising an oral rehydration solution made from home ingredients, the problem of cost was (partially at least) solved, as was the problem of supplying pre-packaged Oral Rehydration Salts to a population 92% of whom lived in rural areas where transportation was generally very poor.
Finally, by teaching mothers about the lobon-gur mixture by word of mouth, the fact that more than 80% of the country's population was illiterate became of no consequence.
The next chapter describes BRAC's initial attempts to gauge the success of Phase 1 of its Oral Therapy Extension Programme.
THE ORAL THERAPY EXTENSION PROGRAMME — PHASE 1
The first phase of BRAC's Oral Therapy Extension Programme (OTEP) lasted from July 1980 to September 1983.
During this time, 2.5 million households (covering approximately 14 million people) were visited by the Oral Replacement Workers.
Their task, as described in the previous chapter, was to teach the mothers how to make a simple oral electrolyte solution from home ingredients.
This chapter concentrates on the feedback which BRAC received concerning this first phase.
As a result of this feedback, some of the strengths and weaknesses of the programme started to become apparent.
There were three ways by which BRAC obtained information regarding the effectiveness of Phase 1 of the Oral Therapy Extension Programme.
The first, as mentioned in the previous chapter, was continuous feedback from the programme monitors who visited a random 5% of the households one month after the visits of the Oral Replacement Workers.
They graded each household on the basis of the ability of the mother to recall the Seven Points to Remember and her ability to make the lobon-gur solution correctly.
Grade A indicated full competence.
Grade D indicated inability to make the mixture correctly.
Grades B and C were grades between the two extremes indicating that the mother could make the mixture correctly, but could not recall the Seven Point message in full.
In March of 1983, of the 4155 households visited by the programme monitors, 51.4% scored grade A, 46.4% scored grade B, 2.0% scored grade C and 0.2% scored grade D. The programme monitors also determined usage rates for LGS in the villages by asking the mothers whether or not there had been a case of diarrhoea in the household within the past 15 days, and if so, what treatment (if any) had been used.
Utilisation rates were found to vary widely between different areas, with less than 35% of cases of diarrhoea being treated with the lobon-gur mixture (on average).
During the visits of the programme monitors, the mothers would be asked to prepare some LGS, a sample of which was collected and taken to a laboratory where the concentration of sodium ions was measured.
This was necessary in order find out whether the mothers could make a ‘safe’ solution.
As mentioned in Chapter 1, the addition of too much salt (or sugar) to the mixture could be dangerously counter-productive.
The World Health Organisation recommends a sodium ion concentration of 90mmol/l.
For the purposes of the OTEP programme monitors, a sample of LGS with a sodium ion concentration of between 30 and 99mmol/l was defined as ‘safe and effective’.
The results of the sodium ion concentration analyses revealed that 90% of mothers were able to prepare a ‘safe and effective’ solution, thereby dispelling many fears about the safety of a home-made oral rehydration solution.
The second way by which BRAC gauged the effect of its Oral Therapy Extension Programme was by commissioning the Research and Evaluation Division of BRAC to perform a study.
This study compared mortality before and after implementation of the programme in certain areas of Bangladesh between 1981 and 1982.
The results showed a marked reduction in post neo-natal (1–11 months) and early childhood (1–4 years) deaths after implementation of the programme.
However, deficiencies in the ability of the study to accurately record information on the cause of death meant that it could not be shown whether or not the reduction in mortality had been due to a reduction in diarrhoea-related deaths and hence due to the programme.
The results of this study remained unpublished.
In this study, the usage rates for the lobon-gur solution were found to be poor,(corroborating the findings of the programme monitors mentioned above); less than 10% of all cases of diarrhoea had been treated with oral rehydration therapy.
Between January and February 1983 the Swiss Development Cooperation, a major financial contributor to the Oral Therapy Extension Programme, carried out an external evaluation of the programme.
This provided a third source of information for BRAC on the effectiveness of its programme.
The evaluation team concluded that the funding should be continued.
In addition it made some recommendations to BRAC, one of which was to encourage BRAC to make a greater effort to cooperate with the local village practitioners.
This is an important point which will be returned to in the next chapter.
BRAC was obviously encouraged by the grades given by the programme monitors to the mothers who had received training from the Oral Replacement Workers.
The recommendation made by an external evaluation team to one of BRAC's main sponsors to continue funding the programme was also an encouraging sign.
At the same time, BRAC could not ignore the fact that the usage rates of the lobon-gur mixture among those villages visited in Phase 1 were very disappointing.
The next chapter describes Phase 2 of BRAC's Oral Therapy Extension Programme.
In addition, the findings of two large follow-up studies are discussed.
The studies led to the revelation of reasons why the programme was less successful than it might have been.
THE ORAL THERAPY EXTENSION PROGRAMME — PHASE 2
Studies during Phase 1 of the Oral Therapy Extension Programme (described in the previous chapter) revealed success in educating the Bangladeshi mothers about the concept of the lobon-gur solution, but there was a (seemingly paradoxical) low usage rate of the solution for cases of diarrhoea.
The programme continued and further evaluations were commissioned.
One of these evaluations revealed, amongst other things, an important difference between BRAC's perception of diarrhoea and that of the village people.
This misunderstanding, together with the antagonistic attitudes of the village practitioners towards BRAC's message, suggest that BRAC had failed to do sufficient ground work before embarking upon the Oral Therapy Extension Programme.
This chapter now covers these points in further detail:
PHASE 2
Phase 2 of the programme started in October 1983 (immediately after the end of Phase 1) and ended in September 1986.
The main aim of this phase was simply to spread the message about the lobon-gur solution still further: 2.5 million households had been visited during Phase 1, and a further 4.5 million households were visited during Phase 2.
Thus, by the end of 1986, more than 7 million of the 16 million households in Bangladesh had been visited.
From the beginning of Phase 2, BRAC implemented a change in the method of teaching the LGS message to the villagers: Whilst 90% of the unions (subdistricts) visited by Oral Replacement Workers in Phase 2 were given the same ‘Standard’ training which had been offered to the other unions during Phase 1, 10% of the Phase 2 unions were chosen to test an experimental Concentrated Reinforcement Programme (CRP) developed by BRAC.
This programme consisted of the LGS training team remaining in the union for 6 months instead of the standard one month.
During this time they would attempt to popularize the LGS message further by organizing health education activities in schools, mosques and meetings.
Part of this programme included briefing village practitioners about the lobon-gur solution, and these local practitioners were encouraged to use the mixture to treat diarrhoeal patients.
This part of the Concentrated Reinforcement Programme had probably been prompted by the recommendation made by the Swiss Development Cooperation evaluation team that BRAC's programme should involve closer cooperation with the local practitioners, as mentioned in the previous chapter.
THE 1984 VILLAGE CASE STUDY
A village case study was conducted during July to September 1984 based on two villages in the Chittagong division.
The purpose of the study was to provide information concerning the perceptions and beliefs of the local people with regard to diarrhoea and its treatment.
The effectiveness of the Concentrated Reinforcement Programme was not addressed in this study, but was examined in a second study (described later on in this chapter).
BRAC hoped that this first study might reveal reasons for the disappointingly low usage rates for the lobon-gur solution.
It did.
The study showed that the people of Bangladesh divide the symptoms of diarrhoea into four categories:
1)
‘Dud haga’: This is a loose motion attributed exclusively to breast-feeding.
It is therefore found only in children and is said to be caused by ‘polluted breast milk’.
2)
‘Ajirno’: Diarrhoea caused by indigestion due to overeating or food poisoning.
3)
‘Amasha’: This presents with a stool which is generally not watery but contains mucus.
The villages do not know the cause of this illness.
4)
‘Daeria’ or ‘Cholera’: Severe diarrhoea, recognised as being dangerous and often fatal.
Each of the four types of illness was treated differently by the villagers.
Dud haga was considered by many to be part of growing up and no treatment was therefore thought necessary.
Ajirno was treated by resting the stomach (fasting).
Amasha was popularly treated with Boneji, an informal school of medicine that uses herbs and fruit which are thought to possess medicinal powers.
Only Daeria was recognised as requiring the lobon-gur solution or intra-venous fluid therapy.
At this point, BRAC realised its error.
During the Oral Therapy Extension Programme the Oral Replacement Workers had told the mothers to administer LGS to children suffering from diarrhoea.
This the mothers had interpreted as meaning specifically the daeria category mentioned above.
This explained why LGS was not used by mothers to treat many of the cases of loose stool presented by children, since the mothers' diagnosis was of one other than daeria.
The misunderstanding described above was one of five reasons found by the village case study which would explain the low usage rate for the lobon-gur mixture.
A second reason was the observation made by the mothers that LGS did not stop the diarrhoea.
The Oral Replacement Workers had not explained to them that this would be the case, ie. that the lobon-gur solution only treats the dehydration and malnutrition resulting from diarrhoea rather than the purging itself.
As a result the mothers lost faith in it.
A third reason given for non-use of LGS was a non-availability of gur (the unrefined sugar which was used to make LGS).
Availability of gur was subject to seasonal fluctuations.
During the village case study (July to September), gur was only found in 10% of households.
However, the main gur season was January to February, when up to 50% of households possessed gur.
This revelation represented a fundamental flaw in the BRAC programme, since BRAC's plan of introducing appropriate technology to the people of Bangladesh required that the lobon-gur solution should have been available to all who needed it with little difficulty (the first criterion given at the beginning of Chapter 4).
A fourth reason was simply that the lobon-gur mixture was not very pleasant to taste.
This made it all the harder for the mother to treat the ailing youngster and she might give up on the treatment for this reason.
Finally, the village case study revealed that none of the village practitioners were in favour of promoting the LGS message.
On the contrary, some seemed to actively discourage it.
It is not clear whether either of the two villages used in this study had been exposed to the experimental Concentrated Reinforcement Programme or not.
Since this experimental programme included greater cooperation with the village practitioners, it would be expected to reverse the antagonistic attitudes described above.
THE 1984 COMMUNITY HOUSEHOLD SURVEY
The impact of the Concentrated Reinforcement Programme (CRP) was assessed in a Community Household Survey conducted between October and December 1984.
The aim of this survey was to measure usage rates and safety levels of LGS in unions which had been visited during Phase 1, Phase 2 (standard) and Phase 2 (CRP).
It was found that the overall usage rate of LGS out of all cases of diarrhoea was 4.1, 8.2 and 9.9% in Phase 1, Phase 2 (standard) and Phase 2 (CRP) unions respectively.
There was variation in usage of LGS amongst the four different recognised types of diarrhoea (described above).
The results showed that Amasha was the least likely of the four to be treated with LGS and that Daeria, generally regarded as the most dangerous of the four, was the most likely reason for LGS usage.
Of all the cases of Daeria reported during the survey, 25.6%, 31.6% and 52.2% had been treated with LGS in unions of Phase 1, Phase 2 (standard) and Phase 2 (CRP) respectively.
With regard to the safety of the home-made LGS, it was the sodium ion concentration which BRAC was chiefly concerned about, and rightly so.
Taking a sodium ion concentration in excess of 119mmol/l as being dangerous, it was found that of the total number of solutions sampled from unions in Phase 1, Phase 2 (standard) and Phase 3 (CRP), 14.7%, 18.2% and 25.6% respectively were found to be dangerous.
The low usage rates for LGS were disappointing, but could be attributed to the findings of the village case study described above.
However, the high incidence of dangerous lobon-gur solutions was very worrying, especially since those unions in the Concentrated Reinforcement Programme were the greatest offenders.
Interestingly enough, the LGS samples from the Phase 1 unions were less likely to be dangerous than the samples from the Phase 2 unions, despite the fact that the Phase 2 unions had been visited by the Oral Replacement Workers in the previous year whereas two years had passed since the Phase 1 unions had been visited.
Three reasons were given to explain the observation that samples of lobon-gur mixture from Phase 1 unions were less likely to contain dangerously high amounts of salt than samples from Phase 2 unions.
Firstly, due to the low usage figures found by the programme monitors in Phase 1 villages (described in Chapter 5), the Oral Replacement Workers had placed greater emphasis during Phase 2 on telling the village people about LGS at the expense of telling them about the dangers of adding too much salt to the solution.
Secondly, the large number of households covered in Phase 2 resulted in a relative shortage of experienced supervisory staff during this period.
The third reason cited attributes the higher proportion of dangerous lobon-gur mixtures found in Phase 2 unions to the fact that by reducing the prototype ‘Ten Points to Remember’ to ‘Seven Points to Remember’(mentioned in chapter 4) there was a reduced emphasis on the dangers of adding too much salt.
This third reason may be disputed on the grounds that the Ten Point message had been changed to Seven Points before Phase 1 had started.
BRAC'S RESPONSE TO THE FINDINGS OF THE STUDIES
Some of the results of the village case study and the community household survey were noted by BRAC and acted upon.
The Seven Points to Remember were revised so that they mentioned the four types of diarrhoea (previously described) and stated that all four types should be treated with LGS.
The Oral Replacement Workers were told to place greater emphasis upon the dangers of adding too much salt to the solution.
Furthermore, they were told to point out to the mother that LGS would not reduce the output of stool from the sick child, but was meant to prevent the dehydration associated with the diarrhoea.
The Concentrated Reinforcement Programme was discontinued since it was considered that the very marginal improvement that it had over the Standard programme was not worth the relatively more substantial increase in running costs.
It had been found in the village case study that the lack of availability of gur had prompted some mothers to use more expensive refined sugar instead.
BRAC therefore decided to promote the use of refined sugar as a substitute for gur when the latter was unavailable.
Such a move was clearly designed only to better a bad situation rather than remedy it completely, since it would be expected that the availability of refined sugar would be subject to the same seasonal fluctuations as availability of gur, and there is little reason to suspect that refined sugar was more readily available than the (unrefined) gur.
One of the reasons found to explain the non-use of the lobon-gur solution was the lack of cooperation from the village practitioners.
This observation, made by the village case study in 1984, should have been cause for concern, since four years previously it had been demonstrated that the village practitioners in Bangladesh were willing and capable of being trained in the use and administration of oral rehydration solutions.
Indeed, the practitioners had been shown to be very highly motivated in this subject.
It may therefore be proposed that BRAC's programme failed to communicate properly with the practitioners and consequently alienated them with regard to the concept of the lobon-gur mixture.
If the BRAC workers had collaborated more closely with the village practitioners, then the lobon-gur solution would probably have been placed on a better footing in the Bangladeshi villages.
It is not certain whether or not the discontinuation of the Concentrated Reinforcement Programme has heralded the end of BRAC's collaboration with the village practitioners.
The revelation that the villagers recognised four types of diarrhoea seems to have come as a surprise to BRAC, suggesting insufficient research on the part of BRAC prior to launching its programme.
Another major problem — the lack of availability of gur — required a significant rethink, and this is discussed in the next chapter.
RICE-SALT ORAL REHYDRATION THERAPY
The discovery that the availability of gur was subject to seasonal fluctuations (as described in the previous chapter) led BRAC to consider rice as an alternative.
This chapter describes BRAC's unsuccessful pilot study involving a rice-based oral rehydration solution.
It was Field in 1977 who had suggested that the glucose/sugar component of oral rehydration solutions could be replaced by long chain polymers of glucose, ie. starch.
This would allow a larger number of glucose units to enter the gut, thereby allowing uptake of sodium ions via the sodium ion/glucose cotransporter at a higher rate, and hence allowing speedier reabsorption of water from the gut lumen.
The dangers of osmotic loss of water into the gut lumen from the tissue due to the addition of too many individual glucose molecules to the rehydration solution have already been described in Chapter 1.
However, a single molecule of starch, consisting of many glucose units joined together, has the same osmotic effect as a single isolated glucose molecule.
Digestion of the starch into its component glucose units takes place at the luminal surface of the gut epithelial cells, but these glucose units are immediately absorbed by the sodium ion/glucose cotransporter so that they do not contribute to the osmotic activity in the gut lumen.
The use of rice (a source of starch) in place of gur in an oral electrolyte solution would solve two problems in Bangladesh.
Firstly the use of rice had been shown to reduce stool output and shorten the duration of diarrhoea — a concept which the mothers of Bangladesh would find very attractive.
Bear in mind that the failure of the lobon-gur solution to halt the purging was cited as a reason for its low usage rate in Chapter 6.
Secondly, the fact that rice is available in all Bangladeshi households all the year round would solve the problem of non-availability of gur, thereby making the ideal of ‘appropriate technology’ a reality.
During 1987, BRAC tested its newly formulated Rice-Salt Oral Rehydration Therapy (RSORT) in a field trial covering a population of around 63,000 people.
The rice-salt solution could, according to BRAC, be made in one of two ways.
The ingredients consisted of one fistful (approximately 34 grams) of rice, one 3-finger pinch of salt and 550ml of water.
The rice could be boiled for 50–60 minutes, pasted and then suspended in solution, to which the salt would presumably be added.
Alternatively, having soaked the rice for 3–8 minutes, a stone and pestle could be used to grind the rice into a powder.
The grinding of the rice was a labour intensive procedure, requiring between 7 and 27 minutes.
The ground rice would then be boiled for around 5 minutes, and the salt would be added.
These methods, together with the Seven Points to Remember, were taught to mothers in a field study.
Follow-up studies revealed that the rice-salt solution was not as widely used as the lobon-gur solution.
Four reasons were given for this failure:
i)
The LGS took less time and effort to prepare than the rice-salt mixture.
ii)
There was a cultural belief that children below 6–12 months of age cannot be given solids, particularly rice.
iii)
Children preferred LGS because of its sweet taste.
iv)
Firewood, required for the boiling of the rice, was not easily available in rural areas.
It was found that mothers preferred to grind up the rice prior to boiling, due to the scarcity of fuel — the ground rice requiring less boiling time and hence less fuel.
Hence, in the union (an area of approximately 21,000 people) in which the rice-salt solution had been taught, only 6.5% of all cases of diarrhoea had been treated with this mixture.
In a nearby union in which the lobon-gur solution had been taught, 14.9% of all cases of diarrhoea had been treated with this mixture.
In a union in which both the lobon-gur solution and the rice-salt solution had been taught, LGS was also preferred over the rice-salt therapy, despite the recognition by the mothers of the fact that children treated with the latter recovered from diarrhoea and vomiting more quickly than those treated with LGS.
Hence, BRAC's rice-salt solution failed to gain popularity during the field trial.
In retrospect, it can be seen that this failure was, in part, due to the inappropriateness of the mixture.
Returning to the criteria for appropriate technology listed at the beginning of Chapter 4, the following points are apparent:
Firstly, the rice-salt solution failed to fulfil the second criterion, which demands that the materials needed for preparing the mixture should be affordable by all who need them: The actual components of the mixture were readily available, indeed this was one of the reasons which prompted BRAC to substitute rice for the less readily available gur.
However, the necessary firewood was not readily available.
Secondly, the rice-salt mixture also failed to fulfil the third criterion, which demands that the treatment should not conflict with any cultural beliefs.
The ceremony known as ‘Anna prashna’ normally takes place between the ages of 6 to 12 months.
No child is fed solids, particularly rice, before this ceremony has been performed.
Since 40% of all cases of diarrhoea have been found to occur in the 0–4 year age group, the rice-salt mixture was unable to help one of the most vulnerable groups of the population.
In conclusion, it can be seen that a good idea (ie. the rice-salt solution) was unsuccessful owing to the inherent lack of an important raw material, and the failure of the solution to comply with a certain custom.
As a result BRAC abandoned the rice-salt solution and continued to promote the lobon-gur solution.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This dissertation has dealt with a potentially fatal symptom of disease which affects the lives of millions of people throughout the world every day.
Having identified the mechanism of action of diarrhoea in the human alimentary canal, Physiologists developed an oral electrolyte solution which could replenish the fluids and minerals lost from the body during diarrhoea.
Developed and developing countries could both benefit from this discovery, though developing countries such as Bangladesh are likely to benefit more due to the higher incidence of diarrhoeal diseases.
The concept of appropriate technology has been defined in terms of the criteria of accessibility and affordability to all who need it, and sensitivity to the traditions of the people.
Initial attempts made by the Bangladeshi Government to introduce oral rehydration therapy to the people of Bangladesh (NORP) may be regarded as inappropriate.
In establishing four oral rehydration packet production sites in Bangladesh, they failed to reach the majority of the Bangladeshi people owing to the inefficiencies of the production sites, the inherent inadequacies of the Bangladeshi transport network and the rural nature of the vast majority of the population.
The achievement of the Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee (BRAC) between 1981 and 1987 in teaching mothers in over 7 million households how to make a home-made oral rehydration solution was praiseworthy.
The message that they brought to each doorstep, however, required revision several times during the programme.
After the pilot phase of the programme at the end of the 1970s, revisions had to be made to ease the memorising of the message by changing the Ten Point message to Seven Points.
At the same time, the method of making the home-made lobon-gur solution was revised to prevent confusion over the relative proportions of lobon and gur required.
Major revisions were also found to be necessary halfway through the programme.
The 1984 village case study revealed that the Bangladeshi mothers (some of whom had already been taught about the lobon-gur solution) recognised four different types of diarrhoea and generally thought only one of these types to be an indication for the use of the lobon-gur mixture.
It was unfortunate that BRAC did not notice this fact before the start of the programme, however, BRAC deserves some credit for eventually noticing the mistake.
The discovery that gur (an important component of the lobon-gur solution) was not always readily available in all households, lead to the trials of a rice-salt solution as a possible replacement for the lobon-gur solution.
These trials demonstrated, however, that the rice-based solution was unpopular with the mothers owing to the scarcity of firewood (which was required to make the solution), and the tradition that very young children are not fed rice.
It is surprising that BRAC failed to foresee these problems.
Furthermore, BRAC's apparent failure to recognise the village practitioners as potentially valuable allies who should be won over, should be considered insensitive.
Despite the problems mentioned above, credit should be given to BRAC for realising its errors and (hopefully) rectifying them: BRAC has been monitoring its own programme from the start, and this shows a healthy degree of self-evaluation.
Furthermore, BRAC has been willing to adapt its programme in the light of new findings, as demonstrated in the following brief description of Phase 3.
Phase 3 of BRAC's Oral Therapy Extension Programme started in October 1986 and ended in October 1990, with the unsuccessful trial of the rice-salt solution (described in Chapter 7) being conducted in the first half of 1987.
In this phase, BRAC supplemented the LGS message with two other health messages.
One of these supplementary messages promoted immunisation against six major diseases; diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, poliomyelitis, measles and tuberculosis.
The second supplementary message promoted an awareness of the need to consume foods rich in Vitamin A, owing to Vitamin A deficiency being common in rural Bangladesh.
Since the findings of the surveys described in Chapter 6, the message promoting the lobon-gur solution had been revised so as to include the four different recognised types of diarrhoea and the use of refined sugar as a substitute for gur when the latter was unavailable.
Furthermore, the Oral Replacement Workers had been instructed to emphasise the dangers of adding too much salt to the solution, and warn the mothers that the lobon-gur solution would not reduce the output of stool from the sick child.
BRAC's trial of the rice-salt solution (described in Chapter 7) naturally had to include a ‘control’ union, in which the standard teaching of the lobon-gur solution took place.
Data collected form this union in 1987, 1988 and 1989 suggested that there had been a slight improvement in the usage rate of the lobon-gur solution compared with the unions studied in the 1984 Community Household Survey.
Furthermore, the safety of the solutions was improved over the findings of the 1984 evaluation: only 0.4% — 10.9% of solutions tested between early 1987 and early 1989 were found to have a sodium ion concentration in excess of 119mmol/l, as compared with 14.7% — 25.6% found in 1984.
These improvements may be attributed to the adjustments, described in Chapter 6, which BRAC had made to its standard lobon-gur message as a result of the 1984 observations.
The open-minded attitude of BRAC towards its own faults and its willingness to adapt to new revelations is undoubtedly behind the apparent increase in the popularity of the lobon-gur solution towards the end of the 1980's.
One of BRAC's concerns at present is to see whether the lobon-gur solution has become part of the Bangladeshi culture, in so far as the mothers taught by BRAC's Oral Therapy Replacement Workers might pass their knowledge down to their children.
It would appear that the criteria for appropriate technology (as have been proposed here) are not easy to meet.
BRAC's efforts have brought attention to the concept of oral rehydration therapy in Bangladesh, and this may be regarded as a success.
However, BRAC was unable to find a wholly appropriate form of oral rehydration therapy to teach to the people of Bangladesh.
One conclusion might be that it is possible to define different grades of appropriateness, in which case it could be argued that the word-of-mouth teaching of the lobon-gur solution was a more appropriate form of oral therapy technology than the distribution of an insufficient number of Oral Rehydration Salt packets via restricted outlets.
It is to be hoped that, in the long term, the high incidence of diarrhoea in Bangladesh may fall (as discussed in Chapter 2).
In the mean time, however, the attempts to introduce Oral Rehydration Therapy to the people of Bangladesh may be regarded as a partial success, from which lessons can be learnt.