

Vi looked again at the letter half-hidden behind the sepia vase on the kitchen mantel and wondered bitterly whose fault it had been.
Some seaman pissed out of his mind in a dock-road pub, like as not.
Ale talk for listening ears.
Careless talk, that cost lives.
‘Taking ammo to the Middle East.
Danger money this trip, so fill yer boots, lads.
Sup up.’
Somewhere, someone had opened his mouth and Gerry had paid; him, and fifty others.
The letter was addressed to Mrs Violet Theresa McKeown and she took it down, holding it between finger and thumb.
She didn't take out the folded sheet.
There was no need.
Since it arrived four days ago, every last word was beaten into her brain.
‘…and it is with regret we must inform you that your husband Gerald Patrick McKeown has been reported missing, believed lost at sea as a result of enemy action on the night of 23rd/24th April, 1941…’
There was more, of course, about sympathy and sorrow and about writing again when they had anything more to tell her.
She hadn't been able to read the signature at the bottom of the page, and that seemed wrong, somehow.
A man from the shipping line tells you your husband has been lost at sea and yon don't even know his name.
There were the initials GWE/BW typed at the top of the letter but they hadn't helped.
Dead is dead, no matter who signs the warrant, though it might have been nice to think that BW had felt compassion when she typed that letter and a  bit of respect, maybe, for Stoker Gerry McKeown of the Mercantile Marine.
Vi slipped the envelope into the attaché case packed ready for the shelter.
All her important things were in that case: her marriage certificate and wedding snaps; her Post Office bank book, rent book and ration book.
And Gerry's last letter.
‘…
Thanks for a fine leave.
You are the best there is and I love you, Vi.
Take care of yourself…’
She closed her eyes tightly.
Gerry didn't often use her name.
Girl , he called her, but this last time he'd called her Vi and written that he loved her, and he'd never done that before.
Not ever.
But he'd known, hadn't he, that this trip was his last.
‘Come home to me,’ she'd whispered when he left.
‘Promise you'll take care.
Promise , Gerry.’
But it hadn't been up to him.
The SS Emma Bates 's name was on that torpedo, so he hadn't had much of a choice.
She reached for her mother's photograph and laid it in the case with the rest of the things.
She was glad Mam hadn't lived to see another war.
The last one had brought her trouble enough.
Four kids to rear and a husband coughing away his lungs from mustard gas.
Da had died a year after the armistice, so they hadn't needed to give Mam a pension.
Vi looked around the kitchen and wondered why she had scrubbed the floor and cleaned the window.
Tonight there would be another raid, sure as hell there would, and everything would be covered with muck and dust again.
Tonight, if the bombers came, it would be for the seventh night in a row; a whole week without sleep.
London was almost at a standstill, said the man in the cigarette queue, and now it was Liverpool's turn.
The Germans, he reckoned, were trying to wipe out the docks, yet somehow  the city centre seemed to be getting the worst of it — and all the shops and offices and streets of little houses.
Vi closed her eyes.
Mother of God, don't let them get my house.
They've taken my man and my job; let me keep my home.
The gate handle clicked sharply and she drew aside the lace curtain.
A man crossed the yard and rattled the door knob.
‘Are y'there, Vi?’
‘Richie.
Come in.’
Richie Daly had sailed down the Mersey in the same convoy as Gerry and now he was home.
Vi's heart contracted painfully then settled into a dull ache.
‘All right, then?
Bearing up, are you?’
‘Just about.’
She didn't like Richie Daly.
A shifty-eyed little devil, and his wife always expecting.
‘I see they got Lewis's, Vi.’
‘Yes.
Two nights back.’
No need to remind her.
She'd worked there, hadn't she?
‘So how are you making out?’
‘I'll manage.
There'll be other jobs.
But what brought you, Richie?’
She knew why he had come and what he would tell her, and she didn't want to hear it.
Yet still she asked for news of the Emma Bates .
‘Well, bein' as how I was there, like.’
He drew out a chair and settled his elbows on the table.
‘Bein' as how I saw what happened that night…’
‘Yes?’
She sucked in her breath, angrily, noisily.
‘Well, old Gerry didn't suffer, Vi.
Be sure of that.
The Emma was just astern of us in the convoy and keepin' station fine, even though she was a coal-burner.’
‘She'd keep station all right, with Gerry shovellin'.’
‘Yes.’
He stared fixedly down.
‘Well, one minute the old tub was there and the next —’ He slammed a fist into  the palm of his hand.
‘They was carryin' ammunition, see.
They wouldn't know a thing, any of them.
Commodore didn't even stop to look for survivors, so don't worry yourself none.’
But she did worry and she needed to know every last detail.
‘Where did it happen?’
‘Two days out from Halifax.
Canadian destroyer escort had just left us.’
‘But I thought he was going to Alexandria.’
‘Naw.
The Emma left Liverpool without cargo; took RAF bods to Canada then loaded up with cordite and shells for the return trip.
It was a clear night.
We was all sittin' targets.
Always at night those bastards do it.
It's a dirty way of fightin', but it was quick for old Gerry.’
‘Yes,’ she said dully.
‘Quick.’
‘Ah, well.’
He got to his feet, pushing the chair legs against the floor tiles with a grating that set her teeth on edge.
‘I'll be goin'.’
‘It was good of you to come, Richie.’
Liar.
You hate him for coming because he's told you that Gerry isn't just missing, but dead.
‘'s all right.
Just thought you'd rest a bit easier if you knew he didn't suffer none.
Well — I suppose I'd better get goin'…’
That's right.
Shove off.
I don't want you here.
It's Gerry I want.
It's him should've been coming home tonight.
‘Hey, listen.’
He turned, foot in door.
‘What about a drink, eh?’
He reached out, placing a hand on either shoulder, pulling her nearer.
‘I'll be in the Tarleton about nine; will I see you, Vi?’
‘No, you'll not.’
She shrugged away his hands with an exaggerated gesture.
‘At nine o'clock we'll all be in the shelter, like as not.
And won't your wife be needing a hand when the sirens go?
Getting near her time again, isn't she?,
‘Aw, don't worry about Lil.
It's you I'm thinking about, Vi.
A well-set-up woman like yourself must be — you know…’
He was grinning.
A dirty little grin.
‘No, I don't know.
Must be what ?’
He was too stupid to catch the contempt in her voice or heed the warning that narrowed her eyes.
‘Well, missin' it, like.
Y'know.
A bit of the other.’
‘Oh, I see.
And you're offerin'…?’
‘That's right.’
His eyes brightened and he reached for her again, a hand trailing her breasts.
‘I've been at sea a long time.
Come on upstairs, Vi.’
He pressed nearer and she felt the hardening in his loins.
There were small ginger hairs on his chin and his groping mouth stank of beer.
Disgust shivered through her, and stepping out of the reach of his hands she hissed, ‘Get out of my house, you mucky little sod!
Bloody get out, or I'll swing for yer!’
The sepia vase hurtled across the room and she heard the crash as it shattered against the tiles, heard the slamming of the door and running footsteps.
Then the red mists cleared and she sank to her knees, picking up the pieces, moaning softly.
Gerry's mam, God rest her, had given her that vase.
‘Maybe you can find a use for it, girl .’
The tears came then; great gasping sobs she had been unwilling and unable to cry since the day of the letter.
They came from the deeps of her heart and rose to a wail of anguish.
‘Gerry lad, why, why?
You said you'd come home.
You promised .’
She knelt there long after the sobs were spent, hugging herself tightly, eyes closed.
The floor was hard and cold and her knees throbbed with pain, but still she crouched  there.
Gerry was dead and she was alive.
Sore knees were a small part of her penance.
Stiffly, reluctantly, she rose to her feet and began to sweep up the litter of broken china.
She had never liked that vase.
Probably Ma McKeown hadn't liked it either.
‘Thanks, Ma.’
A small, sad smile lifted the corners of Vi's mouth.
‘I found a use for it.’
The smile flickered and faded.
Since the arrival of the letter a coldness had grown inside her, and a pain in her throat that wasn't really a pain but a hard, tight ball of anger.
It got in the way when she had tried to cry yet it allowed no room for self-pity.
All her feelings had been for Gerry, with the coal-pitted hands, who had never harmed a soul.
Gerry, with the bitty hair, whose right foot turned in when he walked.
Gerry, who had loved her.
Sighing, she lifted the dustbin lid and watched the brown china pieces slip from the shovel, then raised her eyes to the May sky.
It was hard to believe that very soon that innocent sky could throb with the sounds of death.
Liverpool was taking a beating, and rumours were free for the asking on every street corner and in every food queue.
There had been rioting down by the docks, some said, but no one knew exactly where; and Mrs Norris swore they were throwing the dead into mass graves, and half of them good Catholics without the last rites.
Vi wished she could fire a gun and shoot down those bombers if only for what they had done to Gerry, but it was easy to be brave in this small, precious house when the sun still shone in the evening sky and a west wind blew away the stench of bombing and burning and broken bodies.
It was a different matter when the sirens wailed and she hurried, dry-mouthed, into the clammy cold of St Joseph's crypt.
Fear came easily then, even though it was the deepest and safest shelter for streets around.
And when the all clear sounded, even though the realization  that she had survived yet another night sent relief singing through her, there was the agony of wondering what she would find when she returned to Lyra Street.
Mary had told her not to be a fool, to come to her house and get a decent night's sleep.
Mary lived in Ormskirk, and so far they had been lucky there.
But Vi needed to be in her own little home.
It was all she had left now, so she had thanked her sister and left it at that.
Breathing deeply, fighting sudden fresh tears, she stared at the whitewashed walls of the tiny, tidy yard.
Gerry was gone, but his rose still grew there.
Last autumn he had planted it.
‘A red rose for Lancashire, girl.’
‘But Gerry, it'll never grow.’
Not here, she had thought.
Not in this airless back yard with its cat-fouled alley, yet now it bore shining green leaves and four fat flower buds — and Gerry would never see them.
The fingers on the clock of St Joseph's church pointed to eight, though it had long since ceased to chime the hours.
Chiming clocks and the ringing of church bells were forbidden for the duration of hostilities, or until the invasion came.
They'd ring out loud and clear then.
But maybe there wouldn't be an invasion.
It was nearly a year since Dunkirk, and if they'd been going to come, surely they'd not have waited this long.
The potman at the Tarleton had it all worked out, though.
The Germans would invade, he said.
The air raids on London and Liverpool and Birmingham and Clydeside were to knock out communications and close roads and railways and make everybody so pig-sick that they'd welcome Hitler with open arms.
He'd gone on saying it until people complained and the landlord was forced to tell him that such talk amounted to the spreading of gloom and despondency; it was almost as bad as careless talk and  would land him in the Bridewell if the police got to hear.
about it.
Eight o'clock.
Soon it would begin to grow dark, and she hadn't seen to the house yet.
Since the bombing had started, the ritual checking of number seven Lyra Street had given Vi comfort.
It was all she had left of Gerry, now.
The ugly little terrace house was her husband, her lover and the child she had never conceived.
It was, she supposed, her last link with sanity.
Almost without thinking she reached down to turn off the gas and water taps, then climbed the narrow stairs and pushed open the door to her right, smiling at the riot of roses that covered the walls.
Her bedroom wallpaper never failed to give her pleasure.
It was like awakening each morning in a garden in the country, though Gerry had cursed something awful, matching up the roses and rosebuds on the uneven walls.
They had ignored the seriousness of the news bulletins that night and taken a trip down the Mersey on the Royal Iris to celebrate the finishing of their bedroom, though Mr Chamberlain had told them next day that they were at war with Germany.
So Vi called them her last-day-of-peace roses and vowed they would remain there until the war was over, even if it lasted four years, like the last one had done.
Now those roses reminded her of Gerry, who had pasted them there, and she wondered if she would ever find the courage to scrape them off.
Sighing, she began to fill a carrier bag with essentials; an insurance, she supposed, in case the worst happened.
Shoes first, then a towel, soap and toothbrush; and stockings and knickers, of course, and room enough left for her handbag, gas mask and a warm woolly scarf.
There was nothing to check in the front parlour; hardly anything to say goodbye to, for the room was empty of furniture and must remain that way until the shops would  once again have chairs and sofas and rugs and curtains to sell.
Vi walked across the echoing emptiness to gaze at the mantel shelf and the reminders it held of Gerry.
A vase from Shanghai; a pair of plates, hand-painted with gold dragons, from Hong Kong and, on his last trip but one, the two goblets.
They were heavy and sparkled when she held them to the light, and she thought they were the most beautiful things she would ever own.
‘But whatever'll we do with crystal glasses, Gerry?’
‘We'll drink out of 'em, thick 'ead,’ he assured her solemnly.
‘When this old war's over we'll have wine every Christmas, and that's a promise, girl.’
So she had placed them on the mantel with the vase and the dragon plates, and Gerry had promised her two more, next time he docked in Cape Town.
Now, not knowing why, she lifted them down.
Usually she never took anything but essentials to the shelter, but tonight, after Richie Daly had blundered into her kitchen, she needed the comfort of those glasses.
Gently she placed them in the carrier bag.
‘That's it, then.’
She drew the thick blackout curtains and the nightly ritual was finished.
Carrier bag and coat lay on the kitchen table beside the attaché case.
Everything was ready and she returned to the yard to sit on the bench beside the rose tree, to sit and wait, eyes closed, and will her clenched fingers one by one into relaxation.
The bombers were late tonight, but there was still time, she supposed.
Double British Summer Time added two hours of daylight and the Luftwaffe needed the cover of darkness.
But soon the light would begin to fade; then fire watchers would take up positions on rooftops and each air-raid warden and ambulance driver would feel a churning in his stomach.
At fire stations and first-aid posts and rest centres, men and women would look up at the sky  just as she, Vi McKeown, was doing now.
She closed her eyes, concentrating once again on her tightening fingers, trying not to think of Richie Daly and the Emma Bates ; trying not to weep when she thought about the waste of a good life, of fifty good lives.
She was still sitting there when the silence began, those few moments of suspended time that came before the sounding of the air-raid sirens.
She had come to recognize that silence, to smell it, almost.
It was a void so strange and complete that there was no mistaking it.
They were coming again; coming to kill and maim and blast and burn.
Reluctantly she rose to her feet, her breathing loud and harsh, the weariness she had been fighting since the air raids started overpowering her senses.
God, but she was so afraid.
Afraid of tonight and tomorrow and all the empty tomorrows.
It was as if the bombing was draining her of all feeling, leaving her so spent that all she wanted to do was to close her eyes and not open them again until it was all over.
The first of the sirens sounded distantly and she ran to the kitchen, gathering up her belongings with hands that shook.
Her mouth had gone dry again, fear writhed through her.
Turning the back-door key, she looked longingly at the lavatory door.
Why did that awful wailing always make her want to pee?
Now another siren had taken up the warning.
Nearer, this one, its strident undulation beating inside her head.
For just a few seconds she stood petrified; then, taking a deep, shuddering breath, she ran down the entry and into Lyra Street.
The ARP warden, out of work since 1930 and now a man of standing with his steel helmet, army-style respirator and dangling whistle, banged on the door of number five pleading through the letterbox with its occupant.
‘You'll be safer in the shelter, Mrs Norris.’
Grumbling, he turned to Vi.
‘She does this every blasted night, the stubborn old biddy.’
‘Best leave her,’ Vi offered.
‘She says it's more comfortable under the kitchen table.
Reckons that if her name is on a bomb it'll find her, wherever she is.’
‘And who are you, then?’
The warden had no time for niceties.
‘Mrs McKeown from number seven, and you'll not get Mrs Norris out of there, not if you rattle that letterbox all night.’
Poor, silly Ma Norris, who had never been quite right since her three sons were killed on the Somme in the last war.
Three telegrams, all in the same week.
Enough to drive a saint round the bend.
‘And what about number nine?’
‘Gone to Preston, to relations,’ Vi called over her shoulder, hurrying to the gate of St Joseph's, where Father O'Flaherty would be checking in his flock.
Then, against all her better instincts, she stopped and slowly turned to look back down Lyra Street.
Amazed, she shook her head.
Never look back, Gerry always said.
Just four weeks ago, as they stood at the dockyard gate he had said, ‘Ta-ra well, girl.’
Then he'd kissed her and walked away; and though she waited until he was out of sight, he had never once looked back to where she stood.
All right, so sailors considered it unlucky, she thought defiantly, but women were different.
Women did silly things all the time; that's why they were women.
Gently, sadly, she smiled at her house; her house and Gerry's.
‘I'll not be long,’ she whispered, then turning abruptly, walked quickly towards the church.
‘And when,’ demanded the Countess of Donnington of her daughter, ‘are you going to give me a date?
I mean, I feel so foolish, don't I?’
The Countess was annoyed.
Only that morning she had suffered humiliation at the hands of a shop assistant in Harrods, and anger still raged through her.
‘And please take that towel off your head and have the goodness to look at me when I'm speaking to you!’
‘Sorry.’
Lucinda Bainbridge ran her fingers through her half-dry hair.
‘I was listening, truly I was, and I'm sorry you feel foolish.’
‘Don't be pert.
Just give me one good reason why you and Charles cannot be married at once.’
‘Well, I — I'd like to wait a little while, I suppose.’
‘I see.
And had you forgotten you will be twenty in November?
Has it ever occurred to you that I was wedded and bedded and well pregnant by the time I was your age?
Most of the girls who came out with you are married, so why must you be different?’
‘Perhaps because I've always thought it might be nice to have a honeymoon in Venice.’
‘Well, you can't.
No one can go to Venice — or anywhere else, for that matter — until this dreary war is over, so please stop prevaricating.’
‘Yes, Mama.’
Once more Lucinda took refuge beneath the towel and began to rub furiously.
Mama was on her pet hobbyhorse again and it was too foolish, really it was, to have a hurried wedding in London, where she hardly knew a soul, when it could all be so lovely at Lady Mead.
When the government let them live there again, of course.
‘I mean, Charles won't always be at the War Office.
They could post him to a regiment and send him abroad just like that!’
Elegantly, dramatically, the Countess snapped her fingers.
‘And where would you be if he got killed?
You should get married now and get that baby started.
That's all I ask, Lucinda.
At least try to see my point of view.’
‘I do.
Oh, I do.’
Lucinda accepted her mother's need  for a Bainbridge heir and she understood her feelings of guilt, too, even though no one ever blamed her for the accident.
But there had been no more children, and now Cousin Charlie would inherit.
But please, Mama, Lucinda pleaded silently, don't treat me like a complete idiot.
I realized a long time ago why you were so set on Charlie and me marrying, and I'm very fond of him, and I'd like to go on living at Lady Mead for the rest of my life.
But let me do it in my own time, and don't make me feel like a brood mare.
‘I mean, don't you think I've got worries enough, Lucinda, what with this terrible war and the bombing?
And if those Germans ever get here, we'll lose everything.
They don't like the aristocracy.’
‘I rather think that's the Communists.’
‘And what about all the shortages?
It's enough to turn one grey.’
Only that morning she had stood, she, Kitty Bainbridge, had actually stood in a queue for nail polish, and when it came to her turn there was no more left.
‘I'm sorry, modom, don't blame me for the shortages.
There is a war on, you know,’ the common little bitch had said with relish.
And soon there would be a shortage of clothing and wouldn't those shop girls have a field day, then!
‘Worries enough, I said.
And when did you last see Charles?
You spend too much time with those wounded soldiers.’
‘Airmen, Mama.’
‘You're running after them morning, noon and night.
I suppose you'll be off with them to the theatre again, when you ought to be with Charles.’
‘Charlie's fire watching tonight, and I saw him a couple of days ago.’
Two days ago, in this very room, Mama.
Charlie got annoyed with me because I wouldn't let him.
Called me  frigid and said all the other chaps' girls were willing enough, and would it matter all that much if he put a bun in the oven for me?
So I let him, Mama, right there on the sofa, and it wasn't a bit nice, and in the end Charlie went off in a huff…
‘A couple of days ago?
And what did he say?
That boy will go off with someone else, mark my words.’
‘No he won't.
We'll be married, I promise we will.’
And she hoped she would feel better about getting the baby everyone seemed to want so much.
She wanted it too, and maybe when she and Charlie were married and in bed and they'd had a few drinks and she was wearing a black nightie, then maybe it wouldn't be so bad.
‘Married!
I wish I could be sure of that.’
Lady Kitty looked obliquely at her daughter.
Lucinda was tall and beautiful, and most times obedient and biddable.
It was a pity she was an only child; the fault of the riding accident, of course.
Secretly, she had been grateful to the farmer who had strung barbed wire across that particular gate.
Kitty Bainbridge had not enjoyed her pregnancy, though she accepted that her family record had been taken into account when Donnington proposed.
The Cravens were a prolific lot, wretchedly poor but very fertile.
There had been eight of them, four girls and four boys, and only ten years between first and last.
So Kitty Craven had been welcomed to Lady Mead, and the Dowager died happy in the knowledge that her daughter-in-law of six months was five months pregnant.
But the getting of that child was not the pleasurable romp she had been led to believe, and her pregnancy was a sick one.
As for Lucinda's birth — she still shuddered just to think of it, and she had prayed that the next one would produce the son she so desperately needed to enable her to call a halt to the whole disagreeable business.
But fate intervened and the young Countess of  Donnington was thrown from her horse and, badly cut and bruised, lay concussed for two days and nights.
Poor Kitty, everyone said, when she did not conceive again; thank goodness there's a lesser Bainbridge to carry on the line.
Thank goodness indeed, poor Kitty agreed, and from then on Lady Lucinda, smiling in her pram, and her three-year-old cousin Charles, featured hugely in her future plans.
And when they married, thought the Countess happily, the Bainbridge comforts would still be hers to manipulate, provided the Earl popped off first and, as he was fifteen years older, it was almost certain that he would.
‘Well,’ said the Countess, ‘are you to be out on the town again with your wounded soldiers?’
‘Well, they do rather want to take in a show, but we'll have to see what's open.
Don't worry, though.
If there's another raid and it gets bad, we'll go to the nearest tube station.
It's safe enough down there.’
Kitty Bainbridge closed her eyes and shuddered.
She had had enough of the blackout and the bombing and the shortages, and if she let herself think too much about the invasion she would become quite ill.
It was all too much, waiting for that upstart Hitler to make up his mind; to envisage the Germans strutting down the Mall as they'd strutted down the Champs Élysées.
And all because of Poland!
‘Oh, and could I please have the hot-water ration today, Mama?
You did have it yesterday and Thursday too, and I must have a bath.’
‘Then you'll have to take it standing up in cook's enamel bowl.’
If they'd had a cook!
If the wretched woman hadn't taken herself off to war work in a factory canteen for three times the money, or so she had said.
‘They hit the mains last night with a land mine.
No electricity for two  days, the gas turned off too, and now no water.
It's beyond belief, it really is.
I wonder sometimes what the world is coming to.’
Our world, Mama, Lucinda brooded.
Yours and mine.
It's changing, but you won't accept it.
There are no servants now, no seasons in London or Monte, and our lovely, stubborn, precious little island might be invaded any day.
France has gone, and Belgium and Holland, and the German army is only a few miles away across the Channel.
I know why you are so jumpy, Mama, but you mustn't think you are the only one who is being put out.
This is everybody's war; we are all suffering and we are all afraid…
‘Look, don't get upset.
It doesn't matter about the bath.’
It was selfish even to think of one when the fire service needed every drop of water to douse the bombed, blazing buildings.
She laid an arm around her mother's shoulders.
‘You're tired — everyone is.
Why don't you pack a bag and go to Cromlech?
You'd be able to get some sleep up there and —’
‘Scotland?
How can I go there?
McNair's living in Cromlech, or had you forgotten?’
McNair, the elderly gillie who had agreed to live as caretaker in the Earl's shooting lodge.
Lady Kitty had been furious, declaring that the man was arrogant enough without giving him licence to sleep in his employer's bed and sit upon his lavatory.
‘It's either the McNairs or a dozen bombed-outs from Clydeside, m'dear.
Take your pick,’ came the bland retort.
The Countess had settled for McNair.
‘Then how about Lady Mead?
We've still got the Dower House, and Lincolnshire is lovely in May.’
So very lovely, Lucinda remembered.
‘My dear good girl, the Dower House is bursting at the seams with furniture, not to mention Nanny.
Besides, there's no petrol left till the next coupons are due, and I won't go by train.’
‘Then mightn't it help keep your mind off things if you took up war work?
The WVS ladies are in the tube every night making tea when the sirens go.
Or you could drive an ambulance.’
The Countess could not drive an ambulance.
For one thing, she couldn't see a thing in the blackout without her glasses; and for another, the uniform wasn't half attractive enough.
War work?
Oh dear, no.
It was enough with Donnington's preoccupation with his Home Guarding and a daughter who thought more of wounded soldiers than she did of family duty.
‘No thank you!
No need for us all to go in at the deep end.’
‘Oh, Mama, don't make it more difficult than it already is.
Do please try.’
But Mama would never budge.
She had been completely against the war, right from the start.
She was, dare her daughter think it, extremely selfish.
‘Look, darling, I got a hunting-pink lipstick yesterday and some rose-geranium soap.
I'd hidden them away for your birthday.’
Not strictly true.
She had intended using them herself.
‘But if you like you can have them now.’
‘Can I?
Oh, Lucinda, what a poppet you are!’
Lucinda sighed.
Poppet?
Oh, no.
She was a fool, that's what.
But at least for a little while Mama would be happy, and keeping Mama happy had become a way of life, almost.
‘I'll run upstairs and get them,’ she smiled.
Last night too she had waited.
She had waited at the beech tree until the sky began to darken and the sudden, distant roar of aircraft engines told her that soon the bombers would be flying again.
She had hugged herself tightly then against the nausea she always felt when Rob was flying and begun her desperate bargaining with God.
It's Jane, God — Jane Kendal.
Rob's on ops again, so please take care of him and S-Sugar.
Don't let anything happen.
Let him come back, oh,please let him come back!
Cold with fear, she had waited for take-off, willing it not to happen, knowing it would.
Take off.
To leave the ground.
Birds did it all the time with ease and grace, but for the crews of the bombers that flew from Fenton Bishop aerodrome she knew that to take off meant dry-mouthed apprehension and an ice-cold hand that twisted your guts and made you want to throw up the supper you had neither tasted nor enjoyed.
In those fearful few moments hands clutched good-luck charms and lips moved in unashamed prayer, until the clunk of the undercarriage as it folded into the belly of the aircraft told them they had made it.
Then to each of the heavily loaded bombers that roared over her head Jane had whispered, ‘Good luck.
Come back safely,’ and when they were all specks in the distant twilight and the savage pandemonium of their leaving no more than a muted throbbing, she had sent her love high and wide so it would find her lover in that vast, uncaring sky.
‘Take care, Rob.
Please take care…’
Eleven bombers had taken off from Fenton Bishop last night, and in the early hours of the morning eleven had come home.
Rob was safe.
Tonight he would be with her.
The trees were green now with the tender leaves of May, yet when first she knew Rob those trees had been silvered by February frosts.
They had met just three months ago, yet now it seemed that the whole of her life had been crammed into those few fleeting weeks; as if her  living had had no meaning before they met and her future would have no substance if ever he left her.
Now she stood at the gate of Ten-acre Pasture, staring across the hedgetops to the control tower that jutted into the gentle landscape with angular obscenity, begging silently that when she turned the corner he would be there.
The early evening sun was warm on her face and the sky so clear and calm that it seemed impossible so beautiful a world could be at war; that small, beautiful world that was Yeoman's Lane, and Tingle's Wood, through which it ran.
The beech tree was a part of it too, and the stile beneath it where they always met, at seven.
She sucked in a steadying gulp of air, letting it go with little huffing sounds before she walked on and turned into the lane.
Rob wasn't there.
It was seven o'clock, and he hadn't come.
Her suddenly cold hands clenched tightly as she walked on, past the stile and the beech tree, into the green cool of the wood.
The path was narrow and rough with tussocky grass and she trod carefully, eyes straining ahead to where the path ended abruptly at the outer limits of the aerodrome, blocked by a high steel-mesh fence — a cruel fence to keep lovers apart — and no one else had discovered the break in it through which Rob always came.
She saw him then, running swiftly towards her, and she pulled aside the fence, squeezing through the gap.
He had come!
For another night at least, he was safe.
She didn't run to meet him but stood there loving him, stretching out the seconds.
Then he held out his arms and she went into them, laughing, wiping out the days they had been apart in that one eager meeting.
‘Rob, oh Rob.’
She spoke his name softly, her lips  gentling his cheek.
Then, pulling a little way from him, she closed her eyes, lifting her lips to his.
But he did not kiss her.
Instead he took her face in his hands, forcing her eyes to his.
‘Jenny, I can't stay.’
‘Darling, no!
Why not?’
‘They've just told us we're on standby.’
‘Which means you'll be flying,’ she whispered dully.
She traced the outline of his face with her eyes, loving the dear, untidy hair, the mouth that smiled widely and often, the eyes that were old in a young man's face.
She reached out for him again, and his arms felt lean and hard through the sleeves of his tunic.
He was too thin.
Flying was feeding off him, draining him, leaving him taut as an overwound spring.
‘You'll be flying,’ she whispered again.
‘That'll be three nights out of five.
It's madness.’
She disliked herself for what she was saying, for she knew the risk he had taken to be with her.
When the bombers at Fenton Bishop were under orders, a blanket of security covered the aerodrome and to breach that security was the most serious thing.
If there should be a call to briefing and Rob wasn't there…
‘Have you been briefed yet?’
‘No, but there's a call out for pilots and navigators in —’ He glanced at his watch.
‘In fifteen minutes.’
‘That makes it pretty certain then, doesn't it?
And if anyone finds you here, you'll be in terrible trouble.
I love you for coming, darling,’ she whispered, ‘but you mustn't stay.’
‘I'm all right for a couple of minutes.’
He shook two cigarettes from a paper packet, lit them, and placed one gently between her lips.
She pressed closer.
Last night, perhaps, the bombs that fell from Rob's plane had killed women and children and  old, helpless men, but for all that he was a tender lover.
She wished the dead ones could have known that.
‘Any news, Jenny?’
‘No.’
She smiled up at him, knowing what he meant.
‘I had a fright this morning, though.
There was a long buff envelope in the post with OHMS on it and I thought, ‘Oh, my God.’
But it was only something for Dad.’
‘They've forgotten you.
How long is it now since your medical?’
‘Oh, ages.’
She didn't want to talk about it or even think about it.
Before they met she had accepted her call-up into the armed forces because it was one of the things that happened in wartime; accepted it because it was a moral necessity.
There was a war on, so you didn't question anything; and if she was completely honest, there had even been times when she had looked forward to leaving home with a kind of guilty relief.
But not any longer.
Now there was Rob, and even to think of being parted from him left her sick inside.
She turned to him and closed her eyes, reaching for the back of his head, pulling his face closer.
‘Forget it.’
She shivered, without knowing why, and he took off his tunic and wrapped it around her shoulders.
Longing flamed in her again at the smell and feel of it.
She was not ashamed of the need that screamed inside her.
Sometimes she wanted to shout, ‘Listen, world, Rob and I are lovers!’
But their loving was a secret thing and their meetings furtive because of her parents.
‘How was it, last night?’
‘Like it always is,’ he said quietly.
She felt the shrugging of his shoulders as if he were trying to forget for a little while the fear that never seemed quite to leave him.
Fear of a bad take-off, of night fighters, of flak and searchlights.
Fear of cracking up; fear of fear itself.
Rob did not subscribe to the popular image of a  bomber pilot, didn't talk about wizard prangs or pieces of cake, or sport a handlebar moustache.
Rob flew with calculated care, mindful of the lives of his crew and the need to get them back to the safety of the debriefing room and steaming mugs of rum-laced tea.
‘Rob, let's go to York on Saturday and stay the night.’
The words came out in a rush and she felt her face flame.
But she had no pride now where Rob was concerned, and what had pride to do with loving?
‘The night?’
He asked it quietly but she felt a tensing of his body.
‘Could you make it?’
‘I know I could.’
She nodded confidently.
‘My cousin will say I was with her.
You want us to, don't you?’
‘I love you, Jenny.’
His voice was rough and his arms tightened around her.
‘Remember that, always.’
Always .
She recalled the time of their first coupling.
It had been gentle, a sweet, surprised discovering, and they had looked at each other shyly afterwards, unable to speak.
But now her need of him was desperate and unashamed, and their clandestine meetings were not enough.
She wanted something to keep secret inside her; something to balance the loneliness of life without him if one night he shouldn't come back.
‘If I start a baby, will you marry me?’
‘You won't.’
He kissed her harshly, as if to add strength to his denial.
‘But I might.
I could easily —’
‘You won't , Jenny.’
He drew deeply on his cigarette then sent it spinning away with a flick of his fingers.
‘And we'll talk about York tomorrow, sweetheart.’
‘All right, then.’
She shivered again.
‘If you're flying tonight, Rob, what time will take-off be?’
‘I don't know.
They haven't told us anything, but if something doesn't happen by nine, I reckon they'll stand  us down.’
He was looking at his watch, again.
‘Sorry, Jenny.
You'll be all right?’
‘I'll be fine.
Just fine.’
She wasn't fine.
She was angry they had wasted the precious minutes on stupid small talk.
Then she took off his tunic and gave it back, helping him into it, fastening the buttons possessively.
‘Take care, Rob.
Promise to be careful.’
‘I will.’
‘And promise never to stop loving me.’
‘Never.
I promise.’
The same dear words, each time they parted.
The same sweet promises, part of the ritual of their loving.
‘Goodnight, Rob MacDonald,’ she whispered, and he reached for her and kissed her gently, the sadness in his eyes making her suddenly afraid.
‘Goodnight, Jenny.’
He went abruptly and she stood there, eyes on his back, willing him to turn, knowing he would not.
She watched as he broke into a run along the perimeter track; the same track his bomber would lumber round tonight if standby became reality.
Despair shook her, her body screaming silently at the pain of leaving him, choosing not to think of the risk he had taken to be with her.
Damn this war, she thought.
Damn it,damn it !
She turned then, tugging at the wire-mesh fence, squeezing through.
Head down, she ran through the wood, past the beech tree and the stile, not stopping until she came to Dormer Cottage.
‘Hi!’ she called to no one in particular.
‘I'm home.’
She took the stairs at a run, up and up to the attic she slept in.
Breathlessly she flung herself down on the window seat.
She liked this large, low room at the top of the house.
From its windows she could see for miles, across fields and trees to the aerodrome beyond.
From here she could watch and wait for take-off, count the bombers out, bless them on their way.
There was nothing to see, yet.
Toy trucks moved between hangars; a minute tractor drove slowly down the main runway.
Maybe they wouldn't go tonight.
Maybe it would be all right.
She pulled her knees up to her chin, hugging them for comfort, thinking about Saturday and York, and Julia, who had reluctantly agreed to alibi her.
She closed her eyes.
On Saturday night she would be Jenny MacDonald.
No one else called her Jenny.
She was Jane, except to Rob, and now no one else would ever be allowed to use that diminutive.
Jenny and Rob.
Mrs Robert MacDonald, of Glasgow, though where in Glasgow she wasn't at all sure.
What she did know was that he lived with his mother and two brothers, and that after the war he would go back to work in an insurance office.
Frowning, she made a mental note to ask his address, though where a man lived was not important.
What really mattered was that he loved you and that tomorrow he would be waiting by the beech tree, at seven.
Everything else was a triviality.
She rested her chin on her knees, preparing herself for the long wait.
Her parents were down there in the garden, Missy, her labrador bitch, at their heels.
She was sorry about the tension between them.
It had started when they discovered she was meeting Rob, and they had asked for her promise that she would never see him again.
It was the start of the lies and deceit, but she didn't care.
Only Rob mattered now.
She closed her eyes, easing into her favourite fantasy.
She did it all the time when Rob was not with her, recalling words they had spoken, hearing music and shared laughter.
Tonight the air was gentle and the earth green with tender things growing, but when first she met Rob a bitter wind blew from the north-east and the bombers were grounded, standing shrouded against the frost and snow like great wounded birds.
Candlemas, and there was a dance in the sergeants' mess.
Often, now, she thought with wonder that she almost hadn't gone…
Her mother was against it.
Aerodromes were dangerous places, she fretted, the recent air raid and the death of two young Waafs still fresh in her mind.
Her parents didn't want her to become involved with Fenton Bishop's aircrews.
They were a wild lot, her mother said.
They had rowdy parties at the Black Bull and sang dubious songs.
She only gave in when she learned that the vicar's niece would be going to the dance and that the Air Force would be providing transport.
Jane had never been to the aerodrome before — not actually past the guardroom and through the gates — and she hadn't known what to expect that night.
All she was able to see from the back of the truck was the rounded outlines of scattered Nissen huts and, on the dark horizon, tall, wedge-shaped buildings hung with dim blue lights.
A corporal wearing an SP's armband helped her down, and from the distance she sensed the clunk and slap of a double bass and drums that tapped out a rumba beat.
On either side, white-painted kerb stones glowed faintly through the blackness as she walked with the rest towards the sound of the dancing, for ears were of more use than eyes in the blackout.
The aircrew mess was a drab building, erected in the haste of war, with a brown polished floor and girders that criss-crossed to support a low tin roof.
Thick blackout curtains covered the too-small windows and cigarette  smoke hung in a blue haze, drifting lazily, trapped in the roof space above.
The room was noisy and hot.
She laid her coat across a table then stood, not knowing what to do, wondering irritably why she had made such a fuss about coming…
But thank heaven she had, she thought now.
Oh, Rob, imagine.
We might never have met.
Her foot began to tingle and she shifted her position.
Her father was still in the garden.
He was wearing his blue police shirt and the strap of his truncheon hung from his left trouser pocket.
The war had brought extra responsibilities to the village constable and now they were beginning to show in the tired lines on his face.
She wished her father and mother were like other parents and not so narrow-minded.
But they were old.
Her mother must be nearly sixty.
‘We waited so long for you, Jane.
We had given up hope, then suddenly there you were, a little stranger…’
A little stranger.
God, how awful .
And how awful to imagine people of their age doing that .
It made her glad she was disobeying them; gladder still that she and Rob were lovers.
All seemed normal and quiet at the aerodrome and the sun was beginning to set.
She lifted her left hand.
Almost nine o'clock.
‘…if something doesn't happen by nine…’
The cough and splutter of an aircraft engine came to her clearly on the still evening air.
Fear sliced through her and she tried to close her ears to the sound, but as if to mock her it was joined by another and another until the air was filled with a shaking roar.
The pilots were revving up the aircraft engines; there would be no stand-down.
Soon, Rob would take S-Sugar on to the runway and wait for clearance from the control tower.
Then a green light would stab through the gloom and he'd be roaring down  the narrow concrete strip, faster and faster, holding Sugar back until it seemed the boundary fence was hurtling to meet them.
Then slowly, reluctantly almost, they would rise into the air and Rob would let go his breath, and his flight engineer would say, ‘Bloody lovely,’ as he always did.
That was when she'd wish them luck, as they roared over the village, and she would watch them all until they were silhouetted against the dying sun, small and graceful in an apricot sky.
She counted twelve green lights, blessed twelve Halifax bombers on their way.
In less than half an hour they were all airborne and Rob was flying on his seventeenth raid over occupied Europe.
Take care, my love.
Come home safely.
God, but she was so afraid.
At the door of St Joseph's church, Father O'Flaherty waited impatiently and importantly.
‘Down ye go, Theresa.’
He always used Vi's second name, declaring that the name of a flower, however sweet and modest, must give precedence to that of a saint.
‘Thanks, Father.’
Vi walked carefully, eyes on the trailing habit of Sister Cecilia, who negotiated the twisting downward steps with a child beneath each arm.
The crypt was damp and smelled of the occupation of the past six nights.
Benches and chairs had been placed around the walls, and biscuit mattresses, still folded, were stacked in the corner nearest the stone steps.
Not for sleeping on, it was stressed, but for direst emergencies only, such as dying, birthing or suspected heart attack.
Opposite, alongside a loudly dripping tap, Sister Annunciata topped up the already bubbling tea urn, switched on, Vi suspected, without the priest's permission.
Vi took a corner seat farthest away from the door.
Tonight she didn't want to talk.
Tonight Gerry had died, really died.
After the letter came she had hoped for a miracle and prayed for one, too, but Richie Daly's visit had snuffed out that hope in one short sentence.
Gerry was dead, because no seaman, not even a little toerag like Richie Daly, would lie about a thing like that.
She closed her eyes.
No more tears, Vi, she told herself.
You and Gerry had four good years.
Just be thankful you didn't get the baby you wanted so much.
No fun for a kid, is it, growing up without a da.
Better face it, Vi, you're  on your own, now.
There's only Mary and the sisters you haven't seen for ten years, if you can count them.
Margaret and Geraldine had gone to Canada as domestics in the earl y thirties and married Canadian husbands, and wouldn't come back to Liverpool, they wrote, for a big clock.
They'd been good to Mam, though, sending her money when they could.
Neither had been able to get home for her funeral, but they had telegraphed a big wreath and paid their fair share of the undertaker's bill, after which the letters and dollars stopped and Vi and Mary had grown even closer.
A child cried and was silenced with a bottle of orange-coloured liquid.
Lips moved without words, fingers counted rosary beads.
Tonight, everyone seemed to be waiting.
Two hours gone and still nothing had happened.
Weren't they coming, then, and if they weren't, why didn't the all clear sound?
Sister Annunciata caught the priest's eye and held up a packet of tea, but he shook his head and pulled aside the blackout curtain at the foot of the circular staircase.
Vi jumped to her feet and followed him to the door of the church, wincing in the sweet, cold air.
‘Father, can you spare a minute?’
‘What's to do, Theresa?
Go back down, where it's safe.’
‘Just a word, Father.’
She followed his upward gaze.
The sky was dark, with only the outlines of dockside warehouses standing sharp on the skyline.
Long, straight fingers of light searched the sky in sweeping arcs, meeting, touching briefly as if in greeting, then sweeping away again to circle the brooding night.
‘Almost beautiful, isn't it?’
‘It is, Father.’
‘And what's on your conscience, Theresa?
The priest's eyes followed the wandering searchlights.
‘It's Gerry.
He — he's dead, it seems certain now.
Someone who was there came to tell me tonight.’
‘Dead — is — it — God — rest — his — soul.’
Father O'Flaherty s thumb traced a blessing.
‘Will you say a Mass for him?’
Two half-crowns, warm from her fingers, changed hands.
‘Tomorrow, Father?’
‘I'll do that, Theresa, and I'll pray for you, child.
Now go back down and tell the Sisters to make tea.
It's too quiet up here.
Too bloody quiet by half, so it is…
She said, ‘Thank you, Father,’ and began the uneasy descent.
It was always worse going down, and spiral stairs were the very devil in the dark if you had big feet.
It meant you had to walk sideways, almost, like a crab.
Vi wished the good Lord had endowed her with size fours, but it wasn't anybody's fault, really.
Her feet were big because she hadn't worn shoes till her third birthday, or so Mam had said.
She stood for a moment behind the thick black curtain, unwilling to pull it aside.
Added to the musty crypt smell there would be the stink of sweat and unchanged babies, all mingling with the stench of fear, because tonight everyone was more on edge than usual.
Maybe because tonight the warning had been a long time sounding, had started its tormented wailing just when everyone began to think the bombers weren't coming.
And now it seemed they weren't, because nothing was happening.
Perhaps, though, it was all part of a war of nerves.
Perhaps those bombers had flown up the river as they always did, just so the sirens would send Liverpudlians hurrying to the shelters for yet another night, then perversely they had turned inland and dropped their bomb loads on Manchester instead.
But they couldn't be that stupid, Vi reasoned derisively  as she nodded to Sister Annunciata and called, ‘Father says you're to make the tea.’
Backs straightened, nodding heads shot up.
Tea was a soother, a healer.
It had been the blackest day of the war when the government announced the rationing of tea.
Oh, yes, capture India, cut off the tea supply, and Britain would capitulate within a week, said the potman at the Tarleton.
‘Won't be long now!’
The nun's call coincided with the first of the bombs.
It was a fair way off, but those who sensed it rather than heard it, those whose eyes became suddenly afraid, knew that two more would follow.
Bombs came in threes, to those who counted.
There was a strained, listening silence, broken only by Father O'Flaherty's startled feet as they took the stairs in record time.
Then the briefest pause before he drew aside the curtain to enter with dignity and calm.
‘Well now, and just in time for tea,’ he beamed as a second and third bomb fell sickeningly nearer.
It wasn't the noise so much.
Vi pulled a dry tongue around dry lips.
She had always imagined that an exploding bomb would have made an infernal, ear-splitting racket, but it didn't.
It crunched .
You felt a bomb as much as you heard it.
It shocked the earth it slammed into, and those shock waves slammed into the soles of your feet and raged through your body and paralysed your mind.
More bombs fell, and more, until the air was full of a strange continuous roaring and the earth shook as if it were afraid.
Vi sucked in her breath.
They were nearer tonight than they had ever been.
Any closer and they'd hit St Joseph's.
Mother of God, be with us .
Babies stopped crying, hushed by the fear around them.
Eyes were wide in white faces; fingers and lips moved in silent, age-old prayer.
Someone laughed hysterically.
The bombs stopped as suddenly as they started but the hollow screams of anti-aircraft shells continued without pause.
That's it, lads.
Let 'em have it.
Shoot the bastards down.
Make 'em wish they hadn't come.
Was that to be it, then?
Short and sharp tonight.
Eyes turned again to the tea urn.
The big one dropped just as they began to relax.
One bomb, not three, and a tearing, screaming explosion that set the lights swaying on their wires and filled the air with choking dust.
Eyes swivelled upward, bodies tensed again.
The roof would cave in.
It would.
‘Jaysus, Mary and Joseph,’ roared the priest.
The roof disgorged another shower of dust and rubble, and held fast.
There was a ten-foot crack in it, wide enough to take a ma's fist, but it held.
The lights swayed more slowly.
One of them flickered, then died with a ping.
‘Don't any of yez dare to sneeze,’ ordered Father O'Flaherty, but no one laughed.
The all clear came with the morning light, high-pitched and steady, the sweetest sound in the world.
‘That's it, then.
Away to your homes the lot of you, and God go with you,’ called Father O'Flaherty.
Wearily, fearfully, they filed out to face the day.
Vi smelled the desolation before she saw it: a mingling of dust and rubble and burning, water-doused timber.
Somewhere, the bell of a fire engine clanged and men's voices called urgently.
Then she was standing at the church gates and looking down Lyra Street; looking, but not understanding.
She took several steps nearer, counting as she walked.
One and three, they were all right, but number five had gone, and number seven.
And opposite, number four and number six.
There was nothing there but a terrible, yawning gap.
That last bomb had taken out those houses as if it had come with a great grasping fist and scooped them up and crunched them into rubble as easily as if they'd been made of matchsticks.
Number five.
Mrs Norris.
She'd still be in there, under the kitchen table, and number seven — Mother of God, that was hers !
Only then did she comprehend the implications of that great, obscene gap.
They had hit her house, destroyed her home — hers and Gerry's.
A vicious pain slashed through her.
She closed her eyes and opened her lips to a terrible moan.
‘No.
Oh,no !’
She stood there, fighting for breath.
There wasn't a thing left.
Not one thing.
Just beams and brick rubble.
Chairs and pots and pans all gone, and her lovely dusty-pink eiderdown.
And four years of scrimping and saving and sweeping and polishing and loving that little house; the house Gerry came home to.
If he could see it now…
But Gerry wasn't coming home.
He didn't need this house any more.
If she had polished and dusted till the crack of doom, it would have made no difference.
Her husband was dead, her job had gone and now she had no home.
Hot, bitter tears rolled down her cheeks, and with them came back the noise of the street.
A stranger's arm encircled her shoulders.
‘Come away, pet, an’ I'll make you a cup of tea.
It's only an ‘ouse.’
‘Thanks,’ Vi whispered, ‘but leave me a minute.’
She took a step nearer, staring at the drunken heap of rubble.
There was nothing there she recognized.
Not one familiar chair or table top.
And where was her gas stove and the red rose bush from the yard?
There wasn't a yard.
It probably wasn't even her rubble, either.
Hers from across the street, most likely.
It was like that with bomb-blast.
Sometimes it just rushed round things; other times it flattened all in its path then picked up the debris and flung it away.
You could never tell.
She stood there retching.
She needed to be sick.
She wanted to go down on her knees in all the muck and dust and cry and cry until she was sick.
But she wouldn't.
She couldn't, because this wasn't Vi McKeown standing here shaking, and it wasn't Vi's house that bomb had taken.
All this was happening to someone else, so it was no use getting upset over what didn't concern her.
A policeman with red-rimmed eyes and a stubble-covered chin was saying something.
‘You what?’
She looked at him vacantly.
‘I said, was you all right and do you know who lives here?’
‘Why!’
‘Because there might be people in there, that's why.’
‘Her in number seven's all right, but there's an old woman in there, I think.
Under the kitchen table.’
She nodded vaguely in the direction of number five.
‘Christ Almighty!
Over here, lads!
There's a woman under that bloody lot!’
He took the arm of the girl who stared at him with shock-darkened eyes.
‘There's the WVS women at the bottom of the street.
Go and get yourself a cup of tea and tell 'em you need some sugar in it.’
But Vi didn't move except to turn her back on the men with the picks and shovels.
She didn't want to look when they found Ma Norris.
If they found her, that was.
If there was anything left to find.
She hoped the poor old thing had gone.
It'd be a release for her.
No more hiding from the post office boy who brought telegrams from the Somme each day.
Vi supposed she had better be going.
Go where?
But  did it matter?
She raised her eyes to the sky.
It was a beautiful sky.
Very blue, even through the smoke haze.
The early-morning sun was there, too, as if last night had never happened.
Then she saw the wall — her bedroom wall.
It stood out, jagged and broken like a decaying tooth, and it was covered with pale pink roses.
Roses Gerry had pasted there.
For a moment she gazed at her beautiful bedroom wallpaper then anger took her, shook her, slapped her into life again.
The bastards!
The rotten, evil bastards!
Well, they weren't getting away with it this time.
They couldn't take your man and your job and your home and not answer for it!
She made her silent vow to the piece of wallpaper that flapped in the breeze.
I'll have 'em for this, Gerry.
On our mam's grave, I'll have 'em!
The piece of paper tore loose.
She watched it slip and slide this way and that to fall at her feet.
Tenderly she picked it up.
It was all she had left of four years of happiness, and it was very precious.
Special too, because it bore witness to her vow.
‘You all right, luv?’ the policeman asked again.
‘I'm fine,’ Vi said.
And she was.
And fighting mad, too.
‘Got somewhere to go, have you?’
‘Yes.
To town — to London Road.’
To the recruiting office, that's where.
‘Town?
You'll never make it.
No trams, no buses, and the roads blocked with rubble.
And two unexploded bombs in the Mile End Road.
It'll take all day.’
‘That's all right.’
She'd got all day.
All the time in the world, in fact.
‘Please yourself.’
He had better things to do than argue the toss.
Oh, she would please herself, all right.
She would get down to the city centre somehow.
Vi McKeown knew every back street and jigger north of the Liver Building, and she would get there.
Things had gone too far.
They had taken all she had, and nobody did that to a woman of Liverpool and got away with it.
She was joining the fight.
She wanted in, right in the thick of it.
She was joining the Navy and she would go wherever they sent her.
What she could do she had no idea; but she would stand on the cliff top at Dover and heave rocks at the arrogant sods, if that was what it took.
She sniffed away the last of her tears and slipped the piece of dirty, rose-covered wallpaper into her carrier bag.
Her city was battered and burning.
She was alone in the world and owned nothing but the clothes in which she stood, a small attaché case filled with important things and a brown paper carrier bag containing shoes, stockings, and two crystal goblets carefully wrapped in a pair of white cotton knickers.
It wasn't a lot to show for twenty-five years of living and breathing, but at least she was alive.
Now it was time to move on.
Pulling back her shoulders, she walked, head high, out of Lyra Street.
This time, she did not look back.
The Countess of Donnington stood at the window of the first-floor sitting room, intent on the street below.
She had spent a fear-filled night beneath a stone slab in the meat cellar and, what was more, completely alone.
Now the air raid was over and still her husband and daughter had not come home.
Last night's bombing had caught her unawares in the West End.
Normally, to go out alone would have been unthinkable, but unoccupied men were thin on the ground now and invitations almost non-existent.
She had gazed  petulantly at a mantelpiece empty of deckle-edged cards, remembering the time when she had never wanted for an escort or a party.
But most men of her acquaintance were in uniform now, and having the time of their lives, she shouldn't wonder, with girls young enough to be their own daughters.
The alert last night had sounded just as Londoners were beginning to think that just for once there would be no air raid, and the first bombs fell as the last notes of the sirens gave way to an uneasy, brooding silence.
Panic-stricken, she had made her way back to Bruton Street, her feet rubbed into blisters in flimsy evening slippers, wondering how taxis could disappear so completely whenever she needed one.
She could have found shelter, of course.
Hotels and restaurants and clubs always opened their doors to anyone caught above ground when the bombing started.
But if she was going to be killed, she had tearfully decided, it would be at her home in Mayfair.
No one, but no one , would dig Kitty Bainbridge out of a communal shelter in Soho.
For Soho was where she had been last evening, wondering what to do and where to go to fill the time; there, in Shaftesbury Avenue, she had seen Lucinda and the airmen.
And it was then she had decided that war work or not, her daughter's excursions with convalescent wounded must stop at once.
She had felt quite peculiar and quite, quite shocked; how Lucinda could bring herself to do it was a complete mystery.
So she had made her fear-filled way home to spend another night in the cellar, her moods alternating between terror and self-pity, until the high, sweet sound of the all clear brought relief and anger.
When Donnington got home in that ridiculous Home Guard uniform of his and her daughter had torn herself away from those men, then all hell would break loose.
The Countess guaranteed it.
Lighting the last of her cigarettes, she inhaled deeply The world had gone mad, with every capital city in Europe occupied by strutting Nazis.
How soon before they were in London, too?
‘At last!’
She espied her daughter rounding the corner from Berkeley Square.
Running quickly downstairs, she was waiting in the black and white tiled entrance hall long before the doorbell rang.
‘Sorry about this.’
Lucinda was pale and dust-stained, her eyes dark-ringed.
‘Are you all right, Mama?’
‘No, I am not all right!’
Pent-up emotions broke loose.
‘I have been alone all night!
And might I ask where you have been until now?,
‘I'm sorry, truly I am, but I had to look after the boys.
They're still a bit wobbly, you know, and when the bombing got rough I thought I'd better find us all somewhere to go.
We were fine in the tube, but it —’
‘Lucinda!
Listen to me!
I saw you last night, though you chose not to see me, and I cannot understand your casual attitude to life.
You imagine this war gives you the excuse to disobey me and do exactly as you wish.
You stay out all night.
You think more of those creatures, it seems, than your fiancé.
You —’
‘Creatures , Mama?’
‘Well, what else is one to call them?
I was ashamed last night, deeply ashamed that my daughter should be seen in such company, such —’
‘Such what ?’
Lucinda's eyes flew wide with disbelief.
‘Sorry, but I don't understand you.’
‘Well, they're such a terrible sight, aren't they?
Their faces, I mean; so — so grotesque .
You'd think they wouldn't want to be seen in public; but no, there they are, living it up, and my own daughter aiding and abetting them as if she were doing some thing clever.
That tall one, the one with his hands all over you —’
‘Mama, you don't know what you're saying.’
Bright red spots flushed Lucinda's cheeks.
‘I'm not hearing this; I'm not !’
‘Stop playing the innocent with me, child.
Sufficient to say I was deeply embarrassed, and the time has come to put an end to this absurdity.
You will give up this so-called nursing immediately and you will give me a date for your wedding —’
‘Be quiet, Mama!
Shut up and just for once listen to me !,
‘I — I…’
The older woman's mouth sagged open and remained open.
Lucinda, who had always been so obedient, speaking to her mother as if good manners had gone out of fashion?
‘You are without doubt, Mama, the most unreasonable, the most selfish woman I have ever met, and I am not in the least ashamed to be seen with those boys.
I'm proud of them, in fact.
Yes, they are a terrible sight.
They were all fighter pilots and they got hit, you see.
Oh, they managed to bale out, but not before their faces and hands had burned.
No eyelashes, no eyebrows, no hair, no features any more.
That was their reward for trying to keep the bombers away from London, away from people like you, Mama!’
She shook with outrage, her voice thick with unshed tears.
‘The tall one, mind, the one with his hands all over me — on my shoulders , actually, so I could lead him — well, he's a bit luckier.
He'll never have to see himself day after day in a mirror and wonder if it was worth it because he's blind, you see.
His eyes burned, too!’
She was weeping now.
Tears of anger and pity and pride ran down her face, making rivulets in the grime.
‘So don't moan to me about your unhappy lot, Mama.
You think this war was started just to inconvenience you.
You whine and whinge and think of no one but yourself.
You are a bitch, Mama; a selfish, bad-minded bitch, and it is I who am ashamed of you !
I'm going out before I say something I'm sorry for.’
‘Lucinda!
Come back and apologize at once .
You can't speak to me like that.
I can't believe my own ears!,
‘Then you'd better, because I meant every word of it.’
The front door slammed shut and the Countess collapsed on to the bottom step of the staircase, her legs useless.
Her daughter had taken leave of her senses and her husband was never at home when he was needed.
The world had gone completely mad.
Hubert James Bainbridge, tenth earl of Donnington, called out to his daughter as she passed him on the opposite side of the street, but she did not hear him.
He'd have sworn she was crying, poor child.
It was a terrible world for the young ones to grow up in.
Not a lot for them to look forward to.
He watched her disappear round the corner of the street then, shrugging his shoulders, walked on, thinking again of that incredible whispered conversation at company HQ.
Such news, and so completely unbelievable.
He would have to telephone around and see if anyone else had any titbits to add to the mystery.
Better not tell Kitty, though.
Kitty was totally preoccupied with the threatened invasion, and to tell her this would be asking for trouble.
And the rumour might not be true, though it had come from Freddie Elton, who didn't often get it wrong.
But Hess , flying here in a Messerschmitt.
Hitler's deputy, no less, baling out over Scotland then surrendering amiably to a farmer and demanding to be taken to the Duke of Hamilton.
It was a real kettle of fish and no mistake.
The man must be a raving bloody lunatic even to think of coming to this bomb-happy island.
Rudolf Hess, eh?
Who next but the whole German army?
Carefully he opened the front door of his house, quietly he crossed the hall to the library and closed the door behind him.
Then taking off his tunic and loosening his tie, he picked up the telephone.
The elderly admiral sighed and penned his name to yet another scrap of printed paper.
It was all he did, these days; signing chits was all he seemed good for.
Too old to be in uniform, really, so he supposed he should be grateful for the desk job in a small dark room at Admiralty House.
He rose to his feet, genuinely pleased to see the pretty girl who smiled at him from the doorway.
‘Goddy, darling!’
Her kiss was warm.
‘It's good of you to see me.’
‘Good of you to come, Lucinda.’
He held her at arm's length.
‘But what on earth have you been up to, eh?’
Her face was tear-stained, her clothes creased and her pale blonde curls dull with dust.
‘It was the air raid, I suppose.
Spent last night in the tube and it was, oh,awful getting here.’
‘What's it like out there?
Afraid I didn't get home last night.
Slept here, in the basement.
Is it as bad as they say?’
‘It's unbelievable, Goddy.
Everything is at a standstill and so many people in the underground, just sitting there with nowhere to go.
I walked here from Bruton Street and it was like a nightmare.’
‘A lot of casualties, I shouldn't wonder.’
‘Over a thousand, I heard, and heaven knows how many more injured and homeless.
What's happening to us, Goddy?’
‘I don't know for sure, girlie, but we'll sort it all out in the end, just see if we don't.
They say the British lose every battle they ever fight, except the last one.’
The last battle.
And how far away would that be?
But  there had been a full moon last night, a bomber's moon with all London laid out clearly for the Luftwaffe pilots.
And this morning the devastation and burning had been terrible to see.
Unexploded bombs everywhere; water for fire hoses almost non-existent; the acrid air thick with smoke and tiny pieces of charred paper swirling on the breeze.
Poor, proud old London.
‘It's wrong of me, but I wish I could be at Lady Mead, Goddy.
It must be beautiful now, in Lincolnshire.’
‘Ah, yes.’
He clamped an empty pipe between his teeth.
‘I remember your christening.
It was a May day just like now, and warm and sunny.
The chapel at Lady Mead was full of flowers, and how you screamed and yelled.
Nanny was pleased, I seem to recall.
Said you'd cried the devil out of you, and that was good.’
‘Dear Nanny.
She's at Lady Mead, you know.
The Air Force was very good.
They didn't throw us out entirely.
Pa had all the good stuff stored in the Dower House when we had to leave, and Nanny's there now, looking after it.
She writes every week.
But you must be very busy and I came here to ask a favour, a big favour.
I hope you don't mind?’
‘Of course I don't.
Just tell your old godfather, and if I can I'll help.
But what about a cup of tea, eh?
My writer is a little wonder.
Never seems to run out of rations, bless her.
And last night she went to a do at the American Embassy and came back with a packet of chocolate cookies — er — biscuits, no less.’
He thumbed a bell-push on his desk, and a woman in naval uniform opened the door.
‘Leading Wren, this is Lucinda Bainbridge, and she's in desperate need of a mug of tea.
And do we — er-have a biscuit?’
‘Sir, you know we do, though how you got to know about them I can't imagine.’
‘I want to be a Wren,’ Lucinda whispered when they  were alone again.
‘That's why I came — to ask you to help me.
I ought to be doing more than I am.
I — I had a terrible row at home this morning.
I'll have to go back and say I'm sorry, but I want to join up, truly I do.
And not because of Mama,’ she finished breathlessly.
‘I really want to do something useful.’
‘I'm sure you do, but Kitty mustn't ever know that I'd had a hand in it.’
‘Are you afraid of her?
All right then, I'll join the Waafs or the ATS.
I don't mind which, but I've got to do something, Goddy.
Sometimes I feel so ashamed.’
A knock on the door announced the arrival of two white mugs of tea and an anchor-decorated plate on which lay, unbelievably, two large thickly coated chocolate biscuits.
‘Leading Wren, you're an absolute marvel,’ the Admiral said.
‘Oh no, sir,’ she smiled, eyes bright with mischief.
‘It's because I'm feeling so pleased about my leave chit.’
‘Your leave chit?
Did I sign it?’
‘No sir, not yet.
But you're going to, aren't you?’
‘Hussy,’ barked the Admiral to her retreating back.
‘She's a good girl,’ he confided, offering the plate to Lucinda.
‘Her young man was taken prisoner at Dunkirk and not so long ago her father was badly hurt in the Clydeside blitz, but you'd never know it.’
‘There you are, Goddy.
That's what I mean.
That's why you've got to help.
This war is affecting everybody but me, it seems.
You will try to get me in quickly, won't you?
I can't type or do anything useful that I can think of, but I learn quickly.
There's got to be something.’
‘Want a job here in the Admiralty, do you?
Somewhere in London, near Charlie?’
‘Anything will do, though I'd rather go away, if you could manage it.’
‘Hmm.
We'll have to see.
I don't carry a lot of weight now, in spite of all my gold braid.
Now a few years ago…’
His mind flew back with ease to the last war and an up-and-coming young officer on a smoke-belching dread-nought at Jutland.
Now that had been one hell of a scrap.
‘Still, I'll do my best for you, girlie.’
He discussed the matter later with his writer.
‘I'm afraid I'm not entirely au fait with the women's side of things.
Do we know anyone in Recruiting, Leading Wren?,
‘Is your goddaughter serious about joining up, sir?’
‘Very serious, it would seem.’
‘Then I think I know who'll be able to help her.
Oh, and sir, you'll never believe this — it's quite peculiar, really.
It's Rudolf Hess.
There's a strong buzz that he's in Scotland.
Have you heard anything?’
‘Hess?
Here ?
Piffle and tommyrot, Leading Wren!’
Hitler's right-hand man in Scotland?
Whatever next?
The Admiral dismissed the rumour without a second thought and concentrated on more important matters: his goddaughter's immediate entry into the Women's Royal Naval Service, no less.
Poor child.
Her mother wasn't the easiest person to live with, but joining up!
Surely she'd have done better to many young Charlie Bainbridge and settle down to starting a family.
Been on the cards for ages, that wedding.
Strange that Lucinda should not want to stay in London.
It was a rum do, and no mistake.
He regarded his in-tray with a weary eye, then, sighing, picked up his pen again.
Jane awoke without effort, Missy's cold nose on her cheek.
‘What is it, girl?’
Her eyes were wide in an instant.
The bombers were coming back.
Missy had heard their engines  long before a human ear could pick up the first faint sound and had come to tell her.
‘Can you hear them, then?’
She pulled back the curtains and opened the windows wide, patting the seat beside her.
The sky was light to the east, streaks of red and gold piercing the grey.
Birds were starting their morning singing, roused by the missel thrush in the pear tree.
Below her, in the orchard, apple and pear and plum frothed pink and white with blossom, and over in Tingle's Wood a sea of bluebells rose out of the morning mist.
It was all so normal, this May-morning canvas, but soon the bombers would return, stark silhouettes against a pale sky, reminding her that the war was real, setting the frightened pulse in her throat beating again.
She saw them before she heard them.
Two Halifax bombers, wheels already down; two black nightbirds coming home to roost.
She held her breath, listening.
They had taken off with ordered precision; they would straggle home in ones and twos, their engines making a different sound in the thin morning air.
‘That's the first of them, Missy.’
She reached into her pyjama jacket and hooked out the chain that hung around her neck.
On it were her confirmation cross and the farthing Rob had given her soon after they met.
It was bright and new, with the King's head on one side and on the other a wren and the date, 1941.
Rob said it was appropriate, since that was what she was going to be.
‘Keep it for luck, Jenny-love.’
She had done better than that and taken it to a jeweller to be plated and put into a mount so it could hang on her chain.
He had been obliged to tell her, of course, that it was an offence to deface a coin of the realm, but he had done as she asked because women brought sentimental tokens to him every day of the week and, anyway, it was  only a farthing.
To Jane, though, it was precious and priceless and she wore it always.
Now she held it in her hand with the cross, a silent pleading for Rob's return.
The ninth bomber came out of a lightening sky at six o'clock exactly, and though she sat there for another hour, it was the last.
‘…and three of our aircraft have failed to return ,’ the man who read the news would intone on the midday bulletin.
Were they just words he was reading, or did he realize that three aircraft meant twenty-one crew, and countless women waiting anxiously for the phone call that would tell them their man was safe — or the letter that would tell them he was not?
She began to dress, cold clumsy fingers fumbling with buttons.
How soon before she could phone the aerodrome?
Not quite yet.
Crews had to be debriefed and they would have to eat, too.
Yesterday morning it had been all right.
Eleven bombers had taken off; eleven came home.
But three crews not back yet —oh, please not Rob !
Long before the sun was making shadows, she was standing beside the phone box at the crossroads outside the village, willing the minutes away.
Soon it would be half-past seven, and exactly at half-past seven she would ring the aerodrome.
She always used the public box when she phoned Rob.
Police telephones were not to be used for private calls, said her mother.
It was better that way, she supposed, though if things had been normal at home Rob could have phoned her there.
Just a quick ‘Hullo, Jenny.
Everything's fine.’
And perhaps a whispered ‘I love you.’
But things weren't normal at home because her parents had said she must not meet Rob.
Her parents were old and had forgotten, if ever they had known, what it was like to love someone as she loved Rob.
And she wasn't waiting any longer, damn it.
Impatiently she wrenched open the door and taking the pennies from her pocket, picked up the receiver with a hand that shook.
‘Number, please?’
The switchboard answered quickly and it seemed like a good omen.
‘Can I have 220, please?’
She arranged her pennies in. front of her.
‘Just a minute, Jane.’
This morning it must be Ruth on duty.
Ruth knew everybody's voice, even when they had a cold.
‘Have two pennies ready.’
The coins clinked into the slot.
‘Press button A. There you are, now…’
Jane pressed hard, the pennies fell with a clatter and a voice said, ‘Fenton Bishop 220.’
It was a Scottish voice and it gave her comfort.
‘Can I have the aircrew mess?’ she whispered, stiff-lipped.
Her hand was wet and she gripped the receiver tightly, thinking back to the night of the February dance and how the telephone was fixed to the wall beside the door.
She took a deep breath.
In just a few seconds Rob would be talking to her and it would be all right.
It would .
When she asked for Sergeant MacDonald there was a pause, then the man on the other end of the line told her to wait.
She had thought she would hear him calling Rob's name but instead he hissed, ‘It's Mac's girl.’
The background noises stopped and she knew he had put his hand over the mouthpiece.
She closed her eyes tightly.
She felt very sick.
She wanted to put the phone down and pretend it wasn't happening but the noises came back and a different voice said, ‘Sergeant MacDonald isn't here at the moment.
Could you phone back later?’
‘Has he gone out?’
Panic had her now; ice-cold, screaming panic.
‘Has he left the camp?’
‘Well — no.’
‘Then where is he?’
‘I'm not sure.’
He was prevaricating but his voice was kind; too kind.
She took another breath then let it go before she asked, ‘When shall I phone?’
She was shaking and her mouth had filled with saliva.
‘Look, do you think you could leave it until tomorrow?
Or maybe you could get in touch with the Adjutant's office, or the padre?’
She knew what he was trying to tell her, and tomorrow wouldn't do.
‘He was flying last night, wasn't he?’ she made herself ask it.
‘Yes, love, he was.’
He seemed reluctant to talk to her, but probably this man was aircrew, too.
Perhaps talking to her about Rob made him feel that someone was dancing on his own grave.
She whispered, ‘Please tell me.’
‘Sergeant MacDonald isn't back yet.’
The words came in a rush.
‘He's — he's overdue, but don't get upset.
He could have ditched or landed down south somewhere.
Try not to worry.’
A sudden hatred came over her; a cold, bitter hating of everything that lived and breathed.
She wanted to hurt the man who had told her Rob hadn't come back, but he had tried to be kind and anyway she couldn't think clearly.
There was a noise in her head that was making her dizzy so she whispered, ‘Thank you,’ and put the receiver down.
Imagine, she'd thanked him for telling her Rob was missing!
Clasping her arms over her stomach, she tried to stop the writhing inside her.
O God, God, God!
Why did you let this happen?
She did not remember going home.
She'd pushed her bicycle most of the way before she collected enough sense to get on and ride it.
When she walked into the kitchen her mother looked up and said, ‘Where on earth have you been at this hour.
Jane looked at her and at her father and hated them, too.
They were old.
They had been married for more years than she and Rob had lived.
Why weren't they dead, like Rob?
He wasn't coming back; she knew it.
Her father put down his paper.
‘Is anything wrong, Jane?’
Wrong ?
Something had just kicked the breath out of her body but no, nothing was wrong.
She needed to weep, but there was a pain in her throat and it was stopping the tears, so she laughed instead.
She stood there and laughed until she shook.
There wasn't anything else to do but laugh.
She heard her mother say, ‘Stop her, Richard.
She's hysterical,’ and her father shouted ‘Jane!’and took hold of her shoulders, but she went on laughing.
His hand on her cheek hurt.
He slapped her hard and it made her head jerk back.
She stopped in the middle of a scream and the breath left her body with a groan.
It was the first time her father had hit her and he looked upset, but suddenly she was very calm and her voice was steady as she said, ‘I'm sorry.
I shouldn't have done that, but the man I've been going out with is missing.
He was on ops last night and he hasn't come back.’
It didn't sound like her voice.
It was as if the words were coming from inside her and someone else was speaking them.
Her mother covered her mouth with her hand and her face went pale.
Jane was glad about that.
She wanted her to be hurt, and her father too.
If only because they were alive, she wanted it.
‘You used to pretend he didn't exist, didn't you?’ came the voice from inside her.
‘Well, he probably doesn't now.
Are you satisfied?’
She wouldn't cry.
Not in front of them.
She close the door behind her and walked upstairs to her room.
Her face was chalk-white in the mirror and her eyes were large  and wild.
She said.
‘He's dead.
Overdue means missing and missing means dead.
They don't come back.’
She took his photograph from beneath the lining paper in her drawer and looked at it and tried again to cry.
She would have given anything to weep until she was sick, but the pain was still there to stop her.
She slumped down on to the bed.
She didn't know if she was rocking or if it was the room.
The door latch clicked and her father stood there.
He looked so utterly miserable that she tried to feel sorry for him but she could not.
She needed the whole world to be miserable.
‘Would it help to talk about it?’ he said.
When she was little, she always talked to him.
Once, she had loved her father very much.
‘His name was Rob.’
The real Jane was speaking now and every word was a stab of pain.
‘I never told you that, did I?
I don't know a lot about him either, but it doesn't matter now, does it?
He lived in Glasgow but I'm not sure where.
His father's been dead a long time and he has-had — two brothers.’
Her father put out his hand but she pulled away.
‘I loved him very much.
He was so young and it wasn't his war.
It's your fault, yours and Mother's.
It's your generation should be getting killed, not ours!’
Richard Kendal nodded, his eyes bright with pain.
‘Perhaps you're right.
We saw it coming and we did nothing.’
He walked over to the window.
‘Are you all right?’ he asked without looking at her.
‘Mother said she thought you haven't been looking too good lately — a bit peaky.’
She knew what he was trying to say.
They thought she might be having a baby, and if she really wanted to hurt them she could tell them she might be.
But all the fight had gone out of her and she was afraid.
Not of having  Rob's child, but of having it without hi.
But Rob had said it wouldn't happen.
‘I'm all right, Dad.
Don't worry.’
She saw kindness in his face and compassion, and she whispered, ‘I did love him so.
Don't blame us.
There was so little time.’
He held out his arms then, and because she hurt so much, because she wanted to be a little girl again, she went to him and the tears came.
It was good to weep.
She wept until there was nothing inside her but low, gasping sobs and her body was limp.
Her father rocked her in his arms, just as he had done when she was little, and when her mother came in with a cup of hot milk and one of her soothing tablets, she swallowed it obediently, a child again.
‘There now.
It's going to be all right.’
Her father held her tightly until her eyes began to close and from far away she heard her mother pick up the cup and saucer.
‘I think she's asleep now.
When she wakes, don't tell her the letter has come.
Leave it for a while.’
So it was here, the OHMS envelope she had dreaded.
Her call-up papers had come and she must go away.
Oh, Rob, I have to leave you …
‘Flamin' Norah!
Don't tell me it's gone!’
‘Sorry, lassie.’
The ticket collector picked up his coat and bag.
‘You've missed it by ten minutes.
The next train to Garvie leaves at midnight.’
‘That's it, then.
I'm adrift.’
ETA Ardneavie 2200/22/6, her travel instructions stated precisely — which really meant that Wren Violet T. McKeown was expected to arrive at her destination by 10 P.M. on the twenty-second day of June.
‘And that train left on time!’ she flung accusingly.
‘Aye.
They sometimes do.
Last week one arrived on time too.
But you'd better away to the Naval RTO and get your warrant seen to.
You'll no’ get into trouble, then, if you're late arriving.’
The railway transport officer.
She would find one, they had told her at the training depot, at most main-line stations.
Get into difficulties, travelwise, and the RTO would sort it out.
‘Over yonder, by the pile of mailbags.’
The ticket collector had seen it many times and would see it many times more before the railways returned to normal.
If they ever did.
Vi picked up her cases.
She had travelled from Rosyth to Glasgow, hardly any distance at all, yet still she had missed her connection.
Slamming her feet down angrily, she made for the mailbags.
Mother of God, what a place to be stranded in.
But didn't all railway stations look the same, turned by the war into dismal places?
Dimly lit, permanently blacked  out, they had become dirty and dingy and smelled of neglect.
When the war was over, in a million years, and little Marie asked, ‘What was your war like, Auntie Vi?’ she would tell her, ‘Drab, queen.
Very drab.’
But it wasn't only the stations, she frowned.
Passenger trains never ran on time now.
Indeed, men and women not in uniform were asked most pointedly not to use them.
Is your journey really necessary ? the posters demanded accusingly, making it downright unpatriotic for a civilian to even think of occupying a seat on a passenger train.
Vi nodded and smiled at the young soldier and the pale-faced young girl who stood beside him.
You smiled at everyone now.
You cared about other people and tried to be kind to them, even though they were strangers you would probably never meet again.
It had taken a war to do that, Vi realized; though she wouldn't mind betting that on the day peace came, all the caring would end and people would go back to minding their own business again, just as they had before it started.
And it would be the same with railway stations.
Once the war was over, they would be clean and bright, with everything freshly painted and flowers planted in the tubs.
And people going on seaside holidays would have forgotten how stations had once been larger than life, almost; places of meeting and parting, from which dusty, crowded trains had borne servicemen and women to who knew where.
The young soldier and his girl were soon to part.
Now, they smiled, standing with fingers entwined, bodies touching, and even when he left her the smile would remain and she would save her tears until his train was out of sight, trying not to think of the brave goodbye that might be their last.
Vi jerked back her shoulders.
She had whispered her own last goodbye at a Liverpool dockyard gate, though she had not known it.
Two months ago on an innocent  April afternoon, yet already she had lived through a lifetime of sorrow.
Now another life was about to begin, one in which she was no more than a surname and number, a woman who had lifted her hand in salute and sworn allegiance to King and country.
For as long as the war lasted, she would be a part of the Royal Navy and there could be no remembered yesterdays, no thoughts of tomorrow.
One day at a time was how it now must be, and this one day she was adrift, tired and hungry, with new flat-heeled shoes that hurt like hell.
Briefly she closed her eyes, mentally peeling off the scratchy black stockings, lowering her feet inch by beautiful inch into a bowl of cool water.
It made her think of bath night at Lyra Street; of the ritual carrying-in of the tub and filling it from pans and kettles set to boil on bright red coals.
Then the joys of Vinolia soap and towels hung to warm on the fireguard and flames dancing on her nakedness.
Seven Lyra Street.
All she had loved, wiped out in a second.
It was the reason she was here now, standing bemused in this ill-fitting uniform, black and white all over, like a penguin grown tall and lanky.
It was as if she stood in a noisy limbo; all the yesterdays had gone as if they had never been and all the tomorrows were no more than a tantalising promise.
It was why she was adrift with a travel warrant the RTO must stamp.
It was the cause of her sore toes and blistered heel and empty, aching stomach.
One vicious second, that was all it had taken.
Funny, really.
The RTO's office was a small prefabricated hut with a sign on the door that instructed her to knock and walk in.
Inside, it was lit by a single bulb wrapped round with a brown-paper shade and furnished with three wooden chairs and a counter on which stood two telephones and a litter of timetables and pads.
Its walls were almost covered  by official posters urging all who read them to Dig For Victory, Save For Victory, Resist The Squanderbug, Join The Wrens And Free A Man For The Fleet and remember that Careless Talk Costs Lives and Walls Have Ears .
From every small uncovered space, Mr Chad poked down his long nose to demand,Wot, no leave?
Wot, no fags ?— or beer or trains or anything else in short supply which, Vi supposed, was just about everything.
‘Just what do you mean, the London to Glasgow train terminated at Crewe?’ asked the leading hand of the two Wrens who stood at the counter.
‘Trains don't do that.’
‘This one did.
They told me to get off and try to get on the next train going north,’ protested the younger of the two, flushing pink.
‘Which happened to be my train,’ the tall blonde offered uneasily, ‘already two hours late from Plymouth.’
‘Which doubtless made you miss the Garvie Ferry connection,’ their inquisitor barked.
‘You're trying to pull a fast one, aren't you?
You've been skylarking somewhere!’
‘We haven't!
It was the train, truly it was!’
‘All right then, your train was delayed.
So what do you expect me to do about it?
Lay on a destroyer and escort?’
‘N-no.
We just thought you might okay one travel warrants.
We should have been at Ardneavie ages ago.’
‘So you should.’
He read the green documents with pleasure.
‘And you'll both be in the rattle when you get there, won't you?’
Vi studied the bright red anchor on the man's left sleeve.
A hook in naval slang, his badge of rank.
A very new hook and most probably the reason for his arrogance.
He had a mean little mouth, she thought dispassionately.
If she wasn't mistaken, someone above had just licked his backside and, true to naval tradition, he was passing the reprimand down.
But nobody had the right to be that  nasty; not even if his backside was black and blue.
He should pick on someone his own size, not two young kids who were near to tears.
‘But we couldn't help our train being late.
I thought you'd be able to put it right for us.’
‘Did you now?
And you know what thought did, don't you?
Mind, if you were to say please very nicely, I just might decide to stamp your warrants…’
‘Might you just!
Then you'd better decide to stamp mine while you're on with it!’
Vi had heard enough.
Elbowing her way to the counter, she slammed down her own piece of paper.
‘And be sharp about it!’
‘Hey!
Hold on there!’
The leading hand flushed dark red.
‘You wait your turn and speak when you're spoken to.
I'm dealing with these two at the moment.’
‘Well, from now on you're dealin' with me as well, so get stampin' or we'll miss the next train an’ all,’Vi hissed, meeting his gaze, preparing to stare him out.
‘Come on, mate.
Shift yourself.
There's a war on, or hasn't anybody told you?
And while you're about it, where can I get something to eat?’
‘There's a Church of Scotland canteen a couple of blocks down.’
Tight-lipped, the man stamped and initialled the three warrants, his eyes not leaving hers.
‘Thanks,’ she glared back.
‘Next train to Garvie leaves at midnight, doesn't it?’
‘Correct.
Get off at Garvie Quay.
The ferry'll be tied up alongside.
Overnight sailings are suspended for the duration but they'll let you go aboard.
Depart Garvie tomorrow morning, 0600 hours.
ETA Craigiebur Pier 0800 hours.’
He said it reluctantly, repeating it parrot-fashion.
‘All right?
Understood?’
‘Fine.
That's all we wanted, thanks.
Sorry to have put you out.’
Vi picked up the three warrants, her mouth pursing with disapproval.
‘No need to take it like that.
I was only having a bit of fun.’
‘There now.
Fun, was it?
Well, you could have fooled me, mate!’
With a final warming glare, Vi wished him goodnight, then threw open the door and marched out, head high.
Only then did she allow herself a smile.
‘Well, fancy 'im with the 'ook, pulling rank like that then?
Nasty little twerp.’
Her smile widened into a grin.
‘But how about you two?
All right, are you?’
‘Just about.’
The tall, fair girl smiled back.
‘He was giving us a bad time, though, till you came in.
I get the feeling he doesn't like Wrens.’
‘You could be right, queen.
Some sailors don't.
They think that women in the Navy are Jonahs — bad luck.
Or maybe he doesn't want freeing for the Fleet, eh?
But forget about little Hitler in there.
We've seen the last of him.’
Vi studied the warrants closely.
‘Now then, which one of you is Bainbridge, L. V.?’
‘That's me — Lucinda.’
‘And I'm Jane Kendal.’
‘Well, now.’
Vi handed back the warrants.
‘And I'm Vi'let, well,Vi .
And since it looks as if we're all goin' to the same place, why don't we take our kit to the left luggage then see if we can't find that canteen?’
‘Could we?
I'm starving ,’ Lucinda gasped.
‘They gave me sandwiches for the journey, but I left them on my bunk.’
‘And I shared mine with an ATS girl,’ Jane sighed.
‘I'm so hungry I feel dizzy.’
‘Right, then!’
Vi swung her respirator on to her left shoulder and pulled on her navy-blue woollen gloves.
‘There's nothin' wrong with any of us that a cup of hot tea and a ciggie won't put right.’
She smiled happily, her delight genuine.
Life had taken a turn for the better.
She  had found friends, and food and drink were only a couple of blocks away.
All in all, it wasn't such a bad old war.
The canteen was like a thousand others, run by unpaid volunteers and makeshift and bare, but the smile of the elderly helper was as bright as her flowered pinafore.
‘Three teas, please.’
Cautiously Vi eyed a plate of paste sandwiches.
‘And have you any — er, food?’
‘It's getting a bit late, but I think I can find you something a wee bit more filling.
How does hot pie and beans sound?’
It sounded nothing short of miraculous, and Vi ordered three.
‘That'll be one and sixpence, and sorry there's no sugar.
Our ration is used up and there's no more till Tuesday.
There's saccharin on the tables, though.’
Vi dug deep into the pocket of her broad canvas belt and placed three sixpenny pieces on the counter.
That was something else she would have to get used to, she supposed.
No purse.
No handbag either.
She smiled her thanks, and placing cups and plates on a large tin tray, bore them triumphantly to the table.
‘Aaah,’ breathed Lucinda.
‘Food,’ Jane murmured.
Vi sniffed appreciatively, her neglected stomach churning noisily.
The pies were round and flat, the pastry pale, their concave lids filled with beans in bright red sauce.
‘Aaah,’ Lucinda said again, impatiently sinking her knife into the pie crust, watching fascinated as hot brown gravy oozed out.
Blissfully she closed her eyes.
Nothing had ever tasted so good.
Not even after-theatre suppers at the Ritz with Charlie.
Eyes downcast, she ate without speaking, pausing only to smile at Vi.
How lucky she had been to meet Violet, but wasn't that the story of her life?
Hadn't there always been someone to make decisions for  her, smooth her path?
But she was on her own now.
Henceforth she must carry on from where she had started that momentous morning in Goddy's office.
Heady stuff, it had been.
That act of defiance warmed her even now, just thinking of it.
Triumphantly, she forked a straying bean.
Jane ate without pausing.
Hunger was an unknown experience; she had never imagined it could actually hurt.
And wasn't it wonderful to be here, actually here , in Rob's city.
Out there in the gathering darkness was the tenement where Rob had once lived with his mother and brothers.
How strange that from all the many places to which she might have been drafted, chance had come up with Ardneavie.
Two days ago she had stood in line in the drafting office at the training depot, wondering where she would be sent.
The Wren immediately before her was assigned to Appledore, in Devon; the one behind her to Aultbea, in the far north-west; but for Wren Kendal it had been HMS Omega and the Wrens' quarters at Ardneavie.
In Argyll, they told her.
Across the Firth of Clyde from Glasgow.
It was Fate.
It had to be.
Vi ate steadily, rhythmically, savouring every bite, looking around her at yet another facet of this, her strange new life.
Take this place, now — this green-walled, text-hung church hall where servicemen and women could sit out their loneliness for the price of a cup of tea.
A place where men snatched from those they cared for could write cheerful, loving letters with no word of their secret worries.
How would the rent be paid?
How would the children be fed and clothed, on Army pay?
Yet she, thought Vi, was as free as the air, with no home to worry about, no children to rear on a pittance as Mam had done.
From now on the windows she polished, the floors she swept, the cups and saucers and plates she washed would  not be her own.
It would have been too sad to think about had she not met two apprehensive Wrens: Lucinda and Jane, kids hardly out of their gymslips who would need a bit of looking after.
Count your blessings, Mam had always said, and she must never, ever forget it.
‘Hey, but that wasn't half good.’
She rubbed the last of her bread around her plate.
‘Better than a Sunday dinner, that was.’
‘Mm.
I feel almost human again.’
Lucinda took cigarettes and a lighter from the depths of her khaki drill respirator bag, and flicking open the expensive-looking case, handed them round.
‘I say, do you suppose they charged us enough?
Sixpence seems so little…’
‘I don't think they want to make a profit.’
Vi shrugged.
‘They open these canteens to help the war along.’
They were run by the women of a bombed city, most of whom had already lived through one war.
Women who had been forced, in the name of Victory, to return to work in shops and factories, yet still found time at the end of the day to brew tea and serve hot meat pies, and smile.
It made you proud, really, to belong to this daft, defiant little island.
‘Hullo there, girls!’
A soldier with the badge of the Gordon Highlanders shining on his cap leaned over, an unlit cigarette between his fingers.
‘Got a light, blondie?’
He winked broadly at Lucinda, who flicked her lighter and winked back.
‘Thanks, hen.’
‘My pleasure.’
The corners of Lucinda's mouth quirked up into a beaming smile as Vi watched, fascinated.
It was amazing, that quick, dancing smile of hers.
A sudden dart of sunlight ending in deep dimples, one on either cheek.
Lucinda was pretty, Vi acknowledged — chocolate-box pretty.
Not at all like sad-eyed Jane, whose hair glinted  auburn and who, one day, would be nothing less than beautiful.
‘Now then, tell me about yourselves.’
Vi wasn't nosey, she just liked people.
‘We're all goin' to Ardneavie, aren't we?
HMS Omega ?
I wonder what it's like.’
‘A shore station, I shouldn't wonder,’ Lucinda hazarded.
‘Well, I'm a sparker — a wireless telegraphist — and Jane's a coder, so it's got to be something to do with signals.
What's your category, Vi?’
‘General duties.’
Vi smiled.
‘I'm a steward.
Not a mess steward, though; more on the cleanin' side, I think it's goin' to be.
Where did you two meet up?
Trainin' depot, was it?’
‘No.
I did my training in London.’
‘And I,’ Lucinda offered, ‘learned the mysteries of the Morse code and the iniquities of squad drill at Plymouth signal school.
We met up at Crewe station.
Funny world, isn't it?’
‘Funny?’
Vi dropped a saccharin tablet into her tea, watching it rise, fizzing pale green, to the surface.
‘Y-yes, but I can't explain.’
She could have, Lucinda realized, but they would think her a little mad if she did.
How did you say you felt free for the first time in your life?
A strange freedom, though; one a barrage balloon would know if someone severed its cable and set it at liberty to wallow and wander at will.
Or until some high-flying fighter pilot fired a cannon shell into it and it fell, deflated, back to earth.
‘I suppose it's because joining up was something I had to do.
My family — my mother, especially — were totally against it.
Oh, I'd registered when I was eighteen, like everyone else.
But that was in Lincolnshire, where we were living at the time.
Then suddenly we had to leave for London, so I suppose the call-up people didn't know where I was.
I waited and waited, and my mother told me to leave well alone, that  the war would get on very nicely without my efforts.
W-e-ell…’
She paused.
No need to tell them about Charlie and getting married or the unholy row with Mama or the hell that was let loose when she told them she'd had her medical for the WRNS and if anyone tried to stop her going…
‘Well, I felt dreadful about it, and one morning I went to see my godfather at the Admiralty and begged him to get me into the Navy.
And so far, I haven't regretted a minute of it, not even today.
I shouldn't be grateful to the war,’ she said softly, cheeks flushing pink, ‘but I am.
Do you think me quite mad?’
‘No, queen, I know just how you feel.’
Vi nodded.
‘I came out of the shelter one mornin' and all I had was gone.
At first I couldn't believe it.
It was never goin' to happen to me.
To her across the street, perhaps, but not to me.
Then I got mad.
I cursed and blinded and I swore to get even…’
No need to tell them about Gerry.
Not yet.
Not ever, maybe.
‘…get even with big fat Hermann.
I went to the recruitin' office in a right old temper and I joined up there and then.
‘I'll do anything,’ I told them, and it wasn't till afterwards that I realized I'd done the right thing 'cos where else was I to go?
Only to our Mary's, and she didn't really have the room.
So I do know what you mean.’
Jane flicked cigarette ash into the upturned tin lid.
‘I-I suppose I'm glad to be here too.
I'm an only child, you see, and it gets a bit stifling sometimes.
I registered just after my eighteenth birthday and had my medical almost at once.
Then nothing happened.’
Not Rob.
Don't tell them about Rob.
They wouldn't understand.
They couldn't.
‘I really thought they'd forgotten me, lost my records  or something.
But my call-up papers came eventually.
Report to Mill Hill, London on the twenty-fifth of May, they said.
It was a relief, I suppose.
Fenton Bishop-that's where I live — is a one-street village where nothing happens.’
Not until the machines moved in to throw a great concrete runway across the fields, and buildings grew like mushrooms overnight and were camouflaged brown and black and green, and the bombers roared in, and Rob came…
‘I suppose,’ Jane whispered, ‘that I was glad, too.’
‘There now.’
Vi beamed.
‘Takes all sorts to make a world, dunnit?
Shall we have another cup of tea?
There's loads of time.’
‘I'll get them.’
Lucinda jumped to her feet, collecting cups, plates and cutlery together and placing them on the tray.
‘Anyone want anything else?’
‘No, ta.’
Vi wiggled her toes, wondering if she dared take off her shoes just for five minutes, to ease the throbbing, shooting pain.
But do that and she'd never get them on again, and she would arrive at Ardneavie not only late, but shoeless!
Jane ran her finger round her collar.
It was far too tight and chafing her neck.
How would she ever get used to wearing a tie?
And oh, the panic this morning when she lost a collar stud.
She must remember to buy a spare set.
Searching on hands and knees at the crack of dawn was not the best start to a day, especially a day like this one!
‘Tea up!’
Lucinda set down the cups, then, unbuttoning her jacket, sat down at the table, chin on hands.
‘Do you suppose we're ever going to feel comfortable in these uniforms?
I mean, one feels so awkward .’
‘Don't we all, queen?
It isn't as if they fit, either.’
‘And they're so fluffy ,’ Jane mourned.
‘I wonder how long it's going to take us to wear them smooth.’
‘Well, I wouldn't have minded, but they just threw mine at me when we were kitted out.
Look at this.
Miles too big.’
Lucinda rose dramatically to her feet, holding out her arms.
‘The length of these sleeves!
It looks as if I've got no hands.’
‘My skirt is miles too long.
Fourteen inches from the floor it's supposed to be, yet it's nearly tripping me.
What am I expected to do — grow into it?’
‘Oh, it'll be all right.
This get-up'll be quite smart, once we've had a go at it.’
Vi looked at her double-breasted, six-buttoned jacket.
Black buttons, anchor decorated.
Clever, that: no polishing.
A tuck here and there, perhaps, and a couple of inches off the length, and their skirts would be quite presentable.
And white shirts were very smart, really, and would look quite good when they had learned to cope with the board-stiff collars and not to knot their ties so tightly.
No, there was nothing wrong with their uniforms that couldn't be put right, as far as Vi was concerned.
The shoes, though, were altogether a different matter.
‘I think,’ she said sadly, ‘that I'm goin' to have trouble with me feet, though.
I should have been kitted out a week earlier but they'd got no shoes to fit me.
It's a terrible trial havin' big feet.’
‘I suppose it must be.’
Lucinda frowned.
‘Does it — er-run in the family, Vi?’
‘Nah.
It's because I never had no shoes till I was three.
Me feet just spread.
Y'know, I can remember the first time I wore them.
Mam got 'em from the nuns — you could get all sorts of things from the convent in them days.
Free, they were, and I can remember one of the Sisters putting them socks and shoes on me, and me yellin' and screamin' like mad and tryin' to take them off.
Then the weather got cold and I must've realized it was nice  havin' warm feet 'cos Mam said she never had no trouble with me after that.
But that's why I've got big feet.’
‘I don't like these woollen stockings,’ Jane pouted.
‘I've done nothing but itch since I got mine.’
‘And the underwear is a bit much,’ Lucinda added.
‘Pink cotton bras and suspender belts!’
She gave an exaggerated shudder.
‘And the knickers !’
Directoire knickers in navy-blue rayon with long, knee-reaching legs.
‘I thought they went out with Queen Victoria.
No wonder they're called blackouts .’
‘Or passion-killers.’
Jane giggled.
‘You're right.’
Vi grinned.
‘Imagine gettin' knocked down by a tram in the middle of Lime Street wearin' them things.
You'd never be able to look the ambulance men in the face, would you?
We're goin' to have to cut about six inches off them knicker legs.’
‘I suppose we'll get used to everything, in time,, Lucinda shrugged.
‘We feel awkward in uniform at the moment and a bit self-conscious.
And white shirts are hardly the thing for long train journeys.
All those black smuts from the engine, and the door handles covered in grime, and the dusty seats…’
‘You're right, queen.
We're fed-up and tired and we've missed our train, but it'll all come right, just see if it doesn't.
And at least we don't have to worry any more about what to wear.
What about the poor civilians, then?
They get the sticky end of the golden sceptre every time, don't they?’
‘Clothes rationing, you mean?,
‘Clothes rationin',’ Vi affirmed solemnly.
‘Imagine the Government doin' a thing like that, eh?’
It had happened suddenly, just three weeks ago.
The British public had opened its morning papers to the stark announcement that clothing and footwear were rationed.
Coupon values had been placed upon every conceivable  article, and henceforth it would be illegal to buy anything without surrendering the appropriate number of clothing coupons.
Briefly, it stated that sixty-six coupons had been considered adequate for normal use.
The bomb-shell exploded when it added that those sixty-six coupons must last for a whole year.
‘It is outrageous ,’ the Countess had written to her daughter.
‘How is one to be decently clothed when one must hand over sixteen coupons for a coat and five for a pair of shoes?
We shall all be in rags…’
‘It's fair, I suppose,’ Jane argued.
‘Clothes were getting very expensive and in short supply too.
Now everyone will at least get a fair share.’
‘But three whole coupons for a pair of silk stockings,’ Lucinda wailed.
‘My mother was always catching hers on her rings.
She went through any amount of stockings in a week.
She won't be able to do that now.’
‘She'll have to go without, then — or paint her legs, as it suggested in the magazine.
Gravy-browning is supposed to be good.’
‘Good grief!’
Mama bare-legged!
Lucinda shook with silent joy.
Gravy-browning?
But it really wasn't funny, come to think of it, since poor Pa would be the whipping boy for the silk stocking shortage.
One thing was certain, though.
Worrying about clothing coupons would at least make Mama forget the invasion for a while.
‘What's so funny?’
Vi demanded.
‘My mother.
Having to paint her legs.’
Lucinda's smile gave way to a throaty laugh.
‘But she'll find a way round it.’
She would, too.
Lady Kitty's wardrobes were crammed with clothes, and she would give those for which she had no further use to someone with little money — in exchange for some of their coupons, of course.
That it was against the law would not worry milady in the least.
The Countess  of Donnington upheld only those laws with which she agreed, and the rationing of footwear and clothing and the issuing of clothing coupons were not among them.
‘It'll be hard on my sister,’ Vi considered.
‘Got two kids, Mary has.
Just imagine —eight coupons for a pair of pyjamas and five for a blouse and seven for a skirt.
And you've even got to give up a coupon for two ounces of knitting wool as well.
I don't know how she'll manage.
Go without, herself, I shouldn't wonder.’
‘I suppose we're lucky, missing all that.’
Jane remembered the three pairs of London-tan stockings she had left behind her.
It was useless to try to hoard silk stockings, stated the women's magazines.
They deteriorated with time, and the only way to prolong their life was to store them carefully in airtight containers and only wear them on special occasions.
It was patriotic to go bare-legged, insisted fashion editors, whereupon almost the entire female population of the United Kingdom had wrapped their precious stockings in cellophane and placed them, sighing, in screw-topped jars in dark cupboards.
Furtively Jane scratched an itching calf.
Some women had all the luck.
To be stockingless at this moment, she thought fervently, would be nothing short of bliss.
The canteen began to empty.
The Gordon Highlanders had already left, the airmen from the corner table had hoisted kitbags to shoulders and gone their separate ways, and the soldier who had spent the entire evening writing letters called a goodnight and walked out into the darkness.
At the counter the elderly lady took off her pinafore and put on her coat.
‘I'm away to catch the last tram,’ she smiled.
‘The front door is locked now but the caretaker will let you out at the back, so you'll be welcome to stay for a wee while longer.
Good night, girls.
Take care of yourselves.’
‘I suppose we'd better all be making tracks,’ Vi murmured reluctantly.
‘All got our respirators?’
Lose a respirator and the cost was deductible from pay.
Respirators were a nuisance; it was a punishable offence for any member of the armed forces to be caught without one.
Respirators had to go everywhere with them, like the Ancient Mariner and his albatross.
‘Are you wanting away, ladies?’
A white-haired man limped ahead of them and opened a door at the rear of the room.
‘You'll take care in the blackout, now.’
‘We will.
We'll be fine, ta.’
Vi looked at the medal ribbons, proudly worn on the shabby jacket.
Earned in the last war, no doubt, and that stiff, awkward leg too.
They wished him good night, then stood a while, blinking in the darkness, listening to the slam of the door bolts.
The dense blackness lifted a little and they were able to pick out the skyline and the dim glow of white-edged pavements and white-ringed lampposts.
The blackout was complete.
Even torches had to be covered with paper and car headlights painted over, except for a small cross of light at their centres.
They would all be troglodytes before the war was over, thought Lucinda, with eyes that stood out on little stalks.
Ahead of them a match flared and a lighted cigarette glowed briefly like a small bright beacon, reminding them of streetlamps and bonfires and shop windows blazing with light.
One day those lights would go on again, but not just yet, Lucinda thought sadly.
‘It's very quiet, isn't it?’
Jane felt with the toe of her shoe for the kerb edge.
‘Was it this quiet when we came, Vi?’
‘Well, no, but it's late now, innit?
Past eleven, I shouldn't wonder.
Don't worry.
We'll soon be at the station, and it'll be noisy enough there.’
They walked carefully, staring ahead into the night.
‘Did we pass a row of dustbins on the way here?’
‘Don't know.
Don't remember any,’ Vi admitted dubiously.
‘No more did I. I hope I'm wrong but I — I think we're going the wrong way.’
‘What makes you say that?’
True, it had been reasonably light when they left the station, and Glasgow, its war scars softened by the approaching night, had seemed like Liverpool to Vi.
Here, too, were boarded-up shopfronts and sandbagged doorways.
Here, as in her own city, bomb-ravaged buildings stood stark against the glow of a sinking sun, strangely, tragically beautiful.
But now the sameness was gone.
These were not the streets and alleys Vi knew and felt easy in.
Here were unexpected turnings she could not recognize; and there was something else, she thought, suddenly apprehensive.
‘When we left the station, do you remember any trams?’
‘Yes, one.’
Lucinda frowned.
‘Going in the opposite direction, but I haven't heard any lately.’
‘Well, you wouldn't.
Not now.
Don't you remember the canteen lady leaving to get the last tram?’
‘Yes, queen, I do.
But take a look at that road.
No tramlines there.’
‘Then we're lost,’ Lucinda said flatly.
‘It's because we left by the back door.
We went the wrong way, I suppose.
It's easy enough in the blackout.
I suppose now we've either got to cut through the next side street we come to and try to get to the main road, or turn round and find the canteen and start again.’
It would be better, they decided, to retrace their steps and find the door by which they had left.
That way, they would know exactly where they were, and this time, if they turned right, then right again, they would be on course for the station.
They must be.
‘Stupid, innit, the way you can lose your way in the dark, 'specially in a strange place?’
‘Hmm.
I wonder what travellers did hundreds of years ago when there were no proper roads and no streetlights or signposts?’
‘They spent the night at an inn, if they'd any sense.’
Lucinda laughed.
A nervous laugh, because she was beginning to feel uneasy.
And everything was too quiet, though it was an accepted fact that if one stood very still in the blackout and listened intently, there were always footsteps out there, somewhere.
Or the intimate glow of two cigarettes and the soft, low laughter of unseen lovers.
‘Well we,’ said Vi firmly, ‘are goin' to spend the night on the Craigiebur ferry, all nice and comfortable, and we'll be at Ardneavie in time for breakfast.
So let's get it right this time, eh?’
They did not find the canteen, nor any building like it, nor any doorway that even vaguely resembled the one through which they had left.
‘We've got ourselves lost,’ Vi said.
‘That's what we've gone and done.’
Around them the darkness was absolute, the silence oppressive.
It pressed in on them from all sides, menacing, frightening.
‘What do we do now?’
Jane whispered, her mouth suddenly dry.
‘Do you suppose that if we stood still and listened, we might hear someone?
Well,’ Lucinda shrugged, ‘they say you're never alone in the blackout, even though you can't actually see anyone.’
‘Ar, hey,’ Vi said uneasily, ‘don't be saying that, queen.
It's a pity we can't see the street names, though I don't suppose it would do us a lot of good if we could — well, not without a street map.’
‘Then let's stand still for a little while and listen.
Someone is bound to come this way eventually.’
‘Or we could try keeping going.
Maybe that way we'll hit civilization.’
‘I think we should stand here,’ Vi decided.
‘Stay still and listen and try not to panic.’
‘Quiet!’
It was Jane who heard the footsteps first, and they stood unmoving, ears straining, hardly breathing.
‘Yes!’ gasped Lucinda.
Heavy footsteps, coming nearer, slow and measured.
‘I think it's a man,’ Vi whispered, ‘but don't worry.
There's three of us and only one of him.’
‘Shall I call out?’
Lucinda asked.
‘Okay.
Or maybe a whistle would be better.’
‘Right.’
Lucinda ran her tongue round her suddenly dry lips and let out a long, slow whistle.
‘Hullo?
Anybody there?’
They waited, breath indrawn, but there was no answering whistle, no reassuring call.
And now the footsteps had stopped.
‘Where is he?’
Jane demanded.
‘Probably surrounding us.’
‘Now listen, don't be worryin'.
I don't know what he's doin', but if the worst comes to the worst, scream for all you're worth.
It puts 'em off, does screamin,.’
‘Never mind about him ,’ Jane choked.
‘What about the time!,
‘Oh, Lord!’
Lucinda flicked her lighter.
‘The train!’
‘Get that light out!’
The voice was deep and masculine.
‘It's him!’
Vi gasped.
‘Try again.’
Lucinda held the lighter above her head and flicked it again.
‘Help us!
We're lost!’
‘Okay.
Stay there.’
The voice was nearer now, the footfalls heavier, quicker.
‘And put that light out !’
He came suddenly out of the blackness, looming large above them.
‘Who is it?’
Vi demanded.
‘Police.’
Briefly he shone a torch on his face and they glimpsed a uniform and the black and white chequered band around his cap.
Then he shone the light on them, laughing softly.
‘Well now, if it isn't three wee Wrens.’
‘Thank goodness you've come, officer.
We're lost and we've got to get back to the station.’
Lucinda's relief was obvious.
‘Now which station would that be?’
‘Central.
And our train leaves at midnight.
Can you tell us how we get there?
A short cut, perhaps.’
‘Short cuts, is it?
Are you no lost enough already?
No, no.
Best you stay with me till we get to Argyle Street-you'll no be able to miss the station then.’
‘Is it far?’
Vi was anxious.
‘Och, no.
You'll soon be there.
Just follow me and mind your step.’
They followed him blindly, hands clasped, until he called to them to stop.
‘There now, this is where I leave you.
Here's the Queen Street corner, and you just turn right and keep going full steam ahead.
The station's no far.’
He stood listening to their uncertain footsteps, shaking his head as the night closed in around them.
What was this war coming to and where would it all end when they were taking on lassies to help fight it?
Aye, and lassies who couldn't walk a few hundred yards without getting themselves lost.
And as for that train — he shone his torch on the watch at his wrist.
Well, they'd missed that, and no mistake.
Dearie me, he chuckled out loud, where would it all end?
The policeman was right, Vi brooded.
It hadn't taken them long, but she knew instinctively as they hurried into the hollow gloom of the station that they had missed yet another train.
‘Flippin' heck,’ she hissed.
‘Twenty past twelve!’
‘Maybe it's still there,’ Lucinda panted as they retrieved their kit and heaved it, gasping, to platform 8.
‘An’ maybe pigs'll start flyin',’Vi snapped.
‘I mean, miss one train — that's fair enough; but two ?’
‘Bordering on carelessness, I'd say.’
Lucinda nodded soberly.
‘Not to mention what's going to happen when we get there.
If ever we do, that is.’
‘That's it, then.’
Morosely they regarded the deserted platform.
‘The next train leaves at six for the eight o'clock ferry.
Six in the mornin', that is.’
‘Then I suppose it's the RTO again,’ Lucinda ventured.
‘You what ?’
Vi exploded.
‘Face 'im with the 'ook again?
Tell 'im we got lost in the blackout?
Oh, that'd make 'is day, that would.
‘Been to the ale house, 'ave yer?’ that's what he'd say.
We'd be in the rattle before you could say wet Nelly!’
‘You're right.
I suppose they only okay your warrant if you're late through no fault of your own.’
Jane shrugged.
‘Getting lost isn't exactly an act of God, is it?’
‘No it isn't.
It's plain bloody stupid.’
‘Then we're in trouble.’
‘We are.
Up to the ear-'oles in it.
We'd better think up an excuse.
It'll 'ave to be good, so don't come up with something like us all bein' knocked down by a herd of stampedin' giraffes.’
‘Or attacked by a plague of locusts?’
‘Hey, Jane.
Tell yer funny friend that locusts isn't valid neither,’ Vi retorted, pan-faced.
‘Come on, queen.
Get thinkin'.’
‘Then seriously, how about an air raid?
No bombs, of course— they could easily check up on bombs — just an alert, so we'd all be forced to find a shelter.’
‘Sounds good.
About eleven o'clock, would you say?’
‘That's it.’
Vi nodded.
‘That's just about right.
And by the time the all clear went, the train had gone.
Okay?’
‘But would a train be allowed to leave during an alert?’
Lucinda frowned.
‘Wouldn't it have to stay in the station?’
‘Ar, hey, Lucinda, whose side are you on?’
Vi demanded.
‘Sorry.
Just a thought.’
‘Well, like ‘im with the ‘ook said, you know what thought did, don't you?
No, it's got to be an alert, and if we all keep to the same story we might just get away with it.
We'll get it all worked out and one of us'll do the talkin', all right?
Stick together, eh?’
‘Like the Three Musketeers, you mean?,
‘The three wot ?
Who the 'ell are they, when they're at 'ome?’
‘Were .
Three soldiers; figments of fiction.’
‘Imaginary, sort of?’
‘That's it.
Three inseparable friends.’
Lucinda smiled.
‘They stuck together through thick and thin.
One for all and all for one.
Rather like us, I'd say.’
‘Mmm.
Like us.’
The idea pleased Vi and she smiled broadly.
‘Well then, since it was my fault we missed the train again, it'd better be me who does the talkin' when we get there.
You two'll just have to stand behind me and nod your 'eads.’
‘But Vi —’
‘No buts.
I'm the biggest and the oldest.
No more to be said.
Now, let's grab that bench.
If we stay there all night we can't miss the next train, can we?’
‘Want to bet?’
Lucinda liked Vi McKeown.
Vi had what Goddy would call a defiant set to her jib.
It would be really rather nice, she thought as she picked up her cases  for the fiftieth time that day, if they could all stay together, though it was hardly likely.
They didn't do nice things like that.
They .
The faceless ones who spoke with the omnipotent voice of authority and who, for the duration of hostilities, would be obeyed without question.
It would be all right, Jane thought without conviction.
Surely it would all come right.
It wasn't that she doubted that the Allies would win — of course they would.
But where and when would it all end?
Years and years and years it would take.
‘Now then, young Kendal.
Don't look so miserable!’
‘Sorry, Vi.
I didn't mean to.
I was just wondering how
long it's going to be before it's all over and we can go home.’
‘Not long.’
Vi beamed.
‘Now that us three's in the Navy it'll be over by Christmas!’
‘Bless you, Vi.
I shouldn't have said that, should I?’
‘You say what you like, queen.
It's still a free country, innit?
We're all a bit fed up, but it'll pass.
It's like Mam used to tell me.
‘Nothing lasts, our Vi.
Good times nor bad times nothing lasts.’
An' she was right.
Tomorrow night we'll be laughin' our 'eads off about all this.’
‘Of course we will,’ Lucinda whispered.
‘And let's all try like mad to stay together, shall we?’
‘Like them Musketeers, you mean?,
‘Like them.’
‘Right, then.
All for one!
Let's grab that bench.
We'll soon be on one way.
Not long to wait.
Five hours'll soon pass.’
But contrary to Vi McKeown's shining optimism, that night was the most uncomfortable any of them could remember.
Not only were they the longest hours they had ever been called upon to endure, but the coldest.
‘You wouldn't think it was June.’
Jane shrugged into  her greatcoat then spread her raincoat over her knees.
‘I'd give anything for a cup of tea.
Anything .’
‘Then let's all close our eyes and wish like mad for the WVS lady and her trolley to materialize right here in front of us like a dear little fat fairy.’
But of fat fairies bearing hot sweet tea there was never a sign and the fingers of the station clock jerked away the minutes with maddening languor, the tedium of their watch being broken only by the intermittent arrivals and departure of train.
‘I wonder,’ Vi frowned, ‘where that lot'll end up, poor sods.’
They were watching the departure of a troop train from an adjoining platform.
The soldiers, laden with packs, had arrived in trucks, and at-the-double feet quickly formed into orderly ranks before disappearing into the unlit interiors of a dozen carriages.
Sergeants rapped out indecipherable commands, corporals checked kitbags and wooden crates and boxes into the luggage vans, stamped their feet and saluted their officers smartly.
Then the engine belched smoke and steam and pulled reluctantly away from the platform.
‘Ships that pass,’ Jane murmured.
‘Think they're going abroad?’
‘Suppose so.
Going down river to Greenock, I shouldn't wonder.
Probably to a troopship…’
‘Where d'you imagine they'll end up?’
‘Middle East, perhaps.
Or maybe the Far East: Hong Kong, Shanghai, Burma…
Would you ever volunteer for overseas, Vi?,
‘Dunno.’
Mentally, as was her considered duty, Vi blessed the receding train, commending its occupants to the care of St Christopher.
‘Ask me tomorrow when I've got some food inside me.
Now you two try to get some sleep and I'll keep me eyes on that platform.
We don't  want that train creepin' in and creepin' out again while nobody's lookin'.’
She reached out and pulled them to her in a protective motherly gesture.
‘Close your eyes, now.
God bless.
And don't worry.
It'll all come right, just see if it doesn't.’
It was 5.30 A.M. and a new day had begun.
Vi stretched her cold legs and rotated her ankles.
Her feet still hurt and she felt the tingle of cramp in her right arm where Jane's head rested heavily.
Poor kids.
They'd fallen asleep, a head on each shoulder and she was determined to leave them like that for as long as she could.
Not for a long time had Vi felt so uncomfortable.
She was cold and unwashed and hunger pangs were beginning to gnaw again.
But the train would soon be arriving and then they'd
‘Paper!’
A sudden commotion behind her caused her to start as a voice called urgently, stridently, ‘Special edition.
Paper!’
Vi twisted her head then stared, eyes wide, at the newsboy's billboard.
‘Mother of God!’
Sleepers forgotten, she jumped to her feet and read the word again.
It was written large and thick in bright red ink and it sent a shock of fear slicing through her.
‘Will you look at that !’
‘Sorry.’
Jane rose unsteadily to her feet.
‘Been asleep.
Didn't mean to…’
‘Never mind about sorry.’
Impatiently Vi shook Lucinda's arm.
‘Look at that, for Pete's sake!’
There was no mistaking the word.
Even in their befuddled state its meaning was frighteningly explicit.
‘Invasion .’
Jane's lips formed the word but no sound came.
‘Dear God,no .’
This was it, then.
Just when everyone was beginning to believe it would never come.
‘I'm goin' for a paper.’
Vi ran to the paper-seller, digging into her pocket for a penny, shaking open the newspaper with agitated hands.
‘RUSSIA ATTACKED ON 1,8000 MILE FRONT’, screamed the headlines.
‘SOVIET TOWNS AND PORTS BOMBED’.
‘Listen, you two.’
Vi began to read, her voice strained with disbelief.
‘At dawn on Sunday, 22 June, between 3 and 3.30 in the morning, three million German troops marched into Russia…’ ''
‘Russia?’
Jane gasped.
‘They've invaded Russia ?’
‘That's what it says, queen.’
‘But didn't they sign a pact, or something?’
‘Since when have pacts meant anything to Hitler?’
Instantly they were wide awake.
Suddenly, discomfort forgotten, relief sang through them.
Hitler had taken on the mysterious Soviets, but why had he chosen to invade Russia and not the British Isles?
‘I suppose that lets us off the hook,’ Lucinda offered.
‘Well, for the time being.’
‘And maybe just this once Hitler won't get it all his own way.
Remember what happened to Napoleon.’
‘Those Russians probably don't know yet what's hit them.
But how much do we know about them, anyway?’
Lucinda frowned.
‘How many troops do they have and how many tanks and guns?
I mean, it's not all that long since they threw out the Tsar, is it.
It's dreadful for them, and it might just as easily have been us.
I suppose they'll be on our side now.’
‘Suppose they will,’ Vi agreed.
Then her lips broke into a beaming smile.
‘Just take a look at that .’
The 6 A.M. Glasgow to Garvie train approached platform 8 gently, apologetically almost, then came to a stop with a squealing of brakes and a hiss of escaping steam, and they looked at it with wide-eyed wonder.
‘It's come,’ breathed Vi and so disbelieving was she that  she checked its very existence with the engine driver and his black-faced fireman.
‘This is the Craigiebur Ferry train?’
It was indeed, said the driver, and it would arrive at Garvie at 7.40 for the eight o'clock ferry.
‘I don't believe it,’ Jane gasped as they piled cases, coats and respirators on to the luggage rack.
‘I do not believe it.’
‘You know what's going to happen?’
The corners of Lucinda's mouth tilted mischievously.
‘This train won't leave on time as the last two did, and we'll miss the ferry.’
‘Ar, hey, Lucinda.
You've got a funny sense of humour,’ Vi wailed.
‘If we miss that ferry again I'll shoot myself, honest to God I will!’
‘Me too.
I feel awful,’ Jane sniffed.
‘I'm hungry and tired and my collar's choking me.
And my shirt is filthy and I'm filthy, and if I don't get a bath soon I'll start to smell!,
‘Then we'd all better close our eyes and think not of Victory but of hot water and soap and bathsalts and soft warm towels.’
‘And mugs of tea,’ Vi croaked, ‘and a plate of bacon butties.’
A woman guard slammed the door of their compartment, blew hard on her whistle and waved her green flag.
Slowly the train began to move and bumper met bumper, clink-clanking the length of the train.
Then the 6 A.M. Garvie connection drew slowly away, carrying with it Wrens Bainbridge, Kendal and McKeown.
It seemed like a small, sweet miracle.
Leaning back, they closed their eyes and thought of hot water and soap and bacon sandwiches and mugs of tea.
What might happen when eventually they arrived at Wrens' Quarters, Ardneavie, mattered little.
They had caught the train at last, and beyond that not one of them was able to think.
‘You're adrift!
You should've been here yesterday fore.
noon,’ rapped an irate Chief Wren.
‘And you're dirty and sloppy and you look as if you've been dragged backwards through a hedge, the lot of you!
Where in heaven's name have you been until now?’
‘We've been comin', Chief.
As fast as we could.’
Vi took a step forward, assuming command.
‘I met up with these two on Glasgow station.
They'd missed the connection, too.
Sorry, Chief.
The trains were shockin'.’
as if she had no part in the conversation, Jane gazed around her.
This regulating office was small, and unlike its bare, efficient counterpart at the training depot, was homely and almost feminine.
On either side of the Victorian fireplace with its flower-filled hearth stood an easy chair.
There were even pictures of ships and groups of Wrens on the walls.
‘How shocking?’
‘Well, take Kendal 'ere.’
Vi jabbed a thumb.
‘Now her train just stopped at Crewe.
Goin' no further, they said.’
Lucinda glanced from Vi to Chief Wren Pillmoor, wondering who would be the victor.
Vi had the situation under control but the chief could, and probably would, pull rank.
She looked like a lady who was used to getting her own way, Lucinda considered.
And those eyelashes!
They were longer than Mama's and Mama's were false.
Chief Pillmoor's eyelashes were nothing short of magnificent, and thick and spiky as a stableyard brush.
‘I see.
And Bainbridge?’
‘Bainbridge's train was late, an’ all.
Four hours late into Glasgow.
It's the bombin', see?’
‘And you missed not only the 8 P.M. train but the next one, too?’
Chief Pillmoor's eyebrows winged upwards questioningly.
‘Ah, well.
Yes.
We were all starvin', Chief, so we went to this canteen.
That's when the sirens went and we had  to go to the shelter.
And by the time we got the all clear, the midnight train had gone, too.
We waited on the station all night and it was perishin'.
But it's the war,’ she added without guile, and because the chief had taken a liking to the woman with the thick Liverpool accent who met her gaze without flinching, she told them to cut along to the galley; if they were lucky they might just make standeasy.
Never had three Wren ratings moved with such swiftness, drawn by the tantalizing promise of hot tea.
They had made it.
They had arrived at their given destination, had ridden out the Chief Wren's wrath, and tea — and toast, too, if their noses were to be believed — were within blessed reach.
Hopes high again, they tapped on the galley door.
‘Well, what d'you know, girls?
We did it.’
Gently Vi eased off her shoes, wriggled her toes, then stood for a blissful moment, eyes closed.
‘An’ we're stayin' together, too.
Smashin', innit?’
Around them lay the litter of kit they had carried to the very top of the big old house; to cabin 9, their strange bare room.
They gazed without emotion at three black-painted iron bedsteads piled with folded blankets and sheets, at the familiar blue and white anchor-decorated bedcovers and the essential thick black curtains at the window.
This, then, was their home for as long as the war lasted.
For the duration.
‘At least we've got beds and not bunks.’
‘Yes, and it's nice and quiet up here.’
‘It's luv'ly.
Let's get our beds made up and do our unpackin'.
Who wants which bed, or doesn't it matter?’
It did not matter, nor which chest of drawers belonged to whom.
Midday meal would be at 1230 hours, and they had been told they were excused duties for the remainder  of the day.
What lay beyond they had no inclination to contemplate.
‘Cheer up.
The worst's over.
This billet's goin' to be all right,’ Vi urged.
Already she had inspected the house that stood on the edge of the sea loch.
‘I was talkin' to a girl in the galley.
Seems they leave you alone here to get on with it.
No more polishin' or drillin' or kit inspection — well, only once a month.
And two late passes a week and when you've had those you can get in through the pantry window if the front door's been locked.’
Although Chief Pillmoor wasn't everybody's cup of tea, Vi had discovered, at least the lady was fair and had no favourites.
She gazed with compassion at the two dejected figures.
Their eyes were dark-ringed, their faces pale and their hair lay dull and uncurled.
Kids, that's all they were and in need of a bit of looking-after.
Neither was wearing a ring, but that was nothing to go by.
Hadn't she taken off her own wedding ring and hung it around her neck with her red identity tag and the St Christopher medal Father O'Flaherty had given her?
No rings, no questions, Vi had decided.
‘It'll be fine here,’ she beamed.
‘Just see if it isn't.
And we'll all feel better when we've had a bath and a decent night's sleep.’
Vi had a roof over her head again, bed and board and two shillings a day pay, and, better than that, she had found someone to mother.
The woman from Liverpool was happy.
Well, near-as-damn-it happy.
‘They've arrived, Ma'am.’
Chief Wren Pillmoor placed three sets of official documents on the officer's desk.
‘Railways still in a mess after the air raids — they were so delayed they missed the last ferry connection.
Spent the night on Glasgow station, it would seem.’
‘Oh dear, I hope they're none the worse?’
Third Officer Suzie St John was genuinely concerned.
‘A bit travel weary but otherwise okay, Ma'am.
Bainbridge, Kendal and McKeown.
Two C of E and a Roman Catholic.
I've put them in cabin 9, next door to the boat's-crew lot.
McKeown is the steward we've been expecting and the other two will be working on the ship.
They're all three going to see Sister this afternoon.
No problems, that I can see.’
Suzie St John sighed her relief.
She was charming and gentle and life had not fitted her to cope with the forty assorted females now in her care.
Thus she was constantly grateful for the unfailing vigilance and support of her Chief Wren.
‘Time for a drink before lunch, Pat?’
‘Thanks, love.
Sherry, please.’
Formalities over, Patricia Pillmoor drew out a chair, pulled off her hat and settled down for a chat.
About Russia, of course.
Indeed, there could be no other topic of conversation since it had hit them like a bomb-blast on the early-morning news bulletin.
A hundred divisions pouring across the frontier.
Russia invaded by Germany, the non-aggression pact between them counting for nothing.
Amazing, when you thought about it, but it was turning out to be an amazing war.
And one thing was certain.
There would be no invasion of the British Isles, now.
Chief Pillmoor raised her glass.
‘Cheers.’
She smiled.
‘Anything new on the wireless about Russia?’
The dying sun turned the hills that ringed Loch Ardneavie from green to misty grey, and trees cast long purple shadows.
The new occupants of cabin 9 were tired, yet sleep did not come.
Lucinda lay, gazing upward, thinking about her mother so far away in London and about last night's misfortune, which would have pleased the Countess greatly: three miserable women spending the night on a hard station bench.
‘There you are, I said no good would come of it.
Sneaking off and joining up as if this war were some marvellous crusade,’ Mama would have said.
‘It would seem that you can't even get yourself from A to B without making a mess of it.
But if you'd listened to me, you'd be married to Charles now and doing your duty as a good wife should!’
Poor Charlie.
He had protested strongly when her call-up papers came.
Clever old Goddy, she thought, but Charlie was quite put out.
‘The Wrens , Lucinda?
But the Bainbridges always go into the Army,’ but he had forgiven her, eventually, when she promised to try to take her leave when he took his.
‘They usually let you do it,’ he'd told her, ‘if you're engaged or married.
Tell them it's on compassionate grounds, and you'll get away with it all right.
You really ought to be wearing a ring, Lucinda.
Surely there's something, somewhere, to fit you.’
Indeed there was.
Lying in the bank in a strongbox; several Bainbridge rings, in fact.
There was even the ruby the first earl gave his wife to celebrate the title bestowed  by James Stuart in 1604, but she would have liked a ring.
Lucinda brooded, of her very own; a dainty diamond cluster she and Charlie had chosen together.
Something new, and hers alone.
That, probably, was why her left hand remained bare and the date of their wedding still uncertain.
A little romance, she sighed, might just have
tipped the scales.
But she really must send Charlie her new address and tell him how peculiar it all was; about the strange customs, still revered because Nelson had established them; about rooms which were now cabins, walls which had become bulkheads and a kitchen she must now call a galley.
And the saluting was beyond belief.
One saluted everyone and everything, even the quarterdeck, the moment one set foot on it.
She supposed she would have to salute Charlie now.
And one didn't go to work, one went on watch; pulling the blackout curtains was called darkening ship; and no one went to the lavatory, they went to the heads !
Yes, she must write a long loving letter to Charlie.
Tomorrow.
Vi said her rosary then prayed for Gerry's soul.
It still bothered her that she should feel so contented with her new life when Gerry was dead.
I miss you, lad.
I need to tell you about yesterday, meeting Jane and Lucinda, and about Ardneavie House.
It's smashing here, Gerry.
No sirens or bombs, and a lovely garden, full of flowers.
Ardneavie House is big — at least ten bedrooms — and Lucinda and Jane and me are on the top floor with the boat's-crew Wrens.
Just them and us, up here in the roof, and a storeroom and a bathroom.
The bathroom's lovely, Gerry.
Hot water in the taps, log of it.
No boiling kettles and lugging the bath in from the yard.
This house belonged to a shipyard owner, but the Navy took it from him for the duration and now it's a hostel for Wrens.
I suppose that man had servants.
They'd  there's a little back staircase that goes down to the kitchens —sorry, lad , galley!
And all the rooms have big windows.
You can look out and see hills and trees and not another house in sight.
There's this big depot ship in the loch and it's got a flotilla of submarines …
Submarines.
It had shocked Vi to realize that her own side fought every bit as dirty as the Germans and that German seamen were torpedoed, too.
Her first sight of a submarine had brought back the pain of Gerry's death and she'd had to tell herself that those in the loch were ours , so they couldn't be all that bad.
Strange, how easy it had been to accept the harshness of the training depot and the lessons she had learned.
Never to volunteer for anything, for instance; to keep her bedspace clean and tidy; never, ever, to forget the eleventh commandment,Thou shall not get found out ; and if you were prepared to agree that every word of King's Regulations was Holy Writ and accepted that leave was a privilege and not a right, then life in the Navy needn't be all that bad.
The time to start worrying, she supposed, was when the war was over and they were all sent home-for where was home, now?
…
I miss you, Gerry.
I think about you always and I pray for you.
I won't ever forget you, lad; not while I live and breathe, I won't.
And am sorry about my ring, but it's best I don't wear it.
I can't have people ask me where my husband is.
It would hurt too much.
I've never been able to say rum a widow.
I know it inside me but I can't say it out loud; not yet, Gerry.
Goodnight, lad.
I'm fine, honest to God I am.
Don't worry about me…
Vi punched her pillow and stuck her face into it.
Oh, damn all this killing.
Why did men have to do it?
Why ?
Almost dark now, and the bombers would be taking off from Fenton Bishop, heaving and thrashing into the air, into the same sun that had reddened Loch Ardneavie.
How long would it be, Jane demanded silently of the darkness, before she was able to speak of Rob or think of Rob and not weep inside her?
It was nearly two months since her call-up papers had come; two months since S-Sugar had not come back.
She had been angry at first, then disbelieving, but finally she had gone to the aerodrome to see the padre, begging him for news of Rob.
‘I'm not his next of kin, you see, and I never knew exactly where he lived.
I want to write to his mother.
Can you get her address for me?’
But such things were confidential, said the padre.
He was evasive about Rob too; almost as if he hadn't wanted to talk about him.
‘Try to forget, my dear,’ he had said.
‘Accept that it must end.’
That was when she first realized that to lose someone you love is not to feel instant separation.
Rather it is first like a hopeless drifting, a little apart from the world, afraid and unwilling to reach out and ask for help.
That day, in the padre's little room, she accepted it was best she should be leaving Fenton Bishop, best she should be away from the sight of the uniform Rob had worn and the constant sound of aircraft.
She wanted to be a number, to dress exactly as the other numbers dressed, to be nothing and no one.
That same night she had gone to Yeoman's Lane for the last time, accepting without pain that she had thought their love was untouchable, yet now it was as if it had never been.
Now, that loving counted for nothing and all the sweet promises they had made were empty words that floated like echoes in a great grey void.
Tomorrow's promises they had been, and tomorrow never came.
‘I can't come here again, Rob,’ she had whispered, dry-eyed.
‘Tomorrow I am going away…’
‘You awake, Lucinda?’
Midnight, and sleep still evaded Vi.
‘Afraid so.
I must be too tired, I suppose.
I was thinking about home, actually.’
‘Where's home?’
‘Lincolnshire, really, though we live in London now,’ she whispered into the darkness.
‘But I love Lincolnshire and Lady Mead — that's the house I grew up in.
We lived near Donnington on Bain, right in the country.
Too beautiful.
I wish I could go back there.’
‘You shouldn't have left it, queen.’
‘Had to, Vi.
The Air Force requisitioned it.
Lincolnshire is a flat county, you see, exactly right for aerodromes, and they took our house for the airmen, I suppose.
I'd love to see it again, though I think Mama won't ever go back there.
But Lady Mead will be Charlie's one day, so I'll make it, eventually.’
‘Charlie's your brother, is he?’
‘My cousin.
I don't have a brother, that's why Charlie will inherit.’
‘Inherit?’
Vi was instantly alert.
‘You rich or somethin'?’
‘Not really.
We've got plenty of things — goods and chattels and land — but very little money because we can't sell anything.
Something to do with entail, you see.’
Vi did not see, but people who inherited things intrigued her.
‘If you like that house so much,’ she demanded bluntly, ‘won't it make you mad to see your cousin get it?’
‘Oh, no.
I'm going to marry him, you see.’
‘Just to get an 'ouse?
But you love him, don't you?’
‘Of course I love him.’
Of course she did.
She always  had.
Well, almost always.
She hadn't liked him very much that night on the sofa.
‘But what about you, Vi?
Who do you love?,
‘I — I don't have nobody.’
Sorry, Gerry .
‘Free as the air, I am.
Got no things, neither.
They was all bombed in the May blitz.’
Just two crystal goblets in a drawer in Mary's sideboard.
‘But you do want to get married, Vi?
Every woman wants her own home, and babies.’
‘Homes get bombed and babies need shoes and clothes and food.
You can't rear a baby on love and fair words.’
Why had she started this conversation?
She didn't want to talk about her other life.
Her wound had gone deep and she wasn't ready, yet, for the knife to be turned.
‘What about you, Jane?
You got a boyfriend, eh?’
‘She's asleep,’ Lucinda whispered.
‘Lucky so and so.’
Jane Kendal was not asleep.
It was seven o'clock and she was in Tingle's Wood, waiting for Rob.
And it was all a mistake about his being missing because he was there now, at the perimeter fence, smiling his lovely smile, saying ‘Hullo, Jenny.’
It was her favourite fantasy.
It sustained her when the pain inside her became near-unbearable, and it was not for sharing.
Morning came, silver and gold, with sunlight that skimmed the surface of the loch and gilded the poppies and roses in the garden at Ardneavie.
On either side of the lane that led to the jetty, creamy-white elderflowers scented the morning air and pale pink clover and forget-me-nots grew thickly, scorning the war, denying its existence.
‘Did you remember,’ Jane asked, ‘that this is Midsum-mer Day?’
‘Damn!
And I should have remembered to dance barefoot through the dew and bow to the rising sun.’
‘Be serious.
Aren't you feeling scared?
I know I am.’
They were standing on the jetty with a score of chattering women, waiting for the launch that would take them to the depot ship Omega .
‘Nervous?
I feel sick, Jane.
Positively sick .
I mean, what if I miss a signal?
What if the man on the other end transmits too quickly and I can't keep up with him?
They do, you know.
Some of those operators are stingo.
Oh, it was fine at wireless school.
Mistakes didn't matter so much, but now — well, it's for real, isn't it, and maybe lives depending on me.
Wish I didn't have to go on watch.’
‘You'll be all right.
We both will.
We can only do our best.
They can't put us against a wall and shoot us if —’
‘Hullo.
You're the new girls, aren't you?
They said you'd be coming.
Bainbridge and Kendal, isn't it?
I'm Molly Malone,Mary , really, but with a name like Malone…’
The Wren who introduced herself was slim and smart in a uniform which fitted her perfectly.
She had a wide smile, a freckle-dusted nose and a distinctly Irish accent.
‘I work in the teleprinter room in the CCO.
Like to come on board with me?’
‘Please.
We feel very strange.’
Lucinda forced a smile.
‘CCO — that's central communications office, isn't it?’
‘It is, and it all goes on there: wireless, coding, decoding, signal distribution.
We like to think we're indispensable, that the flotilla couldn't manage without us.
Our submarines are all operational, you see, except for a couple of recent arrivals that are working up; new boats getting a crew together, that is, doing sea trials and dummy runs with torpedoes.
The CCO looks after submarines at sea and keeps —‘
‘Don't!’
Lucinda had gone visibly pale.
‘I'm so nervous I can't think straight.’
‘Then don't be.
You'll be working with a great crowd.
Have either of you ever been on an HM ship before?’
They shook their heads forlornly.
‘Then you'll not know about saluting the quarterdeck?’
‘We'd heard, but where is the quarterdeck, and how will we know when we're on it?’
‘You'll know.
It's aft, always.
At the back end, that is, and as soon as you step on to it, you salute.
It'll get to be second nature, don't worry.
And you're both wearing your Hackouts, aren't you?’
‘Yes.’
Jane frowned.
‘But what's so important about knickers?’
‘You'll see, when we get on board.
Look!
There's the launch now.
That's Lilith's lot bringing it in.
They're the only Wren crew in the flotilla, so they've got to be good.’
‘Why?’
Jane demanded Hankly.
‘Because they're women in a man's world.
We all are.
Wrens rarely get a real ship, you see, and some of the old hands look on us as intruders, to say the least.
A few openly resent us; that's why we've got to try to be as good as they are.’
‘Resent us?’
Lucinda's stomach turned a somersault.
It was going to be worse even than she had feared.
Pictures formed in her mind of bloody-minded leading hands and a frowning chief telegraphist, all of them men and all of them waiting, grim-faced, for Bainbridge, L. V. to make her first mistake; a mistake so terrible that talk of its consequences would reverberate around the Home Fleet for years to come.
‘Isn't that a bit unfair?’
‘Well, they don't actually resent us, I suppose.
Not really.
But we've got to live by their rules and not expect privileges because we happen to be women.’
Molly shrugged.
‘But will you look at that boat's crew?
Aren't they as good as any men?’
The all-woman crew were bringing the launch in, leaping with fearless agility to the jetty and tying up efficiently, as though they had been born on boats and lived on them all their life.
‘Let's have you then!’ the coxswain called.
‘All aboard.
Chop chop!’
They followed Molly on to the launch, hitching up their skirts as she did as they swung over the side, taking their places beside her, feeling strange and excited and apprehensive.
‘There'll be a high gangway to climb when we get alongside Omega ,’ she told them.
‘Well, more of a ladder, really.
First time you go up it can be a bit frightening, but hang on with both hands and don't look down.
Okay?’
They nodded mutely.
‘And when you get to the top you'll be on the quarterdeck, so don't forget to —’
‘Salute,’ they chorused.
‘Let go for'ard!
Let go aft!’
A boathook pushed the launch from the jetty, a wheel spun in capable hands, the engine coughed them on their way.
Then a half-turn astern, and they were heading confidently to the depot ship Omega .
‘Makes you feel proud, so it does,’ Molly beamed.
‘Men won't ever be able to sit on us women again, when this war's over.
Lilith's as good as any man.
I never worry when we're out in a force-eight gale; not if she's in charge.’
Force-eight gales?
High ladders from which she must not look down?
And, when she reached the wireless office, men who might resent her being there and fiends who transmitted Morse at devilish speeds…
‘I feel sick,’ Lucinda whispered.
‘Very sick, and it's got nothing at all to do with the sea.’
The shore receded, the depot ship and its clinging submarines drew closer.
Now Omega was not dull grey as distance had suggested, but a mottle of khaki and black and olive-green, the colours of camouflage.
Now the ship  greyhound outline of a frigate but rather that of a clumsy old sow with submarine piglets suckling beside her.
‘It's bigger than you'd think.’
Jane gazed up at the towering bulk.
And Molly Malone was right: the gangway was little better than a ladder that clung to the ship's side with fragile tenacity.
Up and up.
How many steps?
Twenty?
Thirty?
‘Don't be looking so worried.’
Molly Malone's smile was altogether too smug, Lucinda considered bleakly.
And how was anyone to make even the bottom step of that wretched ladder thing when the launch was rising and falling like a demented yo-yo?
The engine slowed and died.
A boathook reached out and latched on to the ship's side, and a small, dark-haired crewgirl pulled them in until they touched with a gentle bump.
Then, one foot on the launch, one on the gangway, she held them steady.
‘Carry on!’
At once the gangway came alive, trembling and shaking and bucking as forty feet slammed up it.
Jane held on with both hands, gazing ahead at Molly's legs, counting every step, praying she would reach the top before the whole thing collapsed beneath their weight and they all fell, helpless, into the water below.
Twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-three, and she was there.
Ahead of her, Molly stepped on to the deck, lifting her right hand in salute.
Bemused, Jane did the same.
Now she knew why sailors saluted the quarterdeck.
It was not that Nelson had died there, nor was it because many years ago the crucifix that hung there demanded obeisance.
Oh, no.
It was because everyone was so desperately grateful to get off the shifting, jerking, swaying ladders the Navy called gangways.
‘All right?’ she croaked.
‘Think so,’ Lucinda muttered.
‘Right, then.’
Like virgins to the sacrificial altar, they followed Molly Malone to the place where it all happened; where Wrens must learn to live in a men's world because now the war was nearer to them than it had ever been.
And frighteningly real.
The central communications office of HMS Omega was large and surprisingly light, with white-painted bulkheads and an excess of highly polished copper and brass.
At the far end, eight wireless receivers stood in line abreast; doors marked Teleprinters, Coding and Signals opened off the main office space, while in its centre men sat at typewriters, index fingers jabbing furiously.
It was odd, Lucinda thought, that men should be doing a job more suited to women, but this was a real ship, wasn't it, on which, if Molly was to be believed, women had yet to establish themselves.
‘All right, you two!
Over here!’
They knew without being told that this was the chief telegraphist, whose word was law on starboard watch; knew it without seeing the three brass buttons on either sleeve cuff which pronounced his rank or the lightning-flashed wings on his right arm that told them he was the telegraphist they sought.
‘Er — Chief — er.’
‘Wetherby.
And you're adrift, the pair of you.
Should've been here yesterday forenoon!,
‘Yes, Chief.’
‘Sorry, Chief.’
‘All right, all right .
Cut out the chat!
Which one of you is Kendal?’
Eyes wide, Jane stepped forward.
‘Right, Kendal.
Over there.’
A finger indicated the door marked Coding .
‘Jock Menzies is your leading hand.
He'll put you right.
And you, Bainbridge, over there!’
The finger jabbed again, pointing to the only unmanned receiver in the line.
‘That's yours.’
For just a few seconds, Lucinda hesitated; for just long enough to take in the shock of white hair, the lined, weather-worn face and the tremendous size of him.
Then, taking a shuddering breath, she walked in a daze to her position.
The set, she considered, was a new one or maybe one which was less used.
Either way, though, there was a belligerency about it, with dials that gazed at her like eyes; mean, shifty eyes, warning her to beware.
‘All right, Bainbridge.
Get your jacket off and get stuck in!,
Reluctantly Lucinda did as she was ordered, then with cold, clumsy fingers she began to roll up her sleeves.
It was all too awful.
The morning she had slammed out of the house and walked through the blitzed London streets to Goddy's office she had been out of her mind; shell-shocked, or something.
An act of defiance it had been, and look where it had got her.
Mama had been right.
She should be married to Charlie now, and safely pregnant at Lady Mead with Nanny, and if Charlie were to phone her tonight and ask her to marry him tomorrow she would cry, ‘Darling!
Yes!’ and slap in a request for marriage leave without more ado.
Near-frantic with apprehension, she gazed up, eyes wide.
‘Chief?’
‘What is it, girl?
You sick, or something?
Got a bellyache?’
‘N-no, thanks.
It — it's just that I'm so nervous.’
‘Nervous?
What of?’
‘Of getting it wrong, Chief.
Or not getting it at all.’
Fear forced the words.
He'd think she was an imbecile, anyway, so why not tell him and prove him right.
‘I'm scared I'll miss a signal or not be able to read it.
And I  worry what will happen to those men at sea if I do.
I'm afraid.
Really afraid.’
‘Afraid, girl?
That there'll be one of the boats at sea and you'll miss…’
He threw back his head and roared with laughter.
‘Afraid you'll miss the transmission?
Oh, dear.’
‘What did I say?
What's so funny?’
‘You are, Bainbridge.
Oh, for Gawd's sake, didn't they teach you anything at wireless school?
Didn't they tell you that no ship at sea,no ship at all , would be daft enough to send out a signal — well, not in wartime, they wouldn't!
Gawd Almighty, Jerry'd have a fix on 'em before they could say ‘tot time’.
Break radio silence?
Only in the direst emergency.
Never, almost.
All they do when they're at sea is take down the messages we send to them , so don't worry about not picking up a signal, 'cause nobody'll be sending you any.’
‘Oh, Chief.’
Lucinda flashed him a smile of pure joy.
‘I've got a lot to learn, it seems.’
‘Seems you have, girl, but learn it you will.
So get yourself settled.
There's one of the submarines —boats , we say — up in the Gareloch doing trials.
Sparta , she's called, pendant number P.268, and that'll be her call sign.
Now she'll transmit in code every hour, on the hour, and you'll read those signals and write them down then give a receipt.
That's all there is to it; nothing to be scared about in that, is there, Bainbridge?’
‘No, Chief,’ she frowned.
‘But didn't you just say that a ship at sea doesn't transmit?’
‘It doesn't, girl.
It doesn't.
But Sparta isn't at sea.
She's all safe and snug in the Gareloch where Jerry can't reach her.
Safe as houses, she is.’
‘And she'll transmit on the hour?’
‘Exactly on the hour, and if she's only a couple of  minutes late, you sing out, Bainbridge, because I shall want to know.’
‘Why, Chief?’
‘Because on the hour means just that and failure to transmit at the given time usually means one thing.
Trouble.’
‘I see.’
She fixed him with anxious eyes.
‘But something like that isn't likely to happen, is it?’
Not when I'm on watch?
Oh,please , not when it's on my wavelength.
‘No, Bainbridge, it isn't.
As a matter of fact, I've only known it happen once when a new submarine was doing trials.
In ‘38, in Liverpool Bay.
Boat called the Thetis .
Bad job, that was.
Terrible loss of life.
But it isn't going to happen this morning.’
He dug his hands into the pockets of his jacket and, because sailors are the most superstitious of men, he crossed his fingers.
Just to be sure.
‘So get yourself settled.
Sparta 'll be coming up in five minutes exactly.’
He leaned over and adjusted the dials.
‘There now, that's just about it.
She'll make regular transmissions till eleven hundred hours then she'll be doing a deep dive, so you'll hear no more from her till she surfaces at fifteen hundred hours.
All right?
Got it?’
‘Yes, but why will Sparta stop sending out signals during the dive?
I mean, you'd think it would be the one time she would —’
‘A good question, girl, and one to which there is a very simple answer.
A submarine can't transmit when it's underwater.
It's an absolute impossibility.’
‘As I said,’ Lucinda smiled ruefully, ‘I do have a lot to learn.’
‘And as I said,’ Chief Wetherby returned the smile, ‘learn it you will, girl.
learn it you will !’
He nodded in the direction of the brass-banded bulkhead clock.
‘Nearly time.
And you know Omega 's call sign, don't you?
GXU3.
That's what you'll be listening for,’ he said as he walked away.
Questions, questions, but not a bad kid, that Bainbridge.
Not like some they sent him; six weeks in wireless school and they thought they knew it all.
Bainbridge would make a good sparker, given time.
In spite of that plummy voice, she'd make it all right, or his name wasn't Walter Wetherby!
GXU3, Lucinda thought feverishly, eyes on the clock.
GXU3.
The fingers of her right hand clutched tightly at her pencil; those of her left hand were crossed, firmly, desperately.
Oh, Goddy!
She sent a silent message winging to the small room at the Admiralty.
Why didn't you tell me it would be like this?
Why didn't you warn me?
She closed her eyes and swallowed hard, adjusting her headphones, moving the dials a fraction with fingers that were stiff and cold.
She would die.
She really would.
Before this watch was over she would be a nervous, screaming wreck.
It came up out of nowhere, GXU3 demanding her attention.
This was it!
Oh, my God!
Panic slapped her hard and for the splitting of a second she hesitated.
Then, collecting her thoughts, shutting out all sound save that in her headset, she began to take down the message.
The persistent pinging assaulted her ears and she forced it into her head.
On and on.
One page of the signal pad already filled; got to turn over.
Careful.
Don't lose any.
For God's sake, don't!
Dit-da, dit-da-dit .
A. R. They came at last.
The letters that signified the end of the message.
It was over and she had done it.
She had got it all!
Ripping the sheets from her pad, she held them triumphantly high.
‘Ta, love,’ said the messenger, taking them from her  as if they were any old signal, carrying them to the coders who would make the groups of figures into words.
Only then did Lucinda glance to her right.
Only then was she aware of the telegraphist who sat beside her, who smiled and gave her the thumbs-up sign.
Elated, she grinned back.
Bainbridge L. V.’ had done it, and nothing that happened now — absolutely nothing -would be half as bad as that first terrifying signal.
Someone tapped her on the shoulder then placed a mug as big as a chamber pot beside her.
The tea was strong and sweet and laced with tinned milk, and she drank it gratefully.
She was calmer now; confident, almost.
For the first time in her life she was doing something for herself; doing it without help from anyone, and what was more, she was getting it right.
It was heady stuff.
Raising her mug, she turned again to the telegraphist at her side, giving him her most brilliant smile.
‘Bainbridge,’ she said.
‘Lucinda.’
‘Lofty.’
He raised his mug in turn.
‘Everything all right?’
‘Fine, thanks,’ she breathed.
Absolutely fine.
Wonderful, in fact.
Sorry, Charlie, she exulted.
Afraid I've changed my mind.
No wedding, old thing.
Well, not just yet, anyway…
Vi stared into the mirror, tweaking her tie straight.
‘Mother of God, worra face.’
Funny eyes, funny nose, mouth too big and teeth too crooked.
A face, she sighed, that only a mother could have loved.
‘Happy birthday, face.’
Twenty-six today.
She had almost forgotten.
Twenty flaming six.
She could be thirty before this war was over.
It was frightening, if she let herself think about it, how much could happen in a year.
Last birthday there had  been a card from Gerry, written on shore leave and left with Mary for posting, yet now she was a woman alone.
Now, just one year later, she was 44455 Wren McKeown, V. T.’ a steward who would spend the remainder of the war cleaning and polishing whatever the Navy told her to clean and polish.
But at least she was alive, which was something to be glad about, so she winked at Vi-in-the-mirror then turned to the window and the almost unbelievable beauty outside.
She would never tire of that view, never get used to hills that changed colour at the whim of the sun, or the trees and flowers and a sky free of rooftops and chimney stacks.
And out there in the loch lay the depot ship, with only five submarines tied up alongside now because one had left.
She had seen it that morning, black and sleek, leaving hardly a ripple behind it, slipping silently away on the morning tide.
And farther down the loch had waited the frigate that would escort it out to sea and stay with it, someone had told her, until it reached the safety of deep water.
Vi had never imagined she could think kindly of any submarine again, but if it was one of your own then surely it was right and proper to wish it well, and raising her hand she had traced a blessing on the early morning air.
She wondered where that submarine was now and what it was called.
Perhaps Jane or Lucinda would know.
They were there now, on that depot ship.
She had watched from the window as they walked down the jetty, anxious as a mother sending her children off on their first day at school.
She thought about them a lot, wondering how it was going for them on their first real day on active service; the first day, she supposed, of the rest of their lives — of the duration, at least .
The duration .
For as long as the war lasted.
And how many days and weeks and years made up a duration was  anybody's guess.
It had all happened one Sunday morning when an old man in London decided that that was how it would be.
She remembered it clearly.
Gerry's ship had been in the Albert Dock and they had just finished papering the front bedroom.
At eleven o'clock she had turned on the wireless to hear the old man tell them they were at war with Germany.
Again.
But today she wouldn't think about it.
Today was her birthday and Jane and Lucinda would soon be coming ashore, bursting with news.
The thought pleased her, and she smiled.
Jane Kendal's introduction to the war at sea was far less traumatic than that of her cabinmate.
She had, in fact, enjoyed her day.
‘Lucky for me,’ she said that night at supper, ‘that coders often work in pairs so there was someone to help me along.
My oppo was very patient — oppo means opposite number, by the way — and he's very nice.’
‘Young, was he?’
It was important that Vi should know.
‘Oh, no.
About forty, I'd say.
He's got a daughter almost my age, but I shall like working with him.’
She could not help but like him.
From their first hullo the rapport was there, for Jock Menzies spoke with Rob's accent.
‘There, now.’
Vi was well pleased.
She need not, she conceded, have worried about either of them.
The young ones had done very well.
‘Anyone want more pudding?
There's plenty left over.’
‘Please.’
The baptism of fire behind her, Lucinda had found her lost appetite, and bread-and-butter pudding was one of her favourites.
‘Just a little.’
She held out her dish and Vi spooned it full.
‘Remember I was telling you how nervous I was?’
Lucinda confided, spoon poised.
‘Well, I didn't know it at  the time, but the telegraphist on the next set to mine-Lofty, he's called — was on my wavelength too.
I was really afraid I'd not get it all down, and all the time he was listening out for me.
He'll be doing that for a day or two, till I can take over my own wavelength completely.
But I wish I'd known.
It would've saved a lot of agonizing.’
She smiled suddenly, and the smile set her eyes dancing and brought the dimples back to her cheeks.
‘Look — why don't we celebrate?
Let's go out tonight.’
‘Well, I was wonderin' — I've been thinkin'…’
Vi was remembering that today was her birthday and there was the ten-shilling note in her money belt and wondering if she should ask them if they would like to see the film in Craigiebur.
Love on the Dole .
One of the stewards had cried all the way through it, she said, so it must be good.
But Vi did not ask them because someone said, ‘Hullo.
You'll be the new lot in cabin 9.’
Someone who was tall and black-haired, with milkmaid cheeks and deep, dark eyes; eyes so deep and dark it was impossible not to notice them.
‘Who's askin'?’
Vi demanded with Liverpool directness.
‘Lilith.
From cabin 10.
Lilith Penrose.’
‘Vi McKeown.’
Vi took the extended hand.
‘And these two's Lucinda and Jane.’
‘Yes.’
Lilith nodded briefly.
‘I noticed them on the launch this morning.’
‘Well then, that's fine, innit?
Anythin' else?’
‘No.
Just wanted to say hi, and tell you about the message.’
‘Message?
Who for?’
‘That's just it.
I'm not quite sure.
It's all a bit vague, you see.
Look, when you've finished eating I think you'd better come up to cabin 10 and get it sorted out.
In about five minutes — all right?’
It was not all right.
Vi did not like mysteries.
Nor did  she like being summoned to the cabin next door, but Penrose was a leading Wren.
‘What about it?’ she asked.
‘Okay by me.’
Jane nodded.
‘Me too,’ said Lucinda.
‘Right, then.
We'll see you in five minutes.’
‘And what did you make of that?’
Lucinda demanded when they were alone.
‘A message for one of us but she's not sure which.
Peculiar, wouldn't you say?’
Peculiar, they all agreed, but they knew they would go to cabin 10 none the less, for the deep, dark eyes held a mystery.
And secrets.
The door of cabin 10 was stuck and Vi thumped it hard.
‘Hang on.’
Lilith Penrose removed the wedge that held it.
‘Glad you've come.
Soon have it sorted out.’
Vi looked around her.
The room was spacious, with two large windows and a cast-iron fireplace which was obviously used, for log baskets stood either side of it and an airer hung with bell-bottomed trousers and thick navy-blue sweaters swung above it.
But it was the table in the centre of the room that aroused Vi's curiosity because it belonged, she'd have sworn, on the landing outside.
She was certain, in fact, because only that morning she had dusted and polished it.
Shrugging, she gazed pointedly at two Wrens she had not met before.
‘Sorry,’ Lilith smiled.
‘Meet Constance Dean and Fiona Cole — Connie and Fenny — my deck hand and stoker.’
Vi nodded briefly.
‘What's this message, then?’
Her gaze had returned to the circular table, and she was uneasy.
‘The message?’
Lilith closed the door and slid back the wedge.
‘You must try to understand that it isn't a message, as such.
It just came to me and I knew it must be for one of you.’
‘Came to you?’
Now Lucinda had noticed the table.
She  had seen one like it before — well, almost like it.
Letters and numbers set at random around its perimeter and an upended wine glass in the centre.
A planchette, they had called it at school.
It had started as a game but had taken over their lives, almost.
They'd been in terrible trouble when Matron discovered their secret, and each of them had promised never to do anything so wicked again.
‘Came to me,’ Lilith asserted calmly.
‘I get messages all the time.’
‘From the planchette?’
Lucinda's eyes were fixed on the glass.
‘That's not what it's called and the message has nothing to do with —that .’
‘It's a ouija board, innit?’
Vi had heard about such things.
Mention a ouija board at Confession and it would be three Hail Marys and an extra Mass from Father O'Flaherty, soon as look at you it would.
‘It's nothing to do with ouija, either.
That,’ Lilith nodded towards the table, ‘is my own thing.
If you believe, it will tell you what you want to know.
It's a part of my religion, of the old religion.’
‘It flamin' isn't, and I should know,’ Vi countered.
‘I'm a Catholic.’
‘The old religion, Vi, has been with us as long as time and has nothing to do with the Church of Rome.
My mentor is the earth mother and my conscience is ruled by karma.’
‘And what's karma, when it's at home?’ demanded Vi, who knew that consciences were ruled by parish priests.
‘It's a Buddhist belief,’ Lucinda whispered.
‘Sort of take what you want — and pay.
I'm right, aren't I, Lilith?’
‘Vaguely.
But karma isn't entirely Buddhist dogma.
Everyone pays, or is rewarded eventually, usually in another life on earth.’
‘Sorry.’
Vi had heard enough.
‘We've changed our  minds.’
She was having nothing more to do with such heathen talk, message or no message.
‘Come on, you two.’
Pushing away the wedge she opened the door with a flourish and, part relieved, part disappointed, Jane and Lucinda followed her.
‘Sorry,’ Vi said again over her shoulder.
‘So am I,’ Lilith spoke quietly.
‘Because I was just about to wish you a happy birthday.’
‘You what ?’
Vi flung round to face her.
‘Who said it was my birthday?
Who told you?’
‘The message told me, Vi.
I had a feeling it was for you.
‘Message my foot!
You've seen my record sheet, haven't you?’
It was the only way she could have known, unless Mary had phoned.
But Mary wouldn't know where to phone until tomorrow when she got the letter.
‘Haven't you.’
‘All record sheets are confidential, kept locked in Patsy Pill's office; you should know that.
No one sees them but her and Ma'am.’
‘Then how did you find out?’
‘I don't know.
I never ask.
He just said, ‘Happy twenty-sixth birthday, girl.'’
‘He said?’
‘It seemed like a message from a man.’
‘Girl , did he say?
You're sure it was girl ?’
‘Quite sure.
Does it mean something?’
‘It means nothin'.
Nothin' at all.’
Vi tilted her head defiantly.
‘Come on, you two.
We're not soddin' about no more with rubbish like that!’
She closed the door with a firmness she did not feel then sank gratefully on to her bed, dry-mouthed and suddenly cold.
‘Vi!’
Jane gasped.
‘You're as white as a sheet and you're shaking.
Get her some water, Lucinda.’
‘I'm all right, honest I am.’
‘No you're not.’
Lucinda offered the glass.
‘And it is your birthday, isn't it?’
‘What if it is?
There's dozens of ways she could have known.’
‘There aren't, Vi.’
‘She guessed, then.’
‘I don't think she did, but happy birthday all the same.
Are you really twenty-six?
Did she get it right?’
Jane smiled.
‘I suppose so.’
‘And have you any idea who sent the message?’
‘No, queen.’
Vi honestly had not.
It could only have come from Gerry, and Gerry was dead.
‘That Lilith's a good guesser and we're goin' to keep away from her and her funny religion, aren't we?’
They said they were, though they knew it was not true.
They would be drawn back to that table and its shining glass, nothing was more certain.
Vi knew it too, for how she could prevent it she was too shaken, at the moment, even to contemplate.
‘Load of old nonsense, that's what.
Forget Lilith Penrose, eh?
Even her name's funny, innit?’
‘Lilith?’
Lucinda shrugged.
‘It was the first name in creation, some say.’
Vi gathered her forehead into a frown.
‘Who says?’
Everybody knew that Eve was the first woman.
It said so in the Bible, plain as the nose on your face.
‘I-I don't know.
Someone must have said it, I suppose — that Lilith was Adam's first wife, I mean.’
‘Well, that someone was wrong ,’ Vi said grimly.
‘Just you forget such things, Lucinda.
Like I said, we'd all better keep away from cabin 10 and all that carrying on.
She's been nosing around in the regulating office, bet you anything you like she has, and she doesn't fool me!’
The smile was back on Vi's lips again.
Leading Wren Lilith Penrose would have to get up very early in the morning to catch Vi McKeown on the hop.
‘An’ it's still me birthday, innit, and if we're not too late for the transport into Craigiebur, I've got a spare ten bob I feel like spendin'.
My treat.
Anybody interested?’
Jane fidgeted with the signal pads on her desk, plucked a thread from the sleeve of her jacket then stared blankly at the chewed end of her Admiralty-issue pencil.
What was this phenomenon?
Why did everyone sit, breath indrawn, like figures in a tableau?
Why this silence, a silence so unexpected and inexplicable that it screamed ‘Listen to me !’
Through the half-open door of the coding office she could see Lofty's back; beside him Lucinda sat unmoving, her left hand relaxed on a dial.
‘Quiet, isn't it?’
The sudden dense hush was so uncanny that Jane felt compelled to whisper.
‘Has the war stopped, or something?’
‘It happens.’
Jock shrugged.
‘Sometimes, it's as if it takes a breathing space.’
Sometimes, he said, no hand depressed a Morse key or lifted a telephone or received a signal, and even the teleprinters, tired of their own unending chack-chacking, switched themselves off.
It was only minutes, the duration of that fleeting armistice, but such a stillness was so unaccustomed, embraced a silence so complete that it was always noticed, and wondered at.
Such moments happened mostly during the ungodly first hours of a new day, those breathless hours when a soul sighs away from a dying body.
They were to be expected in that, the middle watch, when eyes were gritty with tiredness and the air stale and limbs cold, but it was less usual in a busy forenoon watch as this.
‘It's as if everyone is waiting for something, isn't it?’
‘I know what you mean.’
Jock blew out rings of cigarette smoke then watched them widen and disappear.
‘It's just  one of those things, so try to remember what it's like next time there's a panic on, eh?
And there's no’ a thing you can do about it, lassie, so why don't you sit back and enjoy it?
Or maybe you'd like to watch the boat coming alongside?’
‘Which boat?
Is Sparta back from trials?’
‘No.
This one's Taureg , a T-boat.
A big one, home from patrol.
She's had a bad time, so the buzz has it.
Landed herself in big trouble in the Bay, but managed to get out of it.
The skipper and commander are going to be there, so it'll be caps in the air and three cheers and all that.
You might find it interesting.
Away with you, now.
I'll let you know when things get going again.
Just nip up the steps outside the navigator's sea cabin.
You'll get a good view from there.’
Reluctantly Jane pushed back her chair.
In truth she wasn't really interested in Taureg 's arrival, but anything that broke the self-imposed purdah of her existence was welcome, she supposed, for she still stood outside the real world, looking in; a part of her still waited in Yeoman's Lane and none of this strangeness around her was really happening.
She wished it were not so.
She wanted to come alive again and fall in love again; but that was not possible, for no one but Rob MacDonald would do — and Rob was gone.
‘Okay, Jock.
Thanks.’
Smiling, she pulled on her hat.
‘Won't be long.’
The navigator's sea cabin was small, wedged between the CCO and the signal deck, and one he seldom used since the depot ship rarely went to sea.
Indeed, the whole total of Omega 's movement was a half-swing around her mooring buoy with the incoming tide and a half-swing back again on the ebb.
But the view from the coding-office  portholes was varied and interesting, a slowly changing panorama for those with time to gaze.
She lifted her face to the sun, half closing her eyes against the silver dazzle that bounced across the water, breathing deeply on the tangle-scented air.
The two submarines which had lain alongside Omega at the start of her watch now stood off in the loch, still as two sentries, awaiting Taureg 's arrival, and she wondered how any man could volunteer to serve in such a craft; how he could live in quarters so cramped, with no privacy at all.
And that was apart from the danger.
So small a boat in so vast a sea.
She tried to imagine what it would be like to sink to the sea bed and stay there, calmly, with only a steel hull between a man and the enormous, pressing waters.
I would panic, she thought.
My mind would go numb.
She who loved the fields and trees and the wideness of the North Riding could not have endured so claustrophobic an existence.
She wondered which of the escort vessels would bring Taureg in.
She still found it hard to believe that any British ship could be in danger so near to home; even when Jock had explained that unless a submarine was in water deep enough in which to dive, an escort was essential.
‘It's the Brylcreem boys.
Those Coastal Command laddies are inclined to bomb first and ask questions later.’
She hadn't really believed him, but so much of her new life had still to make sense to her that she had not challenged his statement.
Her eyes swept the broad waters of the loch.
Capricious and Lothian , two of the flotilla's escort frigates, swung at their buoys, which could only mean that the Jan Mayen had gone out to bring the submarine in.
She felt a moment of sorrow for the Jan Mayen 's crew: Dutchmen who had brought their little ship to Portsmouth when Holland was overrun by the Nazi armies, choosing to leave their  country and fight on with the British Navy rather than give their ship into enemy hands.
How sad for those sailors never to receive a letter from home; never to know if the families they had left behind were safe and well and managing to get enough to eat; not even daring to wonder if they were still alive.
Yet those people, the fellow countrymen of Jan Mayen 's crew, would put their lives at risk to give help and shelter to British airmen.
Foolish, wonderful people.
Tears of pride stung her eyes and she brushed them away with an impatient hand.
God, when it's my turn, please let me be brave, too …
‘Penny for them, Jenny.’
‘Uh?
Sorry?’
Startled, Jane's head jerked up.
‘Tell me what's making you so miserable.
Bad, is it?’
The man at her side wore sea boots and a thick white sweater, and he looked at her with one eyebrow raised, a small, teasing smile lifting the corners of his mouth.
And he had called her Jenny.
‘Nothing's making me miserable.’
‘That's all right, then.
Thought you might be feeling a bit strange.
New here, aren't you.
Where do you work?’
‘In the communications office, actually.’
She said it primly, nose tilted.
‘And are you going to like it on Omega , Jenny?’
‘Don't call me that.
My name is not Jenny.’
‘I'm sure it isn't.’
‘Then why ?’
‘Because all Wrens are Jennies.
Got to be, haven't they?
My name's Tom, by the way.
Tom Tavey.
What's yours?’
Grudgingly she told him.
‘Then can we start again?
Hullo, Jane Kendal.’
‘Hullo.’
She wished Taureg would come and she wished the sailor would go away.
He was trying to pick her up, of course, but any Wren new to the flotilla must expect to be fair game, she acknowledged, especially in a base so isolated, where women were outnumbered by fifty to one.
‘Ever seen a submarine get the full treatment when it's done a patrol?’
‘Afraid not.’
Until a few days ago she hadn't even seen a submarine.
‘Is there something special about it?’
‘When a submarine's had a spectacular patrol, yes.
Taureg got depth-charged in the Bay of Biscay.
A whole pack of German destroyers were after them.
They had it pretty rough, by all accounts.’
‘But they obviously made it.’
‘They deserved to.
They'd dived, you see, but eventually they had to surface — the air must've been getting bad — and up they came, drew nearly alongside a German destroyer the pack had left behind when they called off the hunt, waiting there, just in case Taureg surfaced.
And surface she did; too near for the German to train his guns on her but near enough to get her own gun on them .
Pumped one straight into the destroyer's magazine, then took off, the cheeky sods!
Laughing like drains, I shouldn't wonder.’
He grinned.
‘Bet they couldn't believe their luck.’
‘It isn't funny, all that killing.’
‘No, Jane.’
The smile was gone in an instant.
‘Necessary, though.
It's them or us, isn't it?
You don't hang around to say ‘Sorry, mate.’
That's what war is all about.
Anyway,Taureg survived thirty-eight depth charges so she deserves a bit of a cheer.
But we'll know exactly what she's been up to when we get a look at her Jolly Roger.’
‘Jolly Roger?’
Jane's eyebrows shot upward.
‘On one of His Majesty's ships?’
‘That's right.
The pirate flag.
All returning submarines fly one if they've had a good patrol.’
‘You're pulling my leg!’
Did he really expect her to  believe such Peter Pan Wendy nonsense.
In the Royal Navy?
‘All right, then.
Wait till they come alongside.’
She shrugged and stared unspeaking down the loch, and wished again that he would go away.
‘That's the skipper arriving, and the submarine commander,’ he said, pointing to the well deck below them.
‘Taureg can't be long now.’
His Majesty's submarine Taureg came home to base smoothly and smartly, escorted by a frigate of the Free Netherlands Navy.
On her fore and after casing, seamen submariners in bell-bottomed trousers and white sweaters stood comfortably at ease; on the bridge stood three officers, smartly dressed.
Jan Mayen gave a salute on her siren, then slipped away to her mooring buoy, leaving the submarine and her crew to savour their homecoming.
The bosun's pipe whistled shrilly over the Tannoy.
‘Attention on the upper deck ,’ commanded the disembodied voice.
‘Face to port .’
Omega 's captain and the submarine commander beside him lifted their hands in salute; heads high,Taureg 's officers returned it as the at-ease submariners snapped as one man to attention.
‘Three cheers for Taureg !’ came the order and once, twice, three times, hats and caps rose in the air and once, twice, three times the assembled well-wishers roared their approval.
So this was how a submarine came back from a successful patrol!
And how very understated and very British, with every man of its crew trying not to show how pleased he was or how embarrassed, and quietly thanking the good Lord for getting them out of the mess in the Bay, and if He wouldn't mind, could some other perishing  submarine have the next thirty-eight?
And whilst He was on their wavelength, how about a spot of leave…?
‘It isn't !’
Only then did Jane see the flag.
‘Not the skull and crossbones!’
Tom Tavey laughed.
‘It is .’
‘But you wouldn't think it would be allowed.’
Grown men on a killer submarine, flying a Jolly Roger!
‘Do they all do it?’
‘All of them.’
He nodded.
‘Every submarine takes one on patrol and someone sews on the bits as they happen.
Take a look.’
The youngest of Taureg 's officers was holding out the flag for all to see, proudly proclaiming the success of their patrol and the reason for this, their special homecoming.
‘See the white bars in the top right-hand corner, Jane?
They represent enemy ships sunk by torpedoes, and the crossed guns on the left means they've been in a surface action — that'd be when they got the German destroyer — and the dagger below is a special operation.’
Unbelieving still, Jane counted the white bars.
Three ships sunk on this patrol; three merchantmen sent to the bottom, and thank God Vi wasn't here to see this!
‘Special operation?’ she murmured.
‘Cloak-and-dagger stuff.
Usually picking up an agent from one of the occupied countries, or taking one out.
A couple of weeks back there was a strong buzz that Saffron landed one by dinghy into France.
A young woman, I believe it was.’
He said it matter of factly, as if it happened all the time.
‘Then let's just hope that Taureg has brought her back again,’ Jane whispered.
What next would be asked of women and what would women do, when at last peace came?
Would they, could they, after the sudden heady freedom thrust upon them by war, ever go back to what they had been?
‘You're doing it again, Jane Kendal.
Frowning.
Looking chokka.’
‘I'm not.
Really I'm not.
It — it's Just the way my face is arranged, I suppose.’
Adroitly, she changed the subject.
‘What's happening now?’
The returning submarine had nosed in to the depot ship's side, and willing hands on the well-deck rails pulled on her stem lines, easing her closer, making her fast.
Now the sentinel submarines were under way again, gently manoeuvring to take up positions alongside Taureg .
‘They've stopped engines.
That's the skipper and commander going on board her now.
The pink gin'll be flowing in the wardroom and there'll be an extra tot for the lower decks, I shouldn't wonder.’
He glanced down at his wrist.
‘Almost eleven o'clock.
You'll hear the pipe soon, over the Tannoy.’
‘Forgive me, but what's so special about eleven hundred hours?’
‘What's so special?’
His face registered disbelief, then his lips parted in a smile.
‘Eleven o'clock is tot time; time for spirit that oils wheels and greases palms and sometimes even settles debts.
The rum ration , Jane.
Oh, I can see I'll have to teach you a thing or two about the Royal Navy.’
‘Oh, I know all about that ,’ she returned airily, ‘but it's only a drink of rum, after all…’
‘Lesson one, Wren Kendal.
Rum is never drunk.
It is sipped or it is gulped; sippers and gulpers, that is.
And make no mistake, the rum ration is very important to a matelot; not only to be sipped or gulped, but something to be used for bargaining or the repayment of a favour, or even bottled and taken home on leave.
It would be a sad and sorry day for the Navy if ever they stopped it.
There'd be mutiny, I shouldn't wonder.’
‘But what about sailors who don't like rum?’
‘Don't like …?’
Tom Tavey's face registered blank  disbelief.
‘Well, there might be the odd one or two who've signed the pledge,’ he acknowledged, ‘and they get threepence a day on their pay if they don't draw, as we call it.
I've never met one, though,’ he added hastily.
‘There now!’
His face brightened as the bosun's pipe shrilled over the Tannoy: ‘Up spirits!
Up spirits!’
‘That's it, Jane.
Tot time.
That's the call for the leading hands to collect the rations from the rum bosun.
Best pipe of the day,’ he grinned.
‘See what I mean?
Soon cleared the well deck.’
And so it had.
Taureg had done well and had received her just and sincere due, but this was tot time, and on board the depot ship Omega , first things came first.
‘Well, thanks for explaining it all to me, but I'll have to be going too, I'm afraid.’
She turned to walk away, but he stopped her, a hand on her arm.
‘Come out with me tonight, Jane.
There's a good hop on, down in Craigiebur.
Or would you rather see a flick?’
‘If it's Love on the Dole , I've seen it, but thanks all the same.’
She'd been right, he was trying to pick her up, which was a pity, really, because she liked to dance.
But dancing made her remember a cold Candlemas Eve, and every sentimentally crooned love song reminded her of something that was best not remembered, and she wasn't ready, yet, to stick out her chin and smile.
‘The dance, then?
The band is very good.’
‘Sorry,’ she said, over her shoulder.
Tom Tavey was nice, but no, not just yet.
And besides, he was altogether too attractive, too sure of his masculinity, and it unnerved her.
‘Sorry,’ she said again.
‘So am I, Jenny Wren.’
Eyes narrowed, he watched her walk away.
Maybe she went in for officers, or maybe, he realized, she already had a boyfriend.
A good-looker like her probably had half a dozen in tow.
And she was good, looking, and intriguing  too.
Something to do with her eyes and the way they looked at you, yet saw nothing.
And as for that red hair!
Weren't redheads all ice on the thatch but with a red-hot fire burning in the hearth?
With luck, this one would run true to form.
Then, remembering it was five minutes past tot time, he ran down the ladder to the well deck, and away to the spare-crew mess.
She was a little darling, though.
Might be interesting to have another try.
A girl who looked like Wren Jane Kendal would be worth it.
Well worth it…
She turned to watch him disappear down the ladder.
He did it nimbly, his feet scarcely touching the narrow steel treads.
His shoulders, she tried not to remember, were broad, his skin attractively tanned.
Ought she have said yes to his offer of a date, accepted the challenge in those probing blue eyes?
Shrugging, she walked slowly down the ladder.
Accept?
Of course not.
How could she have?
He'd called her Jenny, hadn't he, and no one did that.
She blinked as she stepped back into the office, closing her eyes against the sudden change of light.
Jock looked up briefly, then motioned for her to hurry.
‘Come on now, lassie.
There's a rush-immediate to be seen to.
K-tables we'll be needing.
You call, I'll subtract.
Chop chop!’
The war had started again, but wouldn't it be wonderful, Jane thought, if during those brief moments of stillness, no one had been wounded or blinded or burned.
And no aircrews reported missing.
The launch headed for Ardneavie jetty and Lucinda sighed contentment.
Another watch over, another day of getting it right.
To be enjoying the war was very wrong, but her new-found feeling of achievement was akin to joy.
She should, she supposed, feel thoroughly ashamed.
‘Got any money?’ she asked Jane, fishing deep into the pocket of her broad canvas belt and pulling out a shilling and three pennies.
‘Not a sausage.
Hat broke till payday,’ Jane sighed.
‘Which means we'll be staying in tonight.
Or we could go to cabin 10.’
‘To Lilith's?
Why not?
But what about Vi?
Think she'll come?,
‘I don't know.
She was a bit shaken up last night.
She thinks Lilith is guessing, and maybe she's right.
But I want to go, Lucinda.
There's something I've got to know.’
‘About a man?’
‘Maybe.
By the way, you should ask Chief Wetherby to let you watch next time a submarine comes back from patrol.
D'you know they actually fly a Jolly Roger?
It was fascinating .’
There now, she had admitted it.
In spite of her affected disinterest,Taureg 's return had been well worth watching.
Which was, she decided, the whole trouble with Ardneavie and Omega and the strangeness of life in the Royal Navy, pitched into it feet first as she had been.
Part of her embraced it gratefully whilst the other, the sad, secret part, rejected and resented it, all the while clinging blindly to what had been.
Yet this morning, a part of her had been guiltily glad that Taureg had sunk three enemy ships, not to mention the destroyer.
Four up for S-Sugar, she had thought with bitter satisfaction.
‘And there was a sailor there — submariner, I think he was — and he asked me for a date, but I said no.’
‘Why?’
Lucinda demanded, eyebrows arched.
‘Bad breath and big ears, or something?’
‘No.
He was nice;very nice and rather good-looking, I suppose.’
He would probably have been good to dance with, too.
He had only one fault, in fact.
He was not Rob MacDonald.
‘But he wasn't my type, not really.’
The launch bumped gently against the jetty, and the Wren ratings of starboard watch hurried ashore.
‘Oooh.
I can smell it from here.’
Lucinda closed her eyes and sniffed the air ecstatically.
‘Liver, with onion gravy.
do hurry, Kendal dear.
I'm ravenous .
They went to cabin 10 that night; Jane because nothing would have kept her away; Lucinda because she had nothing better to do; and Vi reluctantly, because someone had to keep an eye on Lilith and her peculiar ways and maybe, though the eldest of the trio would never have admitted it, because she was more than a little curious about the birthday message.
Half of her wanted to believe it; the other half clung to the dogma of her church and rejected it out of hand.
One thing, though, was certain.
Leading Wren Lilith Penrose would have to be watched, or Lucinda and Jane would be in it, right up to their ear-holes.
‘I thought you'd come,’ Lilith smiled, answering their knock.
‘It works better if you believe.’
‘Believe?
Who said anythin' about believin'?’
Vi demanded bluntly, wanting things straight, right from the start.
‘You know the way it is with me.
I'm not messin' about with no glasses.
All I've come for is to see fair play.’
‘Then that's a great pity, Vi, because you're a true medium, I'm sure of it.’
‘Yer wot?
Me ?
I'm a good Cath'lic, that's what I am.’
‘And a natural medium in spite of it.
But not to worry, we're going to get somewhere tonight, so let's make a start, shall we?’
‘Not me.
I'm going into Craigiebur.’
To emphasize her words, Connie Dean pulled on her hat.
‘With him?’
‘Yes, Lilith.
With him.
Again .’
‘Then you're a fool.
When will you get it into your head  he's no good for you?
How many times must I say it before it sinks in?’
‘Johnny loves me!’
Connie's cheeks flamed.
‘And I told him you said he was married and he says it isn't true.’
‘Then he won't mind letting you look at his paybook, will he?
Paybooks don't lie.’
‘Oh, shut up, Penrose!
You're bad-minded.
You might be boss of the launch, but what I do in my own time is none of your bloody business!’
The door slammed.
Angry feet slapped against the stone stairs.
‘Silly little fool.
And you can't blame the men, not entirely.
Away from their wives, and girls like Connie handing it out on a plate.’
Shrugging, Lilith slid home the door wedge.
‘But I'm right, I know it.
She'll find out too late, but that'll be her funeral.’
‘Right about what?’
Vi demanded.
‘That Connie Dean's going to land herself in big trouble if she doesn't finish with that man.
Apart from being married, he's got a nasty reputation where the Wrens in this flotilla are concerned.
But Connie's a good-time girl.
That's all she joined up for.
Men, and to get away from her parents.’
‘This feller — a submariner, is he?’
‘No, he's on one of the escort frigates.
Johnny Jones.
There's quite a few fancy their chances around here, and I know about them all; but our Johnny's a real lecher, so be warned.’
Picking up the glass, she began to polish it slowly and carefully, breathing deeply until her anger was gone.
Then, smiling, she asked, ‘Sure you won't join us, Vi?,
Settling herself on the window seat, Vi shook her head.
‘No.
Ta, all the same.’
‘Right, then.’
Lilith returned the glass, rim down, to  the centre of the table.
‘Pull up your chairs and let's make a start.
Fenny next to me, please.’
‘Will it tell us,’ Jane asked uneasily, ‘or must we ask it?’
‘We'll see if there are any messages first.
If not, we'll try a question.
Now, put your index finger very lightly on the glass, left finger if you're left-handed.
Gently,’ Lilith breathed.
‘Think of the person you want to contact.’
‘Dead or alive?’
Lucinda wasn't sure.
‘Either, though those who have passed on make better contacts.
Concentrate, now.
Clear your mind of all negative thoughts and believe.
Believe in it with all your heart.
Charge it with positive vibrations.’
‘How will we know who the message is for?’
Jane's cheeks were flushed, her eyes large.
‘The glass will move to the letters and spell out the words, and whoever the message is for will recognize it.
Concentrate.
Think of your contact.
Think hard.’
Jane closed her eyes and made her mind a blank; Lucinda sighed tremulously, and from her seat in the window Vi coughed nervously, yet the glass remained stubbornly still.
‘No messages tonight.’
Lilith removed her finger.
‘We'll have to ask it.
Anyone got a question?’
‘Me!
Well — if it's all right, that is .
I don't know what to do, though.’
Excitement churned inside her and every small pulse in Jane's body beat dully.
Not that anything would happen.
It was just an ordinary glass on an ordinary table.
Of course it wouldn't work, but she must try.
She must try everything.
‘Take the glass — carefully,’ Lilith warned.
‘Hold it in your hands.
Make contact.
Talk into it.
Believe in it.’
Dry-mouthed, Jane cupped the glass in her palms, lifting it until her lips were level with its rim and her breath filled it.
‘Glass, beautiful glass, what has happened to Rob?
If  you know, please tell me.
And if you can't tell me, please give me a sign.
Please .’
She raised her eyes to Lilith's.
‘That's right, Jane.
Put it back on the table and everybody try again.’
Four fingers made contact and the glass became a part of them, a living, shining thing.
Slowly, it slid across the table.
‘Oh, my God!’
Lucinda gasped.
The glass moved more smoothly, more quickly, then came to rest at the figure zero.
Then, without pausing, it moved anti-clockwise around the table, circling the letters again and again, stopping nowhere.
‘It's charged,’ Lilith breathed, ‘but it isn't enough.
Vi, we need you, too.’
‘Please,’ Jane begged.
‘For me.’
Vi crossed over to the table.
Maybe just this once.
And she did owe Lilith something for the birthday message.
‘All right, then.’
She closed her mind against Father O'Flaherty's disapproval.
‘But only for you, Jane.’
Five fingers reached out and the glass began to move again, surer, stronger.
S-E-V-E-N.
It came to rest precisely beside each letter before coming to a halt in the centre of the table.
‘Well, Jane?’
Lilith asked, nose wrinkled.
‘Does seven mean anything?’
‘It does, oh, it does!
Only Rob could have known seven.’
Tears shone in her eyes then spilled down her cheeks.
‘Oh, Lilith…’
‘Now look what you've gone and done!’
Vi was on her feet in an instant.
‘You've made her cry with your messin, about.
There, now, queen.’
Her arm encircled the shaking shoulders protectively.
‘It's all right.
Dry your eyes, pet.
We're not doin' it no more.’
‘But Vi, I'm not upset.
I'm not crying, not really.’
Jane  raised her face, eyes blissfully bright.
‘It's all right.
The message was from Rob.
It was .’
‘Good,’ Lilith sighed.
‘Anyone else got a question?’
She challenged Vi with her eyes, demanding she should stay at the table.
‘What about you, Vi?
There's something you want to know, isn't there?
Something you're not sure about?’
‘Well, I'm not sayin' I believe it, mind, but I want to know about that happy-birthday message.
There's only one person could've sent it and he — he's dead.
Where did it come from?
Was it from the glass, Lilith?’
‘No, Vi.
The message was between me and him.
He sent it, I picked it up.
It came through very clearly.
He was very insistent.’
‘He's dead,’ Vi repeated dully.
‘Dead or not, he wanted to say happy birthday.’
Lilith spoke gently, her eyes kind.
‘A lot of love came over, but I sensed that he was restless, and anxious too.
Why don't you try to put his mind at rest, Vi?’
‘I —no !’
She wouldn't touch that glass again, not if Gerry were trapped in Purgatory for the rest of time, she wouldn't.
‘Leave it.’
Fenny Cole pushed back her chair.
‘You know what happens if we try to force it, Lilith.
We've done well enough for one night, and it'll be standeasy soon.
Let's all try again tomorrow.’
‘Shall we?’
Lilith looked directly at Vi.
‘Tomorrow night, after supper?’
‘I don't know.’
Vi let go a shuddering breath.
‘I'll have to think about it.’
‘Well, whatever you decide, you mustn't talk about this.
No one else must ever know,’ Lilith warned.
‘Patsy Pill would have a fit if she found out, and we'd all be at defaulters’.'
No one, they all said.
Not a single word to anyone.
Not  even to the padre next time he came to Ardneavie to hear Confession, Vi thought grimly.
What happened in cabin ten must be a matter of conscience.
‘We'd better be goin',’ she whispered.
‘Ta-ra, well.’
‘Goodnight.’
Smiling, Lilith held open the door.
‘Blessed be.’
‘It's cocoa tonight.’
Vi set down the standeasy tray.
‘And I've brought up some bread and jam, in case anybody's hungry.’
They said they weren't, but they jammed the bread and ate it without speaking.
‘I know you're both a bit sceptical.’
Lucinda broke the silence.
‘But sometimes it's uncanny the way those things get at the truth.
We used to do something quite like it at school.
After lights-out we'd all get up and play with this planchette thing.
And it got a hold on us, too.
We'd be there for hours, then wake up bog-eyed and fit for nothing next morning.
It didn't take Matron long to realize that something was going on and put a stop to it.’
‘If they work,’ Vi frowned.
‘If what happened tonight wasn't somebody's finger pushin' that glass.’
‘I was the only one who knew about seven , and I didn't push it, I swear I didn't,’ Jane said quietly.
‘It was as if it knew exactly where to go.’
‘All right.
Maybe it works,’ Vi acknowledged.
‘So if you was me, what would you think about that happy-birthday message I got?’
‘If I were you, Vi, I'd believe what I wanted to believe.
If the message could have been from someone you care for, then where's the harm in it?
It's only if you let it take over your life that it's wrong.’
‘That's all right, then.’
Vi's eyes were clouded and sad.
‘Because I wanted Gerry to remember my birthday.
I was  so lonely for him I could almost have believed that he did, though I know I mustn't.’
‘Your church?
Eternal damnation, and all that?’
Lucinda smiled.
‘Oh, I think love is stronger than such things.
You must care for him a lot, Vi.
Gerry — is that his name?’
‘Was.
He's dead.
Got killed at sea.
Torpedoed.’
‘Oh, I'm sorry, truly I am.’
Lucinda's eyes begged forgiveness.
‘I shouldn't have asked.
Too stupid of me.
I didn't know.’
‘Of course you didn't.
How could you know?
Don't worry, queen.
I've been bottling it up inside me far too long.
Best I should talk about it.’
‘Does talking about it help, do you think?’
Jane's heart still thudded uneasily.
‘Would talking help take away the pain?’
‘Maybe.
They say the pain goes in time, and then you can remember things and be glad.
I'm a — a widow, you see.
It's the first time I've said that word since Gerry died, but I've said it now.
Widow .’
‘Vi, I'm so very sorry.
I'd no idea.
No ring, you see.’
‘I took it off.’
Vi pulled out the chain on which her wedding ring hung.
‘Thought it was better that way.
Daft of me, wasn't it?’
‘No, I can understand.’
Jane's voice was gentle.
‘There are things you can't talk about; things you keep inside you — memories, mostly.’
‘Rob?
You've lost someone, too?’
‘On the eighth of May.
Missing from a raid over Germany.
We weren't married, but we were — close.’
‘Poor kid.’
Vi smiled softly.
‘This is a bugger of a war, innit?
Why the 'ell did they let it happen!
Why didn't us women get together and tell 'em it wasn't on?
Them that caused this war and them that's getting fat on it should be made to fight it out between them, not our fellers.’
‘But isn't there any hope at all for Gerry?’
‘Don't think so.
There was this bloke came to see me.
Sailed in the same convoy as Gerry.
Told me the Emma Bates got a direct hit.
Not a lot of hope.
They was carryin ammunition, see.’
‘Will it hurt too much to tell us about him?’
‘Hurt?
No.
All the hurt inside me is for Gerry, really.
Never had a crack of the whip, he didn't.
The eldest of thirteen kids.
Ma McKeown said thirteen must've been her lucky number because she never had no more after that one.
But Gerry was never a child.
Had to grow up fast, him being the eldest.
When he was twelve he lied about his age and went to sea as a cabin boy.’
Vi's eyes were clouded, her gaze distant, seeing the gates of the Albert Dock, and Gerry walking away from her.
‘Then later he remustered as a stoker, and a right swine of a job that was.
On the old coal-burning boats he ended up, shovellin' coal into red-hot boilers.
Always got the shitty end of the stick, Gerry did.
That's why I made a fuss of him when we got married.
Nobody had ever made a fuss of Gerry before and he was real chuffed.
‘You're a lady,’ he'd say.
‘That's what you are.’
And he treated me like a lady, too, not a shop-girl.
Didn't even mind about me great big feet.’
She smiled.
‘Only the best for you, girl,’ Gerry'd say.
Girl .
That's what he called me.
That's why I can half believe what Lilith said.
Only me and Gerry knew about that.’
‘So you've nothing left now, Vi?
Your home — you said it was bombed.’
‘That's right.
Nothing left now, but dreams.
Ar hey, lovely, it was.
Me an’ Gerry'd build up the kitchen fire and we'd sit there and talk about what we'd do if we won the Irish Sweepstake.
‘First thing we buy is an 'ouse for you, girl, near your Mary's,’ Gerry'd say, ‘with a garden and a bathroom.’
He wanted a bathroom real bad.
Well, dreams are cheap, aren't they?
Like promises.
Gerry promised he'd take care, promised to come back to me, but…’
‘Rob promised, too, always to love me,’ Jane whispered.
‘And I'll always love him.
I'll never forget him.
Never.’
‘Oh, dear, I feel quite full up.’
Lucinda felt guilty.
Nothing half so terrible had happened to her; no one she loved had been killed or even hurt.
Indeed, had it not been for the blazing row with Mama she would still be living with her parents, seeing Charlie twice a week and helping the wounded airmen get back their confidence.
And she would still be listening to Mama's complaining and thinking up excuses for not having the wedding just yet, which hadn't been fair of her, really, because she did want to marry Charlie.
Later, though.
She and Charlie had made no promises.
He had always been there, like a brother, their relationship easy.
He hadn't proposed to her, either, not actually asked her to marry him.
Like everyone else, he had assumed she would.
Even Nanny took it for granted.
‘Once you and Captain Charles are married I shall look after your babies, Lucinda, as I looked after you.’
Babies and Charlie.
The two seemed inseparable.
She and Charlie weren't in love, not really in love.
Their relationship was civilized and uncomplicated, and she wished it could have been that way too for Vi and Jane.
‘Shall we go again to Lilith's?’ she ventured.
‘Yes!’
Jane's reply was instant.
‘Oh, I know it's wrong to believe in such things, but Lilith couldn't have known about seven , could she?’
‘Is it a special number?’
‘I suppose it is.
Seven was the time we used to meet.
My mother didn't like my seeing Rob, so it wasn't easy for him to get in touch with me.
He never knew when  he'd be flying, you see, so I'd wait for him every night at seven and hope he'd be there.’
‘Did you know him long, queen?’
‘Not really, though I felt I'd always known him.
Thirteen weeks and four days, that was all.
Then he went missing.’
‘Three months.
It isn't a lot,’ Vi sympathized.
‘I was luckier than you.
Me and Gerry had four years.
But missing isn't — well, there's a chance for your Rob, isn't there?
One day there'll be a letter tellin' you he's all right, just you see if there isn't.’
‘There won't, Vi.
I'm not his next of kin.
The Air Force will write to his mother if there's anything to tell, and the awful part of it is that I don't know where she lives.
Somehow, Rob didn't get around to telling me where.
He meant to, but addresses didn't seem important — well, not until it was too late.
All I know is that he lived in Glasgow.
Funny, isn't it, loving someone the way I loved Rob yet knowing so little about him.’
‘No clues?
Did he mention where he went to school?’
Lucinda jammed a second slice of bread.
‘No.
Only that he got a scholarship to the local academy.
And I know he worked in insurance, but there must be hundreds of insurance offices, and dozens of schools.’
‘And he never mentioned the street he lived in — even casually?,
‘Never, though he did say his local picture house was the Pavilion and I know his mother took her loaves to be baked at a place called Jimmy McFadden's bakery, but they're not in the phone book, either of them.
I've looked.’
‘Then you'll have to be patient, won't you; wait till he gets in touch with you.
And one day there'll be a letter, I'll bet you anything you like there will.’
‘Or a message,’ Jane said softly, ‘like tonight.
We will go to Lilith's again, Vi.
You won't try to persuade me not to?,
‘No, queen, I'll not do that.
But it won't be tomorrow nor Friday because I'm on late duty those nights.
But we'll go, all of us, just as soon as we can make it.’
And get to the bottom of that Lilith woman and her tricks — if tricks they were…