

Diana and Charles in separate bedrooms
Clive Nelson in Seoul
A PUBLIC relations stunt to prove that Charles and Diana have patched up their troubled marriage backfired last night when it was revealed they will still sleep in separate beds.
The couple will each have their own suite when they arrive in South Korea today on an official visit, despite carefully leaked reports that they will share a room.
Officials in the capital Seoul have hinted that the royal couple would both occupy the one-bedroom Presidential suite at the luxury Hyatt hotel, which has its own dining room and library with grand piano.
But TODAY can reveal that the £2,500-a-night suite is for Charles alone.
Diana has a smaller suite nearby.
‘We have been told that Prince Charles sleeps in one room and his lady in another,’ said a Korean worker at the hotel.
‘In our country, man and wife sleep together.
Is it different in Britain?’
British officials yesterday persisted in spreading the myth that the couple were sharing a room.
‘They are in the Presidential suite.
There is only one bed in it.
You must draw your own conclusions,’ said a senior member of the team arranging the visit.
However, another source said: ‘It is pure window dressing.
‘They live separate lives and come together when necessary, for example for the children or for public engagements.’
Certainly as they jetted out of Heathrow last night there was no sign of rekindled romance.
They arrived in separate motorcades and barely exchanged a glance as they walked across the tarmac.
Management at the Hyatt hotel, situated above Seoul with dramatic views over the city, said they had been told not to discuss where the couple would sleep.
But they helpfully handed out brochures describing the suite's one kingsize bed and a Jacuzzi ‘big enough for four people’.
The bill for the royal party's four-day stay — said to be up to £24,000 a night — is being met by the Korean government.
Charles and Diana will probably be offered traditional Korean food at a series of official lunches and dinners.
The national dish is kimchi — boiled, pickled cabbage served with peppers and garlic.
Octopus, chopped up live, and giant water slugs may also be on the menu.
BBC news man killed
A BBC cameraman was killed yesterday when his vehicle came under mortar fire in Bosnia.
Freelancer Tihomir Tunukovic, 25, a Croatian known as ‘Tuna’, was driving the BBC armoured vehicle in a convoy when it was attacked near Travnik as fierce fighting shattered the start of a UN-brokered ‘Week of Tranquillity’.
Chris Cramer, of the BBC, said: ‘Tuna exhibited extreme courage and professionalism during the coverage of the conflict.
We are all shocked by his death.’
Patten: I'll fight on
HONG Kong will not buckle at the knees over disagreements with China, its governor Chris Patten vowed yesterday.
‘I hope we can reach agreement with China and that, where we have disagreements, they won't poison our relationship,’ he said on ITV's Walden programme.
Mr Patten pledged to continue fighting for greater democracy for the colony.
However he added: ‘It is important for us to go on keeping cool and keeping calm, as we will.’
Die hard Willis beaten to punch
HOLLYWOOD star Bruce Willis's plans for a third Die Hard adventure have been hit by action man rival Steven Segal.
Willis wanted to battle terrorists aboard a cruise liner but tough guy Segal beat him to it with his movie Under Siege.
‘There is a feeling the two plots are a little too similar,’ said a spokesman.
Now writers are trying to come up with a new story for Willis as rival studios race to cash in on the Die Hard formula.
Sylvester Stallone has just filmed Cliffhanger, described as ‘Die Hard on a mountain top’, and before then audiences will see Wesley Snipes take on hijackers in Passenger 57.
Broke Britt: I want to be next Jackie Collins
Chris Hutchins
ACTRESS Britt Ekland is to try her luck as a novelist following the failure of her eight-year marriage to toy boy ‘Slim’ Jim McDonnell.
TODAY revealed last week that the Swedish star is to divorce the 31-year-old Stray Cats guitarist, the father of her five-year-old son Thomas Jefferson.
‘Neither of them will be claiming any money from the other because there just isn't any big money for either to go for,’ said a close friend of the couple last night.
‘They sold their Beverly Hills home on Doheney Drive earlier this year and now Britt is pinning her hopes on becoming the new Jackie Collins in order to maintain the lifestyle she became used to after marrying Peter Sellers.
She has had to work really hard to maintain herself in recent times.
‘She has made a super fitness video and the advance royalties together with her earnings from a Swedish TV chat show have helped financially, but they are not enough to maintain her in Beverly Hills luxury.
‘Having reached the age of 50 a month ago, Britt was quite content to leave California and settle down somewhere less extravagant but Jim loves Los Angeles and doesn't intend to leave the city.’
Earlier this year the mother of three, who counts Warren Beatty and George Hamilton among her former beaus, was quoted as saying: ‘If someone gave me the cash I'd have a facelift this minute.’
Rock manager turned film maker Billy Gaff says that Britt spent her 50th birthday in October with him at his home near Dublin.
Mr Gaff, who managed Britt's former lover Rod Stewart, added: ‘She knows that she is welcome to move in with me if that's what she wants.’
The Irish entrepreneur is the same age as the actress.
She said at the weekend: ‘If I have a new relationship it will be with someone my own age.’
Gaff continued: ‘I am very fond of her and yes, I know all about her novel — she was working on it while she stayed with me in Dublin.
It's wonderful Jackie Collins-style prose, but classier.
I have no doubt that Britt will have great success with it.
He said of the split: ‘As far as I am aware there is no one else in either of their lives.
‘Sadly, after eight years of being married to each other, they just grew apart.
‘To anyone who says that the age gap had anything to do with it, I would point out that she is fitter than her husband.
‘Britt and Jim just grew apart.
It will be an amicable divorce because that's all they want from each other.’
Don't show your face around Gere
RICHARD Gere has been banned from his local corner shop.
Owner Gil Turner acted when staff complained the Officer and A Gentleman star was rude.
‘He came in here one night with a very angry look,’ said store boss Mike Brent.
‘He got what he wanted and slammed it down on the counter.
The owner said it's not right to be mean to working class people.
We work hard, just like him.’
But Gere, 41, who hasn't been to the shop on Sunset Strip, LA, since the ban, can send his model wife Cindy Crawford, to run his errands.
‘She's polite,’ said Mike.
Smoking ban is a drag, says French
Alison James in Paris
THE picture of wizened old Frenchmen puffing contentedly on their Gauloises over a glass of pastis could be coming to an end — by law.
The French yesterday did what many thought impossible — banned smoking in public places.
Anyone who flouts the law by lighting up in cafes, restaurants, buses, trains, offices and factories faces a fine of up to £130.
Smokers are furious at what they say is an attack on their personal freedom.
And yesterday the reaction from most was to blow a puff of smoke into the law's face.
Jacques Pinon, owner of a cafe tabac in Paris has put up the required ‘no smoking’ signs, but thinks his responsibility stops there.
‘I can hardly sell someone a packet of cigarettes and then tell them they can't smoke.
It's stupid,’ he said.
At Le Progres in Montmartre Muriel Langlade, 19, drew defiantly on her Camel and said: ‘They can arrest me if they want, I'm not giving up.’
A sign on the door reads: ‘Restaurant reserved for smokers — non-smokers admitted’.
Most restaurants and cafes have set aside small no-smoking areas but won't be enforcing the rule.
Even the police seem reluctant to get tough.
‘We are taking it gently.
It will take a couple of months to get used to it,’ one officer said.
Neck and neck for the last hurrah
Margaret Hall in Washington
ELECTION fever reaches its climax tomorrow — with the White House candidates hurtling almost neck-and-neck towards the finish.
One poll yesterday gave Democrat Bill Clinton a healthy nine-point lead over President George Bush.
But others showed him a mere two or three points ahead.
Independent candidate Ross Perot, 62, is losing support.
Clinton aides claimed that their own polling showed their man winning comfortably, a steady seven points ahead of Bush.
That did not stop 46-year-old Clinton swinging into a final frenzied 24-hour sweep of at least 15 key states, before flying home to Arkansas early tomorrow, to sit out the tension of polling day.
Bush, at 68, had a hard job keeping up with such a pace.
And tonight, he won't even try.
Unlike his rivals, he will not make a final TV pitch for support.
THE President got one piece of good news yesterday.
Daughter, Doro, who remarried in June, is expecting a baby — his 13th grandchild.
Lester's vow to carry on racing after horror fall
Mike McDonough and Richard Creasy
RACING legend Lester Piggott last night vowed to carry on riding as he lay in his The 11-times champion jockey has a partially collapsed lung, broken collar bone, damaged spleen, broken ribs and facial cuts after falling from his horse at 40mph in Miami.
Yesterday, as he ate jelly while watching a replay, he said: ‘I'm sore, but I've no plans to retire.
‘People have begun writing me off but I will be back.
There have been worse bumps and knocks.’
Piggott said all he could remember about the fall was the horse ‘stumbled for about 20 yards before his legs gave way’.
‘I remember looking around behind me before I hit the ground to see if any riders were coming up,’ he added.
Piggott's daughter Tracy, 27, was in tears as she commentated on the race for television.
She accompanied him in the ambulance to Hollywood Memorial Hospital and stayed at his bedside in the intensive care unit as he had a series of brain scans.
Dr Lawrence Lottenberg said: ‘He will be out of hospital in three or four days.
He is awake and alert.’
Among Piggott's first visitors was 38-year-old Anna Ludlow, his personal assistant and constant companion for two years.
Anna once worked as a secretary to Piggott's wife Susan.
She and the jockey are now inseparable.
Mrs Piggott, 51, who watched a slow motion TV replay of the fall, is getting hourly bulletins on his progress from Tracy.
‘The doctors are tremendously impressed with his fitness and health, so I don't think we have seen the last of him,’ she said at home in Newmarket yesterday.
‘There have been some gloomy articles talking about retirement, but Lester won't think that way.’
She added: ‘Apart from being devastated about the death of the horse Mr Brooks, he is in good spirits.’
Mr Brooks was part-owned by Hollywood film director Mel Brooks and his wife Anne Bancroft.
They wished Piggott luck before Saturday's Breeders' Cup race.
Superfit Piggott amazes doctors
AMAZED American doctors say Lester Piggott is the fittest 56-year-old they have ever seen.
His superb physical shape has been honed over the years by a practical approach to food and exercise.
Simple meals based on fish and salads form the main part of his diet.
Piggott, 57 on Thursday, puts his strength and stamina down to 30 years of top-class riding.
But he has had more than his fair share of injuries in that time.
In 1977 he was nearly killed when his mount bolted.
Four years later, his head was smashed and his ear partly ripped off when a horse ducked under the starting stalls.
And in 1984, he chipped a thigh bone as he was dragged along the course after his saddle slipped.
‘Jockeys make riding look easy when the reality is different,’ his daughter Maureen Haggas, 31, said last night.
Horses need immense strength and skill to control, she said.
‘Riders have to use all their muscles.
A jockey may ride as many as 12 or 14 races a day.
You can't do that if you are out of condition.’
One of Piggott's few vices is cigars.
He avoids alcohol however.
Vanessa and paradise lost
SINGER Vanessa Paradis, at Number 13 in the charts with Be My Baby, finds success has its drawbacks.
The 19-year-old French beauty, who had a million-seller with Joe Le Taxi, has told how strangers have attacked her in the street.
‘Girls still treat me as a bitch and pull my hair,’ said Vanessa.
‘You have to deal with it.’
Steffi faces court ordeal
TENNIS star Steffi Graf faces a new legal ordeal over her father's affair with a nude model.
Nicole Meissner, 24, and boyfriend Ebby Thust are to appeal against their jail sentence for blackmailing Peter Graf, 54, out of Pounds 320,000.
Now Steffi, 23, may have to appear in court as a witness.
‘We have new evidence and we may have to call Steffi,’ defence lawyer Hans-Ulrich Endres said in Germany yesterday.
Gales delay polar trek
EXPLORER Sir Ranulph Fiennes' polar trek has been delayed by bad weather.
The 48-year-old adventurer was due to start a 2,200-mile trek across the Antarctic at the weekend, but high winds cancelled his flight to the peninsula.
If successful, the 100-day trek for multiple sclerosis charities will make Fiennes' team the first to cross Antarctica via the South Pole without dogs or ground and air support.
Parents in fight for son's ashes
A DIVORCED couple have asked a judge to settle a row over their dead son's ashes.
Grieving father Peter O'Shaughnessy and ex-wife Constance Los want the remains of their son Ryan to rest in separate places.
The court has now told the warring couple to each keep half the ashes until they can agree on a resting place.
The battle has been going on since Ryan, 15, died in a road accident.
His mother gave orders for him to be cremated, against his father's wishes.
She now wants to bury all Ryan's ashes in Santa Barbara, California.
But his father wants them buried in a family plot in Santa Inez.
Mr O'Shaughnessy, who was given custody of Ryan when his marriage ended 10 years ago, said: ‘My sister and grand-daughter are buried there.
That's where Ryan belongs.’
But his ex-wife believes he would prevent her from visiting the grave.
‘I've agreed to bring the ashes together when I'm emotionally ready to do that,’ she said.
‘But Ryan lived the majority of his life in Santa Barbara, not in Santa Inez, and he should be here.’
Patten vows to fight on
HONG Kong will not buckle at the knees over disagreements with China, its governor Chris Patten vowed yesterday.
He said the people of Hong Kong were ‘very mature, very responsible — they have seen it all before’.
‘I hope we can reach agreement with China and that, where we have disagreements, they won't poison our relationship right across the board — certainly won't poison it for all time,’ said Mr Patten.
He told ITV's Walden programme the clash over proposals to give the colony greater democracy were ‘quite interesting’.
Mr Patten pledged to fight for Hong Kong.
‘I am demonstrating that I want to stand up for Hong Kong's interests.
‘The community would have much less confidence in me if they believed I was not the sort of person who would stand up for their interests.
‘It is reasonable for the Hong Kong government to do what it believes to be in the best interests of the people of Hong Kong.’
Mr Patten said there had been ‘static in the air’ before over proposals put forward by the Hong Kong government.
‘It is important for us to go on keeping cool and keeping calm, as we will,’ he added.
Fat ladies sing: It's over, Bush
THREE large ladies wearing Viking helmets sang what they called George Bush's swansong outside the White House yesterday.
‘We're gathered here to test the hypothesis that it ain't over 'till the fat lady sings,’ said Peggy Haine, of the Women of Substance Chorale.
The latest poll indicated that it was already over for George Bush, as presidential rival Bill Clinton stretched his lead to 12 points.
The besieged President refused to concede defeat on the last day of his campaign yesterday.
The opinion polls didn't matter, he told one rally after another.
‘What Governor Clinton doesn't understand is that it's the people in the voting booths that matter.’
However, the CNN/ USA Today poll which gives Clinton the huge lead is considered the most accurate, as it includes undecided voters.
On past records, most waverers go for the challenger rather than the one who holds power.
While Bush was still publicly optimistic, his chances seemed slim — especially as the fat ladies couldn't wait until tomorrow to sing.
Irving out in Nazi row
HISTORIAN David Irving, who claims the Nazi holocaust was exaggerated, was facing deportation from Canada last night.
Mr Irving, 54, was ordered out of the country on Sunday because his views could violate anti-hate laws.
He was in a Niagara Falls jail yesterday waiting to hear if he would be sent back to Britain after being refused entry to America.
‘He's being picked on.
The man's only here to speak,’ his lawyer Kirk Lyons said.
Diana gets the cold shoulder
Clive Nelson in Seoul
THE atmosphere is decidedly frosty as Charles and Diana begin their tour of Korea.
Walking several feet apart and avoiding even making eye contact, the royal couple arrive at Seoul's national cemetery.
Here, in the clearest indication yet that their marriage is over, Charles froze his wife out of official duties planned for them both.
The princess was forced to stand aside, watching grim-faced, as her husband laid a wreath to victims of the 1950–53 Korean War alone, even though the silk label bore both their names.
Charles then dropped incense into a smoldering urn in a traditional Korean ceremony.
As pungent smoke was blown into her face, Diana's eyes went red and watery.
‘She looked on the verge of tears,’ said one observer.
‘I don't know if she was upset or her eyes were watering because of the smoke.
She looked very pale and uncomfortable.’
After signing the visitors' book, the couple were driven at high speed to Seoul's new £4 million British Embassy.
There Charles went solo again, unveiling a plaque — which bore both their names — as Diana stood meekly behind him.
The only words they exchanged during the engagements were to discuss which side of the car they were going to step out of.
After an official reception at the Embassy they were hurriedly whisked to separate suites at the luxurious Hyatt Hotel.
From the moment the couple stepped from their RAF VC10 flight yesterday afternoon they appeared cold and distant.
Diana, wearing an old primrose suit by her favourite designer Katherine Walker, was totally indifferent to her husband as they walked across the tarmac.
He grimaced slightly as a traditional Korean band in multi-coloured silk costumes played a welcome fanfare on conch shells.
Charles and Diana did not speak as they climbed into their limousine to drive to the war memorial.
It was here that the subtle changes to the royal itinerary were made and Diana was shouldered out.
Drug man guilty
A BRITISH man has pleaded guilty in Thailand to charges of heroin trafficking, saying he has no hope of proving he was set up by drug smugglers.
‘The heroin was in my possession and I cannot prove it wasn't mine,’ said 26-year-old Peter Heather after the hearing in Bangkok.
Heather, from Stoke-on-Trent, says he was tricked into picking up a package of heroin by some Westerners he met in Bangkok.
Police arrested him with 14 ounces of the drug in January and he now faces up to 25 years in jail.
‘During 11 months on remand I saw people go on trial every day but never anyone win.
There is no winning in the legal system in Thailand on narcotic charges,’ said Heather, who will be sentenced on Thursday.
Guide to safer sex
A NEW booklet is to give fire safety advice for Dutch dungeons specialising in sado-masochism.
Brothel bigwigs are concerned that clients who find themselves tied up may end up being roasted in their handcuffs if fire breaks out.
The VWA, one of five Dutch sado-masochism associations, is recommending stricter fire safety regulations because ‘people who are handcuffed or tied up need more time to get out of a building’.
America hails President Bill
Margaret Hall in Washington
AMERICA hailed a new President early today: Bill Clinton.
He inflicted the heaviest defeat ever to wrest the keys of the world's most powerful office from a President seeking re-election.
The landslide triumph of 46-year-old Clinton left George Bush, condemned to history at 68, with scant consolation…just a handful of the 50 states.
Clinton fought off Bush's campaign of dirty tricks to win the heart of the nation.
Bush branded him a womaniser, a pot-smoker, a draft-dodger — charges which were all denied.
The mud-slinging splashed back in the face of the accuser.
America, fed up with Bush's neglect of the economy and lack of human touch, voted for the ‘change’ the charismatic Clinton constantly promised.
And he won an astounding 60 per cent of all votes by women.
Of 20 states in which results were forecast early today only four went to Bush.
The results were wildly ahead of the Democrats' most optimistic forecasts.
Bush, in front of a bank of TVs in Houston, Texas, was rumoured by aides to be writing his resignation speech.
Asked how he thought early results were going, he said: ‘I've seen better, but we'll see.’
Voters were mostly influenced by the economy, jobs and the budget deficit — not the tax cuts stressed by Bush.
Clinton was sensationally tipped to have captured the battleground state of Georgia, a result that would sound the death knell of Republican hopes.
New Hampshire and Vermont — key Republican states, like Georgia — were also reported to have been taken by Clinton.
Vermont has voted Republican in presidential elections every year since the party was formed in 1856, except for the Lyndon Johnson Democratic landslide in 1964.
New Hampshire is nearly as staunchly Republican and also had not voted Democratic since 1964.
‘There are the possible makings of not a very good night for the Republicans,’ said CBS television newsreader Dan Rather.
The challenger comfortably held New York.
Clinton was also expected to win Kentucky, another key state, with 44 per cent of the vote, a two per cent lead over Bush.
A Republican aide said despairingly: ‘It looks like we've lost Kentucky.
It's going to be a rough night.’
Consolation for Bush came with the Indiana result.
He won, but only by the skin of his teeth.
He held Oklahoma, South Carolina and Nebraska, but other states forecast victory for Clinton by staggering margins: California — which had given Clinton a 17 per cent lead — put him ahead by 23 per cent; Arizona 7; Ohio 5; Michigan 14; Colorado 11; New Jersey 13; Wisconsin 10, Illinois 14.
Even Bush's adopted home state of Texas gave Clinton a five per cent lead.
The Democrats' exit polls gave a 60 per cent majority for Clinton — 321 electoral votes.
The winner only needs 270.
No challenger to a President in office has ever scored so heavily.
Bush's humiliation approached that of George McGovern in 1972, when he won only two seats in his attempt to oust Richard Nixon.
In Washington a Democratic national committee official said: ‘It's a blow-out.
If these figures stand up it's going to be an incredible night — an incredible night for all of America.’
Clinton was expected to declare himself the winner at 4am British time, even before some polls on the west coast closed.
Although all polling station results will be in today the official result will only be announced on January 4, after the Electoral College has cast its votes — however these are always a rubber-stamping of today's return figures.
The new President will be inaugurated on January 20 next year.
Indiana, besides being the home of Quayle, has voted Republican every year since 1940 except for the Lyndon Johnson landslide of 1964.
A predicted Clinton win in recession-clobbered Ohio — by 5 per cent— was an early clue to the outcome.
Considered a must-win state, with its vital 21 electoral votes, it was too close to call on election eve.
Another important prediction was the 14 per cent Democrat win in Michigan.
A further humiliation for Bush was the news that maverick Independent Ross Perot headed him in several states.
Voters flocked to the polls, despite drizzle, rain and snow, in record numbers.
Clinton was predicting that he would be making his victory speech just a couple of hours after the majority of booths closed.
He started the day with the election in the bag, according to the opinion polls.
All the surveys had him ahead with leads ranging from seven to 12 points.
The last poll of the campaign by CBS News showed Clinton with 45 per cent backing among registered voters against 37 for Bush and 15 per cent for Perot.
Translated into electoral votes — there are 538 — that meant Clinton comfortably winning the number needed.
Clinton's victory was all but assured by the youth vote.
First-timers in their millions were backing the saxophone-playing candidate from the baby-boom years they could identify with.
Hoarse but buoyant, Clinton had roared towards the end of a marathon tour of eight states yesterday pleading for every last vote.
‘I have just about lost my voice,’ he told a largely working-class crowd at McAllen, Texas.
‘In the voting booth,’ he said: ‘If you will be my voice, I will speak for you for four years.’
And at Fort Worth airport he asked a crowd of thousands: ‘Do you think you'd be better off with four more years?
Wouldn't it be nice to have four new years?
It drives me nuts to see all the jobs that are out there to be done.’
As the first forecasts started coming in, there was no reason to doubt his promise of a ‘new dawn for America’.
Bush went jogging with his pregnant daughter Doro in Houston at dawn.
But as he emerged from the polling booth in the gym of St Mary's seminary, Houston, at 8.37 am, he was asked if he was relieved the campaigning was all over.
‘Very, very pleased,’ he said.
He had told an election-eve rally in Astroarena, Washington: ‘The gods are smiling upon us and I know we are going to win.’
But still he went shopping and renewed his hunting licence, bought a new fishing reel and cassettes of country music.
The right equipment for Quayle-hunting.
Assassins don't scare my boy Bill
BILL Clinton has thought about the chance of being assassinated, like his political heroes John Kennedy and Martin Luther King, but refuses to let it affect him, his mother revealed yesterday.
‘We discussed this before he ran for office,’ said five-times-wed Virginia Kelley, 69, at her home in Hot Springs, Arkansas.
‘We have not mentioned it since.
‘He said nobody in this world can live their life in fear.
He wanted an understanding with his family that it's not the way we will live.
‘I promised him I wouldn't live in fear.
And I haven't.’
Election fever packs 'em in
AMERICAN revellers flocked to US-style grill bars for a state-by-state countdown of the election results.
They were queueing outside Kenny's cajun bar in Chelsea, west London, from 9.30pm — hours before the first returns were due.
Big screen coverage guaranteed the small cellar bistro was packed.
Student Ken Payton, 22, from New York, said: ‘I hope to stay the pace and follow it through the night.’
Harry's Bar divines it
DRINKERS in Harry's Bar elected Bill Clinton as president well before polls closed in the US.
American citizens voted in the mock election at the Paris watering hole over the past two weeks.
Results announced in the bar last night gave Clinton 389 votes, George Bush 341 and Ross Perot 88.
Since 1928, Harry's clients have got the result wrong only once.
They voted for Gerald Ford in 1976 when Jimmy Carter won.
Little comfort for George
THE first voters in the US 1992 presidential election gave George Bush their backing — by seven votes.
Bill Clinton came last in the four-way race in the New Hampshire hamlet of Dixville Notch which has a population of 37.
Single signal
GEORGE Bush must be wondering whether the music business has been trying to tell him something.
The best-selling single in America's Billboard charts last week — and this — was End Of The Road, by Boyz II Men.
Prince and Princes of Wales state banquet
A cheerful and smiling Diana got away from Prince Charles last night to welcome guests ar state president Roh Tae-Woo.
But the smile disappeared to be replaced by a doleful frown when she had to go into dinner herself — and sit next to her husband.
Laura's brave battle helps transplant girl
Andrew Russell
THE courage of Laura Davies has rescued a four-year-old American girl from the brink of death.
Charlie Fourstar, whose family live on an Indian reservation in Montana, was born with a similar condition to Laura who underwent a liver-bowel transplant five months ago.
With no medical insurance, Charlie's family had no hope of paying for the £500,000 surgery and the American state medical organisation Medicare refused to fund it.
Then the Disney Corporation made a film about Laura's battle.
The Fourstars' lawyer showed it to Medicare which finally relented.
On Monday, all Charlie's digestive organs were replaced in a 16-hour operation in the same Pittsburgh hospital where four-year-old Laura's life was saved.
Watching the complex surgery was British surgeon Adrian Bianchi who treated Laura, of Eccles, Manchester.
Lisa Rossi of the Pittsburgh Children's Hospital said: ‘It was a lovely film which showed that the surgery is no longer experimental.
It persuaded Medicare to change their minds and pay for Charlie's transplant.
Laura's story was the major factor.
She is a wonderful advertisement for us.’
Laura's pregnant mother Fran, 26, said: ‘If Laura has helped another child to have a chance, then we are delighted.
Our thoughts are with Charlie and her family now.’
Laura flies home tomorrow following tests in Pittsburgh to make sure she was fit to travel.
Yesterday she was trying on her new school uniform.
Fran said: ‘Fingers crossed, she can soon sit in class with all the other youngsters just as she has always wanted.
Six months ago we never thought she would achieve her ambition.’
Nuke sale man held
A BRITON suspected of trying to sell Saddam Hussein enough plutonium for 15 nuclear bombs has been arrested in Germany.
Norman Derbyshire, 51, of Flensburg, Germany, was held after allegedly attempting to have 176lb of the material delivered by a former British Intelligence agent.
Ins and outs of the White House
Margaret Hall in Washington
How Hillary turned herself into a presidential partner.
OFFICIALLY there has been just one Clinton fighting on the Democrat ticket to get into the White House.
But make no mistake it will be the Clintons who will reign.
Hillary Clinton has made it clear that she would have her own part to play after husband Bill was swept to power.
Not for her the gentle, feminine title First Lady and a background role choosing the Oval Office curtains.
Hillary will be called the Presidential Partner — and she intends to make her own mark in the cut and thrust of American political and national life.
In fact the 45-year-old lawyer, a fiercely independent career woman in her own right, has been so determined to secure victory for Clinton and an influential role for herself that she has almost re-invented herself in the process.
As Bill has sharpened his image to match his growing political fortunes, so Hillary cast aside her intellectual reserve to transform herself from a dowdy schoolma'am type in heavy glasses to a glamorous, designer-dressed head-turner who would grace any State function.
She got contact lenses and bleached her hair blonde.
When she made her network TV debut, telling viewers that the allegations of her husband's affair with Gennifer Flowers were rubbish, it wasn't hard to believe her, she looked so good.
Since that January night, Hillary has undergone the second stage of her transformation.
The velvet headband has gone, along with the over-tailored suits.
Her hair is now streaked with expensive frosting courtesy of e Christofe, Beverly Hills stylist to the superstars.
The contact lenses have been upgraded to the Hollywood variety too.
Her eyes are now a flashing turquoise thanks to high-tech ophthalmic fashion.
But behind the make-up there still lies a razor sharp intellectual who has been quoted for the past several years as one of the top 100 lawyers in the US.
‘Hillary is a woman with an integrity and persona of her own,’ says leading Arkansas editor Paul Greenberg.
It is a measure of her individuality that Greenberg, long one of her husband's critics, is such a big fan of hers.
There are many differences between Hillary and her 46-year-old Oxford graduate husband.
They attend different churches and are said to hold separate bank accounts.
For a long time she maintained her maiden name until it became a public and political necessity to adopt the surname Clinton.
Hillary's critics also say that she is way to the left of her husband politically.
The conservative journal American Spectator has even branded her ‘the Winnie Mandela of American politics’.
What is certain is that she will stamp her own identity on whatever activities she heads up within the White House.
In the past, presidential wives have made an impression but usually in a way that has drawn fierce criticism, mainly because they pretended they weren't an influence on their husbands.
Compare that to one of the most sported slogans of this current campaign — Vote For Hillary's Husband.
That said, Hillary has already reluctantly accepted that she will not land a government position.
At one stage it was seriously suggested that she would end up as Attorney General.
If President John Kennedy could appoint brother Bobby to the post in the Sixties, why not a presidential spouse today?
There's little doubt she would be excellent in the job.
But Hillary knows that would be taking nepotism too far and is reconciled to being appointed unpaid head of some commission or other.
by no means however will she adopt the time-honoured ‘women behind the man’ mantle.
Even now Hillary is quietly garnering her own forces — and we are not talking about a social secretary and party faithful volunteers to answer the phones.
The first thing she will do is organise more space than the limited suite of offices traditionally allocated to the First Lady.
Then she will announce in a suitable low-key way her appointees.
An indication of the powerhouse force she plans to be is the existence of a shortlist of top business women, earmarked for her ‘Chief of Staff’.
The use of that job title alone is indicative of Hillary's frame of mind — it is a title singularly associated with being President.
Hillary is nothing if not aware of the pitfalls that lie ahead.
She is not going to make the same mistake Jimmy Carter's First Lady Rosalyn did.
There was an outcry when it was revealed Rosalyn sat in on cabinet meetings.
Nancy Reagan, determined not to be caught in the same trap, created controversy instead by over-attention to the trivia of office.
She ordered tens of thousands of dollars worth of unneeded official china, while accepting ‘freebie’ designer clothes.
The catchy Just Say No slogan of the anti-drug movement invented for Nancy to head were words conjured up by smart PR people.
The only words Hillary Clinton will be uttering from the White House will be her own.
The causes and concerns she focuses on will be of her choice.
The attack strategies will be devised by her.
During the presidential campaign her projected involvements have revolved around women and children's affairs.
But no one doubts that once installed she will broaden her interests and concerns.
If nothing else she will be kept busy telling the President what to do and how to do it.
On the campaign trail last week a Clinton aide confided: ‘He doesn't make any decisions until he consults Hillary.
It's frustrating having to clear everything with her.
That way decisions are delayed.
‘It's not going to be any different when they're in the White House.’
Long-time Clinton opponent, Arkansas newspaper columnist John Starr, has no doubt that the Clintons will turn the Presidency into a job-sharing position.
‘It's all come from Hillary,’ he says.
‘When she worked for Bill from 1983 to 1987, things got done.
‘When she left to return to her law practice, he fell apart.
He's hopeless without her.’
Of all the experts and aides surrounding Clinton, Hillary is the one he relies on.
She is the one who knows how to puncture the wordiness of his speeches, getting him to edit his arguments so he can ram the message home in half the time.
Clinton's long-time Arkansas-based aide Betsey Wright has seen the alliance work for a dozen years.
‘Hillary has the analytic ability to make certain that the decisions he is leaning toward are iron-clad.’
But in the final days of the race to the White House, Hillary's voice seemed to disappear.
Party chiefs told her to cool it.
Her verbal spontaneity ruffled far too many feathers even if it attracted admiration from thousands of radicals and feminists.
Party leaders were concerned by the ‘two for the price of one’ sales pitch Hillary was using as she stumped around the country, often leading her husband into the fray rather than following.
Campaign managers solved the problem of her enthusiasm by giving Hillary her own, separate campaign agenda.
That way the Clinton message was spread across the nation without Hillary obviously out-playing the traditional wife function.
But now she will be able to return to her outspoken, opinionated self.
Her mother-in-law, Virginia Kelley, has no doubt that Hillary is going to be a major part of her son's administration as the 41st president of the United States.
‘This is going to be the greatest team ever seen in the White House,’ she predicts.
Meanwhile Hillary's reward for standing by her man and not forging too far ahead with her own individual approach will be immense — a degree of personal power that no American woman has ever savoured before.
This morning, she will be wielding it.
Clinton's new home
THIS is the White House Hillary Clinton will take over.
She is expected to make many changes to the 200-year-old building.
It has 132 rooms with seven staircases, 412 doors, 147 windows, 28 fireplaces and 32 bathrooms.
The rooms are stuffed with antiques and priceless treasures.
In addition there is a billiard room, solarium, cinema, indoor and outdoor pools, bowling alley and gym.
Washington wags suggest the Clintons may add a sound-proofed music room where Bill can relax with his saxophone.
Their 12-year-old daughter Chelsea is expected to get her choice of suites and will be allowed to decorate it as she wishes.
She is likely to choose the room Amy Carter opted for in 1976.
The Queen's rooms were so called to mark America's independence from Britain.
One feature that is certain to go is George Bush's horse shoe pit.
The Clintons are expected to turn this into a rose garden.
Ins and outs of the White Houes
Battling Barbara yearned secretly for George to lose.
BARBARA Bush seems hurt and angry that the American voters have finally turned on her husband.
But deep, deep down the relief is overwhelming.
It has become agony for her to live up to the manufactured image of America's favourite grandmother.
The truth is that Barbara loves being a grandmother but while she was in the White House she couldn't be a proper one.
Now she wants to cruise the canals of France in a barge, tend to her beloved garden in Kennebunkport and read to her own grandchildren, instead of other people's.
As First Lady, none of that had been possible.
This time last year Barbara faced the hard truths of her life in the White House and decided she wanted no more of it.
She was then 67 and George was 68 and she wanted them to spend their retirement years quietly, without affairs of State dogging their every move.
Washington insiders believe that she told her husband how she felt and suggested he should use the ‘excuse’ of Graves Disease, a condition affecting the heart rhythm which they both suffer from, as a way of standing down from office.
Instead, the President persuaded her to give him four more years.
But Barbara never stopped wanting a different sort of life.
When she took over as First Lady four years ago, she was hailed as the freshest breath of air to hit Washington in years.
After eight years of Queen Nancy in the White House, she seemed charmingly normal and down-to-earth.
Suddenly she was doing for silver-haired women of matronly stature what Joan Collins had done for the middle aged.
The President himself remarked: ‘I think if Barbara Bush were running this year she'd be elected, but it's too late.’
But the glamour soon wore off and she began publicly complaining about media attacks and lack of privacy.
‘It's just not fun to run when lies and things, hurtful lies (are published),’ she said in a recent interview.
In recent months the presidential asset has been the subject of some distinctly unflattering news articles, including a long Vanity Fair magazine story that painted her as an autocrat angry with her husband and out of touch with her family.
Meanwhile, a Washington Post article borrowed from Little Red Riding Hood to exclaim sarcastically: ‘What big teeth you have, Grandma’.
Barbara, a political wife to the end, managed to bite her lip.
But over the past few weeks many Americans have sensed a change in her.
The new Barbara, they say, is dying to speak out.
Until now, the only speaking Barbara has managed to do has been through the mouth of her dog Millie by way of a book written in the pet's name.
The book went on to become a best-seller and last year's Presidential Christmas card was even ‘paw-signed’ by Millie.
Meanwhile Millie's mistress, frustrated at being parted from the family she had devoted herself to rearing and longing for the freedom to travel and relax, stayed loyal to her husband's ambitions.
Now, as those ambitions have crumbled, Barbara must be remembering how it all started, the day when she and George swept into the White House after his eight years as Vice-President.
That day, she said how much she hoped George would try to enjoy the excitement of the office.
It was wrong to do things in life and not enjoy them.
‘That is not to say that this is going to be all fun,’ she hastily added.
For Barbara it was fun, but only for a while.
After that the First Lady started wanting to be a wife, mother and grandmother again.
Flier dive-bombs wife
A JILTED husband stole a plane and dive-bombed his estranged wife's home.
But Bill Marconda, 35, crashed into a road in Fontana, California, because he could not fly.
He suffered bruises and faces charges.
Rod Stewart's glasses
Glasses, a beard and lots of grey hairs — 47-year-old Rod Stewart's new look seems to have stunned his model wife Rachel Hunter who joined him at a Los Angeles club.
Charles and Diana go to war again
Clive Nelson in Korea
PRINCE Charles and Princess Diana were at war last night as they toured a country torn apart by civil strife.
On the second day of their official visit to Korea they fought a bitter personal conflict by ignoring each other and communicating only with a series of grimaces.
The saddest scenes occurred late last night at a banquet hosted by Korea's leader, President Roh Tae-Woo.
During a 30-minute speech-making session, Diana completely froze out her husband.
Charles made just two fleeting references to his wife, while she stared blankly ahead.
Diana, whose frustration in her failed marriage has been revealed in TODAY, refused to give her husband a hint of the warmth she once showed.
Three times as the president spoke, Diana flashed him the kind of flattering sideways glances she once gave Charles.
But as far as the Prince's speech was concerned the couple might as well have been strangers.
British members of the 200-strong audience at The Blue House, Seoul's presidential palace, winced as Charles read one particular phrase in his prepared speech.
Flanked by his grim-faced wife he said: ‘We are fortunate in the depth of our relationship.’
He was talking about trade links between Britain and Korea.
But nobody else in Seoul cared about trade links when they could focus all their attention on the crumbling marriage of the warring Waleses.
Behind the scenes, British diplomats in Seoul, Korea were furious at the way last night's meeting was handled.
For bungling Korean officials hung the Union Flag upside down— a symbol of distress.
One guest at the presidential banquet said wryly: ‘It was strangely appropriate.
You could have cut the atmosphere with a knife.’
Other officials claimed Diana's total indifference to the four-day South Korean tour was illustrated by her choice of clothes.
For a Royal tour she always used to pull out the stops and literally shop until she dropped for the occasion.
Catherine Walker, her favourite designer, would run her up half a dozen suits and milliner Philip Somerville would have supplied the hats.
On past trips to Japan and Saudi Arabia Philip Somerville created up to a dozen hats for her.
For this tour he received no new orders,
‘She has lots of hats and dresses that aren't worn out and she obviously feels it's a pity not to wear them again,’ he says.
‘She is also setting an example in these hard economic times and I think we should respect the Princess for this.’
On this tour, she was clearly being economical.
She stepped off the plane wearing an old primrose Catherine Walker number which last saw the light of day five years ago.
And for the important State Gala she donned an outfit she had worn only last week at the Queen's 40th Anniversary celebrations and before that on the Nigerian tour in 1989.
The wife of one prominent member of the British community in Seoul said: ‘We would have hoped she'd have picked something she hadn't worn just a week ago.’
Diana topped the encrusted multi-colour bolero jacket and long lavender skirt with her family's own Spencer tiara.
Last night Buckingham Palace denied that this trip would be the last one Charles and Diana would ever take together and three separate sources confirmed that the couple still planned to travel abroad next spring.
But Palace insiders last night refused to name the destination.
One said: ‘We are saying nothing until all the details have been finalised.’
Privately, other aides claimed it would help calm the furious row if details of the trip were leaked.
One said: ‘It might not be a bad idea if it was all to come out.
At least it would stop this dreadful speculation.’
Buckingham Palace refused to be drawn into the row about whether the Queen forced Diana to travel to Korea with Charles.
A spokesman said: ‘We see no point in dignifying this kind of speculation with a comment.’
In a clear reference to last June's revelations by Royal writer Andrew Morton in his best-seller Diana: Her True Story, the spokesman added: ‘We didn't in the summer and we don't intend to now.’
The day which ended terribly at the presidential palace started badly at the same venue.
Prince Charles and Princess Di ana arrived together for what diplomats described as a ‘courtesy call’ on the president of Korea and his wife.
But there was no hint of courtesy or even ordinary politeness between the Prince and Princess of Wales, who barely acknowledged each other with a glance.
Diana, wearing a pale blue fitted jacket and navy velvet skirt, giggled nervously as she was told exactly where to stand with her husband.
The pair cringed in embarrassment as the president, speaking through an interpreter, paid them the world's most unlikely compliment.
He said they looked like ‘a beautiful couple together’.
Nothing was further from the truth.
The brief visit was further marred when their two most trusted aides, deputy private secretary Peter Westmacott and first Lady-in-Waiting Anne Beckworth-Smith, were barred from the Palace by over-zealous Korean security guards.
Their official car, following behind the royals, was stopped and then forced into a police compound.
After 10 minutes of frantic negotiations, the pair were released by embarrassed security guards and the trusted aides were allowed to join Charles and Diana.
The day got worse for Diana as it went on.
While Charles made a speech to young Korean businessmen on the environment — potentially embarrassing in the world's third most polluted city — Diana opened an exhibition planned to boost British trade.
The promotion, in Seoul's Lotte department store, was supposed to show the best of British goods.
But, alongside top names including Wedgwood, Burberry, Jaeger and Laura Ashley was some of the worst of the rubbish sold to tourists.
As a medley of ‘traditional British music’ including Rule Britannia, Greensleeves and The Lincolnshire Poacher was played over a crackly PA, Diana was forced to walk past a tacky display of plastic policemen's helmets and twee musical boxes shaped like Shakespeare's cottage.
Diana noticed the musical boxes — selling at 55,000 Korean Won (about £48)— and swiftly turned away.
Her embarrassment continued when she was introduced to a procession of Korean shop workers, none of whom spoke any English.
Each of them bowed in turn and Diana was forced to smile weakly back.
Things got worse when ITN Royal reporter David Chater, 39, fired a question at her.
In a clear reference to the claim that the Queen forced her to undertake the visit he shouted: ‘Are you really happy to be here, ma'am?’
Diana gave him a soulful glance and replied: ‘Yes, thank you very much.’
Despite admitting she was still suffering from jet lag she was forced to spend lunchtime with Prince Charles at the official home of Prime Minister Hyun Soong-Jong and his wife.
Again, she and Charles appeared to avoid each other entirely.
Later they went to the scene of one of the most bloody battles in the 1950–53 Korean war affecting British troops.
It was there that Diana took her own revenge — by deliberately upstaging her husband.
After two days of meekly walking behind him, Diana was determined to steal the show.
The battle took place just one mile from the blood-drenched border with North Korea.
As the pair were taken to Castle Hill, overlooking the spot where 59 British soldiers were killed by Chinese invaders, Diana made her move.
It began when the couple were introduced to war veteran Sam Mercer, 63, of Streatham, South London.
Charles was clearly fascinated by Mr Mercer's story of how he was shot twice by the Chinese and held prisoner for two years.
He listened in rapt concentration as Mr Mercer described how one soldier shot off his leg and threatened to kill him until he shouted back at him ‘in best barrack room invective’.
Charles laughed and said: ‘I bet you did.
I bet you did.’
After the meeting, photographed by 30 cameramen and TV crews from around the world, Charles turned to leave.
Then Diana pounced.
Although she appeared uninterested while Army commanders Brigadier David Morgan and Major John Martin described what happened in 1951, she moved towards Mr Mercer the moment Charles's back was turned.
As he walked to their chauffeur-driven Range Rover, she approached Mr Mercer and cracked a joke.
For the next minute Diana and the old soldier stood laughing delightedly together.
Charles turned abruptly round and gave his wife a withering look as reporters homed in on the pair.
Diana had stolen the show again.
Body language spells out the bitter divide
Robyn Foyster
AS the Prince and Princess of Wales sat only a few feet apart in Seoul's Presidential palace yesterday they could have been mistaken for strangers uncomfortably thrown together.
Even when they stood shoul der-to-shoulder, they looked as tense as people crammed in a lift, desperate to avoid any more contact than necessary.
Despite Buckingham Palace's bid to show the Waleses as a united couple, the pictures on these two pages speak volumes about their inability to relax in each other 's company.
The main picture shows them sitting bolt upright with their hands clenched together in their laps.
Despite the opulence of the surroundings, they look as wooden as the chairs they sit in.
Diana's pinched expression and deliberate attempts to avoid her husband's penetrating gaze demonstrate her determination to shut herself off from him.
Prince Charles is sitting with his legs spread but there is a give-away sign of his unease: he is nervously playing with his cuff-links.
In that single photograph, Buckingham Palace's damage limitation exercise comes unstuck.
The picture shows without doubt that the royal couple are close to a marriage split, says an expert in body language.
‘There is nothing here to suggest any show of affection or love between them,’ says psychologist Dr Peter Trower.
‘You have a desperate attempt by Prince Charles to be the boss.
But he is leaking another message that he is not confident he has succeeded.
‘He obviously picks up Diana's refusal to comply.’
Dr Trower says Diana's way of holding her head high shows that she will not be submissive in the face of Charles's attempt to dominate.
‘He does this by resorting to gorilla-like behaviour, puffing up his chest and appearing expansive,’ says Dr Trower.
‘Yet he does show great uncertainty in the face of her determination.
That's why he is twitching his cuff-links and directing his body away from her.’
The picture on the far left shows the divide between the two, says Dr Trower.
‘There is no glimmer of affection between them,’ he says.
‘Clearly they hate each other 's company and they deal with it by looking away from each other.
Their heads and body angles even point in different directions.’
The picture above, which shows Diana standing with her head slumped, is also revealing, says Dr Trower.
‘Her lips are tightly shut showing a hint of social smile, yet her eyes are sad,’ he says.
‘This picture shows her unhappy resignation.’
HER BACK
DIANA looks uncomfortably stiff as she sits formally with her back bolt upright.
‘Her shoulders are not dipped suggesting a refusal to adopt a submissive role,’ says psychologist Dr Peter Trower.
‘She's proud and wants to convey her determination to stand up to him.
Her upright posture is typical of women in a formal situation.’
HER HANDS
HER hands are placed flat and squarely on her lap in a tidy yet tight pose.
Her clutched hands are locked together showing that she is completely cut off in her emotions towards her husband.
‘Women in a formal situation often have a similarly closed posture as if they are cut off from things around them,’ says Dr Trower.
HER HEAD
STEELY determination not to be dominated by her husband shows in the way Diana holds her head high.
By gazing towards him yet avoiding eye-contact, she is showing non-compliance.
Dr Trower says: ‘She's saying ‘don't look me down’.’
HER LEGS
THE firmly closed position of her feet and knees and the way she points her knees away from her husband shows that she feels no signs of affection towards him.
It indicates her willingness to be the dutiful wife yet refusal to be seen as part of a united couple.
HIS HEAD
CHARLES tilts his head slightly away from Diana showing he feels awkward about her refusal to show any sign of emotion.
His eyes are fixed on hers as if he is trying to outstare her.
‘But he is painfully aware of his failure to dominate her,’ says Dr Trower.
His right eyebrow is raised questioningly and his eyes try to hide his anxiety.
HIS HANDS
CLENCHED on top of each other like building blocks, his hands are putting on a show of determination.
But he shows signs of unease by touching his cuff-links with his thumb and finger, one of his nervous habits.
‘His hands show just how tense he is,’ says Dr Trower.
‘They suggest his feelings are of aggression towards her.’
HIS FEET
HIS left foot is pointing away from her, which shows he is not confident that he has succeeded in his attempt to dominate her.
‘His arms, legs and knees are spread out to add to the appearance of his size,’ says Dr Trower.
‘In this way, he is clearly trying to dominate his wife in what is known in men as gorilla-like behaviour.’
Richard Gere
RICHARD Gere is desperate to have children so long as he does not have to change any nappies.
‘But I wouldn't mind taking a couple of years just sitting round the house and reading,’ the 43-year-old actor, who is married to Cindy Crawford, told Oprah Winfrey on American TV yesterday.
‘I keep asking everyone, when you have a kid can you read?’
Sex power and the President
Margaret Hall in Washington
VICTORIOUS Bill Clinton hailed the women of America yesterday after their massive support put him in the White House.
About 60 per cent ignored accusations of womanising and voted for the 46-year-old governor of Arkansas, giving him a landslide win over President Bush.
A TODAY analysis of his victory shows a combination of caring policies, sex and power helped him win.
With a hug and a kiss from his stylish and loyal wife Hillary, the President-elect promised a new beginning for the country he called the Re-United States.
Top lawyer Hillary's part in her husband's success was reflected on bumper stickers appearing in Washington carrying the message: ‘Hillary will be secretary of whatever she damn well wants.’
The President-elect got straight down to work yesterday with a meeting with the team responsible for easing his passage into power on January 20.
Then he began planning a whirlwind national and international tour.
Premier John Major hinted they would have their first meeting ‘in the next few days’.
As Clinton was taking up the reins of power, a disconsolate President Bush flew back to Washington to make arrangements for the handover.
After a gracious speech in which he asked America to unite behind the new president, he whispered to his wife: ‘It's over.’
Clinton needed 270 electoral votes from among the 50 states to secure victory — each state carries a number of votes proportionate to its population.
The final result of electoral votes was: Clinton 370, Bush 168, Perot 0.
Clinton gained 43 per cent of the public votes, Bush 38 per cent and Perot 19 per cent.
Of the states, Clinton won 32 plus the District of Columbia, Bush 18, Perot 0.
Clinton syphoned off suburban traditional Republican voters while still commanding backing from the poor and black Democrats in the inner-cities.
He also got strong support from Vietnam veterans, who Bush said would turn against Clinton because of his anti-war activities.
Celebrating his victory in Arkansas, Clinton was handed his speech by his wife — who also showed him where to stand.
There was even speculation that she had helped him write it.
He told ecstatic supporters: ‘The American people have voted to make a new beginning.
‘This election is a clarion call for our country to face the challenges of the end of the Cold War and beginning of the next century.
‘Today, the steelworker and the stenographer, the teacher and the nurse, had as much power in the mystery of our democracy as the president, the billionaire, and the governor.
‘You all spoke with equal voices for change.
And tomorrow we will try to give you that.
‘You can trust us to wake up every day remembering the people we saw in the bus trips, the people we touched at the rallies, the people who had never voted before, the people who hadn't voted in 20 years, the people who'd never voted for a Democrat, the people who had given up hope, all of them saying we want our future back.’
Diana turns on the charm in a pact with Charles
Clive Nelson in Seoul
THE Princess of Wales charmed her Korean hosts yesterday after making an extraordinary pact with Prince Charles.
In a meeting late on Tuesday, the couple agreed the tour had got off to a bad start, upsetting the Koreans.
And they agreed to forget their differ ences and carry out their duties as planned.
The pact was prompted by reports sent to them from Buckingham Palace about reaction to the obvious signs of tension and unhappiness between them.
The Korean visit is taking place in the shadow of new disclosures by author Andrew Morton in an additional chapter of his book, Diana: Her True Story.
He revealed details of furious rows between Diana, her husband and Prince Philip, and an agreement Diana made to stay in the Royal Family after the Queen threatened her with exile.
The Koreans have become increasingly angry that the tour was being turned into a war between the royal couple.
‘Charles was told that they owed it to their hosts to give of their professional best,’ a royal aide said yesterday.
‘I think you'll find it will be all happiness and light from now on.’
The strain of the couple's pact clearly showed while they were together yesterday.
But they came the closest to looking like husband and wife so far when Charles handed Diana his pen after signing the visitors' book at an Anglican Cathedral.
As soon as they set off on separate duties, they both visibly relaxed.
The sparkle was back in Diana's eyes as she was able to concentrate on her favourite issues — visiting children, the sick and the elderly.
She turned on the charm to all she met and grinned at cameramen, seeming to know instinctively when the best pictures were being taken.
At the welfare centre in Seoul's Chungang University which serves food for the capital's poorest children, she was offered a beef-filled pancake.
But she spun away from the cameras as she popped the parcel into her mouth using chopsticks.
An aide said later: ‘The last thing she wanted was to have her picture taken when she was eating.’
Diana is said to have been deeply distressed by reports that she has recently suffered another outbreak of bulimia nervosa, the binge-eating disease.
After she had gulped the pancake, she picked up a shrimp and ate that saying: ‘I like that.’
Then she added: ‘I can't eat any more.
It's nearly lunchtime.’
She emerged into the autumn sunshine to be swamped by around 100 cheering Korean children desperate to see her.
Then it was on to the Salvation Army old people's home where one resident remarked: ‘How beautiful you are.
What is your secret?’
Diana replied: ‘Well I must admit, partly make-up and I do drink lots of water.’
Salvation Army territorial commander Peter Chang added later: ‘I've got to say she didn't put it down as being in love.’
A cheerful Charles, meanwhile, visited business and environmental seminars.
After unveiling a display of his own watercolours at Seoul's Hilton Hotel, he revealed he was ‘filled with a sense of panic’ about speaking in public.
He explained: ‘It is all too easy to make some apparently innocent, well-intentioned remark which is immediately seized upon by the press who love to hear guest speakers make a complete fool of themselves.
‘It's a problem which is acute in my own country and which, I am told, is beginning to afflict you here.’
Britt's pain
SHE was once considered one of the world's most beautiful women, but yesterday every line etched on Britt Ekland's face told a story of personal anguish.
The 50-year-old actress is struggling to come to terms with a series of disasters that have brought her life crashing round her.
Britt is heartbroken that her eight-year marriage to toyboy husband ‘Slim’ Jim McDonnell, 31, is to end in divorce.
She is also deeply worried their beloved young son Thomas Jefferson, four, will suffer from the split.
And while she tries to keep her family life together, her mother Mae-Britt, 73, is slipping slowly away from her each day with Alzheimer's Disease.
She still visits her even though Mae-Britt doesn't now recognise her.
Britt's distress is being made worse by a daunting work schedule and the strain was painfully evident as she jetted from Stockholm to Malmo.
Ahead of her she knew she had a tough day hosting a TV show about cancer, the disease which first struck Mae-Britt 22 years ago.
Dark glasses and make-up couldn't hide the lines, and she sat with her face hidden in her hands in the back of the car.
What looked like a wedding ring was wedged on her thumb.
Last night her brother Bengt said: ‘She is under strain and overworked.
There are many things on her hands at the moment.
‘She is very upset about the whole thing.’
I promise to change the world
Margaret Hall in Washington
PRESIDENT-elect Bill Clinton's pledge to change America echoed around the world last night.
If he can alter the fortunes of the superpower state for the better, other nations will follow.
Clinton comes from a place named Hope — and it is hope other leaders are placing on his shoulders.
Premier John Major and Japan's foreign minister were yesterday among the first to remind Clinton of America's responsibilities.
And hours after being elected on a mandate of change, Clinton plunged straight into the hard work of weaving the magic he has been promising his people.
Economic reform will be the thrust of his plan to get the country, and ultimately, the world, back on its feet.
Interest alone on the gigantic US deficit has grown to $204 billion — more than the money spent on all domestic programmes except defence.
If Clinton is to keep faith with the electors, he will invest in jobs for the 10 million on the dole, provide for wide-ranging health care for all and implement drastic tax reforms.
He has about 100 days to begin to crank new reforms into action.
The American electorate is among the most impatient in the world.
His first task must be to appoint his top team, the Clinton Cabinet.
These men and women will become household names around the world, as James Baker and Dick Cheney became in the Bush White House.
He will appoint a combination team of baby boomers and the old guard, some of whom have waited 12 years for another crack at running the country.
A fascinating tip for defence secretary is General Colin Powell, who master-minded the Gulf War.
By homing in on a national hero, Clinton will be keeping one of his early election promises to pick the best people — regardless of their party affiliaton.
With the team in place Clinton will be ready to swing into action putting his detailed budget proposals on the table by March.
The slashing here has to be drastic.
His pledge to halve the deficit over the next four years is largely based on eliminating 100,000 government jobs.
To get the economy moving he will rely on repairing the infrastructure of America — its ageing bridges and roads — to create eight million jobs.
There are plans to give everyone affordable health insurance, allow leave from work for anyone with a sick child or elderly relative to look after, and enforce a seven-day wait for anyone wanting to buy a handgun.
He will also lose no time in appointing an Aids expert to head a heavily-funded White House task-force.
He is likely to overturn the Bush ban on abortion counselling and the military's outlawing of gays.
Four of the highest judges likely to retire soon will replace them with more liberal appointments.
That way America, and the rest of the world, stand a chance of getting the ‘kinder, gentler’ approach Bush promised but failed to deliver.
Foreign policy will take a back seat while Clinton sorts out domestic problems.
But he cannot ignore it for long.
The US already stands on the brink of a trade war with the EC over the failure of GATT talks.
‘If Clinton cannot get the economy started and has trouble financing his ambitious spending programme, you may expect a greater withdrawal from foreign commitments, trade sanctions — whatever he thinks it will take,’ said one analyst.
But reaction to his election was upbeat.
Mr Major anticipated ‘continuing close and friendly relations between our two countries’.
Japanese Foreign Minister Michio Watanabe said a revitalised American economy was important for Japan and for the whole world.
Bill Clinton and his Secret Service
MR CLINTON is set to give his Secret Service agents fits in his determination not to live in fear of the assassin's bullet.
One January 20, he promises the front door of the White House will swing open for the first time in nearly 30 years, as Bill, wife Hilary and 12-year-old daughter Chelsea pop down to McDonald's and do a little shopping.
Bill Clinton bet wins women £56,250
A NEW YORK woman who backed Bill Clinton last April to win the presidency scooped £56,250 when he swept to victory, bookmakers William Hill said.
Chelsea under the spotlight
CHELSEA Clinton has had her first taste of what it is to be a president's daughter.
Bill and Hillary's only child has been assigned a secret service agent to protect her while she attends public school near Little Rock.
At the age of 12, she is the youngest First Child since Amy Carter's arrival at the White House aged nine in 1977.
Chelsea, named after a Joni Mitchell song Chelsea Morning, will now become one of the most photographed children in the world.
Everything she does, the clothes she wears and her boyfriends will be minutely scrutinized.
Comparisons with Awful Amy, who yawned throughout her father Jimmy's victory speech and who was regarded as an electoral liability four years later when he was thrown out of the White House, will be inevitable.
But the Clintons have been careful to keep their daughter out of the campaign spotlight, and friends predict she will adapt well to her new life.
Her thoughts were carefully filtered through her father's public relations machine which ensured she was never interviewed.
Her one speaking part was in an advertising plug for the family on the eve of the election.
Friends point out she is mature for her age and has become accustomed to the cameras, as her relaxed style showed when she joined her father at the polling booth on election day.
‘Stupid’ slogan turned Bush from a war hero to villain overnight
Sue Pettit and Gerard Evans
‘It's the economy, stupid.’
The Democrat campaign slogan said it all loud and clear and President Bush has paid the price for failing to listen.
The American people told him at the polls what they had been screaming from the rooftops for two years.
Exit polls revealed 43 per cent had voted on the issue of the economy, and they voted against the president because he wasn't hearing them.
When he uttered his infamous words ‘Read my lips.
No new taxes’ in the last election campaign he had already sealed his fate.
For he went on to introduce new taxes.
As the recession deepened into slump, the people tried to tell their government they were hurting.
But no treatment was forthcoming as 10 million were put on the dole, two million on food stamps and hundreds of thousands out on the streets.
So now the people have cut off the offending limb to save the rest of the body, their nation.
Just two years ago President Bush was the most popular American president ever.
He basked in the glow of adulation as US troops returned victorious from the Gulf War.
The Cold War was also won.
He seemed unassailable.
Yet his subsequent collapse from hero to villain has been as sudden as a Patriot missile strike.
His mistake may have been to assume the election was won before it was fought.
He proved himself out of touch over the economy and by opposing abortion on demand.
And when the country's worst riots in decades brought the ugliest face of the rich-poor divide into every citizen's living room, Bush shrugged it off.
His presidency was plunged further into trouble with a series of minor health scares culminating in the humiliation of throwing up sushi over the feet of the Japanese Prime Minister.
The prospect of a President Dan Quayle was not one many relished.
In Arkansas, Democrat Governor Bill Clinton saw and seized his chance.
The rest, as they say, is history.
Now Mr Bush is heading for his seaside home in Kennebunkport to hang up the sign — Gone Fishin'.
Even before the first exit polls came in he was buying new tackle in readiness.
He once said he was ‘looking forward to the day I can go fishing without someone sitting in the back of the boat saying don't I know there's a war on’.
Apart from getting big in the fishing business he wanted to get ‘big in the golf business and big in the grandchild business’.
But he may find his new sporting pursuits bunkered by some retirement activity he hadn't planned on.
For five years Bush insisted he was ‘out of the loop’ on the arms for hostages deal.
Evidence keeps surfacing to the contrary and retirement will not excuse the president from facing investigation and possible prosecution.
As a one-term loser Bush will not be in great demand for £15,000 a time dinner speeches and lectures across the globe.
‘You can't imagine the Japanese inviting him over,’ said one insider.
Meanwhile, billionaire Ross Perot looked anything but a loser as he appeared before a crowd of cheering supporters, danced with his wife to the tune Crazy and pronounced Clinton had won.
‘The American people have spoken,’ he said.
US defence changes
ONE of the biggest changes in US defence policy under Clinton will be the ending of the ban on gays.
Said one senior army general:
‘The homosexual thing bothers me.
There will be a major morale problem.’
Tight grip on Congress
THE vote that gave the Democrats the White House and is expected to give them their tightest grip on Congress in decades also saw the first black woman elected to the Senate.
Carol Moseley Braun, the Cook County Recorder of Deeds who won in Illinois, had entered the race following the Anita Hill/Clarence Thomas sexual harassment hearings.
Borg's wife serves up Pounds ¼m-a-year divorce ace
David Jones in Stockholm
£20m debt that is slowly destroying a boom town.
TENNIS legend Bjorn Borg has been served with a £21,000 a month maintenance claim to pay for his estranged wife's household staff.
Italian pop star Loredana Berte told a judge she needs the massive handouts to keep her in the luxurious style she enjoyed when they were together.
She says the settlement, which works out at £252,000 a year, will allow her to keep her maid, cook and secretary and help with the costs of a plush Milan apartment.
Last night Borg's lawyer said her demand was outrageous.
She was probably more wealthy than the 36-year-old six-times Wimbledon champion, he claimed.
Borg, who split with 41-year-old Loredana earlier this year, is now playing tennis tournaments for the over-35s for purses of just a few thousand pounds.
His lawyer Lars Mattsson said most of his multi-million pound fortune had been spent repaying creditors after his clothing company crashed.
‘Loredana said she needed to support herself even though there aren't any children,’ he said.
‘We are contesting it very strongly.
‘Our case will be that Bjorn filed for divorce first here in Sweden.’
Asked whether the ice-cool Borg was angry at Loredana's claim he replied: ‘Bjorn very seldom loses his temper.
But he says it's ridiculous.’
Brave Laura home at last 
Olga Craig, in Pittsburgh
BRAVE tot Laura Davies flew home in triumph last night after her remarkable recovery from a pioneering liver and bowel transplant in America.
It was the day her mother Fran has prayed for.
As she watched her boisterous daughter race down a Pittsburgh street yesterday, the giggles and grins meant only one thing: ‘We're all going home.’
Fran, unable to drag her gaze away from the little girl's excited face, said: ‘We got the final all-clear from the Pittsburgh Children's Hospital yesterday.
‘You have no idea how we felt.
We told Laura three days ago she was going home, and she just kept shouting: ‘Lewis, Lewis, I'm going home to see Lewis.’
‘She's missed our two-year-old so much since we've been out here.
‘Last night she wanted to wrap up a pizza for him.
Now that she's started eating, she just doesn't stop.
She'd live on cheese pizzas if we let her.’
Watching Laura, it is hard to believe that one year ago this chubby child from Manchester with the tangle of blonde curls was a jaundiced, wasted waif, waiting to die.
Diagnosed as suffering from gastroschisis, a major bowel disorder, at birth, she was unable to digest any food at all.
But thanks to a team of pioneering transplant surgeons in America, Laura can look forward to a happy life.
‘Now we're going home for the first proper Christmas Laura has ever had,’ said Fran.
‘Believe me, it will be the best.’
Delors ‘sabotaged jobs for Britain’ in trade war
By Russell Jenkins
JACQUES Delors was last night accused of sabotaging thousands of British jobs for the sake of personal ambition.
He was accused of scuppering crucial GATT talks to avert a world trade war by EC negotiator Ray MacSharry.
Irishman Mr MacSharry was so furious about Mr Delors' interference that he resigned his post.
Arriving back in Brussels after failing to reach agreement in Chicago, Mr MacSharry accused Mr Delors of buttering up farmers to boost his chances of becoming French president.
The EC Commission president is said to have telephoned Mr MacSharry when he was close to clinching a deal in Chicago.
Mr Delors is said to have threatened to have any deal involving concessions voted down in Brussels.
‘I wash my hands of these talks.
I won't continue as EC negotiator,’ Mr MacSharry wrote to Mr Delors in Brussels.
‘It is impossible to carry on when your boss is undermining you,’ he told colleagues.
Mr Delors is now likely to come under pressure to quit his Pounds 120,000-a-year job as commission president.
He is supposed to remain impartial and not get involved in national politics.
As the GATT talks broke down, Washington imposed 200 per cent tariffs on £650 million worth of EC wines and dairy produce.
The move could trigger a tit-for-tat trans-Atlantic trade war if the Community retaliates in kind.
The Americans were angered by what they believe is excessive protection for French farmers.
The stumbling block in the GATT talks is the level of subsidies to oil seed.
US trade representative Carla Hills said: ‘We have demonstrated extraordinary patience and are open to further negotiation in the 30 days before the tariffs become effective.’
The taxes apply to white wine, rapeseed oil and wheat gluten.
She warned a further £1.1 billion in EC goods could be targeted.
America acted despite a last-ditch plea to avert a world trade war by Michael Heseltine last night.
‘It is in the interests of both sides to avoid starting a spiral retaliation, which can only harm exports and damage prospects for a GATT agreement,’ the Board of Trade president told MPs.
‘We may never have a better chance to conclude such a wide-ranging agreement.
The prospects for the world trading system are serious and those most directly concerned will carry a heavy responsibility.’
John Major, who believes £150 billion of extra world trade hangs on a GATT deal, is anxious for an agreement to take to the forthcoming Edinburgh Euro summit.
Irish premier calls election
IRISH Prime Minister Albert Reynolds called a General Election last night after losing a confidence vote.
Voters will elect a new government on November 26 — the same day they decide if the country's ban on abortion should be changed.
Mr Reynolds's government lost the motion by 88 votes to 77 after a walkout by coalition partners the Progressive Democrats.
They were furious Mr Reynolds had accused their leader, Des O'Malley, of being dishonest.
Hezza bid to halt war on US trade
By Russell Jenkins
A LAST-DITCH plea to avert a world trade war was made by Michael Heseltine last night.
His appeal came as Washington imposed 200 per cent tariffs on £650 million worth of EC wines and dairy produce.
‘It is in the interests of both sides to avoid starting a spiral retaliation, which can only harm exports and damage prospects for a GATT agreement,’ the Board of Trade president told MPs.
‘We may never have a better chance to conclude such a wide-ranging agreement.
If this chance is missed, the prospects for the world trading system are serious and those most directly concerned will carry a heavy responsibility.’
EC Commissioner Ray MacSharry and America's Ed Madigan blamed each other after failing to reach agreement in Chicago.
Arriving back in Brussels, Mr MacSharry accused his boss Jacques Delors of sabotaging the GATT talks because his hopes of becoming French president may depend on farmers' votes.
Mr Delors is said to have phoned Mr MacSharry and threatened to have any deal involving concessions voted down in Brussels.
‘I wash my hands of these talks,’ Mr MacSharry wrote to Mr Delors.
US trade representative Carla Hills said: ‘We have demonstrated extraordinary patience and are open to further negotiation in the 30 days before the tariffs become effective.’
She warned a further £1.1 billion in EC goods could be targeted.
Why that confession means so much to Di
By Clive Nelson in Seoul
IT WAS what Diana has always wanted…official acceptance by the Palace that her marriage is not a good one.
Yes, WE all knew that the marriage was in deep trouble because of reports in this newspaper, Andrew Morton's book on Diana and endless reports from all corners of the media world.
But the Palace has always refused to admit it until yesterday.
Diana felt she would never be free to enjoy her life until some official recognition was given to the truth about her marriage to Charles.
She now hopes that the world will no longer expect to see her on the arm of her husband, hugging or kissing him in public, behaving like a loving wife.
As TODAY disclosed, Diana and Charles have reached an agreement to go their separate ways within the marriage.
They will have their own friends, run separate diaries and make their own official tours and engagements.
They will only come together for official royal engagements, when the Queen specially requests their company at Balmoral or other royal houses, and for the sake of the children, William and Harry.
Diana hopes that all the pressures of trying to pretend to loyal supporters about her marriage will now be removed.
Buckingham Palace has always insisted that it does not comment on the private affairs of members of the family.
The announcements about Princess Margaret's divorce and Anne's break-up came only after solicitors had agreed terms.
Palace Press officers would never hold a conference to make a statement about any of the royal marriages.
Furious
Their style is to give information to selected journalists — in this case all the royal correspondents in Korea — making sure that they remain unnamed sources.
Diana has been furious that some Palace aides tried to build up stories before the tour that the couple were getting closer together again.
One even went as far as giving a story to a newspaper that the couple would share the same bed in Korea.
TODAY has learned that Diana was furious at this attempt to manipulate her.
She showed her anger in public by virtually ignoring Charles.
But she was flying home last night knowing that the Palace plot failed.
She will be able to get on with her independent life knowing at last that everyone is aware of the truth.
The Palace official who made the confession to reporters is a highly-experienced diplomat.
Although he was engaged in a heated discussion with a journalist about the way the tour of Korea had been reported, it is unlikely that he would have said anything that he did not think his employer, the Princess of Wales, wanted known.
He has always been protective towards the princess.
For example, he was not one of the Palace officials who tried to pretend that the Korean trip was the Togetherness Tour for the Prince and Princess.
He did not take part in the false publicity that some aides drummed up before the tour.
Last night the Palace denied the aide's remarks had been sanctioned.
But one official told TODAY: ‘The Press has been wanting us to make some statement on the marriage and Morton's book for some time.
So has Diana.
‘Now you've all got your wish.
Perhaps the prince and princess can now get on with their official duties without all this speculation about their marriage.’
Pictures riddle of Andrew and girl in bikini
By Margaret Hall in Washington
MYSTERY surrounds a claim that Prince Andrew was caught by the camera as he frolicked with a bikini-clad beauty.
The woman in the fun photos, a 24-year-old Briton, is said to have sold her story of the time she spent in Andrew's company to an American magazine.
She told the National Enquirer that she had met the prince just months before the Duchess of York was snapped in intimate poses in the South of France with American financial adviser John Bryan, 37.
According to the magazine, which has published only artist's impressions of the pictures, it was Fergie's discovery of the photos that ended the Yorks' marriage and sent her into Bryan's arms.
Now the woman is hoping to raise over £100,000 by selling souvenirs of her friendship.
There are eight snapshots allegedly showing Andrew wearing a towel draped over his legs.
But the woman is also trying to sell a dozen letters and postcards which, she claims, Andrew sent her when he was away at sea.
She says she doesn't really want to earn money from the revelations but simply wants to set the story of the Yorks' marriage straight.
The woman is not named in the Enquirer story.
It is the latest sensation to rock the Royal Family.
Last night TODAY was told unofficially that several European magazines had been approached with the material.
Paris Match, which originally published the pictures of Fergie with Johnny Bryan, said they hadn't seen the pictures.
But one worker confirmed they had been in the office and seemed to be completely genuine.
The source at the magazine confirmed later: ‘Paris Match has been approached and pictures of that nature have been seen by some members of staff.
There is no doubt in my mind that they exist.’
And at the National Enquirer in the US, the paper which broke the story and published artist's impressions of the pictures, insiders said the pictures had been seen by at least one member of staff.
The woman's sales representative, who has been negotiating big-money deals in America, Europe and Australia, said: ‘The pictures are absolutely genuine.’
But publications in America and Europe which may have been approached to buy were being wary on the subject yesterday.
Buckingham Palace refused to comment last night.
‘We heard similar unfounded rumours a short time ago, and did not comment then,’ a spokesman said.
‘We will not do so now.’
Branson warns of job cuts
By Kevin Murphy
AIRLINE tycoon Richard Branson has asked his 3,000 staff to share jobs or take unpaid leave.
In a letter to Virgin Atlantic employees, he warned that unless he can get more flight slots out of Heathrow he may even be forced to axe jobs.
The grim news comes in the wake of the controversial British Airways takeover of debt-ridden Dan-Air, which has been strongly criticised by Britain's smaller airlines.
They say BA already dominates at Heathrow and the takeover gives it a big foothold at Gatwick as well.
Branson told employees that Virgin's present staffing level was designed to allow for a modest expansion.
‘But if we are not able to obtain all the slots we've applied for at Heathrow we may have to consider cutting back,’ he said.
Cutting back on jobs was something he had never wanted to do.
‘I dearly hope it won't be necessary,’ he added, asking for volunteers to take six months unpaid leave and take part in job-sharing schemes.
Branson has asked European Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan to launch an inquiry into the system of allocating airport slots.
Following his failure to grab a slice of Dan-Air, he announced that he is pressing ahead with plans to set up a small European airline if Virgin can get permission to fly from Heathrow to Brussels, Paris and Maastricht.
He also wants routes from Heathrow to key US destinations and to Johannesburg in South Africa.
Branson has poured money into his airline since selling Virgin Music to Thorn EMI for £560million in March.
But he warned: ‘There is a finite amount.
‘And it would be unfair at this stage to concentrate it exclusively on the airline.’
Meryl Streep
OSCAR winner Meryl Streep is to star in Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber's new stage musical Sunset Boulevard.
Meryl, above, who revealed her singing talents in Postcards From The Edge, will play the role made famous by Gloria Swanson in the 1950 film.
The world premiere will be in Los Angeles next year.
Richard where are you?
By Emma Campbell
A LOVESICK Frenchwoman plastered a town with pictures of her English sweetheart only to discover he was married.
Isabelle Pech pursued Richard Burley to Britain after he suddenly broke off their summer romance and disappeared.
She only knew his first name and that he was from somewhere near Luton, Beds.
She fly-posted the town with photos of them and the caption: ‘Richard, where are you?’
But last night, Isabelle, 25, an English teacher, was back home in Albi near Montpellier, France.
Jobless Richard, 34, of Hitchin, Herts, said: ‘It was just a holiday fling.
‘This is going to destroy my marriage.
Everyone thinks it's a joke, but it's not funny to me.’
Romance flared after they met on a camping holiday in Cap d'Agde in the South of France.
‘He was tall, blond and handsome, a real English gentleman,’ Isabelle said.
The devout Roman Catholic said she got involved with Richard because he said he cared for her and he was single.
They both talked of marriage, she claimed.
When the two-week holiday finished, Richard told her he was going to Dijon in the centre of France.
‘I missed him so much I phoned every campsite in the area to try to track him down, but no luck,’ she said.
‘He promised to stay in regular contact, but I haven't received a single phone call.’
Isabelle was being comforted by family and friends last night after an anonymous call from England confirmed the awful truth to her.
‘I was used and lied to,’ she said.
‘I feel I've been taken for a fool.’
‘I thought he was sincere when he told me he wanted to stay in France.
‘I did not expect to find he was married.
Why didn't he tell me the truth?
I don't want to see him again.’
Your £3m cheque, mate
CHESS ace Bobby Fischer wept yesterday after clinching a £3 million revenge match against Soviet rival Boris Spassky.
Their 30-game battle, which ended in Yugoslavia, marked Fischer's return to international chess after 20 years.
The heavenly nude who became a nun
IT'S been a long time since Sister Jacques-Marie took her clothes off for public viewing.
Nearly 50 years, in fact.
Once, she was Monique Bourgeois — nude model and muse to French artist Henri Matisse.
Today, as a Dominican nun, she stays fully clothed in long white habit and black wimple, running a disabled people's home near Biarritz, France.
But the old Monique remains forever unclad, sprawled on a tiled floor, in the Matisse painting, Pink Nude.
Monique was 20 when she began the intense three-year association with Matisse, in 1941.
He was 71.
When she gave up modelling for religion, Matisse was distraught.
He spent his remaining 10 years, until he died in 1954, vainly trying to lure her back to his studio.
‘There can be no salvation outside the Church,’ the Sister insisted.
But she had already found immortality.
Just ask the Pink Nude.
Schoolboy in stab killing wins freedom
By Christian Gysin
A PUBLIC schoolboy who killed a fellow pupil he claimed had raped his girlfriend, was freed by the Appeal Court yesterday.
Martial arts expert Andrew Richens, 23, was just 17 when he flew into a rage and stabbed teenager William Choi.
Choi, a contemporary at the £8,000-a-year Dover College, Kent, taunted the brilliant student about having sex with his beautiful Malaysian sweetheart.
He told him: ‘She wanted it.
She probably never had a real man before.’
After the killing, at Choi's flat in Balham, South London, Richens and the girl, Sabrina Ngiau, put the body in a trunk.
They then had it driven to Kent, where it was buried in a field behind Richens' parents' house in the village of Ightham.
Some members of the jury wept as they returned their murder verdict at the Old Bailey in March 1988.
Yesterday, three appeal judges headed by Lord Taylor, the Lord Chief Justice, ruled they were not properly directed.
The Appeal Court accepted Richens' defence of provocation and he was freed, having served a seven year sentence.
Teachers at Dover College described Richens as a brilliant sportsman and scholar who they expected to become a lawyer.
He was a prefect and house captain, a member of the school rugby team, practised karate and was a fine cross country runner.
Sabrina was the only person he had ever loved.
‘It was more than just a sexual attraction between us.
I cared about her before I cared about anything else,’ he said.
Lord Taylor said Richens had explained he was carrying the sheath knife, used in the killing, to reassure Sabrina, who had been frightened about staying at the flat since Choi raped her.
At the time of the trial she fled back to her wealthy family in Malaysia.
Alert on highway to hell
DRIVERS are being warned to steer clear of a major road because of sniper and rock-throwing attacks.
A motorist was killed when he was hit in the head by concrete while another was shot in the jaw.
More than 20 other drivers have reported their cars being hit by bullets or boulders on the 10-mile stretch since June.
‘This is the first time we've issued a warning because of violence on the highway,’ an American AA spokesman said.
The Interstate-295 around Jacksonville, Florida, carries 80,000 vehicles a day and is a popular tourist route.
At last a smile for Grandma Brigitte
By Alison James in Paris
BRIGITTE Bardot's happiness is complete as she shares a proud, loving moment with her long-lost son Nicolas and the grand-daughter she feared she'd never meet.
Like any protective grandmother, she keeps a careful hand on Thea-Josephine as the child balances precariously on her father's shoulders.
Just hours earlier she had set eyes on the pretty two-year-old and sister Anna-Camilla, seven, for the first time.
Brigitte's grand reunion with her new found family came after a separation from Nicolas of more than 10 years.
Her joy on the trip to Oslo, where her son has set up home with his Norwegian wife Anne-line, was made complete when she married fiance Bernard d'Ormale.
They tied the knot in a romantic ceremony on the banks of a fjord.
Brigitte, 58, who devotes her life to animal welfare, said she felt 17 again.
Those who know her say the actress is transformed from a care-worn recluse into her old vivacious self.
Nicolas, 32, and his 31-year-old wife live in a modest apartment and friends say pride stopped them getting in touch with her.
He was born when Brigitte was at the top, living as a spoilt star with actor-husband Jacques Charrier.
Motherhood was more than she could cope with.
The couple split up and it was left to Jacques and his parents to raise Nicolas.
Now, Brigitte has become a mother, grandmother and wife all at once— and she couldn't look happier.
Brit drug dealer held in chains
A BRITON sentenced to 40 years in a Thai jail for drug trafficking is being kept in chains, his father revealed yesterday.
Peter Heather, 27, was found with heroin worth £60,000.
His father Ted, of Stoke-on-Trent, said: ‘He could endure prison if he were not chained.’
The parents of Patricia Cahill, 19, who is serving more than 18 years in Thailand for heroin trafficking, have averted financial ruin by selling their Birmingham house.
Gunman kills his family
A MAN killed his estranged wife, their two young daughters and his mother and father-in-law before turning his gun on himself.
His brother-in-law managed to escape and raise the alarm when Stephane Bohaine, 30, burst into his wife's family home at Aubagne, southern France.
‘We believe it was a family row,’ said police.
Girlfriend sues Magic over Aids
BASKETBALL star Magic Johnson is being sued by a woman who claims he gave her the Aids virus.
The American admitted sleeping with the woman, but denied he gave her the killer disease.
His lawyer said the unnamed woman was demanding a great deal of money.
But he added: ‘For all we know she was the individual who infected him.’
The 6ft 9in star, 33, retired for the second time this week after players said they were too scared to compete against him.
4 die in family massacre
By Gerard Evans and Cheryl Stonehouse
A WEALTHY Briton was being hunted by detectives last night after his wife and three children were found shot dead at home.
Police in San Diego said Gail Spiro, 40, daughters Sara, 16, Deana, 11, and son Adam, 14, were hit in the head as they slept.
International commodities broker Ian Spiro, 46, is still missing.
Police fear he may also have been a victim.
A spokesman for the San Diego County Sheriff said: ‘This was a particularly brutal killing.’
‘These people were cold bloodedly shot in the head as they slept in separate bedrooms.’
There were no signs of forced entry.
Only the family car was taken from the £1 million landscaped home.
County homicide chief, Lieutenant John Tenwolde said he could not rule out the possibility that Mr Spiro had also been a victim of his family's killer.
‘We have not been able to account for him and we don't know where he is and we're very much interested in talking to him,’ he said.
‘This was a very contented, prosperous family who showed no signs of discord.’
But the public were warned not to approach Mr Spiro, who had a seven-day growth of beard, if he was spotted.
Mr Spiro swapped London for California and moved his family into the luxury home earlier this year.
Last night his distraught mother Phyllis said: ‘I heard the news earlier today.
‘Obviously it's a terrible shock.
‘I haven't heard from my son for a couple of weeks.’
Dumb pupils get a short sharp shock
FIVE schoolchildren in Japan were given 100-volt electric shocks for not bringing textbooks to class.
A teacher at the junior high school in the town of Kizu made them hold negative and positive terminals while he turned on an electric current.
Police were said to be planning to question the principal and teachers.
Japanese schools are very disciplinarian, with corporal punishment accepted, and rules regulating everything from hairstyle to how to lace one's shoes.
Drugs girl admits to smuggling
DRUGS girl Patricia Cahill has admitted that she knew she was smuggling when customs men seized her in Bangkok.
Cahill, 19, who is serving an 18-year sentence, said: ‘I knew I was carrying something.’
But she claimed she did not know her cargo was heroin.
‘It could have been gold or ammunition,’ she said.
Cahill is pinning her hopes on the King of Thailand, who regularly pardons long-term prisoners on his birthday.
But her solicitor said: ‘Admitting this has not done any good.
It would have been better if she had kept a low profile.’
Cahill and Karen Smith, 21, from the West Midlands, were caught in July 1990 with heroin worth £4 million hidden in their luggage.
Smith was jailed for 25 years.
Preacher cashes in on armageddon
A DOOMSDAY preacher persuaded followers to hand over all their money before the end of the world — and spent it.
Lee Jang-lim, 46, said the faithful would ascend to heaven in a ‘rapture’ on October 28 as Armageddon struck the world.
Lee was arrested and charged with pocketing £900,000 of his followers' money.
He told a court in Seoul, South Korea: ‘I'm sorry the rapture did not come, but it will one day.’
Spy hunt police discover body
By Gerard Evans in San Diego
POLICE hunting a British spy believed to have murdered his wife and three children last night found a body fitting his description.
The Ford car in which Ian Spiro fled after the shooting was discovered in a remote area 100 miles east of San Diego, near the Mexican border.
Inside was the body of a man who had been shot through the mouth.
Ron Van Rapphorst of San Diego police said: ‘We have located the vehicle we have been looking for.
‘There is a body inside but we don't know yet if it is Mr Spiro.
Detectives say Spiro, 46, had calmly walked from bedroom to bedroom at his rented home near San Diego and killed his family ‘execution-style’.
Their bodies were found several days later when neighbours alerted police.
MI6, Scotland Yard and the FBI had been called in to hunt for the shadowy Surrey-born spy.
New hope for snip fathers
By Anthea Gerrie
MEN who want children after having a vasectomy have been given new hope.
A clinic has perfected a £3,500 technique to help make them fathers again.
Of 80,000 men who have the snip every year, five per cent want another child, says the Surgical Advisory Service in London.
‘Statistics show half of all vasectomies are irreversible,’ said gynaecologist Zak Amarin.
He is the first doctor in Britain to successfully attempt the three-step microsurgery.
It involves taking sperm from men and mixing it with their partner's eggs which are replaced in the Fallopian tube in the GIFT technique — Gamete Intra Fallopian Transfer.
Mr Amarin claims a better than one-in-four chance of conception.
He has attempted the procedure twice.
One try resulted in a pregnancy which ended in a miscarriage, but the couple are saving for a second try.
The clinic believes the new technique will particularly appeal to older men in second or third relationships with younger women.
The technique was pioneered in California where several babies have already been delivered.
The Bath Clinic in Avon is cutting the price of vasectomies to £180 to attract patients over a traditionally quiet Christmas.
Twisted revenge of jealous judge
A TOP judge was being held in a psychiatric ward last night, charged with harassing and blackmailing his ex-mistress.
Married New York State Judge Sol Wachtler is said to have sent socialite Joy Silverman bizarre letters and posted a condom to her 14-year-old daughter.
He also threatened to kidnap the child for a £120,000 ransom, say FBI agents.
Wachtler, the most senior judge in the state, allegedly demanded Pounds 12,000 to return photographs of Silverman, 45, making love with her new boyfriend.
Silverman, who is estranged from her industrialist husband Jeffrey, was among rich Republicans who helped fund George Bush's 1988 election campaign.
Anti-Nazis pelt Kohl
CHANCELLOR Helmut Kohl and German government leaders were pelted by eggs and paint bombs at a rally against Nazi-style violence and anti-semitism yesterday.
Riot police charged into the crowd of 350,000 as Left-wing militants showered the speaker's stage in Berlin with missiles.
President Richard von Weizsacker was hit and forced to interrupt a speech while order was restored.
Six die in gun rampage
A GUNMAN killed six people in a rampage through two towns yesterday.
Lynwood Drake then took a 60-year-old woman hostage but shot himself dead when her house was surrounded by armed police.
The carnage began when Drake, 43, shot three people in a bar in Morro Bay, California.
He then drove 20 miles to Pasa Robles where he opened fire on four men, killing three.
The fourth man was critically injured.
A police spokesman said they thought Drake knew both groups.
Sergeant Martin Ashle of Pasa Robles police said: ‘At the moment we know of no reason for the attacks.
We don't know why he did it.’
Who-dunnit to actor?
A WHO-DUNNIT on stage turned into an attempted murder inquiry when the baddie shot his victim for real.
Francois Roland, 71, was in hospital last night after being hit in the arm.
A police spokesman in Soisy-sous-Montmorency, northern France, said: ‘Someone swapped the blank for a real bullet.
He is lucky to be alive.’
Broke Wayne widow sells £2m mansion
Malcolm Balfour, in Los Angeles
FILM legend John Wayne's hard-up widow is selling her luxury mansion and moving into a caravan.
Pilar Wayne now says she can't afford the upkeep on ‘La Roca’ in exclusive Newport Beach, California, and has put it on the market for £2 million.
She had the mansion built in memory of ‘The Duke’ shortly after his death in 1979.
As soon as it is sold the 58-year-old widow plans to move into the mobile home in nearby Laguna Beach.
Pilar has been living alone in the huge house and has struggled to maintain it with four staff.
Although she inherited millions from film star Wayne, friends say she is not good at handling finances and the debts have mounted up.
‘She has always lavished money on her three beloved children, Alissa, Marissa and son Ethan, 30,’ said one friend.
‘I know it's going to just kill Pilar to give up the house she loves.
‘She packed it full of photos and mementos, turning it into a shrine to her husband.
She's a very proud woman who refuses to hold her hand out.
‘But she owes £55,000 on credit card bills and loans.
‘To top it off, the state of California has slapped a £97,000 tax on the house.
And she owes the Bank of America £54,000.’
Crew dumps stowaways
THE crew of a cargo ship were arrested yesterday on suspicion of tossing seven stowaways overboard and shooting them.
One Ghanain claiming to have escaped the ordeal alerted police when the Ukranian ship landed at Le Harve, France.
The surviving stowaway said his friends on board the MacRuby were beaten by six crewmen before being hurled into the Atlantic off Portugal.
He stalked the house and shot his wife and children in the head
THE little girl seemed to be sleeping in her bed when the fire chief crept into her room.
But then the chilling truth dawned on Captain Gary Snavely.
‘I walked round her bed I could see her lying face up under the bedclothes,’ he said.
‘She had been shot in the head and there was blood all over the sheets.
‘It must have been a heavy calibre weapon because the entry and exit wounds were considerable.
Her injuries were massive.
It was awful.
‘We called the police and let them go through the house.
They came back and said there were three more like her.’
Gail Spiro 41, and children Sara, 16, Adam, 14, and Deana, 11, had been shot by a single bullet to the head as they slept.
There was no sign of a break-in.
They had been dead for several days when police were called in by neighbours in the millionaire's district of Rancho Sante Fe, near San Diego, California.
Police believe British spy Ian Spiro cold-bloodedly walked from bedroom to bedroom and murdered them.
Lieutenant John Tenwolde, of San Diego police confirmed all four were shot in the head once ‘execution style’.
‘Evidence suggests Ian Spiro shot and killed his family some time between Sunday and Thursday.
He is believed to be carrying a hand gun and should not be approached,’ he said.
Spiro was earning £13,000 a month but had begun to slip into debt.
It is believed he had fallen behind on rent payments for the four-bedroom house and had difficulties funding the children's education.
Detectives said they have called in MI6, Scotland Yard and the FBI in the hunt for Surrey-born Spiro who was involved in the release of Beirut hostages Terry Waite and John McCarthy.
Police refused to say if he had a criminal record or gun licence, but he is know to have several passports.
They issued a photograph of 6ft 2in Spiro who has a distinctive drooping moustache and beard growth.
They said he is armed and dangerous.
The Spiro family arrived in Rancho Santa Fe 18 months ago telling people he was a broker in anything from rice to sweaters to cigarettes.
The last person to see his wife and children alive was Joe Zerboni who had played bridge with them at a Halloween party at a California country club.
A woman walking a dog heard 12 shots on Sunday as she passed the house.
She did not report it, thinking they came from a gun range nearby.
‘They were a good close family,’ said Mr Zerboni.
‘If Ian had a fault it was over-indulging his children.
‘This is all a world away from the man I know.
You think you know people and then you wonder if you ever knew them at all.’
Last night, Spiro's daughters from his first marriage, who live in London, pleaded with him to surrender.
Samantha and Gino Spiro, said: ‘Please come forward.
Until this is sorted out we are frightened for our own safety.’
They said their father contacted them suddenly for the first time two months ago after walking out on them 18 years ago.
He did not explain his long silence and they refused to go into detail about the conversations.
Spiro, whose mother still lives in a comfortable first floor flat in Golders Green, had the best education money could buy.
He was sent to Carmel College, an orthodox Jewish school in Oxfordshire, now Britain's most expensive boarding school.
Spiro made a small fortune in the London property boom.
By 1974 the boom had bust.
Spiro fled Britain leaving his wife Jenny of 10 years with two daughters and massive debts.
The contrast could not be more stark between Spiro's Hollywood life-style and the North London suburb he once called home.
A friend described him as a charming rogue ‘always on the make’.
‘You couldn't help liking him, but you always felt he was out for what he could get,’ she said.
‘In any other time he would have been a pirate or a highwayman.’
Jenny now lives in a terraced ground-floor flat in Queens Park with family friend Michael Saffer, Samantha, 22, and Gina, 19.
They are left with the hope he is alive and ‘an innocent party’ in the massacre.
By 1978, their father had made a new life in Beirut where he met and married Gail, a nurse.
There had been little luxury in their lives in contrast to Spiro's second family, who enjoyed the best of everything.
In 1989, Spiro and his new family moved into £500,000 Rake Manor, near Godalming, Surrey.
Former neighbour Alan Bott, a director of P & O Containers said: ‘We heard he had made a million, lost a million and made a million again.’
The family rented the mansion.
They planned to buy it from Spiro's cousin Nigel, but returned to California after telling neighbours the children hated the wet cold weather.
Another Godalming neighbour said: ‘When I saw the pictures of Spiro's family on the television I remembered the cousin.
‘It is horrible to think of what happened to that poor, poor family.’
Victim No 2: Daughter Sara, 16
Victim No 3: Son Adam, 14
Victim No 4: Daughter Deana, 11
There was no sign of forced entry into the house or burglary (1).
The bodies of Gail, Sara, Adam and Deana were found in rooms 2, 3, 4 and 5 respectively.
And, right, a police officer at the £1m ranch-style home in California.
Reporting team: Gerard Evans in San Diego, Margaret Hall in Washington, Adrian Lee, Barbara Lewis, Tracey Kandohla and Shoba Vazirani in London.
Spy in £1m paradise
THE £1.1 million ranch where the Spiros were massacred is modest compared with its neighbours.
Ian Spiro was splashing out £3,000 a month to rent the house which came complete with swimming pool, stables and garages for four cars.
Neighbours in the millionaire's paradise of Rancho Sante Fe include Arnold Schwarzenegger, singer LaToya Jackson and best-selling novelist Joseph Wambaugh.
Average price for a home is £3 million but some fetch up to three times more.
Private emergency services have almost wiped out crime, so the quadruple murder has replaced property prices as the sole topic of interest.
Neighbours were abuzz with rumours of conspiracies involving MI6, the CIA and IRA.
‘I can't believe this could happen here,’ said one.
‘You think you buy into somewhere crime cannot reach and then it hits you with the worst kind.’
The wealthy rub shoulders in the village centre with its quaint olde worlde shops comprising almost entirely estate agents.
Ian Spiro was a novice in this league but still acted like he was in the big time, joining Lomas Santa Fe Country Club where membership costs ‘tens of thousands’.
The houses are set acres apart and noisy neighbours are never a problem.
You couldn't even hear a gun go off next door.
Spiro set up Beirut meeting with Waite
SUPERSPY Ian Spiro set up a secret meeting with Terry Waite in Beirut organised by Colonel Oliver North, it was claimed last night.
Waite does not admit it, but author Con Coughlin says the Anglican envoy was introduced to Spiro before North's arms for hostages deal was made public.
‘I had contact with hundreds of people prior to my first face to face meeting with the kidnappers in Beirut,’ Waite said in a statement yesterday.
‘Most adopted a false identity.
Some were helpful.
The majority were not.
Even if I could identify these contacts I would not because of the obvious dangers.’
Coughlin says North's only constructive contribution to Waite's Lebanon mission had been to introduce him to an undercover agent working in Lebanon for British and American intelligence.
North called the man Spiro because he was thought to have originally hailed from Greece.
Waite preferred to call him John Smith.
Coughlin says when Terry Waite decided in 1985 to concentrate on trying to free American hostages held in Lebanon, William Casey, then head of the CIA, suggested to North he should introduce Spiro to Waite.
‘He was the kind of operative who was as disposable as toilet tissue,’ Coughlin was told by one American source who worked closely with Spiro.
Coughlin says Spiro contacted Waite at his office in Lambeth Palace in August, 1985, and was invited to visit him.
More than 6ft tall with short hair and in his forties, Spiro is said to have reminded Waite of Sean Connery in his James Bond days.
Coughlin says in his book Hostage that Spiro was later given a new identity by the CIA and lived in California.
He told Waite he had contact with Islamic Jihad and offered to set up a meeting.
In reality, Spiro's main contact was Dr Adnan Mroueh, a Shia Moslem gynaecologist who had also served as a junior minister in the Lebanese Cabinet.
It was at Mroueh's clinic that Waite met a group of Hezbollah members who asked him to go with them in November.
After making sure they were indeed the kidnappers, Waite was blindfolded.
A gun was pushed in his back and he was taken to meet the group's leader.
It was 14 months later in January 1987 — shortly after Oliver North's arms for hostages deal had been made public — that Waite was kidnapped while waiting in Dr Mroueh's surgery for another meeting with the kidnappers.
Spiro was discarded by American and British intelligence services after the arms deal became known.
After Waite's abduction, he tried briefly to use his contacts with Lebanese Shia leaders and Iran to secure Waite's release.
But as the security situation in Beirut deteriorated, Spiro felt it was time to get out.
He tried setting up in Geneva and Canada before ending up in San Diego.
Ever a Walter Mitty character, he tried to get back into the CIA fold, but after the North fiasco they did not want to know him.
We'll climb Everest in a hurricane
Stephen Farrell
Army teams start trek to top of world.
THE British expedition attempting a rare winter ascent of Everest flew out yesterday, with top mountaineer Chris Bonington saying: ‘If anyone can do it, you can.’
But he warned the Territorial Army group, partly sponsored by TODAY, that it faced conditions far worse than those of his 1985 success.
The world's highest peak has been scaled many times since Sir Edmund Hillary and Sherpa Tenzing Norgay first conquered it in 1953.
But only three teams have managed it in winter.
Now, after three years planning, the 19-strong Operation Darc Star squad — led by Falklands war hero Lt Col Philip Neame — aims to be the first British success.
‘The conditions up there in December are savage — ferocious winds and extreme cold,’ said Himalayas expert Bonington.
‘I haven't been up in winter but I was on the south-west face in 1972 when we finally gave up our attempt in mid-November, and we were only getting a taste of the conditions they will face.
‘In winter it's a totally different dimension.
I would say it is five times more difficult than at any other time of the year.’
Bonington was impressed with the Darc Star climbers when he met them training on the Scottish peaks last winter.
‘It is a strong team, basically Territorial Army but with some very good civilian climbers.
They have prepared fully and have a good depth of experience.
‘I hope they get to the top, but it will be difficult.’
The main obstacle will be howling 140mph winds on the top slopes which sap the strength of even top-class mountaineers, cutting the odds of reaching the 29,028-ft summit to one in five.
‘What they really need for the final push is a window where the wind isn't quite as bad’, said Bonington.
‘There are days like that and it is a matter of making sure you are in the right place at the right time.
It is possible, but much more challenging.
It has been done but it is a hell of a thing to repeat, it will be a very, very fine piece of mountaineering if they pull it off.’
Would he like to be on the trip?
‘Not remotely, it will be much too painful.
If I go back up Everest it will be in spring or summer.’
Two advance parties, including Lt Col Neame, have already flown to Nepal to organise the 500 sherpas and scores of yaks who will carry nine tons of supplies to the south face base camp.
Also there is Dr Christine A'Court, the 32-year-old expedition doctor who will carry out high-altitude medical research.
When the main party flew out yesterday it was joined by girlfriends and trip sponsors who will accompany the climbers on a ‘support’ trek before turning back just before the serious work begins.
But one man forced to leave his loved ones behind was Bristol engineer and TA volunteer Bryan Stadden.
Bryan, 36, took the difficult decision to go even though his wife Hilary gave birth to their second daughter Jennifer just three weeks ago.
He is fully aware of the dangers, but has put in years of preparation.
‘It was a bit harrowing at the train station this morning,’ he admitted yesterday.
‘You could have drowned in the tears.
But Hilary's behind me.
This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.’
Although, like every climber, he wants to get to the summit, Bryan says the team's success is more important than any individual.
‘There's no pecking order, it's who is in the right place at the right time and who is the strongest,’ he says.
‘This outfit has been together for almost three years, everyone knows each other, we all get on and there's no prima donnas etime .’
‘My own ambition is to get to the top camp from where we launch the summit bid.
‘That would get me above 8,000 metres, something a lot of rock climbers want to get to.
‘They call it the death zone because above there the human body doesn't restore itself any more, it's always deteriorating.’
Expedition deputy leader Rod Stables only set his marriage date two days before he flew out.
He and fiancee Wendy Hodgson will marry in July.
That much has been decided, and they'll be able to discuss gifts and the guest list at leisure during the dark nights ahead because Wendy is on the support trek to base camp.
Rod, an officer in the TA for seven years, is a cardiologist at the Brompton National Heart and Lung Hospital in Chelsea and is pragmatic about the risks involved.
‘I wouldn't be going if I wasn't absolutely fit and confident of the people and equipment on the trip,’ he insists.
‘What I want is a safe, happy and successful climb — very much in that order.
‘I want to get as high as I am able to, and to contribute as much as I can to the team.
‘There are very, very few things worth dying for, and a mountain isn't one of them.’
Ship hit in nuclear sea chase
A GREENPEACE crew tracking a freighter with the biggest ever cargo of plutonium said their boat was rammed by a Japanese warship yesterday.
The collision happened as the Greenpeace boat tried to follow the Akatsuki Maru on its voyage back to Japan with 1.7 tons of plutonium loaded in Cherbourg, France, on Saturday.
Both vessels were damaged off the coast of France.
A Greenpeace crew member said: ‘Those guys are pirates.
They rammed into us,’ said a Greenpeace crewman.
Patten plea
HONG KONG Governor Chris Patten has offered an £80 reward for Soda, the family dog, who disappeared on a hiking trip.
The seven-month-old terrier, who wears a tag with the inscription Government House, ran off when Mr Patten's wife, Lavender, was out on Sunday.
With steel nerve, it's Robodoc to rescue
Jim Gallagher, in New York
WITH nerves of steel, superhuman precision and no bedside manner whatsoever, a 7ft robot has taken part in a hospital operation for the first time.
Robodoc, a mechanical arm with a drill on the end, helped surgeons carry out a complicated hip replacement.
Robodoc drilled small holes in the patient's thigh bone to anchor an artificial joint.
The drill was guided by computerised medical imaging equipment.
Surgeons in Sacramento, California, decided to use the high-tech machine after winning approval from the US Food and Drug Administration.
The operation was a complete success and doctors at the Sutter General Hospital look forward to using the automaton again in nine more test operations.
Hospital administrator Larry Maas said robotics have been used in industry, adding: ‘We see no reason to exclude health care from that technology.
‘We believe the technology will have major applications, not just for orthopedics.
‘We are obviously excited to introduce this technology.
We believe the Robodoc offers tremendous potential to enhance patient care.’
A hospital spokesman said: ‘We believe it was a world first.
The robot has tremendous accuracy and it could be a great help in the future.’
The 64-year-old male patient, who was suffering from arthritis, has asked not to be identified but was said to be in stable condition last night.
The revolutionary Robodoc procedure took orthopaedic surgeon William Bargar and veterinarian Howard Paul more than six years to develop.
It was tried out in 26 dog operations before the Sacramento replacement.
The high precision work reduces the space between the implant and the bone.
This encourages the bone and the implant to bond together quicker.
Until now the work has had to be done manually using a form of surgical cement.
Dr Bargar said: ‘The entire procedure went remarkably well.’
The operation, which normally takes two and a half hours, lasted twice as long, allowing the surgeons and systems engineers to mix the robot technology with traditional procedures.
More than 200,000 hip replacements are done annually in the US alone.
Little black book blues
SOME of America's most powerful men are worried sick after the theft of an address book belonging to New York's most notorious madam.
Sidney Biddle Barrows, who ran a call-girl service in the 1980s, said the top-secret file was the only thing stolen from her Manhattan flat.
‘I'm afraid someone's now out there blackmailing these poor guys,’ said Barrows.
Carla's squeaky clean
BATHING beauty Carla Bruni shows why she can command up to Pounds 40,000 a week with this sensational new picture.
The Italian model hit the headlines earlier this year when it was rumoured she went to Thailand with Mick Jagger.
The Rolling Stone's wife Jerry Hall rang and warned her to keep her hands off her husband.
But Carla just shrugged it off.
Hit squad wiped out my sister and family
Gerard Evans in San Diego
A BOOK that blew the cover of spy Ian Spiro was last night blamed for the slaughter of his family.
The study of middle eastern terrorism, Hostage, by Con Coughlin, could have alerted an Arab revenge squad, said Spiro's brother-in-law.
Speaking from behind a barred gate and protected by armed guards the unnamed brother said: ‘We wouldn't be surprised that because of that book someone sought retribution, and has tried to take out all Ian's seed, which is a Middle Eastern style of doing things.
‘It's not a behaviour pattern from any part of the world.’
The relative said the circumstances of Ian's death were suspicious, particularly the absence of any marks on his body.
‘It might have been set up to look like that.
One possible answer for Ian being found away from his family is that he knew he was in danger, and expected them to come after him.
‘He may have taken his life after hearing about the death of the family.’
Earlier yesterday medics said Spiro, who was found in a remote Indian reservation, died of a drugs overdose.
The 46-year-old commodity broker who worked for M16 and the CIA for nearly 10 years was found slumped in the family's four-track safari vehicle 100 miles from civilisation.
A post mortem examination was due to be carried out later today.
‘We are treating it as a drug induced death,’ said a spokesman for the San Diego medical examiner's office.
Police are now investigating the possibility Spiro even slaughtered his family while high on drugs.
Detectives believe the broker, who helped Terry Waite's efforts to free hostages in Lebanon, may even have drugged his wife and children before shooting them in the head.
That would explain why his victims all stayed in bed as he blasted away with a handgun in the luxury, ranch-style home near San Diego, California.
Two brothers of wife Gail Spiro and a distant relative of her husband arrived in San Diego yesterday.
They will arrange for the bodies of Gail, 41, and children Sarah, 16, Adam 14 and Deana, 11, to be brought to Britain for burial.
New lead in Rachel hunt
DETECTIVES hunting the killer of Rachel Nickel flew to Italy yesterday to quiz a gravedigger who worked near the spot where she died.
The man, who disappeared the day after the murder, worked at Putney Vale cemetery close to Wimbledon Common where 23-year-old Rachel was hacked to death.
A police dog, which picked up the murderer's scent, followed the trail to the huge graveyard.
The 28-year-old is thought to be working at a vineyard in Teviso.
Green Al gets lost in woods
AMERICAN vice president-elect Al Gore and wife Tipper had to be rescued by secret service agents after getting lost on a weekend hike.
The country loving politician was strolling in a 1,500 acre forest near Washington DC, when the light began to fade.
‘It's a wilderness atmosphere here and they actually got lost,’ said Sam Ashelman, co-owner of the Coolfont Park.
‘It got dark Saturday afternoon while they were out hiking, so they had to use the Secret Service to find their way back down again.’
The two were never in danger and were helped down the trail by the men whose job it is to protect all presidents and vice-presidents.
‘It's one of the few places close to Washington where you can get lost and still not get hurt,’ Ashelman said.
‘They have been coming here for the past six years.’
Gore, who wrote a book on the environment, was unavailable for comment yesterday.
Riddle of deaf girl trapped in world of witches
Alison James in Paris
A DEAF and dumb teenager found wandering the streets of Paris has startled police with a series of sinister ‘life story’ drawings.
In one picture the 18-year-old, who has given her name as Danielle Sanchez, shows her mother and a group of hooded, witch-like women about to sacrifice animals.
Another shows Danielle weeping as her mother kills her pet cat and collects its blood in a container.
The mute teenager has also drawn herself bound to a bed being forced to take part in a ceremony, and slumped on the floor, with her mother holding a syringe and a key.
Yet another picture shows her in hospital having a brain scan.
Her father is with her.
Police are unsure whether the mysterious girl has gone through some hideous black-magic ritual or whether the drawings spring from a tortured imagination.
Until Danielle is identified, nobody can tell.
One detailed drawing shows a grand chateau with vineyards, tennis court and swimming pool.
Her father's red Ferrari is in a garage.
A black Rolls-Royce is in the drive.
Danielle and her teacher, ‘Jean’, are at a fourth-floor window.
Above this picture, the mystery waif wrote: Danielle Sanchez, the big manor in Lyon.
But a search of wine-makers' chateaux in the Lyon area have produced no link.
Danielle was found on the street one night in August.
She had £7 in her pocket and two cuddly toys in a rucksack.
She was taken to a psychiatric hospital but doctors soon realised this girl trapped in a world of witches was no ordinary vagrant.
Her sweater and jeans were designer brands — with the labels removed.
Staff at the Maison Blanche hospital found that although Danielle seems to be a deaf-mute, she is not familiar with hearing aids and doesn't know how to lip-read.
They suspect that she may really be able to hear — but has been struck dumb by some sort of shock.
‘It's the first time we've had a patient like this,’ said Nurse Jean-Claude Auge yesterday.
This week, on the evidence of the drawings, a Paris court launched an inquiry into a possible kidnapping.
And the TV show Lost From View featured the mystery.
The big question was: Who is this girl — and what has been happening to her?
Freddy's back
IT SEEMS Freddy's not dead after all.
Actor Robert Englund is to return in a seventh Nightmare on Elm Street film next year, despite moguls vowing Freddy's Dead: The Final Nightmare was the last.
‘If I have to kill a few more people, so be it,’ said Robert.
Patten dog plea
HONG KONG Governor Chris Patten has offered an £80 reward for the return of Soda, their family dog, who disappeared on a hiking trip.
The seven-month-old terrier, who wears a tag with the inscription Government House, ran off when Mr Patten's wife, Lavender, was out walking on Sunday.
Kidnap mystery of deaf girl trapped in world of witches
By Alison James in Paris
A DEAF and dumb teenager found wandering the streets of Paris has startled police with a series of sinister ‘life story’ drawings.
In one picture the 18-year-old, who has given her name as Danielle Sanchez, shows her mother and a group of hooded, witch-like women about to sacrifice animals.
Another shows Danielle weeping as her mother kills her pet cat and collects its blood in a container.
The mute teenager has also drawn herself bound to a bed, being forced to take part in a ceremony.
She has also sketched herself slumped on the floor, with her mother brandishing a syringe and a key.
Yet another picture shows her in hospital having a brain scan.
Her moustachioed, bow-tied father is with her.
Police are unsure whether the mysterious girl has gone through some hideous black-magic ritual or whether the drawings spring from a tortured imagination Until Danielle is identified, nobody can tell.
One immensely-detailed drawing shows a grand chateau with vineyards, tennis court and swimming pool.
Her father's red Ferrari is in a garage.
A black Rolls-Royce is in the drive.
Danielle and her teacher, ‘Jean’, are at a fourth-floor window.
Above this picture, the mystery waif wrote: Danielle Sanchez, the big manor in Lyon.
But a search of wine-makers' chateaux in the Lyon area have produced no link.
Danielle was found on the street one night in August.
She had £7 in her pocket, and two cuddly toys in a rucksack.
She was taken to a psychatric hospital.
But doctors soon realised this girl trapped in a world of witches was no ordinary vagrant.
Her sweater and jeans were designer brands — with the labels removed.
Danielle refused to eat with other patients, or drink from anything but her own cup.
And she proved an excellent chess player.
Staff at the Maison Blanche hospital found that although Danielle seems to be a deaf-mute, she is not familiar with hearing aids and doesn't know how to lip-read.
They suspect that she may really be able to hear — but has been struck dumb by some sort of shock.
‘It's the first time we've had a patient like this,’ Nurse Jean-Claude Auge said yesterday.
‘She's intelligent.
We just don't know what is at the root of her condition.’
This week, on the evidence of the drawings, a Paris court launched an investigation into a possible kidnapping.
And the television show Lost From View featured the Danielle mystery.
Usually, presenter Jacques Pradel appeals for news of missing persons.
This one was different.
The big question was: Who is this girl — and what has been happening to her?
Arnie wife ill
ARNOLD Schwarzenegger's wife is being treated for the killer virus meningitis.
The multi-millionaire actor has maintained a round-the-clock vigil at the bedside of TV reporter Maria Shriver since she was admitted to hospital with a soaring temperature.
The disease causes inflammation of the brain but Maria, 37, is improving and doctors are optimisitic she will make a full recovery.
NBC spokeswoman Tori Beilinson said Maria suddenly began feeling unwell last week.
‘She complained of a severe headache,’ she said.
Jacko Backo
MICHAEL Jackson's world tour is back on, the singer announced last night.
And Jackson, who caused upset when he held his nose after touching down in the Ivory Coast, plans to perform extra dates in Africa.
The singer pulled out of the tour with a cold-related throat infection after cancelling some European concerts — including Wembley.
Earlier, he was accused of insulting the Africans by holding his nose because he could not stand the smell.
‘He wants to go back to Africa to make amends and because he really liked the place,’ a spokesman said.
Axl guilty
ROCKER Axl Rose was yesterday found guilty of damaging property and assault at a Guns N' Roses concert which turned into a riot.
The singer, who was not in court, was given two years' probation and ordered to donate £30,000 to five local community projects by St Louis County Circuit Judge Ellis Gregory.
Arnie's wife struck by killer brain bug
ARNOLD Schwarzenegger's wife is being treated for the killer virus meningitis.
The multi-millionaire actor has maintained a round-the-clock vigil at the bedside of TV reporter Maria Shriver since she was admitted to hospital with a soaring temperature.
The disease causes inflammation of the brain but doctors are optimistic Maria, 37 will make a full recovery.
NBC's Tori Beilinson said,–‘She complained of severe headache,’ she said.
Jackson's world tour is back on
MICHAEL Jackson has announced that his world tour is back on.
And the singer, who caused upset when he held his nose after touching down in the Ivory Coast, plans to perform extra dates in Africa ‘to make amends’.
He pulled out of the tour with a cold-related throat infection after cancelling some European concerts — including Wembley.
Earlier, he was accused of insulting the Africans by holding his nose because he could not stand the smell.
Paul Hogan new film
CROCODILE Dundee star Paul Hogan is all fired up for his new role as a Wild West outlaw.
Hogan, above, is writing and starring in To Be An Outlaw, a bank robber who finds his profession under threat as the West bows to 20th Century technology.
It is Hogan's first role since the 1989 box office disaster Almost An Angel.
Even the robot wore its surgical gown
Jim Gallagher
IT may look like an everyday scene from any hospital operating theatre but this medical team has an unusual extra member.
Carrying out the precision drilling in a delicate hip replacement operation is the world's first robotic surgeon.
Just like the other doctors, it has scrubbed up and donned a protective gown before starting work in Sacramento, California.
Guided by a computerised brain, the mechanical arm drilled a perfect hole into a patient's femur to fit a new, artificial hip.
The sophisticated, 7ft tall Robodoc produced an exact match, cutting down on space between the bone and implant, allowing them to bond more quickly.
Until now surgeons have done the drilling manually and usually needed to fill gaps with a cement-like substance.
Pioneering surgeon Dr William Bargar took a scan of the 64-year-old male patient's thigh bone and fed the information into the computer.
Using three dimensional imaging, he told Robodoc exactly where he wanted to put the implant before starting the five-hour operation.
Afterwards a delighted Dr Bargar said: ‘The entire procedure went well.’
Nine more experimental hip replacements will be carried out at Sutter General Hospital with the robot during a test period which ends next February.
It is then hoped to expand its use to other joint surgery which requires precision drilling.
If tests are successful, inventors Integrated Surgical Systems, which took six years to develop Robodoc, will apply for clinical trials throughout America.
Hospitals in Chicago, New York and New England are already queuing up to give Robodoc a job.
‘We expect to sell it very fast once the trial period is over,’ said a company spokesman.
Meanwhile the patient, who has not been named, was making a rapid recovery and yesterday walked for the first time since the operation.
Hospital spokeswoman Gilly Weinstein said: ‘He was very happy and is doing well.
He was eager to be the first one.’
The man had already endured a normal hip replacement on his other side which needed two follow-up operations.
Thanks to Robodoc's accuracy, doctors hope further surgery will not be necessary this time.
Vintage year for a strike
STEELWORKERS staging a sit-in gave their strike fund a boost yesterday by selling the bosses' wine stock.
They found nearly 7,000 bottles of vintage red wine in the management cellars at the Forges de Clabecq plant, outside Brussels.
Motorists queued yesterday outside the plant to buy bargain £4 bottles from the display on trestle tables.
Police just looked on.
Holiday Brits' prison ordeal
THREE Welshmen held in a Spanish jail for 17 months over the stabbing of a Turk were yesterday told they will have to wait another six months to be tried.
Relatives of Alan Sell 25, his brother Paul, 23, and Jamie Humphries, 19, were stunned by the decision to postpone the hearing.
Wayne David, Labour MEP for south Wales, said the Foreign Office should intervene immediately.
‘It's appalling,’ he said.
Tears of a fallen leader
By Margaret Hall in Washington
GEORGE Bush broke down in tears yesterday, overcome by the pain of defeat and the touching words of his allies.
The beaten President put his head in his hands and wept at a Republican Party tribute to him.
The party's powerful Senate minority leader, Bob Dole, had just told Bush: ‘Just as I know you've changed the world, I also know the best man didn't win.’
Bush tried to hide his tears as the 160 guests burst into wild applause.
Even Dole, who once challenged him for the Presidency, was on verge of tears.
Bush should have trusted his own misgivings about attending the dinner, confessing he knew it would be ‘something sorrowful and sad’.
It was just that.
He talked of the magnitude and hurtfulness of defeat.
But he added: ‘Don't worry about the Bushes.
We are looking ahead now.’
Later he put aside his grief to invite successor Bill Clinton to the White House for a few tips on settling in.
Trade war on hold as EC resumes talks
THE immediate threat of a world trade war was lifted yesterday when Jacques Delors gave the go-ahead for new talks with the US.
The European Commission agreed in Brussels that negotiations on GATT — the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade — will resume, probably next week.
It was a personal triumph for Premier John Major, who had been pressing Commission president Mr Delors to re-open talks before the US carried out its threat to impose huge extra duty on EC goods.
EC negotiator Ray MacSharry, back in charge after walking out accusing Mr Delors of thinking only of the French, predicted last night an agreement could be reached within days.
It would mean a £200 billion boost to world trade.
Suicide killer ‘took cyanide’
BRITISH spy Ian Spiro may have swallowed cyanide after killing his wife and three children, police said last night.
Officers said traces of the poison were found in the family's car, which was discovered at a remote Indian reservation with the commodity broker's body inside.
Mr Spiro is believed to have shot dead his wife and three children at their luxury rented home near San Diego, California, before driving out to the site.
Shower of flowers for sick Liz
MOVIE queen Liz Taylor was flooded with flowers as she fought pneumonia at her Hollywood home yesterday.
Lorryloads of blooms rolled up to the Bel Air mansion where Liz, 60, lay in bed, surrounded by her doctors.
Outside, anxious fans gathered.
Liz, who never quite recovered from catching flu in Spain, has cancelled all engagements for the rest of the year.
Two years ago, she nearly died of pneumonia and a blood disorder.
Last year, she collapsed.
And last January, she was ill at a gala.
£50,000 to trap killer
A £50,000 reward has been offered to try to trap the killer of two backpackers.
The government of New South Wales, Australia, where British tourists Caroline Clarke and Joanne Walters were brutally murdered, has also promised to pardon any accomplice with information.
Police said the ferocity of the killings prompted the reward, one of the highest in 12 years.
Prince Albert of Monaco
PRINCE Albert of Monaco, above, has been hit with a paternity suit less than a month after beating a similar claim.
Californian Tamara Rotola has hired a lawyer to fight for maintenance from Albert for her six-month-old daughter.
Today clue to Danielle
Alison James
A DEAF and dumb teenager whose drawings of witchcraft have stunned France may be identified, thanks to TODAY.
‘Danielle’, the mystery girl found in Paris whose moving plight was revealed by us, was thought to be French.
But an English ex-social worker has come forward after seeing her picture in TODAY and claimed she is a youngster he once counselled.
Her real name is Karen and she comes from a wealthy family in the south of England.
‘I was reading my TODAY and there she was,’ he said.
The social worker, who wants to remain anonymous, is now in contact with doctors at the Maison Blanche Hospital in Paris.
‘It will be marvellous if TODAY has helped us to identify ‘Danielle’,’ a spokesman said.
Michael Jackson goes shopping in mask
MICHAEL Jackson went shopping in a black surgical mask and baseball hat yesterday for Madonna's risque book Sex.
But after he browsed for a while staff in the Los Angeles shop, told Jacko, above, they were out of stock.
New weapon in Aids fight
SCIENTISTS are claiming a major breakthrough in the fight against Aids.
The ‘molecular knife’— an enzyme designed to stop the virus reproducing in the body — has been discovered by researchers at the University of California in San Diego.
Tests on sufferers will start soon.
‘We're very excited about the possibilities,’ said a spokesman.
Cheating wife laid bare by mum-in-law
AN angry mother-in-law took instant revenge when she discovered her son's wife was unfaithful.
She beat the 24-year-old woman, stripped her naked and tied her to the balcony.
Then, through a loudspeaker, the mother told cheering neighbours in Palermo, Sicily: ‘An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth and nudity for nudity.’
The girl's ordeal lasted 12 hours until police broke down the front door and arrested five people.
Audrey is cleared of cancer
SCREEN legend Audrey Hepburn left hospital yesterday after last week's operation to remove a tumour from her colon.
Tests revealed the cancerous growth was of ‘low-grade malignancy’, doctors confirmed.
Ron Wise of Cedars-Sinai Medical Centre said: ‘Her condition has continued to improve.’
The tumour was in its early stages and there were no signs it had spread or caused any lasting damage, said the hospital.
Audrey, 63, widely known for roles in Roman Holiday and Breakfast At Tiffany's, had recently returned from a tour of famine-hit Somalia, representing UN children's fund UNICEF.
Audrey, the daughter of a British businessman and Dutch baroness, got her first break in 1951 with Broadway's Gigi.
Two years later she won an Oscar for Roman Holiday.
Later hits included My Fair Lady and Sabrina.
New clues to Oz backpacker killer
NEW leads in the hunt for the killer of two British backpackers were uncovered yesterday, only hours after Australian police offered a £50,000 reward.
A tent similar to one used by murdered Joanne Walter, of Maesteg, Wales and Caroline Clarke, of Surrey, had been sighted near a campervan in a layby.
Their backpacks are believed to have been seen on a dump.
The bodies of the young Britons, both 22, who disappeared at Easter, were found outside Sydney.
A quick apology
DUTCH transport minister Johanna Maij-Weggen apologised to colleagues yesterday for breaking her own speed limit.
Mrs Maij-Weggen was in her official Ford Scorpio when her chauffeur was caught driving at 90mph in a 60mph zone.
‘I was in a hurry for a lunch,’ she said.
Tourists in bus attack
SIX German holidaymakers and their driver were wounded when gunmen attacked a tourist bus in southern Egypt yesterday.
One Moslem terrorist was arrested.
Lavender Patten and Soda
Lavender Patten gives a cuddle to runaway terrier Soda yesterday.
The governor's pet was found by joggers after fears that she had ended up in a Chinese meal.
New video Walkman
A HEADSET video screen, worn like ski goggles, is being developed by Japanese company Sony.
The firm that made the Walkman personal stereo said yesterday the ‘Visortron’, has two liquid crystal screens and headphones.
Spokesman Jun Shimoyamada said: ‘You'll be able to immerse yourself in the picture.’
Lover's film revenge
A JILTED boyfriend distributed a video tape of his ex-lover having sex on her desk at a government office.
He sent the tape to the secretary's bosses — who are leading politicians in Bonn — when she ended their relationship, said the Bild newspaper yesterday.
Drop trousers for top results
By Dennis Newson in Brussels
AN exhibition of hilarious examples of bad English collected from around the world by EC translators went on show yesterday in Brussels.
Visitors to Thailand would do well to avoid the donkey rides, where a notice reads: ‘Would you like to ride on your own ass?’
At a Czech tourist agency holidaymakers are invited to: ‘Take one of our horse-drawn city tours — we guarantee no miscarriages.’
People arriving at Moscow airport were greeted with: ‘If this is your first visit to the USSR you are welcome to it.’
And a sign at a Bangkok dry-cleaners says: ‘Drop your trousers here for best results.’
In Rome, an advert for a laundry reads: ‘Ladies, leave your clothes here and spend the afternoon having a good time.’
Other gaffes include one from an Acapulco hotel which states: ‘The manager has personally passed all the water served here.’
A sign in a Zurich hotel says: ‘Because of the impropriety of entertaining guests of the opposite sex in the bedroom, it is suggested that the lobby be used for this purpose.’
And for the ultimate in room service, why not try a Japanese hotel where: ‘You are invited to take advantage of the chambermaid.’
Luke's nightmare
BEVERLY Hills 90210 heart-throb Luke Perry has spoken for the first time of his nightmare childhood with a drunken father who beat up his mother.
‘He was loud and abusive.
I was afraid for my mother,’ Luke says.
‘No one should have to live through that.’
Peace bomb sent to US
RUSSIA will launch a missile towards America's nuclear submarine and bomber aircraft bases tomorrow.
But Washington state officials will not be heading for underground shelters as the rocket is loaded with peace messages and pleas for investment.
The stunt is part of International Year of Space festivities.
Republic of Oz by 2000
AUSTRALIA will replace the Queen as head of state by the end of the century, premier Paul Keating forecast yesterday.
‘It is time we had our own national identity,’ he said in Sydney.
Twenty years ago Australians rejected calls for a republic.
But latest polls show a majority in favour of breaking away.
I fear for Madonna
AN autograph hunter claims he was beaten up by Madonna's boyfriend and left covered in blood.
What the alleged attacker didn't know, says Madonna fan Alan Pettit, is that his victim has Aids.
So the boyfriend, nightclub owner John Enos, could be in danger of the disease through contact with the blood.
Pettit said he heard Madonna and Enos having a huge row in a pickup truck parked in Los Angeles.
‘They were arguing furious,’ Pettit said.
‘It sounded as if they were about to come to blows.
‘Madonna jumped out and strode off.
I asked if she needed a ride.
She replied, ‘I'm OK — just leave me alone’.’
Then Pettit took a photograph and, he claimed, Enos attacked him — throwing him over a fence and punching him in a headlock.
‘I was a mess,’ Pettit told National Enquirer magazine.
‘There was blood everywhere.
My arm was cut and my knuckles were bleeding.
‘His fists were flying so fast, I didn't have a chance to tell him I have Aids.’
Enos said: ‘It didn't happen.
And I don't know Madonna.’
Gazza gift
PAUL Gascoigne has splashed out on a secret honeymoon for his sister.
Lazio ace Gazza, 25, will be best man to John King when he marries Anna-Maria, 26, in Dunston, Tyne and Wear today.
Prime suspect
By Gerard Evans in Los Angeles
BRITISH spy Ian Spiro left bloody fingerprints smeared on his son's bedroom walls after blasting him in the head twice with a handgun.
The grisly evidence convinced detectives that Spiro, 46, was responsible for the bloodbath at his £3,300-a-month luxury rented ranch in California.
Forensic experts believe he shot his son in the head and was then spattered with blood firing a second bullet point blank into 14-year-old Adam.
He may have then reeled backwards and put his bloody hands on the wall to support himself before carrying on with his killing spree.
Adam, mother Gail, 41, and sisters Sara, 16 and Dina, 11 were all found dead in bed four days later.
Lieutenant John Tenwolde of San Diego Sheriff's office said Spiro is the only suspect in the mystery case.
The family's maid has told how a dishevelled Spiro stopped her working when she turned up at the home the day after the killings.
Paula Rojas, 18, was ordered into a room while he got dressed in a green shirt and blue nylon jogging pants — the clothes he was found dead in.
‘He got dressed really fast.
Before leaving the kitchen I noticed there were dirty coffee cups and plates piled in the sink.
It looked like someone had been drinking and eating bread,’ said Rojas.
She said Spiro told her: ‘My wife and children are not home.’
She asked to be taken home and as he dropped her off he said cryptically: ‘I'm sorry.
I have problems.’
Lieutenant Tenwolde confirmed sodium cyanide was found in a bag between the front seats of Spiro's car alongside a cup and two water bottles.
The body of Spiro, who worked for MI6 and the CIA, is being tested for poison.
Body in bath for four years
A LONELY bachelor who died in his bath has been found four years later.
Car mechanic Klaus Teich, 51, died of a heart attack at home in Dresden, East Germany.
His body was discovered not by concerned neighbours but by police chasing unpaid bills.
Shopper stung
A WOMAN was stung by a scorpion when she picked up a bunch of bananas in a supermarket.
An assistant at the store, in Finnentrop, Germany, knocked the scorpion to the floor and trod on it.
Marianne Zepke, 52, survived after being treated in hospital.
A doctor said: ‘She immediately squeezed the poison out and that probably saved her life.’
The bananas had been packed in Honduras, Central America.
Nudist torn off a strip
A STUDENT who turned up naked to classes has been suspended.
Andrew Martinez, 19, arrived in his birthday suit for a disciplinary meeting at the University of California, Berkeley — as a protest against what he claims is society's ‘repression’.
‘He showed up wearing only a backpack and a devilish smirk,’ a spokesman said.
Officials are to decide whether he should be expelled.
French attack ‘bias’ over BA
AIR France has protested to the European Commission over alleged favouritism towards British Airways in recent takeover deals.
The deals, authorised by competition commissioner Sir Leon Brittan, would give BA 60 per cent of the take-off and landing slots at London's Gatwick Airport.
Top perks for luxury Cruise
FILM stars Tom Cruise and Demi Moore demanded perks worth Pounds 320,000 for their last film.
Cruise had already picked up £8 million and Moore was paid Pounds 1.5 million for A Few Good Men.
But the studio paid out for fringe benefits including personal trainers and chauffeurs to keep them happy.
Dracula's box office swoop
DRACULA earned £7 million on its first day of release in the US.
The Francis Ford Coppola movie was the most successful opening in film makers Columbia Pictures' history.
‘We're all fascinated by the dark side,’ said Oscar-winner Anthony Hopkins, 54.
He plays a vampire hunter out to kill Dracula, played by Britain's Gary Oldman.
Too sexy for Fred
CHAMPION golfer Fred Couples has walked out on his wife of 12 years because she embarrassed him by dancing on a table, friends claimed last night.
They said Debbie, 33, jumped up and simulated a striptease to Right Said Fred's I'm Too Sexy hit during a party to celebrate this summer's British Open.
She was bundled off the table by shocked Ryder cup player Craig Stadler.
Now multi-millionaire Fred, also 33, says she is ‘not suitable’ as a golfer's wife, added the sources.
Last night a tearful Debbie admitted: ‘Fred's left me.
I'm shocked by my husband's behaviour.
I don't know what I've done to deserve this.’
Yesterday Fred, ranked number two in the world, was playing the Kapalua International in Hawaii.
He refused to talk about his businesswoman wife who often followed his rounds wearing bright, tight dresses and cheering him on at every green.
A barman who saw the dance at Berwick's Quarterbeck Club said last night: ‘She was having a very enjoyable time and was clearly the life and soul of the party.
‘But there was nothing untoward going on that could have given anyone any offence.’
Clinton girl gets lesson in survival
NEW US president Bill Clinton's girl Chelsea is getting a crash course on surviving the White House from the daughter of ex-president Jimmy Carter.
Amy Carter, now 24, remembers the heartache she suffered and is passing on her experience to the 12-year-old daughter of the President-elect.
And, like Amy, Chelsea has little time for affairs of state.
‘All mom and dad talk about is politics, I'm already getting kind of sick of it,’ she said.
So-lonely Gabriela needs love
BEAUTIFUL tennis champion Gabriela Sabatini is desperate for love.
The millionairess Argentinian star blames her gruelling workload for the lack of a boyfriend.
Former US Open winner Gabriela, 22, had a brief fling with French tennis heart-throb Henri Leconte.
But she told Best magazine: ‘It's difficult.
Just sitting around waiting for me to finish playing is no life for a boyfriend.’
Mac's back home
HOLLYWOOD threw a party yesterday as Home Alone 2: Lost In New York had its world premiere.
Macaulay Culkin, the 11-year-old star who earns £4 million per movie, was decked out in purple Home Alone 2 T-shirt and mis-matched sneakers for the fun-filled event on the Avenue of The Stars in Los Angeles.
He said: ‘I think people just have a good time watching all the stunts.
Parents like the movie as much as kids.
It's for everyone.’
Of its predecessor, which became the third highest money-making film, actress Mariel Hemingway said: ‘My lot have seen the movie 20 times at least and they still get a laugh out of it.
There aren't too many movies these days that are great fun for parents and kids.’
Producer John Hughes, a father of two, said: ‘The second one was easier to write because I knew who was in it.
‘We've had to strike a balance between offering people what they liked with the first movie but coming up with something fresh.
‘Macauley is every kid's and parent's idea of the boy down the street.’
Jane Seymour and her brood — Sean, seven, and Katy, nine — performed their version of the Macauley Culkin scream as they walked into the screening.
‘We have Home Alone on video and the kids still watch it all the time,’ she said.
Home Alone 2: Lost in New York carries on the adventures of smart schoolboy Kevin who outwits blundering thieves Harry and Marv, played by Joe Pesci and Daniel Stern.
The film, which cost £27 million to make, also stars Oscar-winning British actress Brenda Fricker.
I'm Kylie, fly me..
KYLIE Minogue reckons she can get any man she wants.
And if he lived on the other side of the world she would think nothing of flying to meet him, she said.
The 24-year-old star, who once dated INXS singer Michael Hutchence, said her ambition is to settle down, have a house on the beach, and children.
‘Sometimes I think I could make any man fancy me,’ she told Chat magazine.
‘I do get nervous and do really dumb things, although I think some men actually like that.’
Cybill is demo target
MOONLIGHTING star Cybill Shepherd's Beverly Hills home was besieged by animal rights campaigners at the weekend.
A banner across the front gates read ‘The house that dripped blood’.
Two activists handcuffed themselves to her fence.
Cybill, 42, advertises L'Oreal cosmetics, said to be tested on animals.
10 killed in rail smash
AT LEAST 10 people died and 30 were critically injured in a 130mph collision between a freight wagon and a passenger train yesterday.
The wagon broke free from the freight train as it passed through the German town of Northeim.
It veered on to another track and smashed into the approaching passenger train.
The crash was so violent that one coach was flung into a nearby street.
Jet crash man back from dead
A BRITON feared dead in the Amsterdam jumbo jet disaster six week ago has turned up alive.
Cambridge University lecturer Carl Swann, 36, had checked in at Amsterdam's Schiphol airport for a flight to Manchester just before an El Al cargo plane hit a nearby block of flats.
His parents, who live at Clevelys, near Blackpool, feared he had strayed outside the airport and got caught up in the disaster.
Carl had been on his way home from working in Japan and changed planes at Schiphol.
When his baggage arrived in Dublin by way of Manchester without him, police launched worldwide inquiries.
But 42 days after the crash there was a knock on the door of his parents' home — and it was Carl.
‘To us, he had come back from the dead,’ his mother, Camilla Swann, said yesterday.
‘From what he says, he has been in Amsterdam for the last six weeks, and rarely went far from the airport.
‘The crash appears to have affected him very badly.
It appears he waited and waited to pluck up courage to catch a plane home.
‘He didn't realise that people all over the world have been looking for him.’
Monkeying with words
A MONKEY'S scream is more than just a screech, researchers have discovered.
It has a range of sounds and frequencies to alert other monkeys to danger.
And experts at Suwanee, Georgia, have found that yellow pigtail macaque monkey families even have their own dialects.
‘The accent they use lets other monkeys know which family they're in, and the nature of a threat,’ said researcher Sarah Gouzoules.
Hong Kong election row
A NEW row erupted between Britain and China over the future of Hong Kong last night.
Governor Chris Patten plans to boost voters' rights to make most of the colony's ruling body elected by 1995.
But the Chinese fear it would challenge their governing from 1997.
A British source said: ‘Mr Patten will not be diverted.’
Refugees get cold shoulder
MORE than 170 Bosnian refugees have been refused visas to enter Britain, only hours after they turned down an asylum offer from Spain.
The refugees have spent six days on the Austrian border holding out for British permits.
Only six will be allowed into Britain, said Armed Forces Minister Archie Hamilton last night.
Where did the catwalk go?
Liz Moore
IT'S not as elegant as Linda Evangelista's usual poses, but then who cares when you're being paid £60,000 a second?
The top model turned stuntwoman to film Coca-Cola's latest Diet Coke commercial, for which she was paid a sparkling £1.8 million.
The 27-year-old fashion queen ends up looking more like a cat burglar than a catwalk model in the 30-second ad.
Linda once said she would not get out of bed for less than Pounds 10,000.
But for almost two million pounds she not only got up, but got to grips with the crumbling guttering on a Paris rooftop.
Risking the loss of her usual cool dignity, and wearing little more than a feather-trimmed tutu and high heels, Linda was filmed clinging to the building and edging along it before plunging, screaming, to the ground.
An insider on the set said: ‘You can bet there was a hefty accident bonus written into her contract — just in case she landed squarely on her assets and permanently damaged the goods.’
Linda was chosen to star in the advert as Coke's response to rivals Pepsi, which have bought in rap star Hammer as their television commercial celebrity.
But viewers in Britain are unlikely to get a glimpse of Linda's high-rise exploits.
The ad was filmed in France — where Coke holds 80 per cent of the cola market — for French TV.
‘There are no plans to show it in the UK at the moment,’ a spokeswoman from Coca-Cola said yesterday.
It's not Pharaoh say TV crew hit by King Tut curse
By Ivan Waterman
THE curse of Tutankhamun left a film crew shaking with fear after a series of bizarre happenings in the desert.
Two of the BBC documentary team, which spent a week inside the boy king's tomb, almost died when a hotel lift crashed 21 floors to the ground.
Then inside the grave, in Egypt's Valley of the Kings, the two members of the crew were left in darkness high on a platform after all the lights fused.
Later, as the crew re-enacted a play meant to raise the spirits of the dead, they were blinded by a sandstorm which left almost all of them with conjunctivitis.
Yesterday presenter Christopher Frayling and producer David Wallace told of their fear as the lift plunged down the shaft after a cable snapped.
‘It was absolutely terrifying,’ said Frayling, who is Professor of Cultural History at the Royal College of Art.
‘I was pinned to the floor and David was against the wall.
‘How we came out of that alive is beyond me.
I thought I would look up and see King Tut staring down with a hacksaw blade in his hand.’
The string of strange incidents came during the making of The Face Of Tutankhamun, beginning Friday on BBC2.
The extraordinary happenings even continued after the unit returned to Britain, when a sealed canister containing a print of the series arrived at the BBC from a laboratory covered in fresh earth.
‘The whole experience was the weirdest thing I've ever encountered,’ said Professor Frayling.
The series, which features unseen film dating back to the Twenties, celebrates the 70th anniversary of the discovery of the tomb by archeologist Howard Carter.
To help mark the anniversary a facsimile of the mummy, produced by a new British technique, will be at an exhibition called Face to Face with Tutankhamun, in Dorchester, Dorset, tomorrow.
The BBC crew were well aware that Carter's sponsor Lord Carnavon died within weeks of the find after being bitten by a mosquito.
Eight others connected directly or indirectly with the dig later died in mysterious circumstances.
When Lovejoy actor Ian McShane went to Egypt a decade ago to play the lead in an ITV drama about the curse he broke a leg before filming started.
‘I was extremely sceptical when I went out there,’ said Professor Frayling.
‘Now, I'm not so sure.
‘I know this sounds like hype but I promise you I don't come from the sort of academic background where we get involved in hysteria.’
Driving ambition
US President-elect Bill Clinton drives his friends round the bend with his love of speed on the roads.
Clinton talks, steers, eats and searches for his favourite song on the tape deck — all at the same time.
‘We need him as president because it takes him off the streets,’ said his close pal, David Leopoulis.
Clinton's other favourite pastimes include basketball, reading, and peanut butter and banana sandwiches.
De Klerk's white hope
SOUTH African President F W de Klerk said yesterday he did not want his children to marry blacks.
He told the BBC: ‘I would like to see my children marry an Afrikaner.’
Eight months ago coloured Erica Adams blamed de Klerk when she broke off her engagement to his son Willem.
Ice-cap explorer saved from chasm
EXPLORER Sir Ranulph Fiennes rescued his partner from an Antarctic crevasse as the pair fought their way across the ice-cap, it was disclosed yesterday.
Dr Michael Stroud slipped into the chasm as the pair were crossing an ice shelf in driving snow and 100mph winds.
Then the two, who hope to become the first men to walk 2,200 miles unsupported across Antarctica, battled on to set up a camp and radio their base.
A spokesman said: ‘They were tired but in good spirits.’
‘Corpse’ baby dies
A BABY was born dead yesterday to the 18-year-old kept artificially alive after a car crash last month.
German doctors at a university hospital in Bavaria planned to keep the unnamed brain-dead woman's body functioning for the sake of the child, which was not due to be born until next April.
A statement said there was a spontaneous abortion and the life support machine had now been turned off.
Hello!
‘Curse’ strikes again
THE curse of Hello! magazine has struck again — this time at Brigitte Bardot.
Bardot, 58, took a drugs overdose on Saturday just after featuring in the magazine as a ‘happy wife, mother and grandmother’.
Hello! has won a reputation as heralding disaster by featuring families apparently in bliss just before they hit the rocks.
Last year Viscount Althorp presented his new baby daughter, Kitty.
Days later his passionate affair with cartoonist Sally Anne Lassoon was making headlines.
Actress Jane Seymour posed for a 40th birthday article with husband David Flynn and their children in March 1991.
Even before Hello! went on sale the couple had split.
Yesterday mystery still surrounded Bardot's overdose with many people asking why the screen legend should try to take her own life at a time when she seemed to have found happiness with her new husband.
Tourist is beaten to death in Oz
A BRITISH holidaymaker was beaten to death while drinking in a bar in Australia.
Father-of-three Andrew Cockle, 31, was taken to hospital with neck and chest injuries but died after emergency surgery.
Andrew, of Bedminster, Bristol, flew to Australia in June for a working holiday.
His death in Brisbane is the third tragedy to hit estranged wife Sue and heartbroken parents Maurice and Marlene.
Their other son Martin, 24, was killed in a car crash nine years ago, and Sue's brother died in May after being swept out of a dinghy in Greece.
Sue, 29, the mother of his children Guy, 10, Lee, eight, and Sarah, five, said: ‘I can't believe he's not coming home.
The worst thing was telling the children.
They took it very badly.
‘All we know is that he was knocked out while someone jumped on him.’
Andrew's grief-stricken mother sobbed: ‘Both my sons were wonderful, special people.
‘Andrew just wanted to have some adventure.
We never thought it would be the last time we saw him.’
The British consulate in Australia said a man has been arrested and charged with Andrew's murder.
Clinton flies to see Bush
BILL Clinton will fly to Washington today for his first post-election meeting with outgoing president George Bush.
He will discuss the transition before his inauguration in January.
White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said: ‘President Bush will reiterate he wants a smooth transition and will co-operate in any way possible.’
Mr Clinton hasn't left his home town of Little Rock, Arkansas, since victory a fortnight ago.
Demolished
THE home of cannibal killer Jeffrey Dahmer is being demolished out of respect for his 15 victims.
Flowers will be planted on the site, in Milwaukee.
Marley's widow in the clear
THE widow of Bob Marley was cleared yesterday of defrauding the reggae star's estate.
Lawyer David Steinberg and accountant Marvin Zolt were found guilty and ordered to pay £1.5 million to the estate in a New York court.
But Rita Marley was acquitted even though she admitted forging her husband's signature.
Marley died in 1981 but left no will.
His 11 children inherited most of his estate.
Tyson hit by new sex claim
THE beauty queen raped by boxer Mike Tyson says the former heavyweight champion gave her two venereal diseases.
Desiree Washington, 19, above, who is still being treated, will make the claim when she sues Tyson for damages.
‘He will be out of prison in three years but I have to live with this,’ she said.
Tyson's lawyer Alan Dershowitz will claim that Washington tested for VD four weeks before meeting Tyson.
Sorry for dirty tricks, says Bush
PRESIDENT George Bush's top State Department official has apologised to Bill Clinton for the election ‘dirty tricks’ campaign.
President-elect Clinton takes office in January after a landslide victory over Bush earlier this month.
Yesterday, Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger admitted Clinton's records and files had been searched in a muck-raking bid ‘to influence the outcome of the presidential election.’
At the time, Mr Bush was making an issue of Mr Clinton's character and opposition to the Vietnam War.
But a top-level inquiry by Inspector General Sherman Funk found the White House was not responsible for ordering the search.
It said Elizabeth Tamposi, already fired by President Bush, and her officials in the State Department's consular affairs bureau took the action in ‘partisan hopes of derailing the Clinton campaign.’
The investigation found no evidence that the then Democratic candidate had been engaged in illegal activities during a trip to Moscow in 1969–70.
Neither was there any proof that he tried to change his citizenship while attending Oxford University in the late Sixties, the report said.
The inquiry recommended 10 officials should be disciplined.
Mr Eagleburger, who has already offered to resign, said he would be taking ‘corrective actions’.
But as the results of the inquiry were being made public, Mr Clinton spent two hours holding ‘terrific’ talks with the president.
‘He was very candid and he gave me the benefit of his thinking about a lot of things,’ Clinton told reporters after leaving the White House.
Bhutto arrested
PAKISTAN'S opposition leader Benazir Bhutto was arrested yesterday after attempting to march on parliament.
Bhutto was choked by tear gas earlier when police fired canisters directly at her open-top jeep.
Thousands who joined the protest were beaten by the security forces, who fired into the air.
The Pakistan People's Party leader wants the removal of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, who she says was elected in a rigged vote.
More than 200 people have been hurt in battles with police in Lahore and the capital Islamabad was sealed off.
Mia's bizarre Valentine of hate to Allen
By Jim Gallagher, in New York
ACTRESS Mia Farrow gave a Valentine's card to her former lover Woody Allen showing a steak knife plunged into her chest, his friends said last night.
The gruesome picture, below right, also features meat skewers stuck into the hearts of her children, and shows better than words the hatred she feels for him.
A stark poem with the photograph reads: ‘Once my heart was one and it was yours to keep.
My child you used and pierced my heart a hundred times and deep.’
The shocking card was leaked by Allen's friends yesterday in the latest twist to the world's most bitter and public custody battle.
Both have fed the media with accusations.
A video of their adopted daughter Dylan telling how she was allegedly molested by Allen was given to — though not aired by — a TV show.
Last night's revelations included a note Farrow is said to have pinned to Allen's door saying: ‘Child molester at birthday party!
Molested then abused one sister.
Now focused on youngest sister.
Family disgusted.’
The Valentine's Day horror was written a month after Farrow discovered Allen was having an affair with her 21-year-old adopted daughter Soon-Yi.
She is said to have beaten the girl, torn up her clothes and locked her in a bedroom after finding nude pictures of her in Allen's Manhattan flat.
The other note refers to the allegations surrounding seven-year-old Dylan.
Allen's friends spoke out yesterday following an article in last month's Vanity Fair — over which he is suing — portraying the comedian as an unstable man obsessed with Dylan.
They said Farrow gave him the Valentine with ‘a gentle, almost kindly’ glance after he had given her an embroidered heart and a red satin box of chocolates.
Soon after, Farrow is said to have begun making threatening phone calls in the middle of the night, screaming that he was the devil and should die and burn in hell.
She allegedly shouted at him: ‘You took away my daughter and I will take away yours.’
Allen's friends told the magazine New York Newsday that Farrow was jealous of the closeness between him and Dylan and that she favoured her natural children over her adopted youngsters.
Allen has not seen his adopted daughter since the allegations of child molesting exploded in August and is only allowed to see his natural son, four-year-old Satchel, twice a week while the custody battle continues.
The next instalment in the feud over Dylan, Satchel and another adopted son, 14-year-old Moses, will get a wider audience than ever when it goes back to court in December.
A judge has ruled that TV cameras will be allowed to film every detail.
FBI probe hit squad link to Spiro killings
By Gerard Evans, in Los Angeles
THE FBI has been called in to investigate the deaths of British spy Ian Spiro and his family.
They have joined the inquiry as speculation mounts that the killings may have been staged by a Middle East hit squad to look like a domestic tragedy.
At the same time a fraud unit has begun to probe Mr Spiro's business dealings including those in the Middle East allegedly involving arms dealing.
The 46-year-old spy was found poisoned three days after his wife Gail and three young children were discovered shot dead at their California home.
Steve Pitman, an expert in mass killings, said: ‘There are quite a few puzzling anomalies in this case.
It could well be that someone has tried to make this look like murder followed by suicide.’
It was revealed that Spiro had been a middle man between the CIA and MI6 over the release of Beirut hostages including Terry Waite and John McCarthy.
Families of both Ian and Gail insist it was ‘inconceivable’ that he shot the family.
They say a Middle East hit squad was involved.
Family maid Paula Rojas said last night: ‘I never saw them argue.
I cannot believe Mr Spiro would do this.
He loved them.’
One theory is Spiro was assassinated because he was about to sell his story of cash-for-hostages negotiations.
Lieutenant John Tenwolde, who is leading the investigation in the US, said: ‘The allegations surrounding the Spiros are so serious that we cannot discount them.
To that end we have enlisted the support of the FBI.’
Stephanie's man accused
THE boyfriend of Monaco's Princess Stephanie, ex-bodyguard Daniel Ducruet, 29, is due in court today on a warrant alleging assault.
Monaco shepherd Francis Clary, 45, claims he was beaten up after his car held up Ducruet's white Renault on the road outside Monaco, two years ago.
Princess Stephanie's son by Ducruet is due to be born any day.
Fraud squad
WAXWORK dummy police are sat in patrol cars on Hollywood freeways to slow down speeding motorists.
Meanwhile officers in Belgium are going plain-clothed.
The force's tailor in Brussels is refusing to provide uniforms until his bill is settled.
Tom Selleck
MAGNUM star Tom Selleck has put his film career on hold to host a series of science documentaries on American TV.
Selleck, 47, above, jumped at the chance to present The Practical Guide to the Universe.
‘The scripts make me sound very smart and I like that,’ he said.
Pals strike fools gold 40 years on
A CAB driver and an unemployed man will make close to £2.5 million after a jury ruled they wrote the Fifties classic Why Do Fools Fall In Love?
Jimmy Merchant and Herman Santiago, both 52, had their song stolen by promoters who got massive royalties from versions by Diana Ross, The Beach Boys and Joni Mitchell.
New York cabbie Jimmy said: ‘It's been a long, awful struggle that we've been fighting since we were kids.
‘We were very ignorant.
They said ‘we'll take care of you.
The money will be there when you turn 21’, and we believed them.’
Following the verdict at Manhattan Federal Court, the pair face another hearing to decide how much money they are owed.
They were just 15 when they tried out their song Birds Sing So Gay on Gee Records' boss, George Goldner.
Joined by Sherman Garnes, Joe Negroni and 13-year-old Frankie Lymon, they recorded the song under its new name.
It soared to the top of the pop charts in early 1956 and for a while Frankie And The Teenagers were household names.
Only Merchant and Santiago are still alive.
Lymon died from a heroin overdose, Garnes during heart surgery and Negroni from a stroke.
A new nest for Madonna pet
IT'S nothing grand.
Just a six-bedroom hideaway with four marble-tiled bathrooms, pool and private beach.
But for Madonna and her dear friend Ingrid, this £3.3 million Spanish-style villa in Miami is to be home.
For that modest kind of money, of course, you can't expect perfection.
So 34-year-old Madonna, who also owns a £1.5 million Hollywood mansion, luxury New York pad and £1 million cabin cruiser, is chucking in another million dollars for a bit of decorating.
Once the paint is dry, Madonna and 25-year-old Ingrid Casaras, who were shown kissing in the singer's much-hyped book, Sex, will move in together.
Which is not going to please actress Sandra Bernhard, Madonna's former constant companion.
Last month Bernhard, 37, accused Madonna of poaching her friend Ingrid, a one-time shop girl.
‘Madonna,’ Bernhard announced, ‘is a jerk.
She has been so evil with me.’
Meanwhile a carefree Madonna goes jogging on the beach with her personal trainer.
And Ingrid.
Court sends O'Neal son to drug clinic
THE hellraising son of actor Ryan O'Neal was yesterday sentenced to spend a year in a tough drug and alcohol clinic.
Griffin O'Neal will undergo specialist treatment after pleading guilty to shooting up former girlfriend Lynn Oddo's car in a drunken rage.
He was only spared a long jail term when 24-year-old Lynn agreed to drop assault charges providing he went into therapy.
She said: ‘I'd rather he was sorted out than behind bars.
But I never want to see him again.’
According to police reports, he threw Lynn to the ground and kicked and punched her.
Lynn's pal Kathy Karges claimed she heard Griffin shout: ‘I'm going to burn her house down and burn her down too.’
As part of a five-year probation, Griffin must not leave the jail-like clinic for the first six months.
If he violates the tough conditions, including random drugs tests, he could end up doing three years in a State prison.
Griffin, 27, was also ordered to not to contact Lynn and pay her up to £6,500 compensation at Santa Monica Superior Court, Los Angeles.
Griffin, who has already spent years undergoing alcohol-abuse therapy, stood meekly as the sentence was read.
Judge Lawrence Rubin warned: ‘Sort yourself out — or go to prison for three years.’
Tycoon Bond wins appeal
BANKRUPT businessman Alan Bond was last night cleared of a dishonesty charge.
Bond, 54, the former head of a £400 million empire, spent three months on a prison farm near Perth before an Australian appeal court cleared him of concealing a £7 million fee for shoring up failed merchant bank Rothwells.
Murderer's final farewell
AN American killer who stabbed a teenager and a boy aged seven to death said farewell to his fiancee in Britain before being given a lethal injection yesterday.
Jeffery Griffin, the 53rd person executed in Texas since capital punishment was restored in 1982, said: ‘I want to say 'bye to my fiancee Regina in England.’
Barbra buzzes off over bees
SINGER Barbra Streisand pulled out of buying her dream ranch because of killer bees.
Barbra, 50, had her heart set on property in California until she found out it was in the path of the killers which are slowly migrating north from South America where 600 people have been stung to death.
A spokesman said: ‘She decided caution is the better side of valour.’
Mystery call hits Rock trial
By Geraint Jones in Gibraltar
SECURITY surrounding murder suspect Roderick Newall was tightened on Gibraltar yesterday when an intercepted phone call sparked fears of a plan to free him.
Detectives launched the massive operation after eavesdropping on the conversation between a mystery woman and the playboy yachtsman accused of murdering his parents.
Newall was flanked by two officers armed with semi-automatic rifles as he left the Moorish castle that serves as the Rock's jail for the opening of extradition proceedings.
Handcuffed to a plain-clothes policeman, he was driven the half-mile to court along a carefully-monitored route.
The courthouse itself was protected by barbed wire and ringed with police.
Inside, more armed officers stood guard.
Throughout the proceedings two plain-clothes policemen sat each side of 27-year-old Newall, accused of killing his parents on Jersey.
Wearing a blue blazer, a white open-necked shirt and jeans, Newall listened intently as his lawyer battled to stop him being sent for trial in Britain.
Press and public were then excluded from the court as lawyers debated whether an alleged tape recording of Newall was admissible as evidence.
As the argument continued behind closed doors, a row erupted over the huge cost of Newall's arrest and detention, estimated at more than £1 million.
The issue will be debated in Gibraltar's parliament on Monday.
Freddy Vasquez of the opposition party, the Gibraltar Social Democrats, is demanding to know the exact cost and who will pay.
Just guarding Newall is estimated at £2,000 a day.
‘I do not like the whole business of armed police running around Gibraltar,’ said Mr Vasquez yesterday.
‘Many people are upset by this.’
Lloyd's underwriter Nicholas Newall, 56, and his wife Elizabeth, 48, disappeared from their Jersey home in October 1987 but their bodies have never been found.
Roderick and and his brother Mark, 25, inherited an estimated Pounds 500,000 last year after winning a court bid to have their parents declared ‘presumed dead.’
Newall was arrested in August this year when a Royal Navy frigate intercepted his yacht off Gibraltar — an operation that cost an estimated £250,000.
He has been refused bail and repeatedly protests about being held in the grim 13th Century jail.
In September he tried to kill himself by slashing his wrists.
Airport bid set for take-off
PLANS for a second airport at Hong Kong will be put forward despite China's opposition.
The scheme is to go before the island's Legislative Council for approval in defiance of its giant neighbour.
China, which takes over the British colony in 1997, has flatly rejected two plans.
But Hong Kong officials say any further delay would add billions to the £14 billion cost.
Financial Secretary Hamish Macleod denied the move was a snub to the Chinese government in Peking which is already enraged by Governor Chris Patten's plans for democratic reform.
‘We have been very careful to choose the least confrontational way of proceeding,’ he said.
Powers Weds
ACTRESS Stefanie Powers is to marry her French biologist fiance.
Hart to Hart screen husband Robert Wagner will join 200 guests at Stefanie's Kenyan ranch for the April Fool's Day wedding.
Stefanie, 50, said: ‘We're very much in love.’
Vital tape barred in Newall case
AN Army officer accused of murdering his parents may walk free after a magistrate threw out crucial evidence.
A taped conversation, alleged to implicate Roderick Newall, 27, was ruled inadmissible at an extradition hearing in Gibraltar yesterday.
Magistrate Felix Pizzarello attacked the police for secretly taping a conversation between Newall and his uncle and aunt in which he is said to have made certain admissions.
The ruling means that Newall will be a step closer to freedom when the hearing to extradite him to Jersey re-opens on Wednesday.
Mr Pizzarello said the police had been ‘sneaky’ in circumventing Newall's right to silence.
‘The tape has to be treated in the nature of a confession.
It is prima facie evidence, but I disallow it,’ he said.
It was unfair to the defendant and came about by the calculated action of the police to lull Newall into a false sense of security, he added.
Newall has not admitted to the murders.
Christopher Finch, defending, said the aunt and uncle's scheme was despicable.
Newall's wealthy parents, former Lloyd's underwriter Nicholas, 56, and his wife Elizabeth, 48, disappeared from their Jersey home five years ago.
Their bodies have never been found.
Captain runs up the Rock
ROYAL Navy captain Fabian Malbon, 46, led 300 crew up the 1,400ft-high rock of Gibraltar yesterday to raise money for a cancer appeal.
Captain Malbon, commander of the aircraft carrier Invincible, hoped to raise £700 for the Team Up appeal.
The fund, organised by brain-tumour victim Janet Murray, 33, buys the cancer-fighting drug Temozolomide.
Dyed hard
MOONLIGHTING and Die Hard star Bruce Willis is planning to grow a ponytail after sprouting new locks.
Asked how he had beaten the march of time Willis, 37, would only say: ‘Tricks of the trade.’
2 killed by wall of snow
James Murray
TWO British students died under tons of snow when they were engulfed by a huge avalanche while skiing in the French Alps.
Chris Maxwell, 21, and 22-year-old Roderick Arkell were swamped by the rolling white wall near the Val Thorens resort, near Grenoble.
Their bodies lay crushed for an hour before they were dug out and it was too late to save them, rescuers said last night.
Five others, including a boy of 10, also perished.
Chris and Roderick were taking a break while spending a year studying engineering at Lyon as part of their degree courses at British universities.
They were overcome by the thundering avalanche as they skied on a fairly flat, marked piste on a mountain at St Martine De Belleville in sunny weather on Saturday.
The snow was wet and heavy which prevented anyone trapped from breathing or struggling free.
More than 100 rescuers including doctors, mountain rescue teams and other skiers, clawed at the snow.
The Britons were given mouth to mouth and heart massage but it was too late.
Rescuer Francois Gros said: ‘It was terrible.
The snow wasn't deep but it was very heavy.
It was like they were buried in concrete.’
Chris's grief-stricken father Rob ert, 51, of Bristol, Avon said: ‘Chris loved life and sports.
He was a very keen and accomplished sportsman and had skied several times before.
‘Chris had such a bright future.
He was a very bright boy and was doing so well in his studies.
We were so proud of him.
He had surpassed all our expectations.’
Chris was head boy at Bristol Grammar School.
He completed two years of a civil engineering course at Nottingham University before moving to Lyon.
He was due to return to Nottingham next summer to complete the final year of his course.
Bristol engineers MRM had promised him a job.
Robert's wife Jeannette, 56, was too upset to talk.
They have another son James, 18.
Roderick, from Rowlands Gill, County Durham, was described as a brilliant student with a great future.
He had gone to the Val Thorens region from the Science Institute in Lyon.
At the end of his year long stay he was due to return to lectures at Sheffield University.
Last night his 46-year-old father Richard, a planning officer, was flying out to identify his body.
His mother Jennifer, 46, a French teacher, was being comforted by her daughter Helen, 17.
They have another son Rowland, 20.
Helen said: ‘We can't believe what's happened.
It's terrible.’
Neighbour James Longrigg, a senior lecturer at Newcastle University, said: ‘Rod was an absolutely splendid young man.
‘He seemed to have everything before him.
‘He was a brilliant A-level student and got three A passes.
His parents were very proud.’
The Britons had made friends with many in the party who perished, including 21-year-old Australian Pierce Kitely.
Frenchman Olivier Pons, 22, also died with a party of three, Dutchman Robertus Volk, 28, Houria Lakhdari and 10-year-old Abdnouri Mehdi.
Twenty other skiers were hurt.
French government officials are to launch a judicial investigation.
The Val Thorens resort, at 7,500ft, is the highest in Europe.
Stunned ski instructor Gilles Marsurin said: ‘We've had eight or nine years without enough snow and now suddenly this.’
Resort officials had deliberately set off a number of small avalanches on Saturday morning as a normal safety procedure.
The avalanche struck on the Jean Beranger black run, 600ft above the resort.
Mr Gros, 57, said: ‘We spent over an hour trying to revive one, but it was too late.’
The bodies were taken down the mountain by snow plough.
Mr Gros said: ‘No one has died in an avalanche here for 10 years and there has never been one at that spot before.
It was just a freak.’
Prince Charles was nearly swept to his death when an avalanche in March 1988 claimed the life of his friend Major Hugh Lindsay, 34, at Klosters, Switzerland.
The worst avalanche disaster was at the French Alps resort of Val-d'Isere in 1970 when 39 people died.
There was an avalanche warning from Scotland yesterday.
Blyth Wright, of the Scottish Avalanche Information Service, said: ‘We had about six avalanches in October but, fortunately, no one was killed, although one climber was caught up in one.
‘Conditions are becoming about right for more.’
French farmers rampage
Alison James
AMERICAN restaurants and government buildings were attacked as French farmers went on the rampage in protest at the cuts agreed in the Gatt trade talks.
Families had to be barricaded inside a McDonald's for 90 minutes when more than 100 demonstrators besieged the restaurant.
Enraged farmers banged on windows, shouting anti-American slogans.
Last night staff said they had to bundle customers into a basement of the fast food store in Amiens.
‘Everyone was scared,’ said manager Gerard Jobar, 23.
‘Some of the farmers were very aggressive, yelling and banging on the windows.
We shut the doors and told everybody to stay calm but some people panicked.
‘Police blocked farmers from coming inside and they just stood in front shouting and calling messages over a loud hailer.’
In Lille, staff defused tempers by offering free meals for farmers' children.
‘We were frightened,’ said manager Teo Nossen, 30.
‘They were pretty threatening but we tried to reason with them by offering free meals to children.
It worked and they went away.’
Several official buildings were also hit.
Bales of hay and tyres were set alight, damaging the entrance of one office.
Protesters also stopped traffic on a motorway slip road.
Demonstrations over the Gatt agreement to reduce French farming exports are feared to be the tip of the iceberg.
Farmers have promised more mayhem if their government does not resist US demands for cuts — and they are backed by public opinion.
One EC official said the French government, now isolated in the rest of Europe because of its stubborn stance, finds itself ‘between the devil and the deep blue sea’.
The French crisis looks set to deepen when an EC commission meeting on Wednesday decides whether the Gatt deal agrees with its own farming reforms.
The rest of Europe is anxious for a settlement but France is expected to oppose the accord.
Prime Minister Pierre Beregovoy will ask MPs to support a revolt against the trade agreement.
‘We consider that the fundamental interests of France, of our agricultural economy, will be jeopardised,’ he said.
He called on farmers to ‘stay calm’ but would not say whether France would veto the ‘unacceptable’agreement and talked of negotiating a more favourable deal.
We want Mel in our stockings
LETHAL Weapon star Mel Gibson would make the hunkiest Father Christmas, according to a survey.
He was the choice of one in four women, beating rugged Robert Redford into second place with 18 per cent of the 1,000 Hollywood women polled.
Even at 62, Scottish star Sean Connery captured 10 per cent.
Model Cindy Crawford was voted most attractive Mother Christmas by the 1,000 men questioned.
She was chosen by one in five, narrowly beat sexy actress Kim Basinger's 16 per cent, with Catwoman Michelle Pfeiffer in third place.
Pop queen Madonna came fourth.
Making Whoopi
THEIR affair has been oh-so-discreet.
When Room Service knocked at their hotel door, Cheers TV star Ted Danson answered — while comedy actress Whoopi Goldberg hid in the back bedroom.
And for these two, breakfast at Hollywood's £500-a-night Bel Air Hotel was a staggered affair.
First, 44-year-old Danson would stroll, whistling innocently, through the hotel grounds for breakfast.
At a decent interval later, twice-divorced Whoopi, 43, would saunter out, like any other unattached lady guest.
But whoever they were hiding their affair from, it certainly wasn't Danson's wife Casey, 54.
When she found out, she walked out on the 15-year marriage, taking daughters Katie, 13, and Alexis, eight, with her.
And Danson checked into the hotel, claiming that he had the decorators in at home.
He and Whoopi met making Made In America, having a screen romance that swiftly turned into a real one.
They will soon be working again, when Whoopi joins the cast of Cheers.
Lately, the lovers have become more open, walking hand-in-hand through the garden.
And Danson has showered Whoopi with flowers and love poems.
‘They can't get enough of each other,’ a friend said.
Doctors' vigil for Liz in new health scare
Shoba Vazirani
LIZ TAYLOR is bedridden with severe bronchitis and has been ordered: Stay put or you may die.
Her alarmed personal physician Dr Michael Roth was forced to give her the stark warning when she refused to rest up completely.
Now the 60-year-old film star has cancelled all her engagements until the end of the year.
Dr Roth fears the bronchitis and sinusitis could develop into pneumonia.
Two years ago the same infections almost killed her and she received the last rites.
‘She has to be extra careful in view of her past medical history with this illness,’ said Dr Roth last night.
‘She shouldn't be out and about for the rest of the year in my view.’
Liz is now under close watch at her Bel Air home where her seventh husband Larry Fortensky is nursing her.
Film producer Norma Heyman, who was matron of honour at their wedding in October last year, said: ‘Elizabeth isn't well at all.
She is in good spirits although she can hardly speak.
Larry is with her and she's being very brave.
‘We're keeping our fingers crossed she's going to be okay but it's a worry when she's ill in that area.
She's very weak in the lungs.’
According to Liz's publicist Chen Sam, the actress was seriously ill when she appeared on stage at New York's Madison Square Gardens with Elton John and George Michael in an Aids fundraising event last month.
‘This is a forced rest for Liz,’ she said.
‘But she hates to be confined.
She gets cabin fever.’
Liz's illness led to rumours that she had collapsed and died at 5am yesterday.
The first Chen Sam knew about it was when reporters began ringing up for confirmation.
But the publicist said: ‘Elizabeth is very much alive — and furious.
‘Someone is doing something very sick indeed.
There is no truth whatsoever to the malicious rumours.’
A bodyguard at Taylor's home added: ‘She's sleeping in bed.
We didn't bother waking her to tell her she was dead.’
Red tape cuts free phone line for aid troops
Ellis Plaice, Defence Correspondent
A PHONE link to help frontline troops in Bosnia keep in touch with their families in Britain has been cut.
Bosnian officials cancelled the planned Mercury cardphones, used by troops during the Gulf war, because they are desperate for cash.
Now 2,400 troops will have to queue with locals in freezing conditions for whatever public phones they can find.
Boxes quickly become choked with coins and the chances of booking calls at Christmas are slim.
Mercury had expected to provide a non-profit service with Cable and Wireless like its morale-booster during the Gulf war.
Now the Army is to give every soldier an extra £10 a month, which should pay for a weekly three-minute call.
But phone companies know they will spend thousands more from their own pay.
‘We had hoped to link cardphones directly into the Bosnian cable network,’ said a Mercury spokesman.
‘But they were unwilling to accept our equipment.’
One defence source was more frank.
Search for solo yachtsman
AN RAF plane was searching the Atlantic last night for a missing solo yachtsman.
American Mike Plant's 65ft yacht Coyote was found capsized yesterday 1,000 miles from the Irish coast.
Rescuers hope he took to a dinghy, which is missing.
Would Sir like it wrapped?
Gerard Evans in New York
THE countdown to Christmas is going well.
You've got the winceyette nightie for Aunt Mabel and the Blue Stratos aftershave for Uncle Joe.
But what can you give that really special person in your life?
The answer — as long as you are stinking rich — lies in the ultimate gift guide, Robb Report magazine's annual list of the most exclusive presents on earth.
Would that special person fancy a nice French-style chateau overlooking Los Angeles?
A snip at £21 million.
And to drive up in style, there's one of the most spectacular cars ever built, the 200mph McLaren F1 coupe.
If you're vulgar enough to ask the price, it's around £670,000.
But you can sail over the head of any McLaren owner by giving the build-it-yourself Cobra helicopter, able to park in tight spots.
Price: A mere £30,000.
For the sporting type, how about the £40,000 Taj Mahal pool cue, made of ivory, ebony, malachite and gold?
Perfect to play on the hand-crafted Daly billard table, which will mop up the spare £47,000 you couldn't be bothered to take back to the bank.
Or there's a £100,000 package of the boxing gloves worn by Gentleman Jim Corbett in the world's first heavyweight championship fight, 100 years ago.
Programme included.
To help Cinderella catch midnight, give her the Swiss International Watch Company's £150,000 Grande Complication timepiece.
It will show the date for the next 500 years.
Or there's the Lavigne clock — as used by the Sultan of Brunei, the world's richest man.
All gold, crystal and diamonds.
To you, Pounds 275,000.
For a £44,000 touch of fantasy, give the British-made Virtual Reality video games outfit.
Players in goggled helmets stage 3D tank and spaceship battles.
‘These gifts won't be found on department store shelves,’ says magazine editor Robert Feeman, with some confidence.
The one item that comes in under the £100 mark might not suit your favourite Brit.
It's a goldplated baseball score card.
City chiefs join homeless
FOUR officials have been ordered to spend a night sleeping with the homeless.
The New York City officials were found in contempt of court for failing to find shelter quickly enough for needy families.
The three men and one woman will have to sleep in welfare offices on table tops or filthy floors.
A homeless woman said they would find conditions ‘not good enough for dogs’.
Hilary Clinton airport
BILL Clinton's wife Hillary, above, has been snubbed over plans to rename her local airport in her honour.
Airport officials at Little Rock, Arkansas, were forced to back down after a storm of protest from residents.
Price of my fame
RUGGED movie star Robert Redford says the price of fame is fear.
The father of three revealed he and his children had received death threats.
‘People come at me out of nowhere,’ he said.
‘You develop eyes in the back of your head.’
The 55-year-old actor shot to fame with Butch Cassidy And The Sundance Kid in 1969.
Since then, he says, the film industry has gone downhill.
‘It's tied to a fast-food, sound bite, give-it-to-me-now mentality,’ he told Esquire magazine.
‘Very little is asked of audiences.’
Redford, whose latest film, Sneakers, has just been released in Britain, first wanted to be an artist.
He studied art in Paris and Florence, then landed a Broadway role.
Giving up art was ‘an agony’.
16 die in tornado
SIXTEEN people were killed and over 200 injured when tornadoes ripped into the southern United States yesterday.
At least two children and a pregnant woman were among the dead.
‘Two-storey homes are being reduced to firewood,’ said a policeman near the Mississippi capital of Jackson.
The storm cut power, felled trees and wrecked homes in its path.
Film crew crashes into live volcano
Gerard Evans, in Los Angeles
RESCUERS were last night battling to save a Hollywood film crew whose helicopter crashed inside an active volcano.
A cameraman and sound recordist filming scenes for the new Sharon Stone thriller Sliver were trapped in the Kilauea volcano on Hawaii.
The injured pilot was airlifted to safety but deadly gases from bubbling molten lava at first forced the 12 rescuers to abandon their search for the rest of crew.
They managed to crawl away from the lava to spend a freezing night on a ledge 150 yards inside the 500ft vent.
Neither Stone, her co-star William Baldwin or the rest of the cast were involved.
National Park rangers eventually managed to speak to the two men but were unable to see them for clouds of steam.
Ranger Bruce Malloy said: ‘We hope to reach them shortly.
It is a very serious situation because the gases are extremely toxic.
‘They have managed to find a pocket of air to breathe in but are unable to go up or down.
They are lucky to be alive.’
The helicopter is believed to have crashed after the gases caused engine failure.
A Paramount spokesman said: ‘Everything is being done to get these guys out.
We are terribly worried.
‘This sort of thing only happens in the movies, not during filming.’
Mia's ‘murder threat’
Jim Gallagher in New York
WOODY ALLEN told last night how Mia Farrow threatened to have him murdered.
The film director claimed his former lover regularly rang him in the middle of the night to scare him.
‘She threatened to have me killed or to kill me,’ he said.
‘I took it seriously in the middle of the night.
You get scared in the night.’
He made the claims on prime-time TV, in his first interview since August when he was accused of molesting his and Mia's adopted seven-year-old daughter, Dylan.
Allen said he was still in love with Soon-Yi, Mia's 21-year-old adopted daughter.
The actress found out about their relationship when she discovered nude photos of Soon-Yi taken by Allen.
about the pictures Allen visibly squirmed before saying: ‘What is the question?’
Mr Mafia keeps fit with Jane
JAILED American Mafia boss John Gotti does daily workouts in his prison cell — to Jane Fonda exercise tapes.
Gotti, 51, also does 1,000 push ups every morning in the 7ft by 8ft cell at Marion prison, Illinois.
The Teflon Don, head of the Gambino crime family, was jailed for life last June, for murder, gambling, loan-sharking extortion and tax fraud.
Now, a TV is his only luxury.
The one-time King of Crime sleeps on a thin mattress on the floor, next to a stainless-steel toilet.
And he cannot leave the cell without handcuffs and shackles.
But he told a newspaper through his lawyer: ‘I've got no complaints.’
Crater drama
TWO film cameramen were yesterday stranded inside a Hawaiian volcano after their helicopter crashed.
The pilot was winched to safety after Saturday's crash, but the Paramount Studios staff had to stay overnight in the crater.
Delay may have cost skiers' lives
Alison James
SKI resort bosses failed to alert a special medical team about the avalanche which killed seven people until 90 minutes afterwards, it was revealed yesterday.
Doctors at the French town of Moutiers said if they had been told sooner on Saturday they may have been able to save some of the victim's lives.
The delay meant the team, which was based 20 mile from the resort, did not arrive until 2½ hours later.
British students Chris Maxwell, 21, and Roderick Arkell, 22, and the other skiers were buried under a wall of snow at Val Thorens.
Rescue workers had battled for over an hour to revive them.
Spokesman Pierre-Marie Bouchard said yesterday: ‘We did what we could once we were contacted.
‘It took only 40 minutes to get there which is quite satisfactory.
But I don't know why we weren't alerted sooner.’
A spokesman at the fire and rescue centre in Chambery, which co-ordinates rescue services for the Savoy region, confirmed they were not notified until 4.40pm.
‘We sent our rescue team as soon as we could, but it was too late,’ he said.
‘There were experienced rescuers at the resort but doctors from the hospital were probably better placed.’
He said the head of rescue services in each resort chose whether to call on help from Chambery.
Macaulay's £20m smash
Gerard Evans, in Los Angeles
THE sequel to Home Alone is set for the record books after pulling in £20 million in its first weekend.
Home Alone 2: Lost in New York, starring 11-year-old Macaulay Culkin, enjoyed the sixth biggest opening in history at the US box office.
It could have attracted the highest-ever launch receipts if most of its audiences had not been children buying half-priced tickets.
Twentieth Century Fox executive Tom Sherak estimated the return would have been £25 million-plus if all tickets had been full price.
The comedy, which averaged £8,750 a cinema, hammered Francis Ford Coppola's Dracula and Spike Lee's Malcolm X.
It is almost certain to earn more than its original — which became the third biggest grossing movie ever — and looks set to edge out top grossing film Terminator II for opening figures.
After Fox's most successful three-day launch, the best ever non-summer debut, Mr Sherak said: ‘We have doubled what the first movie earned two years ago.
The film is working with kids and adults all over America.’
Cinema surveys showed 46 per cent of the film's audiences were over 25 who had loved the original.
It was rated excellent by 90 per cent of children and 65 per cent of grown-ups.
The sequel, which also stars Joe Pesci and Daniel Stern, earned rave reviews from critics despite closely mirroring the original plot.
The £25 million film has its British release on December 11.
‘My advice to cinema operators is to stock up on popcorn,’ said Mr Sherak.
The original, which opened with £10 million two years ago, earned more than £312 million worldwide, becoming Hollywood's most unexpected smash hit.
For that Macaulay reportedly earned £62,000 but his fee has soared to more than £2 million, making him the highest paid child star of all time.
£3m street girl
MADONNA will get £3 million to play a hard-nosed street girl in new film Angie I Says.
‘It's perfect because the character is the essence of what she is,’ said producer Larry Brezner.
Nazi gang kill 3 in firebomb blitz
Lesley Yarranton, in Berlin
A GANG of neo-Nazis was being hunted by police last night after two women and a 10-year-old girl were killed when their home was firebombed.
The women, aged 21 and 40, and the girl were asleep in the hostel for Turkish immigrants when the thugs hurled Molotov cocktails through their bedroom window.
The arsonists then phoned the local police station in the quiet German town of Moelln, near Hamburg, with the message: ‘A house burns on Muehlen Street.
Heil Hitler.’
Nine Turkish immigrants were treated in hospital for burns and shock after the attack.
Detectives were yesterday examining a tape of the anonymous caller and letters claiming responsibility for the arson attack on the two buildings, which housed more than 40 Turkish workers.
Germany's chief federal prosecutor Alexander von Stahl announced he was taking over the murder inquiry because of its links to Right-wing terrorism.
He said the letters and sinister phone call showed that ‘the unidentified criminals wanted to use their crime to help restore a Nazi dictatorship in Germany’.
The killings came at the end of a weekend of racial violence in which a 27-year-old student was stabbed to death, more than 12 people seriously hurt and 25 arrested.
There was no immediate comment from Chancellor Helmut Kohl's government, which has been accused of not trying hard enough to contain the wave of Right-wing violence.
The opposition Social Democrats called for neo-Nazi arsonists to be punished severely.
‘The terrible arson attack in Moelln raises fears of increased violence against foreigners.
We are appalled and shocked,’ said a spokesman.
Neo-Nazi gangs have carried out nearly 2,000 attacks on foreigners in Germany this year.
The firebombing brought the total dead to at least 14.
Senator on sex charges
ONE of America's top women's rights campaigners is facing ruin over sexual harassment charges.
Senator Bob Packwood faces a Senate Ethics Committee over allegations that he has been fondling female aides for years.
Ten women have come forward to nail veteran Republican Packwood, with claims dating from back to 1969.
Ex-wife Georgie said: ‘It's overdue.’
Last words
ACTOR Sterling Holloway, the voice behind many Disney favourites like Winnie the Pooh and the snake in The Jungle Book, has died aged 87.
Film man out of volcano
Gerard Evans in Los Angeles
A CAMERAMAN was plucked to safety yesterday after being trapped for two days inside an active volcano.
A sudden break in the cloud allowed rescuers to spot Michael Benson, 42, who had spent two nights in the 500 ft deep vent in Hawaii.
He had managed to find an air pocket on a crumbling ledge 150 ft above a molten lava bed.
Pilot Tom Hauptman flew his helicopter into clouds of steaming, poisonous gas.
Ranger Jeffrey Judd was winched down in a basket to where the Hollywood cameraman lay exhausted, 60 ft below the rim of the Kilauea volcano.
‘He helped Mr Benson into the basket and they got him out,’ said a national park spokeswoman.
‘He was taken to hospital in a conscious state but very weak.’
The hour-long rescue came two days after Mr Benson and sound recordist Chris Duddy crashed inside the volcano.
Their helicopter had developed engine trouble as they filmed scenes for the new Sharon Stone thriller Sliver.
The pilot was winched to safety before bad weather set in.
Mr Duddy spent a day stuck on the sheer sides of the cone before managing to crawl out on his own.
Jet victim found alive
SEARCHERS have found a survivor a week after a horrific plane crash in which at least 30 people died.
Annette Henriette, 32, a Dutch woman, was discovered in a tiny village hospital in Khanh Hoa, Vietnam.
A spokesman for Vietnam Airlines said: ‘She is in good condition, but has lost two teeth.’
She has now been transferred to Ho Chi Minh City.
An unnamed Briton was among the dead when the plane went down on November 14.
On the red — in the black
A DESPERATE businessman saved his company from bankruptcy by gambling every penny he had on the spin of a wheel.
German Wilfried Koenig wagered £1,400 in a casino at Bad Oeynhausen — and won £67,000.
Mr Koenig, 44, celebrated with champagne yesterday — and rehired five workers he had been forced to sack from his tool business.
Casino boss Peter Welter said: ‘He hadn't a clue about gambling, but he had enormous luck.’
Divorcees' blue genes
MARRIAGE may be made in heaven but divorce is determined by your genes, according to scientists.
The overall divorce rate is 20 per cent.
But for identical twins — who share the same genes — it rockets to 45 per cent if one twin is already divorced.
A spokesman for America's University of Minnesota, said: ‘Plan for the contingency of being apart if you see a lot of divorce in both families.’
Tom foots students' bill
HOLLYWOOD heart-throb Tom Cruise picked up the bill for a group of students he saw trying to impress their girlfriends.
Stallone resolves Cliffhanger
SYLVESTER Stallone took a £1.2 million pay cut to save his latest movie after it went £15 million over budget.
His sacrifice will cover the cost of Cliffhanger's key stunt scene in which a bad guy jumps between airborne planes.
‘The scene is so central to the whole film that Sly felt he had to take the cut to save production,’ said a film insider.
He will still pick up £9 million for the £43 million film.
Tornado baby survives with a scratch
A SIX-day-old baby escaped with just scratches after being plucked from her father's arms by a tornado and carried off into the night.
Selissa Vance's frantic parents searched for nearly an hour before they found her, virtually unhurt, under a nearby tree.
‘It's more than a miracle.
It's a blessing we're alive,’ said her father Curtis yesterday.
He and his wife Adrian, 24, were at home in Florence, Mississippi, when the storm hit last Saturday.
‘I went back to the bedroom to be with my baby,’ said 28-year-old Curtis.
‘I had her up in my arms.
Then there was like a big boom and I was just spinning around.’
The tornado picked up their mobile home and dumped it across the street.
It took a few minutes for Curtis and Adrian to realise their baby had disappeared.
After searching in the wind and rain for 40 minutes Selissa's crying was heard from the base of a tree.
‘Lightning flashed, and I saw her,’ said a relative.
Actor Landon saved my life
AS Cheryl Landon lay dying in a coma after an horrific car crash only her stepfather refused to give up hope.
Today Cheryl tells how Michael Landon's constant vigil saved her life.
She also reveals how the actor who tried to make the world a better place was to rescue her from the brink again.
90-minute delay may have cost ski Britons their lives
By Alison James in Paris
SKI resort bosses failed to alert a special medical team about the avalanche which killed seven people until 90 minutes afterwards, it was revealed yesterday.
Doctors at the French town of Moutiers said if they had been told sooner on Saturday they may have been able to save some of the victim's lives.
The delay meant the team, which was based 20 mile from the resort, did not arrive until 2½ hours later.
British students Chris Maxwell, 21, and Roderick Arkell, 22, and the other skiers were buried under a wall of snow at Val Thorens.
Rescue workers had battled for over an hour to revive them.
Yesterday, Pierre-Marie Bouchard said the hospital should have ‘certainly’ been warned sooner.
‘We did what we could once we were contacted.
It took only 40 minutes to get there which is quite satisfactory.
But I don't know why we weren't alerted sooner.’
A spokesman at the fire and rescue centre in Chambery, which co-ordinates rescue services for the Savoy region, confirmed they were not notified until 4.40pm.
‘It was a shame.
We sent our rescue team as soon as we could, but it was too late,’ he said.
‘There were experienced rescuers at the resort but doctors from the hospital were probably better placed to deal with the victims.’
He said the head of rescue services in each resort chose whether to call on further help from Chambery.
Volcano hero on the mend
A FILM cameraman was airlifted to safety yesterday after being trapped inside a volcano for two days.
Michael Benson, 42, of Los Angeles, was whisked to hospital with serious lung damage after the daring helicopter mission in zero visibility.
He and colleague Chris Duddy were shooting scenes for Sharon Stone's new film Sliver when their helicopter crashed inside Kilauea on Hawaii.
Duddy, a mountaineer, climbed 175ft to get out.
Rod rocked by £100,000 supercar loss
Rob Perkins
ROCK superstar Rod Stewart is putting his supercar up for auction.
And he looks like losing a fortune on it.
Rod, 47, paid £135,000 for the Lamborghini Countach QV three years ago.
That was £45,000 over the odds, even for a brand-new model — and he had to get a secondhand one because back in 1989 the prestige-car market was still booming and the limited supply of Lamborghinis imported from Italy had already been snapped up.
Rod was devastated at being left out of the elite Lamborghini set.
He got dealers to track down an enthusiast in Essex who had got in ahead of him, and made the supergenerous offer for the supercar.
The Countach, which is less than four years old, comes complete with blue leather interior and is powered by a V12 engine.
It has a top speed of 180 mph and does 0 to 60 in 5.2 seconds.
The car still has only 16,000 miles on the clock.
But the market has largely collapsed.
Next Monday, Rod's prize goes under the hammer through ADT, the world's biggest car-auction firm at Blackbushe, Hants.
And Stewart is thought to have put a reserve price of something over £50,000.
The auctioneers, diplomatically, would not comment on why the multi-millionaire star is selling, though they confirmed that there is a reserve price.
Spokesman Tim Naylor said: ‘We are expecting a lot of interest in the car.
Of course, Rod Stewart's name adds a lot of additional interest for any potential buyer.’
Britain's leading supercar dealer, Tom Hartley, is interested in buying — but, he said last night, not at anything over £40,000.
‘He will find the supercar market is very hard at the moment,’ Mr Hartley said.
‘I already have a potential customer for the car, in the South of France.
‘But in these hard times, cars are only selling at the right price.
And the right price for Rod's Lamborghini at the moment is £40,000.
Rod is about to become the latest victim of the slump in exotic cars.’
Mr Hartley agreed that Stewart — who also owns a string of other luxury cars, including a Lamborghini Diablo — will attract extra interest in the sale.
But, the expert insisted, it would still not be enough to bring in higher offers.
Rod, working on his own life story with a ghost writer, has promised: ‘I am going to leave no stone unturned — I intend to delve deeply into the numerous stains I have left on the tapestry of life.’
Only time will tell whether his revelations will include Why The Lamborghini Had To Go.
Madonna sex cuts
EXPLICIT sex scenes cut from Madonna's latest film have outraged her co-star.
Willem Dafoe says Body of Evidence is no longer erotic enough.
‘They have taken the guts out of the movie, except for Europe which always sees the true version,’ the actor said.
Madonna, who plays a murder suspect who seduces her married lawyer, has no complaints.
‘The cuts don't take anything away from the film,’ she said after seeing the tamer version acceptable to American cinemas.
Mia Farrow threat to Woody Allen
FRIENDS of actress Mia Farrow, above, yesterday hit back at claims by her ex-lover Woody Allen that she threatened to kill him.
The film director said a threat was made after Mia discovered he was having an affair with her adopted daughter.
Mia's lawyer said: ‘If there had been threats he'd call the cops.’
Brits scoop TV ‘Oscars’
BRITISH TV was the toast of New York yesterday after winning four out of six International Emmy Awards.
Heading the near-clean sweep of television's ‘Oscars’ was Anglia's A Dangerous Man: Lawrence Of Arabia, which was voted best drama.
Channel 4's Drop The Dead Donkey picked up best popular arts programme, while the independently-produced Jose Carreras: A Life Story was best arts documentary.
Beat That; Hairdressing, won the best children's and young people's category.
Lies painted the angels as heroes
Jim Gallagher, in New York
THE founder of the Guardian Angels yesterday admitted a string of hoaxes to win support for the vigilante group.
Curtis Sliwa, 38, faked heroics when the Angels looked like folding.
First he pretended two Angels found a wallet full of cash in New York and returned it to a pensioner who had been attacked.
Then Sliwa said Angels had rescued a mugging victim.
But the victim was a colleague who had bruises from a fall.
And a woman who offered a reward was Sliwa's actress sister.
Other made-up stories included the Angels thwarting rapists and Sliwa being thrown 17ft down a track by a shotgun-toting mugger.
Sliwa, who has exported the Angels to London and around the world, said the lies ended 12 years ago.
In Sliwa's last stunt he faked his own kidnapping and blamed it on off-duty police officers.
After that he was threatened with jail if evidence of a hoax was discovered.
Two attacks on him this year were genuine, said Sliwa.
He was shot five times in a taxi cab in June, two months after being beaten by thugs with baseball bats.
He told his wife, Lisa, of the lies at the weekend then revealed the truth in response to warm wishes received after the attacks.
Sliwa said: ‘If people are going to like you it's time they know the truth.
If I go from hero to bum, so be it.’
Deputy shocked the sheriff
A WOMAN deputy sheriff has been fired for fondling male colleagues and talking dirty to them.
Sheriff Carl Peed of Virginia in America, said the un-named officer was the first woman to be been sacked for sexual harassment.
The deputy was investigated after being seen feeling a colleague's groin.
Other men confirmed that they had been subjected to her unwanted attentions and ‘filthy language’ over six years but had not reported her.
141 killed in air crash
ALL 141 people aboard a Boeing 737 died when it crashed into a mountain in China's worst air crash yesterday.
In the country's fifth air disaster in four months, the China Southern Airlines plane crashed as it approached to land at the city of Guilin.
Witnesses saw the jet belch smoke before it exploded into pieces.
Impulse drove me to murder
A BRIDE-TO-BE was murdered in a frenzied knife attack by a man who claimed he had an impulse to kill.
Allison Dutton, 24, was working late at her office in Cherbourg, France, where she had moved to live with her fiance, when she was stabbed 18 times.
Jean-Marie Chantreux, 28, smirked as he told a Normandy court that he went to the shipping company to steal.
‘I heard a photocopier going as I rummaged around,’ he said.
‘I had a plastic bag over my head.
Then I saw someone.
She screamed and I stabbed her.
I wanted to kill.’
Edinburgh University graduate Allison, a talented violinist from Tyne and Wear, was found by her fiance lying in a pool of blood.
Chantreux claims he was insane when he killed her.
The case continues.
Birthday Demi on cloud 9
ACTOR Bruce Willis gave wife Demi Moore a star-studded 30th birthday bash — 30,000ft up in the air.
Cheers barman Woody Harrelson and Bangle Susanna Hoff were among guests on a jet chartered by the Die Hard star.
It flew from Los Angeles to Las Vegas for a show and a visit to city casinos.
As the party headed home the flight crew served cake and sang Happy Birthday.
Last year Demi, who co-starred in Ghost, hired an amusement park for 37-year-old Bruce's big day.
A friend said: ‘Demi couldn't believe Bruce topped her stunt.’
Trade deal threat
THE French Government looked ready to back down to angry farmers last night and torpedo a £200 billion boost to world trade.
Socialist Prime Minister Pierre Beregovoy said he would tell EC partners that France opposed the Gatt deal.
‘France will say that it will veto any draft agreement that goes against its basic interests,’ he told MPs.
Outside the parliament building in Paris protesters pelted police with eggs and vegetables, dumped cereal substitutes in the river Seine, uprooted flag poles and hurled fireworks.
Mia's boy-ban shocks Woody
MIA FARROW yesterday banned her former lover Woody Allen from seeing their five-year-old son Satchel.
It follows the film star's refusal to sign an agreement covering his twice-weekly meetings with the boy.
A friend of Allen said: ‘He can't see any of his kids now.
They're hostages, completely under her control.
They are hostages.
Woody is very upset.’
Allen was already unable to see adopted children Moses, 14, and Dylan, seven.
Fry Hard
FILM cameraman Mike Benson, 42, who is ‘feeling pretty good’ after two days trapped in a Hawaiian volcano, was told yesterday that his rescue is to be made into a film.
Top studios are fighting for the rights to Benson's story.
Stars being touted for the lead role include Die Hard star Bruce Willis and Tom Cruise.
TV tears of Bill's brother
BILL Clinton's younger brother burst into tears while talking about America's President-elect on a TV show.
Rock singer Roger Clinton, 36, told of his love and respect for Democrat victor Bill as he talked about the abuse he received from his alcoholic father.
He said after his father, also called Roger, died in 1968: ‘Bill assumed the role of father, best friend, guardian and protector.’
Roger, who said he was abused from the age of four and saw his mother Virginia regularly beaten, told of his two years in prison for selling cocaine and his former addiction to the drug.
Drug parents sell children
A COUPLE have been charged for trying to sell their children to buy drugs.
Mitchel Dedes, 23, and wife Karen, 31, of New York, offered Anthony, two, and baby Felicia to a neighbour.
Telly Savalas making comeback
KOJAK star Telly Savalas is making a television comeback — on the wrong side of the law.
The former detective hero has won a role as a mobster in a new American cop series The Commish.
An insider said: ‘He plays such a nasty character his new catchphrase should be ‘Who hates ya baby?’’
Major lays down Delors
PREMIER John Major was last night on a collision course with EC president Jacques Delors after a bid to save Britain £500 billion.
Mr Delors wants an extra £650 million from Britain towards Pounds 64 billion EC spending by 1999.
Mr Major's plan, to be put to EC bosses in Brussels today, cuts the total and increases Britain's contribution by only £150 million.
Princess Caroline of Monaco
PRINCESS Caroline of Monaco is moving back home after less than three months in her Provencale hideaway.
The princess, above, is said to have changed her mind for the sake of her father, Prince Rainier.
The lonely 75-year-old monarch was missing his elder daughter and grandchildren Andrea, eight, Charlotte, six, and Pierre, five.
Massacre spy takes secret to the grave
By Andrew Russell
SPY Ian Spiro took the riddle of his family's massacre with him to the grave yesterday.
His ashes were placed in his wife Gail's coffin which was buried with their three children in the rainswept Lake District.
The ceremony was 6,000 miles from where Gail and children Sara, 16, Adam, 14, and Dina, 11, were gunned down in their luxury home in San Diego, California.
Mr Spiro was found dead from cyanide poisoning in his truck three days after the November 6 massacre.
Police are keeping an open mind on whether the 46-year-old, who had shadowy links with British and American intelligence, cold-bloodedly shot his family then killed himself, or whether the family were the victims of an Arab hit squad.
Mr Spiro said he was ‘in mortal danger’ after a book linked him to Terry Waite's hostage negotiations.
Both families refuse to believe Ian would kill his wife and children.
A statement at the funeral yesterday read: ‘We know nothing of Ian's business dealings.
We remember the Spiros as a warm and loving family.’
They were buried in the hamlet of Boot, near Ravenglass, Cumbria.
Gail, 41, who met Ian when she was working at the American Hospital in Beirut, grew up nearby.
Sex clients revealed
By Michael McDonough in Miami
DOZENS of men are to be exposed as clients of vice girl Kathy Willets after a court ruled her little black book can be made public.
It was a bitter pill for the 117 men listed to swallow with their Thanksgiving turkey yesterday.
Florida's Supreme Court ruled the men had no right to privacy because they willingly took part in criminal activities.
However the judges did order that margin notes made by the so-called nymphomaniac on their genital size, sexual skills and bedroom fantasies would remain secret.
‘I feel sorry for these guys,’ said 34-year-old Kathy yesterday.
‘It's time the dust settled on the whole business.’
She caught worldwide attention last year when she claimed in a defence of prostitution charges that she could only satisfy a sex addiction by selling herself to the long line of men.
During the case, a leading local politician and campaigner against prostitutes and strip joints was forced to resign after his name was revealed as being on the list.
Kathy's policeman husband and pimp Jeff, 42, videotaped his wife's activities from a wardrobe and also wrote reports on the varying skills of the clients.
He was jailed for 3.5 years for his part in the affair.
She was given 18 months' probation.
Jeff received a further 2.5-year sentence last week for trying to strangle Kathy after hearing a false rumour that she was pregnant by a former client.
Hostage wife seriously ill
FORMER Beirut hostage Jack Mann's wife, Sunnie, 78, remained seriously ill yesterday.
Mrs Mann, whose husband, also 78, was held by terrorists for over two years, is in hospital in Cyprus.
The couple settled there after Jackie's release last year.
Cancer specialist Dr Helen Soteriou said: ‘Mrs Mann is very seriously ill, with a lung condition.’
Karaoke star
ACTRESS Kathleen Turner stole the show when she took to the stage at a late-night bar for a karaoke session.
She belted out classics for half an hour at the Stephen Talkhouse in Florida.
‘She has a great voice,’ said one reveller.
Carjack duo sent packing by widow, 73
Jane Holtam in New York
A PENSIONER took revenge on two carjackers by ramming their car and then trying to mow one of them down as they fled in terror.
Retired school secretary Anne Stern, 73, was on her way to spend Thanksgiving with relatives when two shabbily-dressed youths pulled in front of her and began trying to force her off the road.
The two cars slammed into each other several times as they sped along a quiet tree-lined avenue before the youths finally forced her into a garden.
As she wound down her window to scream for help, one of the youths then tried to drag her from her car.
‘I put the car into drive to run him down and kill him,’ said Anne, who is just 5ft tall.
‘He jumped to the side and I missed him.
He then grabbed me with one hand and grabbed my steering wheel with the other.
‘I floored the car into reverse and dragged him with me until he finally got smart and let go.
I hoped he wouldn't let go because I wanted to kill him.
I was using my car as a weapon.’
The two young thieves eventually fled in terror.
A Long Island police spokesman said: ‘She did what any 73-year-old woman would do.
She threw the car into reverse.
‘She was driving like Mario Andretti to get away from them.’
Bart Simpson
Bart Simpson stole the show yesterday when a 50ft balloon of the cartoon character flew above New York City's traditional Thanksgiving Day parade 
Borg is big loser in court
FALLEN Wimbledon ace Bjorn Borg has been personally ordered to pay debts of almost £400,000.
As well as settling with 11 creditors from the collapse of his fashion company he must also cough up nearly £80,000 costs.
A court in Sweden rejected appeals from Borg, 36, that he was nearly bankrupt.
The order is the latest setback to the Seventies tennis idol.
His former business associate Lars Skarke has filed a suit against Borg claiming £50 million damages arising out of the collapse of their business group.
Earlier this month Borg was ordered to pay £13,000 a month to his estranged Italian wife, Loredana Berte.
Windsor all over again
A ROYAL palace erupted in flames early yesterday, exactly a week after the Windsor Castle blaze.
This time it was the great Hofburg Palace in the Austrian capital, Vienna — centuries-old seat of the Habsburg emperors and home to the famous Spanish Riding School.
And there were remarkable similiarities between the Hofburg Palace disaster and the fire that devastated Windsor.
Just like Windsor, the blaze happened during restoration work.
Just like Windsor, volunteers formed a human chain to rescue nearly 200,000 precious items — in this case, books and manuscripts that had to be protected from the firemen's hoses as well as the flames.
And just like Windsor, the Hofburg Palace was uninsured because premiums would have been so high.
Three hundred firemen and 400 policemen raced to the Hofburg after a smoke detector set off the alarm soon after midnight.
Flames spurted through the roof of the ornate 16th-century Redoutensaal and adjoining ballrooms and the National Library.
But firefighters managed to stop the blaze spreading next door to the Spanish Riding School built by the Emperor Maximilian around 400 years ago.
The school's world-famous Lippizaner horses were led to safety in a park.
Firemen had to break down some doors secured by ancient locks that could not be opened with modern keys.
The main wing of the library and the adjoining treasury, which houses priceless coronation jewels and works of art, escaped damage.
But the ballrooms, used for talks on European security, were burned out.
First cautious estimates put the cost of the damage at £65 million.
That's not quite the £80 million that Windsor cost.
Hillary Clinton
FIRST Lady elect Hillary Clinton went on a crash diet to save her marriage.
The 44-year-old lawyer, above, was forced into action in 1989 by rumours of husband Bill's affairs and daughter Chelsea, 12, asking: ‘Why doesn't Daddy love you?’
Hillary bought sexy undies and showed Bill more affection in public.
‘I was forced to do something desperate,’ she said.
3 killers beheaded in public THREE convicted murderers were beheaded in Saudi Arabia yesterday.
The three men — a Pakistani and two Bangladeshis — were executed in different cities for three separate murders.
On Thursday, three other Saudis were also put to death for robbing a bank vehicle.
Under Islamic law, rapists, murderers and drug traffickers are beheaded in public while convicted thieves have their hands amputated.
The kiss of life that was too late
A MEDIC fights to save the life of a boy caught in a huge apartment block blaze.
Firemen who pulled him from the inferno looked on anxiously as off-duty technician James McDonald tried to revive him.
But despite Mr McDonald's frantic efforts, the kiss of life was not enough to bring him back from the dead.
The child's brother and sister also died in the blaze, which left an apartment block in ruins in the Hyde Park area of Boston, Massachusetts.
The blaze, which started on Saturday, was thought to be one of the city's largest.
It was was still smouldering last night, more than 48 hour later.
Play it again, Jason
Chris Hutchins, in Casablanca
OF all the stars in all the world, Jason Donovan had to walk into Humphrey Bogart's shrine — and the comparison didn't bear thinking about.
Men didn't come much tougher than hard-drinking, womanising Bogart, who baited even such close companions as Frank Sinatra until they were fit to kill him.
And they don't come much nicer than Jason, who won a £200,000 libel action against The Face magazine earlier this year then promptly gave the money back.
Nevertheless, their souls met at the weekend in Rick's Cafe Americain, where men dressed in crisp linen suits drank bourbon beneath whispering ceiling fans under the watchful eye of a Moroccan inspector of police.
Teetotal Jason was in Casablanca to promote his new single, As Time Goes By, and to chase Bogie's ghost.
But Bogart never came here.
His part was filmed in less than three weeks on a Hollywood backlot 50 years ago.
That, and the fact that Rick's Cafe, in the Hyatt Regency Hotel, was built more than a dozen years after Bogart's death, does not prevent taxi drivers from pointing out the building ‘where the movie was made’ and indicating the top floor suite ‘where he wooed Ingrid Bergman’.
Jason, 24, found himself in the north African city between concerts in Bournemouth and St Austell — two other places Bogart never visited.
Radio One DJ Jakki Brambles had the bright idea of getting Jason to record As Time Goes By after she and producer Jonathan Ruffle dreamed up the idea of broadcasting her show from Morocco to mark the film's 50th anniversary.
Jason spent the afternoon on a whirlwind tour of Casablanca, then ended up in Rick's bar, as everyone used to.
Since he successfully sued The Face for alleging he was gay and a hypocrite for denying it, he has attracted a lot of abuse.
‘When strangers walk up to you in the street and scream abuse, it hurts,’ he said.
‘And it happens a lot.
I don't think people have any idea how tough it has been for me.
‘But I'm not a whinger — that's not in my nature.’
Rick might have put it a little differently: ‘The problems of the little people don't amount to a row of beans in this crazy world.’
Four die in grenade attack at golf club
FOUR people were killed and 17 injured when a gang of blacks set off hand grenades and sprayed a South African golf club with bullets.
The raiders burst into the dining-room and rolled hand grenades along the floor as a petrol bomb was launched outside.
As horrified guests dived for cover, the gang of five fired into the crowd, killing two white couples, before escaping.
The military-style raid is believed to be the first of its kind in the white Cape Province settlement of King William's Town.
‘It all happened in seconds,’ said Nationalist Party member Ray Radue.
‘It was a scene of devastation — of absolute carnage.’
The attack happened as the multi-racial golf club hosted a wine-tasting function.
Broken glass, bloodstained tablecloths and unopened champagne bottles littered the dining room and one explosion left a hole the size of a football.
‘I will never understand this for the rest of my life.
I can only ask why,’ said survivor Michael Tassel.
The African National Congress condemned the attack which they said was by shadowy forces, intent on encouraging violence in the volatile black Ciskei homeland.
The region has been tense since Ciskei troops shot dead 29 people during an ANC march in September.
‘It is an initiative by certain groups to undermine the relative stability we are trying to cultivate in our area,’ said a spokesman.
It brought the number of people killed over the weekend to 25.
Eighteen people, including eight blacks shot and stabbed by a gang on a commuter train, died in separate attacks in Durban.
Another three, including a grandmother, were shot dead in their beds, the corpses dragged outside and chopped up.
The South African government said the violence was prompted by political motives.
‘They represent a harsh and discordant note after the hope of progress with political reform negotiations,’ said a government spokesman.
Nazis carve up girl's face
NEO-NAZI thugs used a broken bottle to carve a swastika on the face of a 14-year-girl who refused to join their gang.
The girl, identified only as Dominique K, was attacked by the two skinheads at her home.
‘They just laughed and then carved the swastika in my face,’ she said.
‘I'm too scared to go out.’
The attack in Bautzen, Germany, came as racial violence flared again.
At the weekend there were two firebomb attacks on refugee hostels in different cities.
No one was hurt.
In other incidents a 19-year-old Turk was stabbed and a Lebanese refugee shot at.
Police raided 56 homes of banned neo-Nazi National Front group members in a bid to end the violence.
They uncovered a big haul of weapons, explosives, knives, knuckle-dusters and Nazi propaganda.
Widow to become a mum at 62
A WIDOW is set to become the world's oldest new mum at the age of 63.
The Sicilian pensioner, whose identity is being kept secret, was inseminated using the frozen sperm of her husband, who died a year ago, and a donated egg.
Professor Severino Antinori, director of the Italian Research for Human Reproduction Institute, said the woman, now 62, was four months pregnant.
‘The lady prefers not to have us reveal any details, only to say that she is doing this out of love for her late husband,’ he said.
‘His sperm was kept frozen and we inseminated her after she underwent physical and psychological tests.’
Colleagues and the Italian media are outraged at the ethics of the latest case.
But Professor Antinori said: ‘She is 63 years old, but where can you draw the line?
If a woman wants to become pregnant, we try and help her as long as we are satisfied with physical and mental tests.’
The woman's parents are still alive and healthy in their 90s.
Royal rebel to marry
PRINCESS Stephanie plans to tie the knot with her former bodyguard after Christmas.
The royal rebel caused ructions in Monaco after giving birth to son Louis Robert last week.
The boy, who bears the surname of his fish wholesaler father Daniel Ducruet, is said to have no claim to the throne and is not even a royal.
‘When she marries the situation will change,’ said her lawyer Thierry Lacoste.
Daniel, will marry Stephanie, 27, with or without Prince Rainier's consent, insiders told Italian magazine Oggi.
Free again
BRIGHTNESS the beluga whale has been seen swimming happily in the Black Sea after escaping for the second time.
Brightness became an international star when he gave Russian scientists the slip last September.
Down and out in Beverly Hills
THE property slump is leaving Hollywood stars hundreds of thousands of pounds out of pocket.
Actress Britt Ekland and her estranged husband Jim McDonnell were forced to slash £200,000 off the price of their five-bedroom home in Beverly Hills to clinch a sale.
The £450,000 selling price was nearly a third under its value.
Back To The Future star Michael J Fox cut the price of his house in Bel Air by half to sell it for £1.3 million.
Other celebrities to have lost out in Beverly Hills' worst recession include Rod Stewart, who knocked £2 million off his £8 million home two years ago.
Eddie Murphy had to cut the price of the huge mansion he bought from singer Cher in Benedict Canyon in 1988 from £5 million to £3.5 million.
Zsa Zsa Gabor was told to drop the price of her £7.5 million Bel Air home by £3 million when she decided to move.
But one star's loss is another's gain.
LA estate agent Mike Silverman said there were amazing bargains.
‘This is the biggest recession Beverly Hills has seen.
Celebrity homes used to be guaranteed to make big bucks but not any more.’
Bruce Springsteen managed to pick up a new house for £2 million less than the asking price.
Gem of a gift for 73 girls
A MILLIONAIRE has given away his dead wife's jewels to 73 young women.
Alois Spinner, 77, left the diamonds and pearls in his will to the ‘fair daughters’ of his home town.
More than 260 women in Koenigstein, near Frankfurt, took part in a lottery with 73 winners receiving gems worth up to £2,000.
Spinner killed himself after his wife's death.
McEnroe still my smash hit says Tatum
Jim Gallagher in New York
THE marriage of tennis star John McEnroe and Tatum O'Neal seemed to have been saved last night after a series of tantrums.
Tatum, 29, was said to have walked out because he banned her from going back into movies after six years as a wife and mother.
But last night, as she left her New York apartment, she said angrily: ‘It's not true.’
The star kissed her three children goodbye before they were whisked away in a chauffeur-driven car with their nanny and John's brother Patrick.
Tatum, dressed in a black velvet coat and patterned trousers, lowered her head and brushed past photographers as she went back inside.
The couple's other home in Malibu, California, where McEnroe, 33, is reported to be living, was empty.
According to reports at the weekend, former Wimbledon champion McEnroe stopped Tatum's credit cards and made tearful phone calls to her family, saying she was about to file for divorce.
The star, who won an Oscar for Paper Moon at the age of nine, was desperate to resume her career.
McEnroe insisted that she stay at home and look after Kevin, six, Sean, five, and one-year-old Emily.
When asked eight weeks ago what her dream for the future was, Tatum replied: ‘It's that when John's career is finished he takes care of the kids while I make two pictures a year and get to pick my scripts and work with whoever I want.
‘Five years ago, after Sean was born, I realised I wanted my career back.
‘I said, ‘I need something for myself and if I don't get it then I worry for me and my marriage’.’
Tatum's first stage appearance, in the off-Broadway play A Terrible Beauty, opened to poor reviews in April and closed soon after.
‘It was a disappointment, but not devastating,’ she said.
Just 13 days ago the couple seemed happy enough at the New York premiere of Malcolm X, the controversial film about the black civil rights leader.
They posed for photographers at the star-studded show, giving the lie to rumours they had been separated for several weeks.
The reported separation was the third blow to hit Tatum in a week.
Her trouble-prone younger brother Griffin, 27, was sentenced to a year in an alcohol and drug rehabilitation centre and her mother Joanna Moore lost two fingers in a car crash.
But Tatum is not afraid to take a few knocks.
She says she learned toughness after being brought up in a man's world by her divorced father, Ryan O'Neal.
‘I learned a lot about men,’ she said.
‘If I can stand up to McEnroe I can stand up to anyone.’
Mia's sorrow
ACTRESS Mia Farrow wept at her first Thanksgiving holiday without long-time lover Woody Allen, a friend revealed yesterday.
It was also the first time that her 21-year-old adopted daughter Soon-Yi, Allen's new lover, was not at the traditional family meal.
Mia told her pal: ‘I'm feeling very low.’