

Never say die Pigggott
Mike Allan in Florida
LESTER PIGGOTT, still under intensive care in a Florida hospital last night, is confident that he will be back in the saddle ‘in two weeks’.
The world's greatest jockey, 57 next Thursday and who won his first Derby on the aptly-named Never Say Die an astonishing 38 years ago, is making a rapid recovery following his spectacular fall from Mr Brooks in the Breeders' Cup.
Piggott was sitting up in bed, laughing at reports in American newspapers that his legendary 44-year career is finished.
Watching a video replay of the horrific tumble, he said: ‘Of course I'll be back, it's nonsense to say I will not ride again.
After all, I've got nothing else to do.
Shattered
‘I'll be back on a horse in two weeks, and could race ride in three weeks.
It's only a broken collar-bone and two fractured ribs.
I've had much worse falls during my career.’
The Richard Hannon-trained Mr Brooks, who shattered his right foreleg, was destroyed behind green screens.
The ugly episode happened halfway round the home turn, two furlongs from the winning line.
Piggott had sensed that disaster was imminent, taking desperate looks over his shoulder as Mr Brooks started to stumble — shooting his partner head first to the ground at 40mph.
Looking back on the fall, he said: ‘I knew he was going down 20 yards before it happened.
After that I was a bit dazed.
‘It's very unfortunate it happened to Mr Brooks.
He was a lovely horse, and would have won some good races next year.’
Although the British turf season is nearing an end, Piggott said he will fulfil a contract to ride in Hong Kong in February.
Apart from a 10% collapsed lung, Lester broke two ribs and his left collarbone.
Top American jockeys were horrified by Lester's accident.
Eddie Delahoussaye, fresh from his Breeders Cup double on A.P.
Indy and Thirty Slews, said: ‘I was close by as Lester was stretchered into the ambulance to go to hospital.
His eyes were open and seemed to be focusing pretty well, I just said to him, ‘Hang on in there, Lester’— and he seemed to take it in.’
Delahoussaye continued: ‘Racing is so competitive when you are out there on the track, but when something like this happens you know it could be you next time.
It doesn't matter what country we all come from, we are pretty close.’
Pat Day, Kentucky Derby winning jockey, slammed the TV networks, saying: ‘We have so many positives in our sport they shouldn't emphasise the negative as they did.
‘They must have shown the slow mo of that fall 20 times.
Once was enough and most of us in the jockeys room agreed on that.
Should he retire?
That's within himself, but Lester is a real tough guy.’
Respect
Robert Sangster, millionaire owner of Lester's intended mount in the Breeders' Cup Classic Rodrigo De Triano, said: ‘You will never tell Lester when he should stop.
‘He should carry on if he wants to and I for one will go on using him — he's the best!’
Peter Chapple-Hyam, for whom Lester has won four Group 1 races on Rodrigo De Triano this year, said: ‘It is up to him — it's his life.
People shouldn't be telling him what to do.
If he carries on riding, we'll back him up, if he retires we will respect that decision as well.’
Raiders humbled in Miami heat
Mike Allan
THE inquest has begun after British racing's humiliating Miami mauling under the scorching tropical sun.
Leaving behind wounded legend Lester Piggott, the British retreated with heads hung low after the 7–0 hammering by the Americans at the $10 million Breeders' Cup world championships.
All 12 runners, including defending Sprint champion Sheikh Albadou, Rodrigo De Triano, Dr Devious and Selkirk, failed to reach the first three.
So much had been expected, yet it was a carbon copy of the wipe-out on the same track three years ago, and may signal a pruning down in future transatlantic visits for the Breeders' Cup.
Yet the Irish read it right.
Dermot Weld's Brief Truce, the country's only challenger, turned in a tremendous performance, surviving bad luck in running, to take third in the Mile, beating Selkirk and Arazi.
The travellers' spirit wilted as loser followed loser, then came the final degradation.
Great hope Rodrigo De Triano, on whom Walter Swinburn deputised for Piggott, finished last, beaten over 35 lengths, in the world's richest race, the $3 million Classic.
His trainer, Peter Chapple-Hyam, has vowed never to bring another horse to Florida.
Fallen legend
Piggott is comforted by leading American jockey Eddie Delahoussaye as he is stretchered into an ambulance after his horrific fall from ill-fated Mr Brooks in the Breeders' Cup.
Dated Irish pay penalty
Tony Roche
Ireland 17, Australia 42
ALAN DAVIES was being sincere when he expressed his sympathy for an Irish team exposed in this record home crushing as second rate.
‘I will never forget when this happened to me,’ admitted Welsh coach Davies.
‘A year ago the Wallabies crushed us 38–3 in Cardiff and that was also our biggest home defeat by anybody.’
Wales, under Davies and Bob Norster, have started the long haul back towards former prowess.
Ireland are still playing a style of rugby you only see when watching an old black and white Pathe News reel.
Davies left Lansdowne Road looking pensive, but alert to Australia's dislike of Garryowens, their growing weariness after two years of international stress, and the disruption of losing a fourth player through injury.
Influential fly half and captain Michael Lynagh is out for six weeks with a dislocated left shoulder.
The world champions, having wiped Ireland off their pitch, today settle down in Swansea preparing for the second leg of their tour which culminates in the 16th international between the nations at Cardiff Arms Park on November 21.
‘We know what to expect from the world champions,’ said Davies.
‘But maybe this time they won't know exactly what to expect from us.’
Improved
Actually, Bob Dwyer's Wallabies do know what to expect in Cardiff — tremendous singing, improved opposition and another victory.
Australia soaked the pressure, punished Ireland's handling blunders and scampered out of their 22 at will to score tries that numbed the huge crowd.
Inevitably, world record try scorer David Campese, who teased the Irish about their style before the game, tormented them during it, scoring number 51 to spark a massacre.
The Irish management said nothing worth reporting after their ninth consecutive defeat and 13th without beating an International Board nation.
Peter Russell scored four penalties, Richard Wallace was rewarded with a try but Australia were different class.
Lynagh, helped off just before the interval, failed to score for the first time in 60 Tests, but new goal-kicker Marty Roebuck was cool as he amassed 17 points from three penalties and four conversions.
Boks in snub to French
Tony Kell
SOUTH AFRICA'S Springboks arrived in England under a cloud yesterday after leaving angry French rugby officials behind at an after-match dinner on Saturday night.
The tourists, beaten 25–20 by the French Barbarians, were due to fly to London last night.
But they brought their arrangements forward after deciding to make the journey by ferry and coach.
Despite their early start, they still attended the dinner laid on by the Flanders rugby authorities.
But after 45 minutes, their opponents had not appeared and they decided to leave.
The French team, it seems, arrived 10 minutes later to find that South African Rugby Football Union representative Jackie Abrahams was the only visitor still there.
Earlier, when asked what was the most satisfactory aspect of the tour, leading player Naas Botha replied: ‘Leaving France and moving on to England.’
He added: ‘Tours should never go beyond the last Test.
The hosts lose interest and the players lose interest.
‘After the English Test we will be on our way home and that is how it should be.’
Cash boost for Tour
GOLF'S 1993 European Volvo Tour will be worth £24.75 million, a 12.5 per cent increase for 39 events in 19 different countries — 16 of which will be worth a minimum of £600,000.
Tour boss Ken Schofield said: ‘This confirms golf is flourishing.’
Thai 'n easy
THAILAND'S James Wattana shocked in-form John Parrott with a 10–5 victory in the final of the £60,000 Humo Masters in Antwerp last night to claim the £15,000 winner's cheque.
Heavy case
ANDREW SAXTON and Andrew Davies, the British Olympic weightlifters exonerated this weekend of drugs offences, are now ready to take legal action.
Mariner touted
FORMER Ipswich and England striker Paul Mariner has emerged as favourite for the manager's job at Cambridge United after the sacking of John Beck.
Will power
SOUTH African Willie Mtolo won the New York City marathon in two hours, nine minutes and 29 seconds.
Australian Lisa Ondieki won the women's race.
Wily Fox has Saints on the run
Ray French
St Helens 18, Bradford Northern 35
DERYCK FOX, Northern's £140,000 club record buy, helped himself to 19 points as brilliant Bradford shattered Saints' unbeaten championship record.
Centre Steve McGowan put Northern on the way to the top of Division One with a superb first-half hat-trick of tries.
But it was the mercurial Fox, aided by skilful loose-forward David Heron, who ensured Northern's seventh consecutive League victory and their first at Knowsley Road for six years.
Fox scored two tries, five goals and a neatly-taken drop goal.
The 28-year-old Great Britain scrum-half combined magnificently with pack stars Karl Fairbank, Roy Powell and skipper David Hobbs, spraying passes in all directions and prising huge gaps in a fragile defence.
Slick
McGowan's three tries came in the opening 32 minutes, the best being his second, cleverly made after slick passing between Fox and Kiwi full-back Dave Watson, who showed surprising fitness on his return after a three-month ban for drug abuse.
Trailing 19–2 at half-time, woeful Saints hit further setbacks when Fox raced in for two tries in three minutes early in the second half.
In the 48th minute, clever interpassing between outstanding forwards Powell and Fairbank allowed Northern's half-back star to scamper over for a try near the posts.
And, three minutes later, it was prop John Hamer and international second row Fairbank again whose passes once more paved the way for Fox to add his second touchdown.
It was no more than he deserved.
And lively Bradford forward Fairbank completed the rout of the League leaders with a final touchdown after racing at top speed onto Watson's delicate short pass.
Saints did show the free-running, slick football that has been their trademark this season late in the second half.
But, despite an opportunist try from pacy full-back Alan Hunte and two superb touchdowns from wing Les Quirk, Saints simply had no answer to Bradford's fast, ball-handling pack stars and midfield maestro Fox.
Said delighted Northern coach Peter Fox: ‘When you come to Knowsley Road and win you know you are championship material — but I was surprised at the number of points we scored.’
High-class Iro
Leeds 48 Widnes 16
LEEDS scored eight tries in their best attacking performance of the season.
New Zealand Test centre Kevin Iro — on his Leeds debut — showed his class with two splendid tries in the first half.
The visitors had two players sent off by referee Ian Ollerton for midfield incidents but were already losing 38–10 at three-quarter time when forwards Steve McCurrie and Harvey Howard were dismissed.
Hero Kenyon
Warrington 34, Hull 10
WARRINGTON'S Neil Kenyon grabbed a hat-trick as the home side swamped Hull.
Hull were reduced to 12 men on the hour when Mark Jones was sent off for throwing a punch at Gary Tees.
Warrington's tries came from Kiwi hooker Duane Mann, Tony Thorniley and Kenyon's hat-trick.
Hull managed two tries, Paul Harrison and James Grant touching down.
Gutsy Lyle toughs it out
Bill Blighton in Sotogrande
SANDY LYLE survived every weekend hacker's worst nightmare before clinching the £110,000 Volvo Masters title at Valderrama yesterday.
He defeated fellow Scot Colin Montgomerie at the first hole of a sudden-death decider after the pair had tied on three-over-par 287.
Lyle looked beaten when he hit his third shot out of bounds at the 17th.
But the ball cannoned into a tree, back on to the course and he salvaged his par to get into the play-off.
Then, at the first play-off hole, Montgomerie snap-hooked his drive into a tree just 50 yards away, eventually needing four shots to reach the green.
Crucial
Lyle's par four not only gave him his most crucial win since the 1988 US Masters but relegated winless Montgomerie to runner-up for the fourth time this year.
Lyle, who scored a 73 against his rival's 69, gasped: ‘Guts got me through and I'm delighted.
It's my most important victory since the US Masters.’
Montgomerie was kept waiting 30 minutes for Lyle to finish and he said: ‘That gave Sandy a big advantage.
I didn't have a sweater and I was cold.
He walked straight from the 18th green to the 10th tee.’
Nick Faldo shared 23rd spot but finished the European season with a record £708,522.
Waddle mission
Sheff W 0, Blackburn 0
IF anyone can keep Wednesday — 3–1 down to Kaiserslautern — in the UEFA Cup this week, it's Chris Waddle.
Waddle, says Blackburn's Kevin Moran, is ‘unstoppable on this form.’
He added: ‘Kaiserslautern will pack defensively, but Waddle has skills to open them up.
‘We put on a substitute, Tony Dobson, as a second marker and Waddle still produced crosses.’
Dobson came on because Waddle was tormenting poor Alan Wright on a day that looked to belong to Wednesday when John Harkes let rip.
But his shot hit a post to leave Blackburn still top.
Rovers centre back Colin Hendry justified their point by clinging to soccer's oldest consolation.
‘A clean sheet is important,’ he said.
‘The way we dealt with a lot of pressure shows we are hard to beat.’
MoM: Waddle (inspired).?
No luck for Grant
KIM GRANT cursed his luck in Charlton's 0–0 draw with Birmingham yesterday.
First he forced an excellent save from keeper Les Sealey, then saw Paul Holmes clear another effort off the line.
In contrast to Sealey, Mike Salmon — in his first game for two years — had a quiet afternoon, making one good save early on from Trevor Matthewson.
MILLWALL boss Mick McCarthy was angry with the sending off of teenager Andy Roberts in the 1–0 defeat at Bristol Rovers.
‘He went under the second bookable offence rule,’ stormed McCarthy.
‘His second offence was kicking the ball away at a free-kick.’
Batty faces Euro fitness race
David Alexander
Leeds 2, Coventry 2
DAVID BATTY had treatment at Elland Road yesterday in a desperate bid to face Rangers in the European Cup on Wednesday.
The odds are stacked against the Leeds midfielder, who has damaged ankle ligaments.
‘I've got to be rated doubtful but I'm still hoping,’ he said.
Batty, who was carried off after a tackle by Stewart Robson, added: ‘I am just relieved I haven't broken it.’
David Rocastle is the likely stand-in for Batty, with Gary Speed moving into the centre of midfield, his preferred position.
On Saturday Leeds burgled an equaliser through Chris Fairclough 45 seconds into added time to protect an 18-month unbeaten run at Elland Road.
Lee Chapman had cancelled out a Gary McAllister own goal before Peter Ndlovu finished another smash-and-grab.
Coventry boss Bobby Gould said: ‘We had a 17-year-old Irishman, an 18-year-old Zimbabwean, a postman who was out of work for 18 months and an on-loan forward.
And we didn't come to lie down.’
MoM: Ndlovu (constant threat).
Dean sparking title fight
David Harrison
Aston Villa 2 QPR 0
DEAN SAUNDERS provided the spark which launched Aston Villa's title challenge into orbit yesterday as his incredible goal-scoring streak continued to light up the skies above Villa Park.
The £2.3 million striker's eighth goal in 10 games, coupled with a second from his partner Dalian Atkinson, lifted Ron Atkinson's expensively-assembled side above QPR into third place — their highest placing in a season of growing anticipation.
Saunders' goals are working like a Championship charm.
They have come in five games since his move from Liverpool and Villa have won them all.
Their victory over Rangers extended their unbeaten run to 11 games and with only Blackburn and Norwich three points ahead of them at the top, their sights are being raised ever higher.
With Saunders and Atkinson, who scored his ninth of the season, firing with the lethal impact of a double-barrelled shotgun, nothing appears beyond Villa's reach.
Manager Atkinson said: ‘I thought QPR were having the better of the first half until Deano did what he's good at — scoring a goal when there is not really anything on.
‘He's infectious, brilliant.
I bet he didn't even look up to see the goalkeeper coming at him and a defender closing in ready to clatter him when he scored.
All he would have been aware of was the ball and the net.’
Saunders had already hit the inside of the post in the 16th minute and Atkinson had a shot from point blank range blocked by Darren Peacock when Rangers began to take control of the opening 45 minutes.
Les Ferdinand should have scored in the 16th minute when he escaped Shaun Teale and side-stepped goalkeeper Nigel Spink but the Rangers striker allowed Steve Staunton to get back and make two retrieving tackles in front of a gaping net.
A flashing volley in the 31st minute by England candidate Ferdinand lifted just over the bar to confirm the Londoners' supremacy.
But the irrepressible Saunders had the final word in the first half.
Atkinson flicked on a clearance from goalkeeper Nigel Spink, and the Welsh international outpaced Alan McDonald before lifting his left foot shot wide of goalkeeper Tony Roberts.
Villa had their tails up in the second half and Atkinson and Staunton both had chances to increase their lead.
They went begging and it needed an excellent save from goalkeeper Roberts to deny Saunders again in the 76th minute.
They advanced on Garry Parker's through pass, side-stepped Peacock and drilled a low shot towards the bottom corner which the alert Roberts saved one-handed.
A mistake by Peacock let in Atkinson for the goal which wrapped up the points for Villa.
The Rangers defender slipped and fell over as he went to make a routine interception and Atkinson advanced forward to place the ball through Roberts' legs into the net.
Rangers boss Gerry Francis said: ‘I was very disappointed to say the least to come in 1–0 down at half-time.
‘We made two mistakes which cost us dearly.
‘The turning point was Saunders' goal.
It meant we had to chase the game and it left more room for their two dangerous strikers.
‘Villa are in the middle of a really good run.
If they get in front it is difficult to contain them.’
Booze boys
Des Kelly
Man Utd 0, Wimbledon 1:
VINNIE JONES put down his pint and revealed the unique preparations that guided Wimbledon to another incredible triumph against the odds — a week of partying, brawling and booze.
The Dons cranked up the ghetto-blaster and happily rubbed United's noses in their demoralising defeat with an impromptu dressing room bash, capped by the bizarre sight of naked backsides wiggling in the sombre Old Trafford corridors.
It was enough to make the Premier League aristocrats choke with apoplectic rage but Jones cheekily suggested that Alex Ferguson's men should ease the tension gripping his club by copying the Dons' rough 'n' tumble, get-the-beers-in approach.
The Wimbledon star said: ‘Everyone here at United has got the hump with us playing our music.
‘But we've had a great laugh, in fact it's like a holiday in the north.
We've been on the booze for five days and the boys only settled the hotel bar bill at six o'clock on Thursday morning.
‘The gaffer was ready to hammer us for that but after this result I asked, where are we going next Thursday — a nightclub?
‘Righto,’ he said.
‘I could see United looking at us and thinking, bloody hell!
This is a Premier League game and they're all treating it like a Sunday morning kick-about.
But we're happy-go-lucky — our training sessions show that.
Fight
‘On Friday it was youngsters against old ones.
It started off with a bundle.
We had a fight for 15 minutes, then we had a quick five-a-side and worked on our set pieces for a couple of minutes.
‘United don't build-up for games in the same way but perhaps they'd want to try it.
On Thursday, at about six in the morning, it might do them good to have a bottle of Becks in their hand.
Maybe they'd be more relaxed then.’
There's no doubting the camaraderie in Joe Kinnear's camp right now, as Jones points out, and that factor alone should again guarantee their Premier League status.
‘We've proved that when the ball moves at three on Saturday we're all together.
If one of the lads gets booted we are all there,’ he said.
The unconventional methods might raise an eyebrow but Wimbledon are a club struggling on meagre gates and forever forced to sell their best players to survive.
In those circumstances any end justifies the means.
So this morning, Jones and Co can again thumb their noses at the elite (if they can find it through the hangover haze) thanks to Lawrie Sanchez's 80th-minute strike.
Despite the party, Jones insists it's no big deal: ‘The days have gone where we are stuck on the ceiling by a result like this.
Don't forget I've won at Old Trafford before and at Anfield three times.
‘United thought we were just going to come here and hump it, get 11 behind the ball and hold on.
But we gave them a lesson.
We had all the chances and we played all the football as well.’
No arguments about that!
It used to be a case of whether United would win the title again before Doomsday.
Right now a goal would do.
And with Comet Swift-Tuttle due to obliterate the Earth in August 2126, it could be a close-run thing.
That's a problem for my grandchildren to contend with.
But, in an uncanny moment of premonition, I am able to see through the mists of time to Judgement Day.
And who is that whooping it up at the bar with a glass in his hand?
Why it's Jones junior…
Wimbledon's success won them the Barclays Performance of the Week award.
The decision by England manager Graham Taylor's panel means that a local South London boys club benefit to the tune of £650.
MoM: Roger Joseph, Wimbledon (flawless defence).
Souness walking a tightrope
Rob Shepherd
Spurs 2, Liverpool 0
GRAEME SOUNESS knows full well what Liverpool's elimination from the European Cup Winners' Cup this week could mean for him.
His team are already 4–2 down to Moscow Spartak and, after seeing them allow Tottenham to win a game well in Liverpool's grasp, Souness said: ‘I'm disappointed because it is my job on the line.
And it is my responsibility to make sure the players concentrate over the entire 90 minutes and are not looking towards the next match.
‘I think they had Wednesday's game too much on their minds.’
Yet, if Souness had been as rational during the game, Spurs might not have won their first League match in six weeks.
At one point, instead of offering orders or advice, he jumped off his bench to hollow from the sidelines: ‘What the ***** going on out there?’
On the other hand, Spurs' coaching double act of Ray Clemence and Doug Livermore opted for words of wisdom rather than wrath, after Liverpool had dominated the first half.
Although the decisive opening goal, a brilliant volley by Nayim, owed nothing to planning, it was just reward for a display that emphasised the spirit of resilience that now prevails at the club.
Neil Ruddock headed home the second.
MoM: Ruddock (dominant force).
Bassett wins Wise support
Ben Bacon
Chelsea 1, Sheff Utd 2:
ALTHOUGH Chelsea players won't be scrawling ‘Dave Bassett is innocent, OK’ along the Kings Road, they will help him against get off allegations of obscene behaviour.
Chelsea midfielder Dennis Wise sprinted to his defence last night and turned against their own supporters after a couple of them had complained to police that the United boss had sworn and made a V-sign.
I witnessed the entire episode during injury time and Bassett showed commendable restraint after being subjected to a torrent of personal abuse by Chelsea's yob element.
These people believe they are entitled to vent their frustrations by shouting, ranting, threatening and swearing at any person involved in a match because they pay their entrance money, and not suffer any reaction from the targetted individuals.
When an exasperated Bassett eventually did tell them to shut up, two of them immediately demanded police action because THEY had been offended and an investigation ensued.
Wise, operating on the right side of the pitch close to the United dugout, said: ‘I heard nothing and I saw nothing.
It is a waste of everyone's time because it is just a case of sour grapes as we were losing.
‘Bassett had taken a lot worse and not reacted.
Fans just get the hump when they lose.
However, if someone scores a goal and flicks a V-sign in someone's face, then he should be done.
’ Bassett himself suggested: ‘If fans had to put forward £100 for police to investigate I am sure the complaints would end.
If the person was found guilty their money would be returned but, if not, the police would keep it.’
Adrian Littlejohn gave United the lead but Andy Townsend equalised within a minute.
Then Chelsea keeper Kevin Hitchcock lost control of a back pass and allowed Littlejohn to set up Brian Deane's winner.
MoM: Littlejohn (sharp)
Forest kept out
Adrian Holloway
Nottm F 0, Ipswich 1
FOREST'S dismal season reached crisis point as they failed to beat a keeper who only this summer was struggling on the dole.
The manner of the defeat and the Forest fans' reaction to it signalled that after 18 trophy-filled years under Brian Clough, the club could really be in trouble.
Stand-in Ipswich keeper Clive Baker, 33, produced five outstanding saves, while’ Jason Dozzell fired his fifth goal of the season and then criticized Forest's powder puff tactics.
He said: ‘They're lightweight.
I couldn't believe the space I had for my goal.’
MoM: Baker (class act)
Coppell's double bid
CRYSTAL PALACE aim to put the record straight on two fronts in tonight's BSkyB televised clash with Arsenal at Selhurst Park.
Palace hope to clinch their first Premier League home win against the only side Steve Coppell's men have failed to beat since returning to the top flight in 1989.
Coppell said: ‘We have beaten them all — Liverpool, Everton, Spurs and Manchester United — but not Arsenal.
‘We usually draw at home against Arsenal and concede four goals in the return match at Highbury.
‘We must start winning at home if we are to climb the table.’
Le Tissier dilemma
Soton 1, Oldham 0
SAINTS' Matthew Le Tissier backed under-siege manager Ian Branfoot — but insisted his own future is still in the balance.
Nearly 1,000 fans staged a sit-down protest calling for Branfoot's head, despite the victory sealed by Richard Hall's header.
But Le Tissier said: ‘You can't help but admire the bloke.
He takes the flak every time he walks down the touchline.’
Le Tissier, thinking over a four-year contract, added: ‘It is not matter of wanting more money.
The football is the sticking point.’
MoM: Le Tissier (tricky).
Sweet Pears
Mike Walters
Norwich City 1 Middlesbrough 1
STEPHEN PEARS enhanced his England claims with a flawless display for Boro — including an amazing save with his head.
Jon Gittens' over-hit back pass was dipping under the bar until quick-thinking Pears turned it over with a neatly executed back header.
MoM: Pears (pick of the bunch).
Deadly combination can make Lewis king
Roy Collins
LENNOX LEWIS, whose credentials as a world heavyweight title contender have been almost as disputed as his British citizenship, has devastatingly emerged as the most dangerous hybrid in the division.
As he completed a ruthless second-round knockout of Canada's Donovan ‘Razor’ Ruddock in the early hours of yesterday, Lewis was clasped as readily to the purist breast of those seeking the lesser spotted boxer-puncher as refuge-seeking patriots.
As a non-electric Razor was counted out 46 seconds into the second round following a third and final knockdown, even the comparison made by Lewis's trainer Pepe Correa between his man and Muhammad Ali seemed less outrageous.
The comparison is still too precipitate.
But Lewis's dramatic demonstration that he can mix knockout punches with impeccable boxing technique was straight out of Ali's famous butterfly and bee nature study.
There can be no doubt now that Lewis is not only fit and ready to challenge for the world heavyweight title, but that he is a probable, rather than a possible, to become Britain's first champion at the weight in 100 years.
The Halloween night fight at London's Earls Court was hyped as the worst nightmare for one of the boxers.
Yet even when Ruddock allowed his sleep to be interrupted by thoughts of Lewis's punching ability, he couldn't have envisaged his boxing rival having the power to produce a single knockout punch.
Artist
Lewis produced that, a right over the top after a sight-finding jab had sailed over Ruddock's ducking head, in the final seconds of the first round.
Ruddock's sickly grin on rising, intended to signal that he was okay, was in fact unwitting facial semaphore that the fight would have been over but for the rescuing bell.
The second knockdown came early in round two.
And though embellished with a couple of right hands which sought but did not destroy, it was the work of a crushing left hook-cum-uppercut that was ripped from the top shelf of Razor's own weapon room.
Finally, after Ruddock had made one clumsy, belated attempt to launch ‘the Smash’, Lewis provided the killing brush strokes of the boxing artist.
Left jab, right cross, left jab, right cross, a short left on the chin and Ruddock was a still life on the canvas.
His performance, Lewis said, answered most of the questions about him.
But in boxing, as in life, every answer only seems to prompt another question.
In this case, whether Ruddock had been damaged irreparably in body and spirit by the l9 rounds he shared with Mike Tyson last year.
Ruddock himself doesn't know.
‘It could be,’ he muttered.
‘I can't be sure.
I just know that this comes to all of us, the best of us.
Now I've got to go away and think what I'm gonna do.’
Whether or not Ruddock was suffering from any residual Tyson damage, it should not detract from a Lewis performance that was an awesome demonstration of boxing technique, punching power and admirable concentration.
Lewis's performance was a reminder of how compelling heavyweight boxing can still be when it dares to step out from behind the curtain of cynical and protective matchmaking; when it dares to put on a career life-or-death fight between two men with the pedigree to be king.
Lewis's win provided more than cosmetic surgery to the battered, punch-drunk features of heavyweight boxing.
Power
It sculpted a whole new form of a division tottering from dubious title contests and an apparent conspiracy to shuffle all the leading contenders into neutral corners.
The point was appreciated by a very live Earls Court audience and the millions of insomniacs watching on television around the world, who won't care whether Lewis was born in London, England or London, Ontario.
What will excite them is not where Lewis is from, but where he's going — and more importantly, the manner in which he is travelling.
So deep is the cynicism that some people still insist, even as Lewis begins preparations for a title fight against Evander Holyfield or Riddick Bowe next Spring, that he was wrong to fight Ruddock.
They say he should have waited around like a good boy, taken a few duff, even Duff fights, and he would have been rewarded in due course by boxing's power brokers.
Lewis and Ruddock, egged on by Holyfield's camp which wanted one of them removed from their man's path, were courageous enough to buck the cosy cartel of challengers-in-waiting to set their own agenda.
Belief
Ruddock, already talking of retirement as he was led, still numb with disbelief, into the night, knew one of them would pay the ultimate price.
But he endorsed the belief of most people at ringside that Lewis can be the man to end Britain's search for a world heavyweight champion, and bring a new order to the division.
‘Anyone who can beat me has a good chance of knocking out Holyfield,’ he said.
If the prime hope of Holyfield's camp was to see the monster Ruddock tamed by Lewis's superior boxing, they ended it wondering just what kind of animal they had created in his place.
Lewis, in answering questions about his ability and nationality, will have raised a lot more among those closest to Holyfield.
Uppermost among them will be how they begin to devise a strategy to defeat a man who is both boxer and puncher.
Lou Duva, trainer of Holyfield, said: ‘He looked like an old-fashioned heavyweight with some delightful combination punching.
Support
‘I'll be telling my guy to come with a shotgun.
No, make that a machine gun.’
If the bullet-proof vest is unnecessary, Holyfield's handlers were sufficiently spooked by what they saw on Halloween night to scrap plans to fight in London, especially after the Bruno-style support afforded Lewis.
George Foreman, whose comeback as the roly-poly, cheeseburger contender has helped to hasten heavyweight boxing's descent towards something dangerously close to the wide world of wrestling, recognised Lewis's devastating performance as a sea change in the game.
Having predicted that Lewis could rule as world champion for some time, Foreman was asked whether he would like to fight him.
He rolled up his eyes by way of an answer and left in search of a less threatening conversation.
Experts give their verdict
Steve Acteson
FORMER champions George Foreman and Floyd Patterson watched with Britons Henry Cooper and Frank Bruno.
Their thoughts:
FOREMAN: ‘Holyfield ought to be scared because the only person that can stop Lewis winning the title now is Lewis.
COOPER: ‘I believe the search for a British heavyweight world champion is over.’
PATTERSON: ‘Razor got caught cold and that happens.
I know from my own experience.’
BRUNO: ‘Lewis surprised me.
I knew he could punch but I didn't know Razor could go down as quickly as that.’
Top gun
Steve Acteson
WORLD champion Evander Holyfield last night received a piece of simple advice from his trainer Lou Duva: ‘Take a shotgun in with you against Lennox Lewis — hold it, let's make that a machine gun.
‘Lennox is like an old-time champion who can take a man out with one punch.’
Duva was reacting to Lewis's astounding second round knockout of ‘Razor’ Ruddock amid wild scenes in the early hours of Sunday morning at London's Earls Court.
It was a crushing victory that immediately promoted bookmakers William Hill to make him 8–11 to become undisputed world heavyweight champion in 1993.
Britain's 27-year-old new boxing hero now meets Holyfield or Riddick Bowe in the spring for that title — a clash it is estimated will earn him £4 million.
Holyfield, watching Ruddock gunned down live on the American HBO cable network at his training camp home in Houston where he is preparing for his November 13 defence against Bowe, said: ‘Sure, Lewis looked good but I'm not alarmed because I'm a very cool person.
And I'm so confident that I believe I can beat anyone — starting with Bowe.
‘I said all along that Lennox would win — but I thought it would be on points.
‘It's nice to be able to say that I saw that big right coming but Ruddock didn't, in fact I don't think he saw anything that came his way.
‘When the first bell went and I saw the way Lennox was going after him I told the guys watching with me that Ruddock had better watch for that left of Lewis's or he'd be counter-punched with the right and get himself knocked out — and that's exactly what happened.’
Lewis spent yesterday basking in the afterglow of a phenomenal performance that stretches his unbeaten record to 22 fights with 19 wins inside the distance.
He revealed that the massive right that finished Ruddock — honed in months of intense preparation — was no lucky sucker punch.
‘Hours of watching Ruddock on video revealed that he had a tendency to drop his left hand low, so he was wide open to my right and we've been working hard on a left-right combination,’ he explained.
‘That right is a natural punch for me and could be the best I've ever thrown, it felt so good and I didn't get any shock at all up my arm.
‘Normally, when I hit anybody with that punch they don't get up, but as Ruddock was getting to his feet I just kept watching him and I could tell by his eyes that he was hurting bad.
‘But I stayed composed and cool, I didn't want to get caught by anything stupid but still nearly did when he almost hit me with an uppercut — I felt the wind of that one.
But the way he landed the third time I knew he wouldn't get up again.
Razor's a tough guy but I was hoping he wasn't hurt.’
Was he surprised it was over so quickly?
‘Well I think Ruddock was a bit more surprised than me,’ he joked.
‘But it hasn't really sunk in yet and I guess it will take a couple of days.
‘Ruddock's trouble was that he was always going on in the build-up to the fight about how he reckoned he used to knock me out in sparring when we were kids.
‘He was always talking about the past but I wanted to introduce him to the present.
There was no doubt in my mind that I would go out and prove myself and answer all those questions about me.’
Lewis had stood, coolly staring, even smiling at Ruddock's aggressive tough-guy antics before the start, and he explained: ‘I could see he was agitated and edgy and I was determined to go out there and antagonise him even more.’
But Ruddock is history now as Lewis attempts to become the first Briton since Bob Fitzsimmons almost a century ago to land perhaps the most cherished prize in sport.
‘I believe I'll be fighting Holyfield because he's such a workaholic.
And I'd like to fight him because he's undefeated and I want to be the first man to beat him.
‘I know fighting Bowe would be exciting because it would be a rematch of the Olympic final and no doubt he'll be gracious enough to give me the chance to fight him again,’ he jibed, tongue in cheek.
Regrettably, though, Holyfield v Lewis would not be in London.
Promoter Dan Duva, Lou's son, said: ‘It has to be in Las Vegas, not here, because Vegas is where the money is — and if you win you can come back and defend it in front of your own fans.’
Villa issue title warning
David Harrison
DEADLY duo Dean Saunders and Dalian Atkinson lifted Aston Villa into striking distance of the Premier League leaders yesterday and warned: ‘There is much more to come.’
The strikers who have cost a combined total of £4 million for manager Ron Atkinson, took their total as a partnership to 14 goals in the 2–0 victory over QPR yesterday — moving Villa into third place.
But the goal-hungry pair are still not satisfied.
Striker Atkinson said: ‘These are early days and I still don't believe I have hit top form.’
Saunders added: ‘It is becoming a very good team with the defence looking really solid.’
Hit and miss for Barlow
Everton 1, Man C 3
WHINGEING Tony Cottee talked himself out of a job, then watched his stand-in play a major role in the Everton tragi-comedy that followed, writes Graham Fisher.
Manager Howard Kendall ruled Cottee had committed the cardinal sin of having a go at team-mates, so in came Stuart Barlow.
As City hit three regal goals through Mike Sheron (2) and David White, Barlow buzzed around at the other end.
But everything he hit went straight to keeper Tony Coton, except for a late penalty that hit a post.
MoM: Sheron (sweet finisher).
Latics goal mystery
Soton 1, Oldham 0
OLDHAM are mystified after their free-scoring style deserted them once more at The Dell.
Keeper Jon Hallworth, beaten by Richard Hall's header, said: ‘Earlier in the season everyone was talking about us scoring loads of goals and letting in as many.
‘Now we've tightened up at the back but we are not putting them away up front.don't seem to be able to put them away up front.
It's a mystery to us.’
We are still creating chances but we can't score the goals.’
Oldham boss Joe Royle said: ‘Scoring goals has not normally been a problem for us but it is at the moment.’
Ireland coach steps down
by Barry Lucas
CIARAN Fitzgerald, the former Ireland and Lions captain, yesterday announced his resignation as Irish coach.
Fitzgerald quit 48 hours after his team suffered a record defeat when Australia won 42–17 in Dublin.
He said: ‘I have been very disappointed with the results during my time.
I have decided to step down to allow someone with a fresh approach to take charge in the hope that Irish rugby may achieve the success it needs.’
Fitzgerald succeeded Jimmy Davidson as coach in the 1990–91 season.
Since then, Ireland have not won a Five Nations match and their best result was a 21–21 draw with Wales at Cardiff in 1991.
Nucleus
But Fitzgerald added: ‘I believe we have the nucleus of a good squad but it will take time to reach its full potential.’
Meanwhile, Wallaby skipper Michael Lynagh will set out on a remarkable 24,000 mile round trip that will take him to Brisbane for an operation and back to Wales for the final fortnight of the Australian tour.
Lynagh's high speed trip should take a week and, if successful, should ensure he has no further trouble with the left shoulder he dislocated in the match against Ireland.
‘I'm going home to have an operation on my shoulder and, all being well, I'll be back with the party early next week,’ said Lynagh.
Lloyd Walker is poised to replace Lynagh and a fifth replacement could be called if Michael Brial's injury does not clear up quickly.
The captaincy has been handed to pack leader Phil Kearns, who will lead a side containing eight of the team that figured in the record rout of the Irish when the Aussies open the Welsh leg of their tour at Swansea tomorrow.
Welsh fitness fright
WALES have been hit by an injury crisis before their rugby league international with England at Swansea.
Warrington scrum-half Kevin Ellis (broken ribs), Carlisle hooker Barry Williams (chipped bone in his back) and powerful Widnes second row Paul Moriarty (knee damage) face a frantic battle to be fit for the match on November 27.
Hull's former Neath and Wales Union star Mark Jones, dismissed in the Championship battle with Widnes on Sunday, must appear before the League's Disciplinary Committee on Thursday.
Welsh coach Clive Griffiths said: ‘With so few players to choose from, we are always on a knife edge.
A real injury crisis like this can devalue the game.
It's a problem, but I can't manufacture Welsh rugby league players.’
Widnes stand off Tony Myler's playing career is under threat.
He came back from a serious back injury last season, but was injured again at the weekend.
India hit top form
AJAY JADEJA (254) and Sanjay Manjrekar (186) put on 415 as India scored a massive 556–3 declared — a lead of 230 — against Combined Bowl XI, who were then reduced to 51–6, in Johannesburg.
Lee on loan
SOUTHAMPTON winger David Lee, signed only 14 months ago from Bury for £350,000, has joined Second Division Bolton on a month's loan.
Same again Brady
by Scott McMunn
CELTIC aim to rewind the tape and produce an action replay at Parkhead tonight when they bid for a place in the third round of a European competition for the first time in nine years.
Last month the Glasgow side faced Cologne at Parkhead with a 2–0 deficit to overcome — and triumphed with a 3–2 aggregate victory in the UEFA Cup.
Now another Bundesliga side, Borussia Dortmund, are the visitors, but this time Celtic only have a 1–0 first leg loss to peg back.
Exposed
Manager Liam Brady believes that a repeat success is very much on the cards.
‘I'm very optimistic that we can get the goals, but we don't need to chase the game right from the start and leave ourselves exposed at the back.
‘We have to be cautious.
We could get the two goals we need in five minutes or in the last 30 minutes.
We can afford to bide our time, unless Dortmund show signs of nervousness, in which case we will go at them.’
Keegan is calm
John Wardle
KEVIN KEEGAN was keeping cool yesterday following a run of three defeats that has left fans wondering whether Newcastle's bubble has burst.
At the same time, his skipper Gavin Peacock insisted: ‘There is no panic here.
We are still six points clear on top of the First Division with a game in hand.
‘This is a good test of our character and we won't be found wanting.’
Keegan, who ten days ago was boss of an apparently invincible Geordie side, said: ‘I know what people are thinking, but the only difference between our defeat at Leicester on Saturday and our early season results was that we gave away a silly goal.’
Meanwhile, Sunderland fans have given chairman Bob Murray the go-ahead to move from Roker Park to a brand-new £60m stadium.
‘We plan to be up and running by June 1995,’ he said.
Battling Batty's prayer
by David Alexander
DAVID BATTY is desperately clinging to the belief that he will be fit to face Rangers tomorrow.
Batty was on crutches on Sunday but last night said: ‘Don't rule me out.’
But the odds appear to be stacked against him appearing in the Battle of Britain Part II, at Elland Road.
Batty's right ankle was still swollen yesterday and it looked as though he would need a miracle cure to make the second leg of the European Cup tie.
‘I'll know tomorrow.
I don't need the crutches now and can put my weight on it,’ he said.
Swollen
‘I just want to be there but, if the worst comes to the worst, the squad is strong enough to win.’
Batty damaged ankle ligaments after a tackle by Coventry's Stewart Robson on Saturday and Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson said: ‘It was swollen and bleeding but it's a lot better today.
‘We will give him every chance until Wednesday and then leave the final decision to him.’
‘He has damaged the ligaments but the nature of the injury makes us more hopeful of recovery than we would be from some ankle injuries.’
If Batty is missing, Wilkinson will either bring in David Rocastle or Eric Cantona, with Gary Speed moving into central midfield.
Friendly flies the flag
Henry Rix
EUROPE'S star filly User Friendly has a chance to restore some British pride in the Japan Cup this month.
The tough dual Oaks heroine, brave runner-up to Subotica in the Arc last time, is heading for a showdown with Breeders' Cup Classic hero A P Indy in Tokyo.
This is an ideal chance to put one over the Americans after Saturday's 7–0 thrashing at the Breeders' Cup in the Florida heat.
Clive Brittain is confident, and believes that User Friendly will be meeting her rivals on more favourable terms on November 29.
‘The conditions will be more like we have here.
The temperature in Tokyo is nowhere near what it is in Florida,’ he said.
‘I have no qualms about going to Japan.
She has had a nice break and, who knows, if it rains there they can shut the shop!’ he added.
A P Indy is on the reserve list for the Japan Cup, and is likely to be invited to Tokyo because American candidates Solar Splendour has picked up an injury.
User Friendly's connections have already accepted the invitation as a member of the European contingent that includes Dear Doctor, Dr Devious and Subotica.
Ton-up Dettori
FRANKIE Dettori and Ray Cochrane both joined the 100 Club at Newcastle yesterday, leaving the nervous nineties in their wake with a double apiece.
The champagne corks were popping to brighten a raw afternoon as the pair became the seventh and eighth jockeys to reach the 100-winner mark this term.
Dettori, starting the day on 99, was first to the century when Gushing won the High Society Maiden.
‘I was getting a bit anxious, because today was realistically my last chance to do it on turf,’ he said.
‘I've got no rides at Hamilton tomorrow, then I start a four-day ban on Wednesday.’
Dallas young guns lead the way
David Tossell
DALLAS COWBOYS, the youngest team in the NFL, are looking more like the best in the league every week.
Emmitt Smith rushed for 163 yards and Troy Aikman threw for 214 yards and two touchdowns as the Cowboys avenged their only defeat of the season by beating Philadelphia Eagles 20–10.
Dallas, with an average age of 25, now have a 7–1 record — the best in the NFL following the San Francisco 49ers' shock 24–14 defeat to the Phoenix Cardinals.
Eagles coach Rich Kotite benched quarterback Randall Cunningham in favour of Jim McMahon, saying: ‘We had to try and get something clicking.
Things weren't happening.’
Phoenix, winners of one previous game this year, had Chris Chandler's three touchdown passes to thank for their upset of the 49ers, who lost quarterback Steve Young with flu.
New York Giants moved back into the play-off picture by beating Washington Redskins 24–7.
Rodney Hampton ran for 138 yards and Jeff Hostetler passed for a pair of touchdowns.
Recalled New York Jets quarterback Ken O'Brien passed for three first-half touchdowns in a 26–14 defeat of Miami Dolphins.
Results: Green Bay 27, Detroit 13; Pittsburgh 21, Houston 20; Atlanta 30, Los Angeles Rams 28; New York Jets 26, Miami 14; Buffalo 16, New England 7; New Orleans 23, Tampa Bay 21; Cincinnati 30, Cleveland 10; San Diego 26, Indianapolis 0; Dallas 20, Philadelphia 10; Phoenix 24, San Francisco 14; New York Giants 24, Washington 7.
Not a patch on Croft original
David Harrison
CINDERELLA made it to the ball — and just often enough to avoid her tennis return from becoming a pantomime farce.
Annabel Croft, once the British No 1 but now a star of stage and the small screen, cringed at the quality of her performance in the opening round of the Volkswagen National Championships at Telford yesterday.
She was doing it for fun, a one-off comeback to the sport she had come to despise and walked out of five years ago.
In sporting terms, it was about as relevant as a showing of Treasure Hunt or Interceptor — the TV game shows which have occupied her recently.
But she pulled off a 6–4, 6–7, 6–3 victory over Alison Smith, the 23rd ranked Briton, in 2hr 3min to justify the attention afforded to a rather meaningless tennis encounter.
For Annabel, it was merely a means of filling in time before she starts rehearsals for her starring role in Cinderella in Norwich this month, when she appears with Gary Webster, of Minder, dancer Lionel Blair, and ‘a lady from Teabag’, whose name she couldn't remember.
There were occasions yesterday when she didn't look a bad player, certainly trimmer and more mobile than when she played the game for real, and showing some nimble footwork which Lionel himself would have envied.
In her tennis era, she was leaden-footed and heavy, and would have been perfectly cast as the rear end of a pantomime horse.
Hungry
But her new shape is hardly surprising.
considering her exercise routine.She runs eight miles a day around Richmond Park, goes jazz dancing three times a week, and hill running regularly.
If only she had shown such dedication as a tennis player.
She was honest enough to admit yesterday that in general terms, the tennis was an embarrassment and an awful spectacle for the 74 people watching.
‘It must have been pretty horrendous for the spectators,’ she confessed.
‘I felt sorry for them.
‘I'm fitter than I've ever been in my life.
But I must have aged 20 years out there.
I didn't quite anticipate fun being like that.
‘I started to think, ‘Whose idea was this?’.
Pantomime will be easy after this.
‘I was absolutely exhausted.
I felt like a filly starting a race beforehand, sweating and so hyped up.
But I managed to give out some positive body language, and at least came through with a win.’
Asked whether she had any real appetite for the professional game, she joked: ‘Well, I was very hungry out there.
My stomach wouldn't stop rumbling.
But no, I won't be playing any more tournaments after this.’
Besides, she only has one tennis racket to her name.
She had to carry along a spare one which belongs to her mum yesterday, in case the one she has had since 1984 became damaged.
And the tennis skirt looked a little threadbare.
After all, it was a home-made outfit she first wore as a 14-year-old.
Any more outings, and Cinders really would be wearing rags!
Protests greet return of Boks
Tony Roche
SOUTH AFRICA last night celebrated their return to England after a 23-year absence by naming five internationals to face the Midlands at Leicester tomorrow.
World class centre Danie Gerber, Garth Wright, Wahl Bartmann, Willie Hills and Tiaan Strauss all play.
Around 20 protestors at their Surrey HQ on Sunday night ended up throwing flour bombs and eggs at startled residents before police swept them away, and yesterday's protestors fared no better.
RFU secretary Dudley Wood is seeing to the tourists' security, while South African manager Abie Malan insisted: ‘Let's get something straight.
Apartheid is dead in my country.
‘The players have been told to ignore protestors.
We must retain our dignity.’
Defeat
Malan gave his version of Saturday's events when the Springboks left a dinner early after defeat by the French Barbarians.
‘The French players forgot about the dinner.
‘We walked out to show them that good manners matter and when a function says 8pm it does not mean 9pm.
If we turned up an hour late for a function in England we would be hammered by everybody.’
Malan, asked if his players were ‘sensible’ to sing the national anthem ‘Die Stem’in their hotel afterwards, replied:
‘I believe you can sing what you like in total privacy.
I cannot make my players sing any anthem in their rooms, nor can I stop them.’
Ciaran Fitzgerald, the former Ireland and Lions captain, yesterday resigned as Irish coach.
Australian skipper Michael Lynagh will undergo a 24,000 mile round trip to Brisbane for an operation on his dislocated shoulder and return for the final fortnight of the Welsh tour.
Mansell is under fire
AUSTRIAN Gerhard Berger yesterday criticised Nigel Mansell for letting Williams team-mate Riccardo Patrese win the Japanese Grand Prix.
Berger, preparing for Sunday's Australian Grand Prix, said the sport's credibility suffered.
‘It was not honest help,’ he said.
‘Any action taken by a driver should be done properly.’
Mansell had a record nine victories for the year when he let Patrese pass.
Meanwhile, Britain's Tyrrell racing team will link up with Yamaha for the next two Formula One seasons.
Dons hand Fergie sobering message
Roy Collins
WIMBLEDON'S Vinnie Jones couldn't have chosen a less appropriate place than Old Trafford to expound on his vision of Premier League football as a glorified hangover cure.
Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson, as we know from his rages at players who've had as much as a sniff of the barmaid's apron, is the man who put the temper in temperance.
Ferguson will have been horrified at Jones' claim, which might have been the after-match drinks talking rather than the pre-match ones, that Wimbledon's players spent the days before their win over United drinking until six in the morning.
Though Wimbledon's players, after a few bottles of Beck's lager, no doubt named after Cambridge's late, lamented manager John, are not most people's idea of convivial company, one does wonder whether manager Ferguson and his uptight team might benefit from a little relaxation a la Jones.
Riding a high for ace Lester
Roy Collins
LESTER PIGGOTT isn't yet ready to have the green tarpaulin pulled around him while racing officials apply the friendly bullet to his career.
Piggott, in fact, has already defined why he will continue riding in one of those pithy sentences that, from him, represents a flight of high oratory.
‘It's nonsense to say I won't ride again,’ comes the defiant bulletin from his hospital bed.
‘After all, I've nothing else to do.’
This was not an attempt at wit.
More a bland statement of fact from a man whose decision to return to horse racing two years ago rescued him from a life of increasingly worrying seclusion following his term in prison for tax evasion.
If that decision has now put him in the casualty ward, it has equally kept him from the sanatorium.
Only on top of a horse can Piggott truly feel on top of the world.
Riding winners was the only way he knew how to re-establish his self-worth, let alone his public esteem.
It still needed courage to make the decision, since he couldn't be sure how the fans and the horses would react to him.
Roar
As for many old performers, though, the roar of the grandstand and the smell of the horse-sweat proved irresistible.
And only during his second coming has Piggott appeared to realise what racing means to him.
To find a simple joy in his supreme talent that the rest of us had enjoyed for years.
If he's still not exactly the life and soul of the weighing room, other jockeys will tell you he's far more relaxed than of old.
Disconcertingly to those who remember him as Old Stoneface, he even laughs occasionally now.
Having discovered all this at life's two-furlong pole, Piggott is not about to let some doctor tell him that he won't finish the race — especially not an American doctor.
As his wife Susan says: ‘I don't think we've seen the last of him.’
They shoot horses, don't they?
And they'd need to hold a gun to Piggott's head to keep him in hospital a day — no an hour — longer than strictly necessary.
There are horses to ride.
Races to be won.
A life to be led.
Managers cop it
Roy Collins
PRISONS, long considered to be academies of crime, may become academies of football if the police continue their ridiculous persecution of managers.
Sheffield United's Dave Bassett is the latest to find himself the subject of a police inquiry after being reported by the gentle, clean-mouthed souls who inhabit Chelsea's stands for swearing.
West Ham's assistant manager Harry Redknapp has been another victim of a fans' fit-up.
As have several players, notably Arsenal's Ian Wright, also accused by Chelsea fans.
Strangely, though, there appears to be no police urgency to feel a certain goalkeeping jersey collar at Nottingham Forest, despite newspaper pictures showing someone resembling Brian Clough making a sign with two of his fingers.
Sandy is back
Bill Blighton
SANDY LYLE'S victory in the Volvo Masters on Sunday has put him back on course for another Major title.
He conquered one of Europe's toughest courses, the tour's strongest field and the critics who labelled him a loser with his sudden-death triumph over Colin Montgomerie, elevating him back among the world's leading players.
And Lyle believes he is ready to impose himself in the Majors.
He said: ‘This was the win I really needed.
It has provided the spark to get me going again.’
Offiah downs Eagles
Ray French
Wigan 44, Sheffield 10
THREE second half tries in eight minutes from Wigan put paid to any hopes the ambitious Eagles had of grabbing a shock win at Central Park last night.
And following touchdowns by Denis Betts and Shaun Edwards it was the dramatic try-scoring thrust of Martin Offiah that brought the 8,261 crowd to their feet.
Andre Stoop and Betts, who added his second try in the 75th minute, took Eagles by surprise down the left flank and released Offiah.
He easily rounded Eagles cover and cantered the fifty metres to score his first try in a month.
And Offiah scored again towards the end.
But Wigan only managed a Martin Crompton try and two Frano Botica penalty goals in a dull first half.
And when Eagles' David Mycoe grabbed a try in the 45th minute Wigan looked to be in some danger.
But Edwards second try and Offiah's late flourish dismissed Sheffield's hopes.
Great Scot Higgins
SCOTLAND'S 17-year-old former world junior snooker champion John Higgins notched a 5–1 win over England's Tony Rampello in the Pounds 25,000 Benson & Hedges championship in Glasgow last night.
Magic quits
MAGIC JOHNSON, who has contracted the Aids virus, has decided not to resume his professional basketball career with the Los Angeles Lakers.
Lamb slam
ALLAN LAMB scored an unbeaten 206 as Western Province won their four-day Castle Cup match with Northern Transvaal by 183 runs in Cape Town yesterday.
Council cuts
THE Sports Council may cut the British Amateur Weightlifters' Association's £170,000 grant for taking no action against Andrew Davies and Andrew Saxton.
Hot Rod
ROD LATHAM was run out for 119 as New Zealand finished on 325–3 after the second day of their rain-affected First Test against Zimbabwe in Bulawayo.
Fergie's recruits
Graham Fisher
ADAM NDLOVU, elder brother of Coventry's Zimbabwe sensation Peter, will be the latest foreign import at Old Trafford.
The 21-year-old international, also a forward, clocks on for a trial period today, 24 hours after the arrival of Norway's star striker, Tore Andre Dahlum of Rosenberg, who started a week's trial yesterday.
Former Coventry boss John Sillett spotted the Ndlovus — along with a third brother who plays in the German league — when City played Zimbabwe on tour a year ago.
He says: ‘I wanted to sign them both and was sorting out the work permit side of it when I was dismissed.
‘They are different types.
Adam is stockier with as much flair, but is more a passer of the ball who brings other people into the game, whereas Peter has an individual style.’
Cottee is so sorry
Des Kelly
TONY COTTEE has apologised to his Everton team-mates for his scathing assault on the struggling club.
The Goodison Park striker claimed manager Howard Kendall had made him the scapegoat for all the problems besetting the Mersey giants and blamed the absence of a midfield creator for the lack of goals.
Cottee was fined just over £6,000 last night for his outburst — the equivalent of two weeks' wages.
But skipper Dave Watson revealed: ‘Tony was disappointed at being dropped and he said what he felt at the time.
But after he sat down and thought about it he came in and apologised to the lads.’
Kop's our secret weapon — Souness
Des Kelly
LIVERPOOL manager Graeme Souness last night urged his players to find their killer instinct and warned that the Kop would expect nothing less.
Souness believes the sell-out Anfield crowd could make Spartak Moscow crumble as he bids to recover a 4–2 Cup Winners' Cup deficit.
And Souness is hoping for a repeat of last season's UEFA Cup triumph, when French club Auxerre were frightened by a hostile reception and gave up a two-goal lead.
‘We will need to be passionate and chase the Russians,’ he said.
‘We played plenty of pretty football at Spurs, but it wasn't good enough because we just didn't threaten them ‘We will The side I put out on Wednesday night will have to be positive.
The fans won't let us go about things any other way.
‘Liverpool are lucky enough to have the best fans in the world and I know they'll turn up the volume and strike fear into Spartak.
‘The Moscow game is a sell-out so it'll be even more intimidating for them.
They might be used to big crowds in the Lenin Stadium, but it'll nothing like they'll get at Anfield.’
Steve McManaman has calf trouble, but Souness is hopeful he will recover in time for tomorrow night.
Defender Steve Nicol is fit to return, while Jan Molby and Rob Jones are also included in the squad.
Meanwhile, John Sheridan last night revealed the added incentive behind his mission to help Sheffield Wednesday gain UEFA Cup revenge over Kaiserslautern, 3–1 ahead, tomorrow.
Manager Trevor Francis has had to drop gifted teenager Chris Bart-Williams to make way for Sheridan's comeback from a knee operation.
And Sheridan admitted: ‘Chris has so much ability I have got to play well just to stay in the team.
In a year or two he will be one of the country's top players.
My heart is with Rangers but my head says Leeds
Graham Fisher
I PLAYED for Rangers when they last met Leeds in the quarter-final of the old Fairs Cup back in 1968.
After a goalless first leg we lost 2–0 at Elland Road and I handled on the line to give away a penalty.
I'd love to see that error put right tomorrow but, although my heart is with Rangers, Leeds are a mighty outfit and I think the force will be with them at Elland Road.
My head says Leeds will do it inside the 90 minutes.
The pride of Scotland hold a 2–1 European Cup first leg lead but it looks fragile when you consider the awesome power of Leeds on their own territory and the effect of that Yorkshire choir at full blast.
My Manchester United lads went there three times in a fortnight last season and came home with two wins and a draw, and the biggest factor was the way Gary Pallister handled Lee Chapman.
Success
Chapman has a phenomenal record for Leeds, scoring regularly at the rate of one every two games.
If you keep him quiet you are a long way down the road to achieving some success at Leeds.
The big man should never be underestimated.
Pallister did the job brilliantly.
Chapman did not score over the three games and that was probably the biggest single practical reason — among many — why we did so well.
I can't help thinking that the battle in the penalty box tomorrow will be just as vital.
Rangers have a top performer in Richard Gough, though he isn't the biggest of central defenders.
If Gough can dominate Chapman then Rangers will be well pleased because this face-to-face test of nerve, strength and skill will have a huge influence on the outcome.
It will be very strange for Rangers to perform without their passionate supporters and fascinating to see how they cope in that alien atmosphere.
Leeds will see that aspect as a potent aid.
They, too, felt the almost physical barrier of a partisan crowd at Ibrox especially in that first half period when they lost two goals.
but they survived pretty well and came home with a priceless away goal.
They'll be saying to themselves: we felt it up there, how much will Rangers feel it down here?
Gary McAllister put Leeds ahead in Glasgow after just one minute.
I don't envisage a repeat of that from either side.
The stakes are so enormous.
More so than in the first leg.
There is a fortune on offer for the side that go into the European Cup's mini-league, the build-up has been intense and not many of the players will have taken part in a bigger or more crucial event.
And this time there is no second match to get anyone off the hook!
This time the fear of conceding an early goal will outweigh any desire for an instant lift.
Expect some caution in the first 15 minutes, until the players are warmed up and have judged the mood and tempo of the game.
Once the sparring is over, both teams I feel will take risks.
Power
Leeds are such a strong, strong force at Elland Road.
The way they set about their job makes them a hell of a hard team to beat.
Stuttgart in the last round was a reminder of just what a power they can be.
They are what they are and I don't see how they can change their style.
They will pour forward with so many bodies, banking on the law of averages that says they will pick up 50 per cent of what falls into the box.
They'll be looking for knock-downs from Chapman and Gary Speed, McAllister and Rod Wallace will all get in there.
There are two factors to worry them and one was the quality of crosses at Ibrox.
I know Howard Wilkinson was disappointed at the delivery in the first leg and, if I know him, Leeds will have spent some time since working to make sure those balls count next time.
The other, of course, is David Batty, doubtful with an ankle injury.
The match may be won and lost in midfield and if Batty isn't around, with his aggression and combative instinct, then who is going to stop Ian Durrant?
He can play, that boy: run without the ball, play one-twos, thread balls through, pass and he also has great acceleration.
And he can finish!
Howard has a stack of midfielders he can call on like Steve Hodge, Scott Sellars and David Rocastle, but not one of them is a Batty.
If he is, maybe the best Howard Wilkinson can hope for is to field someone who at least knows where Durrant is.
Howard will be thinking about this.
He is very thorough on the tactics and won't miss a thing.
But Walter and his boys don't need to tremble.
Gough is the best man for his job and both full backs, Dave McPherson and David Robertson, are pacy and good in the air.
They can blunt the Leeds machine and my only reservation is Andy Goram's lack of inches.
Andy is a good 'keeper but his height could cost them…and Leeds know that.
Baresi ends exile
Steve Acteson
FRANCO BARESI, the AC Milan captain, last night reversed his decision to retire from international football.
That will spare Italy's World Cup blushes — but it's bad news for Scotland, their next opponents, who will now have to face him at Ibrox on November 18.
The 32-year-old libero, regarded as one of the most accomplished and stylish defenders in world soccer, turned his back on the national team last month to spend more time with his family.
But Italy's defence was in chaos without him in the dismal 2–2 draw with Switzerland in their opening qualifying tie and he changed his mind yesterday under pressure from his wife and Italian federation president Antonio Matarrese.
Meanwhile, Torino had defender Roberto Mussi sent off, but still forced champions AC Milan to drop their first point of the season as the Italian League top-of-the-table clash ended in a goalless draw.
To make matters even worse for AC, city rivals Internazionale moved level with Torino on 11 points after a 4–1 win at struggling Pescara.
David Platt's Juventus recovered from a bad defeat at Inter last week by thrashing Ancona 5–1 to move into fourth place.
Deportivo Coruna stay top of the Spanish First Division for the eighth successive week after a 2–1 home win over Sporting Gijon.
Wright's title lift
Rob Shepherd
C Palace 1 Arsenal 2
IAN WRIGHT returned to his old hunting ground last night and with a poacher's instinct shot Arsenal to within a point of the Premier League leadership.
Wright couldn't have asked for a better way to celebrate his 29th birthday today.
His superbly-crafted strike arrived just after Palace had seemingly hauled themselves back into the game after Eddie McGoldrick had cancelled out Paul Merson's early strike.
Wright collected the ball on the edge of the Palace area, employed a subtle one-two with Kevin Campbell and beat Nigel Martyn with a fierce left-foot drive.
Wright confessed: ‘When the ball goes in like that it's hard to contain yourself.
I got some stick from a small section of the Palace crowd which I didn't expect, but it didn't bother me.
It was a special feeling to score, and hopefully I can carry on like that.’
Palace manager Steve Coppell certainly believes Wright, and Arsenal can justify their billing as Premier League favourites.
Coppell said: ‘I am Ian's biggest fan and the goal he scored is special.
He's the best striker I've ever worked with, I just wished he could do that sort of thing when he played for England.
‘And if I had to put money on it at the moment then I would back Arsenal to win the title.’
Gunners boss George Graham refused to get carried away with his side's fifth successive League victory, which lifted them into third place.
He said: ‘We got off to a bad start to the season, and we've had to work our way back gradually.
We are sitting in a good position now but there's a long way to go.
We are beginning to play some good stuff but I still think we can step u Arsenal were quickly off the mark, going ahead after only five minutes when a long David Seaman clearance found its way to Lee Dixon, whose early pass picked out Alan Smith.
He cut out the Palace defence with a deft left-foot flick and Merson powerfully shot beyond Martyn for his third goal of the season.
Chris Armstrong and Paul Williams have yet to strike up a true understanding in the Palace attack and despite some promising service from wingers John Salako and McGoldrick, Gunners' keeper David Seaman was rarely troubled during the first half.
Prolific
Since leaving Palace Wright has become one of the country's most prolific marksmen, scoring 34 goals in 46 matches for the Gunners.
But as a first-half Merson free kick ricocheted to him eight yards from goal he miscued.
Danish international John Jensen, who is gradually finding the feel of the English game, placed a subtle pass to Wright in the 55th minute.
But this time the England striker's shot on the turn was diverted over the bar by Eric Young's outstretched leg.
A minute later Jensen became the 28th Arsenal player to be booked this season after he kicked the ball away when a free kick had been awarded.
The decision may have been harsh, however, because it appeared he had not heard the whistle.
Power
Palace were back level when, in the 66th minute, Tony Adams and Seaman hesitated as the ball bobbed around in Arsenal's penalty area.
Eventually Adams headed away, but without sufficient power.
Salako picked up the loose ball, played a short pass to Osborn, who drove the ball through a crowd of players.
It emerged at the far post where McGoldrick slid in to score his seventh goal of the season.
Five minutes later Arsenal might have restored their lead when Smith grazed the outside of the far post.
But birthday boy Wright was waiting to break the deadlock with the goal he had been seeking all night.
Lewis stays mum
Steve Acteson
MOTHER'S boy Lennox Lewis last night declared: ‘I won't fall into the Mike Tyson trap.’
Lewis can become a multi-millionaire over the next four years if he becomes our first world heavyweight champion for nearly a century — and defends successfully.
But he vowed that even if he becomes the world's richest sportsman, he will stay firmly clear of the bright lights that cost Tyson his freedom.
Lewis says his love for his mother Vi will keep him out of trouble, declaring: ‘She brought me into this world and I consider myself a mother's boy — I owe it all to her.
My brother Dennis has done so much for me, too.
‘When times are bad the family are always there to support me and when times are good they can share the celebrations.
‘I'm not a man for fancy living and fancy women.
I'm very much a family man and need to be close to those I love.’
Former champion and born-again Christian George Foreman — who has seen the sleazy side of life at first hand — warned after Lewis's brilliant two-round knockout of Razor Ruddock at Earls Court: ‘Lennox Lewis will win the world title — as long as he doesn't get in with the wrong crowd.’
But Lewis said: ‘George Foreman is just thinking about the Mike Tyson scenario.
That's not for me and never will be.’
Lewis insists he cannot be suborned by men in sharp suits with silver tongues and evil intentions.
He said: ‘From the beginning Lennox Lewis has been in control of his own destiny — in the end Lennox Lewis will still be in control.
‘George Foreman doesn't know me, he doesn't know where I'm coming from — I'm a pretty level-headed guy.’
Nor, said Lewis, will he become complacent through the sudden adulation of a public that seem to have crowned him champion already.
‘I'm on an unfinished mission — to become the first British heavyweight champion this century and bring those championship belts back to England,’ he said.
‘I've got to stay focussed, not just for myself and my family, but also for the British public.
‘Before the fight they were chanting my name for the first time and I could see the effect it had on Ruddock, his head was going down while my chest was swelling with pride.
‘And at the end there were people crying, people laughing — all of them just overjoyed at my success.
It feels good, but I always knew I would get them behind me — it was just a matter of going out there and proving myself.’
Lewis plans to take a long break — in Britain — after first heading to Las Vegas to commentate for Sky TV on the November 13 title battle between reigning champion Evander Holyfield and Riddick Bowe that will decide his opponent next April.
Forecast Lewis: ‘It's going to be a rough battle because they are both good and confident fighters, but I tip Holyfield to win because he's been world class longer.
‘And I want him to win because he's unbeaten and I want to be the first man to take the H out of Holyfield.’
If crowned champion, Lewis has long-term plans to accommodate Mike Tyson —‘once he's out of jail’— and to give Frank Bruno a title tilt in Britain's fight of the century.
Said Lewis: ‘I have to keep setting goals for myself and that's why I would like to fight Tyson.
‘But the British public would like to see a fight here between me and Bruno and we can get that on, if Frank wants to take such a big risk.’
Sky TV yesterday announced they have exclusive rights to show his championship challenge and, if successful, his first defence.
I'll sue Deano pledges Elliott
Steve Acteson
CHELSEA defender Paul Elliott is ready to sue Liverpool and their former striker Dean Saunders over a tackle which threatens his career.
The 28-year-old centre half has instructed solicitors to take preliminary steps in a claim for damages against the club and the Welsh international.
Elliott suffered damage to the cruciate ligaments in his knee during an incident with Saunders at Anfield on September 5.
He has already undergone one operation and faces further surgery.
The clash occurred in a tackle during Saunders' last game for Liverpool before his £2.3 million move to Aston Villa.
Ironically, Sheffield referee John Key awarded the free-kick to Liverpool for a foul by Elliott and he said last night: ‘In my opinion, Elliott came in dangerously.
I don't think I made the right decision, I know I did.’
Evidence
Despite this, Elliott is happy to supply video evidence to prove he was the victim of an alleged two-footed challenge.
His solicitor, John Stitt, confirmed: ‘We are acting on behalf of Mr Paul Elliott with a view to a potential claim against Liverpool and Dean Saunders in relation to an injury sustained by our client.
‘It was a serious injury which may affect his career.
We have taken preliminary steps.
We have given notice that a claim may be made.’
Saunders was unavailable for comment yesterday, but a spokesman for the striker said: ‘The matter is in the hands of solicitors and there will be no further comment.’
Liverpool, who are being sued as Saunders' employers at the time of the incident, have also received a letter from Elliott's solicitors and are understood to have passed it on to their insurers.
The impending civil action comes at a time when Saunders' career has reached a new high with eight goals in 10 matches since moving to Villa.
But any court action is bound to hang ominously over him, even though he can take some comfort from Mr Key, who added: ‘There was an assessor at the game from the Premier League and the incident was mentioned in his report.
I got the thumbs up, there was no problem.’
There have been a couple of recent precedents to Elliott's action.
Spurs defender Danny Thomas claimed damages against Gavin Maguire and his club QPR over an incident which ended his career and this was settled out of court.
Norwich defender John O'Neill is still proceeding with a claim against Wimbledon striker John Fashanu over a tackle which forced him to quit.
Piper to call Benn's tune
Frank Ward
NIGEL BENN'S defence of his WBC super-middleweight crown, the first of two steps towards a lucrative return with Chris Eubank next spring, will be against Welshman Nicky Piper at Alexandra Palace on December 12.
Benn won and lost the WBO middleweight title in 1990, but returned from boxing's wilderness to beat lame Italian Mauro Galvano last month — in three easy rounds — to capture the more meaningful WBC crown.
Piper is a massive underdog but is a clever customer in more ways than one.
He recently joined MENSA with a intelligence rating of 153, while in the ring he has power in both of his accurate fists.
Confident
He's confident, too, claiming: ‘Benn has taken a great risk in fighting me because, like Ruddock, he is very predictable and I aim to exploit his lack of variety.
‘Despite all the talk about Benn boxing behind his jab, he still rushes in with his head exposed and I will pick my counters just like Lennox Lewis did on Saturday.’
Piper, 26, has been beaten only once in his 18-fight career, when he strayed 7lb above the super-middleweight limit and conceded an additional 10lb to Manchester's Karl Thompson, who has since won the British cruiserweight title.
‘I've stopped 13 opponents and dropped most of them cleanly with quick counters and that will be Benn's downfall,’ continued Piper.
‘When Benn beat Galvano he was caught with counters but was able to walk through them because the Italian was not a puncher.
Against me it will be different.’
Benn's record stretches back to 1987 and is cluttered with the debris of two divisions and outlined by the cream from the same two divisions.
He has stopped, or beaten into a mess, 30 of his 36 opponents.
Factor
He has lost twice, to Michael Watson and Eubank, but at the increased poundage he has been extended by Sugar Boy Malinga and Lenzie Morgan.
His fearsome single knockout punch is no longer a factor and its absence is at the centre of Piper's plans.
‘I've spoken to Benn's first trainer, Brian Lynch, and he has put me wise.
And unless there is a drastic change in Benn's style the outcome will be the same as Lewis against Ruddock,’ insisted the gently-spoken Welshman hero.
Unbeaten light middleweight Rob McCracken will fight Sheffield's Martin Smith in a British title final eliminator, with the winner going on to fight Northolt's Andy Till.
Jones facing video rap
VINNY JONES has been ordered to appear in front of a Football Association disciplinary commission at Lancaster Gate on November 17.
The Wimbledon midfielder must answer a misconduct charge after his involvement in the controversial video ‘Soccer's Hard Men’.
Jones can expect a hefty fine and possibly a ban.
White pulls out
JIMMY WHITE was forced to pull out of the £25,000 Benson and Hedges snooker tournament in Glasgow yesterday because of an illness in his family.
Irishman Ken Doherty eased into the fifth round, thrashing Steve Longworth 5–0 but Eugene Hughes lost 5–4 to Scot John Lardner.
Kenny let-off
KENNY DALGLISH and Joe Kinnear are likely to escape FA punishment for comments made about referee Martin Bodenham after Blackburn's game against Wimbledon.
Dalglish and Kinnear have given written reports and the FA have not brought charges.
Making Merry
SUSSEX have won a three-year sponsorship deal with Merrydown Cider which could be worth as much as £250,000.
The basic £200,000 deal will rise depending on Sussex's success in the County Championship and limited overs competitions.?
Rain check
HEAVY rains gave way long enough for New Zealand to declare at 325–3 yesterday in the first Test at against Zimbabwe in Bulawayo.
In reply, Zimbabwe were 54–1 at the close with Grant Flower caught off Dipak Patel for 29 and Kevin Arnott on 25 not out.
Lester wasn't to blame
Colin Cooper
RICHARD Hannon yesterday defended Lester Piggott's decision not to withdraw Mr Brooks at the start of the Breeders' Cup Sprint.
Piggott has come under fire from American observers following Walter Swinburn's report that the veteran jockey had told him Mr Brooks ‘moved terrible’ going to the start.
And NBC's live coverage on Saturday night suggested that Piggott should have informed the course vet of the problem.
However, Hannon maintains that any stiffness would have had no connection with the broken leg which led to Mr Brooks' death.
‘The horse was 100 per cent when he arrived in America and was 100 per cent right up to the start of the race,’ he said.
‘There was no way he would have been allowed to run if something was wrong.
‘That sort of injury is a one-off.
It could happen any time.
Everyone saw that the horse was galloping well until there was a clean break of the leg.
‘It's difficult to understand why he might have been moving badly going to the start — perhaps it was the dirt or maybe it was because the heat was so intense.’
Piggott was still in the Hollywood Memorial Hospital last night recovering from the broken collar bone and ribs sustained in the fall.
He looks almost certain to be released today.
Woosie chases cup record
Bill Blighton
IAN WOOSNAM has the chance to join the legendary Jack Nicklaus in the history books when he leads Wales in the Philip Morris World Cup in Madrid tomorrow.
Woosnam is aiming to equal Nicklaus's feat of winning the 32-nation tournament's individual title three times.
‘I'm not one for records, but it would be nice to stand alongside such a great player as Nicklaus,’ said Woosnam, who partners Mark Mouland in the two-man team event.
‘But I don't need incentives to play well in the World Cup, just playing for my country is enough.
That's what brings out the best in me.’
Sweden's Anders Forsbrand and Per Ulrik Johanneson defend the title, while Steve Richardson and David Gilford line up for England.
Scotland and Ireland are also represented but the biggest threat to a home win lies with American duo Fred Couples and Davis Love.
Jones facing league probe
Ray French
MARK JONES, the 16-stone Welsh forward in trouble after being sent off for a punch in Hull's fiery clash with Warrington, is in more hot water.
Hull's powerful prop looks likely to be cited to the Rugby League for a tackle on Wires second-row forward Bob Jackson, which saw the Aussie skipper carried off with a nasty eye injury.
No action was taken but Warrington general manager Ron Close said: ‘We have looked closely at the video and it looks as if Jones might have deliberately kicked Bob, who has been told by a specialist that he came within an eighth of an inch of losing the eye.
‘He has had a great number of stitches inserted in the eyelid and underneath the eye in an effort to keep it closed and avoid further damage.
Aggrieved
‘Naturally, we are very aggrieved at the incident and are considering citing Jones for the incident in the tackle.’
But the former Neath and Wales rugby union star, later dismissed for throwing a punch at Gary Tees, insisted last night: ‘All I can remember is that it was in a tackle.
‘I was attempting to get up on my feet and if my boot caught Bob Jackson then it was accidental.
It was certainly not deliberate.’
Hull coach Royce Simmons added: ‘I think it was an accident but I am not prepared to say anything more than that until I receive any official notification.’
Jones faces the League's disciplinary committee on Thursday for the Tees incident and, if he receives a lengthy ban, will miss Wales' date with England on November 27 at Swansea.
Top sprinter Ade Mafe is having trials with Wigan.
Mafe, 25, who won world gold with the Great Britain 4x400m relay team, said: ‘I've reached the point in my life where I have to start earning money.
‘I've been practising with a ball on my own.
Hopefully what Wigan will be interested in is my speed.’
Croft crumbles
ANNABEL CROFT'S comeback trail hit the buffers yesterday when she lost 6–4, 7–5 to 11th seed Sarah Bentley in the Volkswagen National Tennis Championships at Telford.
But the one-time British No 1, who came to Telford to play for fun, had her chances to further dent the reputations of the nation's full-time players when she led 5–1 in the second set.
‘That's when I started to play,’ said Bentley, who last shared a court with Croft when she was a ball girl in a Wightman Cup match at the Royal Albert Hall several years ago.
Defending champion and British No 1 Jo Durie took a decisive first step towards her seventh title, thrashing Birmingham's Katie Rickett 6–1, 6–3.
Second seed Amanda Grunfeld, from Manchester, joined Durie in the last 16 with a 6–1, 6–4 victory over Banbury's Claire Spencer, while Devon's third-seeded Sara Gomer, runner-up for the past three years, crushed Fulham's Claire Spencer 6–4, 6–2.
Gibbs hunts Horan
Mike Allan
SCOTT GIBBS believes there is no better centre pairing in the world than Tim Horan and Jason Little, and Horan tops the lot in the individual stakes.
He chased them in Australia last year, tried to hunt them down at the Arms Park in the World Cup, but found himself on the end of the heaviest Welsh defeats home and away.
The chase continues at St Helens where Swansea face the world champions.
‘I've chased Horan and Little on more than one occasion and have yet to get my hands on them,’ said Gibbs, who figured in the 63–6 Welsh defeat in Brisbane and then the 38–3 World Cup loss.
‘There's no doubting they are the best pair in the world,’ he added.
If Gibbs does not finally catch up with Horan and Little, any talk of a resurgence in Welsh fortunes will have to be put on ice.
Swansea: A Clement; M Titley, S Gibbs, K Hopkins, Simon Davies; A Williams, R Jones; C Clark, G Jenkins, K Colclough, P Arnold, R Moriarty, A Reynolds, Stuart Davies, R Webster.
Australia: T Keleher; D Smith, J Little, T Horan, P Carozza; P Kahl, P Slattery; M Ryan, P Kearns, A Blades, W Waugh, J Eales, T Coker, T Gavin, S Scott-Young.
Diplomatic immunity
Tony Roche
PIETER Muller read the messages of hate, shrugged and got on with the job of becoming one of the best centres in the world.
Not that he could have avoided his post-breakfast greeting — they were daubed all over South Africa's team bus, parked far too handily outside their Leicester hotel.
Immune to such madness, the Springboks washed their bus of obscenity, their hands of the topic and then trained in welcome peace.
The anti-apartheid brigade's first blow failed to register.
Today, South Africa play rugby in England for the first time in nearly 23 years when a line-up containing five current internationals faces the Midlands at Leicester's Welford Road.
Warned
Protests are expected, but the players have been drilled.
They have been warned what to expect, despite the recent statement by the ANC requesting no demonstrations and a peaceful completion of a tour they sanctioned.
‘We are here to play rugby and learn,’ said Muller.
‘We have no argument with anybody.’
There are people here who believe they have an argument with Muller and his colleagues, an assembly of protest who claim to have formed on October 7 for the specific purpose of political disruption.
Aware of the history of that awful bloody confrontation throughout the 1969–70 tour, the new-era Springboks are determined to keep their heads high and their political profile low.
Muller will watch from the stand knowing he is destined to face the England B team at Bristol on Saturday in preparation for a confrontation of which he could once only dream of: ‘Facing Will Carling and Jeremy Guscott at Twickenham.’
Muller represents the future of South African rugby, a powerful, aggressive and gifted three-quarter currently playing alongside boyhood hero Danie Gerber and, he admits, ‘learning from Naas Botha, the best of captains’.
He is a sight to behold on the rampage, an upright runner who tackles hard, driving his victim backwards — a devotee of the style of Wallaby centres Tim Horan and Jason Little.
Older brother Helgard won three caps in the early 80s, and Muller found it tough growing up with that comparison.
‘I feel sad that he could not have enjoyed this opportunity of unification and won more caps, but I want to keep the family name in the side,’ said Muller.
‘I have an excellent job in Durban working for a French barrier fencing company and am also studying for qualification in personnel management.
But right now rugby is very important to me.’
Muller helped Natal beat Transvaal 14–13 in the Currie Cup final, and his display confirmed what the Springbok selectors suspected — they have a star on their hands.
He celebrated his international debut against New Zealand in Johannesburg in August with a try and went on to face Australia before playing in both Tests against France.
‘I will never forget our victory in the first French Test,’ he added.
‘We are fighting to get back on par with the rest of the world, and squaring the series in France was a big boost.’
Promise
The second Test in Paris left Muller one cap ahead of Helgard and exhibiting the promise to take his place among the great Springbok names which punctuate rugby legend.
Muller, however, is surprised to find himself in the company of players he once idolised, and he has yet to recognise that he is about to become a similar figure.
Providing, of course, that South Africa do not repeat the kind of blunder which marred their comeback Test at Ellis Park.
The singing of white anthem Die Stem and the flying of the Republic's flag nearly inflamed the ANC to cancel the tour, but Muller is adamant change is here to stay, and for the good.
‘I am all for change,’ he says.
‘I hate the thought of violence in my country, and I'm certainly prepared to compromise.’
But there will be no compromise when England No 8 Dean Richards leads the Midlands into a moment of rugby history today.
Muller and his team-mates expect a hard four-match tour and welcome the challenge.
‘Every game is a learning process for us,’ explained Muller.
‘But give us all a chance and we will soon repay such faith.’
The Springboks aim to spray their message all over the pitch, not the Midlands bus.
MIDLANDS: J Liley; S Hackney, S Potter, I Bates (all Leicester), H Thorneycroft (Northampton); J Steele (N'hampton), A Kardooni (Leicester); M Linnett (Moseley), J Olver (N'hampton), G Pearce (N'hampton), M Johnson (Leicester), M Bayfield (N'hampton), P Shillingford (Moseley), D Richards (Leicester), R Tebbutt (N'hampton).
SOUTH AFRICA: T van Rensburg; D Oosthuysen, F Knoetze, D Gerber, P Hendriks; H Le Roux, G Wright; H Rodgers, W Hills, K Andrews, D Hattingh, P Schutte, W Bartmann, A Richter, I Macdonald.
Morley magic saves Hammers
Barry Lucas
Grimsby 1, West Ham 1
A SUPERB late strike by Trevor Morley rescued a point for West Ham in a glowing advert for the First Division.
Morley's goal cancelled out Clive Mendonca's 25-yarder and ended Grimsby's run of three successive League wins and the Hammers' recent slide, which has seen two consecutive defeats.
Grimsby found the skills of West Ham a daunting proposition in the early stages.
Clive Allen, Mark Robson and wide man Kevin Keen often had the Grimsby defence in trouble, though Paul Butcher was a tower of strength in the back four.
But on-loan keeper Dave Beasant had to move fast to keep out a cross-come-shot from Hammers stalwart Alvin Martin.
Once Grimsby settled down, they began to play some neat football.
Midfield dynamo Dave Gilbert and striker Mendonca linked well on the left, but the visitors' defence held firm, ensuring Grimsby's forward thrusts rarely progressed further than the midfield.
Grimsby's best opening came on the half-hour, when Paul Groves put Mendonca in behind keeper Ludo Miklosko.
But the ball ran too fast for the striker who, with an open goal ahead of him, could only hit the side-netting.
The Hammers began to lose a little of their early composure as the half-time interval approached, but both defences regained a firm grip on proceedings after the break.
It was clear something special would be required to break the deadlock, and Mendonca provided just that when he unleashed his tremendous 25-yard drive past the helpless Miklosko.
Mendonca's 53rd-minute strike shocked West Ham's travelling supporters into silence and heralded a dominant spell by Grimsby.
And the Hammers' efforts to find an equaliser met stern resistance, until Morley produced his high-quality goal 15 minutes from time.
Meanwhile, two goals in the last minute earned Oxford a 5–5 draw from a remarkable tussle with Portsmouth at the Manor Ground.
Oxford looked dead and buried until Pompey substitute Stuart Doling brought down John Durnin to allow Jim Magilton to cut the deficit to 5–4 from the penalty spot.
And seconds later, Oxford keeper Paul Reece took the ball 30 yards outside his area and hit a long clearance to Joey Beauchamp, whose shot was blocked by Alan Knight before Chris Allen headed in the equaliser.
Bees boost
Swindon 0, Brentford 2
BRENTFORD shattered high-flying Swindon's unbeaten home record last night.
The visitors deservedly went ahead in the 19th minute when Gary Blissett fired home from 12 yards.
They grabbed the second in the 31st minute when Marcus Gayle ran 30 yards before slipping the ball to Lee Luscombe, who scored easily.
Swindon swept forward after the break and were given a 50th-minute penalty when Martin Ling was brought down in the area.
But top scorer Craig Maskell saw his weak spot-kick easily saved by Gerry Peyton.
Tony Philliskirk scored twice as PETERBOROUGH enjoyed a 2–1 win at WATFORD.
Former Posh striker Ken Charlery missed a succession of chances before heading Watford's consolation in the 80th minute.
Francis is super sub
Cambridge 3, Luton 3
CAMBRIDGE struck three times in the last 17 minutes to earn a point.
Lee Philpott pulled one back in the 73rd minute and then super sub John Francis scored twice to grab an unlikely draw.
Luton took the lead in the 22nd minute through Scott Oakes.
They went 2–0 up three minutes into the second half when Phil Gray hit a fierce 20-yard drive that was deflected past keeper Jon Sheffield.
And six minutes later, Gray made it 3–0.
Celtic dream dashed by double strike
Scott McMunn
Celtic 1, Borussia Dortmund 2 (Agg: 1–3)
TWO goals in five dramatic second-half minutes destroyed Celtic's hopes of UEFA Cup glory at Parkhead last night.
Celtic, given a marvellous start by Gerry Creaney, who levelled the scores on aggregate, were stunned by striker Stephane Chapuisat's 53rd-minute equaliser.
And just five minutes later the Germans booked their third-round place with a strike by Michael Zorc.
Disappointed Celtic boss Liam Brady admitted Borussia were the better side on the night and said: ‘They could go on and win the trophy.
‘It showed British football is behind the Germans' in technique.
They have two class forwards in Chapuisat and Zorc.’
The Scottish club, trailing 1–0 after the first leg of this second round tie, had to wait only 13 minutes before levelling the scores.
John Collins lobbed the ball into the crowded goalmouth for Creaney to head past keeper Stefan Klos.
Just before the break, Charlie Nicholas, enjoying his return to action after an 18-game absence, unleashed a ferocious, 18-yard effort that clipped the base of a post.
Celtic's world, though, suddenly caved in as Borussia struck with two goals in the space of five minutes.
Michael Rummenigge released the deadly Swiss striker Chapuisat, who fired home from 14 yards.
Then the crowd of 31,578 fell totally silent in the 58th minute as Zorc hit Borussia's second.
Leeds in safe hands
David Alexander
KEEPER John Lukic tonight has to face up to his bizarre error that punished Leeds heavily against Rangers in Glasgow.
Lukic, normally rock solid, punched the ball into his own net to allow Rangers to draw level in the first leg of their European Cup tie.
Now the pressure is on the big keeper as Leeds start at Elland Road 2–1 down and with a disturbing habit of conceding too many goals this season.
But the Leeds players are backing Lukic to banish that nightmare in what will be a second leg atmosphere as intense as at Ibrox.
Club captain Gordon Strachan made the feelings of the Leeds players over Lukic plain last night when he said: ‘He's so mentally tough it won't bother him in the slightest.
I'm sure he can handle it.
‘You could take any keeper in Britain — there's not one we would rather have between the post tonight more than him.
‘And you can't blame him for the way we've been conceding goals.
You have to look at the whole team for that.
He knows he made a mistake at Ibrox but he will have wiped it from his mind.
‘We haven't spoken about what happened.
It's like me missing a penalty.
You don't want people patronising you, feeling sorry for you at such moments.
Pressure
‘I don't know in which way he has handled it but I know he won't be feeling the pressure at all.’
If Rangers score, it means Leeds have to get three tonight but team skipper Gary McAllister — scorer of a spectacular goal at Ibrox — insists Lukic is under no extra pressure.
‘Everyone here believes in him and we've not even thought of criticising him.
He's much too good to let what happened in Glasgow affect him tomorrow,’ said McAllister.
‘He told us what happened.
He held his hands up and admitted an error and we felt for him on the night.
He said he lost the ball in the lights and it's a fact that the lights at Ibrox are very bright.’
And McAllister added: ‘He played a major part in Stuttgart, where he made three or four great saves.
Without him we might not have won the Championship or be in a position to be playing Rangers.
‘There's no way the Rangers experience will affect him.
This guy's played a million games.’
Incredibly, Leeds have conceded 23 goals in the League this season, the worst record in the Premier League apart from Norwich.
Manager Howard Wilkinson said: ‘Goals change things.
Stuttgart were a different proposition in the last 20 minutes when they'd scored.
‘We have been controlling games but still conceding goals and I don't know why.
Luck evens itself out but not unless you do certain things properly — and I think we do.
‘We've paid a heavy price for our mistakes this season and I can't explain it any other way than to say it's bad luck.
Hopefully it will change.
‘I think we did well in the first game at Ibrox, despite the result.
We controlled the game better than might have been expected but this game is different and, however much you plan things, a goal can change everything.
‘The important thing is the performance of the players.
The manager can say this and that and it looks good on paper and there may be great reasoning behind it.
‘But if you tell me my players will perform well tonight, I'll settle for that.’
With David Batty unlikely to be fit, Wilkinson must decide whether to replace him with David Rocastle or Eric Cantona.
Souness could use divine guidance
Duncan McKenzie
GRAEME SOUNESS will have Liverpool buzzing tonight.
But the result at Anfield is in the lap of the gods.
They have talented players and can overcome the 4–2 deficit against Spartak Moscow.
But they're just as capable of losing at home.
The days when Souness was just one of the stars in a great Liverpool side are long gone.
And sadly he needs all the help he can get right now…starting tonight.
When Souness admits his players had Spartak on their minds at Spurs on Saturday, and when Ray Clemence says Liverpool are in a transitional period, you know they have problems.
Here are two Anfield greats talking about something that would just never have happened before.
Now, neither Souness nor the Liverpool fans have any idea how the team is going to perform on any given day and trying to predict that is like trying to find eight draws.
We've seen flashes of the old Liverpool but all too often they've fallen below acceptable standards and that's the problem — their consistency has gone and that was always their hallmark.
The reasons?
The team doesn't automatically pick itself any more.
There aren't the players on the staff to put pressure on those in the team to perform.
And as soon as any of the old big names are fit, they're guaranteed a place in the team.
That's not Liverpool.
They have no chance of winning the title this season and in the long term they'll struggle to win the Premier League because they can't compete with Blackburn, Arsenal, Leeds and Manchester United…not only on the playing field but on the financial front.
That can be the only explanation for the sale of Dean Saunders and not Ian Rush.
Saunders was sold because Rush would not generate a big fee.
It was a short-term solution to try to get back to winning things.
They don't have the cash to finance the rebuilding of the side and that can become a vicious circle: poor results, lower crowds, less revenue.
Souness is partly to blame — he has a big L plate and not all his buys have been successes.
But the deterioration really started with the European ban.
Liverpool have always admitted they need Europe to pay their way and when it went they were left with highly paid players on long-term contracts — and the books didn't balance.
Souness has taken over a club with financial difficulties.
It's different from Rangers where, if he had an injury, he could go out and buy.
Now he can't compete financially, which nearly puts Liverpool in Division Two of the Premier League.
Souness is a battler and he's passionate about football, make no mistake.
But now he has to pin his faith on the emerging talent and pray they continue to make progress.
There's nothing he can do but hope because he can't put 30-year-old heads on young shoulders.
He has to keep these kids in the team because there's nothing better to replace them — yet even five years ago Jamie Redknapp and Don Hutchison would have been back in the reserves, getting the time they need.
Not now.
Souness can't do it.
He has to play them and bear the consequences, which include, as he says, getting him the sack.
I don't think that's going to happen but he desperately needs finance from Europe.
And he has to pray they do the business…starting tonight against Spartak.
Deadly Durrant better than Gazza
Scott McMunn
IN THE millionaires' row that is Ibrox, the most valuable player is one who didn't cost a penny.
When Ian Durrant returned from three years on the scrapheap with a crippling knee injury, Graeme Souness said it was like signing a Pounds 3 million star.
Ray Wilkins rates him better than Gazza.
His skipper, Richard Gough, calls him the best player at the club.
And Leeds United know all about him, too.
Durrant ran the show against them in the first leg of the ‘Battle of Britain’, forging through from midfield, skipping tackles and spraying passes non-stop.
The English thought the 25-year-old had played out of his skin.
Anyone at Ibrox will tell you they were wrong.
Before his horrific injury, in a tackle with Aberdeen's Neil Simpson in October 1988, he was turning in match-winning performances week in, week out.
Now, his team-mates — all £14m worth of them — reckon the kid who was brought up a stone's throw from Ibrox is even better.
Captain Gough said: ‘I said in April that Ian Durrant was the most talented player at this football club.
‘Back then, he was just coming back and I got a lot of funny looks because of the talent of the other players around here.
‘But I think now he has started to prove that he is the most gifted player at Rangers, as Leeds found out at Ibrox.
‘And I believe he is the man who can win it for us at Elland Road.
Leeds play very square at the back and that's tailor-made for Durrant.
‘He loves coming from deep and running through defences.
‘Howard Wilkinson is a very good manager and a fine tactician but there aren't too many ways of stopping Durrant.’
Saviour
Former England skipper Wilkins, who partnered a young Durrant in midfield for a season, championed the youngster's cause long before he came back from injury.
During the 1990 World Cup, when England was hailing Paul Gascoigne as the saviour of football, Wilkins said Durrant was as good — if not better.
He said: ‘On top of all his talent, to have come back from such a serious injury and regain his best form is supremely brave.
He can go on to become one of the true greats.’
Rangers manager Walter Smith has still to settle on his line-up.
Trevor Steven is injured and Smith will call up either Pieter Huistra or Alexi Mikhailichenko, while Dale Gordon, the ex-Norwich City winger, is also being considered.
Eager Owls fired up for a fightback
David Alexander
MANAGER Trevor Francis revealed the sense of injustice that will fuel Sheffield Wednesday's UEFA Cup challenge tonight.
Wednesday's players are still furious over the controversial refereeing that saw striker David Hirst sent off in the 3–1 first leg defeat in Kaiserslautern.
And last night, Francis warned: ‘It doesn't matter which side I put out, they're ready for the game.
They've been waiting for it.
‘I won't have to talk to the players to motivate them.
It won't be needed.’
The French referee awarded a dubious penalty to make it 1–1 in Germany, and then dismissed Wednesday goalscorer Hirst after Kaiserslautern defender Marco Haber dramatically fell to the ground after the players brushed together.
Hope
Despite being without the suspended Hirst, Wednesday's leading scorer for the past four seasons, Francis fully expects to progress into the next round.
‘I think Kaiserslautern would regard themselves as favourites, but we've watched them a lot and feel we can score against them,’ he said.
‘In Germany, even with 10 men, we had two good chances against them, and that must give us hope.
‘And they won't be as strong this time because they have lost two or three players through injury.’
Wednesday are also hoping a capacity crowd will generate an intimidating atmosphere for the Germans.
‘Against Blackburn on Saturday some areas of the ground were very quiet.
We want a sea of noise tomorrow,’ said Francis.
‘The supporters can play a big part.
That's not a request, we're expecting it.
I would also like them to be sure which player was responsible for Hirst being sent off — his name's Haber.
‘Kaiserslautern are experienced and might not be troubled by the atmosphere, but what will bother them is the type of football we are playing,’ he added, referring to the game against Blackburn and the 7–1 Coca-Cola Cup thrashing of Leicester.
Wednesday are likely to start with Paul Warhurst and Gordon Watson up front, though Nigel Jemson will play if Watson fails to recover from a heavy cold.
Player-manager Francis is not fit, but Wednesday will be strengthened by the return of Roland Nilsson at right-back and midfielder John Sheridan.
Rocky lifeline
David Harrison
NOTTINGHAM Forest are ready to offer midfielder David Rocastle an escape from the wilderness of Leeds reserves.
Brian Clough has already made an inquiry for the player he tried to sign a couple of years ago from Arsenal and, if Leeds go out of the European Cup tonight, a rapid departure could be on the cards.
If Howard Wilkinson is prepared to accept less than the £2 million he paid Arsenal during the summer, Clough is keen to do business.
And that could set up a multi-million pound transfer merry-go-round at the City Ground, with fans' favourite Roy Keane at the centre of it.
Rocastle's arrival at relegation-threatened Forest would re-awaken Arsenal's interest in Irish star Keane, an exceptional midfielder and unhappy at being u Forest supporters, already outraged at the departure of Des Walker, Darren Wassall, Steve Sutton and Teddy Sheringham over the past 12 months, would go wild but may be appeased if Clough spent the Keane money on a defender and a striker.
Arsenal's Andy Linighan and Alan Smith could be considered.
Clough must act quickly to arrest Forest's bottom-of-the-table plight because the fear of relegation is spreading through the club.
His son, Nigel, admitted: ‘For the first time in my career I'm scared.
I've been in the game for eight years and have never tasted such a chilling fear.
‘The prospect of relegation makes me sick to the pit of my stomach.
‘This is what we are up against — the situation is that critical.
I remember joking about us going down last year when we were briefly third from the bottom but there's no funny side this time.’
Hooper in shock call-up
Des Kelly
MIKE HOOPER, the goalkeeper whose Liverpool career looked over, returns to the firing line tonight in a shock European selection gamble.
Anfield manager Graeme Souness has decided to opt for his more experienced third keeper over £1.3 million signing David James in the bid to overturn a 4–2 Cup Winners' Cup deficit against Spartak Moscow.
Souness feels James, 22, is still developing and not yet ready for a high-pressure European tie, where one away goal could be disastrous.
The decision is a big blow to James but a welcome boost for Hooper.
The 28-year-old graduate from Bristol University was fined at the end of last season for failing to turn up for the team coach travelling to the FA Cup final after discovering he had been dropped in favour of the fit-again Bruce Grobbelaar.
But Hooper has earned a reprieve with Liverpool looking for the solidity and assurance he showed in last year's UEFA Cup battle with Italian club Genoa.
Souness will conduct tonight's team talk at the pre-match hotel and then take a seat in the directors' box as he starts a five-match touchline and dressing room ban.
Midfielder Michael Thomas and winger Steve McManaman are both doubtful, opening the way for Danish star Jan Molby.
Count on me
David Alexander
DAVID BATTY handed Leeds the European Cup verdict they wanted to hear last night: ‘Count me in.’
The England midfield man, given little chance 36 hours ago of facing Rangers, is ready to join an all-out Leeds onslaught in tonight's Elland Road showdown.
‘There's been a big improvement, and I'll almost certainly be okay,’ he revealed.
Batty, injured by a tackle from Coventry's Stewart Robson on Saturday, was on crutches on Sunday and still nursing a badly swollen right ankle on Monday.
But there was no ligament damage, and intensive treatment looks like achieving the miracle cure Leeds wanted.
‘There may be a bit of pain, but I don't mind that,’ added Batty.
‘I just want to play and it looks as though I will.’
If he makes it, manager Howard Wilkinson's only problem is who to name alongside Lee Chapman up front— Rod Wallace or Eric Cantona — as he prepares to stun Rangers with all the power of Leeds' attacking force.
The English champions are the Premier League's leading goalscorers and unbeaten at home for 18 months, which makes the protection of a 2–1 first-leg lead a massive proposition for Rangers.
Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson said: ‘We have the capability of going out and winning games well.
Some teams do not have that, but we have the capability of winning by scoring a lot of goals.’
However, a 1–0 win would be enough, and Wilkinson added: ‘We scored here and in Barcelona, we made chances in Stuttgart, and we should have scored more at Ibrox.
I can't see us not scoring against Rangers.
I'd be very surprised if we didn't.’
Captain Gary McAllister was also quick to point out their determination to succeed in a match that has seen £18 tickets changing hands for Pounds 150.
He said: ‘We were three down after the first leg against Stuttgart, but there was a great feeling we could do it.
‘We must be confident this time because we have that same feeling again.
We've got an away goal, but I don't think away goals will come into it.’
The nagging doubt for Leeds is their poor defensive record this season.
But Wilkinson still believes their ability to score will decide the tie.
‘We've been controlling games and still letting goals in,’ he conceded.
‘But we've been scoring as well, and that's what we've got to do.’
As at Ibrox, the match is for home fans only, but 1,000 Scots fans are expected to travel and police are mounting a huge security operation to stop touting outside the stadium.
Lack of Will
WILL SUTHERLAND, skipper of one of the yachts in the British Steel Challenge round-the-world race, has resigned after the first leg from Southampton to Rio de Janeiro for personal reasons.
The vessel finished last on the opening leg.
Great Goran
CROATIA'S Goran Ivanisevic, winner of last week's Stockholm Open, destroyed Frenchman Cedric Pioline 6–4, 7–5 to reach the Paris Open last 16 yesterday and said: ‘I was serving so good, he didn't have a chance.’
Boro boy's call-up
by Tony Kell
MIDDLESBROUGH'S 18-year-old midfielder Graham Kavanagh is poised to make his first full appearance for the Republic of Ireland Under-21s against Spain in Jerez de la Frontera.
Kavanagh was a late substitute when the Irish youngsters lost 3–2 in Denmark last month in their most recent UEFA Championship match.
Since then, he has made Middlesbrough's first team.
He was impressive in his Premier League debut against Nottingham Forest and retained his place for the 1–1 draw with Sheffield Wednesday.
And yesterday he was named again in Ireland's 16-man squad for the Spain match, 24 hours before Jack Charlton's senior side play a World Cup qualifier in Seville on November 18.
Struggle
Brighton centre-half Paul McCarthy is set to return to the Under-21s as captain after missing the defeat in Copenhagen with injury.
Chelsea's third-choice goalkeeper, Nick Colgan, who made his Irish debut against Denmark, is also in the squad along with West Ham winger Matthew Rush and Norwich City striker Lee Power.
Before the defeat by the Danes, the Republic beat Albania 3–1.
But manager Maurice Setters knows his side have a struggle to qualify from a tough section — Germany are the other team in five-nation group three.
Players support Johnson
CAMBRIDGE'S caretaker-manager Gary Johnson is being backed by his players to take on the job full-time.
United's 3–3 draw with Luton on Tuesday stretched their unbeaten run to four games since John Beck was sacked.
And the players hope they have done enough to make Johnson's spell in charge permanent.
‘The players want Gary to be our manager,’ revealed defender Alan Kimble.
‘No disrespect to John Beck, but the club has been happier since he left.’
Johnson moved up from youth coach to take temporary charge.
He is one of 30 applicants for the manager's job.
Among his rivals are former Ipswich and England internationals Paul Mariner and Mick Mills.
Albion end Wilson talks
WEST BROM boss Ossie Ardiles has abandoned his long-running bid to sign Notts County's out-of-favour striker, Kevin Wilson.
Ardiles twice tried to capture the 28-year-old Northern Ireland international but has finally refused to meet County's £200,000 valuation for the former Chelsea forward.
Albion chairman Trevor Summers insisted: ‘The deal is off.
‘We have our valuation of the player, County have theirs and the matter will not be going any further.’
First Division strugglers County were trying to recoup most of the £225,000 they paid eight months ago to prise Wilson from Stamford Bridge.
Ardiles is now set to consider a bid for Watford's former England striker, Luther Blissett, who is on-loan at The Hawthorns.
Blissett, 34, scored his first goal for Albion during Tuesday's 3–1 victory over Hartlepool United.
That result has helped Ardiles's side open up a two-point lead over Frank Stapleton's Bradford City at the top of the Second Division.
Return of the rover
by Mike Walters
MALCOLM ALLISON returned to football with Bristol Rovers yesterday, an old age pensioner answering his latest SOS.
One of soccer's great trouble-shooters clocked in at the Cadbury's chocolate factory where Rovers train but the last thing that greeted him was the sweet smell of success.
Anchored to the foot of Division One and shell-shocked by Tuesday night's 5–1 home defeat by Barnsley, Rovers are in trouble.
Eight years have elapsed since Middlesbrough terminated Allison's last post in League football, since when he has dabbled in non-League management with Fisher, and coached Danes, Swedes and Scots.
No one in Bristol — certainly not Big Mal, now 65 — was letting on exactly who hired him for his latest battle against relegation.
Definitely not under-pressure Rovers manager Dennis Rofe who, nonetheless, will welcome Allison's help three days a week.
His task is both daunting and serious, but Allison — famed for that Fedora and fat cigars — would go to the gallows cracking jokes and his humour is sorely needed to lift some long faces in the dressing room.
‘There are two types of people who succeed in coaching,’ he declared.
‘They are conmen, confidence tricksters who teach players tricks of the trade, or intelligent men who build your confidence and belief.’
And which one is Big Mal?
‘I'm the conman,’ he replied, and that humiliation by Barnsley instantly began to feel like nothing worse than a bad dream.
‘I can remember getting walloped 6–1 by AC Milan when I was with West Ham,’ he added, ‘and I was so shaken I was too frightened to look at people for weeks.
‘The players here are leaking a few goals and losing faith in themselves but there might not be a lot wrong.
‘If each of them can just improve a little bit in 10 ways, the team will improve in a hundred ways and that's not asking a lot of them.’
How those players — like struggling striker John Taylor, still reeling from the barracking he received against Barnsley — need a lift.
‘Some of us were poor and a few of us, myself included, absolutely abysmal,’ he conceded.
‘Any help will be welcome.’
In his heyday Allison was involved with five Championship-winning sides worldwide and is perhaps best remembered for his Manchester City triumph in 1967–68 with the late Joe Mercer.
He has also managed to win seven cups.
But today there is little hint of Allison's old Champagne Charlie image.
He arrived in the West Country after a long train journey from his Cleveland home to admit that the Fedora, ever-present symbol of Crystal Palace's 1976 FA Cup run, has long since been auctioned off for £1,500 to charity.
Career.
And apart from his three days in tracksuit and boots getting Rovers Bristol fashion, Allison will not be part of the matchday fixtures and fittings at Twerton Park, the tiny ground where his managerial career began 29 years ago with Bath City.
‘When Saturday comes, Dennis is the man in charge,’ he said.
‘If I'm going to watch games, I would be of more use studying the following week's opposition and helping prepare for them.
‘I've been fortunate enough to work with the likes of Joe Mercer and Jack Charlton and I know my place in a football club.
‘Jack used to call me into the office, ask me to sign three letters and then order me back out onto the training pitch because he knew that was my second home.’
Alison has certainly had his uses off the pitch, though…once acting as Terry Venables' sausage courier!
‘When Terry was coaching Barcelona and I went over to visit him, he asked me to bring a few pounds of good old English pork sausages because he was missing his bangers and mash for tea,’ he explained.
A few years later it's chocs away for Rovers' new regime at Wolves on Saturday.
The chocolate bars are on Big Mal if they start with three points.
Beasant wants to stay at top
by Barry Lucas
DAVE BEASANT will reject any attempt by Grimsby to buy him — despite resurrecting his career at the Blundell Park club.
The Chelsea goalkeeper has found a new lease of life at Grimsby since joining them on loan.
But when the loan period expires, Beasant is determined to head back to Stamford Bridge and try to prolong his career in the Premier League.
‘No disrespect to Grimsby — they are a good club and a fine footballing side — but I still believe I have a future at the highest level,’ he said yesterday.
‘I've enjoyed my time here but when my loan period is finished I will be going back to Chelsea.’
Grimsby have remained unbeaten in the three games since the former England keeper arrived.
He followed clean sheets against Newcastle and Portsmouth by turning in a five-star performance in the 1–1 draw against West Ham on Tuesday.
His heroics prompted disappointed Hammers striker Clive Allen to admit: ‘If it hadn't been for him, we would have won.’
Chelsea, meanwhile, are looking at Bournemouth's Vince Bartram to solve their goalkeeper crisis.
Blues manager Ian Porterfield was at Dean Court on Tuesday to spy on the £500,000-rated keeper in action against Brighton.
Bartram, 24, who joined Bournemouth from Wolves last year, has already been the target of a £300,000 bid from Blackburn during the summer.
And Manchester United have taken their former keeper Fraser Digby on a month's loan from Swindon Town as cover for Peter Schmeichel.
Second-choice keeper Gary Walsh went into hospital yesterday for a knee operation and third string Ian Wilkinson is out with a broken wrist.
Americans elect for revenge bid
from Bill Blighton in Madrid
DAVIS LOVE and Fred Couples are looking for a World Cup landslide victory to equal that of new US President Bill Clinton.
Love 'n' Couples do not intend extending the arm of friendship too far in the $1.1 million Philip-Morris sponsored tournament at La Moraleja today.
America's top two golfers — they have won $2.5m between them on the US circuit this season — have been elected favourites for the 32-nation event, and they want to avenge their recent defeat in the Dunhill Cup, when Love, Couples and Tom Kite lost to England in the semi-finals.
‘We are here for a good time, it isn't a crusade, but we want to win,’ said Masters champion Couples.
‘We were the obvious favourites at St Andrews, but England played well to beat us.
I'll be disappointed if we play poorly this time.’
Strong
The US duo arrived in Spain on a private jet from North Carolina, where they played in the US Tour Championship on Sunday, and both have to be back in the States next Monday.
Couples added: ‘One of the reasons we are here is that Davis and I are such good friends.
‘I didn't pick Davis, we chose each other and decided a long time ago that we wanted to play this tournament together.
We should be a strong pair.’
The 32 two-man teams all play four rounds, with the lowest combined total taking the team trophy — and the Americans could well be tackling England again for the honours.
England have Steve Richardson and the dependable David Gilford, two of their triumphant Dunhill Cup team, while Scotland, with Colin Montgomerie and Gordon Brand Jnr, are also well fancied.
Ian Woosnam, who defends the International Trophy awarded to the individual player with the lowest 72-hole score, teams up with Mark Mouland as Wales bid to add to their 1987 triumph.
Christy O'Connor Jnr and Ronan Rafferty are in tandem for the Irish, while Sweden's Anders Forsbrand and Per-Ulrik Johansson defend the team title.
BRITISH CHALLENGERS.
ENGLAND: Steven Richardson, David Gilford.
The Ryder Cup pair proved their ability at medal matchplay with victory in the Dunhill Cup, without the help of Nick Faldo.
Both are playing well and should prove a strong partnership with Richardson's flair for birdies allied to Gilford's skill around the greens.
IRELAND: Ronan Rafferty, Christy O'Connor Jnr.
O'Connor made his World Cup debut in 1974 and Rafferty has made seven appearances.
O'Connor beat Fred Couples in the Dunhill Cup and was third in the Volvo Masters on Sunday, but they will do well to finish among the top three.
SCOTLAND: Colin Montgomerie, Gordon Brand Jnr.
Montgomerie badly wants to finish his season with a win, having been runner-up four times, including the Dunhill Cup team tournament.
Brand has struggled but showed some welcome improvement at Valderrama last week.
WALES: Ian Woosnam, Mark Mouland.
Woosnam is fiercely patriotic and coaxed David Llewellyn to a Welsh World Cup win in 1987.
Woosie wants a record-equalling third individual title, but their team chances could be hampered by erratic Mouland — only one top-10 finish this year.
Crosby riding his luck
by John Wardle
SUNDERLAND manager Malcolm Crosby admits he's on a roundabout — but is determined to hang on to his job.
Defiant Crosby averted the threat of the chop with Tuesday's 2–0 win over Wolves.
The manager who took Sunderland to Wembley six months ago knows that he's still not out of the woods, but he has turned back the clock in a bid to stay in business.
Success Sunderland are adopting the same formation that brought Ipswich success in the 70s, and the results have been encouraging enough to persuade the 37-year-old boss to call off his search for a midfield playmaker.
‘I think we are getting something together and these players deserve another chance,’ he said.
‘There is pressure on me, but too much has been made of that.
‘It's the players who have suffered, but now there are signs that things are on the mend.’
Hirst Turkish delight
by Rob Shepherd
DAVID HIRST can expect to return to the England fold today when Graham Taylor names his party to face Turkey in their second World Cup qualifier in a fortnight.
Hirst, who broke his foot at the start of the season, missed both the games against Spain and Norway.
And although he was forced to sit out Sheffield Wednesday's UEFA Cup tie with Kaiserslauten last night through suspension, Taylor will want him back in the fold.
Hirst was one of the five players named by Taylor after the Norway game as men wanted, as soon as they were available.
Martin Keown, Paul Parker, Rob Jones and John Barnes were the other four.
Both Keown and Parker have since returned for Everton and Manchester United respectively, so they are also likely to be drafted in.
But for Jones, still troubled by injury, and Barnes, yet to make a comeback, it is still too early.
The return of Hirst would intensify the competition for a place in attack as Alan Shearer's partner.
They have only played together for 45 minutes at international level, when Shearer scored on his debut against France nine months ago.
Hirst, who scored in his second appearance on the 1991 tour of Australasia, has not played for the senior side since that Wembley game.
Although Ian Wright will be included and is likely to get another chance, Taylor has yet to be convinced he is the right man to play alongside the Blackburn striker.
A Hirst return, of course, would push Nigel Clough further out of the picture, while Parker's return offers further options in defence, particularly at right-back where Lee Dixon is under pressure.
In addition, while Tony Adams played well against Norway, Keown's availability will be welcomed as he was one of the few successes in the European Champion-ships.
The last of Parker's 17 caps came in an orthodox central defensive role in the defeat by Germany in September last year.
But his ability to play right-back will sharpen Taylor's pleasure at his recovery after a season of injury problems.
But Taylor will unveil few other changes, either in his squad or the actual team.
Criticised for making so many alterations since becoming manager, Taylor is now looking for stability.
Jim jolted
PORTSMOUTH manager Jim Smith was still shell-shocked yesterday after seeing his side throw away a 5–3 lead to draw by conceding two goals in the last minute of a remarkable match at Oxford.
Pompey conceded two goals in the last minute, and Smith admitted: ‘I don't know whether to laugh or cry.
‘We went three goals up away from home, ended up scoring five and we only got a share of the points.
‘I needed a bottle of scotch after that lot, not just a glass!’
‘I've never seen anything like it.
It was a crazy night.’
Barnet threat
TROUBLED Barnet were yesterday threatened with a winding-up order over an unpaid £15,000 bill for replica kit.
Manufacturers DMF Sportswear are in the first year of a three-year deal with Third Division Barnet, who have three weeks to come up with the cash or face High Court action.
‘I regret that we have had to take this step,’ said DMF managing director Neil Friar.
‘But it is a substantial amount of money and we have tried the conventional means of reclaiming it without success.
‘I have not experienced such a serious problem before.’
Give job to psycho
by David Harrison
STUART PEARCE is the man to take over the Nottingham Forest hot seat from Brian Clough.
That is the startling recommendation of former Forest striker Lee Chapman as Cloughie's career in football management draws to a close.
With Forest rooted to the bottom of the Premier League, there is increasing speculation that the time is approaching when they will have to start looking for an alternative to Clough's unique management style.
In his book ‘More than a Match: A Player's Story’(Stanley Paul Pounds 14.99), published yesterday, Leeds striker Chapman, who viewed Clough at close quarters when he was at the City Ground, examines the alternatives.
Valid
And he believes England skipper Pearce, known as Psycho, would be a surprise, but valid candidate.
‘My outside bet for the job was suggested to me by Steve Hodge shortly before I left Forest,’ writes Chapman.
‘At the time, everyone dismissed his theory out of hand.
In the meantime, I have changed my mind.
‘The person in question has proved his powers of leadership, he is a firm favourite with the supporters, and he has shown he can handle the media.
‘Although it may be too early for Stuart Pearce at the present time, he will surely be in contention at some stage in the future.’
Chapman dismisses assistant manager Ronnie Fenton as a suitable contender because he would not receive the full backing of the Forest players.
‘Ron Fenton may seem an obvious choice to an outsider,’ he said, ‘but my inside knowledge tells me he would not be the players' choice.
‘Over the years, too many players have felt let down by him through his strong allegiance to the manager — it is a stigma that will not go away.
‘Archie Gemmill, the reserve team coach, would in many ways provide similarities to Cloughie.
He has been at the club long enough to know its workings inside out and must be a candidate.
‘First team coach Liam O'Kane has always had a good relationship with the players and he, too, would come into contention.
A Gemmill-O'Kane partnership would in many ways be an ideal solution to the managerial position if it becomes vacant.’
But Chapman doubts Forest can ever achieve the same level of success when Clough calls it a day, and he likens their position to the massive void left behind when Don Revie quit Leeds 18 years ago.
Chapman says: ‘I often wonder what will become of Forest when Brian Clough decides to call it a day.
Who will take over, and will the club ever enjoy the success it has enjoyed during the Clough era?
‘The answer to the latter question is that I very much doubt it.
Cloughie has performed miracles with limited resources at his disposal.
There is no doubt he is a one off.
‘But more than this, his domination with every aspect of the club is such that the transition period after his departure could be as painful and prolonged as the one Leeds endured after Don Revie left in 1974.’
Chapman's final advice to Clough is not to linger too long in the job because of the toll it could take upon him.
The much-travelled striker said: ‘He first has to make the decision to retire, and I sincerely hope he does not leave it too late.
The perils of his job are very intense, as recent tragic cases have proved.
‘I am sure that whatever happens he will always be there in a consultative role.
Forest without Clough seems inconceivable.
The choice of his replacement, I am sure, will be influenced by Brian himself.’
Brady blasts back
by Scott McMunn
LIAM BRADY last night hit back at allegations from Borussia Dortmund coach Otmar Hitzfeld that Celtic are ‘violent’.
‘Celtic were over-physical and we have six players injured for our match against Werder Bremen on Saturday,’ said Hitzfield, whose team pitched the Scots out of the UEFA Cup on Tuesday.
‘At times the Scots were violent.’
But Brady countered: ‘It is ridiculous.
We had only one yellow card, Tony Mowbray, while the Germans had three.’
He went on to praise the Germans, adding: ‘They are a quality side and can go on to win the UEFA Cup.
It shows how much technically the Germans are ahead of British football.’
There is no time for Celtic to lick their wounds.
On Saturday they face League leaders Rangers, who are four points ahead of them with a game in hand.
‘There has been much talk that Rangers have the title sewn up but we still have 58 points to play for and that makes it ludicrously premature to suggest that the destination of the title is cut and dried,’ said Brady.
Turner support
WOLVES manager Graham Turner has received a vote of confidence from club chairman Jonathan Hayward following the club's dismal run of seven matches without a win.
With Steve Bull suffering from the worst goalscoring drought of his career and Wolves picking up just three points from a possible 21, Turner faces problems.
But Hayward said: ‘This is no time to panic and there's certainly no pressure on Graham Turner.
‘We're still seventh in the table and in a good position to challenge for promotion.
But the manager knows that he has no money to spend on new players.’
Bull has now failed to score for seven games but Turner said: ‘There is not a striker in the country who has not been through that sort of spell.’
Boks bang in form
by Tony Roche
THE bomb squad and sniffer dogs swept through Welford Road Stadium hours before the South African rugby team's historic return to England after 23 years.
But the only explosions in a convincing 32–9 victory over Midlands at Leicester came via four outstanding tries.
It was compliments all round as the security operators celebrated a virtually+ trouble-free day and Springbok manager John Williams hailed English rugby as ‘the most organised in the world’.
Williams added: ‘We have looked forward to coming here and found English rugby, on and off the field, is the greatest in the world in terms of organisation and attitude.’
Williams was making a thinly-disguised attack on the French authorities who, according to captain Naas Botha, ‘certainly made our stay something of a learning experience’.
Match-wise, Botha admitted: ‘We have to do something ourselves about the number of penalties we are conceding.
If we give away so many against England, I fear Jonathan Webb will not miss them.’
Coral's 7–1 to do the double
Henry Rix
ANOTHER CORAL has been installed as 7–1 favourite to complete a Mackeson Gold Cup double at Cheltenham a week on Saturday.
Trainer David Nicholson yesterday confirmed that the nine-year-old is on course to attempt to emulate Half Free, who gained back-to-back successes in the jump season's first major handicap chase in 1984 and 1985.
Another Coral made an encouraging seasonal debut last month when going down by seven lengths to Tipping Tim at Cheltenham — a race in which he also finished second last year — and is now 11lb better off with that rival.
Promising
Andy Turnell's top weight Katabatic is unlikely to make the line-up after disappointing badly behind Waterloo Boy at Exeter on Tuesday.
If that is the case, the weights would rise by 10lb leaving King's Fountain at the head of the handicap.
Kim Bailey's gelding, a promising runner-up to Remittance Man at Wincanton recently, booked his place for the big race with a satisfactory two mile gallop after racing at Newbury yesterday.
Ladbrokes bet: 7–1 Another Coral, 10–1 Pat's Jester, 12–1 Edberg, Gale Again, King's Fountain & Tipping Tim, 14–1 others.
World Cup on cards
ENGLAND look clear favourites to stage cricket's next World Cup following South Africa's decision to drop out of the bidding.
The Test and County Cricket Board have been working on a detailed financial plan aimed at hosting the competition for the fourth time in 1995.
Three major companies are interested in sponsorship and the TCCB's only rivals will come from the sub-continent where India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka are discussing a joint bid.
Applicants must submit their financial plans by December 1 — in time for the International Cricket Council to make a firm decision by the end of January.
Keen
‘We are very keen to host the competition again and determined our bid to stage it will be acceptable,’ said TCCB chief executive Alan Smith.
‘We have a great deal of experience in managing events of this stature.’
England hosted the first three World Cups in 1975, 79 and 83.
The fourth was jointly staged by India and Pakistan and the fifth, earlier this year, went to Australia and New Zealand.
The sixth World Cup will be the biggest yet with 12 teams taking part.
South Africa pulled out because of a crowded international programme and to host the World Cup would take resources and attention away from their development programme.
Bok with a vengeance
Tony Roche
Midlands 9 S.Africa 32
SOUTH AFRICA's triumphant return to English soil at Welford Road was hewn out of superb defence and secured by flashes of near-forgotten brilliance.
Sadly for the Midlands, Leicester's John Liley endured a nightmare as goal-kicker, his usually reliable right boot missing five out of seven penalties, many of them awarded when the game was balanced on the width of a gum shield.
The Springboks, back after a 23-year absence, trailed in the first minute to one of Liley's two successes.
But once Naas Botha equalised in kind, the tourists edged ahead and were out of sight by the time Danie Gerber scored their fourth try in the last minute.
Prowess
Botha's inclusion, enforced when Hennie Le Roux pulled out with flu, was an unexpected bonus for the 13,000 crowd.
The legendary fly-half exhibited all his renowned prowess with the boot, kicking three conversions, two penalties and hitting the post with an audacious drop goal attempt.
For all their possession, Midlands simply could not find a way through a defence that at times shuddered bones — often those of England's Dean Richards, leading as usual from the front, but this time in vain.
This is not a great Springbok side, indeed sometimes it looks a little short of being good.
But 11 years of being in the international wilderness takes some overhauling and there are definite signs among their young-bloods that tours like this will soon restore pride.
But it was an older blood who really caught the eye.
Gerber, 34, stunned Midlands with his pace and power.
Once one of the greatest centres in the world, Gerber demonstrated all the arts running, handling, tackling, kicking, passing and, as he has done so often, try-scoring.
Gerber has now grabbed four tries in four Tests since the Springboks returned to the international fold against New Zealand in August.
But the Springboks' strength in the scrum will also worry England.
And it must ensure a swift return to England's front row for hooker Brian Moore and tighthead prop Jeff Probyn, who both face South Africa for England B at Bristol on Saturday.
Referee Jim Fleming irritated the crowd with the speed of his whistling, often scorning the possibility of advantage and creating far too many stoppages.
Proud
South Africa can be especially proud of the victory, as their lineout was disrupted by the loss of two key players through injury.
Philip Schutte went off in the 18th minute after a tackle on Aadel Kardooni, and Wahl Bartmann followed in the 32nd minute with a shoulder injury.
Their replacements, Frederick Smit and Piet Pretorius, settled in quickly but it was surprising that Midlands didn't move England's Martin Bayfield from the middle to the front of the lineout, where Drikus Hattingh impressed with a succession of clean two-handed catches.
By the time they worked this out, hooker Willie Hills was finding Adriaan Richter at the back of the lineout and his hands were equally glue-like.
The first try lit up the ground in the 23rd minute and followed two surging drives.
From the second, scrum-half Garth Wright found Botha, whose ball to Gerber led to two superb dummies and an ankle-high pass snapped up by Faffa Knoetze to score behind the posts.
John Steele brought Midlands back to life with a splendid 36th-minute drop goal and just before half-time Liley made it 9–10.
The second half was one-way traffic for long periods — Midlands on a rather misguided rampage, the Springboks showing their physical strength in the tackle.
It became a lost cause in the 66th minute when Wright found Knoetze on the left and this time the centre stepped in to the gap and raced for the line for a second try.
But the best was to come.
With five minutes left, Deon Oosthuysen made ribbons of the Midlands defence on the right after Theo van Rensburg had committed the midfield with a powerful break.
And then in the final minute came the try that brought the crowd to their feet.
It exploded from just inside the Springbok 22 and Oosthuysen raced three-quarters the length of the pitch with Steve Hackney closing on him every second.
As Hackney's tackle connected, a perfect pass found Gerber in support to complete the try.
Liley, the Courage League First Division's leading goalscorer, was left to reflect on his distressing misses from easy positions, but the Boks were buoyant.
Tougher
Only six of the side that began the Test against France last month appeared yesterday, but this mix of first and second teams still ran away against the English divisional champions.
On Saturday they face England B, who will undoubtedly be tougher all-round opposition.
But the South Africans have achieved target No 1 in England — avoiding what many critics believed would be a four-match whitewash.
And they showed they will be far from easy meat for England in Saturday week's Twickenham Test.
Aussies humbled
Mike Allan
Swansea 21, Australia 6:
SALUTE magnificent Swansea.
They not only outplayed world champions Australia, but did so with panache, spirit and skill that will send shock waves throughout the game.
Before the match the Aussies had established such a reputation that people began to believe they were unbeatable.
That myth was ended without argument on an historic afternoon at St Helens.
Swansea have a proud record against tour sides — they beat South Africa 3–0 in 1913, Australia 9–8 in 1966 and New Zealand 11–3 in 1935.
But none of those famous victories matches the significance to Welsh rugby, so long in the doldrums, of this scintillating triumph.
Make no mistake, the Aussies were humbled — or as their shell-shocked coach Bob Dwyer said: ‘We were creamed.’
And he added: ‘I thanked my team for trying hard after the game, but I had to tell them they were outplayed by a better team.
‘It was a comprehensive victory for Swansea.’
Swansea were packed with six of the current Welsh side and set up a mouthwatering revenge mission for the national side on November 21.
And their skipper Stuart Davies said: ‘This win will show the Welsh players that with the right preparation and training, Wales can look forward to a good result against the Australians.’
With Robert Jones and Aled Williams a dominating half-back force, Wales coach Alan Davies will need little prompting about the men he should choose for the Test in two weeks time.
It was Jones who set up Swansea's first try by firing out a quick, decisive pass which Scott Gibbs took on the burst to drive over.
That put Swansea 8–6 in front at half-time, but even then the Aussies couldn't have expected the storm that awaited them in the second half.
Within 12 minutes, Aled Williams had banged over a second penalty goal as a prelude to a tremendous Swansea surge which brought the second try from Jenkins.
Williams' conversion suddenly had the Australians trailing 18–6, a fitting tribute to Swansea's domination.
And, with Tim Kelaher missing two penalty chances which might have brought the Aussies back into the game, victory was sealed two minutes from time when Williams, in his finest hour for the All Whites, fired over a superb drop goal.
Leeds lead Lucas chase
Ray French
LEEDS are expected to lead the chase for Wigan's £150,000 transfer-listed rugby league international Ian Lucas.
Leeds coach Doug Laughton has already lured former Wigan stars Andy Gregory, Andy Goodway and Ellery Hanley from Central Park and now looks set to try to persuade the 17-stone prop to join them at Headingley.
Lucas, 25, who returned home early from Great Britain's summer tour Down Under with concussion, is upset at not gaining a regular place in the Wigan front row.
And he admitted: ‘I have got to consider my future.
When everyone is fit, I'm usually the one sitting on the substitutes' bench.
‘It will be a real wrench to leave the club after eight years but I have got to a stage when I must now look at what is best for my future.’
American revenge bid
Bill Blighton
DAVIS LOVE and Fred Couples are looking for a World Cup landslide victory to equal that of new US President Bill Clinton.
America's top two golfers have been elected favourites for the 32-nation event, and they are determined to avenge their recent defeat in the Dunhill Cup at St Andrews.
Love, Couples and US Open champion Tom Kite were beaten by England in the semi-finals.
And Couples warned: ‘We are here for a good time, but we want to win.
I'll be disappointed if we play poorly this time.’
England have Steve Richardson and David Gilford, two of their triumphant Dunhill Cup team, while Scotland, with Colin Montgomerie and Gordon Brand Jnr, are also well fancied.
Welsh hopes rest with Ian Woosnam and Mark Mouland.
Castle calls it a day
DEFENDING champion Andrew Castle yesterday reached the third round of the Volkswagen National Championships in Telford — then announced he is quitting full-time tennis.
Castle confirmed his retirement after demolishing Norfolk's Ulli Nganga 6–0, 6–2 in just 52 minutes.
Bishop boost
PACEMAN Ian Bishop, returning after a two-year absence with a back injury, took 3–21 yesterday to lead the West Indies to a 28-run one-day victory over Western Australia in Perth.
West Indies made 199 all out and the home side 171 all out.
Owning up
SHOT-PUTTER Craig Watson has admitted testing positive for Clenbuterol at the British Athletics Championships in June.
Athletics Australia kept his identity secret and delayed taking action because of uncertainty over the drug's status.
Deadly Dipak
NEW ZEALAND off-spinner Dipak Patel captured a Test best 6–113 as the Kiwis took a first-innings lead of 106 over Zimbabwe, bowled out for 219 in Bulawayo.
Mark Greatbatch hit 80 not out as they made 163–1 in their second innings.
McEnroe out
BORIS BECKER yesterday beat John McEnroe for the eighth time in 10 meetings.
The ninth seed produced 15 aces in a 6–4, 6–4 Paris Open victory which marked McEnroe's farewell to the French capital.
Poor Parke
SIMON PARKE suffered another first-round exit in the European Squash Open in Kiel, losing 15–13, 15–9, 4–15, 15–9 to England No 4 Philip Whitlock.
Night of anguish for Owls
David Alexander
Sheffield Wed 2 Kaiserslautern 2
SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY'S dreams of European glory this season ended last night — sunk by a German sub.
Wednesday, 3–1 down from the first leg of this UEFA Cup tie, went about their work impressively.
As the Owls entered the last 25 minutes, they needed just one goal to square the tie — and they looked perfectly capable of getting it.
But with the Germans having a torrid time at the back as Wednesday's attacking momentum gained pace, backed by fanatical Hillsborough support, substitute Thomas Zeyer pulled the trigger.
Zeyer had come on as a defender to protect the score when Kaiserslautern levelled at 1–1, but his role changed dramatically when Wednesday immediately hit back to make it 2–1.
It was from a forward position that the defensive midfield player hauled Wednesday below the waterline, turning to drive a low, 25-yard shot just inside the post after 76 minutes.
Wednesday approached a difficult job well and scored two good-looking goals, but the truth is the tie was really lost in Kaiserslautern, where goalscorer David Hirst was sent off in bizarre circumstances.
That much was confirmed afterwards by Wednesday manager Trevor Francis, who said: ‘I thought the game was lost in the 43rd minute in Kaiserslautern, when Hirst was dismissed.
‘I was confident before the game that we would score, even without Hirst.
My one worry was that British teams are all vulnerable to quick counter-attacking.
‘We were caught tonight.
I feel that at 1–0 we gave ourselves a very good chance.
We scored an away goal and then two at home, and I feel perhaps we should have done a bit better.’
The Germans had already demonstrated their pace and accuracy on the break with their first goal after 61 minutes, a vintage solo effort from striker Marcel Witeczek.
The Polish Under-21 international collected the ball on the half-way line and went on a 50-yard run, jinking past Nigel Pearson and Viv Anderson before waltzing round keeper Chris Woods.
That equalised a classic 26th-minute volley from Danny Wallace, which had given Wednesday real hope of clearing the 3–1 first-leg deficit.
And though John Sheridan responded with a delightful curling drive from a 20-yard free-kick to make it 2–1, Zeyer's bombshell came too late to leave Wednesday any hope of being rescued.
Worry
Francis was not totally disconsolate and added: ‘The way our fans came behind us is the best I've ever heard it here, and I hope it continues.
‘The players could not have given any more.
They're really down now, but we've had a little taste of Europe and the best way to get back in is to start winning League games again.
‘I've got to be fair to Kaiserslautern, they did not pull nine men back behind the ball, they had a go at us.’
It was, therefore, a proud Rainer Zobel — the Kaiserslautern coach — who said: ‘My players have done very well to come here and succeed.
‘We knew Wednesday had problems at the back when long balls were played at them, so it came as no surprise when we scored on the break to make it 1–1.’
The Germans quickly showed they had no intention of simply defending their first-leg advantage, the evidence provided by left-back Oliver Schafer.
The man who had the responsibility of marking Chris Waddle managed to get forward throughout the game, the first time after 12 minutes when he stole into the box to rattle the Wednesday woodwork.
Wednesday were twice in trouble in the first half — Woods doing well to tip over a Marcus Marin shot, and Nigel Worthington clearing a Witeczek header off the line.
But the home side did look capable of winning the tie in the second half.
They came closest when stand-in striker Paul Warhurst turned to hit a volley that keeper Michael Serr did well to keep out.
Anderson was booked in the first half for bringing down Marin on a night when the Germans again showed their propensity for going down theatrically under straightforward challenges.
Holders crushed
HOLDERS Barcelona crashed out of the European Cup after squandering a two-goal lead in front of their stunned fans in the Nou Camp Stadium.
The Spanish champions were beaten 3–2 by CSKA Moscow to go out 4–3 on aggregate.
Barcelona went 2–0 up after 31 minutes, but the Russians refused to give in and produced a stunning three goals in 16 minutes to steal the tie.
Strength
AC Milan, European Cup winners in 1989 and 1990, underlined the strength of their challenge this season with a 4–0 win over Slovan Bratislava of Czechoslovakia for a 5–0 aggregate triumph.
But Scottish club Hearts' hopes of a UEFA Cup fightback were cruelly ended in Belgium last night, as they lost 1–0 for a 2–0 aggregate defeat to Standard Liege.
Hearts stormed forward from the start, dominating the first half, only to miss a series of chances.
And Belgium international striker Marc Wilmots made the tie safe when he scored the only goal of the night after 62 minutes.
Rampant Lions roar back
Millwall 4, Bristol C 1
MILLWALL bounced back from Saturday's defeat at Twerton Park, thanks to a blistering four-goal first half burst.
Struggling Bristol City suffered their second humiliation in London in five days, despite creating plenty of chances themselves.
‘It was a strange game,’ said Lions boss Mick McCarthy.
‘It could have been 12–8.
But if nothing else, we're entertaining.
‘It was important to come back after Saturday, and we always want to win at home.
Anything we pick up away is a bonus.’
Victory was assured by the half-hour after skipper Colin Cooper had opened the scoring from close range on 13 minutes.
That was after Andy Cole had wasted a golden opportunity to put City ahead, shooting weakly at Lions keeper Casey Keller.
‘We had enough chances to be in the game,’ claimed Bristol boss Denis Smith, ‘but any team that gets a corner against us is likely to score.’
It was from a corner that Malcolm Allen headed the second after 18 minutes to claim his eighth of the season before Andy May volleyed the third from the edge of the box against his former club.
Jamie Moralee outpaced City defender Russell Osman to make it four on 30 minutes before Andy Cole pulled one back for Bristol from close range just before the break.
The second period saw no addition to the score, mainly thanks to Keith Welch.
The City keeper denied Millwall's new signing John Byrne just before the end, but it was a good debut for the £250,000 signing from Sunderland.
‘I'm pleased with John.
He's come through the game well,’ said McCarthy.
Souness suffers Mersey misery
Des Kelly
Liverpool 0 Spartak Moscow 2
GRAEME SOUNESS sat helpless in the stands as fiery Liverpool were extinguished by the ice-cool professionalism of Spartak Moscow.
The Anfield boss, starting his five-match UEFA ban from the dug-out and dressing room, waved a defiant clenched-fist salute as he took his seat in the directors' box and his team followed his passionate lead.
But it was a night when emotion alone could not carry them through and Souness watched in frustration as his young side's Cup Winners' Cup ambitions were ended with ruthless efficiency by the Russian champions.
Liverpool finally exited in bad-tempered disarray, with Mike Marsh sent off two minutes from time for a dangerous high tackle on Dimitri Radchenko, scorer of Moscow's first goal.
It meant Liverpool collected a red card in each of their last three European ties, following the dismissals of Paul Stewart and Bruce Grobbelaar.
Frenetic
Afterwards, Souness admitted his side were their own worst enemies.
‘They made us chase shadows for long spells but we had to go after this game and that situation was tailor-made for Spartak,’ he said.
‘We had a lot of youngsters out there and we were a bit too fast and frenetic when we had the ball but that's down to inexperience.
‘As far as I'm concerned we lost this game during the closing minutes of the first leg in Moscow when we conceded two late goals.
‘But who knows what would have happened if we had made the early breakthrough tonight?
Perhaps the Russians would have felt the pressure then and not looked so silky on the ball.
‘All credit to them though.
They passed us out of it.’
As the match progressed, it increasingly looked like men against boys as the wily Russians slowed the pace and silenced the Kop.
They succeeded, giving Liverpool a lesson in patience and inflicting the Mersey club's fifth home defeat in European competition.
The atmosphere was hostile enough to make even the sturdiest outfit crumble, with almost 38,000 — the biggest crowd in England this season outside Wembley — turning Anfield into a seething cauldron.
‘You'll Never Walk Alone’ was sung with gusto and flares glowed on the terraces as Liverpool started with barely controlled frenzy.
The Spartak goal was threatened after just 80 seconds as Steve McManaman whipped in a cross and Don Hutchison flashed an instinctive half-volley over the Moscow crossbar.
Moments later David Burrows let fly with a rasping left-foot drive from 20 yards that had goalkeeper Stanislav Cherchesov grasping to touch the ball over.
The venom of Liverpool's first-half tackling tested the resolve of the Russians.
Tempers briefly flared in the 15th minute when Steve Nicol was flattened by Viktor Onopko's blatant lunge, which followed a crunching challenge seconds beforehand.
Mark Wright, restored to the captaincy, squared up to anyone who would listen but the Spartak player was booked, as was Burrows as the melee died.
Moscow did not falter under the onslaught and their counter-attacking potential was a constant threat.
Flair
Souness was also denied the attacking flair of Mark Walters, sidelined with a thigh injury.
But most of the attention was directed towards Mike Hooper, dramatically recalled in place of David James.
The Bristol University graduate, the third-choice keeper until last night, did not put a hand, or foot, wrong and he could do nothing about the Spartak goals.
The hammer blow came in the 62nd minute.
Vladimir Beschastnikh broke clear down the right and 22-year-old Radchenko coolly slotted home his early centre.
And as the Marsh dismissal raged, Spartak compounded Liverpool's agony when Andrei Piatnitski struck the second goal in the closing seconds.
They still had some close escapes, the most important of which came after 49 minutes when midfielder Michael Thomas beat the keeper with his cross-shot only to see the ball come off the foot of a defender on the line.
Ton-up Nelson
Charlton 2, Leicester 0
GARRY NELSON scored twice to go past the 100 League goal mark and move Charlton into third place in the First Division.
After a goal-less first half, the game burst into life with a goal and a sending off inside three minutes.
First, Nelson, a first-half substitute for the injured Kim Grant, gave Charlton the lead in the 46th minute with a close-range header.
Then Leicester's task was made more difficult when skipper Steve Walsh was dismissed for elbowing Carl Leaburn in an off-the-ball incident which left the Charlton striker needing treatment.
Leicester substitute Ian Ormondroyd almost equalised in the 64th minute, but Nelson made it safe with his second in the 77th minute with a low, curling 20-yard shot.
Brock stands firm
Birmingham 2, Newcastle 3
FIRST Division leaders Newcastle returned to winning ways last night, despite losing goalkeeper Tommy Wright at half-time.
Substitute Kevin Brock took over in goal and did enough to protect their 3–2 lead.
The leaders, beaten in their last three games, went in front in the seventh minute through Gavin Peacock, but David Speedie, on loan from Southampton, scored his first goal for Birmingham to level the scores two minutes later.
Newcastle edged ahead again in the 31st minute when defender Kevin Scott hooked home from close range.
The home side equalised once more two minutes later when 17-year-old youth international Graham Potter ran clear before a Trevor Matthewson own goal gave Newcastle victory.
Lights go out for Leeds
Rob Shepherd
Leeds 1 Rangers 2 (Aggregate: 2–4)
THE Battle of Britain is won and now Rangers can march forward onto the continental mainland in search of their own VE Day.
The home fires will be kept burning, as Walter Smith's men pursue their interest in the European Cup on foreign fields in the mini-league stage.
It was an emphatic display by Rangers on a night when the lights went out for all English interest in Europe.
And the depth and quality of their performance suggests that Rangers have the capability of frightening the cream they will now face.
It was entirely appropriate the outcome of this confrontation should reach it's conclusion on the eve of November 5.
For this meeting has always been a bonfire of the vanities — not just an encounter to earn the right to progress further in Europe, but one of national pride.
The champions of England and Scotland, the ‘auld enemy’, were fighting for the right to be acknowledged as champions of Britain.
And just as in the first leg at Ibrox a fortnight ago, there were football fireworks at Elland Road last night.
The game exploded into life very much as it had done in Glasgow.
On that occasion Gary McAllister had silenced a frenzied atmosphere with a stunning volley in the second minute.
Intense
Although the capacity was restricted to 25,000, because of the redevelopment of Leeds' home, the noise and expectancy from the crowd was as intense as it had been at Ibrox.
And so was the silence when, in the third minute, a cracking volley put the away side in command.
Mark Hateley, who squandered an opportunity in the final minute two weeks ago which would have given Rangers a 3–1 lead, made dramatic amends.
Rangers, having just survived a lucky escape, launched their first attack.
Ally McCoist climbed above Chris Fairclough to meet Andy Goram's long clearance.
McCoist's header fell invitingly to Hateley, who was lurking on the edge of the Leeds penalty area.
Without a second thought the 30-year-old former England centre forward met the ball on the full, unleashing a powerful left-foot drive.
You could feel the dismay amongst the Leeds players and their fans as it thundered past John Lukic and into the back of the net, leaving them searching for three goals to progress in the competition.
Spectacular as it looked, however, Lukic — whose terrible error in the first game when he punched into his own goal allowed Rangers back in the tie — must once more shoulder the blame.
Fiercely hit as the shot was, Lukic appeared well positioned to deal with it, but strangely dived underneath the flight rather than extending his arms to meet it.
It was a particularly bitter blow for Leeds, because in the very first minute they should have levelled the tie.
David Rocastle, with his future in doubt, was starting only his second game for the club since his summer move from Arsenal because David Batty failed a fitness test.
Rocastle sent Eric Cantona clear with a fine pass and the Frenchman outpaced John Brown, drew Goram and appeared poised to lob the ball in.
But he hesitated fractionally, giving Brown time to recover and block the effort.
And although it appeared he used his arm to do so, Russian referee Alexei Spirin ignored the appeals for a penalty.
The referee might have been wrong, but Cantona should have buried the chance and, determined as they were, Leeds quickly learned just why in 119 previous matches Rangers had not lost a lead.
The absence of Batty's bite in midfield restricted the space in which McAllister could operate and, with Gordon Strachan deployed on the left, Leeds lacked their most effective shape.
Excellent
They had plenty of pressure, but too many of their attacks were one dimensional, the Rangers defence — inspired by captain Richard Gough — coping comfortably.
And on the occasions they did manage to create openings, they found Goram in outstanding form.
In the first half he twice denied Cantona with excellent saves and shortly into the second he beat out another effort by the Frenchman.
The danger for Leeds was that as they began to over-extend themselves they would become exposed at the back, where they are at their weakest.
In the 36th minute only the alertness of Lukic had prevented McCoist from scoring.
Leeds, however, did not heed that warning, and paid the ultimate price in the 59th minute, when Rangers ensured their passage to the next phase of the competition.
A rapid counter-offensive culminated in Hateley bursting down the left flank.
He spotted McCoist unmarked at the far post, and reached him with a fine cross.
McCoist flung himself at the ball and beat Lukic with a wonderful diving header.
Leeds now needed four goals, and there was no way back for them.
Their night was summed up when, shortly after replacing Rocastle, Rod Wallace saw a close-range effort chipped on to the post by Goram.
Leeds eventually managed to score in the 85th minute, when Cantona pounced on a Lee Chapman nod-down, but by then it was far too late for them to make a miraculous recovery.
But there was no doubt that it was Rangers who deserved to emerge from this memorable encounter as worthy victors.
Geoff Sweet's star ratings
Geoff Sweet
LEEDS
LUKIC Back on form.
Surprised by Hateley blast and slightly iffy at corners
FAIRCLOUGH Outjumped by Durrant for Hateley's goal.
Okay moving forward, but finally taken off 6
DORIGO Brimming with endeavour and confidence.
His surges down the left always posed a threat 8
WHYTE Crucial clearances but rarely got to grips with Hateley or McCoist 6
NEWSOME Reasonable holding job on McCoist but often beaten on blindside
ROCASTLE Picked his men out well, especially Cantona.
Strong, gutsy and whispish.
Substituted as a tactical measure 7
STRACHAN Never beaten in his heart and always penetrating on the ball 8
CANTONA So nearly the hero.
Missed great chances, but pace and shooting power always evident.
Fully deserved his goal 8
CHAPMAN Struggled to keep his feet.
One decent header but otherwise ineffective 5
McALLISTER Occasional decent run but flashed in and out of game 6
SPEED Only threatened to blossom after indifferent start.
Failed to get a grip 6
HODGE Substitute — little impact 6
WALLACE Substitute — couple of menacing shots 6
RANGERS
GORAM Outstanding.
First-half saves denied Cantona a hat-trick and Wallace a ‘certain’ second-half strike 10
McPHERSON Less effective on overlap in this leg 6
ROBERTSON Desperate defending at times but kept his cool 7
GOUGH Master of the back row.
Brave, enterprising and commanding 9
BROWN Read the pressure game well.
Unruffled.
Good man for the trenches
McCALL Header off line crucial in first half, while surging runs and accurate long-range passes made him thorn in Leeds' flesh 8
GORDON Subdued holding job in wide positions that prevented McAllister and Speed beaking more often.
Withdrawn 7
FERGUSON Quietly persuasive.
Mopped up when it mattered and linked effectively with wide men.
Also keen to shoot 7
McCOIST 29th goal of season killed the tie.
Elusive, always an outlet when not in possession.
Nightmare to mark 8
HATELEY Stupendous shot for goal, quickfire and deadly centre for McCoist's header.
This power game right up his street 8
DURRANT Cameo runs, flicks and instinctive passes.
Once again a joy to watch 8
MIKAILICHENKO Substitute — kept team shape 6
Fall Guys
Ben Bacon
English clubs suffer triple knockout blow.
IT NEEDED a firework display last night by all three English sides battling to stay in Europe — but it all turned out as a damp squib.
Leeds, Liverpool and Sheffield Wednesday failed to come from behind and overturn first-leg deficits.
But Rangers, after their 2–1 European Cup triumph at Elland Road, proved that the best of Scotland is indeed the best of British.
They are the only British side left in Europe after Englishman Mark Hateley and lethal Scot Ally McCoist KO'd Leeds with the goals which gave Rangers a 4–2 second-round aggregate win.
Liverpool went out in disgrace, Mike Marsh becoming their third player to be sent off in four Cup-Winners' Cup ties this season as Spartak Moscow won a cold war at Anfield that also produced five bookings.
Marsh was dismissed with three minutes to go for a late challenge on Dimitr Radchenko, scorer of Spartak's first goal, in their 2–0 success which made it 6–2 on aggregate.
Wednesday, meanwhile, went down 5–3 over their two ties with Kaiserslautern after the 2–2 draw at Hillsborough.
Leeds, producing another inspired display in an enthralling match, were denied by exceptional goalkeeping from Andy Goram.
And with Hateley scoring the goal of his career after only three minutes — a stunning, driven volley from almost 25 yards — they were left to reflect on a £5 million jackpot that will now be Rangers' in the mini-league section.
Manager Howard Wilkinson said: ‘To say I am very disappointed is a bit of an understatement.
The first goal was definitely the killer, because after that it felt like we were carrying a one-ton weight up a down escalator.
‘We hadn't even got plan A into operation when Hateley scored.
It was then a case of forget plan B, C and D. Try X.
‘It's not the most painful defeat of my Leeds management, because I know that we performed and lost.
Even I was amazed at how we kept going, especially towards the end.
‘In virtually every respect, I can't see how they could have done better.’
After McCoist's spectacular diving header, Eric Cantona finally beat Goram — in the 85th minute but it was all too late.
And as the Rangers coach prepared to pull away from Elland Road with Tina Turner's ‘Simply the Best’ blasting out of its sound system, Hateley said: ‘It was a great result and one of the best goals of my career.
‘But I've scored a lot of great goals in my time.’
With Liverpool manager Graeme Souness starting a five-match UEFA touchline ban for abusing the referee in the first leg, their 1992 European campaign has produced a catalogue of disasters for a club once feared across the continent.
Souness said: ‘I thought the referee was very disappointing’, but he refused to elaborate on Marsh's dismissal.
‘We made it difficult for ourselves, but we needed to get the early breakthrough,’ he added.
Spartak coach Oleg Ivanovic Romantsev said: ‘The happiness will come later when this achievement sinks in.
It is a great victory over one of the most famous clubs in Europe.’
He added: ‘Now we intend to win the European Cup.’
Wednesday had David Hirst sent off in their 3–1 UEFA Cup reverse in Kaiserslautern a fortnight ago and manager Trevor Francis said: ‘We felt unjustly treated after the first game, but tonight it was very fair and they deserved to go through.
We lost the tie when Hirst was sent off.
‘We got the two goals back, but you have to stop them at the other end as well.
‘We scored an away goal and two at home and I feel we should have done a bit better.
The players are down but they could not have given any more.’
Vikings rule
MINNESOTA VIKINGS beat NFL rivals Chicago Bears 38–10 to take command of the NFC Central division with a 6–2 record.
Linebacker Jack Del Rio had two interceptions, including an 84-yard touchdown, as the Bears dropped to 4–4.
Kev opens door for Quinn exit
By John Wardle
MICK QUINN could be ready to stamp his own exit visa at Newcastle after being axed from the squad for tonight's test at Birmingham.
Boss Kevin Keegan is not pushing the 30-year-old striker out of the door, but he is unlikely to stand in the way if Quinn decides he wants to leave.
Quinn opted to stay behind and train after being told he wouldn't be in the side or on the bench at St Andrews.
‘He is sick and I can understand that,’ said Keegan, who only a few weeks ago described Quinn as ‘the best finisher in football’.
during a run of five goals in five games.
‘I have to make decisions and look at what I have got.
‘I didn't want him travelling down thinking he was playing.
I gave him the option to come but explained that he wouldn't be involved.
It was his decision to stay.’
Admitted Keegan: ‘It is in everybody's interests to reduce squad numbers a bit.
‘But I am under no pressure to sell and I haven't had a phone call for any player — Mick Quinn included.’
Upset Quinn, unavailable for comment even though Keegan gave him permission to talk to the press, will now consider his future.
Keegan, meanwhile, has kept faith with defender Steve Howey and handed a vote of confidence to the rest of his promotion-chasers after a run of three defeats.
that knocked the gloss off the club's dynamic start to the season.
Howey took the blame for one of the goals in Saturday's setback at Leicester, but Keegan insisted: ‘I don't see any reason to make big changes.
‘Howey made one mistake, but he has had a tremendous season so far and I have no need to worry about him.
His class will come through.’
Despite their mini-slump, Newcastle left Tyneside nursing a six-point lead at the top of the First Division.
And Keegan pledged: ‘We won't change anything.
We have one way of playing and we'll stay with it.
Over the season it will be good enough to get us out of this division provided we stick together.
‘We have to start being meaner at the back.
‘But the players must keep believing in themselves.
I believe in them and they mustn't start thinking it has gone.’
Robert Lee will return to the side if he passes a late fitness test.
Meanwhile, David Speedie puts himself in the shop window at St Andrews tonight.
The volatile Scot, currently on a month's loan to Birmingham City after being transfer-listed by Southampton, lines up against Newcastle with an eye on a move back into the Premier League.
Keegan will have unhappy recent memories of Speedie who scored a hat-trick for Blackburn against United early in the manager's reign at St James Park.
After three straight defeats against Grimsby, Chelsea and Leicester City, Newcastle will have to be on their guard against danger man Speedie.
Speedie has yet to score a goal this season and believes if he can break his duck tonight the offers might come flooding in.
He said: ‘Newcastle are a good side and I'll be doing my best to get a goal against them.
I've nothing at all to prove.
‘My record speaks for itself.
It's just a question of which clubs can afford me.
‘I'm prepared to listen to anyone and still think I can do a good job in the Premier League.
I'm open to offers.’
Yen for Terry
Ben Bacon
TERRY BUTCHER is wanted by Japan's leading clubs…as a manager.
The former England centre-half has been targeted after conducting a hugely successful coaching clinic in Japan during the summer.
With the League due to start next year, Gary Lineker has already signed a multi-million pound deal to play for Nagoya Grampus Eight.
And now Butcher is set to be the first big name to move into management.
Butcher, 34 next month, is under contract for the rest of the season with First Division Sunderland but the Japanese are confident it won't be a problem.
A friend of Butcher's, who has strong football links with Japan, said last night: ‘He is very popular over there and they are keen to strengthen the coaching side of their game.
‘It's all very well having top foreign players but they also want coaches to help develop their local talent.’
Frain to remain
JOHN FRAIN, the left-back Birmingham City almost sold last week, is to be awarded a lucrative new contract at St Andrews.
Frain should have joined Sunderland for £350,000 but the move collapsed when Birmingham chairman Samesh Kumar demanded a clause be inserted in the deal that would give Birmingham 25 per cent of any sell-on fee.
After talks with Kumar and Birmingham manager Terry Cooper, Frain will now be offered a new three-year contract.
Spanish surprise as Irwin wins call
By Tony Kell
MANCHESTER UNITED'S Denis Irwin is a surprise inclusion in the 21-man Republic of Ireland squad for the World Cup qualifying tie against Spain in Seville on November 18 — thanks to a plea from Old Trafford boss Alex Ferguson.
Defender Irwin suffered a hamstring injury a week ago and only started training again on Monday.
But Ferguson informed Republic of Ireland boss Jack Charlton: ‘Denis is doing everything in his power to get fit.
He badly wants to play against Spain.’
Ruled out of the squad at the moment, however, are Liverpool's Ronnie Whelan, Sheffield Wednesday's John Sheridan and Tommy Coyne of Celtic.
Manager Charlton will monitor the progress and fitness of his three injured players before deciding whether to add them to his squad at a later date.
Middlesbrough skipper Alan Kernaghan has a one-match ban and long-term injuries keep out Milwall player-manager and former skipper Mick McCarthy and Chelsea striker Tony Cascarino.
John Byrne, who missed last month's scoreless draw with European champions Denmark in Copenhagen because of injury, is recalled after his recent £250,000 transfer from Sunderland to Millwall.
Squad: Bonner (Celtic), Peyton (Brentford), Irwin (Man Utd), Morris (Middlesbrough), McGrath (Aston Villa), Moran (Blackburn), O'Leary (Arsenal), Phelan (Man City), Staunton (Aston Villa), Houghton (Aston Villa), McLoughlin (Portsmouth), Keane (Nottm Forest), Townsend (Chelsea), McGoldrick (Crystal Palace), Byrne (Millwall), O'Brien (Newcastle), Aldridge (Tranmere), Quinn (Man City), Kelly (Newcastle), Slaven (Middlesbrough), Sheedy (Newcastle).
‘Reckless’ Saunders under fire
By Ben Bacon
THE solicitor representing Paul Elliott last night described Dean Saunders' career-threatening tackle as a ‘two-footed jump’ at his client.
And John Stitt  allegedinsisted other top professionals — past and present — agree with his verdict.: ‘It was nasty and dangerous.
It wasn't a tackle but a two-footed jump at him.
‘There could be a severe claim because no-one's certain when Elliott will get back playing again.
‘No one knows the long term result on his health, although we think he will get back.
‘However, the surgeon says even he's still uncertain.’
Stitt added: ‘We have two videos of it from the BBC and Sky and have shown them to professional people who think it's a horrible tackle.
‘I wouldn't describe it as an assault but it was certainly reckless and dangerous play.
‘I'm surprised the match referee has come out and said he was right to give the free-kick to Saunders because, in his opinion, it was dangerous play by Elliott.
It seems to me he's trying to play judge and jury.’
Pursue
Elliott, reluctant to comment publicly, and Stitt will decide by the end of the month whether to pursue the matter through the courts.
Liverpool have acknowledged receipt of their letter in which they hold Saunders responsible for dangerous play.
Saunders, now at Villa, has yet to put his side of the case.
David Pleat has turned down the chance to control his own destiny at crisis-club Luton.
The former Spurs manager has rejected an offer to become a joint owner of the Bedfordshire club.
Pleat had the chance to follow the same path trod by Terry Venables at Tottenham but couldn't come up with the necessary funds for a stake in the struggling First Division outfit.
Managing Director David Kohler, who owns a substantial part of the club, offered Pleat the opportunity to come in with him as a partner.
Kohler said: ‘I offered David the chance to come in with me in a partnership but unfortunately he couldn't come up with the necessary amount.’
Parties interested in buying the club include a consortium involving Barry Fry, the Barnet manager, and one headed by Keith Haslam, son of former Luton boss Harry.
Meanwhile, confusion reigned at Barnet yesterday just as the club seemed to have got over its recent problems.
Fry claimed the payment fiasco had not been resolved — but captain Duncan Horton, the club's PFA representative, insisted there was no problem.
A players' strike was averted only after a top-level six-hour meeting last week, but Fry revealed some players were still not happy with their pay-slips, allegedly short of £60.
He said: ‘They received their first proper wage slips on Saturday and half the players were not pleased.
‘But a meeting has been arranged and hopefully the accountants can clear it up.’
But Horton insisted: ‘There's no problem.
The Football League accountant told us it would take two or three weeks for the proper tax codes to be sorted out.
‘The players who are short are probably on emergency codes but they'll get the money back.’
Big Mal is back
MALCOLM ALLISON is to help Bristol Rovers' First Division survival fight.
Allison will be assisting manager Denis Rofe on a consultancy basis from later this week, returning to the Twerton Park ground where he began his managerial career 29 years ago with Bath City.
Since then he has been in charge at Plymouth, Crystal Palace, Manchester City and Middlesbrough as well as managing abroad.
His last post was with non-League Fisher.
‘Malcolm may be coming in for a couple of days each week,’ said Rofe.
‘A fresh face for the players and some new ideas might do us a lot of good.’
Rovers, meanwhile, are trying to persuade on-loan central defender Kevin Moore to join them permanently from Southampton.
Super stopper
Rob Shepherd
THE Football Association last night insisted they would block any moves to form an official British Super League or Cup.
The tremendous interest generated by the ‘Battle of Britain’ European Cup saga between Leeds and Rangers, which reaches its conclusion tonight, has resurrected the notion.
But the FA are acutely aware that any such union would jeopardise the international identity of the Home Countries.
FA chief executive Graham Kelly said last night: ‘Already there are members of FIFA who believe there should only be one team from the British Isles competing in the World Cup and European Championship.
‘Anything like an official competition involving English and Scottish clubs would strengthen their case for a Great Britain team, at the expense of England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
‘The political situation in FIFA, at the moment, is such that we have to be very careful of not seeing the majority move towards that idea.’
Mark's vow
By Des Kelly
MARK WALTERS, the match-winner in Liverpool's last great European fightback, predicts they could repeat the feat tonight.
Graeme Souness's men must recover from a 4–2 first-leg Cup Winners' Cup defeat against Russian champions Spartak Moscow in front of a sell-out 38,000 Anfield crowd.
Walters scored the vital third goal against French side Auxerre to seal a stunning UEFA Cup triumph a year ago this week.
And the former Rangers and Aston Villa winger said: ‘We've come back from this kind of position before and we are optimistic we can get a result.
‘Spartak have a lot of international players with pace but they are not a perfect team by any means.
‘Their reputation is built on the fact that they are a counter-attacking side and we have got to be careful.
But with the crowd behind us, I'm sure we can exploit their problems and beat them.’
Banned Maguire misses Mackeson
By Henry Rix
YOUNG riding sensation Adrian Maguire will miss Cheltenham's prestige Mackeson Gold Cup meeting after picking up a four-day whip ban at Wincanton yesterday.
Maguire, who has rocketed to stardom in the last 18 months, was punished for incorrect use of the whip on Playing Truant, short head winner of the Hopeful Novices' Hurdle.
His ban, which begins on November 14, means that he misses the Mackeson Gold Cup and the first Sunday National Hunt fixture.
Maguire, who struck Playing Truant 14 times, had been expecting to ride the Richard Lee-trained Space Fair in the Mackeson.
Hitting the Wright note
Mike Walters
WHOEVER judged the inflatable sumo wrestling bout at half-time must have been from the WBO.
Oochi Koochi Kendo, representing Crystal Palace, benefited from a home-town decision…
Arsenal's Tiki Taki Tojo was robbed.
The dancing girls needed thermals, Bart Simpson was man-of-the-pre-match and Ian Wright competed with the crew from Fantastic Fireworks for the title of Britain's premier firepower.
This is soccer, BSkyB-style, more of a circus than a ‘Whole new ball game’.
Their decision to screen live matches regularly on Monday nights was greeted with a mixture of sour grapes and shrewish dismay.
But like it or not, the beginning of the week may never be the same.
Sky are determined to disprove the hackneyed managerial cliche that ‘it's all about 90 minutes’ with a variety show that goes far beyond 22 men and a ball.
Holocaust
Head of Sport Dave Hill stood at Selhurst Park on Monday night, deafened by wolf-whistles and dinner invitations aimed at the dancing Sky Strikers, and remarked: ‘The punters hate it, don't they?’
The fireworks — £3,000 worth of them go up in 60 seconds on the final whistle — have been dubbed ‘a pyrotechnic holocaust’ by killjoy critics.
But fans say: the mortar the merrier!
It's an explosive climax to a day that begins with the 65-strong Sky crew, 40 technical staff and a 25-man production team, parking their giant mobile studios outside the stadium at first light.
Before kick-off, 30km of cables are laid, 15 cameras positioned and a 36,000-watt sound system installed.
Four hours before the programme goes on air, presenter Richard Keys and analyst Andy Gray rehearse in the temporary studio behind one goal.
And as dusk falls, match commentator Ian Darke arrives armed with encyclopaedic facts and anecdotes about each player.
Gray, a barnstorming centre-forward in his day, is equally fearless as a commentator.
If the truth hurts, so be it.
‘If the game is poor, I'm not going to try to pull the wool over anyone's eyes,’ he vows.
Wright's winner against his old club needed no hyperbole and was arguably THE highlight of a soccer-saturated weekend when Sky's £304 million alliance with the BBC clearly came top of the entertainment stakes, if not the viewing figures.
Match of the Day, featuring the smooth Des Lynam and even smoother Alan Hansen, averages 4.32 million viewers for its Premier League highlights and goals package on Saturday nights.
Channel 4's Italian soccer coverage on Sunday afternoons attracts around 2.5 million a week.
ITV's viewing figures are low because their First Division games are screened only in certain regions — but their choice last Sunday, Charlton's goal-less draw with Birmingham, was a turn-off.
And Sky are claiming 800,000 viewers for each live Premier League match after spreading their coverage evenly among the elite instead of the so-called Big Five.
Sky Head of Football Vic Wakeling admits: ‘There is scope for improvement.
But we are only 20 games into a contract which covers 300.’
And Hill adds: ‘This time next year, fans will come to expect the sort of entertainment we provide at every match.
They will feel naked without it.’
I'm just a money making machine
Roy Collins
THE HOME town of Dylan Thomas seemed an ideal setting for David Campese's own poetic genius.
But Campese's talent stayed zipped in his tracksuit at Swansea on Wednesday as Australia's rugby World Cup winners suffered prosaic defeat.
If it was a day of moody magnificence that would have inspired Thomas — coal-black skies, lashing rain, swirling winds — some would say it wasn't one suited to the Wallaby winger's high-summer skills.
Then again, is there any day in rugby that couldn't be brightened by the sunshine talent of Campese, rugby union's first superstar and a man with a sidestep to match Fred Astaire's?
As someone once said: he's the sort of player you cheer when he scores a try against your side.
Brain
In a game that's becoming the ultimate team sport, rivalling American football in the search for statistical truths, Campese seems increasingly to operate on a track of his own, to his own individual creed.
Part of this may be because, as World Cup-winning captain Nick Farr-Jones says: ‘He's the sort of player whose brain doesn't always know where his legs are carrying him.’
Sadly, they won't carry him on one of his exciting runs to the tryline in the next eight days of Australia's Welsh tour because he sprained an ankle at training.
If Campese misses the Wales Test at Cardiff Arms Park on November 22, he may find consolation in the ad men who drew up the match posters being left with more egg on their faces than those who dreamed up George Bush's ‘four more years’ slogan.
The poster shows Campese arrested in full flight by the tail of a pursuing red dragon, with the caption: ‘Capture the magic of the wizards of Oz’.
Campese, also featured on a poster in South Africa next to the words ‘Come and see a Wallaby skinned’, is incensed.
And not just because he's affronted at the idea of a dragon beating him over 100 metres.
He says: ‘I didn't know anything about the posters and I'm pretty upset.
‘When I wanted to produce a special jumper to commemorate my 50th Test try, with the emblems of all the countries I'd scored against, I was told I'd have to pay royalties for using them.
‘Yet no-one thinks to ask me about this.
Worse still, everyone will think I'm making money from it, which I'm not.’
Campese is not so much dragon as dinosaur in a world of rugby that has been usurped by believers in forward power, physical prowess and the art of containment.
In a game of increasing thunder, he's a welcome fork of lightning, sometimes appearing to thrive in spite of team-mates rather than because of them.
He could be described as the George Best of rugby except that his fame is confined, outside of Australia, mainly to those who follow his sport, rather than Best's.
Soccer superstar Best is still recognised throughout the world.
Even in Italy, where Campese plays for the other Milan club owned by multi-millionaire Silvia Berlusconi — AC Milan having slightly more kudos — Campese can walk around freely.
Sacrifice
Campese, definitely unlike Best, says he wouldn't know how to chat up a girl, though Best didn't have to do much chatting.
And Shannon, Campese's girlfriend of 12 months, gave him a Dear David phone call two weeks ago.
‘I was hoping it would have developed into a serious relationship,’ he says, a line Best will recognise.
‘But I don't know where I'm heading most of the time and there just wasn't time to be together.
‘If you choose to play sport at this level, friends and relationships are among the things you must sacrifice.’
Campese, scorer of a record 51 Test tries, the most recent against Ireland last weekend, had second thoughts about taking his World Cup winners' medal into retirement, despite his claim that rugby players are running themselves into the ground.
He describes the tour of Wales as ‘a joke’, not meant as a jibe at the opposition but at Australian officials for keeping them on a whistle stop that would daunt American tourists.
‘We're just money-making machines,’ he says, ‘though I don't know who for.’
But Campese admits to achieving millionaire status five years and about 20 tries ago.
Having taken better care of it than Besty, or more accurately Besty's hangers on, he invested some of it in a Sydney sports shop a few months ago, which he'll run when he retires.
For someone who is never less than outspoken — he even insulted the Irish last week and says if he was subjected to a Will Carling team talk he'd fall asleep — Campese can be genuinely modest about his achievements.
He has been known to refuse autographs by pleading that he's nothing special and really doesn't warrant such attention.
The doctrine he has carried through his career that if you don't enjoy it, there's no point bothering, can easily be misconstrued as arrogance.
‘I get most of the attention but I don't go out thinking what I'm going to do, what headlines I'm going to make.
‘I can't do anything if the team doesn't do things for me.’
His attitude of carefreeness is also misleading.
‘In Swansea, I heard a chant I hadn't heard for a while: ‘Who beat the Wallabies?’
‘It's not something I like.
Faults
‘It has taken a long 10 years' work to get Australia to where we are now yet it can disappear so quickly.
‘Sometimes, now, we lose focus and assume we're going to win.’
Campese admits faults of his own, mainly that he talks too much and occasionally, though this he would admit only under threat of being lectured by Carling, out of turn.
If he looked bored and cold and ready to quit in Swansea the other night, he'll carry on running into places his own brain can't conceive until his genius leaves him.
The passage of his life, like some of his glorious tries, seems a case of serendipity.
‘I never set out to be famous, to set records, to do anything particular.
It's just happened.
‘I've had my tough times, too.
‘And I guess that a player like me is loved by one half of the fans and hated by the other half.
‘But life is not meant to be easy.’
£10m Nigel
From Frank Ward
NIGEL MANSELL'S new IndyCar team have placed a £10 million price tag on their star signing amid renewed attempts to persuade the Briton to remain in Formula One.
Williams-Renault are reported to have approached Mansell's new Paul Newman-Carl Haas Indy team with a view to buying out his contract on the eve of qualifying for this weekend's Australian Grand Prix in Adelaide.
Grand Prix chiefs are worried world champion Mansell's impending departure, coupled with the possible loss of Brazilian star Ayrton Senna, will herald a dramatic slump in F1.
Disenchanted Senna echoed those fears yesterday, insisting: ‘If we both go together, it will be a tremendous loss.’
UEFA plans Cup boost
NEXT season's UEFA Cup competition may be boosted from 64 clubs to 96, European football's ruling body revealed yesterday.
UEFA is considering the change due to political changes in Europe which have created several new countries.
Jim fixes it
TOP-SEEDED Jim Courier fought off 13 aces from 1991 Wimbledon singles champion Michael Stich to beat the powerful German 7–6, 6–1 and reach the quarter-finals of the Paris Open yesterday.
Jones joy
HULL'S Welsh prop Mark Jones, sent off last weekend for striking Warrington's Gary Tees, has escaped a ban after a disciplinary hearing in Leeds.
Jones's dismissal was deemed sufficient punishment.
Petchey pasted
MARK PETCHEY, the third seed, crashed out of the Volkswagen National Championships yesterday when he was crushed 6–2, 6–2 by Davis Cup team-mate Neil Broad in their third round match.
Rangers victory over cynics
By Mike Crouch
WITH a single goal to score to put them into the next round of the European Cup, only Scots south of the border doubted Leeds United's ability to conclude the issue in their favour.
The English were in for a shock.
Ibrox had not been a Glaswegian one-night stand.
Rangers are a team of substance, skill, verve and resilience.
To see them annihilate all-comers in the Scottish League only serves to confirm our prejudices about the infirmity of their national football.
Scotland has been in the doldrums of international competition for years, only able to raise its game in occasional moments of glorious defeat as in the last European Championship.
The worm is turning.
Rangers are winning matches because, from front to back, they are a side capable of beating the strong, not because they are regularly matched against the weak.
Over the two legs of the Leeds tie Mark Hateley, the Geronimo of their attack, and Ally McCoist, the cheeky assassin, made Lee Chapman, so poor on the ground, and Eric Cantona look like powder puffs in comparison.
Midfielder Ian Durrant would not look out of place at AC Milan and will have Italian scouts drooling before the competition is over.
Richard Gough is unmatched by any current English central defender and Spurs must still be cursing the day they let him go.
And the anticipation, handling and shot-stopping of Andy Goram demonstrated that the validity of those crowing remarks about Scottish goalkeepers vanished along with Jim Leighton.
Rangers are a well-balanced demolition squad.
In Leeds United they were facing one of the top three English sides playing at the pinnacle of their powers.
Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson admitted as much.
What he did not point out was that his own two best players, Gary McAllister and Gordon Strachan, are Scottish.
In the time-honoured phraseology of football managers, there are no easy matches against the Scots any more.
Double fault
By Mike Crouch
THOSE who fondly believed British tennis could get no worse have again been proved wrong.
Not for the first time Annabel Croft is responsible.
In the past she has often been the butt of uncomplimentary remarks herself but this time it is not her performance which should be belittled.
After all, she was returning to competition for the first time in five years.
Annabel, who always excited more by her appearance than her standard of play, knew she would soon be going to the ball as Cinderella and she was only playing in the National Championships on a whim.
She may have been totally unprepared but she still managed to win her first round match quite comfortably.
Somehow a professional, presumably the beneficiary of full-time coaching and training, contrived to lose to her.
Annabel did let slip that the first thing she had done when she packed up tennis as a career was to lose weight.
Others would also benefit from taking a good look in the mirror.
Florida failure par for course
By Mike Crouch
EVEN poor old Lester's horrendous fall on Mr Brooks could not obscure that other disaster, the woeful performance of European horses in Florida at the weekend.
Thirty of them made the trip to Gulfstream Park and the best they could manage was one Irish and one French third place, both well beaten.
The only signal that the others were there at all was the dropping jaw of Brough Scott.
By the last race his face was so long viewers must have been rushing to adjust their sets.
However, the performance was not untypical.
Clear
Over a period of nine years it has become clear that the breeders referred to in the cup of that name do not include those operating on this side of the pond.
This is the record: ENGLAND: 2 winners, 7 placed out of 62 runners
IRELAND: 1 winner, 1 placed from 12 runners
FRANCE: 7 winners, 9 placed from 57 runners
Only the French can claim anything like a faintly reasonable return when our champions meet the best of the rest.
Admittedly, conditions at Gulfstream were heavily stacked in favour of the Americans, who are more accustomed to the heat and humidity, the dirt and the tight tracks.
In addition, a wintry spell before the Cesarewitch was prompting our runners to start donning their winter coats before they set off.
Blast
They are said to have worked pretty well in the morning before the full blast of Florida's finest struck their backs.
Unfortunately, some of their riders then did them no favours whatsoever by steering for the rail and getting them penned in the pack.
All of this suggests that our owners and trainers need to provide much better — and probably longer — preparation if they are really intent on bringing home the richest prizes in their sport.
As it is, our reputation is sinking fast in the west.
Mac's back
David Tossell
JIM McMAHON, one of the NFL's most colourful characters, is back in the spotlight after the Philadelphia Eagles' decision to drop quarterback Randall Cunningham, writes David Tossell.
Coach Rich Kotite has chosen McMahon's winning knack over Cunningham's unpredictability to get the Eagles flying against the Los Angeles Raiders after losing three out of four games.
A Super Bowl winner with the Chicago Bears seven years ago, McMahon's won-lost record of 58–25 over his 11-year career is bettered only by Joe Montana and Mark Rypien.
Sunday: LA Raiders at Philadelphia; Dallas at Detroit; New Orleans at New England; Cleveland at Houston; Green Bay at NY Giants; Miami at Indianapolis; Minnesota at Tampa; Pittsburgh at Buffalo; Washington at Seattle; NY Jets at Denver; San Diego at Kansas City; Phoenix at LA Rams; Cincinnati at Chicago.
Monday: San Francisco at Atlanta.
Old English in struggle
ENGLAND, including forwards Steve Brain, Mike Rafter and Bob Hesford, struggled to overcome host nation Bermuda 39–24 in the first round of the World Rugby Classic tournament for ex-internationals over 33 years old.
Leading role
WIDNES and former Wales union star Jonathan Davies will lead the Welsh rugby league team against England at Swansea on November 27 — if he proves his fitness this weekend against Ryedale York.
Hooper hopeful
By Des Kelly
MIKE HOOPER is hoping his surprise European Cup Winners' Cup call-up on Wednesday night is not just a flash in the pan.
And he hopes to retain his place in tomorrow's Premier League meeting with Middlesbrough ahead of Bruce Grobbelaar and David James.
‘I started this year as number three and now I've played the biggest game of the season so far,’ he said.
‘If I keep my place on Saturday it is up to me to show composure and stability at the back.
‘I don't think I did anything wrong on Wednesday night and I was quite pleased with my own performance, but it falls a bit flat because we were beaten.
‘I enjoyed the atmosphere but I wish it would happen more often.’
Hirst aims to impress
David Alexander
DAVID HIRST will be back for Sheffield Wednesday on Sunday, hoping to reinforce his claim to a place in the next England squad.
Hirst was left out of the party for Turkey yesterday, though he has scored seven goals in nine games this season.
The 24-year-old was suspended for the game against Kaiserslautern at Hillsborough — and badly missed.
Now Wednesday are hoping Hirst and Mark Bright will spearhead a challenge for a place in Europe again, starting in Sunday's derby against Sheffield United.
United 'keeper Simon Tracey is ruled out after dislocating a shoulder.
Giggs return boosts Welsh
Tom Lyons
MANCHESTER UNITED winger Ryan Giggs is back in Wales' World Cup squad to play Group Four leaders Belgium in Brussels on November 18.
Giggs missed the 1–0 World Cup victory over Cyprus and manager Terry Yorath admitted: ‘We are all looking forward to Ryan's return.
I'm hoping he will be able to play.
‘Belgium have won all their four games so far and we need to come away with a share of the spoils.’
SQUAD: Southall, Roberts, Bowen, Phillips, Coleman, Young, Melville, Symons, Blackmore, Giggs, Hughes, Rush, Saunders, Speed, Horne, Pembridge.
Rovers raid
BRISTOL ROVERS began their fight for First Division survival yesterday by signing QPR's Andy Tillson and Gary Waddock for nearly £500,000.
Central defender Tillson, 24, was valued at £370,000, a new club record fee for Rovers.
Midfielder Waddock, 30, was rated at £100,000.
Meanwhile, Crystal Palace striker David Whyte faces a knee operation and a five-month lay-off.
Bring on the best
By Rob Shepherd
WHEN you are known as Attila, the prospect of rampaging through Europe holds no fears.
And Mark Hateley, so named during his days in Italian football, believes Rangers are more than capable of taking on Europe's best now they have reached the mini-league stage of the Champions Cup.
Indeed, Hateley is confident that the Scottish champions, buoyant after the way in which they disposed of English champions Leeds, can lick the continent's cream.
Rangers will today discover which of the other teams — AC Milan, Marseille, Porto, Bruges, PSV Eindhoven, CSKA Moscow and Gothenburg — will join them in their four-team section of the mini-league stage, with the winners of each group facing each other in the final.
Even the prospect of taking on Milan, for whom Hateley played between 1984 and 1987, does not concern the 30-year-old former England striker, despite the Italian club's billing as the clear favourites.
Milan are being described as Europe's dream team, with comparisons being drawn with the great Real Madrid and Ajax teams.
Hateley says: ‘We have reached the prestige stage of the tournament, but the prestige of Rangers already speaks for itself.
‘We see ourself as the biggest club in Britain, with a stadium to match, and we feel we are among the top five clubs in Europe.
‘Now we have the opportunity to show it, and I think we are more than capable of doing so.
‘A lot of people down south were suggesting before our matches against Leeds that we were not up to it, but I think we've done more than enough to show that we are.
‘None of the clubs left in the competition will relish the prospect of coming to Ibrox, where they will face an awesome atmosphere with 45,000 fans breathing down their necks — even Milan won't fancy that.
‘But we won't just be relying on home advantage and the passion our supporters generate.
In many ways, we play our best football away from home because the responsibility and pressure on us to take the game to the opposition is not so great.
‘That was evident in our performance at Elland Road, where we produced a display of controlled football.
We were strong at the back, and had the capability in midfield to launch attacks on the counter.
And I certainly believe my partnership with Ally McCoist can pose problems for even the best of defences.
‘So the belief and confidence is very high now, and another factor in our favour is that the six group matches will allow some margin for error.
Friends
‘I would definitely relish the prospect of being drawn against Milan.
I still have a lot of friends over there, If we do get them in our group it won't worry me too much.
‘I keep hearing how good they are, but I watched them draw 0–0 with Torino last Sun day and they looked pretty ordinary to me.
And if they've got a large squad, so do we.
Having the likes of Alexei Mikhailichenko, who cost £2.3m, on the bench shows what strength in depth we have.
‘We have failed to progress in Europe in recent years, but we have picked up valuable lessons from those experiences and I feel we are now ready for the challenge.’
FOUNDED 1899
1992 RECORD: v Olimpia Ljubliana (Slovenia) 4–0 home, 3–0 away (agg 7–0); v Slovan Bratislava (Czech) 1–0 away, 4–0 home (agg 5–0).
STARS: Marco van Basten, Ruud Gullit, Frank Rijkaard, Franco Baresi, Jean-Pierre Papin, Gianluigi Lentini.
HONOURS: European Cup winners 1963, 1969, 1989, 1990; Cup-Winners' Cup winners 1968, 1973; World Club Cup winners 1969, 1989, 1990.
DOMESTIC HONOURS: 12 Championships, 4 Cups.
FOUNDED 1904
1992 RECORD: v Besiktas (Turkey) 2–0 home, 1–2 away (agg 3–2); v Lech Poznan (Poland) 1–0 away, 3–0 home (agg 4–0).
STARS: Johnny Ekstrom, Thomas Ravelli, Stefan Rehn.
HONOURS: UEFA Cup winners 1982, 1989.
DOMESTIC: 13 Championships, 3 Cups.
FOUNDED 1891
1992 RECORD: v Maccabi Tel Aviv (Israel) 1–0 away,
3–0 home (agg 4–0); v Austria Vienna 1–3 away, 2–0 home (agg 3–3, won on away goals).
STARS: Foeke Booy, Daniel Amokachi, Frank van der Elst.
HONOURS: No European trophies.
DOMESTIC: 9 Championships, 5 Cups.
FOUNDED 1873
1992 RECORD: v Lyngby (Denmark) 2–0 home, 1–0 away (agg 3–0); v Leeds United (England) 2–1 home, 2–1 away (agg 4–2).
STARS: Richard Gough, Ally McCoist, Mark Hateley, Ian Durrant, Andy Goram.
HONOURS: Cup-Winners' Cup winners 1972.
DOMESTIC: 42 Championships, 25 Cups.
FOUNDED 1923
1992 RECORD: v Vikingur Reykjavik (Iceland) 1–0 away, 4–2 home (agg 5–2); v Barcelona (Spain) 1–1 home, 3–2 away (agg 4–3).
STARS: Yevgeni Busmanov, Dennis Mashkarin.
HONOURS: No European trophies: DOMESTIC: 7 Soviet Championships, 4 Cups.
FOUNDED 1899
1992 RECORD: v Glentoran (N Ireland) 5–0 away, 3–0 home (agg 8–0); v Dinamo Bucharest (Romania) 0–0 away, 2–0 home (agg 2–0).
STARS: Rudi Voller, Basile Boli, Abedi Pele, Rafael Martin-Vasquez, Oman-Biyik, Alen Boksic.
HONOURS: No European trophies.
DOMESTIC: 8 Championships, 10 Cups.
FOUNDED 1913
1992 RECORD: v Zhalgiris Vilnius (Lithuania)
6–0 home, 2–0 away (agg 8–0); v AEK Athens (Greece) 0–1 away, 3–0 home (agg 3–1).
STARS: Romario, Gerald Vanenburg, Hans van Breukelen, Gheorge Popescu, Barry Van Aerle.
HONOURS: European Cup winners 1988; UEFA Cup winners 1978.
DOMESTIC: 13 Championships, 7 Cups.
1992 record: v US Luxembourg 4–1 away, 5–0 home (agg 9–1); v FC Sion (Switzerland) 2–2 away, 4–0 home (agg 6–2).
STARS: Joao Pinto, Emil Kostadinov, Daniel Timofte.
HONOURS: European Cup winners 1987; World Club Cup winners 1987; European Super Cup winners 1987.
DOMESTIC: 12 Championships, 7 Cups.
AC MILAN
IFK GOTHENBURG (Sweden)
FC BRUGES (Belgium)
RANGERS (Scotland)
CSKA MOSCOW (CIS)
MARSEILLE (France)
PSV EINDHOVEN (Holland)
FC PORTO (Portugal) FOUNDED 1906
Leeds free-fall warning
STUART McCALL warned Leeds last night that their heartbreaking European Cup exit could wreck their season.
The Rangers midfield player, who used to stand on the Elland Road terraces, fears Howard Wilkinson's champions could copy Arsenal by going into free-fall after crashing out of Europe.
Following a 3–1 defeat by Benfica at Highbury in last season's second round, the Gunners won only two of their next 12 League matches.
Arsenal then suffered an FA Cup humiliation at Wrexham — and by January's close their season was effectively over.
And McCall, the driving force in Rangers' 2–1 European Cup win at Elland Road, said: ‘Leeds have great character and ability and I hope they go on to do well this season, but it will be difficult for them to pick themselves up from this.
‘It is a psychological problem that can take time to overcome, just as Arsenal found last season.
I know how gutted the Leeds players must feel, but beating them at Elland Road was the best result of my career.’
The signs of crisis are already there with 10 goals conceded in the last five games.
More worrying, it was senior players, like Gary McAllister, who stumbled from the pitch looking drained of confidence on Wednesday night.
Woosie in birdie blitz
From Bill Blighton in Madrid
IAN WOOSNAM yesterday hammered a seven-birdie warning to America's dream team in the Philip Morris World Cup here yesterday.
Welsh warrior Woosie fired a five-under-par 67 — but he and partner Mark Mouland still trailed US pair Freddie Couples and Davis Love by five shots.
Masters champion Couples coasted to a 66 while Love, the US No 2, chipped in with a 68 for the Americans to set the first round pace with a combined 10 under par total of 134.
But Woosie, who is defending the individual title, declared: ‘We still have a fighting chance of beating them.
They've made a great start, but five shots after one round is nothing in this tournament.’
Incentive
The former Master golfer should know, having partnered David Llewellyn to victory in 1987, and he has the added incentive of trying to equal Jack Nicklaus's record of three individual crowns.
Woosnam added: ‘I always seem to play well in this, I work hard at getting as many under par as possible to help my partner.’
He toiled endlessly to rescue Wales with Mouland scoring a triple bogey six at the fourth hole before Woosnam nursed him to a 72.
‘I was playing so badly, it was ridiculous.
I couldn't hit the ball,’ said Mouland.
‘I felt I was letting Ian down.
But he helped me all the way round and I hope I can do him justice tomorrow.’
Couples and Love, America's top two golfers this year, were irrepressible, gathering 13 birdies between them as they ripped apart the La Moraleja course, suggested as a venue for the 1997 Ryder Cup.
They are two strokes ahead of Spain's Rivero and Miguel Jiminez, but Dunhill Cup finalists England and Scotland trail by nine shots.
Turkish delight
By Rob Shepherd and Ben Bacon
LES FERDINAND was yesterday drafted into the England squad for the World Cup qualifier against Turkey, the country that helped re-launch his career.
The 25-year-old QPR striker, who once had the blood of a slaughtered sheep smothered on his forehead and boots in Turkey, was the only new name Graham Taylor announced for the November 18 game.
It will be Ferdinand's first visit to Wembley for an England match.
His inclusion effectively ends the international ambitions of Rangers' Mark Hateley, who destroyed Leeds on Wednesday night.
Ferdinand, who spent 11 months on loan with Besiktas three years ago, said: ‘I'm delighted, particularly as I know most of the lads in the Turkish side.
Without doubt, it's the greatest moment of my career.
‘The Turks have the highest regard for English football and I'd love to have the chance of playing against them but I don't expect I'll get it.
Alan Shearer and Ian Wright need more time for their partnership to mature.
‘It was a fantastic experience in Turkey and one I will never forget.
At the start of every season, the club used to slaughter a sheep on the pitch by slitting its throat.
Blood
‘Its blood is then smothered on the forehead and boots of the players.
They did it to me, even though I tried to run away.
‘I also remember that some of us were individually handed pigeons that we were meant to cradle in our hands and then throw into the air in the centre-circle.
Well, I threw mine up but it fell back down.
‘Cor blimey,’ I thought.
‘That's a good omen’.
‘But in the end the club wanted to keep me and even considered getting Margaret Thatcher involved in the transfer after QPR said no.’
Ferdinand, who played at Wembley for Southall in the FA Vase Final, has scored seven goals in the Premier League this season and recently signed a lucrative three-year contract.
Taylor said last night: ‘I think Ferdinand's selection answers the questions about Hateley's international future.’
Taylor is likely to retain the side that drew 1–1 with Norway.
He doesn't feel David Hirst, Paul Parker, Martin Keown or Rob Jones have been back long enough after overcoming injuries.
‘I said after the European Championships I would be looking for a much more settled squad,’ said Taylor.
‘That's why I've kept changes to a minimum.’
SQUAD: Woods, Seaman, Dixon, Bardsley, Pearce, Dorigo, Walker, Adams, Jobson, Pallister, Platt, Batty, Palmer, Ince, Gascoigne, Merson, Sinton, Salako, Shearer, Clough, Wright, Ferdinand.
Standby: Martyn, P Parker, G Parker, White, Deane.
Rangers jackpot
Ben Bacon
RANGERS players are on a staggering £70,000-a-man bonus to win the European Cup, it was revealed last night.
David Murray, the club's multi-millionaire chairman, yesterday disclosed the figure, which is almost twice the amount England were promised to win the European Championship in Sweden last summer.
It's easily the biggest financial incentive ever dangled in front of British footballers and dwarfs the £14,000 the England players eventually earned for their troubles in Sweden.
They were promised £40,000 if they won the tournament.
Murray's extraordinary offer — the pay-out could total as much as Pounds 1.5 million — confirms the club's determination to be the best in Europe.
It was worked out with Richard Gough 18 months ago and is part of a two-year bonus agreement.
Murray said: ‘Each Rangers player is on a £70,000 bonus to win the European Cup, and I would happily sign the cheques today if we were guaranteed winning it.
‘If it was decided on guts and determination, we would.’
‘They each earned £20,000 by beating Leeds because the League stage of the competition is where the really big money comes in.
We have worked out the club will earn a minimum of £4m and a maximum of £6m, so why shouldn't the players have their share.
‘It was important we reached the League stage and I thought our players wanted it more than Leeds.
‘Mark Hateley and Richard Gough won't have too many more opportunities and they were magnificent.
‘You never win anything with boys — you win things with men.’
So impressed was the forward-thinking Murray with the two games against Leeds that he wants to speed up the introduction of a British Cup.
He said: ‘I would like a British Cup competition introduced as quickly as next season.
‘Ideally, it would involve the six clubs in Scotland and 10 in England who failed to qualify for European competition.’
Dooley in dock again
By Giles Smith
WADE DOOLEY'S international career was under threat again last night after an alleged off-the-ball incident involving a fellow police officer in a club match at the weekend.
The England and British Lions lock is alleged to have been involved in the incident in the match between his side, Preston Grasshoppers, and Stoke which left Steve Maskery with a bad head injury.
A spokesman for Stoke said the referee was to submit a report on the incident to the RFU.
If he does, it could put a big question mark over the future of the controversial 6ft 7in player.
Last night England manager Geoff Cooke said he hadn't heard about the incident, but confirmed: ‘We have always said that players who play for England must be aware of the responsibilities that go with that.’
If there is a formal report, it could be the end for Dooley, England's most capped lock, who was dropped after punching an opponent in the infamous 1987 England-Wales brawl.
He recently admitted in his autobiography that he had used violence on the rugby field on at least4
three occasions.
But Cooke added he wasn't going to prejudge the incident.
‘I find it strange that a report is being talked about when no-one was sent off,’ he said.
Losing Dooley would be a major setback just two weeks away from the historic international against South Africa at Twickenham.
The weekend incident led to angry scenes and a furious exchange of views at the end of the match between Dooley and Stoke assistant coach, Tony Brindley.
England hooker Brian Moore last night blasted South Africa as ‘living offside.’
Moore lines up for England B against the Springboks at Bristol tomorrow.
And he said: ‘We have watched them on television when they were playing in France and, from what we've seen, they are offside all the time.’
Woosie gave me a rollicking — Mouland
From Bill Blighton in Madrid
MARK MOULAND last night paid tribute to Welsh team-mate Ian Woosnam for helping to rescue him from the golfing scrap heap.
Wales kept in touch with halfway leaders USA in the Philip Morris World Cup here yesterday — but the tournament has already been a resounding success for Mouland.
Woosnam (69) and Mouland (70) moved to ten under par, five shots behind American stars Fred Couples and Davis Love, who suffered for six hours in the hot sunshine before posting a 15-under-par 273.
Mouland was tipped as a rising star of European golf when he turned professional in 1981 after winning the British Boys Championship.
Success swiftly followed with two tour titles, the second in the Dutch Open four years ago.
The 31-year-old from Kenilworth slumped to 84th in the rankings this year but has regained his enthusiasm after two rounds with Woosnam.
‘Woosie is one of the best players in the world and he is an inspiration to me,’ said Mouland.
‘He has lifted my game.
If I had been playing on my own my head would have dropped off by now.
‘I've been fed up for the last few years and people have been telling me I am in danger of wasting my time.
In fact, Woosie gives me a rollicking every week.
‘He told me: ‘What the hell else are you going to do to earn money’— and he is absolutely right.
His words have really come home to me this week.
Here I am playing with some of the world's top golfers and I realise this is the stage I should be performing on.’
Now Mouland is determined to put a brake on his decline.
He added: ‘I am going to get myself physically and mentally sorted out during the winter.
I smoke too much and I enjoy a drink.
I intend cutting down on both.
‘I'm going to see a sports psychologist because I haven't been focusing on the job and I must become more positive.’
If Woosnam has his way, Mouland will be back on the winning trail tomorrow with the former World No 1 convinced he can tear the La Morajela course apart at the weekend.
‘I can shoot ten under par here and anything can happen if we click together,’ insisted Woosnam.
‘It's just a matter of getting my putting right.
I had eight realistic birdie chances and might easily have had an eagle out there today.’
Love (68) and Couples (71) clung on to their overnight lead, three shots ahead of host nation Spain.
— despite both being besieged by jet-lag and the six hours it needed to complete their second rounds.
Love fell out of love with the four-ball format, saying: ‘We'd heard about how slow play was, but we didn't believe it.
There is no way four professional golfers should take six hours to play 18 holes.
I just cannot understand it.’
England, trailing by 11 shots, and Scotland, 13 behind, need a miracle if they are going to figure in the honours tomorrow, while Ireland, at four over par, are out of the hunt.
Mansell: I know of bid
From Frank Ward in Adelaide
NIGEL MANSELL confirmed last night that he is aware of moves to buy him out of his Indy Car racing contract and sensationally persuade him to stay in Formula One next year.
Mansell spoke after grabbing provisional pole position for tomorrow's Australian Grand Prix with a lap record.
But he still expects to join Hollywood star Paul Newman's Indy Car team.
Mansell said: ‘At this moment, nothing has changed and I don't see it changing.
If I give a commitment, I like to stick to it.
I am not going to let anyone down in America.
‘If they accept this offer, then I'm in a different position — but they cannot do anything without my confirmation.’
Tough
Mansell dominated the opening qualifying in his Canon-Williams-Renault for the tough 81-lap Adelaide street circuit race, where his 1986 title hopes were wrecked by a tyre blow-out.
Asked about Ayrton Senna's suggestion that he and Mansell would leave a big hole in Formula One if they left together, Mansell said: ‘No, they'll forget all about us in a week.
‘A lot of bad things have been said but I've fulfilled a lifelong dream this season for which I've worked very hard.’
Mansell dominated the day on and off the track as he clocked his lap record 1min 13.732sec at an average speed of 114.680mph.
This puts him on course for his first pole in Adelaide since 1986, his first win in Australia, a record 10th victory of the season and the 31st of his 12-year career.
Martin Brundle, in his last Grand Prix for Camel-Benetton-Ford, was eighth on the overnight grid, while Johnny Herbert, in the Castrol-Lotus-Ford, was 12th.
Castle goes the distance
ANDREW CASTLE yesterday overcame a big hurdle in defence of his Volkswagen National Championship in Telford with a 6–7, 6–4, 6–4 quarter-final win over Chris Wilkinson.
Wragg mourned
DICK WRAGG, chairman of the FA International committee and a vice-president of the FA and the Football League, died in Sheffield yesterday.
He was 82.
Boris boost
BORIS BECKER bounced back from a poor spell with a 7–6, 6–3 victory over world No 1 Jim Courier in the quarter-finals of the Paris Open yesterday.
Higgins rolls on
ALEX HIGGINS continued his snooker comeback with a 5–1 victory over Anthony O'Connor in the fifth round of the B&H Championship in Glasgow last night.
Gallant Gus
GUS LOGIE and Jimmy Adams put on 75 in 58 minutes to help West Indies recover to 280 all out on the opening day against Western Australia in Perth.
Hansie a hit
BATSMAN Hansie Cronje staked a claim for a place in South Africa's Test side with a well-crafted 73 out of the President's XI 268 against the touring Indians.
Chepstow TV Guide
1.00:TOP weight BOLLIN WILLIAM bolted up by 10 lengths on his reappearance at Bangor eight days ago, and will be very hard to beat in this less competitive contest off just an 8lb higher mark.
Va Utu doesn't stay a testing two miles.
1.30:TALENTED claimer Rodney Farrant teams up with former Gold Cup hero Norton's Coin, but the combination face a very stiff task over this inadequate trip.
I fancy DEEP SENSATION, not disgraced when runner-up to King Of The Lot on his seasonal debut and well in on last year's form.
Nicky Henderson's Freeline Finishing, a most impressive 10-length Exeter winner two weeks ago, should finish second.
2.00:IMPRESSIVE Newbury winner Mighty Mogul has a cracking chance under his 3lb penalty but is certainly not worth backing at around 7–4.
PETOSKU is a decent each-way alternative at 10–1 with Hills and Coral.
He wasn't beaten far by subsequent Sandown winner Kilcash over two miles here last month, and will be ideally suited by today's extra half-mile.
Needwood Muppet, 25–1 with Coral, could well run into a place.
Holme and dry
Henry Rix
1.30:THESE ladies races are invariably run at a lightning fast pace, which is ideal for Touch Above who has shown all his best form over a strongly-run 10 furlongs.
However, I prefer NO COMEBACKS, not badly treated on just a 4lb higher mark than when landing a comfortable victory at Redcar last month.
Lots Of Luck is hard to fancy after disappointing badly at Haydock last time, and Carrolls Marc, although effective over further, remains on a reasonable mark is likely to provide more of a threat.
2.05:JOHN Gosden's Daru has been backed off the boards in the ante-post market for this valuable handicap.
But he showed much improved form when stepped up to a mile and three quarters, and is definitely worth opposing over this trip at such a short price.
WESTHOLME is the each-way value at 25–1 with Coral and Ladbrokes.
He returned to form with a comfortable Chester success last time, and is very well handicapped on his best form.
Whitechapel, who didn't get the trip at Ascot last time, has place prospects.
2.35:KEEN Hunter finished just two lengths runner-up to Mr Brooks in the Prix l'Abbaye at Longchamp on Arc weekend, but is worth opposing over today's extra furlong.
I fancy SPANIARDS CLOSE, who was given plenty to do and stayed on strongly to finish second to Ashtina off a high mark in a hot handicap at Ascot early last time.
Blyton Lad didn't get the best of runs when runner-up to Hamas in a Listed race at Newmarket three weeks ago, but is more effective over the minimum trip on a stiff track.
3.05:THE lightly-raced HIGHLAND DRESS made an impressive belated debut at Newbury last month, and was not disgraced when unsuited by the slow gallop at Newmarket eight days ago.
He has been working well recently and looks sure to take all the beating in an uncompetitive contest.
Tunbridge Wells finished runner-up to Michael Stoute's colt at Newbury, but is most unlikely to have progressed enough to reverse the form even on 12lb better terms.
In The Money could run into a place.
Lucky touch
A MYSTERY London punter yesterday scooped a staggering Pounds 120,038.07 with a bet of just £20.
The man, a middle-aged shift worker, placed his bet with bookmakers William Hill in Kentish Town on his way to work.
TODAY racing followers were also in the money when Pot Luck struck for the second day running with two winning Placepot lines for a profit of over £50 at Doncaster.
Henry Rix landed a hat-trick of naps with Our Slimbridge (2–1) at Market Rasen.
Pick of the Boks
By Tony Roche
SOUTH Africa will today give England manager Geoff Cooke an unexpected gift — a sneak preview of their line-up for the Twickenham Test in a week.
The Springbok side to face a powerful England B at Bristol have been told by coach John Williams that if they fulfil his expectations, they will face the Five Nations champions on Saturday.
That message is confidential and I understand Williams will look closely at Adolf Malan in the line-out now that giant Philip Schutte has recovered from a neck injury.
But certain doubts were dispelled during the 32–9 victory over Midlands at Leicester on Wednesday as captain Naas Botha warned: ‘We are improving with every game and I believe we will peak when it matters, against Will Carling's team.’
Theo van Rensburg is back at full-back after being dropped in France, the front row looks settled, Garth Wright holds the scrum-half role and Tiaan Strauss moves to blindside flanker following Wahl Bartman's shoulder injury, with Adriaan Richter at No 8.
The happiest Boks at yesterday's training session were 34-year-old veterans Botha and Danie Gerber, both playing superbly 12 years into their hugely interrupted international careers.
They began their Springbok lives together but both reject suggestions that they plan to bow out at Twickenham.
Botha, flattered by Northern Transvaal's invitation for him to coach as well as play for them next season, said: ‘I am keeping my options open.
I have not made a decision on either matter.
What counts right now is dealing with a very good looking England B.’ Gerber said: ‘I will go home, play for Western Province and see if the selectors want me.
If they do, then I will give my best every time.’
Williams's plans could lie in ruins tonight if Graham Smith's B side grasp the nettle, particularly those with immediate Test hopes.
Ian Hunter, the two-try hero against Canada on his debut, reverts to his preferred full-back role knowing winger Nigel Heslop will go all-out to recapture the shirt he lost to Simon Halliday last season.
Brian Moore and Jeff Probyn, dropped for the Canada international, will take no prisoners in the front-row war to ensure they join Jason Leonard against the same three Springboks at Twickenham.
It's a big day, too, for Tim Rodber.
With Mike Teague, Mick Skinner and John Hall out of contention, the blindside role is between the Northampton back-rower and Wasps' Dean Ryan.
Ben Clarke, of Bath, has the awesome task of dislodging Dean Richards at No 8 if he is to make his England debut on Saturday.
The Boks know they will have a job containing one of England's most exciting prospects.
Hooker Willie Hills admitted: ‘We face one hell of a game for sure.
‘I expect England to revert to the front row that has done so well for so long, which means I must play out of my skin against Moore for the chance to face the guy again next week.
Some incentive!
‘And Probyn is recognised by us as the world's best tighthead prop so no argument there.
‘This will be a level higher than we faced on Wednesday.’
Welsh come roaring back
By Giles Smith
THE WELSH are closing in on the standards of play that immortalised the sixties and seventies as the golden age of their rugby.
That's the firm view of Wales manager Alan Davies, who helped establish the trend with two Five Nations victories last season and was further heartened this week by Swansea's demolition of world champions Australia.
‘We're not there yet, of course, but I now detect a completely new enthusiasm, a new belief among the players,’ he said.
‘People realise deep down that they have the talent to be among the best in the world.
That was demonstrated by Swansea.’
Today Wales B take on the shaken Aussies in Cardiff — and Davies doesn't rule out another shock Welsh win.
‘Of course we can win, Swansea showed the country it can be done,’ he argued.
‘It will require a huge effort and a great deal of concentration, but the attitude of the players is so different now to what it was a year ago, it is not out of the question.’
Outrageous
Even for the full Welsh side to beat Australia — let alone the second string-would have seemed an outrageous dream a year ago in the wake of humiliating defeats at the hands of the world champions, 63–6 on tour Down Under, and 38–3 in the World Cup.
But Davies is adamant.
‘Over the past year there has been far greater commitment among the players, and a completely new enthusiasm,’ he said.
‘They are now giving 100 per cent and more.
They have an insatiable appetite for success.
‘When the full Welsh team take on Australia, there will be six or seven players in the squad who have tasted victory against them with Swansea — and that is a completely new situation.’
The B team are so determined they gave up holiday time and daily allowances to assemble for two days of intensive preparation this week in Cardiff.
Skipper Rupert Moon said: ‘There are firemen, policemen and doctors in our side and they have had to switch shifts or take holiday leave so that we could get together early.
‘It's a question of building team understanding.
‘Our spirit is magnificent, and we are certainly not in awe of Australia just because they are the world champions.
Disrupted
‘Swansea showed they are not invincible and that they can be disrupted.
We want to beat them as well.’
Australian coach Bob Dwyer agrees Welsh rugby is on the upsurge again.
‘I had that feeling when we were here last year,’ he reasoned.
‘Wales had their problems after a disastrous tour of Australia, but since then they have addressed them and, under Davies, they have worked very hard.’
Llanelli's Colin Stephens takes over the key outside half position from the injured Neil Jenkins for Wales B, while injury-hit Australia call on seven of their first choice pack.
The recall of Willie Ofahengaue, Rod McCall, Ewan McKenzie and Dave Wilson should allow hooker and acting skipper Phil Kearns to make a much bigger impression, but, of the backs, only full-back Marty Roebuck can be considered an automatic Test choice.
Anthony Ekert and Tim Wallace will be the half-back pairing, while Damian Smith retains his place on the wing in the absence of David Campese.
Introducing the men to face England
T VAN RENSBURG
(Transvaal)
Compact and composed full-back who made a superb debut against New Zealand in August, Theo was one of the few successes against Australia.
Lost his place in France but hot favourite to face England.
CAPS: 2
NAAS BOTHA
(N Transvaal)
The man who divides a nation between adoration and anger, but an all-time great fly-half who, at 34, can still control a game — indeed, turn it on its head.
Famed for his kicking but accused of rarely tackling, Botha can the vision to turn a game on its head.
CAPS: 27
JAMES SMALL
(Transvaal)
Stocky, powerful wing whose father Vernon played for the Springbok soccer team.
Debut against the All Blacks and has played in all four Tests since South Africa's return to the international scene.
CAPS: 4
DANIE GERBER
(W Province)
World-class centre with a world-beating record strike-rate of 19 tries in 23 Tests, including four in the last four games.
Springbok ban cost him about 50 caps but at 34 still quick and dangerous.
CAPS: 23
PIETER MULLER
(Natal)
Powerful centre who helped his Province to a Currie Cup triumph this season and scored a try on his debut v NZ.
Younger brother of former Springbok Helgard and spent a season playing in Dublin.
CAPS: 4
JACQUES OLIVIER
(N Transvaal)
Pacy wing once told to give up rugby because he would never even make a club player.
Made a sensational debut in Springboks' 20–15 victory over France in Lyons.
Nephew of former Springbok Jan Ellis.
CAPS: 2
GARTH WRIGHT
(Transvaal)
Small, quick half-back with good hands and a swift delivery.
Debut 1986 v NZ Cavaliers but ignored for the NZ and Australia comeback games before regaining his place during the French tour.
CAPS: 6
JOHANN STYGER
(Free State)
Tough loose-head called up when Heinrich Rodgers tripped on the hotel stairs last night and tore ankle ligaments.
Rodgers is out of the tour, which gives Styger the chance to face England.
CAPS: 4
WILLIE HILLS
(N Transvaal)
Versatile tight forward who began as a prop but moved to hooker when Uli Schmidt pulled out of the tour.
Debut in the victory over France in Lyons and has proved a real success in both tight and loose.
CAPS: 2
KEITH ANDREWS
(W Province)
Uncapped tight-head who, at 30, believed all hope of playing internationals had gone, despite 95 games for his province.
Played well against Midlands and needs a sound game to secure a Test place.
CAPS: 0
DRIKUS HATTINGH
(N Transvaal)
Fierce lock who jumps well at the front of the line-out.
and jumps on anything that moves.
Banned for using illegal substance while an athlete but switched to rugby and made Test debut as a replacement against Australia in August.
CAPS: 2
ADOLF MALAN
(N Transvaal)
Tall middle-jumper with 159 provincial games behind him.
Needs a powerful game to hold off challenge of Philip Schutte.
Debut v World XV in 1989, faced NZ and Australia and played in both French Tests.
CAPS: 6
TIAAN STRAUSS
(W Province)
Gets his chance on his preferred blindside because Wahl Bartman has suffered a serious shoulder injury.
A powerful flanker who was most impressive on his debut against France in Lyons.
CAPS: 2
ADRIAAN RICHTER
(N Transvaal)
Another France debutant whose handling is impressive and strength on the drive capable of causing immense problems in the loose.
His two-handed catching at back of line-out troubled the Midlands.
CAPS: 2
FREDERICK SMIT
(W Province)
Uncapped openside flanker who took his chance well when summoned to replace Bartmann at Leicester.
Has operated both openside and blind, tackles with ferocity and possesses safe hands in the loose.
CAPS: 0
Chelsea close in on Russian
Mike Walters
CHELSEA last night moved a step closer to signing Russian international Dimitri Kharin and ending their search for chastised goalkeeper Dave Beasant's replacement.
Kharin flew into London again yesterday after helping CSKA Moscow defeat European Cup holders Barcelona in midweek.
He trained with Chelsea last month before returning home to play in Russia's 2–0 World Cup qualifying win against Luxembourg, but Chelsea manager Ian Porterfield is now confident of signing the £500,000-rated keeper.
Porterfield said: ‘We watched him in action against Barcelona and he has come back to train with us again.
Something might happen within the next few days.’
The Russian's return to Stamford Bridge will put extra pressure on current No 1 Kevin Hitchcock, who succeeded Beasant, in today's home game with Crystal Palace.
But Porterfield stressed: ‘Kevin has done very well for us since coming into the side and has made important saves to keep us alive in some games.’
Purists
Wimbledon manager Joe Kinnear hopes another London derby, when QPR visit Selhurst Park, will confirm his team's conversion from football pirates to purists.
Kinnear said: ‘The way we played at Mancheser United last week was the highlight of our season so far.
Both Bryan Robson and Alex Ferguson said it was the best they had ever seen a Wimbledon side play — it makes a change to get credit when it's due.’
Rangers could spring a surprise by playing England winger Andy Sinton, who resumed light training yesterday — just 10 days after sustaining a shin injury from Bury defender Lee Anderson's horrific over-the-top tackle.
Aston Villa manager Ron Atkinson last night heightened the tension surrounding today's Premier League match of the day by recalling that it is six years to the day since Manchester United sacked him.
United visit Villa Park and Atkinson wistfully linked the past with the present when he said: ‘If I'd had Dean Saunders at United, we would have won the Championship.
‘Saunders is the best natural striker I've ever worked with.
‘Alongside Mark Hughes, Norman Whiteside, Gordon Strachan, Arnold Muhren and Bryan Robson in my team, United would have won everything, including the Ashes.’
Ipswich team manager Mick McGiven pinpointed Matt Le Tissier as the danger-man for the visit of struggling Southampton.
Two seasons ago Ipswich, then in the Second Division, lost to the Saints in both the League and FA Cup competitions, when Le Tissier was the star turn.
McGiven said: ‘I'd like to think we've improved since then, but on his day Le Tissier is virtually unplayable and able to create anything at any time.’
Meanwhile, Saints keeper Tim Flowers pleaded with furious supporters to lay off under-fire manager Ian Branfoot, who has been hounded by disgruntled fans.
He said: ‘There is a lot of pressure on him but he doesn't pass it on to us.
He is a cheerful fellow with a typical Geordie sense of humour.
It doesn't affect the players.
‘There are a few new faces in the team, and when you have that it always takes time for things to settle down.’
Today's changes
Arsenal v Coventry
Midfielder Ray Parlour recalled to Arsenal squad and will probably replace Pal Lydersen on the bench.
Robert Rosario returns after a rib injury to challenge on-loan striker Paul Williams.
Last season: Arsenal 1, Coventry 2; Coventry 0, Arsenal 1.
Aston Villa v Man Utd
Cyrille Regis is back in the Villa squad after Achilles tendon injury, along with Mark Blake.
Bryan Robson will start his first Premier League game for United with Darren Ferguson dropping out and Lee Sharpe likely to appear as a sub.
Last season: Villa 0, Man Utd 1; Man Utd 1 A Villa 0.
Blackburn v Tottenham
Stuart Ripley is ready to return from a back injury for Rovers but fellow winger Jason Wilcox is doubtful with a troublesome knee problem.
Steve Sedgeley is the main doubt for Spurs with a knee injury but Vinnie Samways is fit after suffering knee and calf trouble.
No corresponding fixture.
Chelsea v Crystal Palace
Expect Chelsea to name the same side beaten at home by Sheffield United, which means under-fire keeper Kevin Hitchcock plays.
Palace midfielder Geoff Thomas has twisted knee ligaments but £1 million striker Chris Armstrong has recovered from a ‘dead leg’.
Last season: Palace 0, Chelsea 0; Chelsea 1, Palace 1.
Ipswich v Southampton
Striker Chris Kiwomya has overcome flu and plays for the home side.
He could be joined by Steve Whitton, back after a groin strain.
Saints have close season signing Perry Groves back in contention at Portman Road after a broken toe but Kerry Dixon (back) is still out.
No corresponding fixture.
Liverpool v Boro
Mike Hooper stays in the Liverpool goal ahead of Bruce Grobbelaar (hamstring) and £1.3m David James but Paul Stewart returns.
Torben Piechnik resumes at centre-half but Michael Thomas is injured.
Boro midfielder Robbie Mustoe recalled in place of winger Tommy Wright (hamstring).
No corresponding fixture.
Man City v Leeds Utd
City unchanged for the fourth successive game with fit-again Dutchman Michel Vonk probably on the bench.
David Rocastle will start his first League match for Leeds if David Batty is again ruled out.
There is also a doubt about left-back Tony Dorigo.
Last season: Leeds 3, Man C 0; Man C 4, Leeds 0.
Nottm Forest v Everton
Steve Chettle and Ian Woan return for Forest, so Roy Keane can revert to midfield.
Wingers Gary Crosby and Kingsley Black are dropped.
Peter Beardsley, over flu, returns for Everton.
John Ebbrell also back in squad along with Ian Snodin and Alan Harper.
Last season: Forest 2, Everton 1; Everton 1, Forest 1.
Wimbledon v QPR
John Fashanu (hamstring) again out for the Dons, but QPR's England winger Andy Sinton has made a remarkable recovery from a shin injury and could play.
Last season: Wimbledon 0, QPR 1; QPR 1, Wimbledon 1.
Sheff W v Sheff U
United midfielder Carl Bradshaw back in contention for the Blades, but Wednesday are sweating on centre-half Nigel Pearson for the derby clash.
Last season: Sheff U 2, Sheff W 0; Sheff W 1, Sheff U 3.
Dooley wants justice
WADE DOOLEY has written to Stoke demanding they retract comments made by spokesman Tom Maskery amid accusations of violent play made against him.
The Preston Grasshoppers lock wants his name cleared over the incident which left Maskery's son, Steve, concussed.
Referee Mark Russell awarded a penalty against Dooley, but made no mention of it in his report.
But he did refer to a spectator and an alleged verbal and physical abuse on Dooley and himself.
Dooley, peacemaker in the after-match flare-up said: ‘I have been accused of forearm-smashing this kid on the park.
‘When the opposing player was hurt, he was being tackled by our flanker and I drove into him.
He was dazed, but walked off the pitch.
‘The referee took me aside and penalised me for ‘over-robust’ play, not foul play.’
Of the spectator, Dooley said he stood between the man and the referee as the teams were leaving the pitch.
Pavel Czechs in for Keegan
John Wardle
PAVEL SRNICEK faces a trial by television in Newcastle's top-of-the-table clash with Swindon tomorrow.SUN
Forgotten-man Pavel emerges from the shadows for only his second League appearance for the Geordies in 13 months and just three weeks after coming off the transfer list.
But the giant Czech goalkeeper isn't worried by the pressures of playing in front of a 30,000 crowd and a TV audience of two million as Kevin Keegan's players bid to stretch their First Division lead to at least 10 points.
He said: ‘I have waited a long time for this chance and it's up to me to make the most of it.
It is my biggest test.’
Srnicek, in for injured Tommy Wright, asked to go on the list last season because his family were desperately unhappy in England.
‘I got very depressed and my confidence suffered,’ he confessed.
‘My wife and I didn't speak much English and we had very few friends.
It was a very difficult and depressing time.
‘But now I am happy to be here because we have made new friends and to get into the team is an extra bonus.’
Defeats
Keegan got Newcastle back on the rails at Birmingham, following a run of three defeats.
And he revealed: ‘We sat down and took stock after losing to Leicester and decided that we had to stop feeling sorry for ourselves.’
Brian Atkinson goes hunting for goals at Peterborough today in a bid to cash in on his new role at Sunderland.
The England Under-21 midfielder has sparked a mini-revival since moving into a more attacking position.
‘We switched Brian further forward with half an hour to go at Portsmouth three matches ago and it has produced results,’ said manager Malcolm Crosby.
‘Now I want him to have more shots on goal and get on the end of more chances.’
Crosby needs further good results and performances to stiffen his hold on the job but said yesterday: ‘The Sunderland board doesn't go looking to sack people.
They have gone out of their way to take the pressure off me.’
Revamped Bristol Rovers include central defender Andy Tillson and rugged midfield man Gary Waddock, bought from QPR in a £470,000 joint deal 48 hours ago, against Wolves.
But top scorer John Taylor, who has shown disappointing form recently, could make way for Marcus Browning, who has returned from a loan spell with Hereford after scoring six goals in five games.
‘I have recalled Browning because Taylor is going through a sticky spell,’ said Rovers manager Dennis Rofe.
Birmingham, is promising goals.
Bristol City manager Denis Smith, whose side entertain Terry Cooper's Birmingham, is promising goals.
‘We are creating and missing so many chances that sooner or later we're going to hit someone for six,’ he said.
Plymouth Argyle's forgotten men are set to make their Home Park returns against Rotherham United.
Striker Robbie Turner, 26, and on a weekly contract, has been out of the side with a broken leg since February.
And midfielder Kevin Hodges, 32, was considered too old.
But both played in the goal-less draw at Swansea in midweek and made a big impression on boss Peter Shilton.
Booby prize
Mike Walters
EVERY time rejuvenated Tottenham enter Blackburn Rovers' penalty area today, they will be running into a Booby-trap.
Rarely can a goalkeeper have had such an incentive to shut out a former club than Rovers' Bobby Mimms has at Ewood Park this afternoon.
In three years of misery at White Hart Lane, the former England Under-21 was cruelly nicknamed ‘Booby’ Mimms — and he is still struggling to live down the tag, despite being the Premier League's least charitable keeper this season.
And while Blackburn bask in their unexpected leadership, 29-year-old Mimms is haunted by two televised howlers which sent his Tottenham career into a swallow-dive and shredded his confidence.
If Mimms had a fiver for every time his errors have been exposed to ridicule on TV, his bank balance would rival that of Rovers' multi-millionaire tycoon owner, Jack Walker.
And he knows his next clanger will trigger yet another repeat showing — as well as threatening the first-team place he has worked so hard to hold down at table-topping Blackburn.
Mimms says: ‘A lot of critics are waiting for the bubble to burst.
I'm sure they are waiting to get at me again.
‘I can still remember the matches where it went wrong.
Against Arsenal, when an Alan Smith shot virtually went through my hands.
Honest
‘On another day it might have stuck.
‘Then a few weeks later, at QPR, I boobed again and saw the goal replayed on TV.
To be honest, at the time I really needed to be dropped but there was no-one else at the club ready to take over.
‘So I struggled on when the best thing would have been to go into the reserves and get my confidence back.
I wanted to put it all behind me, but every time I tried the TV footage would come back to haunt me the following week.
‘It all came to a head when we lost 3–0 to Derby and, if I'm honest, all three goals were down to me.
‘Up to then, the fans had been tolerant, but they began to get on my back after that.
It wasn't just me who was playing badly, but the side as a whole.
But I took the brunt of their anger.
‘Ironically, I was possibly playing my best football for Tottenham when I left the club, but I knew there was no way back.
‘When Blackburn came in for me, they were well down the old Second Division, but I jumped at the chance.
And since Jack Walker got involved, I suppose my form has followed the fortunes of the club, and I've never looked back.’
Spurs coach Ray Clemence, who witnessed Mimms' suffering at first hand, also comes face-to-face with a ghost from the past at Ewood Park.
He says: ‘People still talk about the shot from Kenny Dalglish that went through my legs at Hampden Park in 1976 when Scotland beat England, so I know how Bobby must have felt.
‘In the same way, I feel sorry for John Lukic, who will be reminded about that punch of his in the Rangers-Leeds European Cup tie until he's blue in the face.
‘Unfortunately, it's just human nature that keepers mistakes are magnified and replayed over and over again — but I'm always pleased when they bounce back, as Bobby has done at Blackburn.
Luck
‘He always worked very hard on the training pitch when he was at Tottenham, but he didn't always have that bit of luck a keeper sometimes needs.
‘His record this season-just nine goals against in the League so far, with nine clean sheets — speaks volumes for his determination.’
Mimms is now with his ninth League club, a nomadic journey which began at lowly Halifax, reached a dead-end as Neville Southall's understudy at Everton and hit its nadir at Tottenham.
But his new lease of life has saved Blackburn manager Dalglish from dipping further into Walker's personal fortune to reinforce a position once regarded as Rovers' weak link — but now recognised as a pillar of strength.
Ruddock to call the tune
By Mike Walters
ALAN SHEARER was last night hailed as a £10 million wonder — by the man who this afternoon must stop him leading Blackburn's title crusade.
Tottenham defender Neil Ruddock, Shearer's team-mate at Southampton until the summer, promised Britain's most expensive striker no old pals' act at Ewood Park.
And Ruddock revealed that Shearer has fuelled their private war of nerves with ‘threatening’ phone calls.
He said: ‘Alan rang me the other night and told me to bring my hosepipe because he's on fire at the moment.
‘Of his 16 goals this season, 11 have come from outside the box and that tells you the quality of the man.
‘His value is going up with every game and he could soon be worth £10 million.
‘At Southampton, he didn't score that many but did all the work for others — now he does the work and scores heavily.
‘Defenders don't like playing against him because he gives them a rough time but he knows what to expect from me.
‘There will be no mates out there.’
Bassett in TV warning
David Alexander
DAVE BASSETT is warning his players not to be caught out by TV's all-seeing eye tomorrow.
Sheffield United have been trapped by the candid camera too often in the past and Bassett thinks the prying lens is wrong in all sorts of ways.
‘Everyone's got to be a Mary Whitehouse, there are too many hypocrites using football for their own purposes,’ he said before the Sheffield derby that is Sky's live game tomorrow.
‘TV highlights the unsavoury incidents, they are far too ready to put them on the screen.
In fact they seem to go in search of them.
‘They have cameras all over the place now.
When Vinnie Jones was a player here they put one camera on him for 90 minutes, nothing else.
That's not right.’
Last season, United's Carl Bradshaw was caught in confrontation with Chelsea's Vinnie at Stamford Bridge by a camera behind the goal and ended up on a disrepute charge, even though the match officials missed the incident.
‘The players' behaviour has to be impeccable these days,’ said Bassett.
‘But this situation will never change and I've told them I don't want anyone involved in unsavoury incidents.’
Graham blasts back at Dixon boo-boys
By Ben Bacon
GEORGE GRAHAM last night vowed to silence the boo-boys who bait his players in the most spectacular way he can — by winning the Premier League.
Skipper Tony Adams has had to endure donkey chants for years, but now right-back Lee Dixon is feeling the full force of terrace hate.
England international Dixon has been ridiculed by the chant, ‘if Lee Dixon plays for England, so can I’, but has so far refused to talk about it.
However, on the eve of today's clash with Coventry at Highbury, which could result in Arsenal going top, Graham hit back at the fans who have attacked Dixon.
Normally, Graham refuses to talk about the club winning the title, but he broke his silence to protect one of his favourite players at Highbury.
He said: ‘It's terrible, particularly as we're sitting third in the League.
I just hope they're chanting when we win the Championship.
Crafty
‘I'm disappointed by the stick he gets because I know him as a person.
He's one of those players who never hide.
He's not afraid to fail.
‘When he puts a bad cross in, he'll go down the line again a few minutes later and try once more.
‘Maybe a crafty old head would say, ‘I'm not going down that wing again’, but not Lee.
‘I would be more than happy to recommend that the England manager play him.
I can name you players who have over 50 caps and had only half a dozen good games and still keep getting picked.’
Graham rated Dixon, who scored an own goal against Coventry in last season's corresponding game, as Arsenal's man-of-the-match in Monday's 2–1 win at Crystal Palace, a result which increased the club's winning run to five successive League games.
Swedish international Anders Limpar made only a brief substitute's appearance in that victory at Selhurst Park, but his popularity was underlined by the reception he was given by Arsenal fans at Selhurst Park.
Graham further delighted them yesterday by saying Limpar would be offered a new contract — his present deal has 18 months to run.
‘He's an exceptional player, and Arsenal always want talented players,’ said Graham.
‘He has a part to play for this club.
Anders will get his chance and no doubt he'll take it.
I've got an international forward line and I have to leave someone out.
I can't win.’
Ray Parlour, 19, is back in the squad and is likely to be on the substitutes' bench.
Arsenal will go top of the League for the first time since May '91 today if they beat Coventry and Blackburn slip up against Spurs at Ewood Park.
But Bobby Gould's Coventry take the best away record of the Premier League to Highbury.
They are unbeaten in seven away games and they love London.
Only Spurs have beaten them in their last nine visits to the capital.
‘Something has got to give,’ said Gould.
‘It should be a humdinger of a match.’
Coventry could recall Robert Rosario in place of on-loan West Brom striker Paul Williams.
Rangers Euro boost
Rob Shepherd
RANGERS have been handed the key to success in the European Cup.
Yesterday's draw for the mini-league stage of the competition saw the conquerors of Leeds avoid favourites AC Milan.
Their group comprises Marseille, CSKA Moscow and Bruges, each of whom they will play on a home and away basis.
But because of the severe winters in Russia, their ‘away’ match against the team CSKA Moscow, who knocked out holders Barcelona, is set be played in the Catalan capital at Espanol's ground on December 9, which can only help their cause against the powerful Muscovites.
Ibrox chairman David Murray admitted: ‘It looks a reasonable draw but there will be no easy games.
After our first match against Marseille we will get a better idea of our chances.’
Rangers kick off their campaign against the French champions in Glasgow on Wednesday week, as they begin their quest to win the group and reach the final next May.
EUROPEAN CUP: Group A: Bruges, CSKA Moscow, Rangers, Marseille.
Group B: Porto, PSV Eindhoven, IFK Gothenburg, AC Milan.
Rangers' fixtures: November 25:(H) v Marseille; December 9:(A) v CSKA Moscow; March 3:(A) v Bruges; March 17:(H) v Bruges; April 7:(A) v Marseille; April 21:(H) v CSKA Moscow.
I could have won title for United — Atkinson
By Graham Fisher
ASTON VILLA manager Ron Atkinson last night heightened the tension surrounding today's Premier League match of the day by pointing out that it is exactly six years ago to the day since Manchester United sacked him.
United visit Villa Park, and Atkinson wistfully linked the past with the present when he said: ‘If I'd had Dean Saunders at United, we would have won the Championship and I might still be manager of Manchester United.’
Saunders has scored eight times and Villa haven't lost a game since his £2.3 million move from Liverpool.
It was his goal that knocked United out of the Coca-Cola Cup, and Atkinson added: ‘Saunders is the best natural striker I've ever worked with.
‘Alongside Mark Hughes, Norman Whiteside, Gordon Strachan, Arnold Muhren and Bryan Robson in my team, United would have won everything.’
Problem
Villa are currently fourth in the table, but with Bryan Robson making his long-awaited return from injury today, Atkinson warned: ‘Robbo will be a great influence on United.
He was the best all-round player I ever worked with.
‘They beat us twice last season, and he was our greatest problem both times.
He gives them tremendous know-how, and the fact that he has been out for so long won't affect him.
‘He's one of the few naturally fit players who can come straight back in after injury and look as though he's never been out.
This will be our toughest challenge of the season.
United will by extra-motivated by the fact that we knocked them out of the Coca-Cola Cup, and Robbo's return.
‘They know that if they lose this one, then a gap opens up at the top.
United won't want to be cut adrift of Arsenal, the team we all have to get past to win the Championship.’
Atkinson, cheered by 'keeper Nigel Spink agreeing a new two-year extension to his contract, has called up fit-again striker Cyrille Regis, insisting: ‘He's not there to be an ornament.’
That means he could be thinking of linking Regis with Saunders and pushing Dalian Atkinson wide.
United's Darren Ferguson is likely to give way for Robson's return, but manager Alex Ferguson softened the blow for his son when he said: ‘The players know I've been loyal to them because they have fought hard with little reward.
‘But their confidence has slumped.
They know that if I make one or two changes it won't reflect on anyone who is left out.
‘I thought we were unlucky to lose our Coca-Cola match at Villa Park.
I expect another close game, and I'm confident we can get back to winning ways.’
History backs Fergie's optimism — United have lost only one of 10 League games against Villa in his time — but current form suggests otherwise.
The fading Reds have managed only one win in 11 outings, and they have scored only six goals.
Lee Sharpe is also back in the squad, full of beans after seven junior games.
The young England winger, laid low with illness since the start of the season, is likely to be substitute.
Lay off Keane — Clough
By Graham Fisher
NOTTINGHAM Forest manager Brian Clough gave a typically scathing response to suggestions that Blackburn Rovers were ready to buy his coveted Irish cap, Roy Keane.
In a cutting reference to Rovers' multi-millionaire chairman, he scoffed: ‘Jack Walker might as well buy Walker's Crisps before he gets Roy Keane.
‘I'll keep Roy because he's got 18 months left on his contract.
He likes me and he likes Nottingham.
He is an exceptionally talented young man and we don't need the money.’
Clough also took a verbal swipe at the Blackburn manager.
‘If Kenny Dalglish wants Roy Keane he has only to dial the club,’ he added.
‘Then he'll need to take another nine month's sabbatical when he hears my reply.’
The relegation-haunted Forest manager added: ‘I am looking to sign players, not sell them.’
He revealed that he had made bids for reinforcements and reaffirmed that his major target was Manchester United outcast, Neil Webb.
Clough said: ‘We have expressed an interest in Webb but that's hardly surprising.
He was very happy with us but wanted to see if the grass was greener elsewhere.
‘We are interested but that's as far as it has gone because Alex Ferguson has shown no desire to let him go, and that's despite the fact that Neil has not been in his first team.
But that's Alex's prerogative.’
Webb, who joined United for £1.5 million just over three years ago, has started only three games this season and none in the Premier League.
Ferguson will let him go but is looking to recoup around Pounds 1m for the midfielder, whose Old Trafford career never really recovered from a crippling injury in England's colours soon after his move.
Webb has constantly said he is happy to carry on at Old Trafford and fight for his place.
But if terms were agreed he would be off like a shot.
He said recently: ‘I would not say no if United were willing to release me.
Brian Clough taught me everything about playing midfield.’
Clough's offer to date falls short of Ferguson's valuation but the longer Forest struggle the longer the United chief can afford to wait.
Meanwhile Clough is desperate for a good result at Everton today.
He said: ‘I haven't got a grandmother but if I had one I would shoot her in the foot if it meant getting three points.’
I'm not playing grandad
By Tony Roche
STUART BARNES last night warned Rob Andrew that he wants his England shirt.
Bath's fly-half leads England B against South Africa at Bristol today insisting: ‘I do not accept that Rob is the automatic first-choice for the senior team.
‘I did not come back to international rugby just to be the grandad of the B side.
I want to play for my country and believe I am the man for the job.’
Despite helping Bath become one of the best club sides in the world, Barnes's international career has been a miserable disappointment.
Last capped against Fiji in Suva more than four years ago, he has made only eight England appearances — and his four Five Nations games have all been as a replacement.
‘I walked away and put things on hold for a couple of years but now I am committed to getting that shirt,’ he added.
‘My game is more suitable to the new laws.
I believe I am a more flexible player who can sometimes play off the cuff and throw the opposition.
‘Rob prefers to come out with the complete picture in his mind, the game-plan mapped out.
He is a great player but we are different types of fly-half.’
Barnes has fired up a powerful B side and told them: ‘We are going to set down a performance that will make the selectors take notice.
‘We are the first England representative team to face the Springboks in 23 years and we must make it a memorable day, one the selectors cannot ignore.’
Meanwhile, Bristol police last night stepped up security plans for the match.
A spokesman said: ‘We have been told to expect anti-apartheid action and although the ANC requested no such protests for this tour, it seems some people seem determined to carry on anyway.
‘So we will take steps to deal with this.’
Barnes is back
By Des Kelly
LIVERPOOL'S John Barnes makes a dramatic return to action today to give the Mersey giants a timely boost.
The England star takes the first step towards his long-awaited comeback in an A-team game this afternoon, five months after suffering a career-threatening Achilles injury.
While Graeme Souness's men take on Middlesbrough in an attempt to recover from their midweek European exit, Barnes will spend his 29th birthday bidding to resurrect his personal fortunes at the club's training ground.
The Jamaican-born winger is six weeks ahead of schedule and if he comes through this test against a Tranmere side, he will be on target for an appearance in the Premier League match at QPR on November 23.
Setbacks
Following a year-long succession of injury setbacks, Barnes then broke down just 12 minutes into England's clash with Finland last June, their final warm-up match before the European Championships.
It was feared he would not be ready for any contest until Christmas, but intensive treatment at Lilleshall has paid dividends sooner than anticipated.
As he awaits news of Barnes's progress, Souness will welcome back £2.2m midfielder Paul Stewart for the visit of Boro.
Souness said: ‘Stewart has not really started his Liverpool career yet because of injuries.
He has been affected by hamstring problems twice since joining us.
Now I'm hoping he can have a good run and show what he is capable of.’
Mike Hooper retains the goalkeeper's jersey ahead of David James following his solid display against Spartak Moscow.
Torben Piechnik will resume at centre-half, but Michael Thomas is out injured.
Boxing blow
BRITON Dave Pierre was knocked out by Frenchman Valery Kayumba in the ninth round of his European light-welterweight title bout in Luxembourg.
Crowe cracker
MARTIN CROWE hit a match-winning 94 as New Zealand (272–6) beat Zimbabwe (271–6) by four wickets with more than four overs to spare in a one-day cricket international in Harare yesterday.
Cole £2m price tag
BRISTOL CITY have blocked Nottingham Forest's interest in Andy Cole by slapping a £2 million price tag on the 21-year-old striker.
Boss Denis Smith, after Saturday's 3–0 win over BIRMINGHAM, said: ‘I am not in the business of selling my best players.’
BRISTOL ROVERS midfielder Andy Reece moaned after going down 5–1 to WOLVES: ‘There is no way they were four goals better than us.’
Boss Malcolm Crosby, after SUNDERLAND'S 5–2 disaster at PETERBOROUGH, said: ‘It is the fans I feel sorry for.’
Ireland look to Ruddock
IRELAND, bottom of the Five Nations' Championship last season, may turn to a Welshman to lead them in the 1995 rugby union World Cup in South Africa.
The man they have in mind for national coach is Swansea coach Mike Ruddock.
Cram record
STEVE CRAM produced a record-breaking run to win the North Eastern Counties 10-kilometre road running championship at Heaton yesterday in 28min 46sec.
Haynes joy
DESMOND HAYNES (66) and Keith Arthurton (50no) led the West Indies to 235–3, a lead of 276, in the second innings of their match against Western Australia.
Perfect Peter
PETER LINES, the 22-year-old from Leeds, booked a semi-final spot in the Benson & Hedges Championship in Glasgow last night by crushing the much-fancied Willie Thorne 5–1.
Nelson reigns
AZUMAH NELSON of Ghana retained his WBC super-feather title in Lake Tahoe but Calvin Grove went the distance after being floored in the first round.
Boks serve up real treat
Tony Roche
England B 16, South Africa 20:
THE anxious huddle that was England's management were in full debate in the main stand at the end of a spectacle that will be talked about for decades.
Manager Geoff Cooke and his coaches had the look of men unashamedly glad South Africa are not here on a longer tour because the Boks are getting better by the minute.
Impressed by the all-round excellence of Springbok No 8 Adriaan Richter, England reacted by giving Bath's Ben Clarke another crack at him on Saturday, and by recalling Mike Teague at blindside for his first international since the World Cup final.
Stuart Barnes, who captained England B superbly, warned: ‘Their pack is strong, their scrum solid and England must play at their best to stop these guys pulling off a shock.’
Barnes played his heart out but failed to melt the hearts of selectors, who preferred to give Rob Andrew his 50th cap for Saturday's Twickenham showdown.
The little Bath wizard kept England B driving forward and changed a 5–8 half-time deficit into an 11–8 lead with two penalties early in the second period.
But not even Barnes could break down a Springbok side able to absorb the most intense pressure and punish every error.
Barnes added: ‘We have not solved the mystery of unlocking their defence, but it is something the management will discuss a lot over the next few days.’
The Boks were shrewdly marshalled by 34-year-old Naas Botha, and inspired by 34-year-old Danie Gerber in a game which fully deserved the standing ovation from a packed Memorial Ground in Bristol.
Botha dropped an early goal, Ian Hunter thundered over for an unforgettable try, and Drikus Hattingh scored one for the tourists just before the break.
Barnes turned the game with his penalties, but possession alone was not enough to break a Springbok side which defends with a pride born of historical arrogance.
Superb
The turning point came in the 64th minute, when winger Jacques Olivier burned off the challenge of Nigel Heslop, exchanged passes with Gerber and scored a superb try.
England's management turned white when scrum-half Garth Wright drove his pack on the offensive, crushing England on a five metre scrum with Richter picking up and plonking down without hindrance.
Botha converted, and not even Tony Underwood's marvellous late try could rescue a game which left everyone breathless.
Aussies wary of Wales
Giles Smith
Wales B 11, Australia 24
WALES deserve the favouritism for next week's Test against world champions Australia, according to Wallaby coach Bob Dwyer.
Dwyer, who guided the Aussies to World Cup victory last year, insists: ‘There has been such an improvement in Welsh rugby it could be us who go in as underdogs.’
The tourists took until late in the third quarter to overcome Wales B on Saturday at Cardiff Arms Park.
And the Welsh camp agreed that the huge gap between the sides has narrowed.
Missed
B team manager Derek Quinnell said: ‘We are certainly competition for them again, which we weren't a year ago.’
Wales B could have repeated Swansea's midweek defeat of the world champions but Llanelli outside-half Colin Stephens missed with three penalties, a conversion and a drop goal — 14 points that would have made the difference.
Wales actually led 6–3 into the second half but tries to Damien Smith and Garrick Morgan and a conversion and three penalties by full-back Marty Roebuck put the Aussies 24–6 ahead.
Wales deserved their consolation try, scored by Nigel Davies.
Scu's crown could be slipping
Colin Cooper
PETER Scudamore's seven-season monopoly on the champion jump jockeys' title could be under threat, according to the bookies.
Ladbrokes yesterday opened a book for the first time on the title and make Scudamore an apparently generous 4–6 shot.
Richard Dunwoody is quoted at 13–8 after a magnificent five-timer at Chepstow on Saturday put him four clear at the top of the table.
Adrian Maguire, sharing second place with Scudamore on 35 winners, is rated an 8–1 chance.
‘Usually it's not worth our while quoting odds — Scudamore is so far ahead,’ said Ladbrokes' Mike Dillon.
‘But this year things could easily be different.’
William Hill are more optimistic about Scudamore's chances, quoting him at 4–9.
They then offer 3–1 Dunwoody (from 4s) and 4–1 Maguire (from 20s).
Top weight Katabatic has a lung infection and will not run in Saturday's Mackeson Gold Cup.
His defection means a 10lb rise in the weights, enabling last year's winner and ante-post favourite Another Coral to race off his correct mark.
Irish raider General Idea warmed up for the Mackeson with a win at Punchestown yesterday.
Bates issues challenge
Giles Smith
JEREMY BATES last night joined Jo Durie as British national tennis champion and then challenged the younger generation to ‘learn to compete’ to take over their mantle.
After beating last year's champion, Andrew Castle, 7–5, 6–3 at Telford, Bates, 30, declared: ‘There are young players coming along who are hitting the ball well — what they need to learn is how to compete.
‘If they were in any other country, they would be winning and they would be top players.’
Bates, who took his fourth Volkswagen national title, echoed Durie, 31, who clinched her seventh in 10 years on Saturday.
After defeating Brighton's unseeded Julie Salmon 6–3, 6–3, the British No 1 wondered why younger players she beat in the past didn't ask her advice.
‘No one comes to me after our matches to talk about what they could have done better,’ said Durie.
Castle, 28, who is quitting full-time tennis, was even more gloomy about the future of the British game after a disastrous year when the men were knocked out of the Davis Cup's elite group and the women were similarly relegated in the Federation Cup.
‘I just don't know where we go from here,’ said Castle.
‘The guys who could make the breakthrough are in the 15–17 age bracket.
Unfortunately patience is a word we don't want to hear again.’
Tea the toast of slick Saints
Ray French
St Helens 15, Leeds 14
TEA ROPATI grabbed his first drop goal in three seasons to sneak St Helens into this morning's second-round draw of the Regal Trophy.
And afterwards the Kiwi stand-off, who earlier looked likely to be the villain after botching four shots at goal, admitted: ‘The misses were playing on my mind.
I realised defeat or even a draw would rest on my shoulders.’
Ropati snapped the 35-yard drop goal with five minutes left after Leeds' ex-All Black, John Gallagher, had dramatically levelled the score at 14–14.
But Saints owed much to Welsh scrum-half Jonathan Griffiths and the courage and grit of their forwards.
Griffiths, with 40 and 50-yard dashes in midfield, inspired 12-man Saints after fiery second rower Sonny Nickle was sinbinned by Halifax referee Jim Smith in the 69th minute for a foul tackle on Leeds full-back Alan Tait.
Both sides lost Test stars just before kick-off — Leeds stand-off Garry Schofield with a hamstring injury and Saints prop Kevin Ward (neck).
But there was no lack of class on show, especially in a fast and furious opening 40 minutes when Saints young guns Gary Connolly and Alan Hunte ripped in for three tries.
Leeds forwards Ellery Hanley, Gary Mercer and Shaun Wane slugged it out toe-to-toe and backs Craig Innes, Jim Fallon and Andy Gregory more than matched Saints.
Twice, cheeky scrum-half Gregory tore Saints' defence apart.
His fourth-minute chip kick saw Kiwi second rower Mercer crash over for the opening try, while a clever short pass 13 minutes later created a touchdown for former England B rugby union winger Fallon.
And Gallagher's three goals looked to be providing Leeds with a huge payday at Headingley…until Ropati struck.
Joy for Crusaders
LONDON CRUSADERS produced a Regal Trophy shock yesterday by beating Wakefield Trinity, winners of this season's Yorkshire Cup, 30–0.
Wakefield went behind to a fourth-minute penalty by Chris Smith.
He added two more penalties before Darryl Pitt and Shane Buckley grabbed a try apiece.
Three more tries followed to rub more salt into Trinity's wounds and put Crusaders into the second round of the Regal Trophy for only the second time in their history.
Meanwhile, Frano Botica helped himself to 24 points, two tries and eight goals, as Wigan beat French champions, Carcassonne 52–0 — and then admitted his job was on the line.
‘Our coach John Monie has told Martin Crompton and myself that the scrum-half position is between the two of us and that he'll decide on one in a month,’ he revealed.
Villa stake a claim
Rob Shepherd
Aston Villa 1, Manchester United 0
THERE is no greater expert on what it takes to win the Championship than Aston Villa captain Kevin Richardson.
He has won titles at two different clubs — Everton and Arsenal — and to do so at a third would be unique.
After a day which saw United's chances once again undermined by their inability to score, Richardson believes Villa showed just why they are capable of putting up a genuine challenge.
Richardson said: ‘When we won the title at Highbury, George Graham drummed it into us that we would have to be resilient and consistent.
And that's the way we are approaching it here at the moment.
Discipline
‘We may have only won 1–0, but it never looked as if we would lose.
‘Last season in a similar sort of game, we might have lost our shape and the game.
But this season we are sticking together, keeping our discipline and if one goal is enough, so be it.’
‘We are looking very solid, and showing that if we are put under pressure we can cope with it.’
While United had much of the possession, Villa showed a rugged ability to counter it.
Richardson, Garry Parker, Ray Houghton and Steve Staunton were formidable in midfield, Paul McGrath and Shaun Teale outstanding at the back.
But McGrath, who has had eight operations on his knees, revealed this could be his swansong, saying: ‘I will decide at the end of the season, but I'd rather quit at the top than drop down to a lower level, and the knees cause me a lot of pain.
‘I have to play with pain-killing injections and I'm not able to train except for a short time doing set-pieces on a Friday.’
You couldn't tell by the way he performed.
But it is the potent striking partnership of Dalian Atkinson, who scored Villa's 11th-minute winner, and Dean Saunders which gives Villa real possibilities.
Their pace enables Villa to break on the counter with devastating effect.
United manager Alex Ferguson could only look on enviously.
Having dropped Brian McClair, the combination of Mark Hughes, Ryan Giggs and Lee Sharpe failed to solve their attacking problems.
Ferguson is now resolved to buying a goalscorer.
Although on-trial Norwegian striker Tore Andre Dahlum plays for the reserves on Wednesday, Ferguson admits he is for the future, and he must plunge now.
Proven strikers are few and far between and Ferguson cannot afford to gamble on potential.
So he could do no worse than consider Tony Cottee, unwanted by Everton, Tranmere's John Aldridge or Clive Allen of West Ham.
MoM: McGrath (crock of gold).
Sheron pops up to solve City striking rate
David Alexander
Man City 4, Leeds 0
MANCHESTER CITY can call off their wide-ranging search for a goalscorer — the man they want has been at the club all the time.
Mike Sheron, with four goals in four games, has prompted three successive Premier League wins, pushed City to seventh and turned the Maine Road jeers to cheers.
The 20-year-old lightweight, from manager Peter Reid's home town of Liverpool, scored the first, made the second and was always trouble for Leeds.
Physically there's not much to Sheron but Niall Quinn, his partner in a little-and-large strike-force, has no doubt about his talent for sniffing out goals.
‘He's a wonderful finisher and could save this club a fortune,’ said the 6ft 4in Irishman.
‘He reads things so well he reminds me of Clive Allen.’
Allen has around 250 career goals and his combination with Quinn at City always looked dangerous.
Clearly Quinn, just one League goal this season, is hoping Sheron's arrival will change his luck, too.
Just 11 days earlier, the big striker was booed off at Maine Road following a Coca-Cola Cup defeat by Spurs but it was different this time, even though he has not scored a goal since.
Quinn might have had a hat-trick and added: ‘The last two games have been among my best performances here.
The fans were right to give me stick but they've been good to me and it's great to come off to a reception like that.’
The scoreline was unkind to Leeds, who should have been one up through Rod Wallace but were one down when poor defending let Sheron in.
Sheron cleverly created the second for David White after 36 minutes and keeper Mervyn Day saved well from Quinn twice.
Defenders Andy Hill and Ian Brightwell then ran from the back to score in the last 16 minutes.
Leeds, though, had good spells and 37-year-old Day, their goalkeeping coach brought in to replace the injured John Lukic, said: ‘City weren't four goals better than us but the players need a rest.
‘They were down after the Rangers result, it left an indelible mark.
We play Watford and then have 10 days off.
It might be better if they put their feet up.’
MoM: Quinn (tower of strength).
Pacesetters put on grand style
John Wardle
Newcastle 0, Swindon 0
KEVIN KEEGAN and Glenn Hoddle took more than 28,000 fans on a trip down quality street yesterday.
But, despite the talent on show, the journey finished in a dead end in terms of goals.
Hoddle's pivotal role in Swindon's sweeper system stifled United's customary flowing football.
And, for all intelligent prompting of Micky Hazard and Martin Ling, the visitors rarely threatened to spoil Newcastle stand-in keeper Pavel Srnicek's big day.
The Czech Under-21 international, playing his first League game for more than a year, suggested he is ready to throw off his ‘eccentric’ label with important saves from Craig Maskell and David Mitchell.
Swindon keeper Nicky Hammond was equally alert as he kept out efforts from Liam O'Brien and Kevin Sheedy, while Colin Calderwood cleared off the line from David Kelly.
Both managers were content with a result which leaves United in top spot and Swindon third.
Keegan admitted: ‘It was a fair result.
Swindon proved they are one of the quality sides.
‘I would have loved to have seen some goals, but there was still some great football played.
Hoddle agreed: ‘The crowd have seen two teams who will be in there at the death, although it's going to be very close.’
Allen counts cost
Geoff Sweet
MARTIN ALLEN is counting the cost of missing West Ham's next three games through suspension.
‘With win bonuses and appearance money, we could be talking about £2,000 just before Christmas and I don't like that,’ he said, after Saturday's 2–0 win over Notts County.
MILLWALL defender Colin Cooper showed why Nottingham Forest have been pursuing him with a fine display in their 2–1 win at DERBY.
And BRENTFORD'S Lee Luscombe scored twice in their 2–0 win over CHARLTON.
Kevin shows class
David Tossell
Chelsea 3, C Palace 1
CHELSEA'S newly-signed Russian international keeper, Dimitri Kharin, needed no interpreter to understand Kevin Hitchcock's message.
Kharin, unable to speak a word of English, saw Hitchcock pull off one of the saves of the season as he watched his first match following a £400,000 transfer from CSKA Moscow.
The 24-year-old faces a wait of six weeks for a work permit and Hitchcock will use that time to advance his claims on the No 1 jersey.
Blues boss Ian Porterfield admitted: ‘It's up to Kevin to keep playing well.’
And Porterfield had every reason to be delighted with the way Hitchcock saved Chris Armstrong's header when Chelsea led 1–0.
Crystal Palace, meanwhile, have the look of relegation about them after a Richard Shaw own goal and the dismissal of Lee Sinnott summed up their day.
Goals from Graham Stuart and Mick Harford added to their misery, which even Eric Young's goal couldn't ease.
MoM: Andy Townsend, Chelsea (driving force).
Olney's big race
OLDHAM'S Ian Olney faces a race against time to be fit for tonight's Premier League match against Norwich at Boundary park.
The £700,000 striker missed the last two games with a badly bruised shoulder, but he has been back in training for the last couple of days and will have a late fitness check tonight.
Manager Joe Royle said: ‘We will leave it until the last minute to give him every chance.’
Norwich's record signing Darren Beckford has recovered from injury and is set to make his first senior appearance of the season as the Canaries bid to move back to the top of the table.
Midfielder Gary Megson rejoins the squad after an eight-week lay-off with a torn hamstring, while right-back Ian Culverhouse returns after a foot injury.
Gough out
Scott McMunn
RICHARD GOUGH is out of Scotland's World Cup match with Italy at Ibrox on Wednesday week with a recurrence of a groin strain.
And his Rangers team-mate, John Brown, who was in the squad for the Portugal match, is in doubt with a hamstring injury.
Ibrox boss Walter Smith admitted after their 1–0 win over Celtic: ‘We have had too many games.
I said playing the European Championships in Sweden would later take its toll on players and I have been proved correct.’
Shearer stifled by old pal Neil
Graham Fisher
Blackburn Rovers 0, Tottenham Hotspur 2
I AM inclined to agree with Alan Shearer.
What kind of slump is it when England's most expensive striker has yet to go more than two games without a goal?
That is the kind of dry spell some strikers not too distant from Ewood Park would sell their grandmother for.
True, Shearer got little change from the skirmish with Neil Ruddock, his pal from Southampton days.
‘Alan didn't score, but he doesn't play against me every week,’ quipped the jubilant Spurs defender, whose baby daughter is shortly to become Shearer's god-daughter.
Shearer took the ribbing as philosophically as he took the tackles, then assured anxious witnesses the goals would return.
‘I've got 16 already,’ he pointed out, ‘so I'm not grumbling.’
Superior
Critics who fear his so-called lean spell will diminish England's cutting edge against Turkey next week ignore the fact that Shearer will have superior supply lines at Wembley.
It was easy during a drab first hour at Ewood to imagine the likes of Roy Keane or Ian Durrant, not to mention Gazza, making a guest appearance in Blackburn's midfield.
It wasn't as though Tim Sherwood or Gordon Cowans let the side down, just the thought — shared I'm sure by Kenny Dalglish — that a master craftsman might have tried something else to unlock Tottenham's well-manned fortress.
A lack of vision has pegged Rovers back in the last month, plus diligent homework by the likes of Spurs…not any fall from grace on Shearer's part.
Tottenham's fine victory, especially in the last 20 minutes, was full of reassuring evidence that the Terry Venables vision is on the march again, a state of affairs to be welcomed.
It's a curious thing but fans of all persuasions, even in the stubborn North, seem to have a soft spot for Spurs — maybe because, for as long as anyone can remember, they have tried to play the game.
Dalglish emerged from a half-hour inquest behind locked doors to offer one of his proverbs: ‘Before you taste success you get a lot of disappointment.’
It was meant for his own depressed troops, but stand the statement on its head and the words offer huge encouragement to Spurs.
At White Hart Lane, the season began with all the disappointments it could take.
Now, after six games without defeat and the first away win in place, striker Gordon Durie is even talking about joining the title race.
The game plan was based on defence — where the admirable David Howells sat defiantly in front of the back four — and tireless running elsewhere, particularly from Vinny Samways and Durie.
Coach Doug Livermore was highly chuffed.
‘We played very well on the day and it's looking good,’ he said.
‘There's a very happy dressing room back there.’
Howells left his station to score the first after 67 minutes, and by the time Teddy Sheringham had tucked away a second from the penalty spot — earned by the sheer stamina of Durie — Spurs could have had a couple more.
Naive
Dalglish admitted: ‘We found it hard to break down their system, which was a compliment to the lads in itself.
We were a little naive at times.’
But I can't see the man who squirmed through six successive defeats last spring and still reached the Premier League losing too much sleep.
This campaign is still a good one, and there's always Uncle Jack to turn to.
MoM: Samways (always on the go).
Forest consider life without Clough
David Harrison
Nottm Forest 0, Everton 1:
NOTTINGHAM Forest are starting to contemplate a future without Brian Clough.
As he struggles to banish the threat of relegation from the Premier League, 57-year-old Clough is beginning to show outward signs of a lifetime in football management.
And his bottom-of-the-table Forest side looked similarly browbeaten after slipping to their ninth defeat of the season.
Clough went into the match against Everton wondering whether another setback might bring him the sack on the day he joined the Nottinghamshire miners on a protest march.
Forest Chairman Fred Reacher removed any fears that his manager would be joining the pit men in the dole queue, but he hinted that this might be Clough's last season in charge.
Reacher said: ‘When Cloughie first came to Forest, several clubs tried to touch him up, but he honoured his contract.
‘I'm prepared to honour it now.
He has a signed contract until the end of this season, and a word of mouth agreement for another year.
‘I certainly expect him to see this season out.
I don't think he'll run away from it.
‘Sometimes in life you have to stick together through thick and thin.
This is one of the thin times, but I can't think of any other manager to do a better job for Nottingham Forest at the moment than Brian Clough.’
Reacher confirmed he had thought about possible replacements for Clough, and he admitted the job would probably go to a Forest insider.
He said: ‘There's every likelihood of a closed shop when we look at alternatives.
And that is covered by a big umbrella.
It could include former players who have now left the club.
‘But I believe things will start to improve before long.
When we have turned the corner, I will sit down with the manager and discuss the future with him.’
Howard Kendall could breath a little easier after Paul Rideout's 52nd-minute header — his first league goal for the club — gave the Merseysiders a long overdue victory.
There was a bonus for the Everton boss in that he seems to have discovered the creative midfield force he has been lacking, and it is a player he signed during his first spell at the club five-and-a-half years ago.
Ian Snodin, back after four hamstrings and two knee operations, said: ‘That was my first 90 minutes for two-and-a-half years, and it's been four years since I played a full match in midfield.
‘I'm shattered, but delighted to have got it under my belt.
It was so important for us to win today.
If we'd lost we could have gone bottom of the table and that would have been disastrous for a club like Everton.
‘But I don't think either ourselves or Forest will be struggling down there at the end of the season.’
MOM: Ian Snodin, Everton (Midfield master).
Hirst makes point
David Alexander
Sheff U 1, Sheff W 1
STRIKER David Hirst yesterday reminded Graham Taylor that if England are in need of a goalscorer, he could provide the perfect answer.
Hirst, not in England's plans against Turkey next week, stamped justice on to the scoreline with a deserved equaliser six minutes from time at Bramall Lane.
It was his eighth goal in 10 games of a season in which he has been badly affected by injury and left out of Taylor's plans because of a question mark over his match-fitness.
Clever
But Hirst showed he is close to being back to his sharpest again, pouncing on a clever Chris Waddle ball in the 84th minute to beat Alan Kelly.
It was a goal Wednesday had threatened almost from the point when United took the lead on the hour through Adrian Littlejohn, who touched in a Brian Deane header to make it four goals in nine League games.
Mark Bright had two excellent chances to steal it in the closing stages but a draw was perhaps fair.
Afterwards Hirst said: ‘My goals ratio is very satisfactory and I hope to be in competition for a place in the next England squad.’
Tip-top Arsenal look a good bet
Ben Bacon
Arsenal 3, Coventry 0:
WANT to take the speculating out of investing?
Then put your money on Arsenal for the Championship.
At least, that's the financial advice any Arsenal fan will give you after the way they toyed with and destroyed Coventry using an explosive cocktail of skill, imagination and old-fashioned strengths.
And more disturbingly for the other clubs with ambition, the display promises even greater deeds.
Not even Jack Walker's chequebook at Blackburn or Ron Atkinson's golden touch at Aston Villa look like preventing Arsenal from romping to their third title in five seasons.
Ominous
Arsenal's jump to the top of the pile — they were last there in May 1991 — is ominous indeed, particularly as they're on one of their famous rolls.
This was their sixth successive League victory, and though it was only the first time they have scored three goals in a game this season, everyone at Highbury knows it could have been seven.
Captain Tony Adams had promised Arsenal were ready ‘to give some unlucky team a tonking’, and only the woodwork and some slack second-half finishing ensured it wasn't Coventry, although their unbeaten away record was comprehensively shredded.
Arsenal blew Coventry away in a whirlwind first half with a goal apiece from Alan Smith, Ian Wright and Kevin Campbell.
Wright was the pick of the bunch, showing athleticism to control Smith's pass and remarkable coolness and supreme confidence to lob the towering Steve Ogrizovic.
During that 45 minutes, when Arsenal fans must have thought they had been transported from Highbury to Camelot, even Anders Limpar on the bench was forgotten by them.
Coventry, meanwhile, missed the driving force of the injured Stewart Robson in midfield, from where David Hillier and the impressive John Jensen conducted operations for Arsenal.
Bobby Gould, the Coventry manager, had paid Arsenal the ultimate respect by changing tactics in the hope of nullifying Paul Merson and the Gunners, but it backfired.
Arsenal manager George Graham's response to his side's march back to the top was as predictable as the result.
‘There are two thirds of the season left and it's not as cut and dried as everyone thinks,’ he claimed.
‘There are lots of twists to come.
Blackburn will be there or thereabouts at the end of the season, especially with the chequebook.’
Skipper Adams was equally guarded, but said: ‘We're playing good football and we haven't been turned over this season.
‘We've lost four games, but haven't been playing that badly, whereas last season we got turned over at Aston Villa and Everton.
‘We're there or thereabouts now and even though we might have lost by the odd goal, we're still bubbling.
‘A big club like Arsenal have got to go for every major honour, our fans expect it.
‘We've got to be up there challenging and if we're not, then people will have a go at us.
I hope we can stay at the top for the rest of the season.’
MoM: Wright, Arsenal (Mr Magic).
Wilkins wind-up
Adrian Holloway
Wimbledon 0 QPR 2
ENGLAND new boy Les Ferdinand has Ray Wilkins's nagging to thank for his call-up for the Turkey match later this month.
Wilkins superbly chipped Rangers's second goal and then directed a verbal torrent at Ferdinand.
‘Ray's always moaning at me to get in the box.
He never stops nagging,’ Ferdinand said.
‘He's a deliberate pain to be honest but his yelling has made a difference.
He hounds me into scoring positions and now I'm in the England squad.
Ray has had a lot to do with that.’
Wilkins's brilliant goal killed off Wimbledon, who looked toothless without John Fashanu.
Bradley Allen scored his third goal in four games to give Rangers the lead and tipped strike partner Ferdinand for a long England career.
‘Les has got what it takes for international football.
If he keeps scoring, he'll take some stopping,’ he said.
MoM: Allen,(a real livewire).
Ronny eases Rush burden
Des Kelly
Liverpool 4 Middlesbrough 1
IAN RUSH reached yet another milestone in his record-breaking career before calling for regular help to ease his scoring burden.
The Welsh striker capped a rousing display from the Anfield outfit with his 200th League goal, a triumph that swept away the disappointment of Wednesday night's Cup Winners' Cup exit.
But later Rush, often used as a lone-raider this season, singled out the contribution of partner Ronny Rosenthal as the major factor in sparking Liverpool into life.
He said: ‘Ronny unsettles defenders because he is prepared to run at them and they don't like that.
Easier
‘And it makes life easier when I have somebody alongside me.
It takes a bit of weight off my shoulders.’
Middlesbrough found it impossible to come to terms with the Israeli as he snatched two first-half goals.
Unfortunately for boss Graeme Souness, Rosenthal disappears on international duty this week and will miss the Coca-Cola Cup replay against Sheffield United.
In contrast, Boro boss Lennie Lawrence said: ‘I'll be looking to bring in at least one signing before the next match.’
After Rosenthal's double strike, Boro's Jimmy Phillips pulled one back from the penalty spot after an acrobatic dive from John Hendrie but Steve McManaman restored the advantage with a thumping drive.
Typically, Rush had the final say.
MoM: Torben Piechnik, Liverpool (classy).
Mighty Monkou
Julie Tunney
Ipswich 0 Southampton 0
UNDERFIRE boss Ian Branfoot cited defender Ken Monkou as a major factor in struggling Saints picking up only their sixth away point of the season.
He added: ‘I'm astounded he has not been on the fringe of the Dutch team.’
Monkou, bought from Chelsea for £750,000 this season, limited Chris Kiwomya's attacking abilities in a game of few opportunities.
And Ipswich team manager Mick McGiven, Monkou's former coach at Stamford Bridge, said: ‘I don't think I've seen a better marking job on Chris.’
MoM: John Wark, Ipswich (young head on old shoulders).
Nerves wreck Woosie
Bill Blighton in Madrid
IAN WOOSNAM walked off the last green a nervous wreck after losing a sudden-death play-off against Brett Ogle in the Philip Morris World Cup here yesterday.
His dream of equalling Jack Nicklaus's record of three individual titles was wrecked by the tall Australian, who birdied the first extra hole from six feet.
It was a double blow for the courageous Welshman, with he and partner Mark Mouland having to settle for third place in the team event, which was won by America after Fred Couples and Davis Love both birdied the final hole to beat Sweden by one stroke.
Woosnam, who shot six birdies in seven holes to tie with Ogle on 270, said: ‘I'm still shaking — look at my hands.
I was just so nervous and negative standing over the putts, especially those from around two feet.
‘I was literally trembling.
I hate it when I get like this.
If it happened all the time, I would give up the game — I'd quit.
This always happens to me when I play on grainy greens.’
Woosnam failed from eight feet or less on four of the opening six holes, and it proved crucial as Ogle rattled in four birdies in a 69 before snatching the biggest win of his career.
But a defiant Woosnam, who won the individual crown in 1987 and again last year, added: ‘I wanted that third title very badly, and I'll keep coming back until I beat Nicklaus's record.’
Pride
He collected a total of £55,000 for his troubles, and Wales — runners-up in the team tournament last year — eventually finished six strokes behind America, who restored some pride after their failure in last month's Dunhill Cup.
Couples and Love, ranked first and second respectively in the US, trailed defending champions Sweden by two shots when Per-Ulrik Johansson eagled the 16th from 25 feet.
But the young Swede's heroic 65 ended in tears when he missed from just over a yard at the final hole, while Love sank a twisting 15 footer and Couples followed him in from 18 inches.
The US pair returned a 28-under-par combined four-round total of 548, and US Masters champion Couples declared: ‘Davis's putt on the last green won it for us, and I feel very sorry for Per-Ulrik.
‘He played great golf and it was very sad for him to lose by missing that putt.’
The Americans, who took the title for the 18th time, shared Pounds 155,000, with Sweden receiving £77,500.
Gutless
Frank Ward in Adelaide
FURIOUS Nigel Mansell ended his Formula One career yesterday with a blast at the team which gave him the World Drivers' Championship.
Mansell stormed out of Formula One calling his Canon-Williams-Renault team ‘gutless’ called Mansell's record-breaking year finished in frustration and disappointment after a controversial 19th-lap collision with arch-rival Ayrton Senna in the Australian Grand Prix.
Mansell, due to race for the Newman-Haas Indy Car team in America next season, said: ‘I ran across the track to get away because I wanted to avoid a big fight.
‘That's not the way to end your Formula One career.
There should be one rule for everyone.
I've been fined thousands of dollars for much less than Senna did.
There are appalling standards in Formula One.
‘I should have had the support of my team but they are gutless.
And the race stewards did not uphold my protest.
They just said it was a sporting incident.’
Team owner Frank Williams denied Mansell's allegations, saying: ‘No protest could have brought back those 10 points.
It would have ended a fantastic year on a bitter note and I didn't want that.’
Senna explained his version of the collision, saying: ‘Nigel and I had passed the car that had been holding us up and then he braked earlier than I expected.
‘He knew I was very close.
I was on the limit and I could not stop when he braked.
There was a clear track ahead.’
Mansell, who had led from the record 14th pole position start of his season, had been resisting persistent challenges from Senna before the pair tangled.
And it looked very much like the Brazilian's fault as he lost control of his Marlboro-McLaren-Honda and collided into the rear of the luckless Mansell's Canon-Williams-Renault FW14B.
The accident happened just as the duo were about to turn into the hairpin before the pits straight on the Adelaide street circuit.
Senna lost his front left wheel in the crash and both cars bounced over the kerbs and out of the race.
Mansell was livid and admitted he ran away from the scene of the accident to avoid being tempted into big trouble.
He said: ‘I ran away across the track because I wanted to avoid getting into any problems.
‘It was that sort of situation.
All I can say is that someone hit me at about 40 or 50mph up the back as I was turning into the corner.
‘I hurt my back due to the impact in the side.
I went to see the stewards, who said it was a sporting accident.
But I didn't see it that way at all— and I was very disappointed about the whole affair.
‘I felt I had everything under control and I feel disgusted about it.’
Mansell, who had rushed away to the Williams garage where the doors were immediately closed behind him, later emerged red-faced with anger to storm to the stewards' tower.
There he attempted to register his protest but was told there was nothing wrong with the ‘sporting accident’.
Within minutes he left the track with his wife Roseanne and children.
For the 39-year-old Englishman, on his last appearance in Formula One before joining the Indy Car circuit, it was a sad farewell.
He had badly wanted to sign off with a first victory in Adelaide and a record 10th in a single season.
But it was not to be.
Instead, the glory went to Gerhard Berger and the Camel-Benetton-Ford duo of Michael Schumacher — who finished only seven-tenths of a second behind the victorious Berger — and Martin Brundle.
For Brundle, making his last appearance for the team, it was a bitter-sweet moment as he scored points for the 11th time in 12 races.
He also helped them become the first team since Lotus and BRM in 1963 to score points in every race of the year.
‘I have had a wonderful opportunity here with Camel-Benetton-Ford this year and I feel I have grabbed it with both hands,’ Brundle said.
‘I am leaving with no animosity at all and I feel confident I can find something for next year.
‘We'll just have to wait and see.’
It was another sad race day, however, for Johnny Herbert, who was desperate to finish having done so in only four of the previous 15 races this year.
He said: ‘Well, if that's 1992, I am glad it's over.
It was a bad one for me right from the start when I got involved in the spinning at the first corner.’
ADELAIDE RESULTS
1 G Berger (McLaren) 1hr 46mins 54.786 secs, 2 M Schumacher (Benetton) 0.741 seconds behind, 3 M Brundle (Benetton) 54.156, 4 J Alesi (Ferrari) one lap, 5 T Boutsen (Ligier) one lap, 6 S Modena (Jordan) one lap, 7 M Hakkinen (Lotus) one lap, 8 A Suzuki (Footwork) two laps, 9 C Fittipaldi (Minardi) two laps, 10 G Morbidelli (Minardi) two laps, 11 N Larini (Ferrari) two laps, 12 J Lammers (March) three laps, 13 J Herbert (Lotus) four laps.
Did not finish: 14 J J Lehto (Dallara), 15 E Naspetti (March), 16 B Gachot (Venturi), 17 R Patrese (Williams), 18 U Katayama (Venturi), 19 A de Cesaris (Tyrrell), 20 N Mansell (Williams), 21 A Senna (McLaren), 22 M Gugelmin (Jordan), 23 E Comas (Ligier).
Fastest lap: Schumacher 1:16.078 (av speed 111.144 kph).
Teague is back
Tony Roche
BEN CLARKE will make his England debut against South Africa at Twickenham on Saturday.
The Bath back row replaces England's most capped No 8 Dean Richards, dropped for the second time in 12 months.
The shock selection, in a team that shows four changes from that which beat Canada at Wembley last month, is the return of Mike Teague.
The 33-year-old Moseley blindside flanker has not worn an England shirt since the World Cup final last November but manager Geoff Cooke explained: ‘Mike took time off to get over injury problems but now he is in superb physical condition.
‘He comes in because of his upper body strength, which we will need against South Africa.
Mike has played eight games for Moseley and although they are in the Second Division we are satisfied with his form and fitness.’
Also axed is Wasps tighthead Jeff Probyn who lost his place to Bath's Victor Ubogu for the Canada match, but Brian Moore returns at hooker in place of John Olver.
Cooke added: ‘Clarke gets his chance because of his pace and he deserves it.
We watched the video of England B's game against the Springboks and we saw things that were not obvious during the game.’
Clarke said: ‘Joining Bath has changed my career and I aim to make the most of this chance.’
Teague admitted: ‘When I was pounding the hills alone I thought my England days were over.
I am ecstatic about this, it is like winning my first cap not my 23rd.’
Ian Hunter, who made a sensational two-try debut against Canada, retains his right wing role while Rory Underwood, who retired after the World Cup, comes back at the expense of younger brother Tony.
Rob Andrew joins the 50 cap club but his selection is a harsh blow to Stuart Barnes, England B's most outstanding player at Bristol on Saturday.
TEAM: J M Webb; I G Hunter, W D C Carling (capt), A C Guscott, R Underwood; E R Andrew, E D Morris; J Leonard, B C Moore, V E Ubogu, W A Dooley, M C Bayfield, M C Teague, B Clarke, P J Winterbottom.
Replacements: P de Glanville, S Barnes, S D Bates, J A Probyn, C J Olver, T A K Rodber.
Misery for Giants hero
David Tossell
ONE of the greatest NFL careers ended prematurely when New York Giants linebacker Lawrence Taylor ruptured an Achilles tendon.
The 33-year-old, who has more sacks than anyone in League history, had already announced this would be his last season.
Ironically, it ended just as the Giants were putting themselves into the play-off hunt with a 27–7 victory over the Green Bay Packers for their third straight win.
Former Giants coach Bill Parcells, commentating on the game, said: ‘In deference to all the great players I have coached, I would have to say Lawrence Taylor is the greatest of them all.
I am saddened he has to end his career going out of Giants stadium on a golf cart.’
Coach Rick Kotite faces a tough decision this week after stand-in quarter-back Jim McMahon guided Philadelphia Eagles to a 31–10 defeat of the Los Angeles Raiders.
Kotite had said Randall Cunningham, benched after poor form, would face Green Bay next week.
But McMahon, who passed for 157 yards and a touchdown, ignited the Eagles' best display for five weeks.
Jim Kelly threw three touchdown passes and Thurman Thomas rushed for 155 yards as the Buffalo Bills won their AFC showdown against the Pittsburgh Steelers 28–20.
Denver Broncos kept their lead in the AFC West with a 27–16 win over the New York Jets.
Results: Dallas 37, Detroit 3; Cleveland 24, Houston 14; Miami 28, Indianapolis 0; New Orleans 31, New England 14; NY Giants 27, Green Bay 7; Philadelphia 31, LA Raiders 10; Minnesota 35, Tampa Bay 7; Buffalo 28, Pittsburgh 20; Denver 27, NY Jets 16; Kansas 16, San Diego 14; Phoenix 20, LA Rams 14; Washington 16, Seattle 3; Cincinnati 31 Chicago 28.
Street's Sunday outing
Jonathan Ramsden
FORMER Champion hurdler Morley Street and his brother Granville Again head the cast for racing's second Sunday fixture at Cheltenham this weekend.
Following the success of the Flat meeting at Doncaster in July, the home of National Hunt racing hosts the first jumps card to be staged on a Sunday.
Morley Street and Granville Again are set to clash in the Coral-Elite Hurdle which has also attracted this year's Champion runner-up Oh So Risky and Martin Pipe's Tyrone Bridge.
The sponsors are offering 4–7 about Granville Again, with Morley Street, sharpened up by a win on the Flat at Doncaster, available at 5–4.
Admittance for the six-race card will be gained by paying £5 to join the Racegoers Club and, with betting forbidden, the Spastics Society will run a lottery on each race.
Cheltenham chief executive Edward Gillespie believes the quality of the card and its supporting events will attract a crowd of 10,000.
Meanwhile, Another Coral has hardened to 5–1 favourite to land his second successive Mackeson Gold Cup at Cheltenham on Saturday.
Kings Fountain, a creditable runner-up to Remittance Man on his seasonal reappearance at Wincanton, is expected to make the line-up though some of trainer Kim Bailey's Lambourn string have been coughing.
Roberts is champ
TWO new names climbed to the top of Flat racing's roll of honour in 1992.
Michael Roberts, 11 times champion in his native South Africa, rode 206 winners and more than 1,000 horses in his ultimately successful quest to become champion jockey.
And Richard Hannon saddled a similar number of horses — equivalent to eight runners every racing day — to take the trainers' title with 147 winners netting £1.78 million in prize money.
M Roberts 206
Pat Eddery 178
W Carson 125
G Duffield 108
T Quinn 108
R Hannon (147) £1.78m
M Stoute (74) £1.41m
C Brittain (63) £1.32m
H Cecil (109) £1.18m
J Gosden (112) £1.17m
JOCKEYS
TRAINERS
Rovers reward
GIANT-KILLERS Featherstone Rovers have been handed a plum Regal Trophy draw at home to high-flying St Helens.
The Second Division outfit, who had a magnificent 18–14 win at Salford, now face a Saints' side lying third in the Stones Bitter Championship.
Five-times winners Wigan visit strugglers Hull KR in the second round.
DRAW:(to be played Dec 5 and Dec 6): Hull KR v Wigan; Featherstone v St Helens; Leigh v London Crusaders; Warrington v Bradford Northern; Hull v Halifax; Castleford v Carlisle; Hunslet v Workington; Widnes v Rochdale.
Winters so eager tale of scores to level
Tony Roche
FLANKER Peter Winterbottom wins his 54th England cap against South Africa on Saturday with a score to settle.
‘I faced them twice in 1984 and the memory still makes me wince,’ said the Harlequins openside man flanker last night.
‘England lost the first Test 33–15 in Port Elizabeth and it was worse in Johannesburg, where we went down 35–9.
So I have something to put right at Twickenham.’
Winterbottom, 32, knows all about the Boks after two separate and highly-respected playing stints in the Republic.
‘I first went there in 1987, travelling with Chris Butcher and Peter Williams to play for Transvaal B,’ he explained.
‘I returned alone the following season to play for Transvaal.
It was difficult, because as an out-and-out openside my style did not always suit their rugby.
‘But I persevered and believe it was a worthwhile education.
It was a tight style of play which relied on physical strength.
‘You came up against outdoor players, many of them farmers who would simply barrel you backwards in the tight and, if they got to you, in the loose.’
Despite detecting a measure of complacency on this summer's return to the international arena, Winterbottom says never underestimate the Springboks' ability to adapt.
‘I notice now the accent is already switching to more mobility as they come to terms with the new laws,’ he explained.
‘When I played for Transvaal I found my role very different to that employed for either club or country.
‘But the style of rugby I saw in August over there, and that we have seen on their tour of France and England, indicates that before very long the Springboks will be up there with the best.
It would be foolish to underestimate their capacity to adjust.
‘It's a rugby country and the sport evokes a tremendous passion.
It simply would not be tolerated for the old style to continue at the expense of progress.’
Staggered
On the down side, though, Winterbottom made other observations in August.
‘I was staggered by the way they had misjudged their real world standing,’ he said.
‘The Springboks really believed that by the time they faced us at Twickenham — 12 months after the World Cup final — they would lift the crown unofficially.
‘Some people I spoke to during the summer expected New Zealand and Australia to be beaten, then France twice and finally us.
‘It was a huge blow to their pride to discover how far behind they had fallen during isolation — yet coach John Williams has now gone too far the other way.
‘I have heard him criticising his players as not good enough and trying to rationalise their situation to dampen expectations back home.
But I disagree with him.
‘The squad have some very good players, young and promising with lots of talent.
‘They tackle superbly and with typical Springbok defiance — you know, against all the world.
‘When you consider the inexperience of the side they put out in their first Test against France, their 20–15 victory was remarkable.
‘They will give us nothing without a problem on Saturday and every mistake we make will be punished more quickly and more heavily than any Five Nations opponents would manage.’
Slemen master plan
Tony Roche
MIKE SLEMEN last night vowed to bring the Springbok celebrations to a halt when the North take them on at Elland Road, Leeds tonight.
England backs coach Slemen, in charge of the Northern Division, played in the most famous provincial victory in English rugby history when the North beat New Zealand 21–9 in 1979.
And he believes his team, despite being stripped of true international quality, can serve England well.
‘We will be more clinical against the Springboks than the Midlands were last week,’ he said.
‘Their decision-making was naive.
South Africa press up so quickly that you must kick the ball more often to turn them.
‘The Midlands tried back moves that were never going to work against international opposition.’
Slemen's team have been deprived of Northern stalwarts Dewi Morris, Tim Rodber, Wade Dooley and the Underwood brothers Rory and Tony, mainly because of Saturday's Test commitments.
Slemen added: ‘We accept we must take a back seat to the national side, but we are still determined to succeed where the Midlands and England B failed.’
North play four full internationals — Orrell's Nigel Heslop, Bryan Barley of Wakefield, Kevin Simms of Liverpool St Helens and Steve Bainbridge from Newcastle Gosforth — while the Springboks field very much their second string but include lock Drikus Hattingh, certain to face England on Saturday.
Crusaders launch London dream
Giles Smith
ROSS STRUDWICK had been telling us for weeks: the London Crusaders can become big-time.
The problem was, who believed him?
Until Sunday, of course, when the Crusaders's 30–0 walloping of First Division Wakefield was the Regal Trophy's shock result.
It landed the Second Division minnows an away second round date at Leigh and Strudwick, the 42-year-old Australian charged with spreading the rugby league gospel in the capital, was pleased as punch.
‘To continue our development, we must play better teams, so it's the perfect draw,’ he said.
‘Give us one of the real giants in the semi-finals with a 15,000 crowd and the chance to say ‘thanks for the money’ on the way out.
Until then, this is fine.’
Victory was just reward for upgrading training to five nights, in the wake of five league games without a win.
And Strudwick's optimistic mood outweighs a mountain of problems, not least a Portakabin as a headquarters and an average gate hardly reaching four figures.
But he says: ‘I honestly believe we are on the verge of the big breakthrough, promotion to the First Division and making London the headquarters of rugby league in this country.’
To achieve his dream, he has to stand logic on its head.
‘Until we get promotion, we won't get the crowds to bring in the money to get the top players.
‘But until we get the top players, we won't win promotion.
It's a chicken and egg situation.
The only solution is to break the egg and shoot the chicken!’
After winning their first four League matches, they had a run of four defeats and one draw — mainly because of a string of injuries to top players, including on-loan former Welsh union star, David Bishop.
That put any promotion aspirations on the back burner.
But with 17 matches to go and key players returning, Strudwick believes his side can reach the big-time for the first time since the Rugby League began their bid to take the game beyond the confines of Yorkshire and Lancashire with the Fulham experiment back in the early eighties.
And from his Portakabin headquarters behind barbed wire round the back of the Crystal Palace National Sports Centre complex, ‘actually a great improvement on the one room we had inside until this month!’, he's been lining up a string of new sponsorship deals.
This week the team will be playing in a new strip emblazoned with the Carling logo, as the brewers who also sponsor glamour club Leeds put their faith in rugby league in London.
Deals
And two companies with strong Australian transport interests, Britannic Shipping and Playmaker, have agreed sponsorship deals worth nearly £100,000 a year between them for the next three years.
The Australian emphasis is quite deliberate.
The league recently relaxed the overseas-player rules for the Crusaders — before they were allowed only five imports, three more than other teams, now they're to be allowed 10.
And Strudwick intends to take full advantage by bringing in some tough Aussies during their off-season.
Apart from the effect on the playing side, Strudwick sees another benefit with his typically straightforward brand of Aussie logic.
‘If we have plenty of top Aussies playing, we should get a few thousand London-based Australians coming to the games and the chances are they'll bring an English mate,’ he said.
‘Then when we get into the First Division and don't need Aussie players, the English guys will bring other English mates and the crowd problem is solved.’
And that's not the end of his ambitions.
A big coaching scheme to take rugby league to schools in the five London boroughs that surround the Crusaders is already in full swing.
And Strudwick is hoping to hear that the Sports and Arts Foundation will be giving him £250,000 to develop a new administrative headquarters at the Palace.
‘It will be the headquarters of all rugby league in London, not just the Crusaders — development, amateurs, the lot.
‘In 10 years, it could be the headquarters of the whole of rugby league, those guys up North have run the show for too long!’
If determination and persistence guarantee results, that is another typical Strudwick statement ‘the guys up North’ might do well not to ignore.
Skinner tackling old pals
Tony Roche
MICK SKINNER will make an emotional return to Harlequins for the third round of the Pilkington Cup.
Skinner carved out a cult status England career while playing blindside flanker for Quins before switching to Blackheath last summer.
He'll return to The Stoop for one of five derby fixtures drawn yesterday.
The RFU have agreed to clubs switching their games to Sunday, November 29, because the round clashes with the Barbarians v Australia clash at Twickenham.
Squeeze
One club who may change venue are tiny Tabard from Hertfordshire, at home to possible First Division champions Northampton.
The Courage League London Division One side, whose ground is midway between St Albans and Elstree, do not have a stand.
Club president David Burrows said: ‘I believe we could squeeze in 2,000 people providing we erected temporary seating but we will have to talk to Northampton to estimate how many fans they will bring.’
Third Rd (to be played Nov 28 and Nov 29): Clifton v Exeter; Waterloo v Bath; Morley v Tynedale; Richmond v Wakefield; Redruth v London Welsh; Tabard v Northampton; Coventry v Nottingham; Moseley v Fylde; Orrell v Sale; Harlequins v Blackheath; West Hartlepool v London Irish; London Scottish v Leicester; Rugby v Bedford; Rosslyn Park v Wasps; Newcastle Gosforth v Gloucester; Saracens v Bristol.
‘Milky’ aims to bar Leeds way
Mike Walters
LEEDS manager Howard Wilkinson's galaxy of stars square up to the ‘Milky’ way tonight with their season threatening to disintegrate inside six days.
Watford full-back Jason Drysdale aims to hit the champions with the final instalment of a miserable treble by knocking them out of the Coca-Cola Cup at Vicarage Road.
Drysdale is nicknamed ‘Milky’ in the Hornets dressing room because he once resembled TV's Milky Bar Kid.
But Drysdale's claim to fame now is not freckles, specs and white chocolate but arguably the sweetest left foot in the First Division.
Threat
With five goals already this season, Drysdale's barnstorming raids will be a serious threat to Leeds, still licking their wounds after the European Cup disaster against Rangers and Saturday's 4–0 hiding at Manchester City.
Watford will have their biggest crowd for 22 months and Drysdale, subject of a £700,000 bid from Chelsea, admitted: ‘Since Graham Taylor left five years ago, there's been a lot of gloom.
It's time we lifted some of it.
‘Watford used to be a team the big clubs feared in Cup football, but our record in recent seasons has been poor.
‘I'll enjoy being on the same pitch as Tony Dorigo, who is probably the best No 3 in the country for composure on the ball when going forward.
‘Like Dorigo and Stuart Pearce, I like to weigh in with a few goals and in pre-season I joked with the lads that I'd get 15 this year.
‘Needless to say, there were plenty of takers when I offered a small wager — but a few worried expressions when I scored five in the first seven games!
‘I've hit a bit of a barren patch since then, so I wouldn't mind ending the drought against Leeds.’
Drysdale, 21, will be required to provide the ammunition for 11-goal Paul Furlong, a revelation since his £250,000 move from Coventry last summer and back from an ankle injury.
Watford manager Steve Perryman fears a Leeds backlash, but said: ‘This year we've taken on Blackburn, Ipswich and Middlesbrough — and beaten them all, which is perhaps a clue to our chances.
Leeds' pride will have been wounded, but wounded animals are the most dangerous.’
Wilkinson took his team south yesterday with big question marks hanging over the fitness of Dorigo, goalkeeper John Lukic and midfielder David Batty.
But a defiant Wilkinson said: ‘We have had a few days of mourning after the European Cup defeat, but this match gives us another route back into Europe and we know how important it is to stay on it.’
Maradona's magic rubs off on Gazza
Ben Bacon
PAUL GASCOIGNE, who yesterday sampled the magic of EuroDisney, fulfils his own dream tonight when he lines up against Maradona.
Gazza and Maradona square up for the first time for the world's undisputed No 1 title as Lazio take on Seville in a friendly in Spain.
The England star, who missed Sunday's game against Torino with flu, admits the Argentine has his faults but that his football ability excuses most of them.
Gazza said: ‘Some of what he did might have been wrong but I respect the fact that Maradona made himself the player Napoli couldn't do without when he was in Italy.
‘It's every footballer's dream to be the man who makes the team tick.’
Insight
Gazza has been given an insight into Maradona's mad, mad world in Naples by Lazio team-mate Luigi Corimo, who was his understudy at Napoli.
Gazza, who will be watched by England No 2 Lawrie Mcmenemy tonight, said: ‘Luigi couldn't get in the side because of Maradona but he talks about him with no jealously, only admiration.
‘He says the players would often not see him from one day to the next.
They would go to training camp on Friday or Saturday, still no Maradona.
Then, an hour before ‘They'd be giving Luigi his shirt when Maradona would come in as if nothing had happened.
The incredible thing was Luigi was happy to give him the shirt — that's how important he was.‘
Gazza flies into Seville at 5pm, just hours before kick-off.
England manager Graham Taylor has given him this Saturday off to attend the wedding of his sister Anne-Marie.
Meanwhile, Marco Van Basten gave a devastating display for unstoppable AC Milan.
The Dutch striker grabbed four goals to become the Italian League's top scorer as the leaders romped to a 5–1 victory over Napoli.
Davies setback
Tony French
JONATHAN DAVIES'S injury nightmare is set to continue.
The Welsh skipper faces an operation on his hernia tomorrow and will miss Wales's big international clashes with England and France over the next few weeks.
The 29-year-old Widnes maestro was forced to pull out of Great Britain's tour of Australasia in the summer because of a persistent groin strain and said: ‘I feel the injury can only get worse over the next couple of months.’.
Final fling
ENGLAND, strengthened by Paul Rendall and Rob Lozowski, came from 7–0 behind to beat Wales 24–12 and reach the final of the World Rugby Classic in Bermuda.
They now meet New Zealand in a repeat of last year's final.
Kiwis halted
OPENER Kevin Arnott hit 68 to lead a Zimbabwe fightback against New Zealand in the second Test in Harare.
Zimbabwe closed on 173–3 after dismissing the Kiwis for 335, the last four wickets falling for 21.
Hammer Alex
CANADIAN striker Alex Bunbury yesterday agreed to join West Ham in a £200,000 deal.
Bunbury, 25, played for Canada at the weekend as they lost 3–2 to El Salvador in a World Cup qualifier.
Wright on, it's the Gunners by Easter
Duncan McKenzie
ARSENAL'S run to the top of the Premier League confirms my belief that they will wrap up the title for George Graham by Easter.
The team I tipped at the start of the season are now moving into overdrive.
All parts of the engine are now functioning sweetly and the newest component can take a lot of the credit for that.
John Jensen is not a flamboyant player in midfield but looks a brilliant signing for £1 million.
He provides the influence they needed and, together with the best centre-back combination in England, Steve Bould and Tony Adams, the Dane's strength has turned the clock back to the season when Arsenal last won the title through defensive ability.
They give nothing away, and it's Jensen in his rock-solid role as ball-winner and organiser who is providing a base for the ones in front of him to play.
It is here where Arsenal's star has emerged.
Ian Wright has become a player who holds the key for the two Grahams, George and Taylor.
He is the vital element, a striker with so much potential that, if Graham Taylor gives him the same encouragement he has received at Highbury, he will become Gary Lineker Mark II — only better.
At 29 he's got everything, which cannot be said of the other international contenders.
He's the one who can help England reach the World Cup finals.
Wright has lightning pace and a fabulous eye for goal.
He's a wing and a prayer player, a nervous performer who hasn't really got a clue how good he is.
It's a fact that most strikers of his quality learn very early about their strengths and weaknesses, and adjust accordingly.
David Hirst, Alan Shearer and Lineker himself are typical examples but Wright — like Paul Gascoigne — has so much potential he simply is not yet aware of his capabilities.
It's just possible he never will be.
Wright is an instinctive player, football's equivalent of Sandy Lyle.
Such a quantity of natural ability can sometimes cause inner confusion and players like him can turn a match on its head sometimes without knowing how it happened or how they did it.
Wright has such talent that he can become a much more exciting player than Lineker because he has the added bonus of being able to play with the ball as well as without it.
Strength
Gary's great strength was an ability to get to a ball first in the penalty area, but if he received it at his feet 30 yards from goal he was looking for help, to lay it off and get into the penalty area.
Not Wright — he's happy with it at his feet wherever he is and on top of that he has a quite phenomenal strike-rate.
A bit of a late starter at Crystal Palace, Wright has scored nearly 160 goals in the seven and a bit seasons since.
With Paul Merson, Alan Smith and Kevin Campbell, Jensen the protector and the Adams-Bould wall, Arsenal are almost playing a different game to the rest.
I know Liverpool are returning from the land of the lost and Aston Villa are looking good for a shot at the title.
But I stick to my pre-season prediction that Arsenal will have it tucked away well before the last ball is kicked.
Nothing is more certain than that there will be injuries and that one or two will lose some form before April, but there's such a depth in the Highbury squad that this won't be a problem.
Problems
Inevitably, success brings its own problems and one or two will not be happy sitting on the sidelines.
Already Anders Limpar is upset at not being in the starting XI.
Yet if the little Swede is patient, I can see a major part for him in George Graham's scheme of things.
English clubs have had a poor season in Europe — Liverpool, Leeds and Sheffield Wednesday all getting the heave-ho last week — and their standards have been heavily criticised as a result.
However, but I think the Premier League's best are still a match for the rest.
Right now the best are Arsenal and it's just a pity they're not in one of the European competitions, because my money will have been on them to win it.
Crock of gold McGrath
David Harrison
RON ATKINSON last night dismissed reports that Paul McGrath's career is threatened.
Aston Villa manager Atkinson is so convinced about McGrath's future that he is ready to talk about a new contract with his key defender.
The 32-year-old Irishman, who has had eight operations on his knees, has told Atkinson that rumours that he is about to quit are ‘absolute nonsense’.
Atkinson said: ‘Everyone knows Paul has dodgy knees, but he's playing as well as ever.
‘Obviously he doesn't train as much as the other players because we want to ensure he is in good condition for matches.
‘He has another season-and-a-half on his contract, and if he's playing as well as he is now, we will definitely sit down and talk about a new deal.
‘I think he can play until he's 40 — for both Villa and Ireland.’
Meanwhile, Villa chairman Doug Ellis will meet officials of Italian club Bari this week to thrash out a dispute over £1m missing from David Platt's transfer.
Villa, who sold Platt for £5.5m, are entitled to half of any profit Bari received when they sold Platt on to Juventus in the summer.
Villa claim the Juventus deal was worth £7.5m if the valuation of players included in part exchange is taken into account.
West Brom last night signed Blackburn Rovers midfielder Nicky Reid on a free transfer.
Fash to defend pal Vinnie
Ben Bacon
VINNIE JONES has employed fellow Crazy Gangster John Fashanu to spearhead his defence at Tuesday's Football Association trial.
Jones is in the dock for his controversial comments in the football video, ‘Soccer's Hard Men’.
And his choice of articulate former England striker Fashanu is unique because players are usually backed by their managers or chairmen on charges of bringing the game into disrepute.
President Fash, the Dons' club captain, is back in the team for tonight's Coca-Cola Cup replay with Everton.
Owner Sam Hammam, manager Joe Kinnear and chief executive David Barnard will also speak at the hearing.
Fashanu has the ability to charm FA disciplinarians and once at Lancaster Gate came up with the immortal line ‘Would a Bernado's boy do something like that’ when pleading his case after a tunnel clash with Viv Anderson.
Fashanu will give Jones, who he believes is one of soccer's most misunderstood men, a glowing character reference.
He said: ‘I was with him when the call came in to do the video so I was listening to the call, although I was minding my own business.
I certainly won't be talking about his bad side.
‘The hearing hasn't troubled him at all.
He has been through it, seen it and done it all before.’
Wimbledon's large delegation shows their determination for Jones to get off a playing ban.
They correctly argue that the club should not suffer for his indiscretion while at Chelsea.
Jones received £1,600 for his role after his business advisers took their cut and Kinnear believes he should be fined the same amount, even though he has donated the fee to charity.
Kinnear said: ‘I just hope we don't have to suffer the brunt of it.’
Tonight's match will be Fashanu's first since being taken off in the original match at Goodison Park.
Kinnear revealed: ‘John's suffering from a sciatic nerve in his back.
After the recent Tottenham game, he was in agony and couldn't move.’
Tottenham's Steve Sedgley will be out for about a month after knee surgery.
England snub for Boycott
Graham Otway
NEW England manager Keith Fletcher last night gave Geoff Boycott the cold shoulder in the build-up to this winter's tour of India and Sri Lanka.
Boycott has worked with England captain Graham Gooch for many years, but will not be part of the five-strong coaching set-up who will help Fletcher and A team manager Norman Gifford.
The 52-year-old former Yorkshire and England opener wanted to join in, but the only way he will be involved is if one of the players requests him.
A close friend said: ‘He will view it as a snub.
Geoff's helped at England winter nets for the last two years.
He was never paid, so he never had a job to lose, but he's always been happy to help people who asked him.’
Boycott was used by Fletcher's predecessor Micky Stewart for the 1990 West Indian tour and trip to New Zealand last winter.
This year's coaches are Geoff Arnold, Clive Radley, Alan Knott, Graham Saville and Jack Birkenshaw.
England's batting talent is now in the hands of ex-Middlesex star Radley, the MCC chief coach.
Fletcher said: ‘I consider I have chosen the right person.’
I believe Boycott has not been asked because his approach to coaching Test players conflicts with the contract with sponsors Whittingdale, who insist on paid coaches wearing sponsored equipment and sticking to rigid schedules.
An England source said: ‘Geoff has always been willing to help on an unofficial basis.
But it would have been very different to make him a coach this winter, with all that it entails.’
Fletcher added: ‘I will be quite happy if anyone wants to go to Geoff for advice on a personal basis, but he is not part of the official coaching scheme.’
Meanwhile, Fletcher revealed he has not closed the door on David Gower's Test career despite his absence from the tour party.
Fletcher said: ‘I have never said David is too old to play for England.
He still has an England future — he's a quality player.’
Omar Henry will be the first non-white to play Test cricket for South Africa after the team to face India was announced yesterday.
Lennox setback
Roy Collins in Las Vegas
LENNOX LEWIS arrives here today to find his dream of being crowned undisputed world heavyweight champion rapidly evaporating.
Instead, Lewis may be left with the consolation prize of being crowned the WBC champion as the heavyweight division falls apart.
Riddick Bowe, who fights world champion Evander Holyfield here on Friday night, is almost certain to renege on the deal to give Lewis the first defence if he wins.
That would lead to him being stripped of the WBC title and Lewis declared champion.
Bowe has been tempted by a $20million offer to fight George Foreman in Peking in March, a deal that manager Rock Newman said is too good to reject.
The WBC have already said they will strip Bowe or Holyfield if they pulled out of the deal with Lewis, who knocked out Donovan ‘Razor’ Ruddock 10 days ago.
Lewis said yesterday: ‘The last thing I want is to get the title outside the ring.
That would take all the gilt away.’
It would also leave Lewis as possibly a minor player in the world heavyweight scene which could be returning to the chaos that surrounded it before Mike Tyson brutally united sports richest prize.
If Bowe wins, and causes the latest split, Lewis would no doubt look to a domestic defence of the WBC title against Frank Bruno in what would obviously be his best financial option.
MP blasts anthem ban
THE Rugby Football Union were last night branded ‘spineless’ for deciding not to play the national anthem before England's Test against South Africa at Twickenham on Saturday.
Tory MP Graham Riddick accused them of ‘kow-towing’ to the African National Congress, who requested the South African anthem, Die Stem, be omitted because of its links with apartheid.
The RFU then agreed that neither anthem will be played.
Riddick, MP for Colne Valley and a rugby fan, said: ‘The rugby authorities are being spineless.’
Fellow Tory MP John Carlisle added: ‘I shall be there on Saturday.
I shall stand up and sing the national anthem and encourage all those around me to do the same.’
Mark's magic
Graham Fisher
Oldham 2, Norwich City 3
MARK ROBINS, born a stone's throw from Boundary Park, sent Norwich back to the top of the table with a superb hat-trick last night.
And the 22-year-old marksman saved his best for last.
Almost a minute of injury time had ticked away when he jinked through from the left to fire an inch-perfect shot just inside keeper Jon Hallworth's far post.
That made it 10 for Robins this season, and all in front of his policeman dad, Chief Inspector Gordon, who was in charge of crowd control at the ground.
It was a gladiator's performance that again calls into question Manchester United's decision to sell him for £750,000 in the close season.
Robins, clutching the ball after his first senior hat-trick, said: ‘Comparisons are bound to be made because I've just scored three on TV and United are struggling.
‘I always said I only wanted to score goals for Manchester United.
But Norwich are my club now.
‘I just hope that United come out of it and score bags of goals.
If we don't win the League, I hope they do.
You never know, I might end up there again some time.
‘It was brilliant to hit the goals that took us to the top, and it's got to be the best 90 minutes of my career.’
Shortly before flying back, young Robins was reunited with his father, who declared: ‘I'm over the moon.
I'm just sorry that it had to be Oldham.’
Now Norwich have the best part of a fortnight to enjoy their view from the top, and it was all down to Robins.
His first two were classic cases of being in the right place at the right time.
Oldham had twice gone close, through Ian Olney and Ian Marshall, when Robins met an Ian Culverhouse cross with a firm header in the 13th minute.
The second created a storm of controversy.
Robins looked offside as he galloped into a chasm of space created by lively winger Ruel Fox.
Robins coolly beat Hallworth then turned to watch a flock of blue shirts besiege the linesman to no avail.
Misery
Oldham were not mere spectators to this East Anglian gala night.
They twice hit back and were sufficiently in charge of the second half to have nicked the much-needed points themselves.
Graeme Sharp scored their first, sneaking round the back to meet Nick Henry's diagonal ball with a thumping right-foot volley.
Marshall, after two months of misery and just one goal since his restoration to the front line, nabbed the second with a perfect lob over Bryan Gunn from the corner of the penalty area.
Norwich weathered the storm after the break and looked likelier winners as the game wore on.
Darren Beckford had a snapshot brilliantly parried by Hallworth, then Fox saw a lob of his own dance just wide.
But that simply set the stage for a final, beautiful flourish from Robins.
Manager Mike Walker said: ‘My team doesn't surprise me, just other people.
If you keep believing in yourself, you don't know what might happen.
‘We can't get carried away.
But the longer we go on, well, who knows?’
Van Basten in four-star super show
Tony Roche
MARCO VAN BASTEN gave further evidence that he is one of football's most lethal strikers with a devastating performance for AC Milan.
The Dutch international grabbed four goals to become the Italian League's top scorer as the leaders romped to a 5–1 victory over Napoli.
Van Basten, who had the wind at his back, blew Napoli away and admitted: ‘The first one was a good goal, the second swift, the third sweet and that fourth cunning.’
Milan remain two points clear of Torino, who beat Lazio in Rome 2–1 thanks to an 88th-minute own goal by Angelo Gregucci.
But Turin's more illustrious club, Juventus, showed they were gearing up to topple Milan with an equally impressive 5–1 drubbing of Udinese.
Roberto Baggio also scored four times.
Surprise In Spain, wins to Real Madrid and Barcelona see them a point adrift of Deportivo Coruna.
Real beat Espanol 3–1 with strikers Emilio Butragueno and Chilean Ivan Zamorano in dazzling form, and Barcelona defeated Athletic Bilbao 2–1.
Deportivo drew 1–1 at Albacete.
Surprise French leaders Nantes impressed despite drawing 1–1 at home to Sochaux.
Sochaux trainer Sylvester Takac admitted: ‘We haven't been so outplayed all season.
If they had scored a second it would have been no robbery.’
Ajax Amsterdam coach Louis van Gaal was saved from a demoralising home defeat by two players he has on the transfer list.
International winger Bryan Roy set up striker Ron Willems's headed equaliser just before the full-time whistle in the 2–2 draw with MVV Maastricht.
Rhodri bid
RHODRI JONES will bid to step out of the shadow of elder brother Robert, the Welsh scrum-half, when Neath tackle Australia tomorrow.
Jones takes over the No 9 jersey from former international Chris Bridges.
Windies waltz in
CARL HOOPER and Kenneth Benjamin grabbed three wickets each as the West Indies dismissed West Australia for a paltry 131 yesterday to win their four-day cricket match in Perth by 237 runs.
Dowie dropped
SOUTHAMPTON striker Iain Dowie has been dropped from Northern Ireland's World Cup squad.
Luton's Philip Gray replaces him for next Wednesday's qualifier against Denmark.
Roxburgh backs party time
By Graham Fisher
SCOTLAND'S squad will be let loose at the wedding of their truculent ex-colleague Mo Johnston four days before the vital World Cup qualifier against Italy at Ibrox.
Everton striker Johnston, whose periodical outbursts eventually ended his international career, marries former model Karen Bell at Southport on Saturday — and the 16-strong Scottish squad is free to travel south and whoop it up.
Johnston's ex-Rangers pals — six are named in the party — are likely to take advantage, but the proviso is they must be back at Motherwell by 2.30pm on Sunday to work off their excesses.
Manager Andy Roxburgh said: ‘I don't expect any problems.
We are treating the players like responsible adults.’
Roxburgh's licence to live it up could be a matchwinner for a Scotland side who have lost in Switzerland and scraped a lucky home draw with Portugal in their opening Group One matches.
Anything to lift the tension off what Roxburgh calls ‘the most crucial match in the whole section’ could be a bonus.
The six Rangers players in his squad do not include inspirational skipper of club and country, Richard Gough, whose brilliant leadership helped dismiss Leeds from the European Cup.
Gough is sidelined with a groin injury, and Roxburgh admitted: ‘Italian coach Arrigo Saachi will be delighted.
‘He rates Richard as one of the best central defenders in the world after his performances in the European Championship finals.’
Spurs striker Gordon Durie returns to the slimline squad after recovering from injury, but there is no place for Manchester United's Brian McClair.
‘Brian has been suffering from a loss of confidence,’ said Roxburgh of the player who was relegated to the Manchester United substitutes' bench on Saturday.
‘But I have spoken to him and to Alex Ferguson, and if there are any problems I can call him in.’
SQUAD: Goram, Smith, Boyd, Malpas, McPherson, Levein, Whyte, McStay, McCall, McAllister, Collins, Durrant, Ferguson, Durie, McCoist, Robertson.
Keegan targets Swede
By David Alexander
RUNAWAY leaders Newcastle are set to step up their promotion bid with a new striker.
Manager Kevin Keegan hopes to land Swedish international Kennet Andersson from Mechelen in Belgium.
The 6ft 4in goalscorer, who has 16 caps, could cost up to £500,000.
Keegan, whose team are nine points ahead in Division One, is also chasing Morton striker Alec Mathie, 21, in a £250,000 deal.
He said: ‘This may be the best time to buy.’
Fighting
Andersson was on trial at Newcastle in August but the deal fell through.
Sunderland manager Malcolm Crosby will be in charge for Sunday's televised visit of Leicester City.
But Leicester boss Brian Little could be the man to replace Crosby at Roker.
Crosby is fighting for his job after the 5–2 defeat at Peterborough.
‘I've had no contact with the board,’ he said yesterday.
Clough rebuffed
BRISTOL CITY revealed yesterday that they rejected a £700,000 bid from Brian Clough for Nottingham-born striker Andy Cole at the weekend.
The stumbling block for the Forest boss is that Arsenal, who sold 21-year-old Cole to City for £500,000 in the summer, would collect 33 per cent of any fee.
Therefore, it would take an offer of £2 million before City would consider a sale.
‘Talk of Forest bidding £1.5m for Andy Cole is pure speculation,’ said City chairman, Leslie Kew.
‘A smaller offer from Forest was put to my board and, frankly, there was no decision for us to make.
In August, I said his valuation was nearer £3m than £1m.’
Twickers anthems ban
ENGLAND'S players will be denied the chance of pumping themselves up by singing the national anthem on the pitch before Saturday's Test against South Africa at Twickenham.
No anthems will be played.
Rugby Union secretary Dudley Wood said: ‘We had representations from the African National Congress to ensure that the old South African anthem ‘Die Stem’ would not be played.
After discussions with the South African Rugby Union, we decided that the match would not have the anthems of either country as a prelude.’
It was the unauthorised playing of ‘Die Stem’ at Johannesburg in July, before the Test against the All Blacks, that caused controversy and threatened the Test against Australia the following week.
But the move came under fire last night when right wing Tory MP John Carlisle, said: ‘I'll be there on Saturday.
I shall stand up and sing the national anthem and encourage all those around me to do the same.’
It is understood that South African premier, F W De Klerk, is planning to fly in for the game, which could spark a resurgence of anti-apartheid demonstrations.
Bassett blasts Hirst tackle
By Tony Kell
DAVE BASSETT last night hit out angrily at David Hirst over the England striker's horror tackle on Sheffield United left-back Tom Cowan.
Cowan is out of United's Coca-Cola Cup replay at Liverpool tomorrow with an ankle injury.
And boss Bassett blasted: ‘Hirst's dreadful foul could have broken Tom's leg.’
The Wednesday hitman was only booked by Birmingham referee Mike Reed for the challenge, which came early in Sunday's derby match at Bramall Lane, screened live by BSkyB.
Hurt
And Bassett, indignant that Wednesday manager Trevor Francis had appealed before the match for good behaviour by both sides, said: ‘I wonder what would have happened if one of my players had committed a foul like that.’
He added: ‘Hirst has played in two derbys at our ground and was fortunate to finish the match each time.
Last season I was concerned about his foul on our keeper Simon Tracey and on Sunday he should have gone.’
Hirst said last night: ‘The ball was running away and I went in to win it.
‘But I would never set out to hurt anybody because I know what it's like to be on the receiving end.’
The tackle looked two-footed but Hirst argued: ‘I only went in with one — my right foot scraped the ground.’
Wigan refusal
WIGAN have turned down Wakefield Trinity's offer of a swap-deal for international forward Ian Lucas.
He was transfer-listed at Pounds 150,000 last week after asking for a move and Trinity offered Gary Price in exchange.
Cook gets his chance
from Graham Otway in Durban
JIMMY COOK, the mean South African run machine who became a legend in three seasons with Somerset, discovers late in life this week just how good a batsman he really is.
At the age of 39 and 105 days he becomes the ninth oldest player in history to make his Test debut in Friday's historic encounter between South Africa and India in Durban.
And after being surprisingly left out of the South African party that reached the World Cup semi-finals last March, Cook has much to prove and not too many years left in his legs to make his mark on the international game.
Cook, the same age as Graham Gooch but with a more youthful face behind his own brand of drooping moustache, is ready for the challenge.
He said: ‘I played in the unofficial Tests against all the rebel sides that came out to South Africa in the 1980s and that gave me a good idea of what to expect.
‘I think I can make runs at Test level, I don't feel I will be out of my depth.
‘Playing County cricket I faced most of the good fast bowlers that there are around — Curtly Ambrose, Malcolm Marshall and Waqar Younis.
— though obviously not all in one match.
‘Hopefully that experience will now come in handy.’
Taunton fans might find it hard to believe that anyone doubts Cook's ability after three bountiful seasons in the West Country.
But Cook was a long way off selection when the South Africans picked their side for the World Cup and the subsequent mini-tour of the West Indies, which featured the Republic's only other Test since the dismantling of apartheid.
One leading South African critic told me yesterday: ‘Jimmy had two poor domestic seasons here prior to the World Cup.
‘And no matter what people on the outside might have felt the selectors could not pick him purely on his form for Somerset.’
Kevin's field of dreams
Report by Mike Allan
NEATH hooker Kevin Phillips will be on his usual pre-dawn patrol this morning, trying to blot out the worst experience in his rugby union career.
Dairy farmer Phillips will be up at 5am to milk his 60-strong herd of cows but his mind will switch between Brisbane last year and The Gnoll this afternoon.
Phillips, 31, was in the Wales side humiliated 63–6 by Australia in Brisbane.
But he lines up for the Welsh All-Blacks today, hoping to take another step towards erasing the memory.
‘That game will be very much on our minds,’ admitted Phillips, who has not added to his 21 Wales caps since.
‘It is something that tends to live with you for a long time but at least we now have the chance to put the record straight and show that we, too, can play a bit.
But first it will be business as usual down on the farm.
In fact, working at that time of the day often helps to clear the mind and although I don't intend to forget about Brisbane I certainly won't dwell on it.’
Phillips has played in only four of Neath's nine Heineken League matches so far this season but has been picked ahead of Andrew Thomas, who reacted by refusing to sit on the replacements' bench.
Cagey
Rhodri Jones, brother of Swansea's Robert, replaces Chris Bridges at scrum-half in a move that surprised him but it is in the centres where Neath have been stretched.
The losses of Colin Laity and Jason Ball to Cardiff and Swansea respectively see hooker Lloyd Isaac and outside-half Jeff Bird in midfield, while 5ft 7in Matthew McCarthy is at fly-half.
Australia have recalled John Eales to lock the scrum with Rod McCall and they should provide plenty of ball for half-backs Peter Slattery and Tim Wallace.
But coach Bob Dwyer is playing it cagey over his choice to succeed injured skipper Michael Lynagh at fly-half for Saturday week's Test against Wales in Cardiff.
He has paired replacement Lloyd Walker with Jason Little in the centres against Neath.
Walker's ball skills could make him the ideal link between Tim Horan, who switched from centre to fly-half when Lynagh damaged his shoulder against Ireland, and Little.
Dwyer said: ‘Tim could play fly-half against Llanelli on Saturday.
We'll see.
It's a possibility.
‘I'd rather keep Horan and Little together but if Lloyd is a raging success against Neath, it might change our thinking.’
Dwyer, who has watched tapes of Neath, said: ‘They're the sort of scrappy team we haven't played particularly well against on tour.
They're all over you round the edges, coming over the top of the maul and grabbing half-backs.’
Winger David Campese has done some light running as he bids to recover from an ankle injury in time for the Test.
Simms at helm
FIRST Division strugglers Leigh yesterday appointed Australian Steve Simms as their new coach.
Simms, from South Sydney, was recommended by Wigan coach John Monie and Brisbane boss Wayne Bennett.
He will be in charge at least until the end of the season.
Leigh are bottom of the Stones Bitter Championship without a point after eight games.
Dennis Ramsdale, caretaker coach since Jim Crellin's resignation, will pick the team for the last time for tonight's home game against St Helens.
Jobson blast at fans
VIC JOBSON, Southend United's controversial chairman, has likened some of the club's fans to the ‘Hitler Youth Movement’.
His astonishing attack came in the wake of Saturday's 3–0 home defeat by Oxford United, which had fans demanding the chairman's removal and the sacking of boss Colin Murphy.
‘I would liken them to the Hitler Youth Movement — using intimidating tactics to try to control those who come to matches and deterring decent fans from watching us,’ said Jobson, whose Southend side have now gone nine League matches without a win.
‘I just hope they don't drag the club down and that loyal supporters won't wake up one day and say, how did that happen?
How did we allow these destructive influences to kill our club?
‘At places like Newcastle the crowd is worth a one-and-a-half goal start to the home team.
Here, it's probably minus six.
Our players are beginning to dread playing at home.
‘If they stopped shouting ‘Jobson out, Murphy out’ and started supporting the team, we might end up winning a few games.’
Riches to rags decline of sad Thomas
Report by Ben Bacon
GEOFF THOMAS was just 19 minutes away from joining the millionaires' club — now he is left to reflect on a season bankrupt of good memories.
Thomas has had to endure three months of misery, the worst of his career, after the collapse of a £3 million move to Blackburn Rovers which would have set up the Crystal Palace midfielder for life.
He could have expected a weekly salary approaching £10,000, plus all the other expensive trimmings, if he had become Britain's most expensive ever midfield player.
Yet the reality has been so, so different, with the latest low occurring when he damaged medial knee ligaments while playing in a reserve match last Thursday.
The injury will keep him out of action until next month.
The setback confirms the wretched nature of his season, which originally looked so bright.
Thomas kicked it off against Blackburn, but his move to Ewood Park collapsed, and so did his world.
The story goes that Blackburn chairman Jack Walker was unimpressed by Thomas's contribution in the 3–3 draw at Selhurst Park and refused to sign another of his famous cheques with all those zeros.
Turmoil
Thomas's mind has been in turmoil for a long time since that rejection.
It could have broken him, particularly with the other hardships he has suffered, but he has now adopted a philosophical approach to his plight.
Those other hardships include being ignored by England, enduring a mystery nerve complaint, being relegated to the substitutes' bench by Palace and consequently losing the club captaincy to Eric Young.
The 28-year-old has made only 10 appearances all season, and the last Premier League game he started was against Oldham back on September 12.
Last night, Thomas said: ‘One minute I was being talked of as a Pounds 3 million player, the next I was in Crystal Palace's reserves.
‘Football has a way of kicking you down like that.
It can be a very hard game sometimes, but the most important thing for me is that I've now got my mind right.
‘It's all behind me now and I've got to put it down to experience.
It was a very difficult period in my career, and the problem with the transfer was that everything was done out in the open.
‘It was common knowledge that Blackburn were in for me, and there were also rumours about Arsenal.
There were all sorts of things going through my mind.
‘Some people were saying one thing, the chairman was telling me another.
I was thinking of Blackburn one minute, Crystal Palace the next, and it all became very confusing.
‘With hindsight, we'd all do things differently.
But I can't change anything so I'm going to have to live with it.
‘Thankfully I've forgotten it all now and I have to look at it as something that was flattering to me at the time.
It was very difficult to concentrate on football, and then my injuries came at completely the wrong time.
‘It just seems not a lot has been going right for me this season.
The last time I started a Premier League game was against Oldham, and that seems ages ago.
‘Nobody's ever happy when they're on the bench, but it's given me some time to get my mind right again.
Now I cannot wait to start playing football again.
‘I did my medial ligaments against Swindon last Thursday and I'm going to be out for two or three weeks at the very least.
I'll just have to see how it responds to treatment.’
Coincidentally, the England squad team up tomorrow for next week's World Cup qualifier against Turkey.
Thomas began his senior international career against the same country in May last year and won the last of his nine caps against France in February.
Ridicule
Everyone remembers his appalling attempted lob in that match, and Thomas had to suffer the ridicule afterwards.
But that hurt is nothing compared to what the powerful blond-haired midfielder has endured these past few months.
And the pain has been made even worse by Blackburn's incredible table-topping start to the season.
In Thomas's quiet, private moments, the words ‘if only…’ must feature heavily in his thoughts.
Horne fills keeper gap
John Wardle
SUNDERLAND have signed up Brian Horne to help them out of a goalkeeping fix.
But Roker boss Malcolm Crosby missed out on a similar loan bid for Everton striker Tony Cottee.
Goodison boss Howard Kendall wanted straight cash for Cottee but Crosby said: ‘A permanent move was never discussed and the deal is now dead.’
Millwall's Horne, however, will be linking up at Roker Park and could play in Sunday's crunch game with Leicester if Tony Norman fails to recover from injury.
Reserve keeper Tim Carter is already out.
Middlesbrough manager Lennie Lawrence has gone continental in a bid to boost his side's strike power.
He has welcomed Bulgarian goalscorer Todorov to Ayresome Park on trial.
Todorov, who has 20 caps, is expected to play for the reserves tomorrow against Derby and will train at the ground today.
He could be the first Bulgarian import into the British game.
Fan blows whistle on ref
TOP referee Ray Lewis is being investigated by the Football Association for allegedly swearing at a supporter and faces disciplinary action.
Lewis, 48, a marketing director from Great Bookham in Surrey, was reported after last Tuesday's Third Division match between Barnet and Walsall.
FA spokesman David Bloomfield confirmed: ‘We are determining what further action is appropriate.’
Mike Banks, the Walsall fan who reported Lewis, said: ‘I called the referee a bloody disgrace.
He turned round and directed a torrent of abuse at me.
I have a witness, too.’
Lewis refereed last year's Rumbelows Cup final and in the past five years has taken charge of three FA Cup semi-finals.
But he countered: ‘The supporter was saying terrible things to me and I went back up the tunnel because I wanted to have a good look at the face of the person who was abusing me.
But I didn't say anything to him and I didn't swear.’
Meanwhile, in an unprecedented climbdown the Football League yesterday agreed to Bristol City's demand for a change of referee in their First Division game at Watford on December 5.
City protested after learning that Bury St Edmunds referee Kelvin Morton was scheduled to take charge.
They objected because Morton sent off three City players in the corresponding fixture last season.
I'll still score for England — Platt
by David Harrison
DAVID PLATT last night promised Graham Taylor to continue his England goal supply — despite his recent drought in Italian football.
Platt, scorer of his country's last five goals, has been shackled into a more defensive role since his £6.5 million move from Bari to Juventus in the summer.
A player who has thrived on goals throughout his career, suddenly no longer finds himself a regular name on the scoresheet.
In official games, Platt has been on the mark twice in 13 appearances for the Italian giants and that represents a dramatic decline in his career ratio.
Fortunately for England, Platt has not lost his touch at international level and he insisted: ‘My club record won't affect my England performances.
I find it easy to switch from one role to the other.
I feel I could score more goals in Italy if I was given more freedom.
Chances
‘But I know I am not going to get as many goals as I do for England.
‘I would back myself to score 20 goals this season if I were to have three chances in every game, but those opportunities do not come so easy for me in Italy.
‘But it is not affecting me to have to do the job I have been given.
The way I look at it is that if I was scoring goals for Juventus we might be conceding more at the other end because I have other responsibilities now.’
Platt made a flying visit to Birmingham yesterday to announce a new sponsorship deal with Brymon European Airways before re-turning to Italy for a Juventus friendly tonight.
He will be back in England tomorrow to link up with the England squad in readiness for next week's World Cup qualifier against Turkey at Wembley.
While he is careful not to rock the boat at Juventus with any ill-timed criticism, there is clearly some frustration that he is not being used to maximum effect.
But he insists he is happy to fit into coach Giavanni Trappatoni's team plans.
Meanwhile, Crystal Palace winger John Salako may be forced to pull out of the squad to play Turkey with a knee injury.
But Palace yesterday played down fears that Salako aggravated the knee ligaments which required an operation last year.
Birmingham can cash in on success
David Harrison
BIRMINGHAM CITY go into Anglo-Italian Cup action against Bari tonight with a £10 million rescue package dangling in front of them, writes David Harrison.
Multi-millionaire Roy Breuhat, who is based in Guernsey, has taken the first steps towards taking over the financially-stricken First Division club, which is in the hands of a receiver.
Like fellow Channel Islander, Jack Walker, who has plumped his millions into Blackburn Rovers, Breuhat is planning a massive investment into Birmingham.
The 47-year-old bachelor, who has made his fortune out of the plastic industry, said: ‘£5m is needed to develop the ground and another £5m for the manager, Terry Cooper, to build a team.
I would not be frightened of that.
‘I am asking my accountants to have a look at it.
I realise that football clubs lose money and that doesn't worry me.
‘They say that Birmingham is a sleeping giant and it is but it needs a massive injection of money.
I am just a football nut who spends thousands of pounds travelling to watch games.’
Trouble
The Kumar family are still battling hard to retain the ownership of the club after their companies hit trouble following the collapse of the BCCI.
They are challenging the legality of the appointment of a receiver and are still hoping to retain control.
Birmingham's opponents tonight, Bari, can expect a frenzied greeting and their former midfield ace, David Platt, pinpointed the Midland club's way to victory.
Platt said: ‘If Birmingham can get at them, they can knock them out of their stride because Bari will not be used to this sort of opposition.’
Meanwhile, Derby must tackle Pisa without Martin Kuhl and Craig Short, who have previously appeared in the competition this season with Portsmouth and Notts County.
But Tommy Johnson is aiming to step back on the goal trail.
The former England Under-21 player has found the net just twice in 20 matches this season but last night he insisted: ‘My confidence is still sky-high.
The goals will come sooner or later.’
Before his £1.3m move from Notts County last season, Johnson was scoring at a rate of two goals every five matches but he claimed: ‘It's early days for me.
When I was at Notts County, I used to score more goals in the second half of the season.
I just hope that happens here.’
Meanwhile, West Ham defender Julian Dicks has revved up for a big-match return tonight — thanks to a £10,000 Harley Davidson.
Eager
Dicks plays at Cremonese, despite currently serving a five-match ban in England.
And Dicks is eager to prove to the Italians that he is as much of a mean machine as his new bike.
‘I always said I would buy a Harley when I had enough money,’ said the left-back.
‘I take it up to the training ground and the players love it.
‘But the manager hasn't said anything — I suppose because of the potential dangers.’
And Dicks is delighted just to be under consideration, because English League suspensions don't count in the competition, which pits First Division clubs with those from Serie B.
Come home Gazza
Report by David Alexander
NEWCASTLE are ready to take Paul Gascoigne back to Tyneside if he fails to make his mark in Italy.
Manager Kevin Keegan underlined Newcastle's ambition last night when he revealed they would bid for Gazza if he decided to leave Lazio.
Keegan, in Tuscany for the Anglo-Italian Cup game with Serie B side Lucchese, said: ‘We've already tried to buy players of similar stature.
‘If Gazza became available at the end of the season, we would go for him, and we would have more pull than most.
‘We tried to sign Chris Waddle, but it was not right for him at the time.
‘We went for Peter Beardsley, but it wasn't right for Everton.
‘We've looked everywhere, at home and abroad.
‘Our problem is that we're not in the Premier League, but hopefully that will be remedied at the end of this season.’
Newcastle, nine points ahead in the First Division, let Gascoigne go to Spurs for £2 million and Terry Venables has first option on him should he wish to return to England.
But Keegan is undeterred and he stressed that the selling days are over at St James' Park.
‘Not being in the Premier League makes it difficult because certain players need a big stage,’ said Keegan.
‘Italy now has the best players in the world, but no Italian club is bigger than us.
If other clubs can sign big names, we should be able to do it too.’
Keegan spelled out the philosophy which is steering the Geordies back to the big time under multi-millionaire chairman Sir John Hall.
‘There's no limit to the chairman's ambition,’ he said.
‘I've got the ambition — but, more important, he's got it.
Without that backing, my ambition means nothing.
‘Don't underestimate this club, or you'll be left with egg on your face.
When I look around now, I know I've got one of the best squads even in the Premier League.
‘We haven't signed anyone yet, only because it's got to be the right player.
I'm only interested in players better than those we've got, and we already have very good players.
‘We have looked everywhere for players, but it will be easier in the Premier League.
We're a big club, and can establish new trends in English football.’
Faldo pays price
by George Stevens
PGA champion Nick Price posted five birdies in a six-hole stretch to take a one-shot lead after the first round in the Grand Slam of Golf at the PGA West yesterday.
Masters champion Fred Couples, tied for the lead after 17 holes, drove his ball out of bounds on the 18th and took a double bogey to drop one shot behind the Zimbabwean at 71 in the 36-hole event between winners of this year's four major championships.
Nick Faldo, the Open champion, was third after an even-par 72, while US Open winner Tom Kite struggled to a 75.
‘I holed every putt I looked at,’ Price said.
‘That's as well as I can putt.
That's what got me under par today.
I didn't really hit the ball that well.’
Price lost the lead at the 13th hole, when he made a bogey to fall to three-under, while Couples was making birdie to reach four under par.
When Couples three-putted from 65ft for a bogey at 17, he and Price were tied.
At 18, Couples hooked his drive out of bounds, one of the few mistakes he made on a day that turned cold and windy by the time the five-hour 25-minute round had ended.
‘To finish bogey, double-bogey, it's not good,’ Couples said.
‘But I felt like I played very well, except for two shots all day.’
Faldo made four birdies but spend most of the day tapping in after leaving first putts short.
‘I was short all day,’ said Faldo, who trailed by only two strokes in the chase for the $400,000 first prize.
‘I found the greens on the back nine were slow.’
Kite also had trouble with his putter.
He made just two birdies.
Those were offset by a double bogey at the par-five 15th, where his second shot went into the water.
It left Kite looking at a five-shot deficit with 18 holes to play today.
Paying away
Adrian Holloway
IN A desperate bid to end their goal drought, Manchester United boss Alex Ferguson will become the latest manager to call up the foreign legion tomorrow night.
Ferguson is set to play international striker Tor Dahlum, 24, alongside 21-year-old Adam Ndlovu, brother of Coventry's Peter, in a Pontins League match at Bury.
Neither can play ‘competitive matches’ because they are on trial.
But a beleaguered Ferguson will bend the rules to give both their debuts by waiving admission charges at Gigg Lane against Sheffield United reserves.
Cheap
Foreigners are flooding the market — in the last three weeks alone, six Norwegians have been to Premier League clubs on trial.
They're cheap, skilful and speak better English than some natives.
And, with Norway roaring away at the top of England's World Cup group, everyone has been able to see their quality.
Liverpool have been putting hard-tackling left-back Stig Bjorbye through his paces at Anfield, while members of Norway's Under-21 side who beat England last month have been on trial at Leeds, Sheffield United, Oldham and Forest.
Spurs keeper Erik Thorstvedt says English clubs are suddenly realising there are bargains galore in Norway.
‘It's becoming a craze,’ he said.
‘I think being in England's group has a lot to do with it.
‘Norwegian football is semi-professional by law, so English clubs don't have to pay big wages and the fee for a top player is only about £400,000.
What's more, every Norwegian international wants to play here.
‘The guy who scored for us at Wembley, Kjetil Rekdal, is mad about English football.
He never stops talking about it and often goes to Elland Road.
‘And Tore Pederson, who went off injured against England, is crazy about it too.
You can't shut them up about it.’
But Thorstvedt believes physical rigours of the English game will sort out the men from the boys.
‘The players who are being bought are the tough ones, like Jensen, of Denmark.
It's so much more aggressive here.
Players just slide in — they don't care, and before the game everyone gets psyched up and starts shouting.
‘In the Norwegian dressing room no-one talks to each other.
We all get on with our own business.’
A 90-minute viewing was enough to persuade Brian Clough to sign centre-back Alf Inge Haaland at the end of last month.
‘I watched the England-Norway Under-21 international on video and the lad was captain and jumped like a stag.
I'm very pleased we got him,’ Clough said.
But Forest can't play Haaland until January 1, when the troublesome need for a work permit will cease if, as expected, Norway join the EEC.
In 1993 Norwegian players will be as easy to register as British ones and current trialists Frank Strandli (Leeds), Ole Sundgot (Oldham) and Egil Ulfstein (Sheffield United) could make permanent moves.
‘It's not exactly cheap labour,’ says Gunnar Halle, the Oldham and Norway midfielder.
‘But transfer fees are so blown up for British players that managers are now forced to look abroad.
For £200,000 you can always get a much better player from Norway.’
Fanatical
Africa could emerge as another bargain basement…
Coventry paid just £10,000 to bring wonder-kid Peter Ndlovu from Zimbabwe to Highfield Road.
A fanatical letter writer, Peter, 19, says people are wrong to picture him playing out in the bush.
‘I worked in a video store and watched British football on TV,’ he said.
‘At Bulawayo we had 45,000 crowds for club games and I made my international debut at 14, so I wasn't that ‘wowed’ to arrive in England.’
PFA spokesman Brendan Batson surveyed the ever-increasing number of imports and said: ‘The cost of ground developments after the Taylor Report is so steep that many managers can't afford to shop in our domestic transfer market.
‘We protect our members by making the buying club prove that their man is an established international, whose skills are not available in the EEC.
‘But we can't stop any transfers from EEC members.’
Eastern Europeans experience the most difficulty gaining work permits — West Ham were ready to pay £300,000 to bring Yugoslavian Vujacic Budamir to Upton Park last month but had the deal blocked by the Department of Employment.
Manchester United, however, got Ukrainian Andrei Kanchelskis for a snip at £500,000 after a protracted struggle over his work permit in May 1991.
But even when the hurdle is cleared, there's still the language barrier.
West Ham's Czech keeper Ludek Miklosko spent long away trips sitting alone on the team bus with his copy of ‘Teach Yourself English’ while his team-mates played cards.
Miklosko has since made rapid strides with the help of his son, who quickly became fluent at school in Loughton, Essex.
Compatriot Jan Stejskal, the QPR keeper, still uses interpreter Victor Dub two years after signing.
Dub says: ‘On the field they worked out a series of calls and signals for the defenders, but Jan still struggles to make conversation.
‘He can't phone the bank, but he has a passive knowledge.
I think he needs a few drinks!’
Tactical
Southampton had a nightmare when manager Chris Nicholl signed two Russians.
In training, Sergei Gotsmanov interpreted for Alexsey Cherednik, who is still at The Dell.
The story goes that when Nicholl was explaining a new tactical formation to Cherednik, Gotsmanov had the whole squad rolling around by interrupting: ‘What time does the coach leave.’
By stark contrast, the Scandinavians speak perfect English.
And it is an undisputed fact at Manchester City that Dutchman Michael Vonk, signed this year, is more coherent than Scouse manager Peter Reid.
Hoad threatens to sue
Colin Cooper
ROGER HOAD is threatening to sue the Jockey Club for the Pounds 5,500 he spent on successfully defending himself against weight-switching allegations.
The Lewes trainer was cleared in August of passing weights to jockey son Mark after Carfax had won at Lingfield in February.
But he is unhappy with the way the disciplinary inquiry was conducted and claims he will sue if his legal costs are not met.
‘Before the hearing I had witnesses lined up, but they never came down to interview either me, my son Mark or the witnesses,’ said Hoad yesterday.
‘When we got to Portman Square they said it was only an inquiry.
But why have two barristers on their side?
I am only asking for my costs of £5,500 as I had to employ a barrister myself.
‘I had to sell three horses to stay in my yard, plus three shares in Carfax just to keep going.
It has meant starting all over again.’
Trainer John White and his conditional rider Keith Comerford were each fined £300 at Fontwell yesterday under the Jockey Club's ‘non-triers’ rule.
Stewards inquired into the running and riding of Charlie's Darling (8–1 to 16–1) after she finished eighth of the 11 runners in the Aldingbourne Claiming Hurdle.
Bannister votes for high life
Mike Walters
EVEN in his Arkansas power-base, US President-elect Bill Clinton was always overshadowed by England basketball star Alan Bannister.
Clinton was a regular spectator as Bannister, at 7ft 4in Britain's tallest professional sportsman, cut his teeth in Stateside college basketball before returning to England and signing for Manchester Giants — who else?
Bannister is poised to win his first international cap against Russia at Manchester's G-Mex Centre tonight in England's biggest game for 11 years.
Victory by four points or more will put them on course to qualify for the European Championship finals in Germany in 1993 — England's first appearance in the tournament since 1981.
Claim
A narrow three-point reverse in Moscow last year has convinced England coach Kevin Cadle that his side can claim an historic first win against the Russians in front of a sell-out 4,000 crowd.
And Bannister, who weighs 22 stone and has size 17 feet, could be Cadle's secret weapon.
Though unlikely to figure in England's starting five, he said last night: ‘Although it's an important night for basketball in this country, the big occasion won't get to me.
‘I've played for Utah Jazz against the very best in America — including Magic Johnson and Michael Jordan — in front of 40,000 fans and I only hope I put that experience to good use.
‘When you've competed among 30 trialists for just two spots in college basketball, you learn to cope with pressure.’
Bolton-born Bannister, who dwarfs influential team-mate Alton Byrd by 19 inches, is so huge he gets all his clothes and shoes shipped in from the States by mail order.
‘I could spend an entire week shopping in Manchester for clothes and come back empty-handed,’ he said.
And what of the Clinton connection?
‘He was a really friendly guy who regularly watched our games from the stands.
‘I stayed up all night to cheer him on to in the presidential election.
I was counting every vote with him,’ he added.
Bowe's jesting in strip teaser
Roy Collins in Las Vegas
RIDDICK BOWE is so laid back that he doesn't look like a man capable of starting a fight, let alone finishing one.
In fact Bowe, the giggling assassin from Mike Tyson's hometown of Brownsville, has stopped all but four opponents in an unbeaten 31-fight career that has earned him his right to challenge Evander Holyfield for the world heavyweight title here on Friday.
Those statistics, more than the shuffling, lethargic charade of sparring he's staged under canvas as well as on canvas these past few days, have made Holyfield-Bowe the first heavyweight title fight to open at evens with bookies since Liston-Patterson in 1962.
Publicity men have labelled the Friday the 13th affair as the night ‘anything can happen.’
As opposed to heavyweight title fights of recent non-vintage in which virtually nothing has happened.
The bookmakers' indecision, if not final, perhaps insultingly reflects not the undisputed brilliance of two unbeaten fighters but the continuing doubts about both champion and challenger.
Handicap
In Bowe's case, the doubts emanate not from an unblemished professional record but his last fight as an amateur, a points defeat by Britain's Lennox Lewis in the 1988 Olympic final.
Though Bowe had a hand injury and was fighting under a considerable psychological handicap knowing his brother was dying of AIDS, boxing's unforgiving whispering machine claims his defeat was evidence of a suspect will.
Bowe, they say, who does impressions of Stevie Wonder, Bill Cosby and Ronald Reagan that could earn him a different sort of starring role on the Vegas Strip, has yet to prove that he's more than a clever impersonator of a heavyweight champion.
Watching Bowe at work in a giant tent in the back lot of the Mirage Hotel, pawing at sparring partners with less conviction than the white tigers in the hotel lobby paw at the glass separating them from gamblers, is to share the doubts.
Bowe, of course, who did all his serious preparations before arriving here, may just be demonstrating a more honest approach to these final, meaningless training sessions before the big night.
Just as the decision to bar Holyfield's people from his final, unrevealing sparring session on Monday was a piece of boredom-relieving kidology.
Bowe's disturbingly casual manner out of the ring is of more concern to both his rivals and his supporters.
‘This fight is no big deal’ says Bowe of sport's richest prize, ‘just another fight, just another victim.
‘I'm enjoying all the attention.
This ain't my first rodeo, I've done all this before and don't see why Friday should be any different.’
Invest
It was no doubt to test the veracity of this declaration that Holyfield's trainer Lou Duva felt it necessary to poke his head round a curtain at Bowe's press conference to make an insulting remark.
Bowe has survived a much more stringent investigation of his psyche than that, most notably from veteran trainer Eddie Futch, who demanded proof of the contender's ambition before agreeing to invest some of his precious retirement years in another title cause.
Futch, who's trained five world champions and who originally rejected Bowe, says: ‘I was in my late 70s after Bowe's Olympic defeat and I didn't want to waste a minute of my time on someone who wasn't 100 per cent dedicated.’
Futch, having closely questioned Bowe about his aspirations, set a trap to catch any would-be thief of his time up in his training headquarters in Reno.
He pointed out a gruelling three-mile running course to Bowe, instructed him to learn it and then said he'd be going out of town for a few days.
‘The next day,’ says Futch, ‘I drove out to the course, which was covered in snow, to find Riddick chugging along on his own.
I decided from that moment to take him on.
‘This was the kid they said was lazy and undisciplined.’
Bowe might just have been demonstrating an innate sense of psychological testing techniques.
But any fighter who can convince a man like Futch that he's championship material doesn't need to worry about proving his credentials to lesser figures in boxing.
Strangely, for a man fighting for sport's most brutal crown, Bowe finds himself apologising for his obvious lack of aggression in the countdown to his day of destiny.
Although he comes from the same mean streets that spawned Tyson, Bowe says: ‘My approach is totally different to his.
I only change into a fighter in the last ten minutes before I get into the ring.’
The first ten minutes inside the ring at the Thomas and Mack Centre may determine whether Bowe has the will and the skill to produce another change of direction at the top of the heavyweight division.
Lennox Lewis and the rest of boxing await the answer with not inconsiderable interest.
Gooch wants Boycott help
GRAHAM GOOCH will carry on using Geoff Boycott as a guiding light.
‘He has coached me for many years and will certainly do so again,’ admitted Gooch.
England decided not to include Boycott among specialists who will help the squad prepare for this winter's tour of India.
Dooley cleared
STOKE have dropped a complaint against England's Wade Dooley after he was accused of knocking out an opposing player in a recent Courage League match.
Dooley, playing for Preston Grasshoppers, allegedly hit Stoke's Steve Maskrey during the Division Four clash.
Murphy blast
PACE bowler Murphy Su'a dismissed Andy Pycroft, David Houghton and Eddo Brandes in seven balls as Zimbabwe fell to 228–6 in reply to New Zealand's 335 in the rain-affected second Test in Harare yesterday.
Dyer demand
DARREN DYER demanded a fight with British welterweight champion Gary Jacobs after beating tough South African Chris Peters in nine rounds at Dagenham last night — his sixth successive victory.
Fresh start
THE 1993 Milk Race will start at Tunbridge Wells — one of the five new stage towns for the event — on May 30.
The cycling marathon will reach its conclusion two weeks and 1,150 miles later in Manchester.
Athey rebuff
FORMER England batsman Bill Athey has rejected the chance of a move to Derbyshire.
The 35-year-old right-hander was approached after his decision to leave Gloucestershire.
Warning for England
Tony Roche
North 3, South Africa 19:
ENGLAND received their third and final warning last night that South Africa are in the mood for a sensational mini Grand Slam.
Elland Road, home of England's football champions Leeds United, was the stage for the Springboks' third game of their four-match tour, and the North Division took up the gauntlet.
But just as the Midlands and England B found last week, battering offence against drilled defence equals a total lack of common sense.
A 15,000 crowd created a soccer-style atmosphere despite the fact that the tourists fielded essentially their second team.
Yet they still knew too much, possessed superior pace and hit harder than a North side containing more heart than hope.
North and England backs coach, Mike Slemen, said: ‘The lesson for us was in the way the Springboks closed us down.
We could have been 20 points up in the opening 10 minutes, but they had the pace and the organisation to shut us out.
England's backs have far more pace, and they'll cope much better.
‘South Africa must be worried how easily we did get through, and close to their line, because they know that Will Carling and Jeremy Guscott are amongst the quickest in the world.
‘But South Africa are a much better team than they've been given credit for, and they are getting better with every match.
They knew a little too much for my lads tonight.’
Denied
The North twice carved out excellent try-scoring chances in the first 15 minutes.
But Spencer Bromley was smashed to the ground inches from the line by Deon Oosthuysen, and Simon Mitchell was denied by Heinrich Fuls.
Other less clear-cut chances were also smashed back by a Springbok side which continues to make the most of their discipline despite having less ball and creating fewer chances than the opposition.
They still tackle in a powerhouse manner, and the message to England is clear.
They must find a way to unlock the defence other than by simply launching men head first into oblivion.
With the North weakened by this weekend's Twickenham test, only Orrell's Nigel Heslop could lay claim to current international status.
And the scoreline will be of particular embarrassment to his club team-mate, Gerry Ainscough, who missed four out of five kickable penalties.
Springbok full-back Hugh Reece-Edwards, one of eight full internationals in their line-up, scored 14 points with his right boot from four penalties, and a conversion.
That conversion sealed the game's only try, carved out by Piet Hendriks and Hennie le Roux and finished by former Leicester and Scotland B hooker Harry Roberts.
Small wonder
CHRIS SMALL grabbed his first professional title and a Pounds 3,000 winner's cheque with an incredible 9–1 win last night against world No 13 Alan McManus in the £25,000 Benson & Hedges Championship in Glasgow.
The former Edinburgh bank clerk crucified McManus with a total of six half-century breaks to book his wild card entry and a minimum Pounds 7,000 earnings to February's £390,000 B&H Masters at Wembley.
Small said: ‘I still can't believe the margin of my win.
I'm very proud of myself.’
Clough in new crisis
David Harrison
BRIAN CLOUGH was last night facing a new crisis as rebel Nottingham Forest shareholders prepared to force a City Ground showdown.
Signatures have been collected on a petition to call an extraordinary general meeting following Forest's struggling start to the season.
More than the 21 required signatories have already been gathered and it will be presented to Forest chairman Fred Reacher.
Some shareholders are unhappy with the running of the club and are concerned with the way the recent annual meeting was conducted.
There is also speculation that the rebels want to see a change of manager.
Many would prefer to see Clough step aside in favour of a younger man.
And a phone-in programme on a local radio station produced a deluge of anti-Clough callers.
Chairman Reacher said last night: ‘I'm aware of the petition.
I understand the mood but if some of them are disgruntled they are entitled to call an EGM.
I would be happy to discuss the situation with them.’
Bridge of confusion
CHELSEA chairman Ken Bates is confident of buying Stamford Bridge soon even though shares in landlords Cabra Estates were suspended yesterday on the Stock Exchange.
Troubled property group Cabra instigated the action ‘pending clarification of its financial position’.
Bates and Chelsea are insisting there is nothing to worry about.
‘We have been kept closely informed of the situation between Cabra and its bankers, and today's action will have no impact on the continuing ground acquisition negotiations, which we expect to be satisfactorily concluded in the near future,’ said the Premier League club.
Fans fury
VIC JOBSON, Southend United's controversial chairman, has likened some of the club's fans to the ‘Hitler Youth Movement’.
His astonishing attack followed Saturday's 3–0 home defeat by Oxford United.
Supporters demanded his removal and the axing of manager Colin Murphy.
Jobson said: ‘If they started supporting the team we might win a few games.’
Beardsley the saviour
Giles Smith
Wimbledon 0, Everton 1:
PETER BEARDSLEY'S fourth goal of Everton's unhappy season last night gave Howard Kendall something to smile about.
It was enough to see off the challenge of unlucky Wimbledon in this replay at Selhurst Park.
Beardsley combined with former Liverpool team-mate Gary Ablett to put Everton through to a lucrative home tie against Chelsea in the last 16 of the Coca-Cola Cup.
Ablett's inch-perfect pass split the Wimbledon offside trap brilliantly and Beardsley showed all his old class to slide the ball under a diving Hans Segers.
‘It was a brilliant pass and a beautifully taken goal.
It's something we've been working on ever since they both left Liverpool,’ joked a smiling Kendall afterwards.
‘It was a really important result for us considering our league position.
Now we can look forward to a really big crowd at Goodison for Chelsea in the next round.
The win was for our fans.’
‘I'm absolutely delighted that we have got two clean sheets and two wins in a week,’ he added.
The result was a bitter disappointment for Wimbledon who could have scored on three occasions in the first half.
Things look grim for the Dons — languishing third from the bottom of the Premier League — and now out of the Cup.
And manager Joe Kinnear last night reported that John Fashanu was in agony after pulling his hamstring again after coming on as a substitute even though he was ‘only about 10 per cent fit.’
Kinnear moaned: ‘I don't know where we go from here.
They had only one chance in the game and they took it.
‘We've just got to try to keep afloat.
I jut hope to god Fashanu and John Scales sought themselves out.
I am desperately disappointed.’
And he had hard words for striker Dean Holdsworth.
‘He missed a hat-trick.
Strikers should have more responsibility.
They are paid to score goals.’
But clearly angry and frustrated, he paid tribute to Everton keeper Neville Southall.
‘He was their best player by far.
Without him they were nothing.’
Wimbledon's three chances in the first half fell to Alan McLeary whose powerful header was brilliantly saved by Southall.
Then Robbie Earle saw his spectacular bicycle kick hit the bar, and Terry Gibson's free kick was palmed over by Southall.
But after Beardsley's 55th minute strike Everton began to dominate as Wimbledon piled men forward in a bid for an equaliser.
The Merseysiders could have added two more.
Paul Rideout's superb turn and snapshot hitting a post, and substitute Robert Warzycha some how managed to miss from pointblank range.
But the real hero, not for the first time, was the veteran Welsh international Southall who twice saved from Holdsworth in the final minutes.
Gazza wins hands down
Ben Bacon in Seville
Sevilla 1, Lazio 1
PAUL GASCOIGNE took over the crown was unofficially crowned of king of world football here last night as he gloriously won his personal duel with Maradona with a wonder goal that had ‘made in heaven’ stamped all over it.
And Maradona, whose ‘Hand of God’ goal helped knock England out of the 1986 World Cup, could only stand and applaud the young pretender.
The England international magically skipped past four defenders as though stardust had been sprinkled on his boots after turning on the edge of the area.
And he remained ice cool to stroke the ball home with his renowned touch of arrogance.
His 38th-minute effort came straight from the dream factory, which was appropriate considering he had flown in from EuroDisney only three hours before kick-off.
No wonder Gazza was immediately mobbed by his disbelieving team-mates and no wonder Maradona, now mentally and physically battered and bruised at 32, is happy to pass on his tainted crown to him.
The fading Argentine superstar said: ‘Gascoigne is the one player I can see taking over from me on the world stage.’
His goal, which squared the friendly 1–1, was all the more remarkable considering he had been laid up in bed with flu for most of last week and forced to miss Sunday's game against Torino.
And even if Gazza fails to make his mark in Italy, there will be no shortage of interest in him, with his hometown club Newcastle last night reported to be ready to step in at the end of the season.
Manager Kevin Keegan underlined Newcastle's ambition when he revealed: ‘We've already tried to buy players of similar stature to Gazza.
Problem
‘If he became available at the end of the season, the answer is yes, we would go for him, and we would have more pull than most.
‘We tried to sign Chris Waddle, but it was not right for him at the time, we went for Peter Beardsley, but it was not right for Everton.
‘We've looked everywhere, at home and abroad.
Our problem is that we're not in the Premier League, but hopefully that will be remedied at the end of this season.’
Newcastle, nine points ahead in the First Division, let Gascoigne go to Spurs for £2m.
Terry Venables has first option on Gascoigne should he wish to return to England, but Keegan is undeterred.
‘Italy now has the best players in the world, but no Italian club is bigger than us.
If other clubs can sign big names we should be able to do it too.’
Originally, the showdown between Gazza and Maradona was scheduled for Munich, then switched to Rome and finally to Seville.
Gazza's goal was worth the wait and all the confusion but only 5,000 were in the Ramon Sanchez-Pizjuan stadium to witness it.
However, millions watched as the game was transmitted live in Spain and Italy.
It was impossible for Maradona to play in Rome because of the Pounds 2.5m he owes the Italian tax authorities following his turbulent spell at Napoli, where two inspired Championships were overshadowed by sordid drug and racketeering allegations.
He was eventually banned by the Italian Football Association for failing a drugs test and virtually had to be smuggled out of the country in the dark of night to save his sanity back home in Argentina.
Only the patience of FIFA last night prevented an indefinite worldwide ban being imposed on him at midnight because of transfer monies still owed by Sevilla to Napoli.
They have given the Spanish club a further two weeks to find the cash.
Some football lovers might wish they can't find it so we can have our outstanding memories of Maradona at his supreme best.
Poor Maradona was a shadow of the man who stunned the world with his brilliance in Mexico.
Now he's fat and mostly disinterested.
And although he does reserve his party pieces for his formidable long-range free kicks, most of those were off target apart from one effort which hit a post late on.
Gazza tried to play it down, saying: ‘This wasn't Gazza against Maradona, it was only a friendly between Lazio against Sevilla.’
It was Maradona's first appearance against an Italian outfit since he played for Napoli in a 4–1 defeat by Sampdoria in March 1991.
But he was satisfied with the way it had gone and said: ‘We controlled the game but Lazio were very strong in defence.
Italian players are always to be respected.’
Gazza did not even come out for the second half — he had proved all he needed to prove to any disbelievers still out there.
The King is dead!
Long live the King!
Big Mal back in hot seat
John Davies
MALCOLM ALLISON was back in managerial business last night when Dennis Rofe quit struggling Bristol Rovers after a row over the man brought in to guide him through troubled waters.
Successive 5–1 defeats led Allison to suggest Rovers cancel a friendly against a local side in favour of formulating a solid, tactical plan for Saturday's game with Derby County.
The dispute followed Monday night's board meeting at which Rofe, 42, claimed he was asked to relinquish control of both coaching and team selection.
Rovers vice-chairman Geoff Dunford explained: ‘Dennis was given the option to work alongside Allison, but he chose to leave.’
The much-travelled Allison, 65, coaching consultant and now caretaker-manager of Division One's bottom club, immediately ruled himself out of the job full-time.
‘I only came here as a consultant and do not want to get deeply involved,’ he insisted.
‘Soccer is a young man's game and I do not intend to work 15 hours a day, seven days a week.’
Coincidentally, Allison's first management post was at Bath — Bristol Rovers' adopted home city — nearly 30 years ago.
Since then his clubs have included Plymouth (twice), Manchester City (twice) and Crystal Palace (twice).
Salako in clear
JOHN SALAKO last night shrugged off an injury scare and said he desperately wants to be part of England's World Cup plans against Turkey at Wembley next week.
The Crystal Palace winger was hurt in training on Monday, jarring the same knee that required a career-saving operation in the United States last year.
‘It's nothing serious.
Fingers crossed, all it needs is rest,’ he said.
Sad Leeds laid low
Mike Walters
Watford 2, Leeds Utd 1:
LEEDS UNITED'S season threatens to crumble into ashes following the champions' humiliating defeat by First Division Watford in the Coca-Cola Cup.
Defenders David Holdsworth and Jason Drysdale sent an 18,000 crowd wild with second-half strikes from a flying header and a penalty.
The victory condemned Howard Wilkinson's team to their seventh consecutive match without a win — and another headache to follow their European Cup collapse less than a week ago.
Wilkinson, who might have been sporting a more cheerful expression this morning but for a number of glaring misses by Eric Cantona, said: ‘Whipping the people responsible is not the answer.
‘The disappointment will be as excruciatingly painful, as anyone can imagine, for the players.
But most of them can take solace in that their performances aren't being reflected in the results of late.
‘Our suicidal tendencies killed us off tonight again.
We've been going on like that for six to eight weeks now.
But if you go to sleep at night thinking there is no way out, you've got a serious problem.
I don't expect them to jack it in.’
Graham Taylor and Elton John, father figures of Watford's glorious past, joined the salute to a new generation of Cup fighters at Vicarage Road.
Rock star Elton interrupted his world tour to make a 12,000-mile round trip from Mexico to watch his favourite team complete the blackest week of Wilkinson's reign.
And England manager Taylor, whose departure five years ago signalled Watford's decline as a footballing force, was there to witness their greatest night since those days.
Skipper Holdsworth, who made a stirring comeback from ruptured cruciate knee ligaments like his twin brother, Wimbledon striker Dean, played a captain's role, heading the first goal from Trevor Putney's 53rd-minute free kick.
And 19 minutes later, the Milky Bars were on Drysdale, who converted his sixth goal of the season from the penalty spot after Chris Whyte had used Paul Furlong as a climbing frame.
Drysdale, nicknamed Milky because of a passing resemblance to TV's Milky Bar Kid, sent John Lukic the wrong way to leave Leeds' season in tatters.
Gary McAllister' exquisite chip six minutes from time sparked a frantic late charge from the faded champions to salvage a replay from a disastrous six days in which they have been dumped out of Europe by Rangers and mauled 4–0 at Manchester City.
But the Hornets deservedly held on to win a fourth-round trip to Blackburn, leaving the FA Cup as Leeds's only realistic hope of silverware this season.
Watford man of the match Gary Porter, a survivor of Taylor's glorious era, said: ‘That brought back lots of memories from our First Division days.
We used to have a lot of good nights like that and this was up there among the best.
‘I didn't notice how low the Leeds players looked as they walked off because I was too busy celebrating with the fans.
I'm sure they'll bounce back because they were difficult to beat.’
And Drysdale said: ‘That was the biggest and best night I've had in football.
Leeds are the champions of England and it was great to beat them.’
Watford had the best of the early exchanges, but Leeds should have taken the lead after 16 minutes.
Glory
Cantona galloped 60 yards unchallenged down the middle, but his shot was smothered expertly by the onrushing Perry Suckling.
Without an away win since April, Leeds were continually harassed could ill afford to spurn gilt edge changes like that and Watford continued to harass the champions out of their stride in midfield.
After the break, Andy Hessenthaler twice breeched the Leeds defence, before Holdsworth finally made the breakthrough.
Then Cantona committed his second And if the masses shoe-horned onto the Vicarage Road terraces had the growing feeling it was to be Watford's night, Cantona's second howler of the night when Strachan's cross found the darling of Elland Road unmarked again and just six yards out.
But Cantona's firm header went the wrong side of an upright — and Drysdale made Leeds pay.
Watford will have little time to bask in their glory — manager Steve Perryman has pulled them in for training at lunchtime today.
Wilkinson also revealed that David Batty and Tony Dorigo are almost certainly out of the England World Cup squad to face Turkey next week.
Fergie in hunt for £4m Hirst
Rob Shepherd
DAVID HIRST is the man Alex Ferguson wants to end Manchester United's goal drought.
Sheffield Wednesday manager Trevor Francis has rejected his first approach and told Ferguson the England striker is not available…unless the bid is one he simply can't refuse.
That is thought to mean in excess of £4 million for a player now recovered from a broken ankle and the fulcrum of Wednesday's own plans to win the Premier League.
Ferguson, with only six goals to show from United's last 12 games, has £5m to spend and would be reluctant to pour most of it into one signing.
But he admitted last night: ‘We are working on something.
I hope it can be resolved sooner rather than later.’
The pressure on Ferguson was increased by the hat-trick from Mark Robins, the centre-forward sold in the summer for £800,000 to Norwich, at Oldham on Monday.
Robins now has 10 goals this season and would surely have figured in Ferguson's plans by now had he stayed.
Ferguson, who failed to land 16-goal Alan Shearer and bought Dion Dublin — only for him to break a leg — is also thought to be watching Dundee United's Duncan Ferguson.
Paul is Aussie target
By Ray French
GREAT BRITAIN Test hero Paul Eastwood is the latest target for a host of top Aussie clubs.
Canberra Raiders lead the chase for Hull's powerful 14-stone winger, who landed six goals from as many attempts in Britain's 33–10 second Test triumph in Melbourne in the summer.
Eastwood admitted: ‘I definitely want to have a go in Australia.
‘I like their style of football and would like to test myself out in the Sydney Premiership.
Setback ‘I don't mind where I go as long as I get an opportunity with one of their clubs.
I really did enjoy myself in the Tests last summer and know I can reproduce that form again.’
Meanwhile, Welsh coach Clive Griffiths yesterday received another setback in the build-up to the international against England at Swansea on November 27.
Already reeling from the loss of skipper Jonathan Davies, Griffiths was rocked by the news that Kevin Ellis has only a 50–50 chance of being fit.
The exciting Warrington scrum-half has a rib injury.
Close call for Stich
FORMER Wimbledon champion Michael Stich survived three match points before beating Spaniard Sergi Bruguera in the European Community Championship yesterday.
But the hard-fought 7–6, 3–6, 7–6 first-round victory in Antwerp did little to console the 24-year-old.
‘The way I'm playing right now, it's just disappointing,’ he said.
Swiss cup boss quits
ROLAND STADLER, Switzerland's non-playing Davis Cup captain, has quit less than a month before the final against the United States.
Stadler, 33, a Davis Cup veteran of 34 appearances, has clashed repeatedly with national coach Georges Deniau — and the Swiss players have decided to support Frenchman Deniau.
Rovers protest
ANGRY Bristol Rovers fans are planning to protest against the sacking of manager Dennis Rofe before this Saturday's home Division One clash with Derby County.
Test for Nikolai
BULGARIAN Nikolai Todorov will put 5,000 on the gate when he goes on trial tonight for Middlesbrough, writes John Wardle.
The striker said yesterday that he has an ‘open mind’ on a permanent move to the Premier League club.
Todorov, 27, would open the way for more Bulgarians in English football if Boro boss Lennie Lawrence presses his interest.
Lawrence watched Todorov in training and declared: ‘We'll look at him in the reserves against Derby and take it from there.’
Todorov, capped 16 times, cost Montpelier £450,000 from Lokomotiv two seasons ago and was snapped up by Cannes in August.
He returns to Cannes at the weekend for a French League game.
Bassett is cleared
By Ben Bacon
DAVE BASSETT has been found innocent of allegations of obscene behaviour at Chelsea last month.
The Sheffield United boss, who was accused of foul language and making a V-sign by Chelsea fans, has been cleared after an investigation by Fulham police.
The FA will not pursue the matter and yesterday they agreed to take no action against referee Ray Lewis, who was accused by a fan of swearing at him during last week's match between Barnet and Walsall.
Chief Superintendent Doug Johnson of Fulham police said: ‘The allegations against Mr Bassett were not supported by written statements we have taken.’
Preston referee Jim Parker appears at the FA this afternoon to explain his version of events that led to the West Brom players reporting him for swearing.
Brentford Italian job
Ascoli 1, Brentford 3.
BRENTFORD sailed through their Anglo-Italian Cup tie with goals from Jamie Bates, Marcus Gayle and Gary Blissett.
More than 300 Londoners boosted the crowd to just under 1,000 and boss Phil Holder was delighted with the display at the Del Duca Stadium.
He enthused: ‘We gave a very disciplined display and did what we set out to do — win convincingly.’
Amazingly, all four goals came from free kicks, with Brentford's transfer-seeking defender Bates heading the first after 13 minutes from a Billy Manuel free kick.
Bates was only playing because £100,000-signing Shane Westley was cup-tied after playing for Wolves.
Manuel also took the free kick that led to Gayle's goal, while Blissett's 15th goal of the season was a 67th-minute header.
Dane's parting gift to Keegan
By David Alexander in Lecce
Lucchese 1, Newcastle United 1.
NEWCASTLE'S Italian job was salvaged yesterday by a player desperate to leave the club.
Danish defender Bjorn Kristensen hit the second-half equaliser that gave Kevin Keegan's side a point they hardly deserved in the Anglo-Italian Cup they won when it was last staged 19 years ago.
United's 29-year-old saviour then revealed why he wants to walk out on Keegan's Tyneside revolution.
‘I will be leaving soon, it's inevitable,’ he said.
‘I can accept not being in the team but I cannot accept that, because of the circumstances, I'm becoming a worse footballer every week.
‘I'll be sorry to leave, but I know that whatever I did today I don't have a chance of playing at Charlton on Saturday, or the week after.’
Kristensen's equaliser failed to disguise an unimpressive performance by the First Division leaders, and Keegan admitted: ‘I don't have to tell them how badly they played.
‘They battled, but that's it.
It was a disappointing display and we were fortunate to come away with a point.
It was a sub-standard performance and I am not happy.
Three or four players did not fancy it, and I won't have it.
‘One fan hitched all the way here, and this is what he gets.
I feel sorry for the fans who have travelled all this way to see that.’
Kristensen, playing in midfield, struck after 60 minutes to pull Newcastle level with the side currently in the bottom half of Italy's Serie B.
A long cross from John Beresford was headed on by Steve Howey for Kristensen to head United back on level terms.
Stranded
The Italians had gone ahead after 28 minutes, when Bruno Russo's deflected shot left keeper Pavel Srnicek stranded.
It was Lucchese's first shot of a game Newcastle had dominated up to that point, with both Kristensen and Kevin Sheedy having gone close.
The Italians came alive after that, although Sheedy had another scoring opportunity before Kristensen struck his equaliser.
The Dane did not look too happy when substituted 10 minutes from time, and Newcastle faded after his departure, surviving a few uncomfortable moments before the end.
Fashanu setback
By Ben Bacon
WIMBLEDON'S John Fashanu is likely to be out until next month after aggravating a back problem.
The former England striker injured himself in the Coca-Cola Cup replay with Everton on Tuesday and a specialist has advised complete rest.
It's another blow for the club which has had an appalling run of injuries to key players.
Fashanu said: ‘It's a trapped sciatic nerve and I've been told to rest for about three weeks.
It's nothing major, but I've got to get it right before I play again.’
Fashanu has carried the injury for a number of weeks and has had to endure two hours of daily stretching on a rack to ease the pain.
There is also a fear he has hamstring trouble.
Meanwhile, Dons boss Joe Kinnear is trying to sign on-loan Millwall defender Alan McLeary before the weekend.
Cup blow for Scots
Scott McMunn
HEARTS defender Craig Levein has withdrawn from Scotland's squad to face Italy in next week's World Cup qualifier at Ibrox.
The 28-year-old suffered a thigh injury in last night's League game against Partick Thistle and was forced to limp off after 37 minutes.
Levein was ruled out of the World Cup match after a medical check yesterday, leaving manager Andy Roxburgh with defensive problems following the loss of Richard Gough from his original pool.
Roxburgh said: ‘It's a big disappointment but I won't make any decision about a possible replacement until the other midweek matches have been played.’
Game for a laugh
THESE youngsters clearly agree with the title of Graham Taylor's new book ‘Football Training Can Be Fun’(Stanley Paul £6.99) after a session with the England manager yesterday in a London park.
The book targets children and players at all levels.
Brave Spot in dogged comeback
Giles Smith
SPOT the dog is a greyhound in a million — he's beaten cancer, and this weekend will resume his racing career in a bid to pay back some of the costs of two major operations that saved his life.
Perhaps not quite in the miracle league of Bob Champion, who overcame the same disease to win the Grand National, but the story behind this winner of 37 races is no less remarkable.
Last year trainer Liz Redpath discovered a tennis-ball size lump on Spot's left shoulder.
‘We took him to the vet, who diagnosed cancer.
He said he'd try cutting it out, but frankly held out little hope.
‘He gave Spot between six and eight weeks to live,’ she said.
‘But miraculously it worked, he recovered, kept his weight and his fitness and was raring to go again.’
Then disaster struck for the second time when he pulled a tendon in his left leg, an injury that has ended many a greyhound's racing career.
‘He had another operation to have the tendon removed, and he's recovered from that, too.
He's quite a fighter,’ says Redpath.
On Saturday at Portsmouth's Tipner Greyhound Stadium, he'll be making his return to top level racing, and the omens look good after a warm-up race.
‘He came third without really trying.
We were amazed.
Now I think he's got a real chance of winning on Saturday.’
If Spot, who won more than £1,500 for owner John Adams before being struck down by cancer, can resume his winning ways, it'll be a bonus for his connections, who had to find more than £250 for his two operations.
‘If he can start winning some of that back, it'll be the icing on the cake,’ says his devoted trainer.
‘But really we're just happy that he's still alive.
The decision to operate is typical of Redpath, who, apart from training greyhounds at her kennels near Petersfield, Hampshire, runs a ‘find a home scheme’ for racers when they finish their careers.
‘We de-train them, sort of calm them down from their peak racing tension, and then find suitable homes for them.
It's very rewarding,’ she says.
On Saturday at Tipner he's back over his favourite 610 metre distance.
And if he can really put the icing on the cake of this remarkable recovery story by winning, he will be the toast of the Portsmouth greyhound racing fraternity — where he's become a great favourite over the years.
Redpath will be having ‘a couple of quid’ on him — and after what Spot's been through, who'd bet against him?
Golazo, Gazza
Ben Bacon
DIEGO MARADONA last night bowed to the supreme talent of Paul Gascoigne and urged him never to lose his individuality.
‘He can do for Lazio what I did for Napoli,’ said the dethroned Argentine superstar, still talking excitedly yesterday about Gazza's wonder goal on Tuesday night.
Maradona, who inspired Napoli to two Italian championship triumphs, needed only one word to describe the goal which Gazza can't remember because of illness.
That word was ‘Golazo’, and he could deliver no greater compliment.
Golazo roughly translates as unbelievable.
Gazza's goal convinced Maradona there is no greater player on earth than the irrepressible Geordie.
Great
Maradona, who now heads the Spanish branch of the Gazza fan club, said: ‘Gascoigne produced something special — it was a great goal.
‘As soon as he beat our sweeper, I knew it was unstoppable.
But he's not the new Maradona, or the new Cryuff, or the new Pele.
Let him be Gazza — you shouldn't want him to be anyone else.
‘He's already among the best players in the world, but he must look after himself and have his own identity and personality.
‘Maybe the pressure will get to him like it did eventually to me.
I don't know, but I can see he's very good.
‘Right now, I don't think there's a world No 1 — just a list of very good players, and Gazza is among the top group, which includes Van Basten, Gullit, Baresi and Careca.
‘Me?
When I came to Seville, I said I was no longer No 1 — I was No 10,000.
Now maybe it's 2,500!’
Amazingly, Gazza can remember nothing about one of the great goals of his career because he was still suffering the debilitating effects of flu.
Indeed, he was just about to ask to be substituted when he collected the ball in the 38th minute on the edge of the area with his back to goal.
Yet with a twist and a turn, he was away, skipping past four desperate challenges before slipping the ball into the net to level the score for Lazio at 1–1.
At that moment, he was well and truly back.
Lazio manager Dino Zoff is convinced it's Gazza's destiny to rank at the pinnacle of football's history, rubbing shoulders with the likes of Maradona.
He said: ‘Gazza has the skill and the opportunity to be as big as Maradona, but he's not there yet.
‘However he's still young and has the potential to be as great.’
Gazza teams up with England today, and his growing authority and maturity on the pitch is a huge bonus for manager Graham Taylor.
Reckless
No longer does Gascoigne want to take on the world single-handed, and his reckless nature has been replaced by a more thoughtful approach.
He said: ‘I'm the same player I was before my injury in the FA Cup final, but I just use my head a little bit more and try to get more people involved in the game.
‘The big turning point was against Norway, when I proved I could go for 90 minutes.
‘I'm lighter now than I was at Tottenham.
I'm more toned up and I have now got my match fitness.
If I have a bad game, I have a bad game, simple as that.’
Punters back on Road
FORMER champion hurdler Beech Road has been cut to 12–1 for Saturday's Mackeson Gold Cup even though there is an outside chance he could miss the race.
Bookmakers report considerable each-way support for the Toby Balding-trained challenger, prompting William Hill to shorten the horse to 12–1 and Ladbroke to 14–1.
But his stable revealed that the 10-year-old could be diverted to the Hackett Chase at Cheltenham tomorrow over a distance just over half a mile shorter than the Mackeson.
A spokesman for Balding said: ‘The governor is looking at both races though he is still more likely to run on Saturday.’
Richard Lee, trainer of Space Fair, is considering the same option for his Mackeson challenger.
Lee's wife Carol explained: ‘We are leaving our options open but at the moment Space Fair still goes for the Mackeson.
Only if the ground became soft would we have to think again.’
Romola Fitz the bill
Jonathan Ramsden
ADRIAN MAGUIRE's meteoric rise to the top of his profession overshadowed the emergence of another exceptional talent last season.
Fellow Irishman Mick Fitzgerald would have stood out as the ‘find of the season’ in any normal year.
Maguire's remarkable exploits rightly grabbed most of the headlines, but Fitzgerald impressed as a horseman of the highest quality with 38 successes from limited opportunities.
He has carried on the good work this term and is well on the way to establishing himself in the top 10 with 16 wins in the current campaign.
His booking could well make all the difference for Romola Nijinsky in the Orchard Portman Selling Handicap Hurdle (2.50) at Taunton.
Good enough to finish fifth in a Listed race at Goodwood last year, Romola Nijinsky mixes in rather less exaltic circles these days.
However, she showed she retains ability when winning a seller at Market Rasen by 15 lengths and faced a stiff task last time when fifth to the well handicapped Sovereign Niche at Wolverhampton.
Kharif could be thrown in for the Arpal Chase at Kelso (1.40).
Dick Allan's charge, a useful hurdler rated in the mid 120s, has crept in on a mark of 86 over fences after an unenterprisingly-ridden second at Catterick.
Still in need of the run there, he will strip much fitter today.
Willie Sparkle can reverse recent form with Strong Views in the last (3.40) at the Scottish track.
Why Ollie wept in the locker room
Bill Blighton
JOSE Maria Olazabal has chosen to miss next month's £1.7 million Johnnie Walker World Championship in sun-kissed Jamaica because he is exhausted.
He wants a complete break from golf.
Olazabal (pictured) will spend December in Northern Spain hunting with his father and the first month of the New Year with the rest of his family.
His first tournament will be the Tenerife Open, but not until mid-February.
The 26-year-old is guarded about his physical and mental fatigue, but he says pointedly: ‘It's time for me to relax.’
And that was exactly my remedy for him earlier this year when, face down on a bench in Augusta's locker-room, Olazabal shielded the grief of failure in the US Masters.
An opening round of 76 had destroyed his hopes of improving on his second place behind Ian Woosnam the previous year.
The torrent of tears became a flood of determination to confirm his reputation as the world's best young golfer.
But although his next three rounds were more respectable, Olazabal's final total of 287 wasn't good enough for a place among the leading 24 who are awarded automatic invitations back to Augusta.
Now, amazingly, there is no guarantee that he will be able to play in any of the three US Majors next year.
He must rely on invitations.
‘I was devastated for four months after finishing second to Woosnam last year, but now I realise the value of that defeat.
It was a great learning experience,’ he explained.
You must learn to lose a Major before you can win one.’
It is no surprise that Olazabal knocks himself out mentally.
Even when on top of his game the intensity of his desire often makes him appear downcast as he strides down the fairways — in direct contrast to his compatriot Seve Ballesteros, who has every emotion etched on his face.
Focus
He admitted: ‘Seve and I are different personalities but we do have one thing in common— we want to prove we are the best.
You don't see many people smiling during a Major.
‘When I play a Major, I focus solely on doing my best — and forget everything else.
‘But I'm relaxing now.
The rest of the year I will prepare for the Open.
I know I have the game to win, it's just a question of everything being perfect for that special week.’
Nick's Grand flop
NICK FALDO finished last in a sensational climax to golf's Grand Slam at La Quinta yesterday.
American Tom Kite hit a 62 to force a play-off against Zimbabwe's Nick Price in the 36-hole event between the winners of the four Majors.
Price took the £260,000 top prize at the first extra hole.
Faldo finished six shots behind the leaders with American Fred Couples third.
Trev grabs glory
Mike Walters
England 75, Russia 71
TREVOR GORDON sunk two free throws two seconds from time to give England a 75–71 triumph over Russia at Manchester's G-Mex Centre last night.
Those two points kept their European Championship dream alive in thrilling fashion.
Guildford Kings star Gordon, who top scored with 17 points, put his country back on course to qualify for next year's tournament finals in Germany, when all hope had seemed lost with less than five minutes remaining.
England's 34–32 half-time lead left them bang on target for the four-point margin required to overturn last year's narrow 77–74 reverse in Moscow.
The cushion would have been even greater had they not squandered an early 19–10 lead and clocked up 14 team fouls before the break.
But within three minutes of the re-start, Sergei Babkov's two giant three-pointers had punctured English morale as Russia went into overdrive and opened up a 49–40 advantage.
But there was one, remarkable throw of the dice left for England and how the 4,000 crowd loved it.
Leigh in shock win
Leigh 11, St Helens 6
NEW Leigh coach Steve Simms watched the Division One strugglers post their first win of the season by stunning Championship contenders St Helens.
And the Aussie beamed: ‘Leigh are a lot better side than I thought and there is a great deal more football in the team than I was led to believe.’
Taking the history test
Graham Otway, in Durban
SOUTH AFRICA'S first non-white Test cricketer claimed last night he has been the victim of death threats in his bid to break through the barriers of apartheid.
Omar Henry creates history tomorrow when he dons the green and gold South African colours against India at Durban — the Republic's first home Test for 22 years.
But the 40-year-old left-arm spinner from the wine-producing region of Stellenbosch outside Cape Town, has had to fight the deep prejudices of his fellow Cape coloureds, rather than whites, to achieve his ambitions.
Henry, who spent 10 years as a professional in Scottish league cricket and played for Scotland in the Benson and Hedges Cup, turned his back on other coloured South African cricketers in 1976.
Scorn
And playing alongside white men he endured a decade-and-a-half of bitter scorn from people of his own race, in what he now recognises as racism in reverse.
He said: ‘It is the worst thing that has happened in my life.
When I started playing with white men I was called a Nazi, a traitor and was told I would be put up against a wall and shot.
‘And that was from people who I knew, who I had played cricket with since I was a boy and it really hurt.’
It was a small, barely significant event in apartheid terms, that turned Henry away from his roots towards white-dominated cricket at the age of 23.
The son of a humble bookbinder, he had impressed Cape coloured cricket's most famous overseas ambassador Basil D'Oliveira as 14-year-old.
But he played throughout his youth under the auspices of the Indian-dominated South African Cricket Board, with its limited facilities but strict policy of no contact with the white-dominated South African Union, while apartheid ruled.
But Henry broke away from the SACB after an incident which proved to him that apartheid was a two-way affair.
Driving back from a game with fellow coloureds, he stopped at a white sports ground to watch a match played by members of the SACU.
‘Like any sportsman we stopped to watch — just for 10 minutes,’ he said.
But that was against the non-white Cricket Board's policy and when he refused to apologise, he was banned from playing with people of his own race.
Despite his background, Henry switched codes and his talent shone through in the white SACU, which was fighting right wing politicians in a move towards multi-racial cricket.
And he went on to gain first-class status with Western Province in the comparatively liberal atmosphere of the Cape.
At times, he couldn't drink in the same bar as his new white team-mates but there were no barriers to him on the cricket field.
But there were problems when he returned to Stellenbosch and offered his coaching talents to an Indian school.
‘I offered to coach them for nothing but they said they didn't want me,’ he added.
‘Even though my mother was on the school committee she couldn't convince them.’
Inspire
Henry hopes that playing for the officially rehabilitated South African Test side will mean he can inspire other coloureds to break down prejudices.
‘The Test match fulfils an ambition for me that I never thought would be possible in my time,’ he said.
‘It's important, too, for other non-whites — they need heroes with whom they can identify.’
Henry is certainly trying to break down barriers.
From Western Province, he moved out of the first-class game to Boland but last year returned to the South African top flight with Orange Free State.
His colour is now accepted in Bloemfontain, traditionally the heartland of the pro-apartheid Afrikaaner.
But when he is not playing, Henry spends his time coaching in the coloured township of Rocklands and spreading the gospel of multi-racial sport.
Crowe saves the Kiwis
MARTIN CROWE (61) and Ken Rutherford (57no) yesterday shared a fourth-wicket stand of 55 to steer New Zealand out of trouble in the second Test against Zimbabwe in Harare yesterday.
Zimbabwe declared their first innings at 283–9, 52 behind, then took three wickets before the Kiwis struggled to 187–4 by the close.
England are facing shock warns Botha
Tony Roche
NAAS BOTHA last night told the players who beat England B at Bristol: ‘You have the chance to repeat that triumph at Twickenham.’
The Springbok skipper leads an unchanged team for the historic Test against England on Saturday, warning: ‘Some people believed we would lose all four matches here but they are already three times wrong.
‘England have every right to start favourites because of their great achievements over the past three years.
But we have been together now for 12 matches on tour, as well as facing New Zealand and world champions Australia.
‘I said when we arrived two weeks ago that by the time it came to this Test you would have to give us a 50–50 chance because this is a one-off game, not part of a Test series.
‘Right now we are a confident, improving team who will do our country proud.’
Awesome
Botha and Danie Gerber, both 34 and considering international retirement, are the most experienced members of the side with 27 and 24 caps respectively.
The Springboks' biggest problem is easy to spot — the other 13 have only 34 between them and tighthead prop Keith Andrews and openside flanker Frederik Smit will make their debuts.
Yet the warning signs for England flashed brightly during victories over Divisional champions the Midlands, an England B team containing nine internationals and the North on Tuesday night.
No Test side in recent memory has proved more successful with such little ball or been so dangerous after lengthy periods of awesome defence.
In Botha, they have a prolific goal-kicker, drop-goal expert and an elusive wisp of a fly-half who manages to steer clear of hunting flankers and can drill the opposition all the way back to their own 22 with one flashing kick.
Gerber, South Africa's record try-scorer with 19, has touched down four times in as many internationals and his centre partnership with Pieter Muller poses a more difficult challenge to Carling and Jeremy Guscott than they may have envisaged three months ago.
The lineout remains a big headache, although Drikus Hattingh has won good ball at the front and No 8 Adriaan Richter has blossomed as the tour has unfolded.
It's in the middle where their real problems lie.
The occasional sly lift is one thing but I suspect Irish referee Stephen Hilditch will become suspicious when he sees Adolf Malan waving at him from upon high while he waits for the throw.
But the scrum is solid.
Coach John Williams considered recalling loosehead prop Heinrich Rodgers, who had a sound game in Leeds.
It was deemed unnecessary, though, as Johann Styger held his own against Jeff Probyn at Bristol.
SOUTH AFRICA: T van Rensburg; J Small, D Gerber, P Muller, J Olivier; N Botha, G Wright; J Styger, W Hills, K Andrews, D Hattingh, A Malan, T Strauss, A Richter, F Smit.
Hills wants to play here
Tony Roche
WILLEM GERHARDUS HILLS filled his lungs with Yorkshire night air, raised his tracksuit collar against the biting cold and announced a decision that could change his life.
‘I want to play in England,’ said South Africa's hooker.
‘I would like to spend one year here, continue my studies and test myself against the best British players.’
Willie Hills, a 30-year-old Pretoria policeman preparing to do battle with a 30-year-old lawyer at Twickenham on Saturday, is aware of the problems.
There's the 180-day qualification rule for starters, imposed to thin the flow of players between hemispheres.
Hills, however, is undaunted.
The seeds are sown and he intends investigating all possibilities the moment South Africa's short tour of England ends this weekend.
First there is the prospect of his second nose-to-nose with Brian Moore.
The rapidly improving Springbok's stirring 20–16 victory over England B at Bristol on Saturday left Hills quietly confident.
‘I am not concerned about Moore because he did not give me too many problems.
I am concerned about my overall game.
I was happy with my form against Midlands but not so pleased about my tackling and open play last weekend.’
Moore is two weeks older than Hills but in terms of international experience the Harlequins hooker is a lifetime ahead.
There was an unmistakable touch of sadness to his voice when Hills revealed: ‘So much time to make up, so many games missed.
Only we can know how it really feels not to be liked, not to be wanted by the rest of the rugby world.’
Anthems ban stays
THE Rugby Football Union were adamant last night that no anthems will be played before England's Test against South Africa at Twickenham on Saturday.
And they insist that the decision to ban God Save The Queen, which has provoked a storm of patriotic protests, was not influenced by the ANC.
RFU secretary Dudley Wood said: ‘Before the start of the tour, the question of anthems was discussed with the South African RFU.
‘Agreement was reached that, rather than play an anthem for one team and not the other, which would have been discourteous to the visiting team, no anthems at all would be played.
‘Neither the ANC nor any other party played any part in that decision.’
There is a precedent for only one anthem being played before a match.
Whenever England play an international in Dublin, the Irish anthem is played, but God Save the Queen is not.
McClair ends goal drought
BRIAN McCLAIR was back on the goal trail last night as Manchester United beat Brondby 3–2 in an Old Trafford friendly.
McClair's close-range effort in the 14th minute was his first goal in 12 matches.
United's other goals came from Danny Wallace, just before half-time, and a late Mike Phelan penalty.
Euro turn-off
FOOTBALL lovers in the south are set to miss out when Rangers play Marseille in the European Cup.
TVS will not screen the November 25 tie and Thames are expected to follow suit.
Thomas ban
FORMER British champion Pat Thomas has been banned from all involvement in amateur boxing after it was discovered he was a professional trainer with the Billy Aird stable.
Kamara move
LUTON midfielder Chris Kamara will join Premier League Sheffield United on a month's loan this weekend.
Kamara, who joined Luton from Leeds, is keen to return to Yorkshire.
Foster axed
RYEDALE-YORK, rugby league's Division Three leaders, yesterday sacked coach Derek Foster, who has been in charge since May, 1991.
His replacement is former star Steve Crooks.
Giants stay
THE San Francisco Giants baseball team have abandoned their $115 million move to St Petersburg in Florida, after a meeting of team owners voted against the proposal.
Parkers' call-up
Rob Shepherd
MANCHESTER United's Paul Parker and Garry Parker of Aston Villa are poised to join up with the England squad today.
Having already lost David Bardsley for the World Cup game against Turkey, manager Graham Taylor conceded last night that the Leeds pair of David Batty and Tony Dorigo will not be fit enough to join up.
The two Parkers, already on standby, are the obvious replacements, although Carlton Palmer looks likely to replace Batty in a side otherwise unchanged from the one that drew with Norway last month.
Palmer will act as Paul Gascoigne's minder.
Meanwhile, Turkey have their own problems.
They will be without top striker Ridvan Dilmen who has a leg injury.
Handy Anders
ARSENAL'S out-of-favour striker Anders Limpar scored a superb goal last night as Sweden beat Israel 3–1 in their World Cup qualifying group.
He put Sweden 1–0 ahead after 37 minutes with a fierce shot from 25 yards.
Tal Banin equalised but Sweden went back in front in the 58th minute when Limpar's cross was headed in by Martin Dahlin.
Klas Ingesson added Sweden's third.
Wimbledon striker John Fashanu is likely to be out until next month after aggravating a back problem.
Dave Bassett has been found innocent of allegations of obscene behaviour at Chelsea last month.
The Sheffield United manager, who was accused of foul language and making a V-sign by Chelsea fans, was cleared after a police investigation.
If I don't win, I'll be remembered as a bum
Roy Collins
EVANDER HOLYFIELD knows that he might already have been consigned to the freak section of world heavyweight championship history had Mike Tyson taken no for an answer in that Indianapolis hotel room.
One man's prison sentence is another man's reprieve, though having escaped a mugging by Tyson, Holyfield understands that he's still only on bail from the charge that he's a heavyweight fraud.
As he prepares to defend his reputation as well as what is inaccurately described as his undisputed world heavyweight title here tomorrow night against Riddick Bowe, he says: ‘I realise that if I don't win, I'll be remembered as a bum.’
Holyfield's sensitivity outside the ring, which left him genuinely touched when he was recognised by non-boxing people in Barcelona during this year's Olympics, extends to the criticism that champions in all sport have to learn to live with.
However secure he is in his own ability, the champion is upset by the most persistent accusation, that he's never fought a genuine heavyweight.
It is an accusation that's impossible to repudiate if one discounts the obese-a-weight Buster Douglas, from whom he lifted the crown with minimum effort and maximum compliance two years ago.
Bowe, 6ft 5in and 235lb, and with an 81-inch reach, represents the man mountain that Holyfield must scale if he is to be accepted as someone other than a caretaker holding the keys to the division until another genuine champion arrives.
There was a trace of exasperation in his voice as he said: ‘I've told my promoter Dan Duva that I want to fight all those contenders that the people want me to fight.
I said, get me the man whom people think can beat me.
That man is Riddick Bowe.
‘Each time I fight, I try to bring more to the table and I'm looking forward to this fight to show people just what I can do.
It's a big challenge and I'm up for it.’
The evidence of his claim to greatness so far is sketchy, to say the least.
After winning the title against a disgracefully overweight Douglas, Holyfield was taken the distance by George Foreman and Larry Holmes, the division's geriatric twins.
In his only other title defence, against second substitute Bert Cooper a year ago following the unavailability of Tyson, he might have been knocked out but for the protective nature of Mills Lane's refereeing.
George Benton, who like most good trainers is not short of excuses when things go wrong, doesn't attempt to defend his man's performance on that occasion.
Benson says: ‘Whatever profession you're in, you can have a bad night — like you might misspell a word sometimes.
Evander just had a bad night.
‘The great thing about him is that he can fight in and out of the trenches.
He can get down to the nitty gritty and fight inside or he can stand back and box.
And he's got such a tremendous heart.
To beat him, you've got to kill him.’
Remarkably, a record of little more than mediocrity has already lifted Holyfield within one or two fights of eclipsing every man who's ever laced on a glove in terms of financial reward.
The $12 million or so he'll make tomorrow will take his career earnings to $80m, second only to Sugar Ray Leonard's $100m.
It's not however, solely on the bank balance that Holyfield wants to be bracketed with the great names of his sport.
He's more interested in having his name engraved on sport's roll of honour than on its record bankroll.
He says: ‘I'm not motivated by money, otherwise I would have quit after I'd made my first eight million dollars, which was enough for me.
I never dreamed there would be this much money, I just happened to come along when everything started to escalate.
‘But I fight because I love the competition.
I want to fight the best people and to be given respect for all the hard work I've put into boxing, particularly in the gym.’
He accepts that his days of wine and bloody noses will be limited.
After every fight, he says, he thinks about retirement and he intends to give it more consideration that usual in the New Year, vowing that when he quits he'll do so as world champion.
Holyfield says that he regrets the fight with Tyson never took place because ‘that would have been a dream fight.
Compete
‘Two men of differing styles but with matching determination and will to win.
They should put that fight into a computer 'cos I don't think there will be a fight to compete with what that would have been.’
His regrets about not meeting Tyson might evaporate if they opened the gates of the Indiana youth centre tomorrow, especially as Holyfield seemed made for an opponent who is currently America's most famous jailbird.
We won't ever know what might have been if the two had met.
What we and Holyfield do know is that Bowe offers a safer route, if not to heavyweight immortality then to respectful acceptance by his peers for his efforts inside the ring, in line with the respect his quiet dignity commands outside it.
Clough's image cost Nigel caps
Barry Lucas
BRIAN CLOUGH fears his uneasy relationship with the Football Association has cost his son Nigel a host of England caps.
The Nottingham Forest manager feels his abrasive temperament and outspoken style have left Nigel with only eight caps to his name.
‘I am not a bitter man,’ insisted Clough senior.
‘But I genuinely feel that my feelings towards the FA have stopped a bit of progress for my son.
‘I think he has enough talent to have been included many more times.
That is a professional opinion.’
It is one of football's great mysteries why Clough senior won only two caps, despite being one of the deadliest strikers of the late 1950s and early 1960s.
Now he claims the family are being shunned again.
But things might have been different if Brian had landed the job of England manager.
He said: ‘Only the FA can tell you why I didn't get the job.
I had an interview about 10 years ago but they chose the man who wouldn't upset anyone — Ron Greenwood.
‘They removed the heat from the situation.
They thought if I became England manager I would take over the FA — and I would have done!’
Clough also revealed that he thought he had signed Welsh international striker Dean Saunders before his move to Liverpool — and admitted selling Teddy Sheringham to Tottenham may have been a mistake.
‘I thought I had signed Saunders from Derby and he said he would have joined Forest if any other club but Liverpool had wanted him.
‘I could have got him when Liverpool let him go but I said balls to him.
‘But I possibly should have kept hold of Edward Sheringham.’
Hammers humbled
Cremonese 2 West Ham Utd 0
TWO second half goals by Slovenian Mattheus Florjancic sunk the Hammers in this physical Anglo-Italian Cup tie.
Serie B table-toppers Cremonese had four men booked by Coventry's Keiran Barratt and Martin Allen picked up his seventh caution of the season for a scything foul.
Trevor Morley had two good chances to put the visitors in front but both efforts flew wide.
The Italians took the lead in the second half when Giandebiaggi crossed into the area for Florjancic to powerfully nod past Ludo Miklosko.
Florjancic put the game beyond the reach of West Ham after 63 minutes when he raced onto Lombardini's through ball and easily rounded Miklosko.
He could have had a hat-trick but was denied by Miklosko's brilliant save.
Pompey's great Knight
Portsmouth 2, Cesena 0
KEEPER Alan Knight pulled off a string of excellent saves as Pompey made a flying start to the international stage of the Anglo-Italian Cup last night.
Pompey caught their Italian visitors cold after 16 minutes at chilly Fratton Park with Paul Walsh's second goal of the season.
Left back Ray Daniel's cross was expertly controlled by Alan McCloughlin and he fed Walsh, who had all the time he needed to coolly slot in the ball.
Two minutes later Pompey were grateful for a magnificent save when Knight denied Luca Pazzaglia.
Pompey had a lucky escape when Kit Simons cleared off the line from Filippo Masolini.
And they went further ahead in the 61st minute when Kit Symons headed home from close range.
Knight came to the rescue again when he saved well from Pazzaglia.
Holder delight as Bees treble stings Ascoli
Barry Lucas
Ascoli 1, Brentford 3
BRENTFORD sailed through their Anglo-Italian Cup tie with goals from Jamie Bates, Marcus Gayle and Gary Blissett.
More than 300 Londoners made the trip to improve a poor crowd to just under 1,000 and manager Phil Holder was delighted with the performance at the Del Duca Stadium.
He enthused: ‘We gave a very disciplined display and did what we set out to do, win convincingly.
It is a good start for us.’
Amazingly all four goals came from free kicks with Brentford's transfer seeking defender Bates heading the first after 13 minutes from a Billy Manuel free kick.
Bates was only playing because £100,000 signing Shane Westley was cup-tied after playing for Wolves.
Manuel also took the free kick which led to Brentford's second in the 18th minute, Gayle sending in a cracker from 18 yards.
Blissett's 15th goal of the season was a 67th minute header.
But Ascoli pulled a goal back after 75 from Oliver Bierhoff.
Derby were convincing 3–0 winners over Pisa, who also had Jose Antonio Chamot sent off for a professional foul on Ted McMinn.
Tommy Johnson put them in front in the eighth-minute from Marco Gabbiadini's perfect cross.
The Italian side fell further behind two minutes later when keeper Stefano Ciucci made a hash of a McMinn cross and Derby skipper Micky Forsyth was able to stab home.
Mark Pembridge made it 3–0 in the last minute with a stunning 20-yard half-volley into the top of the net.
Bristol City conceded two late goals as they went down 2–0 at home to Cosenza.
Cosenza took the lead in the 78th minute with a skilful goal finished off by Negri and three minutes later City were dead and buried when Signorelli snatched a second.
Aussies lash out at ‘dirty grabbers’
Giles Smith
Neath 8 Australia 16
AUSTRALIA'S tour of Wales erupted into fury last night as Wallaby coach Bob Dwyer accused Neath players of dirty and illegal play.
In a fiery encounter, he claimed that on five occasions his players were grabbed by the testicles and, on more than one occasion, were spat on by their opponents.
But Neath captain Gary Llewellyn hit back strongly.
‘These Aussies are no angels,’ he declared.
‘We had to fight fire with fire.
They're just whingers.’
However, Dwyer was left fuming, saying: ‘I just hope Neath are the only bag-snatching team we meet in Wales.
‘If players consistently break the laws of the game, they deserve to be whacked in the face.
I am glad to say one or two Neath players got just that.
Spitting on people should not be part of the game.
‘If people want to deliberately break the laws of the game, then players are entitled to protect themselves.
There were at least five instances of my players being grabbed by the testicles.’
But Llewellyn denied his players had grabbed testicles or spat at the world champions.
‘I am not aware of that happening at all.
If it did, I would not condone it,’ he said.
He admitted: ‘It was a dirty game but these Aussies are no angels.
We had to meet fire with fire.’
And he charged the Australians with dirty play, too.
‘Brian Williams went down on the ball once and had his head blatantly stamped on and he has a bad cut,’ he added.
‘I am disappointed with them.
I thought they were supposed to be a professional outfit but they were whingeing all the time.’
Glimpse
The Australians showed just one glimpse of the sort of electrifying back play that won them the World Cup so brilliantly just a year ago.
And it brought them a great try that, in the final analysis, won them the match.
Left-winger Darren Junee brilliantly slipped round his marker, James Reynolds, just before half-time and set off on a jinking run down the left wing.
When it seemed he was running out of support, Jason Little suddenly appeared inside him to take the scoring pass.
Skipper Llewellyn's try put Neath into a 5–3 lead after Aussie full-back Tim Kelahar had kicked a penalty in the second minute.
Paul Thorburn made it 8–10 with a penalty but two pieces of indiscipline gave Kelahar the chance to kick two more penalties.
Webb of intrigue
Rob Shepherd and David Harrison
MANCHESTER UNITED will sell Neil Webb to Nottingham Forest, giving them £800,000 towards the near-£5 million it will take to land Sheffield Wednesday striker David Hirst.
Wednesday last night confirmed that they have rejected a British-record £4m offer from United for the England international, as revealed in TODAY yesterday.
But Alex Ferguson, secretly plotting to solve United's goalscoring crisis, is getting desperate and will not give up easily, even though Wednesday maintain they will not sell their prize asset.
Webb's move back to his old club should go through within the next 48 hours.
And to aid his cause Ferguson is close to boosting his already substantial cash kitty by £800,000 with the sale of Neil Webb back to Nottingham Forest poised He could be followed out of Old Trafford by other top internationals, because Ferguson is also ready to offer Wednesday players plus cash for 24-year-old Hirst.
Ferguson has alternatives such as Dundee's Duncan Ferguson, Coventry's Kevin Gallagher and QPR's Les Ferdinand.
But Hirst remains his No 1 target.
I understand Wednesday manager Trevor Francis, who rebuffed Ferguson on the phone, has made it clear to his board that should they be seduced by a new United bid, he would consider his future at the club.
At the moment, Hillsborough chairman David Richards insists they will not let Hirst go, but it seems United are prepared to step up the pressure to test their nerve.
Richards, who admitted United had been in touch with Francis, revealed: ‘Alex Ferguson also telephoned me and suggested talks at chairman level might be useful.
‘But I said that all matters relating to players were Trevor Francis's domain.
‘Martin Edwards then called and suggested that his club were prepared to go very high for Hirst and that other players could be involved if we were interested.
‘My reply was short and to the point and I'm disappointed that what I regarded as a highly confidential matter between two clubs should, 48 hours later, be the subject of Press comment.’
But whatever Wednesday might be saying, the fact Hirst is now aware of United's interest means he will be tempted by a glamour move to Old Trafford which would help his England chances.
And although he signed a lucrative four-year contract with Wednesday last season, he would be aware that a move to United now would make him one of the game's highest earners.
Richards recognises that, saying: ‘This could be seen as an unsettling tactic and I've asked Trevor Francis to take David Hirst on one side and put him fully in the picture.
The days are gone when so-called big clubs like Manchester United could swoop on other clubs and sign their star players.
‘We are building a team at Hillsborough which will be challenging for all the honours in the game.
Our star players are simply not for sale.’
But usually money talks in football, no matter what the club, and if United do raise their bid, Wednesday — despite their protestations — may find it hard to resist.
If Wednesday stand firm, however, United will have to look elsewhere.
Meanwhile, Webb's unhappy Old Trafford career looks like finally being resolved.
He left Forest three years ago in a £1.5m deal and although he was an immediate success in United's midfield, the last 12 months have turned sour.
Brian Clough has been trying for several weeks to recapture the man he sees as a key player in his fight to lift Forest off the bottom of the Premier League.
Mac puts the knife in United
Graham Fisher
Liverpool 3, Sheffield United 0
A DELIGHTFUL double from Steve McManaman smoothed Liverpool's passage into the last 16 of the Coca-Cola Cup after another injury crisis threatened to wreck their night.
Manager Graeme Souness could hardly believe it when first Paul Stewart, with a recurrence of the hamstring strain that has plagued the midfielder since his £2.3 million move from Spurs, then Mark Walters with a troubled thigh had to leave the field.
And that was with only 22 minutes gone.
England defenders Rob Jones and Mark Wright came on in a wholesale reshuffle of resources, but any danger that United would feed off the disruption was dismissed by McManaman's leggy skills.
The 20-year-old struck just after the half-hour after a brilliant Steve Nicol-Don Hutchison raid down the left.
McManaman's snap-shot caught defender Kevin Gage to beat keeper Alan Kelly.
In the 42nd minute, McManaman appeared to stumble and lose control.
But he recovered to plant a glorious chip over Kelly from 20 yards.
for his fifth goal of the campaign.
And McManaman pick of the exciting Anfield brat pack forced into constant duty by Souness' injury saga, twice shunned chances to make it a hat-trick.
Just before half-time he slid his easiest opportunity wide, then turned his back in favour of Mike Marsh after Hutchison was fouled for a penalty six minutes from time that clinched a fourth-round tie with Crystal Palace.
Souness said: ‘I don't think Steve was too fussed.
But we saw two slices of great skill for his goals.’
Paul Rogers missed an even easier chance when Adrian Littlejohn split Liverpool's defence with a low cross, and Brian Deane sent a point-blank header wide, both in a second-half come back that had Liverpool wilting.
Liverpool keeper Mike Hooper, picked ahead of Bruce Grobbelaar and David James also had to earn his corn.
But the Blades haven't won at Anfield since 1968 and the tradition looked safe.
Manager Dave Bassett: ‘We started too late.
We were very poor in the first half and paid the price.’
‘Brian Gayle didn't defend well for the first goal and Gage did a Val Parnell act in the middle of the park to set up the lad for his second.’
And he was justifiably angry at the penalty, which looked a case of simple obstruction by Paul Beesley.
‘The sort of penalty you only get at Leeds, Arsenal, Manchester United and here,’ said Bassett.
Souness, who reported that the latest injuries to hit the club were not too serious, added: ‘It was difficult to entertain in that wind, but I thought we played like a team at times tonight.’
‘We've had to chop and change on a regular basis this season, but it could hold us in good stead because when everyone is fit again, we'll know we have people who can operate well in different positions.’
Scarborough booked a fourth round tie against either Derby or Arsenal when second-half goals from Tommy Mooney and Andy Mockler gave them a 2–1 win over Plymouth.
Hirst is not the answer, Fergie
By Mike Crouch
ALEX FERGUSON is playing a losing game.
It may be no accident that Manchester United have shown their hand in their attempt to lure David Hirst to Old Trafford.
Their manager has no doubt reached the point where he feels the fans must be placated.
And it will do his own prospects no harm if he is seen attempting to make up for his failure to sign Alan Shearer in the summer.
Still the goals fail to materialise, and a deal worth £5 million for a man who hits the net better than once every two games has genuine currency.
Not surprisingly, Sheffield Wednesday are reluctant even to consider releasing such a prolific scorer.
Particularly when he has just returned from a period of injury.
Barren
And just when they are beginning to see a potent combination developing with Mark Bright — with Chris Waddle to provide the crosses and John Sheridan to scheme openings from behind.
But, if Ferguson were successful, would this expensive transfer be in his own best interests anyway?
Suppose Hirst were to fail at Old Trafford, and he might because there is no natural partner for him there.
Ferguson's head would be even more surely on the block than if United continue their barren spell without him spending £5 million.
The United manager would be better advised looking for a short-term solution while his troops re-form and Dion Dublin, their £1 million signing from Cambridge United — is nursed back into the team.
There are a few out-and-out strikers who can be guaranteed to deliver the goods.
Such players as Clive Allen and Tony Cottee are shockingly under-valued these days because they cannot be relied upon to step up their work-rate, to coin a phrase.
But they are still there on the scoresheet every Saturday when given the chance.
If Ferguson is really searching for someone to put the finishing touch to his team's chances and not his own, he would be better offering the job to one of these often maligned stabbers-in of trifles.
What about John Aldridge?
Nigel Mansell
By Mike Crouch
Inevitably, the Grand Prix season ended in a storm with our Nige at its epicentre.
Mansell (pictured above) is the opposite to most men of his age.
They show their immaturity as soon as they get behind the wheel of a sports car.
But it's when Mansell takes his helmet off that the trouble starts.
Give us a break, Clough
By Mike Crouch
SO the chairman of Nottingham Forest is prepared to discuss the unthinkable, a future without Brian Clough.
Shareholders, too, are preparing to signal his mortality.
The life of Brian is often portrayed as a complex one.
Clough, they say, is a complicated soul; no-one knows where they stand with him; he is utterly unpredictable.
Once upon a time this may have been so.
Now, however, the outrageous is expected.
He shocks deliberately: it has come to be expected of him so he will oblige.
His perversity is plain and if the whole world demands he now signs a striker or a central defender to save his team from relegation, he will not.
Webb, another midfielder, is his choice.
Brian Clough has become the Spitting Image of himself, playing a parody while Forest burns.
Oddball
No-one will deny — and even if they did, few would dare say so — that Clough has been a magnificently accomplished football manager, blessed with an alchemy denied to others.
Of course, the truth about how he has done it will probably only emerge in a ghosted autobiography that will cost some newspaper a king's ransom.
The extraordinary stories of oddball training methods, holidays on the job, the wilful behaviour, the bringing down of star players.
There is, sadly, something of Robert Maxwell in Clough.
He, too, is a high-flying Socialist who declaims his no doubt sincerely-held beliefs from atop a mountain of privilege.
Instead of the baseball cap we have the goalie's jersey.
Perverse
But the man-of-the-people hamming, the love of the put-down, is hardly different.
It is beginning to look as if he also carries within him a seed of self-destruction.
Clough has always marched to a different tune, but this time his perversity may finally be his undoing.
However, Nottingham Forest find themselves at the foot of a Premier League where standards are low, largely due to a paucity of decent managers and where none have Clough's breadth of knowledge and experience.
Age is no disadvantage in football management as Bill Shankly, Matt Busby, Bob Paisley, Jock Stein, Joe Mercer and others have illustrated.
However far they look, Nottingham Forest will find no adviser better qualified to plot their survival than Brian Clough.
If only he would drop all this ridiculous pretence, stop acting the fool and raise his game one more time.
Wide appeal
Jonathan Ramsden
2.25:FERDIE Murphy's Campsea-Ash looked an improved performer when chasing home Katabatic at Ascot, but then palpably failed to reproduce that effort when a distant third to Freeline Finishing at Chepstow.
He did not look a particularly easy ride that day and could well prove a handful for his inexperienced rider.
I prefer Peter Hobbs' WIDE BOY, who came back to his best when runner-up to Fragrant Dawn at Newbury.
Clay County is not an ideal type for this track.
3.00:THIS is an ideal opening for the classy BRADBURY STAR to make a winning reappearance.
Josh Gifford's charge, a former top notch hurdler, had an excellent first season over fences last year.
Runner-up to Miinnehoma in a thrilling duel for the Sun Alliance at the Festival, he then landed a valuable prize at Liverpool.
With all five of his rivals carrying at least a stone more than the handicapper intended, he will clearly be very hard to beat.
Useful northern handicapper Whaat Fettle is the obvious bet for the forecast.
3.35:TRIUMPH Hurdle hero Duke Of Monmouth had the ground against him when a well beaten third to STAUNCH FRIEND at Punchestown last backend.
The latter has improved again since — he was most a impressive winner on his reappearance at Newbury last month — and with fitness on his side he is very hard to oppose.
Al Mutahm has been off since springing a big surprise in a Group Three at Ascot back in April and this trip is probably a bare minimum for him over hurdles.
Fountain will run
KINGS FOUNTAIN was last night given the clean bill of health he required to line up for tomorrow's Mackeson Gold Cup at Cheltenham.
Trainer Kim Bailey has managed to keep the strapping chaser away from the coughing that is affecting some of his stable companions.
‘There are about eight horses coughing now, and the decision to move them away from Kings Fountain appears to have worked because he is still in fine shape,’ the Lambourn trainer said.
Charlie Brooks
Charlie Brooks vowed never to run another horse at Taunton after the stewards took no action following an incident involving his runner Roscoe Harvey.
Brooks was fuming after his ten-year-old, 5–2 favourite for the Haygrass Handicap Chase, was hampered at the end of the back straight by eventual winner Powder Boy.
The stewards deemed the interference accidental.
‘If that is their view, then I'm not prepared to send another horse to Taunton,’ said the Lambourn handler.
10 to follow over the jumps
Richard Smith
ARTHUR'S MINSTREL
THIS full-brother to Southern Minstrel has finished second in three novice chases this term.
He is still only five and looks certain to improve.
He will be best at three miles and goes on any ground.
He should win his fair share of races.
Arthur Stephenson.
BARTON BANK
THIS one will hopefully go for the Sun Alliance Chase at Cheltenham.
We were delighted with his debut over fences when he beat Forest Sun in a hot novice contest at Worcester and he followed up at the same course on Wednesday.
David Nicholson.
BELMOUNT CAPTAIN
THE Welsh Grand National is the next target for this progressive staying chaser, who came over from Ireland last year.
He won on his seasonal debut at Chepstow last month and wasn't at all disgraced when third at Ascot the other day.
Toby Balding.
GRANVILLE AGAIN
HE is a top class performer, winning five races for us last season.
His only defeat came when he fell two out in the Champion while going well.
Once again all roads will lead to Cheltenham, and he runs there against Morley Street on Sunday.
Martin Pipe.
LA PRINCESSE
THIS five-year-old mare will go hurdling after being unbeaten in two bumpers last season.
She is from a good family (by Le Bavard) and has plenty of speed, but needs it soft.
We will let her win a small race and take it from there.
Oliver Sherwood.
PREOBLAKENSKY
AFTER three warm-up races over hurdles he started his chasing career with a third at Carlisle on Monday.
Last season he won five of his eight starts in novice hurdles and is a very nice horse with a liking for soft ground.
Gordon Richards
REMITTANCE MAN
A SUPERB athlete, he has eleven wins from twelve chases to his credit, including the Champion Chase at the Festival.
He will run at Huntingdon before another crack at the King George.
We should then have a better idea about the Gold Cup.
Nick Henderson.
SAN FERNANDO
THIS rangy gelding looks as though he has matured during the summer and could develop into a useful handicap hurdler.
He only won once as a novice but was very consistent.
He made a satisfactory seasonal debut at Newbury the other day.
Josh Gifford.
WELLWOTDOUTHINK
SHE is a very quick mare, and will tackle hurdles this term after winning her three bumper races last season.
Although she will not be running a great deal, I think she will win a decent prize and could easily prove top flight.
Mary Reveley.
YOUNG HUSTLER
HE has already won novice chases at Cheltenham and Bangor and we hope he will win a few more, although he couldn't cope with Barton Bank at Worcester recently.
We will take it steadily and I could see him as a Festival hope.
Nigel Twiston-Davies.
Linford in fury at ‘rich’ claims
LINFORD CHRISTIE has received sacks of begging letters following reports about his personal fortune.
The Olympic 100 metres champion has signed a new six-figure deal to head Lucozade's TV campaigns and has been asked to do everything from race a greyhound to switch on the Oxford Street Christmas lights.
But he denies claims he is worth £2.4 million.
‘That's a load of rubbish, totally inaccurate,’ he said, referring to a survey which named him as Britain's 11th richest black person.
‘No way am I worth that sort of money, and it's annoying because I've started getting begging letters.
‘Maybe one day, if things keep going well for me, I might make that sort of money.
But, remember, it's only a few months since I won in Barcelona.’
Sculpt
Christie has set up his own PR company, called Nuff Respect, to promote himself and friend Colin Jackson.
‘It's been unbelievable,’ he said.
‘Someone wanted to have a cast made of my leg, someone wanted to sculpt me in bronze.
‘I've had offers to race a horse, a sports car, a motor bike, even a greyhound.
They haven't asked me to run against Nigel Mansell in his Williams yet, but I'm sure they will.’
His Olympic victory led to his Thames Valley Harriers club gaining 150 new members, and he is ready to use his new-found wealth to help ease the club's financial problems.
‘If the club folds, that's me folding as well,’ he said.
‘It's about putting something back into your roots.’
As tough as Teague
By Brian Moore.
Interview By Tony Roche
SOUTH AFRICA have no chance against England at Twickenham tomorrow because we have a miracle-man in our midst.
I speak, of course, of Mike Teague — once of England, British Lions and Gloucester, who became a battered, knackered cripple.
Years of giving his best and then some more took their toll on Mike, who seemed to have staggered away from international rugby after the World Cup final.
Imagine our surprise at the start of this season when this fresh-faced, super-fit figure came striding across the Loughborough training pitch.
No prizes for guessing that Mike has taken stick from just about every member of the squad for making the most miraculous recovery since Lazarus.
Now he's in tremendous physical condition and his upper body strength and experience are of immense value.
his abilities are known to management and team alike and he is a man refreshed.
In fact he is probably feeling fresher and sharper now, hungrier to resume his England career than for some time.
Mike is always the first man on the drive, where it really hurts, and he can stay on his feet.
Despite all his international experience with England and the Lions, he will be out there tomorrow as if he was winning his first cap and that's a priceless commodity.
He has been welcomed back with open arms by team-mates who appreciate talent, courage and strong character — we will need all three qualities to overcome the Springboks.
Punished
I am confident we will end their three-match winning run in England, but only a fool would underestimate a side who shared a Test series in France.
If we make mistakes we will be punished more quickly and more effectively than any Northern Hemisphere team could equal.
So the first job for us is to starve them of possession; the second to use our ball intelligently.
We must tighten up defensively, not just around our 22 but inside theirs.
Here we have a team unafraid to break out from any area of the field and run at you with ball in hand.
Where many teams would be content to boot the ball deep and far, the Boks have shown that they don't mind taking a risk or three at the highest level — very exciting and very dangerous.
Our scrummage must be rock-solid so we get a stable platform to work off.
Our line-out ball must be clean to scrum-half, not scruffy.
I keep reading about South Africa's problems and it's getting daft; here we face an international squad who have already played four Tests since returning to the world game and who have played 12 games together on tour.
Their only problem right now is that this tour is too short for them, their inexperience is a weakness and only more games will reduce that factor.
But make no mistake, England need to produce a top-drawer performance tomorrow or it's egg on the face time.
We didn't manage that level of display against a big and strong Canadian team at Wembley.
But we did win and it was the first game of what will be a long and demanding season.
The new laws will take time to settle.
In truth the change to the game is subtle rather than sensational and too much fuss has been made when, in fact, some folk are using the new laws as an excuse to disguise their weaknesses.
We are notorious slow starters and I was slower than most this season, mainly through work commitments.
That is why I lost my shirt to John Olver for the Canada match.
John won his third cap, again played well and was again a winner.
John began the season better than me but I have fought to catch up.
And now that I have become a partner in business I can work from very early and right through in order to be free at night to train.
England call upon John for the 32nd time tomorrow and that means his 29th international on the bench unless I get injured.
Yet he never moans and is always upbeat and positive within the squad.
Bonkers
I have to admit that if the situation was reversed I would go bonkers with frustration, so I take my hat off to him — but not my shirt.
This is a big day for Victor Ubogu, at tighthead, given a second chance at the expense of the vastly more experienced Jeff Probyn.
Our new front row will need to click — and quickly.
It is also a red-letter day for Bath's Ben Clarke, who makes his debut.
Ben has strength, pace and excels in the loose and the tight.
But he has to go some to outshine Dean Richards, dropped for the second time in a year.
The great thing for Ben is that he has Peter Winterbottom on one side of him and ‘Lazarus’ on the other.
How can he fail?
Underwoods winging in for Test double
By Tony Roche
IAN HUNTER'S freak injury means Tony and Rory Underwood become the first brothers to play together for England since the war tomorrow.
Northampton back Hunter was named on the right wing to face South Africa after his sensational two-try debut against Canada at Wembley.
But England manager Geoff Cooke was forced to make a dramatic change late last night after Hunter failed to respond to treatment following a soccer injury sustained in club training on Tuesday.
Hunter explained: ‘I was tackled by a team-mate during a fun game and as I hit the ground his knee hit mine, the right knee that required surgery at the start of the season.’
Cooke said: ‘Ian suffered haematoma and we decided not to risk him.
The lad has learned a harsh lesson for doing something daft, but this type of injury could happen to any player at any time in training.
He is desperately disappointed.’
Hunter put it more strongly, saying: ‘I am really devastated.
I feel I could play, but if I broke down during the game I would be letting down the team and myself.
‘And another knock could lead to a long-term and more serious injury.’
He added: ‘Tony and I are good friends and I wish him all the best.
I hope he scores a try and if he keeps his place for the Five Nations at my expense, good luck to him.’
While Hunter was enjoying his debut against the Canadians, 23-year-old Underwood, making his debut, was tense, tried too hard and ultimately faded.
Record
Now he gets the chance he's always wanted, to partner brother Rory, who returns from a short-lived retirement hoping to add to his double England record of 55 caps and 35 tries.
Tony said: ‘I feel very sorry for Ian, who deserves his place, especially after the wonderful try he scored for England B against South Africa on Saturday.
‘Right now I'm feeling very excited.’
Brother Rory added: ‘It's a wonderful day for the family, but no problem for us because Tony and I have played together for Leicester, the North and the Barbarians.’
The last brothers to line up together for England were Coventry forwards Arthur and Harold Wheatley, against Scotland at Twickenham in 1938.
Cooke was a happier man when greeting the news that full-back Jon Webb is assured of completing the season.
Webb, a Bristol surgeon, has secured the orthopaedic registrar's position he sought but it will not, as initially feared, end his rugby career.
‘I am available for Bath and England to the end of the season,’ he said.
‘And I have not ruled out being available for possible British Lions selection.
Helpful
‘I always said that I had to put my medical career before my rugby, but the new job will not force me to retire because my colleagues are so supportive and helpful.’
Cooke said: ‘Jon is a world-class player and a record points-scorer.
He is now playing better than any time in his career and we are delighted he is continuing.’
Cadle eyes history in the making
By Mike Walters
COACH Kevin Cadle last night reflected on England's magnificent nail-biting 75–71 win over Russia in a European Championship basketball qualifier of unprecedented drama and importance.
Following their narrow 77–74 defeat in Moscow last year, England needed to exact revenge by at least four points to stay on course for next summer's finals in Germany.
Trevor Gordon read the script and duly sunk the two free-throws required to establish that margin with just two seconds left.
It was England's first win over the Russians.
But Cadle said: ‘You know what?
We should have beaten them at their place as well.
‘After we lost in Moscow, I ushered the team back into the locker room and locked the door before any administrators could get in and give them a load of bull about how well we had done to run the mighty red machine so close.
Passion
‘I gave it to them straight: competing with the best ain't good enough when you're capable of being the best.’
Cadle, a 37-year-old New Yorker, is a self-confessed bad loser.
Sometimes his passion gets the better of him.
He was banished from the arena last month when his club, Guildford, lost at home to Leicester, for swearing at a referee.
But Cadle cares for English basketball enough to have stayed here for 10 years — most of the time on a budget even Norman Lamont could manage.
‘I could have gone to European clubs for a lot more money than I earn now,’ he says.
‘Places where the team flies around in a private jet.
At Guildford we don't even have a private bus!
But I want to be a history maker, to be the first coach who wins the European Cup for an English club and the coach who makes England an international force.
‘I want this country to be so proud of me that the Queen will give me one of her crowns.
‘Against Russia, we managed a 12 point swing by turning an eight point deficit into a winning margin of four late in the day.
We proved we can beat top teams with a hostile crowd on our side.
‘Now it's time to start winning in someone else's gym.’
Tomorrow night, England face Denmark in Aarhus and then play their final group match against Bulgaria in Jambol.
Cadle added: ‘We now have lift off.
This will go down as a crucial staging post in the sport's history in this country.’
Take care of Donald
From Graham Otway in Durban
WARWICKSHIRE have been told to nurse Allan Donald against burnout or risk him quitting county cricket.
Donald needed a fitness test yesterday before being cleared to play in South Africa's historic first home Test for 22 years against India in Durban this morning.
And with the South Africans planning 18 more Tests and a glut of one day internationals in the next two years, they are anxious not to drain the energy of their top-flight fast bowler.
Donald has two seasons left of a £25,000-per-year contract to run at Warwickshire but now finds it clashes with the international programme.
Senior South African official Ali Bacher told me last night: ‘We are concerned about Allan, but he is entitled to earn a living wherever he can.
‘Fortunately the Warwickshire manager, Bob Woolmer, is a friend of South African cricket and is looking after Allan's interests but we will only be happy while he is there in charge of him.’
All-rounder Dipak Patel took a Test-best 6–50 as New Zealand routed Zimbabwe for 137 in their second innings in Harare yesterday to win the second Test by 177 runs and take the series 1–0.
The West Indies (230–9) lost by three runs to the Australian Prime Minister's XI in a one-day game in Canberra yesterday.
Holyfield finds a perfect match
By Roy Collins
IF Evander Holyfield's fists prove as fast and slick as the promoters' tongues have been these past few days, his world heavyweight title defence against Riddick Bowe tonight promises to be a masterpiece.
Like many of the the weddings entered into on whims at tawdry chapels along the Vegas Strip, it would be stretching a point to describe Holyfield-Bowe as a match made in heaven.
But like those marriages, it should at least be fast and exciting while it lasts.
Boxing and Las Vegas, joined in very unholy matrimony, are waiting with bated breath and heavily baited betting slips for the outcome of a fight that can be almost relied upon to restore some credibility to the heavyweight division.
A genuine fight between two unbeaten men whom even the odds makers can hardly separate.
Mike Tyson, in his brief, brutal reign as world champion, reduced the appeal of heavyweight title fights to that of watching an egg timer.
It was a question of whether he took one, two or three minutes to dispatch rivals into a coma.
Since Holyfield took over and made grandad-bashing respectable on the heavyweight scene, those young lions who ought to have been clawing each other for the right to depose and expose him have been harmlessly shadow boxing around each other.
Now, finally, a new order seems to be emerging, for which a big debt of gratitude is owed to Donovan Razor Ruddock and Britain's Lennox Lewis for daring to have a face off for the chance to get a title shot.
Styles
In similar vein, tonight's promoter Dan Duva said: ‘I've got to thank Evander and Riddick for having the courage to agree to this fight.
It's one that should bring excitement back to heavyweight boxing.’
Bowe's trainer Eddie Futch, 80, who's probably seen more fights than even most men of his age have had hot dinners, expects it to be one of the best he's been involved with.
He says: ‘It's the ideal match up between two men of different styles, which should make it a very, very exciting fight.’
Lou Duva, co-trainer of Holyfield, might have been cranking the hype handle too far when he said that this evening's fight might be a once in a lifetime affair.
But it has such appeal that the casinos are reporting more feverish betting activity than they've known in a long time.
Both camps accept that the fight at the Thomas and Mack Centre, which sounds like a tune-up garage, will answer the ultimate questions about their men's boxing machinery.
Holyfield's men, and there are plenty of them, including a woman as ballet coach, are certain that he will emerge as a true heavyweight champion, capable of taking out the big men of the division.
The other camp talk of the riddle of Riddick Bowe finally being unravelled.
Bowe poses not so much a riddle as two straightforward questions: Does he have the heart, stamina and experience to match Holyfield's over 12 rounds?
If not, does he have the firepower to bring the curtain down on the champ shortly after the fight's sundown beginnings?
With both men having defences more vulnerable than Leeds, there should be no complaints even from those paying $800 for ringside seats about not getting value for money.
The punch rate should be a lot higher than normally seen at heavyweight fights.
Styles, they say, make fights, which if true, ought to make this one a classic.
Holyfield, the shorter man and lighter by more than two stone, will rely mainly on foot and hand speed and the tactics of the ambush.
Bowe will launch his big bombs behind a powerful jab.
that, to listen to his corner, is an infantry movement all by itself.
Eloquent
George Benton, the knowledgeable trainer of Holyfield, says: ‘Evander will be trying to get out of the way early on, blocking and ducking.
‘By about round four, I expect the height and weight advantage to be neutralised and he'll start running the numbers on Bowe.’
That's as eloquent assessment as you'll get, though Lou Duva offered a more colourful one.
He told Bowe at the final press conference: ‘You may well get lucky and catch Holyfield with a good shot.
But when you do, you'd better be prepared for him to come back and hit you on your arms, your chest, that big belly of yours and finally the chin.
Then it will be all over.’
My belief is that Holyfield, who trades in quantity rather than quality when it comes to punches, will recover from the early storm, which could easily see him on the canvas, to win around the 10th.
Then again, if boxing is sometimes known as the sweet science, it's certainly not an exact one.
And it wouldn't be the greatest shock if Bowe proved me wrong by recording a knockout as fast as Lewis's at Earl's Court.
Whatever happens, boxing must resist the temptations to relapse into vaudeville, a prospect raised by the $20 million offer for Bowe to fight George Foreman in Peking if he's victorious this evening.
One trusts that the desert winds blowing through Vegas this week represent the winds of change for the better in boxing.
Lennox Lewis, as a man who did so much a fortnight ago to give boxing back its dignity, must be allowed to move from ringside tonight to ring next spring if heavyweight boxing is going to complete the process of rehabilitation.
Bruno's chance
FRANK BRUNO wants a Riddick victory over Evander Holyfield for a short-cut to his third world title shot.
If Bowe wins and opts for a first defence against veteran George Foreman, the WBC have confirmed they will strip him of the title and declare Lennox Lewis champion.
Bruno said: ‘If Lewis is awarded the title, that's good for me.
I may be the first challenger for Lennox, so it's not surprising that I'm behind Bowe.’
Euro boost for clubs
LEAGUE clubs will be bidding for a slice of the European Championship action following yesterday's decision to recommend a 16-nation event in England in 1996.
Wembley, Old Trafford, Villa Park and Elland Road are likely to be joined by four other grounds for the 31-match competition, spread over 22 days.
Michele move
ITALIAN Michele Alboreto will drive for the Scuderia-Italia Formula One team next season.
Fellow countryman Luca Badoer will partner him.
Alboreto finished 10th in the championship this year driving for the English-based Footwork team.
Lendl out
IVAN LENDL, the No 4 seed, crashed out of the European Community Championships in Antwerp yesterday, beaten 6–4, 6–2 in the second round by unseeded Australian Mark Woodforde.
Widnes blow
WIDNES rugby league star John Devereux misses tonight's clash with Wigan, banned for two games following his sending-off against Ryedale-York last Sunday for a high tackle.
Ref cleared
PRESTON referee Jim Parker was yesterday cleared by the FA of using abusive language after being reported by West Brom players following the game with Stoke last month.
Nets profit
SOMERSET County Cricket Club yesterday announced it made a profit of £82,612 during the last year, although chief executive Peter Anderson warned that the county is still in debt.
Going by the Book
MALCOLM ALLISON has advised Bristol Rovers to bring in Manchester City coach Tony Book to link up with him as a joint managerial team.
Allison is bidding to pull the West Country club off the bottom of the First Division table.
Port Vale's John Rudge emerged last night as a possible successor to Dennis Rofe, while caretaker-manager Allison made it clear he would want a good back-up team if he is to resume a managerial career that ended in 1984.
Allison turned Book into a League star at the age of 30 when he took him from non-League Bath City to Plymouth Argyle.
Later they joined up at Maine Road, where Book skippered Manchester City's 1969 FA Cup-winning side.
Platt secret injury scare
By Ben Bacon
GRAHAM TAYLOR'S England plans were hit last night by an injury scare to top scorer David Platt, who is struggling to be fully fit for next week's World Cup qualifier against Turkey.
Platt, England's only goalscorer since March, was dramatically pulled out of a Juventus friendly on Wednesday night because of a knee injury, which he has been secretly carrying.
It is a considerable headache for Taylor, whose plan to retain the midfield that performed so effectively against Norway last month is in danger of being destroyed.
Taylor won't know until tomorrow whether David Batty of Leeds is fit, while Paul Gascoigne, despite his wonder goal in Seville, has been suffering from 'flu for more than a week.
Worry
Definitely out is Leeds ull-back Tony Dorigo, and Garry Parker of Aston Villa has withdrawn from the stand-by squad with a stomach problem.
As expected, Paul Parker of Manchester United has been drafted in.
The Old Trafford defender collected the last of his 17 caps against Germany in September last year and is certain to play some part against Turkey because of the earlier withdrawal of QPR's David Bardsley.
But the biggest worry for Taylor must be Platt.
The former Villa player sustained the injury in a European tie against Panathanikos recently and has been undergoing intensive treatment.
He was substituted after only 55 minutes of Juventus' 5–1 victory over Udinese last Sunday.
Platt was in England earlier this week, but flew back to play for Juventus in a friendly against Spal in Ferrara on Wednesday only to be pulled out of the game by his club.
The problem has been identified as a floating piece of cartilage in his right knee, which is protruding and causing considerable discomfort.
Juventus manager Giovanni Trapattoni confirmed last night: ‘David has not been playing at the top level recently because of a knee condition.’
A spokesman for the club's medical team said: ‘There's no question of needing surgery at the moment, just treatment.’
Gazza is also making the headlines in Italy.
According to some papers, Lazio are annoyed that the England international jetted out of Rome on Sunday to visit EuroDisney with his girlfriend — particularly as he was judged not fit enough to play against Torino because of 'flu.
The papers also report that the club sent a special envoy to Paris to ensure Gazza got to Seville for Tuesday's friendly against Diego Maradona's side.
Tests
But last night, Gazza's business adviser Mel Stein rubbished the stories, insisting: ‘There's no problem.
Lazio knew Paul was going to EuroDisney.
They even sent someone to accompany him to Seville.’
England players face a series of fitness tests at Lilleshall today, and will then be joined by another injury doubt, John Salako of Crystal Palace, who jarred a knee earlier this week.
Kinnear lands ban
WIMBLEDON boss Joe Kinnear promised to buy himself a walkie-talkie last night after landing a month-long touchline ban, writes Ben Bacon.
by the Football Association.
Kinnear was found guilty by the FA of directing foul and insulting comments at Cornwall referee Martin Bodenham after he sent off Vinnie Jones in the game with Blackburn at Selhurst Park.
He now also has a suspended fine of Pounds 1,500 hanging over him until 1994.
The ban starts next month and runs for five matches.
and he will be in the stands for five matches, including the London derbies with Chelsea and Crystal Palace.Kinnear, guilty of swearing at officials three times in nine months, said: ‘I must learn to bite my lip.
I've got to try to curb myself because ‘I don't want to be banned from a sport I love.
I'm very aggressive in my work, but I must stay away from referees.’
‘I've never watched a game from the directors' box in my life and I'll have to get a walkie-talkie.’
Wimbledon keeper Hans Segers was yesterday fined £150 after admitting speeding on a motorway at 97mph.
Lifeline for Marwood
BRIAN MARWOOD is set to give his fading career a lift by joining First Division strugglers Luton Town.
Luton boss David Pleat is keen on rescuing Marwood from his Sheffield United nightmare.
Marwood has failed to win a regular place at Bramall Lane since his £300,000 transfer from Arsenal two years ago and has not made a single appearance this season.
Now he could be plunged into Luton's relegation fight as part of a swap-deal involving Chris Kamara.
Kamara, valued at £150,000, is due to join Dave Bassett's United on loan.
Pleat is also interested in taking transfer-listed midfielder Mike Lake.
Keegan clear-out
John Wardle
MICK QUINN and Bjorn Kristensen have been told they are no longer wanted at Newcastle United.
Manager Kevin Keegan revealed last night that the experienced pair will go on the transfer list on Monday.
And other players will be added to the list after Keegan has spoken to them over the weekend.
Keegan's decision means both Quinn and Kristensen probably made their last appearances for United in the disappointing Anglo-Italian Cup draw with Lucchese on Wednesday.
Keegan said: ‘We now have a clearer picture of where we are going and we want to get the squad down to a manageable size.
‘That will mean losing some players who are popular with the fans and have been really good servants of the club.
‘I have talked to Quinn and Kristensen and they accept the situation.’
Webb deal is delayed
By David Harrison
NEIL WEBB'S £800,000 move from Manchester United to Nottingham Forest has been delayed — by an insect bite.
The former England midfielder needed hospital treatment after being bitten earlier this week during a United training session.
It has meant that proposed talks with Forest over his return to the club have been put on hold, and the transfer is not expected to be completed until the weekend.
Forest assistant manager Ron Fenton said: ‘The knee has swollen up, and it necessitated him going to hospital.
We don't expect it to cause any problems, and we will still be meeting him for talks some time over the next couple of days.’
Crucial
Forest envisage the return of Webb, who left them in a Pounds 1.5 million deal three years ago, as a crucial step along the road to safety.
Fenton said: ‘Better the devil you know, and we know Neil Webb.
We had good times when he was here before.
‘He linked up well with Stuart Pearce and Nigel Clough, and we had a good run of success.
‘It will be great to bring him back into the club, and his experience will help us.
‘With the addition of another player on top of this one, we definitely believe we'll be back on track again.’
‘We hope it will rekindle the atmosphere of old, not just on the field, but in the dressing room as well.’
Meanwhile, Norwegian trialist Tore Dahlum scored a late winner for Manchester United reserves against Sheffield United last night to relieve the gloom for watching boss Alex Ferguson.
Graeme Souness' signing of Norwegian defender Stig Inge Bjornebye for Liverpool is on hold.
Terms have been agreed with the player and his club, Rosenborg, but a work-permit could take up to six weeks.
Boks face new exile
By Graham Otway in Durban & Tony Roche in London
SOUTH AFRICA have been warned they are on the verge of being kicked out of world rugby again — just 24 hours before tomorrow's historic Test at Twickenham.
Naas Botha and his team play their first international in England since 1969 — and it could be their last in a long while.
And the all-powerful African National Congress say even the 1995 Rugby World Cup in the Republic is in danger unless the game at home throws its doors open to blacks.
The threat came from the ANC's spokesman on sport, Steve Tshwete, who said his organisation are unlikely to sanction any more overseas trips.
The problem, explained Tshwete, surrounds the South African Rugby Football Union's slowness in instigating a development programme in black townships.
‘It is a definite threat,’ he said.
‘We did not want to call off the current tour because it would have created immense resentment back home among the players.
‘But this could be the last tour overseas that we sanction.
Many people have been outraged by some of the things that have been said and done by the rugby players.’
but the situation is still redeemable and we want to build bridges.’
Tshwete agreed that the SARFU had promised money for a development programme.
But the ANC insist on it being put into action.
‘It's not a question of having money in the bank, the development programme must be visible and something that,’ he went on.
‘And it is not just a one off thing — it must be a programme that is still in place long after we have a democratic government here.’
Tshwete lay the blame firmly at the feet of South Africa's white rugby administrators, labelling them ‘arrogant, intransigent and silly’.
‘They are conservative people from a conservative school of thought,’ he added.
‘They are old, practically all of them are over 60, and traditionally not given to any kind of positive relations with blacks,’ he said.
‘People should realise who watch the situation in South Africa quite closely how frail is our current political unity which needs to be protected and nursed.’
Two recent incidents involving rugby players have angered the ANC particularly: the playing of the white-aligned anthem Die Stem before South Africa's Test with New Zealand in Johannesburg and hooker Uli Schmidt's speech against plans to have a training session in a black township before the South Africans made their international reappearance against Australia.
South African tour manager Abie Malan, preparing for the tourists' first game with England since 1984, said: ‘I am disappointed to hear such news on the eve of the last important match of our tour, one which the ANC publicly approved.
‘I find it interesting that we have produced more players of other colours in rugby than they have in our cricket.
‘However, it seems a difficult time for us to consider the situation with such an important match a day away.
When we go home we will know more and we will certainly talk more about it but I do know that our development programme is underway.
‘And I would point out that we have just completed a development squad tour that has taken in Western Samoa, Fiji and Tonga and comprised a black management and a large percentage of black players in the squad.’
England and South Africa officials were last night negotiating to see if ‘God Save The Queen’, originally omitted from the Twickenham song-sheet at the request of the SARU, can be reinstated because of the dismay and fury among England supporters.
What Bull
By Ben Bacon
MANCHESTER UNITED were last night involved in a bizarre transfer mix-up with Barnet over striker Gary Bull.
Barnet manager Barry Fry was convinced yesterday afternoon that the £500,000 deal for the forward had been struck between his chairman Stan Flashman and United chief executive Martin Edwards.
But last night beleaguered United boss Alex Ferguson, under pressure from the Old Trafford board to seal a big-name transfer before his side's next game against Oldham a week tomorrow, whose bid for Sheffield Wednesday striker David Hirst was rejected earlier this week, insisted an agreement was impossible because Edwards had not spoken to EITHER of them.
It's an extraordinary situation, because Fry had already pulled Bull out of tomorrow's FA Cup game versus Bournemouth to prevent the free-scoring striker from being cup-tied.
Fry, who firmly believed his star player — brother of Wolves and England No 9 Steve — was Old Trafford-bound, said: ‘I have never known anything like this before.
It's totally bizarre.
‘I spoke to Edwards about Bull and so did Stan Flashman, but Alex Ferguson tells me Martin Edwards didn't speak to either of us because he was with him all afternoon.
Make of that what you will.
Money
‘Edwards rang Barnet yesterday at 1.40pm and asked to speak to Stan who wasn't there.
He then asked to speak to me, but I was on the phone so he rang back five minutes later.
‘He asked about Bull and he wanted to know what figure we wanted and the way the money would be paid.
‘I then put him in touch with the chairman whom he spoke to for 10 minutes at two o'clock.
‘When Edwards spoke to me we discussed other football matters, such as Webb leaving, Mark Hughes might be going and United returning with an increased bid for Hirst.
‘I am dumbfounded that Ferguson tells me I couldn't have spoken to Edwards, but the person I feel really sorry for is Gary Bull.
I told him at a funeral this afternoon that I was pulling him out of Saturday's game.
‘One moment he's on cloud nine, and now when I tell him all that's gone on he'll feel as though he's been knocked over by a juggernaut.
I've never known anything like this before.’
But last night, Ferguson dismissed the claims as ‘rubbish’ and insisted: ‘I phoned Barry Fry and told him there is nothing in it.’
Ferguson had a record £4 million bid for Sheffield Wednesday's David Hirst rejected this week, but the England striker remains his prime target.
He is expected to increase his offer to £5m, but both Hirst and Wednesday are adamant he will not leave.
I'm next insists Lennox
By Roy Collins in Las Vegas
LENNOX LEWIS arrived here in Las Vegas last night and immediately quashed rumours that he could be paid to step aside if Riddick Bowe wins the world heavyweight crown.
Bowe, who challenges undisputed champion Evander Holyfield's here tonight, is ready to renege on an agreement to meet Lewis next if he wins the world crown.
Instead, he says, he will go to Peking to fight George Foreman in a $20m showdown.
But Lewis insisted: ‘There isn't enough money in Britain or America put together to buy me off.
I've earned the right to fight for the world title and I'm anxious to get on with it.’
His manager Frank Maloney added: ‘Lennox is not going to move over for anyone else.
Why should he?’
Tonight's winner has until mid-December to agree a purse offer with Lewis, who won the right to fight for the title with his second-round knockout of Razor Ruddock.
Denis is a sure Betts for Wigan
By Ray French
Widnes 6, Wigan 18.
A SUPERB performance from second rower Denis Betts last night helped Wigan climb to their customary top position in the Stones Bitter Championship.
Betts, who has appeared jaded after Great Britain's summer tour Down Under, roared back to top form, helping with two tries and grabbing a third as Wigan confirmed their favouritism for a record fourth consecutive title.
Widnes, already without Jonathan Davies, Adrian Hadley and John Devereux, lost the fourth member of their gifted Welsh quartet, 16-stone second rower Paul Moriarty, in the opening minutes with a nasty head wound that needed five stitches.
His departure spurred Widnes, especially lively second rower Richie Eyres, but it was Wigan who pounced first.
Clinical
Stand-off Shaun Edwards, the League's leading try-scorer, grabbed his 23rd touchdown of the season in the 23rd minute after a strong burst by Betts and a short pass from substitute Sam Panapa.
Wigan struck again in the 37th minute when Betts and Edwards combined to send Phil Clarke crashing over by the posts.
The Chemics were finally rewarded when Aussie Julian O'Neill launched a 70-yard movement finished off by David Hulme.
But Wigan had the final say when Betts strolled through three tackles from 20 yards out to score, with Kiwi Frano Botica adding a third goal.
Edwards, who played on despite breaking his nose in the first half, insisted: ‘Widnes created as many chances as we did, but we were a little more clinical in our finishing.
Our defence was absolutely superb.’
Jackson fuming
COLIN JACKSON, the world's top sprint hurdler, yesterday blasted drug-testing officials.
The European Athletic Association (EAA) have said that Jackson's European 110-metre hurdles record of 13.06 secs, set at Crystal Palace in July, will not count because he did not have the mandatory post-race drugs test.
A fuming Jackson said: ‘I spent 40 minutes walking up and down looking for an official, and later two hours near the control centre, but nothing happened.’
Jackson was asked for a test two days afterwards, but European officials said that was too late.
Jackson subsequently set another European record of 13.04secs in Cologne.
Bingo's the one
By Jonathan Ramsden
2.45:BY far and away the most competitive juvenile race run so far this term, and I fancy in-form Flat handicapper ROBINGO to make a winning debut over hurdles for Martin Pipe.
He struck form with a vengeance towards the backend with easy wins at Ascot and Newbury and can outspeed Newton Point, an impressive winner here last month.
3.15:OUTSIDER Tyrone Bridge is the only possible front-runner here, so whether this race will develop into a true test is anyone's guess.
That said, GRANVILLE AGAIN appeals as the likely winner however the cards are played.
Going as well as any when crashing out two from home in the Champion Hurdle, he should have too much finishing pace for older brother Morley Street.
Champion runner-up Oh So Risky, ideally suited by a big field and a strong gallop, is unlikely to have the run of the race.
3.45:NOT many in with a chance here and I expect recent Fakenham scorer Love Anew and SKIPPING TIM to fight out the finish.
Preference is for the latter, below par last time, but who has lumps in hand on his close second to Sirrah Jay at Newton Abbot a month ago.
Certain Style seems to be on the decline.
Cash is banned
RACEGOERS wanting a bet at Cheltenham on Sunday should remember there is no cash betting on course.
The only way you can place a cash bet is with a bookmaker on Saturday.
Betting on the day is only through credit or deposit accounts, or by debit card.
Star's steady
Jonathan Ramsden
12.50:WHITBREAD winner and runner-up, Topsham Bay and Arctic Call, renew rivalry here.
Topsham Bay has had a wind operation since his Sandown success and looked badly in need of the run when well beaten at Exeter on his reappearance.
Arctic Call is often let down by his jumping and with a question mark over his race fitness I prefer BELMOUNT CAPTAIN.
Unsuited by the muddling gallop last time, he was most impressive when winning at Chepstow.
1.25:ALTHOUGH she has form over three miles, Ketti has been running like a non stayer at that trip this year.
She had form at a mile on the Flat this summer, so the drop back to the minimum should not be a problem.
However, SULLI BOY, who shaped encouragingly in third behind Kilcash at Sandown two weeks ago, looks the one to beat.
The form of that race was boosted when the fifth, San Lorenzo, won earlier this week.
2.00:LAST year's winner Another Coral bids to emulate Half Free, who won back-to-back Mackesons in the mid-eighties.
He shaped encouragingly here last month and is sure to be thereabouts, but BRANDESTON makes even greater appeal at the 12–1 with Ladbrokes.
Ferdie Murphy's gelding jumped superbly when making all at Newbury and remains well treated.
Kings Fountain could go close under top weight.
Brand leader
BRADBURY STAR remains a 16–1 shot for the Gold Cup after an inconclusive win at Cheltenham yesterday.
‘He has given himself a hard race,’ said Josh Gifford, but if he recovers quickly the seven-year-old will go for the H and T Walker Chase at Ascot next weekend.
Staunch Friend is unchanged at 16–1 for the Champion Hurdle with Hills after a fairly bloodless win in the ASW Hurdle, but the same firm have had good money for Irish raider Destriero, who is now 12–1 from 20–1.
Leeds set for glory — Laughton
By Ray French
DOUG LAUGHTON, whose Leeds side is struggling with three wins from eight Championship matches, last night vowed: ‘The good times will come back to Headingley.’
Boss Laughton insists his troubled team can still make a charge for the Stones Bitter First Division title.
He said: ‘I now have everything in place for Leeds once again to be a power in the game.
In Hanley, Schofield, Gregory and Iro we have some of the world's best players and I feel we are about to perform, hopefully at the Boulevard on Sunday.’
Laughton has splashed out a further £500,000 on former Wigan favourites Andy Gregory, Kevin Iro and Andy Goodway, ex-Warrington second rower Gary Mercer and Bath rugby union winger Jim Fallon.
And, after thrashing Widnes and a superb performance in losing at St Helens last Sunday, there are signs the Headingley faithful are about to be rewarded.
Jinx
But Leeds' injury jinx has struck again for tomorrow's trip to Hull.
Great Britain skipper Garry Schofield is still out with a hamstring injury and Kiwi Mercer joins him with a damaged ankle.
Great Britain international Paul Dixon replaces Mercer, while John Gallagher is on the wing with former All Black colleague Craig Innes taking Schofield's place at stand-off.
Hull have Great Britain forward Steve McNamara back after injury and Aussie Scott Gale, out for a month with a damaged shoulder, also expects to return.
St Helens, rocked by defeat at bottom-of-the-table Leigh on Wednesday, include David Lyon, out with a hamstring injury since signing from Warrington nine weeks ago.
Peter Niven
PETER Niven's championship odds were cut from 50–1 to 33–1 by Hills after he scored on all five of his mounts at Ayr yesterday.
Victory on Majed, Fishki, Wellwotdouthink, Ambuscade and Programmed To Win, by an aggregate of 41 lengths and at accumulated odds of 43–1, boosted Niven's tally for the season to 32.
Robert's reunion
ROBERT LEE has been promised a good reception today when First Division leaders Newcastle visit promotion rivals Charlton.
Lee had 10 years at Charlton before making the switch to the north east to join the Geordies two months ago for £700,000.
But joint Charlton manager Alan Curbishley said: ‘Nobody begrudged Robert his move — and that was not the case with a couple of players when they left.’
Charlton expect a 15,000-strong crowd for their final ‘home’ game at Upton Park before next month's return to The Valley.
Lee is still looking for his first League goal and admitted: ‘I'd love to get it against Charlton.’
Sunderland are expected to join the chase for Middlesbrough's want-away striker Bernie Slaven.
Boro boss Lennie Lawrence said: ‘Bernie has been in and out and can't focus his mind properly with his contract looming up.’
A load of Bull
BARNET'S Gary Bull was last night bouncing back after becoming the victim of a hoax.
Midfielder Bull believed he was to become a Manchester United player after a man claiming to be United managing director Martin Edwards agreed a £500,000 deal with manager Barry Fry and chairman Stan Flashman.
Bull revealed: ‘Alex Ferguson contacted me later and was incredibly apologetic, saying that neither he nor Edwards had contacted Barnet.’
Flashman said: ‘Barry and I took calls on Thursday from someone saying he was Martin Edwards, and we genuinely thought it was him.
A deal was discussed.
‘United were interested in Gary last season, and Alex Ferguson spoke to Barry about him.’
Clough handed reprieve
By David Harrison
BRIAN CLOUGH defied a gathering lynch mob calling for his head yesterday by signing a new contract with Nottingham Forest.
The 57-year-old manager put his signature to a one-year extension and secured his future until the end of next season.
It was an immense show of faith by the Forest board who have been under increasing pressure from rebels, supporters and shareholders alike, who are seeking a change of manager after a disastrous start to the season.
If he completes the term, it will take Clough to a staggering 19 years in charge at the City Ground and 29 years in total as a manager.
He already had a verbal agreement with Forest for another year, but chairman Frederick Reacher was anxious to put it in writing at a time when the anti-Clough lobby was growing in strength.
Many television viewers were alarmed at the Forest boss's ageing appearance on a BBC interview this week, and Clough admitted yesterday: ‘My wife, Barbara, has told me that I've got uglier and older.
‘But my chairman and vice-chairman have given me another year's contract, and I'm absolutely delighted to be staying at Nottingham Forest.
‘I've never had any intention of resigning, or getting the sack for that matter, even though I'm bottom of the league and 57-years-old.
‘I'm thrilled that the board have shown faith in me by giving me the chance to work with them for another 12 months.
‘My task now is to repay that faith by getting us off the bottom of the league.
I promised them I'll be as good a manager as I've ever been.’
Chairman Reacher, who admitted last weekend that he had already started contemplating life without Brian, added: ‘We are going to get this club back on the rails and climb up the Premier League.
‘Brian Clough and his management team are the men to do that for us.’
Shilton pledge
By Ben Bacon
PETER SHILTON is 90 minutes from a potential disaster — but the former England international vows to carry on as player-manager of Plymouth even if the club lose to non-League Dorking tomorrow.
Plymouth, knocked out of the Coca-Cola Cup by Scarborough this week, desperately need the cash a decent FA Cup run would bring.
in the competition.
Shilton was called into a ‘clear the air’ meeting with the Home Park board yesterday, but insisted it was just routine.
He said: ‘I signed a three-year contract at the club and I want to see the job through.’
‘I'm very happy and I have always had a good relationship with the board.’
‘It's obviously their job to keep tabs on the financial situation and my job to provide enetertaining football on the pitch and win promotion.
‘I like to think I've achieved the former, but I can't get promotion in five months.’
Shilton has spent nearly £1 million on new players since arriving in March and the club need gates of 10,000 to break even.
So far the average is only 6,500.
Given Argyle's appalling away form, an upset is possible.
because of Argyle's appalling away form.
Dorking, top of Diadora League Division One, have also won six of their last seven games.
Edwards in the hot seat
By Graham Fisher
Butler calls in shrink
SALISBURY have called in psychiatrist Jed Lombard to relax the players for their biggest match in 13 years at Marlow.
And manager Geoff Butler has told his Beazer Homes League men to concentrate on a secret catchword which, when shouted from the dug-out in the heat of the match, is designed to trigger their attention.
He explained: ‘When the players are focusing on the game there is not a side in our League to touch them.
‘But the moment they lose concentration they forget everything I have told them to do.’
SUTTON caused one of the biggest upsets when they toppled holders Coventry three years ago and today ex-Sky Blue Greg Downs returns there with his HEREFORD team.
‘There was no hiding place for any Coventry player after that result,’ he said.
‘To go there with Hereford does give me a chance to get some revenge, I suppose, but that won't be my priority.
Getting a result for my current club is what really matters.’
Still chance to turn back clock
By Adrian Holloway
DAGENHAM and Redbridge boss John Still will today relive the nightmare of his only League appearance when he pits his team against the club where his dreams were shattered 25 years ago.
At the age of 17, Still was carried off injured on his debut for Leyton Orient against Torquay — and was never given another chance.
But when Orient visit Victoria Road in the FA Cup first round, Still will be determined to show them that his pedigree as a manager is greater than his achievements at Brisbane Road as a player.
‘If the FA had asked me personally to select our opponents I'd have gone for Orient,’ said Still.
‘Tommy Taylor made his debut in the same game as me.
I drifted off into non-league and he went on to big things at West Ham.
But this Cup tie is a tremendous opportunity for us.
Orient will be dreading it.’
Still's wretched luck initially followed him into management when he was replaced as Maidstone boss immediately after taking them into the Football League in 1989.
Maidstone's offer of a full-time job wasn't good enough to persuade Still to give up his post as a textile manager.
He went to Redbridge Forest, who merged with Diadora League Dagenham, and are now going well in the GM Vauxhall Conference.
Meanwhile, Chris Kelly, now 44, is back on the Cup trail as manager of Diadora League Kingstonian, who take on First Division Peterborough.
Kelly was the striker who helped little Leatherhead embarrass a succession of League sides in the mid-70s and became known as the ‘Leatherhead Lip’.
And he hasn't changed.
‘Football at the moment is a disgrace — a shambles,’ he said.
‘Every club plays the same, banging it upfield.’
‘Even Liverpool have started doing it — and if they have, it doesn't give a lot of hope to the rest of us.
Downs faces up to the past
By David Harrison
GREG DOWNS is happy to take on the job of exorcist today.
The ghost of his FA Cup past holds no great fears for him.
Hereford's player-coach takes his team to face Sutton United — the non-League club behind one of the biggest upsets ever when they toppled Coventry City three years ago.
Downs, a Wembley winner with the Sky Blues in 1987, knows just shame and humiliation follows an embarrassing cup exit.
‘I had a bust up with John Sillett a week or so before and had been transfer-listed and dropped from the team,’ he recalled.
‘But I drove down myself to watch the match at Sutton and couldn't believe what I was seeing.
‘I'm not kidding you, we had 15 chances but couldn't finish them off.
To be honest it was a game we would have won 99 times out of a 100, but this was one of those occasions when we were destined not to do it.
‘Just because I wasn't in the team that day didn't mean I felt any less embarrassed by the result.
It hurt me as much as anyone.
There was no hiding place for any Coventry player.
‘To go there with Hereford does give me a chance to gain some revenge, I suppose, but that won't be my priority.
Getting a result for my current club is what really matters.
‘For me it's a cup tie to be treated like any other.
It's going to be one hell of a hard game.
I know people are looking for another upset here because Sutton are a decent team, but we're not bad ourselves.’
Downs also believes his novel training regime will help keep Hereford afloat at Sutton.
‘I've had the players up at seven in the morning for some hard sessions with a swimming coach,’ he said.
‘They do 40 lengths as a warm-up and then a gruelling sequence of exercises in the water.
Swimming is probably the best form of exercise you can get, and I doubt Sutton will be able to beat us for fitness.’
Yeovil out for revenge
YEOVIL TOWN seek their 15th Football League scalp at Torquay United today.
Player-manager Steve Rutter is quietly confident.
He said: ‘We played Torquay three years ago and were very unlucky to go out 1–0 at their place after a replay.
We've got a better side now and Torquay are struggling a bit.
‘I would put our chances at 50–50 — and you can't really ask for more than that.
‘There's not a lot between us now.
A lot of players are being released by League clubs these days that would have been kept on before, so they end up in the Conference.
‘It won't shake the football world if we beat Torquay — but I want a repeat of the feeling we had last year after beating Walsall.’
Rutter, though, is out with an ankle injury while Wayne Dobbins, signed on a free transfer from Torquay, was sent off last week and is suspended.
Yeovil expect to take over 1,300 fans the 70-odd miles further west to Torquay from Somerset.
Meanwhile, former Newcastle midfielder Phil Mason, 21, aims to crown his fightback from a life-threatening car crash two years ago by helping Blyth Spartans into the second round at Southport's expense.
Mason has not been on the losing side since joining Blyth 16 games ago.
Wessels century works wonders
From Graham Otway in Durban
SOUTH AFRICAN cricket forgot its apartheid past as the history-making first Test against India opened here yesterday.
And when home skipper Kepler Wessels, an Afrikaaner, completed a commanding century, blacks and whites stood shoulder to shoulder in the stands to applaud.
Members of the local Asian community ran onto the pitch to congratulate their South African hero, when they might have been supporting the Indians from the land of their ancestors.
For Wessels it was a poignant moment.
‘It was the most important thing for this country,’ he declared.
‘Cricket has been the one sport that has brought people together.
‘The United Cricket Board and politicians have made a tremendous effort to bring fairness into our system, and it was great that we were being supported by everybody.’
Wessels overcame his country's sporting isolation in the 80s by turning himself into cricket's most infamous mercenary.
After a short period at Sussex, he played 24 Tests for Australia.
And as recently as 1987, he returned to South Africa with an Aussie rebel side.
But if ever proof was needed that cricket in the Republic has cut across old racial divisions, it arrived as Wessels powerfully pulled Javagal Srinath for his 17th four to reach three figures.
From his VIP seat, ANC representative Steve Tshwete applauded enthusiastically, while Asians in the otherwise disappointing 7,000 crowd let off firecrackers.
Without Wessels's 118, South Africa might have sunk without trace.
Jimmy Cook's Test debut started disastrously, falling to Kapil Dev on the first ball of the match, and Jonty Rhodes (41) provided the only real support for Wessels.
Carling's treble chance
By Tony Roche
ENGLAND welcome South Africa back to Twickenham after 23 years seeking to become what their visitors once were — the greatest team in the world.
Much has happened since England won that 1969 Test 11–8, most notably the shift in global power.
Now the tourists find themselves the underdogs with Will Carling expected to lead England to their third win in the sides' 10th meeting.
I cannot see any way that South Africa can win this international, but three distinct ways that England can lose it: IRISH referee Stephen Hilditch proved in Paris last year that he fears nobody, favours no nation.
He sent off two Frenchmen for thuggery.
If England persist with their unfortunate habit of combining brilliant rugby with bovine penalty concessions, both Hilditch and Springbok captain Naas Botha will punish them; IF England try to run possession as stupidly as they did against Australia in the World Cup final, either from too deep or too static, they will not break down a defence inspired by arrogance and pride; IF England spill ball in the contact, another trait of early-season activity, this Springbok side are prepared to run, ball in hand, from end to end and can make a birthday cake out of crumbs.
Conversely, there are also three factors that could swing the Test England's way and ensure South Africa's brief tour ends in defeat.
Dominate the line-out;
Hold their scrum;
Use the boot of both Rob Andrew and Jon Webb to get behind and turn the Boks.
Carling revealed that Thursday's secret training session involved the reserve three-quarters ‘pushing up remarkably quickly so we could work on ways to counter the way the Boks defend’.
They must:
Accusations are in abundance that South Africa's flat, fast advancing back-line are repeatedly offside.
If Hilditch agrees, Botha and his boys are in trouble.
It's that quick, choking defence that has frustrated Midlands, England B and The North so far because it does not allow the backs room in which to play.
Trouble
Another justifiable criticism is of the way South Africa lift in the line-out — Adolf Malan appears to have the ability to levitate — and if Hilditch hammers them it's double trouble…penalties to England, no possession for them.
As often happens, the match can hinge on the form of the kickers, in this case Webb and Botha, their nations' respective points record-holders.
But the brilliant Botha can also turn defence into attack with one raking right-foot kick to touch.
South Africa have employed a potent cocktail of running and kicking in their three tour victories and coach John Williams pledged they would continue in the same vein.
‘We want to win good ball and spread it wide,’ he said.
‘It was not so much the victory over England B last Saturday that was important, as the type of rugby we played.
‘We spread the ball, supported players quickly and were solid in the scrummage.
‘The key factor will be to get possession, to keep it and use it properly.’
Skipper Botha said: warned England last night that their hospitality may rebound on them at Twickenham today.
Botha, who wins his 28th and possibly last cap for South Africa, said: ‘We have received a wonderful welcome in England which has relaxed my players and this is something you can see reflected in our three wins here so far.
‘As I have said repeatedly I believe that in a one-off Test you must give the visiting side a 50–50 chance, even us after our isolation.
‘I have been proud of the way we have played in England and believe we are becoming a better team with every game.
Perhaps if we win here for two more matches before the Test England would have more cause to worry.
‘We have learned many lessons since our game against New Zealand in August and have become a better team because we have travelled and toured as a squad.
‘Now it is an even contest over 80 minutes.
and in rugby so much can happen so quickly that I believe we have earned that 50–50 chance.’
But overall, I feel England are too quick, too experienced and — where it matters — too good to lose this Test, providing they utilise all these attributes correctly.
Carling is determined they will, putting the overriding issue about the Boks' great rugby history and the significance of the match to one side as he concentrates solely on winning.
‘We are not thinking or talking about the past,’ he insisted.
‘We have a great future to secure.
Whatever South Africa were before our time has nothing to do with this Test.
‘Sometimes we make the mistake of believing there is some connection, when in truth we are discussing a different era, different players who played different laws.
‘What matters to us is the fact that we have not enjoyed much success against Southern Hemisphere nations and until we start beating them regularly we will never be world champions.
‘This, therefore, is a vital game for England for the future, not for history.’
Stylish Scarlets
INJURY-HIT Llanelli still field eight Welsh caps against Australia at Stradey Park today, despite losing Phil May, David Fox and Ian Jones.
Andrew Lamerton replaces Fox at hooker, Phil Davies is in for May at lock and Huw Williams is at full-back for Jones, who, like Fox, was injured playing for Wales B against the Wallabies.
But skipper Rupert Moon insisted: ‘We have the players who can run the ball and that is the way we like to play our rugby.
‘We certainly won't be changing our style of play and getting involved in a forward battle.’
Australia try Tim Kelaher at centre with Tim Horan switched to fly-half in the absence of skipper Michael Lynagh.
Damian Smith and Darren Junee are the wingers but coach Bob Dwyer believes star winger David Campese, who has a sprained ankle, will be available for next week's Test.
Regan must end jinx
ROBBIE REGAN must beat Salvatore Fanni, the scourge of British flyweights, if he is to add the European crown to his British title in Cardiff tonight.
The Welshman's Sardinian opponent has already defended his European title against Glasgow's Joe Kelly, Danny Porter from Hitchin and another Scot, James Drummond.
Nigel off track
NIGEL MANSELL, the Formula One world champion, failed to make the halfway cut in the South Australian Open golf championship at Royal Adelaide yesterday.
Mansell hit a second-round six over par 79 for a two-round total of 164 to miss the cut by 14 shots.
Barnes back
JOHN BARNES continues his comeback from an Achilles injury today when he plays in a combined Liverpool-Everton side against a joint Manchester United-City team in Graeme Sharp's testimonial at Goodison Park.
Playing it safe
BOXERS contesting world title bouts should be tested for AIDS, the WBC ruled yesterday.
President Jose Sulaiman said: ‘We know a single drop of blood can transport the virus, and there are fights in which there is a lot of blood.’
Rangers in Spain
RANGERS will play their European Champions' Cup tie with CSKA Moscow at Santander in northern Spain on December 9.
The match cannot be held in Moscow because Russian football shuts down in winter, so CSKA have arranged to play their home tie in Spain.
Mac's back
EOIN JESS, of Aberdeen, and Dundee United's Jim McInally have been called into Scotland's 16-strong squad for the World Cup clash against Italy on Wednesday.
They replace injured Rangers pair Stuart McCall and Ian Ferguson.
Walsh deal
WEST INDIES pace bowler Courtney Walsh has asked agent Jonathan Barnett to negotiate a new deal with Gloucestershire that will earn him as much from county cricket as Pakistan stars Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis.
Platt has let me down
By Rob Shepherd
DAVID PLATT received a ticking-off from Graham Taylor last night for keeping the England boss in the dark over a knee injury which threatens to prevent him playing against Turkey next week.
Taylor made it clear that he is not happy with Platt, scorer of England's last five goals and widely regarded as the manager's favourite footballing son.
He is now resigned to selecting a side for the World Cup qualifier without the Juventus midfielder and described the news as ‘a body blow’.
Problem
Taylor said: ‘I would have liked to have known about it earlier, to say the least.
The situation has thrown me a bit and I shall be talking to him again because I want to know exactly what's going on.
‘But obviously there's something radically wrong with his knee and the signs are telling me that it is a cartilage problem.
‘My thinking is at the moment that we are likely to be without him.
I'm going to wait to see how some other injuries settle down before I decide whether I should bring in a replacement.’
The squad's injury troubles were mounting at Lilleshall last night.
The other players who are on the list are David Batty, Paul Ince, Paul Parker, Lee Dixon, and Tony Adams.
Paul Gascoigne is also troubled by a cold, but he trained yesterday afternoon and, apart from Platt, it is only Batty and Dixon who are real concerns, and Taylor added: ‘I know I may have to look at bringing another right-back and a midfielder, but I am keeping my fingers crossed about Dixon because there are no other right-backs around at the moment.’
The loss of Platt, however, will pose the biggest problem for Taylor.
He has not missed an England match since the friendly in Hungary last May, and has scored all five of England's goals in the seven internationals since.
His knee problems began three weeks ago, but came to a head on Wednesday when he was forced to pull out of a friendly for Juventus against Second Division side Spal, after he broke down during the warm-up.
And Platt admits that he is likely to need surgery in the near future to cure the ailment.
Last night, Platt said: ‘It could go at any time, walking across the training ground or even sitting down to lunch.
‘Other players have had a similar problem and haven't needed surgery for a number of years.
‘But when it went I thought I needed an operation.
And although it is much better now than it was on Thursday morning, I know I can't train for the next three days.
‘The only real cure is rest, and I've had precious little of that recently.’
Taylor could risk Platt at Wembley next Wednesday, but the feeling is that doing so would not go down too well with Juventus.
Juventus are likely to authorise an operation during the Italian League's Christmas break.
That would suit Platt, who would then be back in action in time for England's next game against San Marino.
With Batty unlikely to be fit in time, Carlton Palmer is in line to join Gascoigne and Ince in the midfield, with Platt's place going to Paul Merson.
Will wary of Botha
By Giles Smith
CAPTAIN Will Carling last night told England to sing up and play up in the first 20 minutes or risk Naas Botha wrecking their hopes of winning today's historic international at Twickenham.
‘The first 20 minutes will be critical and, the way he kicks, Botha could beat us on his own if we give him the chances,’ said Carling, whose assessment was backed by pack leader Brian Moore.
Moore warned just how physical the first meeting between the teams since 1984 could become, adding to fears that Botha could bury England with an avalanche of carelessly conceded penalties.
‘They are a big, heavy side and they pride themselves on having rugged forwards,’ said Moore.
‘It will be tough and we have to be disciplined.’
Moore is relying on Irish referee Stephen Hilditch, who sent off two French players in Paris last season for foul play, to lay down the law.
‘The South African backs are offside all the time,’ claimed Moore.
‘Their lifting at the line-out is out of the ark and the English players who have met them so far are frustrated about the amount of ball they are allowed to win on the floor.’
At least Carling, Moore and company are in good heart and voice, particularly after learning yesterday that the Rugby Football Union will, after all, allow the National Anthem to be played before kick-off.
Protests from players, fans and some MPs brought the U-turn, but RFU secretary Dudley Wood confirmed that the South African anthem, Die Stem, with its associations with the old apartheid regime, would still be banned.
‘I think everyone is very pleased they've changed their minds,’ said England's most-capped player, Rory Underwood.
‘I am pretty sure the team would have got together and sung the anthem anyway.’
Some of the South Africans are were last night understood to be unhappy that only the English anthem is to be played, but it was felt better not to cause more controversy in the light of Thursday's threat by the African National Congress to call a halt to future tours.
England, after going through a two-hour final training session, were given a no-nonsense pep-talk by Carling.
‘We have got to be a lot, lot better than in the Canadian game, but I have no doubt we will be,’ he said.
‘They will be a great threat to us in many areas.
We must concentrate on how we are going to contain those threats.
‘Australia and New Zealand have beaten them — for our own credibility we want to beat them, too.’
Rory and Tony Underwood become the first brothers to play in the same England side since the war, while Bath No 8 Ben Clarke makes his debut.
Ebdon hits double top
PETER EBDON yesterday became only the third player to compile two 147 breaks in professional snooker tournaments.
He cleaned up in the 12th frame on his way to a 9–4 defeat of Ken Doherty in the third round of the UK Championship at Preston.
Simmons spree
PHIL SIMMONS smashed 17 boundaries as he raced to a brilliant 106 in only 150 minutes for the West Indies yesterday.
Simmons led the tourists to 254–4 in Hobart in reply to an Australian XI's first innings 341.
Hot Rosset
MARC ROSSET, Switzerland's world No 46 and the Olympic tennis champion, swept aside Germany's Carl-Uwe Steeb in just 64 minutes to win the Kremlin Cup tournament 6–2, 6–2 in Moscow yesterday, his first title since 1990.
Prize guys
NORTHAMPTON'S 3–1 victory over Second Division Fulham in the FA Cup first round has earned them the vote from Graham Taylor's panel as the Barclays Performance of the Week.
A local boys club will collect the £650 prize.
Bowing out with pride
By Roy Collins in Las Vegas
NOTHING distinguished Evander Holyfield's short, uncertain reign as world heavyweight champion more than his leaving of it.
Holyfield, in fact, left heavyweight boxing with far more than the sport's historians will allow him to take from it following Friday night's stunning defeat by Riddick Bowe.
In the process of losing his undisputed title to Bowe, on what one must say was an overwhelming points decision, Holyfield defined the qualities of a true champion.
Holyfield didn't lose his title through neglect, like Mike Tyson, nor surrender it like Buster Douglas.
In one of heavyweight boxing's most distinguished nights, Bowe had to tear the crown from a champion who refused to accept the inevitability of defeat even when he was knocked down and seemingly out in the 11th round of a brilliant fight.
Drama
That either man was capable of summoning any more drama after their extraordinary efforts in the 10th, which will be remembered as one of the most astonishing rounds in heavyweight history, was remarkable in itself.
But even Bowe was shocked to find Holyfield, whose vision by the 12th round was reduced to bloodied pillar box slits in both eyes, still answering to the voice inside him that insisted his hopeless cause was actually winnable.
‘As he was knocking me all around the ring,’ said Holyfield, ‘I thought he'll miss soon and maybe I'll get the chance to knock him out.’
If Bowe was faithful to his own script for the fight, relentlessly unloading huge rights behind his calling card jabs, it was Holyfield who set the agenda as far as courage, determination and work rate was concerned.
Bowe, who had been accused of having an optic measure of heart, had to mine deep into previously untapped resources to resist a man who had every physical disadvantage.
Bowe said Holyfield had the heart of a lion but his manager Rock Newman provided the most eloquent valedictory when he described Holyfield as ‘this wonderful, spiritual, over-achiever who got more out of his ability than was there’.
Holyfield, sadly for him, was born 20lb too light and 20 years too late.
He weighs more than Joe Frazier but in these days of the super tanker heavyweights like Bowe and Lennox Lewis, he's lacking in competitive firepower, even if his heart is totally disproportionate to his size.
Bowe said: ‘I thought he was crazy not to go down in the 10th when I was beating up on him.
No matter how hard I hit him he was there in front of me.’
The world heavyweight crown, however, is back where it belongs, in the custody of a young, fresh, genuine heavyweight.
Skills
Bowe, who gave a masterful performance of boxing and punching skills, proved that there's life after Mike Tyson.
And if his dedication doesn't falter, like so many who have claimed the ultimate prize, he can still be champion on the day Tyson becomes a free man again.
Eddie Futch, an 80-year-old who has stars in his eyes again, says: ‘Riddick is still a baby, he has a lot to learn.
But I believe he has the potential to become the best of my six world champions.
It will be three years before he fully matures.’
From a man who trained Frazier in his prime, that's an arresting compliment.
Bowe represents the new order in heavyweight boxing, which has been in a state of confusion and flux since the day Buster Douglas shocked the world by knocking out Tyson in Tokyo two years ago.
It's taken gravity-defying tightrope walking by boxing authorities to keep the title unified, even if it is once again threatening to be shattered into pieces by Bowe's refusal to honour a deal to immediately defend against Lewis.
A title shared may be a title halved in terms of world kudos but Bowe, we can say for certain after Friday night's great effort here, is a thrillingly genuine heavyweight champion.
Bowe's margin of victory was so clear that when he and Holyfield were dragged off each other at the final bell, there was none of the tension that normally accumulates during the counting of the score card.
Two judges had Bowe ahead 117–110, while judge Chuck Giampa made it 115–112.
While no round was less than absorbing, Bowe throwing the heavier punches but Holyfield responding with ones of more technical merit, the 10th was outstandingly the best.
Holyfield came under such prolonged assault in the first minute or so that the crowd were reduced to a state of suspended animation, tensed for the moment when he would drop.
Instead, he came back with such surprising ferocity of his own that by the bell at least one judge thought he'd done enough to win the round.
He finally succumbed to an uppercut and a big right in the 11th, yet rose to pursue a clearly lost cause until the end, the final bell being greeted with a standing ovation.
Regan in treble bid
Tom Lyons
WELSHMAN Robbie Regan is on course to be a triple boxing champion.
The 24-year-old British flyweight champion, having his 13th professional fight, scorned superstition to win the European crown by outpointing Sardinia's Salvatore Fanni over 12 hard-fought rounds in Cardiff on Saturday night.
After winning a unanimous points decision, Regan now has Scotsman Pat Clinton, the WBO flyweight champion, in his sights.
Regan said: ‘I am confident I can beat Clinton and complete a hat-trick of titles.’
His manager Dai Gardiner hopes to negotiate a title fight with Clinton at Cardiff Arms Park next summer.
Morley Street states case
MORLEY STREET handed out a length beating to younger brother Granville Again in a stirring finish to the Coral-Elite Hurdle at Cheltenham yesterday.
Winning trainer Toby Balding immediately ditched plans to send his stable star chasing this season.
‘Morley Street will be prepared for another Champion, and believe me it will take a very good one to beat him,’ he said.
The 1991 Champion Hurdler could be in action again at Ascot on Friday in the Racecall Trophy.
Impressed
Jockey Richard Dunwoody was impressed.
‘I wouldn't want to ride anything else in the Champion after this performance,’ he said.
‘I don't think a horse has ever quickened for me so well from the final flight.’
Coral are unable to split the pair in ante-post betting for the title and make them 5–1 joint favourites.
Granville Again's trainer Martin Pipe was far from downhearted.
‘It wasn't a proper race anyway, all the runners would have been happier with a stronger gallop,’ he said.
Leicester called off
TODAY's meeting at Leicester has been abandoned due to waterlogging.
Clerk of the course Nick Lees said: ‘There is standing water in the straight and the weather forecast is bad as well.’
Leicester becomes the first casualty of the jumps season.
Stalemate on Sunday
By Richard Smith
BRITAIN's first Sunday jumps meeting proved a winner with the public at Cheltenham yesterday — but the prospect of a proper on-course market still looks light years away.
Almost 13,000 flocked to the rain-soaked Gloucestershire course, despite the fact that outdated Sunday trading laws kept the bookmakers at home.
Punters with credit cards or bookies' accounts managed a wager by queueing at pay phones to place their bets with credit bookmakers.
Everyone else was denied a flutter.
And ironically, just as semi-detached Britain bids to follow France, Italy, Germany and Ireland towards betting on a Sunday, the prospect has receded even further into the distance.
A new Sunday shops trading bill, which Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke is expected to put before Parliament early next year, will apparently not include any changes to the current gaming laws.
Now even the optimists believe cash betting on the Sabbath is at least two years away — if not more.
And until the laws change they admit Sunday racing is a non-starter.
The Jockey Club believes that in the long term Sunday racing without cash betting is impractical and it is resigned to trying to bring about a change in the legislation by a private members' bill.
However, three similar attempts have already failed in the Commons.
Jockey Club senior steward Lord Hartington said last night: ‘We will certainly continue the campaign until we win but, sadly, it may take some time.
‘There's no doubt in my mind it will happen — it's just a question of when.’
Several racecourses would like to stage more Sunday meetings but so far no fixtures (apart from a point-to-point) have been drawn up for next year.
Nigel Clark, chairman of the Sunday Racing Campaign, said: ‘Today's terrific turnout has clearly demonstrated there is a big demand for Sunday racing.
‘Cricket, football and golf all stage their product on a Sunday and why should racing be discriminated against.
‘There's been a wonderful family atmosphere here and in no way would it be harmed by people having a bet.’
Trainer Simon Sherwood, Desert Orchid's Gold Cup winning jockey, said: ‘The whole thing involves so much hypocrisy it's a farce.
‘Sunday meetings give the working man a chance to go racing.
But unless you allow betting it will be destroyed.’
Britain's first Sunday meeting at Doncaster in July attracted 23,000 racegoers, a paid attendance beaten only by The Derby.
And Cheltenham served up a five-star show yesterday.
Champion jockey Peter Scudamore rode his son's pony in a gymkhana and Shetland ponies staged their own Grand National while Morris dancers and a jazz band performed in front of the main stand.
But the biggest cheer was reserved for old Desert Orchid, who led a parade of former champions and then trounced Grand National hero Mr Frisk in a fun run.
The big bookies' credit office phone lines were red hot.
Hill's press officer Don Payne said: ‘We've been busy all day.
But it felt very alien at the track with no bookies.
‘There is definitely something missing — it's like watching football with no ball.’
Russian booed
FIVE LAMPS, ridden by Russian Nikolay Amelchenko, died of a heart attack in front a packed grandstand at Cheltenham yesterday.
The horse collapsed after crossing the line and boos rang out as Amelchenko was seen to hit out with his whip as his mount went down.
The Russian was called before the racecourse stewards, but no action was taken against him.
The horse's trainer Robin Dickin said: ‘It could have happened at any time, on the racecourse or at home.
I am anxious that no responsibility is attributed to the rider.’
Bucknor keeps peace
From Graham Otway in Durban
WEST INDIAN umpire Steve Bucknor stepped in to prevent crowd trouble getting out of hand as India ground their way to a 23-run first innings lead in the first Test against South Africa here yesterday.
The tall 45-year-old Barbadian, appointed to the series as a neutral official to prevent disputes on the pitch, turned peacemaker on the terraces as Indian fans celebrated a century from their new hero Praveen Amre.
Bottles and cans started to fly as the Indians were stopped from running on to the pitch to mob the batsmen by burly stewards.
As play was held up Bucknor strolled over to the scene of the trouble and appealed for calm.
The move had the desired effect but the Indians' ‘Friendship Tour’ was also threatened yesterday by a sex scandal.
Fast bowler Manoj Prabhakar was accused in a local paper of ignoring official warnings of a local AIDS epidemic by chasing girls in an all-night bar.
But Indian manager Amrit Mathur claimed he had no objections, saying: ‘There is no evidence that a team plays any better if everyone is in bed by 8pm.’
Eastwood is Hull hero
By Ray French
Hull 22, Leeds 19.
WINGER Paul Eastwood powered Hull to their sixth consecutive home League win over Leeds with a crucial 52nd-minute try.
He also kicked three goals to give England coach Mal Reilly a timely nudge 48 hours before the squad to face Wales is named.
John Gallagher's 39th-minute drop goal gave Leeds the edge at 7–6 until Eastwood, 26, struck after a blistering 40-yard dash down the right flank by Hull centre James Grant.
Grant's pass went astray but Eastwood, surprisingly axed from Great Britain's World Cup showdown with Australia last month, kicked ahead to beat Leeds substitute Vince Fawcett to the touchdown.
And, despite some exciting running and handling from the visitors in the closing quarter, Hull never lost the lead.
Eastwood admitted: ‘I was upset at missing out in the World Cup final and really do want to get back on to the international scene as quickly as possible.
I can only hope Mal Reilly does not forget me.’
Leeds led 7–0 at half-time after a try by skipper Ellery Hanley, who also grabbed a late touchdown following a brilliant 10-man handling movement, and a Gallagher conversion and drop goal.
Hull hit back with a penalty try in the 48th minute when Aussie Scott Gale grubber kicked and was obstructed by second rower Paul Dixon.
Eastwood's try four minutes later sent Leeds crashing to their sixth defeat in nine matches.
Hull compounded Leeds' agony with touchdowns by full-back Richard Gay, after a clever pass by Jon Sharp, and Great Britain hooker Lee Jackson.
The visitors regained some respectability with Hanley and Dixon tries in the last 10 minutes.
Bradford agony
BRADFORD missed a chance to go back to the top of the Stones Bitter Championship after being hammered 28–6 at home by Castleford.
Northern, seeking their eighth successive League win, were caught cold by Castleford.
Prop Dean Sampson scored first for the visitors after three minutes and they took complete command when centre Tony Smith struck twice to make it 18–0.
Bradford replied with a try by Welsh winger Gerald Cordle but Castleford sealed the match with an early second-half touchdown by forward Tony Morrison.
Danes toppled
ENGLAND made Denmark eat their words with a brilliant victory in the European basketball championship.
Danish coach Steen Knudsen had criticised England prior to their semi-final clash in Aarhus, Holland, claiming their recent successes had been the result of ‘a destructive form of basketball’.
But England coach Kevin Cadle left his side to provide the perfect answer as they thrashed the Danes 80–63 in the second leg.
‘I'm not concerned with what the Danish coach says,’ said Cadle.
‘Anyway, I thought the Danes tried to play a physical game and that hurt them a little.
‘They tried to play our style of basketball and it worked our guys up and brought a competitive edge out of them.’
England must now avoid a 13-point defeat against Bulgaria on Wednesday to qualify alongside Russia for the finals.
A stroll for Liz
LIZ McCOLGAN pulled clear of the field early on to clock an impressive victory in yesterday's Tokyo women's marathon.
It was a triumphant return to Japan for McColgan, who won gold in the 10,000m at the 1991 World Championships.
The 28-year-old Scot clocked 2hr 27min 38sec to beat three-time champion Katrin Dorre of Germany into second place.
McColgan, running only her second marathon, was always in control after pulling away from the pack inside the first five miles.
‘I was just running comfortably, but my legs felt heavy towards the end of the race,’ she said.
Olympic champion Valentina Egorova of Russia finished fourth.
We needed this defeat
From Graham Otway in Durban
I JOINED top Natal referee Philip Botha to watch South Africa's second half thrashing by England on a giant TV screen in the school where he is headmaster.
This, I quickly discovered from liberal rugby followers, was the disappointing result that might finally shake South African rugby's Afrikaaner establishment to the core.
Indeed, South Africans had to openly restrain themselves from cheering for Will Carling's heroes.
In Natal — home of the current Currie Cup champions — rugby followers are desperate for the game's authorities to accept that their game has slipped behind the times.
Contempt
With England running in four tries past the static Springbok forwards, Botha could not hide his contempt for the country's administrators.
‘Perhaps England winning is the best thing that could have happened to South African rugby.
It might wake people up,’ he said.
‘We've been isolated for so long and we all thought we were so bloody good but now we have to accept the reality that we are not.’
Botha laid the blame for South Africa's defeat on a Northern Transvaal mafia which dominated the tour party.
From coach John Williams to skipper Naas Botha he claimed the South Africans still believed physical forward power alone could win international games.
That mistaken arrogance, too, had let South Africa down off the field since boorish behaviour at receptions had earned the tour party a bad reputation.
With adverse publicity about the failure to establish a development programme in the black townships and a renewal of sanctions from the ANC now inevitable, Botha believes that the time has come for ageing administrators like Danie Craven to step down.
‘There will be no great welcome back here for the tour party — the only people to meet them at the airport will be their wives,’ he said bitterly.
Winters the wonder
By Tony Roche
England 33, S. Africa 16.
PETER WINTERBOTTOM, once rated too small to make it by the Springboks, broke their ranks, hearts and spirit at Twickenham.
The 32-year-old flanker spent a season with Transvaal four years ago.
They admired his courage and pace but warned him about his frame in a jungle of South African man-mountains.
But ‘Winters’ hauled England up a second-half mountain, dragging his pack into overdrive and tackling non-stop as the Boks came out of a half-time huddle screeching defiance and ready to build on a 16–11 lead.
‘That's set the record straight,’ said Winterbottom.
‘I played against them twice out there in 1984 and we got two hammerings.
‘We were not a good team then but we are now.
And the way our guys are working to improve despite recent success, I believe England will become a really great team.
‘This is definitely my last season.
If selected, I would love to bow out on another Lions tour.
If not, it could be farewell at the end of what I believe can be a third consecutive Grand Slam.
Mind you, we had to win this one.
I told Mike Teague beforehand that if we lost it would mean the end of the road for a few of us.’
South Africa, who won their three tour games before Saturday's Test, proved that before long their rehabilitation will blossom into full recovery.
Slipping
But they must progress without brilliant fly-half Naas Botha, who announced his retirement at the end of his 28th Test.
This victory was a double landmark, completing Winterbottom's record of beating every nation he has faced in a 10-year, 54-cap career and the most points scored against a Springbok team.
Few in a packed, drenched stadium would have bet on either outcome in a first half where England's attacking approach was skidding and slipping off course while the bigger Boks dug in, drove hard and let the awesome boot of Botha do the rest.
But it was wonderful stuff as the lead changed hands four times after Jon Webb opened the door with a sixth-minute penalty.
Botha equalised from 45 metres and gave his side the lead on 20 minutes with an identically tricky penalty.
Suddenly we caught a true glimpse of England's back row as Mike Teague celebrated his comeback with some muscular work and debutant Ben Clarke enjoyed a raging first taste of glory.
Teague drove on, Wade Dooley emulated and Clarke took the Boks to their line.
The move seemed dead when Springbok full-back Theo van Rensburg hacked the ball away but it flew straight to Rory Underwood.
England's record try-scorer held off his tackler, fed younger brother Tony on the loop and the 24-year-old celebrated the first brother partnership in an England line-up for 54 years by scoring in the left-hand corner.
Enter the magical Botha, who fooled everyone by swivelling behind his scrum to drop an audacious goal from miles.
England wobbled, loused up their own throw on their line and Tiaan Strauss drove over behind the lineout, Botha converting.
Panic
Webb kept England in touch with a penalty but skipper Will Carling admitted: ‘I told the boys not to panic.
I sensed the Boks would tire if we got the ball behind them and it worked.’
Rob Andrew, who led England out on his 50th appearance, pulled the pin with a succession of superb chip kicks behind a defence notorious for a knack of creeping up offside.
Jeremy Guscott snatched his 15th try in 24 internationals, Dewi Morris pounced behind the Springbok scrum for his fifth in 11 when Garth Wright's put-in squirted out too quickly and Carling wrapped it up when two Springboks panicked under an Andrew bomb, allowing him to fall on the ball.
Wales call for Proctor
Llanelli 13, Australia 9.
WALES yesterday named 11 players from Swansea and Llanelli — the two teams to embarrass Australia already this winter — for Saturday's Test against the world champions, writes Giles Smith.
The only new cap is Llanelli's 20-year-old left-wing Wayne Proctor, a former Welsh junior 400m hurdles champion.
But Cardiff's Mike Hall is moved to the centre in place of the injured Roger Bidgood.
Despite the success of the two Heineken League sides, manager Alan Davies warned: ‘Australia prepare to win Test matches.
‘Don't be lulled into believing that Wales are back on top.
Australia will be favourites, but at least we are prepared for a good old battle.’
And Wallaby coach Bob Dwyer said: ‘We lost to Munster in Ireland and everybody was writing us off.
‘But we went into the Test and scored 40 points.
‘Llanelli was a setback, and we are not sure of our best Test side, but we will not be wanting in confidence.’
Llanelli sealed their win thanks to outside half Colin Stephens, who wins back the Welsh No 10 shirt from Neil Jenkins.
His superb line-kicking and two brilliant last-minute drop goals brought wild scenes to Stradey Park.
After Roebuck kicked the Aussies ahead, Llanelli took a 7–3 lead through Ieaun Evans' brilliant try, which Stephens converted.
Two more Roebuck penalties gave the Aussies a 9–7 lead which they held until Stephens' two drop goals.
WALES: Clement (Swansea), Evans (Llanelli, capt), Hall (Cardiff), Gibbs (Swansea), Proctor (Llanelli), Stephens (Llanelli), Jones (Swansea), Griffiths (Cardiff), Jenkins (Swansea), Williams-Jones (SW Pol), Llewellyn (Neath), Copsey (Llanelli), Lewis (Llanelli), Webster (Swansea), Davies (Swansea).
REPLACEMENTS: Moon (Llanelli), Rayer (Cardiff), Meek (Pontypool), Davies (Neath) Wakeford (SW Pol), Reynolds (Swansea).
Kelly told to ‘button it’
David Tossell
Kingstonian 1, Peterborough 1.
KINGSTONIAN manager Chris Kelly was advised by rival boss Chris Turner to keep his ‘Leatherhead Lip’ buttoned.
Kelly has enjoyed his return to the national spotlight after earning his nickname during Leatherhead's FA Cup exploits of the mid-70s.
But after Diadora League Kingstonian came close to upsetting Division One Peterborough, the message from Posh manager Turner was: ‘Chris does himself no favours by being so vocal.
‘He has a very good team here and he would be better off letting them do his talking for him.’
Andy Russell put the home side in front but a mistake by Kingstonian keeper Adrian Blake allowed Tony Adcock to grab the equaliser.
But Blake vowed: We'll beat them at their place.’
Orient given derby fright
By Barry Lucas
Dagenham 4, L Orient 5.
DAGENHAM and Redbridge went within an ace of upsetting their Second Division neighbours Orient in the FA Cup, eventually going down 5–4 after twice leading by a two-goal margin.
Both managers agreed that it had been a classic Cup tie.
Dagenham boss John Still said: ‘That was the best match that I have been involved with in 14 years of management.
It was exhilarating.’
Ironically, Still started as a manager after injury wrecked his playing career after only one League game — for Orient in 1967.
And it was another ex-Orient player, Jason Broom, who opened the scoring for Dagenham after only three minutes.
He said: ‘I played one reserve game for Orient when I was 18 but nothing came of it.’
Broom impressed West Ham recently during a week's trial but said: ‘I haven't heard anything more.
I'll have to ask John Still what the outcome was.’
The talented 22-year-old midfielder certainly looked at home against League opposition.
‘I like to think I could do a good job at a higher level,’ he said.
‘We only train twice a week so Orient are obviously fitter than us, but I thought we gave as good as we got.’
After goals from Steve Conner and Garry Butterworth increased Dagenham's lead, Orient replied through Terry Howard and Adrian Whitbread to make it 3–2 at half-time.
Orient then took the lead with goals from Mark Cooper and Andy Jones, both from Simon Livett free kicks, before Paul Cavell made it 5–4 to set up a rousing finale.
Livett had been chased by Still when he was released by West Ham in the summer.
‘I spoke to the Dagenham manager after leaving West Ham,’ he said.
‘Then Orient came in for me and I could not have been happier with the way things worked out.’
Giant-killers Yeovil became the most successful non-League club in FA Cup history with their 5–2 win at Torquay, their 15th triumph over League opposition.
Downs delight
Sutton 1, Hereford 2.
HEREFORD player-coach Greg Downs was delighted his players took note of his pre-match warnings.
Downs was with Coventry in 1989 when they lost 1–0 to Sutton in one of the biggest Cup upsets of recent years.
‘They knew they had a hell of a battle on their hands and the first thing I stressed was that we had to fight to win the ball — and we did,’ he said.
Hereford won with goals from Owen Pickard and a Phil Barron own goal after Simon Quail had put the Diadora League side ahead.
Vernon hits the jackpot
Cardiff 2, Bath 3.
CUP hero Deion Vernon feared his football career was over last month when he was released by Bristol City.
But Vernon, 19, signed for Conference side Bath City the following day and on Saturday relaunched his career by scoring the first round winner against Cardiff City.
‘I was shocked when Bristol City released me because I thought that I was doing well,’ said Vernon, who has now scored four times in three games for Bath but has not yet started a game.
Bath's Graham Withey opened the scoring but Paul Millar and Welsh Under-21 international Nathan Blake hit back to put Third Division Cardiff in the lead.
Jerry Gill equalised for Bath after 57 minutes.
The winner came from Martin Boyle's cross which Vernon met with a perfect volley.
Paul drives 'em Batty
By Tony Kell
Torquay 2, Yeovil 5.
GIANT-KILLERS Yeovil became the most successful non-League club in FA Cup history in this blood and guts seven-goal thriller.
They were 4–0 up with seven minutes left when the game boiled over with two sendings off, three more goals and the referee escorted from the pitch by police and security guards.
Three second-half goals from Paul Batty — including two hotly disputed penalties — did the damage as Torquay were swamped under a tide of pride and effort.
Yeovil player-manager Steve Rutter, sidelined on crutches, beamed: ‘We were quite magnificent.
We have now won 15 FA Cup ties against League clubs to set a record — but this was without doubt our most comprehensive performance.
Spoiled
‘The sendings off near the end and letting in two goals spoiled things a bit.
But all anyone will remember is our lads hitting five goals in an away tie against a League club.’
Torquay boss Paul Compton said: ‘This was another typical Yeovil giant-killing act and we just didn't have an answer.’
Torquay should have sealed the match in the first half-hour when three chances fell to ex-million pound man Justin Fashanu — one disallowed for a foul.
But Yeovil keeper David Coles did as much for the result as three-goal Batty.
Yeovil's first came in the 31st minute when Paul Wilson scored with a low diving header.
Five minutes into the second half, top scorer Mickey Spencer made it two.
Batty's penalties, in the 58th minute for a foul by Darren Moore and 19 minutes later for handball by Chris Curran, left the crowd baying for the blood of referee Clive Wilkes.
Torquay pulled back to 4–2 through Adrian Foster and substitute Stuart Herd but tempers began to flare.
Torquay's Paul Hall swung a frustrated punch at midfielder Steve Harrower, who reacted by appearing to head-butt the young winger.
Both were dismissed.
And then Batty struck his third, finishing clinically from six yards as the Torquay defence fell apart.
Saints chase Danny
By Tony Kell
STRUGGLING Southampton are set to join the £700,000 chase for Manchester United's out-of-favour winger Danny Wallace.
Former Saint Wallace, 28, is being made available by United as they clear the decks before moving into the transfer market to solve their own goal drought.
Under-fire Saints boss Ian Branfoot knows Wallace would be a huge hit with the fans, who idolised him before his £1.25 million move north four years ago.
He tried to lure Wallace back last year but was frightened off by a £1m price tag.
Middlesborough are also watching Wallace, who would prefer a move south.
Rule
Aston Villa are contemplating a near £1.5 million move for two midfield players — Pisa's £1m-rated Dane Henrik Larsen, and 22-year-old South African Theo Kumalli of Fiorentina.
Arsenal manager George Graham and West Ham's Billy Bonds ran the rule over Gillingham's 21-year-old defender Tony Butler and striker Nicky Forster (19)— who also interests Blackburn and Norwich — at Saturday's FA Cup success over Kettering.
John Barnes scored the final goal for a combined Everton-Liverpool team in a 6–4 victory against a combined Manchester outfit in Gareme Sharpe's testimonial as he continued his comeback programme.
Joy for Julian
By David Alexander
Sunderland 1, Leicester 2.
LEICESTER manager Brian Little, tipped to take over at Roker Park should struggling Sunderland sack Malcolm Crosby, saw his teenage striker Julian Joachim hand his beleaguered rival another huge setback, writes David Alexander.
Little and Crosby stood next to each other after the game and the Leicester boss said: ‘I've been embarrassed by the speculation but Malcolm and I can probably handle it better than anyone.
‘But it does disturb the people around you and that's not right.’
Joachim, 18, grabbed a goal in each half, while keeper Kevin Poole saved a penalty from Peter Davenport, who had earlier put Sunderland level.
Keegan is key to future
By Adrian Holloway
Charlton 1, Newcastle 3.
NEWCASTLE chairman Sir John Hall gave Kevin Keegan a fresh incentive to re-design the landscape of British football after Newcastle swept aside Charlton.
Millionaire Hall watched his side race to their 13th League win and then hinted that he wanted Keegan to stay on indefinitely as Newcastle manager.
Hall said: ‘A three year contract like Kevin's is not long enough to establish the type of continuity that real success demands.
‘I'm after a Brian Clough-style dynasty, which we could use as a base on which to build everything else.’
Keegan responded: ‘It sounds like he wants me to stay for 10 years.
We'll have to see about that.
‘What I do know is that the scale of success we could be embarking upon far out-strips anything I experienced at Liverpool.
‘I've told the players that with the support and talent that's available we could become the biggest club in Britain.’
Newcastle midfielder Gavin Peacock is in the sort of form that could translate Keegan's dreams into reality.
Peacock scored twice to accelerate Charlton's slide down the table and then apologised to his dad Keith, Charlton's reserve team coach.
Peacock junior said: ‘I've now scored 10 this season from midfield which is very pleasing, but I'm worried that Dad won't let me in the house anymore.’
Challenge
Charlton will be hoping their next home game, back at The Valley after seven years away, will revitalise their fading promotion challenge.
At the end of a 16-month stay at Upton Park, Charlton's fans had only a Garry Nelson goal to cheer, as the Geordie masses drowned them out.
No Charlton player could match the first touch control of Newcastle midfielder Lee Clark who set up two of his side's goals.
The 20-year-old Clark is shaping up nicely after being hailed on Tyneside as ‘the new Paul Gascoigne’.
He said: ‘The more publicity I get the better.
It means I'm being successful.’
Following Peacock's first half double, a powerful header from Newcastle centre half Steve Howey put the game beyond Charlton's reach.
Palmer has last laugh
By Rob Shepherd
HE was the butt of jokes as England flopped at the European Championship.
Foreign observers sniggered and called him a basketball player.
But within the England training camp, Carlton Palmer is half of a double act that has transformed the atmosphere in Graham Taylor's squad, banishing the gloom of Sweden.
He's nicknamed ‘The Legend’ and his partner in fun, not surprisingly, is Paul Gascoigne.
On Wednesday, Taylor hopes they can make fools out of World Cup rivals Turkey because, with David Batty out, Palmer looks certain of an eighth cap and the chance to prove he is more than a court jester.
And Palmer is determined not to waste his new role as Gascoigne's straight man on the pitch.
‘My strength is to win the ball and give it, so I like to have a talented player around me,’ he said.
‘At Sheffield Wednesday, I have John Sheridan.
But when he was out injured during the early part of the season it was very difficult because it is not easy for me to start creating things.
That's not my game.
‘I like to give it and go.
That's what I do with Sheridan and I think the system will work well with Gazza.
Quality
‘Unfortunately, when I have played for England before there has not been a player of his quality or sort in the side.
‘John Barnes hasn't played either.
‘And although I don't think I've played as badly as people have said, I think I can get more out of myself, and more out of others around me, if I play in a midfield alongside Gazza.’
Off the pitch, Palmer has long made his mark.
Before his England debut, his rendition of ‘Swing Low, Sweet Chariot’ roused the team before their match in Poland 12 months ago.
And in Gascoigne's absence he played the fool to lighten the mood during the long hours of inactivity that footballers must put up with.
Now paired with the joker-in-chief, Palmer said: ‘We have formed a great relationship off the pitch.
We both like to joke around and play up.
‘We try to make it lighthearted for the other lads because there's a lot of pressure.
We try to make it as much fun as we can.
‘That's my personality.
Football's there to be enjoyed.
‘The atmosphere's better if the lads like each other and have a laugh and a joke.
Rapport
‘Gazza's like me.
He wants to go out and enjoy the game.
‘Of course, just as he is as a player, Gazza is in a different class.
‘I don't share with him but he's always wandering in my room looking to muck around.
‘But there comes a time when I have to reach for the sleeping tablets.
‘Hopefully we can take our rapport onto the pitch on Wednesday and make it work.’
Andy's choice
By Scott McMunn
SCOTLAND manager Andy Roxburgh has looked to Rangers and Celtic to provide the platform for his World Cup challenge.
The Scots face Italy at Ibrox on Wednesday, and Roxburgh said: ‘The backbone of the team is very important and I believe I have players of very high quality who will form the spine of our side on Wednesday.’
He confirmed that Rangers goalkeeper Andy Goram, defender Dave McPherson and striker Ally McCoist are certain starters, as is skipper Paul McStay from Celtic.
Roxburgh said: ‘The four players I've mentioned form a very experienced backbone for me to put the flesh on.
‘I'm optimistic.
I want the Italians to pick their best side against us — that way there can be no excuses afterwards.’
Blues gloom
Reading 1, Birmingham 0.
GOALKEEPER Martin Thomas was sent off yesterday as Birmingham crashed out of the FA Cup.
Stand-in keeper Trevor Matthewson immediately produced a penalty save from Jimmy Quinn, but it was not enough to save the Blues.
Reading took the lead in the sixth minute when Kevin Dillon floated in a free-kick and Quinn headed home.
Reading's Adrian Williams was sent clear only to be dragged down by Thomas on the edge of the area in the 51st minute and referee Ron Groves immediately reached for the red card.
Lions roar to halt Hammers
By Ben Bacon
Millwall 2, West Ham 1.
FIRST Millwall won the war — then they got round to winning this brutal but utterly compelling match at The Den.
The victory, their fifth in six games, sent the Lions leap-frogging over West Ham and into fourth place in Division One.
Seven bookings — four for Millwall and three for the Hammers — reflected the importance both clubs attach to the fixture.
The only surprise was that the game finished with all 22 participants present.
Millwall manager Mick McCarthy admitted: ‘I did advise the lads to cool down at half-time because I didn't want anyone sent off.
‘The action was frantic and frenetic.
Both sets of players were on the receiving end of tackles that were near the knuckle.’
Hammers boss Billy Bonds said: ‘Millwall came out to mix it, and so did we.
It was a typical derby.
There were a few tackles going about, but some people like their football like that.’
The ugly tone of the game might have been so different had referee Kelvin Morton taken a firm hand at the start.
Unfortunately, his brave decision to keep the game flowing as often as possible resulted in too many players getting away with too much.
Millwall took the lead in the 40th minute, when Malcolm Allen converted a penalty after Mark Robson had mis-timed a tackle on Kenny Cunningham.
Allen was also involved in Millwall's second, his shot rebounding off Ludek Miklosko to Phil Barber, who netted from close range.
West Ham hit back with a memorable goal from Robson, and Alvin Martin came close to snatching an undeserved point when he headed against a post three minutes from time.
Holder stung by ref
Tranmere 3, Brentford 2.
BRENTFORD boss Phil Holder was left fuming as Tranmere came from two goals behind to claim a thrilling victory.
The Bees missed a penalty and had a Marcus Gayle goal disallowed, while the Tranmere winner looked suspiciously off-side.
Holder said: ‘The referee made some outrageous decisions.
I didn't realise we were playing against so many men.
‘But I suppose I must keep my mouth shut or I will be in trouble.
Let's just say it was a disappointing result.’
Gary Blissett squandered the penalty in the 24th minute — Eric Nixon saving well — but he made amends by heading Brentford in front on the half-hour.
Gayle made it 2–0 with a sweet 36th-minute volley, but the visitors lost their way in the second period.
Stunning strikes by Kenny Irons and Pat Nevin levelled matters, with Nevin then capitalising on a mix-up between keeper Gerry Peyton and Shane Westley to grab the winner seven minutes from time.
To complete Brentford's tale of woe Westley, Billy Manuel and Chris Hughton were among the game's five bookings.
John's answer
Swindon 3, Southend 2.
SOUTHEND midfielder John Cornwell knows the cure for his side's relegation worries — start playing earlier.
The First Division strugglers were 3–0 down after only 24 minutes to goals from Craig Maskell (2) and Martin Ling but fought back to almost snatch a point.
And Cornwell said: ‘We keep going two or three goals down and then putting teams under pressure in the second half.
‘We've got players who can play but, probably because we are bottom of the division, we are lacking something in confidence.’
Former Swindon midfielder Cornwell scored Southend's second goal seven minutes from time to set up a stirring finish.
‘Obviously, I was pleased to score against my old club, but the shine was completely taken off by the result,’ he said.
Off Guy
Watford 0, Portsmouth 0.
GUY Whittingham, the League's top scorer, had an off day, missing three good chances.
‘Maybe that's why we haven't had an offer for him,’ joked Pompey manager Jim Smith.
Shilton saved by his deputy
By Mike Walters
Dorking 2, Plymouth Argyle 3.
PETER SHILTON gave his able deputy Ray Newland a vote of thanks last night for keeping Plymouth on the Cup trail after his most taxing week in management.
Argyle player-manager Shilton ruled himself out of the hiding-to-nothing trip with a groin strain.
And Newland responded with a succession of brave saves to keep Argyle afloat before two-goal Paul Dalton killed off battling Dorking.
The Diadora League minnows could have been three up in the first 20 minutes.
But Carey Anderson had trouble digging his yawning chances out of the mud and Phil Grainger's crisp left footer was Dorking's only reward for their early domination.
But within 10 minutes Dalton had restored parity with surgical precision from 15 yards.
Two minutes after the break, Dwight Marshall's optimistic 25-yarder beat Dorking keeper Lee Orkney's dive to give Plymouth the lead.
And Dalton's emphatic right foot volley after 65 minutes put Argyle firmly in command.
But Steve Lunn's superb solo effort four minutes from time, the best goal of the match, brought Shilton out of his dugout for the first time to summon all hands on deck.
Argyle survived the final bombardment and Shilton claimed afterwards he had even enjoyed his brush with ignominy.
He said: ‘As far as I'm concerned, the chairman has quashed all the speculation about me being under pressure.’
And Shilton was full of praise for his keeper.
He said: ‘Newland did very well today and made one or two brave saves.’
Rovers impress Big Mal
Bristol R 1, Derby Co 2.
MALCOLM ALLISON watched his side lose to an injury-time goal and was told by Derby boss Arthur Cox: ‘You deserved to win.’
But Big Mal didn't need to be told after Rovers' spirited performance was undone by Tommy Johnson's late strike.
‘I felt sorry for my players,’ said Allison.
‘They played really well in the first half and their commitment was total in the second half.
‘To lose a game with a late goal like that was cruel.
But football is a bit cruel at times.
I can't criticise them in any way.
‘If Rovers can play to that standard they will definitely avoid relegation.
Whether I will be part of it will depend on the new manager Rovers are appointing next week and whether it is a man I like and could work with.’
That man could well be former Southampton boss Chris Nicholl, who was watching from the stands.
Former Leicester striker Paul Kitson gave the visitors the lead after 11 minutes but John Taylor equalised on the half hour before Johnson secured Derby's fifth successive away victory.
Rob joy
WOLVES winger Robbie Dennison has been recalled to Northern Ireland's squad for the first time in a year.
He replaces West Brom skipper Bernard McNally, who has a groin injury, for Wednesday's World Cup qualifier against Denmark in Belfast.
Muscling in
From Roy Collins in Las Vegas
FRANK BRUNO has astonishingly leapt ahead of British rival Lennox Lewis in the race to get first crack at the world heavyweight championship.
Minutes after Riddick Bowe seized the world crown from Evander Holyfield, Bruno entered negotiations with Bowe's manager Rock Newman.
They are hatching a plan for Bruno to fight the new champion in China or London next spring, leaving Lewis to pursue his right to fight for the unified title through the American courts.
Bruno, while coy about the details of the offer, said: ‘Rock gave me his telephone number and I gave him mine.
I'll be spending all day on the phone when I get home to see if things can be sorted out.
‘I have the tools to beat Bowe, and also the power.’
The scenario has left Lewis, who believed he had a cast iron agreement to fight Bowe or Holyfield after his stunning knockout of Razor Ruddock a fortnight ago, thinking he's a victim of another Bruno panto script.
Although the WBC, one of boxing's four governing bodies, has threatened to make Lewis champion if Bowe's first defence is not against him, there would be enormous pressure to keep the world title unified.
That might mean Lewis being fobbed off with a further promise of a title fight sometime in the next year or two, though he insists: ‘I'll fight this in the courts.
I have earned the right to a title shot and I have a signed agreement.
‘Bowe has always said that I am the man he wants more than anybody and now that I am giving him the perfect opportunity, he is shying away from it.
The only fight out there is Lennox Lewis and Riddick Bowe.’
Bruno has dramatically re-entered the world heavyweight picture because of a clause in a TV contract that prevents George Foreman immediately fighting for the world title.
Foreman was first choice for the $20 million showdown in China.
Now that he's unavailable, Bowe's people want Bruno or former champion Larry Holmes.
If it's Bruno, it will be a double whammy for Lewis, denied both a shot at the unified title and a money-spinning all-British fight for the WBC crown.
Bruno and Lewis were both at ringside to witness Bowe's stunning points win over Holyfield.
Afterwards, Bowe dismissed Lewis, who beat him in the 1988 Olympic final, as ‘a big, ugly bum’.
Defend
Lewis says he hopes that public pressure will force Bowe to fight him but after the euphoria of his win over Ruddock and the anticipation of becoming champion, he finds himself as far from the title as ever.
Bruno, it seems, is a winner whatever happens because Lewis has already said that should he win the undisputed title or be awarded the WBC crown, he will instantly defend it against his British rival.
Taylor's demand
By Rob Shepherd
GRAHAM TAYLOR has ordered his team to go on a Turkey shoot at Wembley on Wednesday night.
Taylor, concerned that England have hit just six goals in the last eight games, has demanded his players shoot on sight and overwhelm the Turks.
‘The only time you don't take a shooting chance is if you are certain you can play someone else into a better scoring chance,’ he said last night.
‘If not and you don't shoot, what's the point about it all.
I don't mind if they have a go and miss.
You have got to be prepared to miss.
We have got to get our shots total higher.’
In 26 matches under Taylor, England have managed just 35 goals, their best return coming in the 4–2 win over Malaysia.
Turkey are no longer the soft touch of old, but Taylor recognises that in such a tight group goals could become significant and, in Ian Wright's case, the difference between an international future or not.
Wright was substituted against Norway, having lost his way after missing a good chance, but Taylor said: ‘He deserves another go, but I must impress on him not to get so uptight if one gets away.
Perhaps if he does score the tension will go from his game.’
David Platt's injured knee has improved sufficiently for him to play.
England players see red
By Tony Roche
ENGLAND's rugby players face a bleak financial winter unless they change their approach to capitalising on their success.
On a weekend when the Rugby Union cleared more than £1 million from their international against South Africa at Twickenham, the players who attracted another full house are in the red.
On top of that figure, the RFU can add their income from the Save and Prosper sponsorship, plus the day's commercial sales in an era when every important fixture at their headquarters attracts sponsorship.
The England squad, hoping to make up to £5,000 each, in fact earned only £1,000 from their much-publicised ‘Run With The Ball’ scheme.
And they were shattered to discover that the ir much-publicised ‘Run With The Ball’ scheme, devised last year to recompense players for the increased commitment required at international level, has made a loss because of advertising and expenses.
And that despite the knock-on appeal of successive Grand Slams either side of a World Cup final.
Yet bitter rivals Wales, whose international form in recent years has left them near owners of the wooden spoon, are coining it.
England hooker Brian Moore believes the squad must think again, insisting: ‘It is wrong that we should be portrayed as money-grabbers.
We should be allowed unrestricted access to outside money sources.
I suggested that if there was money available from sponsors that was not intended for the development of rugby, then it might be used as a way of rewarding the squad.
‘Sadly, this was misinterpreted.
The impression was that we wanted sponsors cash even if it detracted from development funds, but nothing could be further from the truth.
‘Part of our scheme included players attending coaching seminars for youngsters and making public appearances which would generate genuine interest in our game.
I realise there is little chance of the sponsorship suggestion coming about, but there should be some way of assuring that playing for your country does not cost you money in an amateur game that makes a fortune.’
In Wales the WRFU has set up an international players' trust fund.
Sponsors put a percentage of their overall commitment into this fund and it is divided among the squad, who will receive around £2,000 each after the Five Nations Championship.
The Irish Rugby Union is negotiating with its squad on similar lines, while the Scottish RFU also have a similar arrangement.
Moore added: ‘Our results reflect our priorities — playing and winning for England.
This is a side-issue, but it is an important one.’
Centres of attention
By Tony Roche
WILL CARLING and Danie Gerber, merciless opponents last Saturday, join forces on a revenge mission against Australia at Twickenham on November 28.
England's most successful captain and South Africa's record try-scorer have been selected as centre-partners in the Barbarians XV to tackle the wobbling World Champions.
Carling won his personal duel with the 34-year-old Springbok during England's thrilling 33–16 triumph last Saturday.
But both have a score to settle with the Wallabies.
Carling is still angry that England lost the World Cup final 6–12 to the Aussies at HQ 12 months ago while Gerber remains numbed by the Springboks record 3–26 home stuffing in August.
Carling said: ‘I admired Gerber as one of the world's great centres long before I ever dreamed I would pull on an England shirt.
‘So I had no hesitation in telling him as much after Saturday's match and I am proud to say we exchanged shirts.
‘Now we have the chance to play together and I believe this will be a wonderful occasion.’
Gerber, with 19 international tries in 24 Tests, is considering retirement when he returns to the Republic, insisting: ‘When you are 24 your mistakes are forgiven, but when you are my age every game has to be excellent or the critics give you a difficult time.
‘I am uncertain.
It depends on the selectors when I get home because France come to us in May.’
Gerber is no stranger to the Barbarians cause, although: ‘It is nine years since I was last invited.’
Political isolation the logical reason.
The last time Gerber wore the famous black and white hooped shirt in 1983 he smashed a powerful Cardiff side with four tries.
The Wallabies, whose arrival at Twickenham sparked a 55,000 sell-out three months ago, face one of the most exciting Baa-Baas line-ups in history.
Tony Clement, full-back for the most talented Swansea side in years, lines up behind a threequarter-line that includes England new-boys Ian Hunter and Tony Underwood on the wings.
Purists will celebrate the combination of Stuart Barnes and Robert Jones as half-back partners.
‘If we get good ball then we have an attacking team to set this game alight,’ said Barbarians secretary Geoffrey Windsor-Lewis.
That ball-winning responsibility falls on line-out experts Canadian captain Norm Hadley, the only new Barbarian in the line-up, and New Zealand ace Ian Jones.
This is a wonderful opportunity also for discarded England tight-head Jeff Probyn, dropped for the Tests against Canada and South Africa but considered by his England team-mates to be essential to their Five Nations campaign.
And apart from Carling and Probyn, there is another Englishman desperate to see off the Wallabies — Blackheath blindside Mick Skinner who returns to Twickenham determined to show England's management that he is still worthy of consideration.
Off the field, however, there is growing concern about the chaos that occurred beneath the East Stand during Saturday's international.
Rebuilding work forces spectators to flood through both ends of a dangerous concrete corridor.
Special
Complaints after the weekend prompted an RFU spokesman to admit: ‘We could call a special meeting of the sub-committee that deals with ground rebuilding.
‘Saturday's situation appears to have been caused because people delayed before going out into the rain.’
Young stars in day of shocks
By David Tossell
DALLAS COWBOYS quarterback Troy Aikman described it as ‘a crazy Sunday’.
And on a day of shock defeats and thrilling finishes, nowhere was it crazier than in San Francisco, where quarterback Steve Young led the 49ers to a dramatic 21–20 comeback against the New Orleans Saints.
Young, who has stepped magnificently out of Joe Montana's shadow, threw two fourth-quarter touchdowns to tight end Brent Jones, including the matchwinner with 46 seconds left.
49ers coach George Seifert said: ‘I think that was one of the most exciting fourth quarters I've seen.’
Bobby Hebert threw for 301 yards and two touchdowns for the Saints.
The Cowboys lost for the second time this season, going down 27–23 to the Los Angeles Rams when Aikman failed to produce a last-minute miracle.
Dallas coach Jimmy Johnson, who had the consolation of seeing division rivals Philadelphia and Washington lose, said: ‘Our team learned that it doesn't matter who you think is the best team, what matters is who plays hardest.’
The Houston Oilers suffered a a blow in their 17–13 win over Minnesota Vikings when quarterback Warren Moon broke his left arm.
He will be out for at least four weeks.
Barry Foster rushed for 106 yards, passing 1000 for the season, as the Pittsburgh Steelers beat the Detroit Lions 17–14.
RESULTS: Atlanta 20, Phoenix 17; San Diego 14, Cleveland 13; Green Bay 27, Philadelphia 24; New England 37, Indianapolis 34 (OT); Kansas City 35, Washington 16; Houston 17, Minnesota 13; NY Jets 17, Cincinnati 14; Pittsburgh 17, Detroit 14; LA Rams 27, Dallas 23; San Francisco 21, New Orleans 20; LA Raiders 20, Seattle 3; Tampa Bay 20, Chicago 17; Denver 27, NY Giants 13.
Aussies warned
AUSTRALIA are promised another rough ride when they face power-packed Monmouthshire at Ebbw Vale today.
The Monmouthshire forwards, coached by legendary Wales prop Charlie Faulkner, broke a scrummaging machine in training.
‘We are looking to take control of the set pieces, particularly the scrums,’ said Faulkner.
‘After watching the Australians at Neath, they don't seem to have a pattern of play.
They look to be jaded after a long, hard year.’
Former Wales lock Kevin Moseley is out after injuring a calf.
Morley makes quick return
Henry Rix
MORLEY STREET returned ‘in smashing shape’ following his impressive defeat of brother Granville Again in the Elite Hurdle at Cheltenham on Sunday.
And now the former Champion Hurdler, trained by Toby Balding (above), is almost certain to make a quick reappearance in the Racecall Hurdle at Ascot on Friday, provided he comes through a gallop tomorrow morning.
Owner Michael Jackson said yesterday: ‘I don't think he had much of a race on Sunday, but it all depends on whether he has recovered.’
Shock
The Bula Hurdle at Cheltenham on December 12 would be considered as an alternative if Morley Street were to miss Ascot, otherwise he might not be seen out before the Irish Champion Hurdle at Leopardstown on January 31.
Despite Morley Street's shock defeat by Chirkpar in that race last year, Jackson is tempted to make the return trip.
There is a £50,000 bonus available to the winner of both the Irish Champion and Cheltenham's premier hurdle.
Kapil in a hurry to set Test record
From Graham Otway in Durban
ENGLAND could be the victims as Kapil Dev fights a neck-and-neck race against Aussie skipper Allan Border to complete a magnificent cricketing double for India this winter.
As the legendary all-rounder prepares for Graham Gooch's men to tour the sub-continent in the New Year, he needs just 25 wickets to overhaul Richard Hadlee's World Test record of 431 victims.
And he desperately wants to overtake Hadlee before Border establishes a new record for Test runs.
Border is just 337 runs behind the current record of 10,122 held by Kapil's former Indian captain and mentor Sunil Gavaskar.
Kapil acknowledges that Border, who shows no signs of retirement at the age of 37, will eventually overhaul Gavaskar.
Honour
But, even if the records only stand for a couple of weeks, Kapil wants two Indians on top at the same time.
Kapil said: ‘When I got my 400th Test wicket in Perth last year I promised Sunny that one day both records would belong to Indians and I intend to honour that.
‘I hope I can get to 432 soon so that the batting and bowling records can be India's exclusively for a while before AB gets past Sunny.’
Kapil had a frustrating day yesterday as a light drizzle washed out the fourth day's play in India's first Test against South Africa in Durban.
But with three Tests to follow in the Republic Kapil should be on the verge of the record by the time England arrive in India after Christmas.
‘Providing I stay fit I will get the record because I plan to keep on playing for some time yet.
‘And on my current strike rate it certainly could be during the England series.’
Kapil has advanced a long way since he burst onto the international scene in the late 1970s.
He was immediately recognised as a contemporary threat to the other great all-rounders of his time, Hadlee, Ian Botham and Imran Khan.
But while injury and age have taken their toll on the others, Kapil, at 33, is still among the world's most effective paceman.
And Gavaskar said: ‘It would be great for Indian cricket if he can capture the record before Border gets past mine — and I know he will be trying hard for it.’
Doubt over tour
ENGLAND'S tour of Sri Lanka this winter has been put in doubt following a terrorist attack in Colombo yesterday.
Five people were killed when a bomb exploded close to the hotel where New Zealand's cricketers were staying — and the shocked Kiwis promptly called off their tour.
England are due to spend a fortnight in Sri Lanka next March, playing a Test and two one-day internationals.
‘It could have implications on our tour of Sri Lanka,’ admitted TCCB chief executive Alan Smith.
Linford wins top award
LINFORD CHRISTIE was named yesterday as the Panasonic Sports Personality of the Year.
The Olympic 100m champion beat off the challenge of Nigel Mansell, Nick Faldo and Sally Gunnell to collect the award at London's Cafe Royal.
Higgins woe
ALEX HIGGINS was crushed 9–3 by James Wattana in snooker's UK Championships in Preston last night.
The ex-world champion moaned: ‘I wouldn't advise any boys to take up the game.
Snooker can seriously damage your health.’
Roberts boss
FORMER England international Graham Roberts was last night promoted from captain to player-manager of Diadora League side Enfield.
Roberts joined the club in the close season on a free transfer from West Bromwich Albion.
Play on Halifax
CASH-STARVED Halifax Town were last night granted an 11th-hour reprieve by their directors.
An emergency meeting of the Third Division's four-man board decided the club will continue to play at least into the New Year.
Merv's war
PACEMAN Merv Hughes was involved in a bouncer war in Hobart yesterday, forcing West Indian bowler Ian Bishop out of action as the visitors were bowled out for 382.
The Australian XI ended the day 101 ahead.
Vinny in dock
WIMBLEDON midfield player Vinny Jones today faces a three-man FA commission in London over his controversial remarks in the best-selling video ‘Soccer's Hard Men’.
Rogue club bunkers Ralph
Bill Blighton
GLENN RALPH is back among the schoolboys this week because a rogue putter found its way into his bag.
The 36-year-old from Bognor failed to retain his tour status by just Pounds 269 and returned to the European Tour Qualifying School for the fifth time.
He explained: ‘Someone popped a putter into my bag at the European Masters.
I teed off with 15 clubs, one too many.
It cost me a two-stroke penalty and £3,500.
I have no idea who put it there and that's why I am here now.’
Ralph finished 125th in this year's rankings, one place outside the card-saving cut-off.
And the £33,789 he won gave him a profit of just £8,000.
He added: ‘I haven't got a sponsor and the rest of the money went on my expenses.
‘It costs around £1,000 a week to play the circuit.
I have two young children, so my wife Denise doesn't work and I have a £50,000 mortgage.
‘Luckily, I won £60,000 in 1991 and we've been digging into that.’
But Ralph didn't think twice about returning to the school, nicknamed the Killing Fields because so many fledgling careers are buried there with only 40 tour cards on offer.
Ralph, who first went to the school with Ian Woosnam in 1976, said: ‘It's almost impossible to play your natural game, there is so much pressure.
‘I have hit shots this week I haven't seen in a long time.
‘It's bloody hard work to keep going.
‘But I love playing the tour and I wouldn't want to do anything else.
That's why this week is so important, not just to me but all the 183 players trying for those cards.’
Beating Faldo cost me £90,000
Bill Blighton reports from Montpelier
FIVE YEARS ago, David Whelan went into a head-to-head battle with Nick Faldo…and won.
He also beat Barry Lane, who tops the Ryder Cup rankings, in the play-off for the Barcelona Open.
Now, Whelan is contemplating life on the dole.
His hope of a return to the frontline of European golf has been replaced by the prospect of joining the job queue in his native North East.
Opening rounds of 85 and 78 at the qualifying school in Montpellier have wrecked his chance of a 1993 tour card and he is close to quitting a game that once promised millionaire status.
Whelan has a mortgage but doesn't own a car.
‘I don't have any money left now,’ he said.
‘I won close to Pounds 100,000 in four years on the tour — £60,000 of that during my first season in 1988.
But I've never had a sponsor and all that cash went back into financing the next three years.’
Whelan chose the Faldo route to fame and fortune, employing world No 1 coach David Leadbetter in the hope of acquiring the same consistency.
But it led the 29-year-old from Peterlee into a cul-de-sac.
Nervous
‘I didn't want to be a superstar, I just wanted to be able to play well.
I even read the same book, Being Happy, that Faldo reads to get my mind in tune but I realise it's your ability to put those thoughts into practice that counts.
‘I cannot eat properly and I can't sleep before a round, I get very nervous.
‘When I beat Nick for the Barcelona Open it gave me a three-year exemption on the tour but it turned out to be a £90,000 exemption — that's what it cost me to keep playing until I lost it in 1991.’
Whelan has played in only three North Region events and six pro-ams this year, spending the rest of the time working in his father's restaurant and glassware gift shop to earn the £1,200 he needed to get to the School.
‘I'll go back to my dad's business until Christmas but then I'll have to look for another job, hopefully I'll be able to stay in golf.
My two brothers have worked for my father all their lives and there isn't really enough for the three of us to do.
‘I worked very hard on my game for two months before I came here, everything revolved around this week.
I hit the ball great on the range but when I get on the course it all goes wrong.
‘I felt less nervous in the play-off against Faldo than I have here.
But that's the nature of the School, there is a lot of grief.’
Whelan is one of 700 entered in the annual ordeal, which offers just 40 cards for next year's £25 million circuit.
Wraith Grant, who spent £26,000 to win £18,000 before losing his tour status in 1991, summed it up: ‘If someone said you could be a millionaire in two years' time, what would you do?
‘It's a gamble you must take no matter what the cost.’
The 31-year-old from Coulsden is making his seventh visit to the School after earning £7,000 from Surrey regional events and £8,000 from a handful of European tournaments this year.
Grant, who receives some backing from Hogan clubs, relies heavily on support from his wife Linda.
He added: ‘I pay the mortgage, she pays the bills.
‘Linda is brilliant.
She knows I am good enough to make it, you have just got to believe in yourself.’
Novel
It is easy to appreciate the lure of the lucre with Faldo winning £708,000 and 53 others on this year's tour banking more than £100,000.
Add sponsors' bonuses, company days, pro-ams and the figure exceeds £150,000.
But at the bottom end of golf, desperation breeds innovation and Yorkshireman Steve Bottomley hit on a novel idea to ease his financial burden.
He borrowed £16,000 and bought a motorcamper for the Challenge Tour — satellite events for those unable to play in the big tournaments.
Bottomley won £30,000 and cashed in on his camper.
He explained: ‘It sleeps six and I let the other five beds to other pros.
There are no hotel bills, they chip in for the petrol and food and everybody's happy.’
There will be 40 happy faces when the School ends tomorrow but there will also be a lot of tears and Whelan may even return for a seventh time.
He smiled: ‘I've seen kids throw away their clubs but they are still here 10 years later.
Right now, I feel I've had enough but golf is in my blood and there's a chance I could be joining them next year.’
O'Neill out to shock Ossie's Albion
By Tony Kell
MARTIN O'NEILL landed the chance to plot a major FA Cup triumph yesterday, when Vauxhall Conference leaders Wycombe Wanderers landed a second round tie at home to West Bromwich Albion.
Former Northern Ireland international O'Neill, who helped Nottingham Forest lift the European Cup in 1980, has taken Wycombe 13 points clear in the race for Football League status.
And he can't wait to pit his managerial wits against Albion boss Ossie Ardiles.
‘Ossie has attempted to play the game in the attractive way he has always believed in,’ said O'Neill.
‘He got sacked at Newcastle, but sometimes I think the game can be cruel by not giving you enough time to make your mark.’
The match will be shown live on BSkyB on Sunday, December 6, while Reading's game against Leyton Orient will be screened live on the Saturday evening.
Woking, who knocked out West Brom two seasons ago, are still coming to terms with their first season in the Conference, but their Cup-fighting instincts are sure to resurface for their trip to Brighton.
SECOND ROUND DRAW: Bradford or Preston v Scunthorpe or Huddersfield; Accrington Stanley v Crewe; Wigan v Bury; Bolton v Blackpool or Rochdale; Chester or Altrincham v Stoke or Port Vale; Macclesfield or Chesterfield v Stockport; Burnley v Shrewsbury; Rotherham v Hull; Marine v Lincoln City or Stafford Rangers; Hartlepool v Southport; Wycombe Wanderers v West Bromwich Albion.
Exeter v Swansea; Plymouth v Kingstonian or Peterborough; Bath v Northampton; Brighton v Woking; Solihull or VS Rugby v Marlow or Salisbury; Yeovil v Hereford; Gillingham v Colchester; Cheltenham v AFC Bournemouth or Barnet; Reading v Leyton Orient.
Ties to be played weekend of Saturday December 5.
Cooper rejects Rovers bid
By John Davies
BIRMINGHAM manager Terry Cooper has turned his back on Bristol Rovers and pledged his future to City.
Cooper was interviewed by Rovers last weekend and emerged as favourite for the vacant manager's job ahead of Port Vale's John Rudge and ex-Southampton manager Chris Nicholl.
He began his career at Rovers, but insisted: ‘I'm going nowhere.
I've signed a three-year contract with Birmingham and want to see it through.’
Meanwhile, Leicester boss Brian Little has squashed rumours of a move to Sunderland.
He had been tipped to replace Roker boss Malcolm Crosby, but insisted: ‘I have no intention of leaving Leicester.
I am quite happy where I am and I will continue to do my job.’
Capriati threatens to quit
By Barry Wood
JENNIFER CAPRIATI yesterday threatened to walk away from tennis.
Capriati has struggled all year to motivate herself, and even winning an Olympic gold medal has failed to resurrect her fading enthusiasm.
‘When I look back on 1992 I know that I didn't give 100 per cent,’ Capriati confessed.
‘I think I've got through that negative stage now.
I like playing again and next year will be different.
‘But if I'm not enjoying it then I won't make the mistake of going through the motions like I did this year.
‘I'll stop, take myself out of tennis and find something else to do with my life.
I think it's the healthy decision.’
‘Sometimes I've felt myself playing because people expect it, and I tell myself ‘no, don't do it.’
I wasn't happy with myself and I felt like no-one really listened to me or understood me,’ she revealed.
And Capriati admitted she is not prepared to wait for ever to achieve her ambition to be world No 1.
‘If I knew my future and that I would never be No 1 I think I'd tell myself to forget it.
I have to be the best at what I'm doing,’ she said.
The world's top eight fit men players arrived in Frankfurt last night agreed on one thing — any one of them could become the 1992 IBM ATP World Champion over the next six days.
‘When you get the best eight players in the world together in a round robin tournament like this, there can be no favourites,’ said world No 1 Jim Courier.
No 2 Stefan Edberg agreed.
‘Every match is going to be tough,’ he said.
And last year's winner Pete Sampras joined in adding: ‘Everyone is capable of winning it.’
Goran Ivanisevic, Michael Chang, Petr Korda, Boris Becker and Richard Krajicek make up the eight.
The two missing from the top eight are Wimbledon champion Andre Agassi and Ivan Lendl, both injured.
Paul saves the day in Cup thriller
By Barry Lucas
Stoke City 0, Port Vale 0.
DEADLY rivals Stoke and Port Vale lived to fight another day after this passionate Potteries derby, and both camps are already talking a good fight before next week's replay.
Stoke boasted the better chances in this absorbing FA Cup first round encounter and almost sneaked a dramatic late winner.
However, Vale keeper Paul Musselwhite — a villain when his side lost to Stoke in the League three weeks ago — emerged as the hero by brilliantly turning aside Nigel Gleghorn's last-minute effort.
Plucky Vale certainly deserved a second crack at their fierce rivals after a frenetic clash which had 24,500 fans living on their nerve ends.
Vale boss John Rudge was the happier of the two managers afterwards, saying: ‘It was a great result for us and a great night all round.
Home advantage will be a big factor next week, and I hope we can now finish off the job.
‘The fans did a magnificent job for us tonight, and this result will keep the city buzzing for another eight days.’
Subdued
Stoke boss Lou Macari was more subdued as he admitted: ‘It needed a little spark of magic up front to get us into the next round, but we didn't have that spark tonight.’
But Macari remained defiant behind Stoke's cause, and said: ‘Cup ties are unpredictable and I'm not worried about having to play away.
It will be another rough, tough game at their place.’
Macari was also quick to heap praise on Vale's bargain buy from non-League football, Ian Taylor.
Taylor saw a second-half header cleared off the line and was a tower of strength in defence.
‘At £15,000, he's got to be the find of the season,’ said Macari.
Stoke actually hit the back of the net in the 59th minute, but Kevin Russell was controversially pulled up for off-side.
Mark Stein then saw a tantalising cross shave the visitors' cross bar, but there was no way through for Stoke's bulldozing tactics.
Meanwhile, Rudge dismissed recent speculation linking him with the managerial vacancy at Bristol Rovers by insisting: ‘It's all paper talk.’
Leeds facing FA rap
By Mike Walters
CHAMPIONS Leeds face an FA inquiry after being reported by a police officer who was shocked by their four-letter tirade.
Howard Wilkinson's team was rebuked by Chief Inspector Steve Read of Hertfordshire Police for their attitude to a 15-minute kick-off delay before last week's 2–1 Coca-Cola Cup defeat at Watford.
Read, in charge of crowd control at Vicarage Road, has confirmed he reported Leeds to the FA.
Exact
He said: ‘When I went into the Leeds dressing room to say kick-off had been delayed, the reaction of their management and players was not as I believe it should be.
You could not print the exact words used, but there were expletives.
I felt there should have been more self-control.
‘There were nearly 5,000 people outside the ground at the scheduled kick-off time.
We had a potential situation similar to Hillsborough.’
Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson said: ‘No abusive remarks were directed at the police officer.
If he overheard anything, it was simply the reaction of grown men disappointed at the delay.’
Francis signs on
TREVOR FRANCIS is backing Sheffield Wednesday's bid to join football's high-fliers by agreeing a new three-and-a-half year contract.
The Wednesday board proved again last week they are as ambitious as Francis by rejecting Manchester United's £4 million raid for David Hirst.
Now the 38-year-old player-manager, who has spent more than £4m in 17 months at the helm, will back Wednesday with a pledge of his own, signing a long-term deal within the next fortnight.
Francis still has 18 months of his original deal to run.
His acceptance of a further two years appears a formality, and he is convinced he can bring honours to Hillsborough.
How to roast Turkey
Duncan McKenzie
PAUL INCE is starting to reap the rewards for getting his act together in the past 12 months.
He will be in the England line-up tomorrow and, make no mistake, his ball-winning role is absolutely crucial against Turkey.
The outcome at Wembley may depend on Ince and Carlton Palmer stifling the Turks in midfield and denying them time and space — unlike the last two occasions.
England scraped 1–0 victories twice last year when the Turks were not closed down and the result was that, at times, they almost toyed with us in midfield.
Turkey don't have much at the back or up front but in the middle of the park they are very comfortable with the ball and if England negate them there it will be enough to win.
Reformed
If you put a good team under pressure they'll struggle.
But if you put a poor team under pressure they'll have no chance and Ince and Palmer are the two who must do that job.
That's why Graham Taylor is right to use two ‘ratters’ in midfield.
It's where the Turks are strong and England have to take that away from them.
David Batty is the best at this job but Ince is not far behind after becoming a reformed character in the past year.
At one stage he was an angry young man with what seemed like a chip on his shoulder, aggravating everyone from referees to opponents.
He struggled with Manchester United, too, until he suddenly saw the light and realised he was going nowhere.
Now he's a different player, has matured, become ready to take responsibility and his prize is a place in the international squad.
Now he's there it should almost be like a holiday because he is required only to do what he is good at — getting tight on the opposition and setting up England's creative players.
Ince, like Palmer, can't finish and will never score goals but he doesn't need to with Paul Gascoigne and David Platt, Alan Shearer and Ian Wright…so different to Old Trafford where there is terrible pressure on everyone, anyone, to get a goal.
He can start things but he can't finish them.
That won't matter, though, if he does the job properly.
If Ince sorts out the midfield with Palmer, I'll be amazed if Shearer and Wright fail to get on the scoresheet.
But it all starts with the midfield.
England have to put Turkey under pressure and by that I don't mean lumping balls into their box and hoping for a break.
It means keeping it, getting it wide and then putting the right ball in.
One of England's big problems recently is that they haven't put opposing teams under pressure for any length of time, so all their attacking has been spasmodic.
They have got to pin down the Turks for five-minute periods, which will exaggerate the sense of panic in their back four.
Freedom
And when the ball does go in, Ince and Palmer must be there to stop the Turkish midfield playing it out from knockdowns and clearances.
On top of that, the presence of these two will allow the full-backs more freedom and I expect to see Stuart Pearce getting forward in his old style.
If you add the power in the air of Tony Adams, England look capable of scoring goals…but only if Ince and Palmer do the essential business.
Keane stalls Forest talks
From Des Kelly in Seville
ROY KEANE last night revealed he will hold off Nottingham Forest's attempts to tie him to a new long-term contract.
Manager Brian Clough has opened talks aimed at keeping the £5m-rated midfielder beyond the end of next season.
But the talented Keane, who plays for the Republic of Ireland against Spain in Seville tomorrow, will put the negotiations on ice while he weighs up his options.
The news will disappoint Clough, who signed a one-year personal extension last week and now faces the difficult task of agreeing new deals for NINE of his current first team.
Keane, who is being pursued by Liverpool, Manchester United, Arsenal and Blackburn, admitted: ‘Forest have spoken to me about a long-term contract, but I don't want to get to the point where I am arguing over details and money.
‘I owe the club a great deal because they took a chance on me, but that doesn't mean I will do anything stupid.’
Jack Charlton, meanwhile, is confident his Republic of Ireland side will reach the World Cup finals.
‘We'll be there in America,’ he boasted last night.
‘It's just a question of who will be joining us.’
Dane-gerous mission
EUROPEAN champions Denmark were last night warned their World Cup quest could end tomorrow at Windsor Park.
The Danes arrived in Belfast with three goalless draws from their World Cup qualifying matches.
And Northern Ireland boss Billy Bingham reckons his team can take advantage.
He said: ‘If we were to win it would be a tremendous setback for Denmark, maybe even terminal.
‘Since winning the European Championship they have not won a match and have not even scored a goal.’
Goal-starved England told shoot to thrill
By Rob Shepherd
IT IS hardly surprising Graham Taylor has appealed to his players to shoot on sight against Turkey tomorrow.
Of the 35 goals England have scored in the 26 matches Taylor has been in charge, just three have come from outside the penalty area.
In Taylor's second match Peter Beardsley wrapped up victory against Poland with a swerving 25 yarder.
In Czechoslovakia last March Martin Keown nearly broke the back of the net with a long-range effort.
The other, ‘scored’ by Lee Dixon in the 1–1 Wembley draw with Ireland, might have required a massive deflection en route…but emphasised the value of taking a chance from distance.
Favourite
Although a couple of David Platt's efforts have derived from shots on the edge of the penalty area, as indeed did Paul Merson's debut goal in Prague, the general rule is that England are not scoring enough from long range.
‘If you don't buy the ticket you don't win the raffle,’ is one of football's favourite cliches.
If you don't shoot you don't score.
It was a philosophy that worked well for Bobby Charlton.
The majority of his 49 international goals came from outside the 18-yard box, and they turned many a game.
And as England found to their cost only last month, it is an ideal which still thrives on the Continent, Norway's equaliser coming as it did from a 30-yard out-of-the-blue effort.
Those who watch Italian football will also recognise the frequent use of the ‘scorcher’.
The best, or the most packed defences in the world, can't do a thing about a perfectly-struck drive.
The trouble is there is a marked reluctance by English players, consumed by the fear of missing, to chance their arm.
But that must change on Wednesday if England are to win by the sort of margin that will enhance their hopes of World Cup qualification.
Paul Gascoigne, one of the best strikers of the ball, must lead the way in open play and from free kicks.
He admits: ‘It is three years since I've scored for England and I'm well aware that the two I scored against Czechoslovakia remain my only goals.
‘It's been so long I've forgotten what's it like, but this game gives me the chance to change that.
For sure, I won't be frightened to have a go if a chance comes along.’
Stuart Pearce, another venomous striker of the ball, must also look to let fly when the opportunity arises.
And Alan Shearer, who has shown his versatility as a striker by scoring several of his 16 goals for Blackburn from distance, ought to try and do the same for England.
Certainly, with such a problem scoring — just six in their last eight games — England need to find a new dimension in front of goal.
Resolute
Of late they have simply become too predictable when seeking the back of the net.
The typical England strike under Taylor has been a lofted cross from the flank or dead ball situation into a crowded penalty area, a scramble, then either Gary Lineker or Platt emerging from the melee in celebration.
The problem is that when the crosses are not good, or the opposing defence resolute, such a route is not productive — particularly when your supreme goal poacher, Lineker, has left the scene.
Goals via the through ball are always hard to come by at the highest level because of the quality of defenders and the sweeper system.
In Taylor's reign, only Trevor Steven's effort in Russia earlier this year from a Nigel Clough pass stands out as an example.
So if England are to prosper against what will be a packed Turkey defence they must heed their manager's advice and shoot to kill tomorrow, with Gascoigne, Shearer and Pearce firing the bullets.
Early strike
Graham Fisher
SCOTLAND manager Andy Roxburgh yesterday named his side 48 hours in advance — for the first time in memory.
His move left his nervous Italian counterpart, Arrigo Sacchi, to juggle his big names back home.
Ian Durrant, whose midfield creativity will be crucial, appeared briefly as a substitute against Switzerland and Portugal but wins a starting role for the first time since being seriously injured four years ago.
Hearts defender Alan McLaren collects his fourth cap, while Tottenham striker Gordon Durie links up again in attack with Ally McCoist.
after missing the goalless draw with Portugal through injury.
Roxburgh, singing Durrant's praises, said: ‘He's different, a real natural.’
SCOTLAND: Goram, Malpas, Boyd, McPherson, Whyte, McLaren, McAllister, McStay, Durrant, Durie, McCoist.
Hide and seek
By Frank Ward
LENNOX LEWIS last night lined up a world title fight with Norwich-based Herbie Hide as the cat-and-mouse game over the heavyweight championship took a new twist.
Lewis insisted that if he was crowned WBC champion by default he was ready to put his title on the line next spring against a British opponent — but it wouldn't be Frank Bruno.
The Lewis camp said they are considering a fight with 21-year-old Hide, but manager Frank Maloney is also talking about bringing veteran Larry Holmes over to Britain.
This is clearly the Lewis counter-punch to the news that world champion Riddick Bowe is dodging a unified title fight with him and instead has entered into negotiations with Bruno for a fight in London or China around the same time.
Hide, the WBC international champion from Norwich, is unbeaten in 18 contests.
But he has nothing like Lewis' big-time experience, is much lighter and was floored before winning his last fight against Australian Craig Petersen in Antwerp a month ago.
However, Maloney said: ‘If Lennox is declared champion, Herbie Hide is a definite possibility.
I've already talked to his manager, Barry Hearn, and we believe Herbie has earned his right to challenge Lennox.
‘Everyone keeps throwing Bruno's name into the pot, but why just him?
Hide is a young, dangerous and live opponent.’
Lewis denied that this would hardly satisfy the British boxing public, who are thirsting to see a showdown with Bruno.
He said: ‘Herbie is a dangerous, up-and-coming boxer and I think it's a fight the public would really go for.
‘I think Bowe's position is that he does not want to fight me because he thinks he'll get beaten.
He's signed an agreement which he's trying to renege on.’
‘There was no animosity between me and him in Las Vegas.
I just want to get out and fight for what is rightfully mine.’
The world heavyweight scene was thrown into confusion at the weekend with Bowe's win over Evander Holyfield.
Lewis believes Bowe will try to avoid the mandatory defence against him ordered by the WBC — even though the American will be forced to hand over his title.
Bowe originally hoped to fight George Foreman in China for £20 million but as well as Bruno, Larry Holmes is also on his list of potential opponents.
Maloney hopes there is a ‘60 per cent chance’ that terms for a fight between Lewis and Bowe can be agreed.
But after flying back from America with Lewis, he was already making contingency plans for his man being handed the title without throwing a punch.
He added: ‘The situation is absolutely, completely crazy.
We went to Vegas expecting to fight Holyfield or Bowe.
Now Rock Newman (Bowe's manager) is trying to sidestep us.
‘All the pieces were in place and now he's taking everything into his own hands.
The lunatics are now running the asylum.’
Turks on big perks
By David Harrison
TURKEY will be on an incredible £12,000-a-man bonus to pull off the greatest result in their football history at Wembley tomorrow.
They will also be showered with gifts like top-of-the-range Mercedes cars and luxury apartments if they can spring a World Cup upset and beat England for the first time.
Their cash bonus for winning is the same as England players will receive if they proceed to the finals of the competition in America in 1994.
A Turkish camp insider said: ‘If we manage to beat England the celebrations back home will be unbelievable.
They'll be even bigger than anything seen on Independence Day and the players will be rewarded accordingly.’
In six games between the two countries England have won five and drawn one, scoring 23 goals with none against.
But Turkey only lost 1–0 on the last two occasions and coach Sepp Piontek says: ‘We are getting closer all the time.
Many people thought we should have beaten England the last time.
‘But the problem is the unusual mentality of the Turkish players.
They are so well paid they don't have to go abroad to make a good living.
‘They are so well rewarded it's hard to motivate them for international football.
They do not seem to want to work so hard.’
That is why the Turkish Federation are putting up such huge cash incentives for the team to beat England who, claims Piontek, have fallen behind in the world league.
‘The English way has not altered for 30 years,’ he says.
‘As soon as they get the ball, their intention is to get it into the box as quickly as possible and to finish with a shot.
‘They don't know when to put the brakes on, like the continentals do.
It's very difficult to play continental teams because you're never sure what tactics and style they'll adopt but with England everyone knows.’
But England manager Graham Taylor countered: ‘I can't see how he can say such things without having an intimate knowledge of our game.
‘After all one of the things I have done, and been criticised for doing, is making many changes in style to see what works.
That is not being predictable.’
Taylor wants a convincing victory to erase doubts about his team's ability to reach the World Cup finals.
He added: ‘In the past three weeks there has been a positive feeling after our performance against Norway.’
England (probable): Woods, Dixon, Adams, Walker, Pearce, Ince, Platt, Palmer, Gascoigne, Wright, Shearer.
Chorus Line
CHORUS LINE…
England players (from left) Nigel Clough, Paul Gascoigne, David Platt, Stuart Pearce, Ian Wright and Les Ferdinand find plenty to shout about in training at Bisham Abbey yesterday.
Jones doubt
PROP Mark Jones has a mystery wrist injury and is doubtful for the Wales rugby league squad to play England on November 27.
Hull chairman Steve Watson said: ‘Although we don't think it is serious, it is obviously a worry.’
Wolves bid
WOLVES manager Graham Turner, desperate not to fall away from the Division One promotion pacesetters, looks set to move for Morton striker Alex Mathie.
Turner has been watching Mathie, who was also a target for Newcastle.
Hood blow
DONNIE HOOD from Glasgow has been forced to pull out of tomorrow's European bantamweight title fight in Milan against former champion Vincenzo Belcastro of Italy after catching 'flu.
Oldham loss
OLDHAM made a loss of more than £500,000 last season — their first back in the top flight for more than 60 years.
The deficit of £535,122 included the club record £700,000 signing of Ian Olney from Aston Villa.
County chief backs Warnock
By Barry Lucas
NOTTS COUNTY chairman Derek Pavis confirmed last night he is under pressure from supporters to sack manager Neil Warnock.
County are in danger of suffering their second relegation in successive seasons, and Pavis said: ‘People have been writing to me asking when I'm going to sack the manager.’
But he is unmoved by the criticism, despite County's failure to win any of their last seven matches.
‘Neil has brought an awful lot of success to this club, and that must count for something,’ he said.
‘People are fed up hearing about our injuries, but you can't run away from the fact that we have 28 professionals, and half of those can't be considered.
‘If we had a full-strength team, you can rest assured we would take some beating in the First Division.’
County have agreed to take Plymouth striker Robbie Turner on a month's loan with defender Richard Dryen moving the other way.
Andy's quick on the draw
By Graham Fisher
ROXY 1, SACCHI 0!
That was the score in the battle of the managers two days before Scotland's win-or-bust World Cup date with Italy.
Scotland's Andy Roxburgh made a departure from his standard procedure by naming his side 48 hours in advance, leaving a nervous Arrigo Sacchi to jumble his big names back home in preparation for the Ibrox showdown.
The Italians do not arrive until tea-time today.
But ahead of the squad came leaks that Gianluca Vialli and Gianluigi Lentini — the world's most expensive players at a combined value of £25 million — will struggle to make the starting grid, and they may not be the only casualties.
Sacchi was sufficiently unnerved by the 2–2 near miss at home to Switzerland to coax veteran sweeper Franco Baresi out of international retirement, and to examine the contributions of a few of his others players.
Roxburgh, however, decided there was no point playing games, and came up with a predictable yet interesting side.
Happy
Ian Durrant, undisputed star of the Rangers-Leeds epic, makes his first start since his horrific knee injury.
And young Alan McLaren of Hearts will be ordered to tread on the golden heels of Roberto Baggio.
There is a double vote of confidence for Anglos Gary McAllister and Gordon Durie, both happy to leave the scene of recent miseries.
McAllister should be on his knees after a gruelling month at Elland Road.
Under his captaincy, Leeds lost twice to Rangers in the European Cup and have since suffered further humiliation in the Premier League and in the Coca-Cola Cup against Watford.
But Roxburgh reasoned: ‘This match may be the World Cup key for Scotland, but in a way the heat's off Gary.
He is very keen to play well.
‘I anticipate he will be back to the form he showed in Sweden, and that spells a threat to Italy.’
Durie, meanwhile, is still awaiting news of his appeal against an FA verdict of feigning injury.
But Roxburgh says: ‘I've kept in touch throughout the controversy, and Gordon, too, has left his troubles south of Hadrian's Wall.’
A cheerful Durie confirmed: ‘Things have been going well for me and Spurs in the last few weeks.
‘I'm on five goals now and I'm happy that the onus is on me and Ally McCoist to score on Wednesday.
It's a big game and I'm looking forward to it.
‘It's not the end of the world if we draw, but I think defeat is out of the question.’
Scotland have so far lost in Switzerland and drawn at home to Portugal, failing on both occasions to reproduce the fluency that lit up Norrkoping in June.
Durie is only half right — a defeat would certainly kiss goodbye to Scotland's sixth successive World Cup finals, but a draw would also seem insufficient.
But Roxburgh has every confidence in his men, and he gave them a lesson in economics by way of illustration.
‘I've told them too ignore the huge transfer fees the Italians all seem to carry,’ he said.
‘They just reflect market levels, not ability.
‘For £2 million in Scotland, read £10 million in Italy.
‘If Ally McCoist, Ian Durrant and Paul McStay had been born bambinos instead of bairns, they would all now be in the Italian first division and commanding the same prices.
Timing
‘But the biggest thing going for our lads is their professional pride.
They all want to match the Italians, individually and as a team.
That motivation is the foundation to everything on Wednesday.’
Roxburgh is also licking his lips at the prospect of Durrant coming good.
He says: ‘You can't compare Ian with his counterparts in the Italian side.
He's different, a natural.
It is impossible to categorize his free-flowing game.
‘His timing of runs and his instinct for where to run and when to shoot are within him.
It's fantastic that the boy is back.’
SCOTLAND: Goram, Malpas, Boyd, McPherson, Whyte, McLaren, McAllister, McStay, Durrant, Durie, McCoist.
Paul has no fears
Graham Fisher
SCOTLAND captain Paul McStay would have known more about Italy had his transfer seeking summer ended differently.
Scotland tomorrow face Italy, and it was from there that he was the subject of offers.
But they never materialised and McStay stayed with Celtic.
The irony was not lost on the smiling Scot yesterday when he said: ‘I won't be making comparisons or drawing conclusions on Wednesday.
It will just be Paul McStay doing his best for his country.
‘We need two points and if we refuse to give them time on the ball then I don't see why not.
‘Especially if there's a good turn out at Ibrox.
The Italians are experienced enough not to let the crowd unsettle them, but a combination of factors could have their effect.
‘Every man in the Italian squad has undoubted class.
But to my mind Gianluca Vialli and Roberto Baggio have that bit extra.
‘But we are confident in that we respect rather than fear their talents.
‘It is always the same with Scotland.
Playing against class sides simply helps us to raise our game — as we showed in Sweden.’
Sure-fire Saunders can batter Belgium
By Ben Bacon in Brussels
DEAN SAUNDERS last night talked about how a winning combination of Ron Atkinson and Mars Bars have sweetened a season which started off so bitterly.
Saunders, on international duty here for Wales against Belgium tomorrow,(Wednesday), believes his £2.3 million move from Liverpool to Aston Villa has transformed him, and resulted in the production of the best football of his career.
A hugely impressive return of eight goals from just 11 games is a true reflection of his amazing turnaround and it has already made him one of the buys of the season, even at that sizeable price tag.
His Anfield insecurity, so noticeable in August and early September, has been replaced by rocketing self confidence.
Now Wales hope he can boost their World Cup qualifying hopes against the Group Four leaders who have taken maximum points from their opening four games.
Belgium know all about Saunders and it's understandable why they hate the sight of him.
He scored in both European Championship qualifying matches, the last a 1–1 draw here 20 months ago.
Saunders said: ‘I'm enjoying the best form of my life and I go into every game fully expecting to score.
‘Ron Atkinson enjoys life and football and it gets through to everyone at Aston Villa.
For instance, in five-a-sides we play for Mars Bars.
‘If I kept scoring at my present rate I would end up with 40 goals but you know you're going to have a lean spell at some time.
‘It's like a cricketer feeling good because he's scoring runs.’
If the cricket analogy is appropriate, then Saunders was hit for six during much of his ill-fated spell at Anfield where he became a scapegoat for the club's ills.
He said: ‘All I ask is for the manager to believe in me and to be wanted.
‘I suppose at Liverpool the finger has to be pointed at someone.
Constantly being criticised wears you down.
‘I was always being linked with other clubs and at one stage there were eight or nine players supposedly lining up to replace me.
Impressive
‘All that breeds insecurity but I never received stick from the crowd.’
Saunders, who has scored 11 goals in 35 international appearances, has not been on a losing side since August 23.
And he doesn't want that impressive undefeated run to end here tomorrow against a Belgium side controlled by the scheming Enzo Scifo, one of the world's best midfield players.
Wales lie third in the group with four points from three games, and a draw here could prove decisive.
Manager Terry Yorath won't publicly name his side just yet, but he will retain the same 11 which won in Cyprus last month.
Ryan Giggs, back in the squad, must settle for a place on the substitutes' bench.
Yorath reports no injury worries and he was further heartened last weekend when Rumania, who thrashed the Welsh 5–1 in May, could only manage a draw at home to Czechoslovakia.
Derby's Mark Pembridge, Andy Melville of Oxford and Portsmouth's Kit Symons came safely through their games and joined up with the squad last night.
Yorath said: ‘We have a clean bill of health which is good news.
Everybody in the squad is looking good, and looking forward to this one.’
Wales:(probable): Southall, Phillips, Bowen, Young, Symons, Blackmore, Horne, Hughes, Speed, Saunders, Rush.
Calamity keepers
IN a season of goalkeeping faux pas— namely the blunders of John Lukic and Bruce Grobbelaar in Europe — the weekend's FA Cup ties surpassed themselves with a collection of laughable errors by lads in the No 1 jersey.
Perhaps the new back pass law and the attention it has thrust on keepers has undermined confidence, but standards do seem to have declined.
I wonder if extra coaching might be applied, with particular regard to punching when under pressure.
Years ago goalkeepers didn't worry about fisting out the old, sodden laced-up ball and today's lighter versions can be punched way outside the penalty area if connected with properly.
Marshall shoots high
By Giles Smith
PETER MARSHALL may not yet be the household name outside squash that Jonah Barrington was, but he could be very soon.
Sensational wins over world No 2 Chris Dittmar and No 3 Rodney Martin in the past three weeks, plus victory over six-times world champion Jahangir Khan in the World Championships, have propelled the Nottingham 21-year-old soaring up the world rankings to No 7.
Now his aim is to be world champion.
‘It's been 20 years since a British player was top of the pile.
World No 1 — that's my aim, and I think I can do it,’ said Marshall.
If he makes it — and many experts think he can — it will be a massive vindication of his decision four years ago to quit a promising school career after no fewer than nine O-levels, giving up the chance of A-levels and university to turn squash professional at the tender age of just 17.
‘It was decision time.
I had done well in my O-levels, but I had already won the Under-16 British squash championships, and I decided to go for broke and turn professional and see how I got on.
Maybe I'll regret it, but I hope not,’ he said.
Marshall actually has career wins over five of the six players ranked above him.
The only one he hasn't beaten is four-times world champion Jansher Khan and he, claims Marshall, isn't invincible.
‘Rodney Martin beat him in the 1991 World Championship and I've beaten Martin, so anything is possible,’ he said.
‘Maybe this year is just a bit too early for me, but I should be reaching my peak in the two or three years after that — who knows?’
Should he take over the Barrington mantle, a small part of the credit will go to the ‘old master’, admits Marshall.
Barrington has taken over as the Squash Racquets Association's Director of Excellence, and has been passing on the benefit of his vast experience to young British players like Marshall, Chris Walker (world ranked 10), Del Harris (11), and Simon Parke (12).
‘The whole system of national training has improved enormously in the past few years,’ Marshall said.
‘There's a real system now, whereas in the past, squash was just seen as a public school sort of pastime.
‘Now there's a real desire and incentive to see British players up there with the best.’
says Marshall.
Age concern
MALCOLM ALLISON says he's too old to go roaring around the country watching matches.
He also wants Bristol Rovers to tempt Tony Book into partnership with him.
I can't see Book jumping at the chance to drive from Bristol to Carlisle and back in time for training next day, either!
Rush to back Chat
By Henry Rix
MARTIN PIPE'S Chatam was yesterday the subject of a major gamble to land a second successive Hennessy Gold Cup on Saturday week.
Chatam, tremendously impressive when beating subsequent Grand National hero Party Politics by four lengths in the Newbury showpiece last year, was on offer at 14–1 on Monday but was yesterday cut to 8–1 third favourite by William Hill.
The possibility of soft ground is failing to deter supporters of French raider The Fellow.
The Francois Doumen-trained gelding has also been well backed and is quoted at 6–1 joint favourite with Captain Dibble.
Party Politics, a 16–1 chance, is in ‘great shape’ in the run up to the big race according to trainer Nick Gaselee.
‘He's very well and is usually at his best when fresh,’ he said.
The trainer intends to give the eight-year-old, who is likely to be ridden by Richard Dunwoody in the Hennessy, a gallop at Newbury racecourse to put him spot-on.
Bradbury Star is a best-priced 3–1 from 7–2 with Ladbrokes for Saturday's H & T Walker Gold Cup at Ascot due to doubts surrounding the participation of second favourite Beech Road.
Danny Harrold has also been in demand for the £50,000 contest and is now 8–1.
Ladbrokes other betting: 5–1 The Illywhacker, Second Schedual, 7–1 Freeline Finishing, Deep Sensation, 8–1 Far Senior.
Pot of gold
FOLLOWING our POT LUCK feature has become a licence to print money in recent weeks.
Readers in the know were rewarded with their fifth payout in a fortnight at Wetherby yesterday when the suggested eight point stake produced a dividend of £135.40 to a £1 unit.
Sampras halts Becker revival
BORIS BECKER'S much heralded return to fitness and form last night ran into the buffers at the ATP World Championships.
The 24-year-old local hero failed to find the superb form which saw him win the French Indoor Championships, as he lost his first match to Pete Sampras, 7–6 (7–5), 7–6 (7–3).
Becker said: ‘It is always difficult to play Pete.
It was very, very close, the difference was two or three big points, he just played them that little bit better.’
Of his prospects for the rest of the tournament, he said: ‘When you have the best eight players in the world, every match is like the final of a big tournament.
Superb
‘I have just got to make sure I win my next match.
If I do, I am still in with a chance.’
Sampras took both the tie-breaks with superb aces, shutting out the raucous cheering that greeted every Becker winner.
It isn't the end for Becker — he still has two more matches in the round robin format to make the semi-finals — but they're against World No 2 Stefan Edberg and Petr Korda.
Becker didn't play particularly badly — his service wasn't broken at all during the match, although he did serve five double faults — but in the big points in the tie-break, Sampras was supreme.
He served 13 sizzling aces during the match, and said afterwards: ‘He played very well.
It all depended on a couple of big points and fortunately I got them.’
Earlier Edberg's attempt to win back his World No 1 ranking got off to a stuttering start when he beat Czecholslovakia's Korda, 6–3, 7–6 (11–9).
In last night's other match Croatia's world No 4 Goran Ivanisevic beat America's Michael Chang, 7–6 (7–4), 6–2.
Martina Navratilova announced she is likely to retire at the end of next year after she blasted aside Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere 6–2, 6–2 in the first round of the Virginia Slims championships in New York.
‘My gut feeling is that this coming year will be my last,’
Navratilova said after her victory.
Edberg on track
From Giles Smith in Frankfurt
STEFAN EDBERG'S bid to regain his World No 1 ranking got off to a stuttering start in the IBM ATP World Championships in Frankfurt last night, writes Giles Smith.
Edberg won his first round-robin match, in the IBM ATP World Championships, beating Czechoslovakia's Petr Korda 6–3, 7–6.
If the Swede wins this week's $2.5m battle of the world's top eight men players, he'll regain the top spot held by Jim Courier for all but six weeks of this year.
Martina set to call it a day
From Barry Wood in New York
MARTINA NAVRATILOVA yesterday revealed that she will finally bring down the curtain on her incredible career at the end of next year.
Despite a devastating 6–2, 6–2 victory over Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere in the first round of the Virginia Slims Championships in New York, which left Maleeva insisting that the American is still playing well enough to be number one, Martina believes she can feel the winds of time beginning to blow.
‘My gut feeling is that this coming year will be my last,’ she said.
‘You kind of know when things are coming to an end.
The signs are there.
‘I asked Chris Evert how she knew she was ready to retire, and she said it was because sometimes she didn't care if she lost.
Errors
‘Well, I still care.
It's just that now I'm losing more often it's not quite as devastating.
But it still keeps my up at night.’
World No 1 Monica Seles began her bid for a third consecutive title by crushing a hopelessly outclassed Nathalie Tauziat 6–1, 6–2.
Poor Tauziat produced only six clean winners throughout the match, with nearly all her points coming from Seles errors.
‘I played pretty well for so early in the tournament,’ said Seles after handing the French girl her third successive first round defeat here.
‘Playing at Madison Square Garden is special, it's very exciting to play in a stadium as big as this.
Your heart starts beating faster.’
Top seed Seles, who has three Grand Slam titles among her nine tournament victories this year, finished off the 14th-ranked Tauziat in 50 minutes, and would have been in the locker room even sooner but for a lapse in concentration during the second set.
‘My mind wandered off at four-love,’ she admitted after winning nine games in succession from 1–1 to easily take the first set and forge a 4–0 lead in the second.
Seles, who has reached the final in 13 of 14 tournaments she has played this year, now faces the winner of the match between America's Mary Joe Fernandez and Jana Novotna of Czechoslovakia.
Amanda Grunfeld beat Julie Pullin 6–3, 7–6 in the battle of British left-handers in the Texaco Women's Challenger indoor tournament at Nottingham.
Grunfeld, 25, the eighth seed from Manchester, now takes on Romanian Ruxandra Dragomir, a 6–3, 6–0 winner over Russian Natalia Bykova-Egorova, for a place in the third round.
Finger pointed at Kapil
From Graham Otway in Durban
OFFICIALS last night were trying to stop a ball-tampering scandal souring India's ‘Friendship Tour’ of South Africa.
As the first Test ended in a tame draw, allegations were made about TV pictures showing India's Kapil Dev fingering the seam.
A TV commentator told viewers during the final morning's play: ‘We have seen plenty of seam lifting going on in this match.’
And speculation was fuelled in the last 10 minutes of South Africa's second innings when West Indian umpire Steve Bucknor called up Indian captain Mohammad Azharuddin to discuss damage to the ball.
Bucknor said it should be changed, but Azharuddin persuaded him to play on as the game was almost over.
Bucknor later showed me a particular mark on the seam though he said the damage had been caused by general play, insisting: ‘There was no problem, Nothing wrong had happened.
If there was anything wrong I would report it straight to the authorities.’
Barnes boost
JOHN BARNES, recovering from an Achilles injury, could play in next Monday's Premier League game against QPR after completing 90 minutes as Liverpool reserves lost 3–0 to Blackburn.
Deadly Davis
STEVE DAVIS, a 9–1 third-round winner over Wayne Jones, went one better in thrashing Irishman Eugene Hughes 9–0 to reach the last 16 of the Royal Liver Assurance UK Snooker Championship at Preston last night.
Burke beaten
EUROPEAN lightweight champion Jean-Baptiste Mendy of France cruised to a comfortable points win after a disappointing display by Britain's Paul Burke in Paris last night.
Poor Pierre
FRANCE rugby union coach Pierre Berbizier faces the sack following Saturday's shock 24–20 home defeat against Argentina.
Berbizier's most likely successor is Pierre Villepreux, the former Toulouse coach.
Controversy no stranger for ‘Psycho’
By Geoff Sweet
VINNIE JONES is the talk of football again — for all the wrong reasons.
He was paid £1,600 for his part in producing a football video nasty and it has cost him a record £20,000 fine.
His transfers from Wealdstone, to Wimbledon, to Leeds, on to Sheffield United, Chelsea and now Wimbledon again have totalled almost £3 million, but the enormity of that sum is nothing compared to his roguish reputation.
The 27-year-old was at Lancaster Gate again yesterday for another dressing down, one of many visits for FA disciplinary hearings in a controversial career.
His catalogue of indiscretions really began in 1987 when he crossed swords with Kenny Dalglish over Jones' alleged threat that he intended ‘to rip off his ear and spit in the hole.’
Dismissed
That distasteful comment brought a fine of £250 and established Jones, dubbed ‘Psycho’ during a spell at Leeds, as a cult figure among a certain section of the soccer fraternity.
Two years earlier Jones had given up work as a hod carrier when Wimbledon signed him from Wealdstone for £10,000.
He took on a starring role in the Plough Lane Crazy Gang production and gained more notoriety when he was sent off for elbowing a village postman in a pre-season friendly on the Isle of Wight.
That was in August 1988 and Jones was fined two weeks' wages by boss Bobby Gould and banned for three matches by the FA.
Jones had been banished in March of that year for kicking Everton's Peter Reid in the face as he lay on the ground and 11 months later he was again dismissed at Goodison Park, this time after a head-to-head with Kevin Ratcliffe.
Altogether Jones has been sent packing on six occasions, the latest for swearing soon after rejoining Wimbledon from Chelsea.
For this he received a two-match ban.
The latest row over the video nasty brought condemnation from Sam Hammam, the Dons chairman, and Players' Union chief Gordon Taylor, who was ‘appalled’.
And FA official David Bloomfield confirmed that Jones is back in the dock saying: ‘Vinny Jones has been charged with misconduct, more specifically bringing the game into disrepute.
He has 14 days to reply to the charges and request a personal hearing.’
Jones, fined £500 after making obscene gestures to QPR players in April 1989, was twice charged by the FA last season.
Energy
He was suspended for one match a year ago after a skirmish with West Ham's Mitchell Thomas and in January was fined £1,500 for abusive gestures to fans before a match at Arsenal.
A succession of managers have sworn by his midfield drive and energy but, it seems, been only too happy to let him move on.
If there is trouble it seems Jones is inevitably in the middle of it, but he can't afford to mix it any more with a six-month suspended ban hanging over him.
Turks shock England
David Harrison
England U21 0, Turkey U21 1.
ENGLAND'S young starlets sank to an all-time low last night when they suffered a humiliating European Under-21 Championship defeat.
It was the first time at any level England have lost to Turkey and the warning for Graham Taylor on the eve of tonight's World Cup qualifier at Wembley rang out loud and clear.
Fears for the future of the international team are already well founded.
After losing to Norway in their opening qualifying game a month ago, the cream of England's young talent is at rock bottom.
Even manager Lawrie McMenemy admitted: ‘There were times when teams couldn't hold a candle to England but that's all changed now.
There has been a general levelling off of teams, not only in Europe, but all over the world.
‘We have a couple of injuries from this game but there were also a few bruised egos and broken hearts.
‘A draw was as much as we could have expected.
We didn't deserve to win.’
The Turks, whose team contained four members of the squad which won the European youth championship last summer, were always the more cohesive unit and the more skilful collection of individuals.
By comparison England played like a bunch of strangers — and a not very talented collection at that.
Only Aston Villa defender Ugo Ehiogu and Arsenal midfielder Ray Parlour, who limped off in the second half, emerged with any great credit.
England were beaten by a stunning 76th minute goal by Turkish striker Aydin Cafer who cut inside to beat Spurs goalkeeper Ian Walker with a fierce rising shot.
Irish in war cry
From Des Kelly in Seville
JACK CHARLTON'S Republic of Ireland last night were warned by the Spanish to prepare themselves for World Cup war tonight.
The last salvos were fired between the rival managers when Spain's Javier Clemente threatened to turn the Roman Sanchez Pizjuan Stadium into a battleground.
Spain, clearly fearing Ireland's physical strength, have decided to fight fire with fire in this Group Three qualifier.
Clemente said: ‘If Ireland want a war, then Spain must take protection.
My Spanish players must have a strong, physical approach.’
But Charlton was quick to squash any suggestion his players overstep the mark physically, countering: ‘I don't think anyone in the world can point the finger at us and say we've started a war on a football field.’
Meanwhile, Northern Ireland manager Billy Bingham, whose side entertain Denmark tonight in the same group, last night fired a broadside at Charlton.
Bingham hit out after Charlton had written-off Northern Ireland's chances of qualifying for the finals.
Charlton said on Monday: ‘We are certainties to go to the States, the only question is which team comes with us, Denmark or Spain.’
He retorted: ‘He's entitled to his opinion, but I don't share it and It's too premature to talk about anyone being certainties, or anyone being out of the running, especially with this group developing so closely.’
Twin bid
FORMER Newcastle manager Jim Smith is heading the chase for two of his old players.
The Portsmouth chief is interested in striker Mick Quinn and full-back Mark Stimson.
IPSWICH yesterday signed two players from Portuguese side Sporting Lisbon for a fee believed to be in the region of £200,000.
The pair are Yugoslavian midfielder Vlado Bozinoski, who has been on trial at Portman Road, and Bulgarian international striker Bentcho Geuntchev.
CHELSEA striker Joe Allon has turned down a record £275,000 transfer to First Division Brentford.
Allon met Brentford manager Phil Holder to discuss personal terms yesterday, but failed to reach agreement.
LEEDS midfield man Scott Sellars has had a hernia operation and is aiming to be back in action by Christmas.
Reilly axe falls on Edwards
By Ray French
SHAUN EDWARDS, rugby league's leading try-scorer, was axed yesterday from the England side to face Wales on Friday week at Swansea.
The Wigan half-back, who gained his 28th cap in last month's World Cup final against Australia, has been dropped along with team-mates Martin Dermott and Joe Lydon.
But England coach Mal Reilly insisted the 26-year-old, who has scored 23 tries this season, has not been disciplined for his outspoken comments on Kiwi referee Dennis Hale before the Cup final.
Reilly opts for the return of England skipper Garry Schofield to stand-off and will give the substitute's role to a younger player.
He said: ‘Edwards is the best support player in the game but it's no use having him hanging about in the wings when the experience could be given to a younger player.
‘Both Edwards and Dermott are class acts.
Lee Jackson has been competing very well as hooker and deserves another chance.
‘And Lydon told me Wembley was his swansong.’
Edwards said: ‘I'm surprised.
I think my form has been good enough.
But Mal Reilly is the coach and it is his judgment.
‘I just have to respect his opinions.’
SQUAD: Connolly (St Helens), Critchley (Salford), Ford (Castleford), Fox (Bradford Northern), Hunte (St Helens), Newlove (Featherstone Rovers), Offiah (Wigan), Powell (Sheffield Eagles), Schofield (Leeds, captain), Spruce (Widnes), Tait (Leeds), Betts (Wigan), Busby (Hull), Clarke (Wigan), Eyres (Widnes), Hanley (Leeds), Jackson (Hull), Joynt (St Helens), Molloy (Leeds), Platt (Wigan), Skerrett (Wigan).
Marty finds right footing
By Mike Allan
Monmouthshire 9, Australia 19.
MARTY ROEBUCK found his kicking boots again to inspire the Wallabies to a morale boosting pre-Test victory at Ebbw Vale.
Having missed with five kicks in the 13–9 defeat at Llanelli last weekend, Roebuck made sure there was no reprieve for Monmouthshire yesterday, banging home four penalties in the opening 20 minutes.
That effectively made the game safe for the tourists, but there was little to commend in a cold and often bitter contest.
Irish referee Brian Smith was forced to act as peacemaker when fighting broke out among the rival front rows on more than one occasion, and once again the Aussies were frustrated by the spoiling tactics of the home side.
Tougher
Aussie coach Bob Dwyer said: ‘It was a bit of a bun fight.
Yet again, we have seen a game where consistent breaches of the law have been committed.
‘The only difference between the lineouts this year and last is that you can get penalised in a few more areas.
There's the same barging, jumping off the shoulder and closing the gap.’
It can only get tougher for the tourists when they face a resurgent Wales at the Arms Park on Saturday, although home hopes of upsetting the world champions were delivered a huge blow yesterday, when Swansea full-back Tony Clement was forced to pull out with a stress fracture of the leg.
Wales manager Robert Norster revealed: ‘Tony has suffered with the problem for quite a while, and the doctor said it had to be put in plaster.’
Mike Rayer will take over the No 15 jersey from Clement and will face the tourists for the second time this season following his recent appearance for the Wales B team.
Another boost for the tourists is that lineout ace John Eales is on the mend and could even creep into Saturday's Test.
That would be bad news for Wales, although they have expected all along that wonder wing David Campese would be 100 per cent by the time it came to the crunch in Cardiff.
‘David will be right for the Test,’ said Dwyer.
‘He would have played last weekend had it been an international.’
The same is so of fellow Test winger, Paul Carozza, who hasn't played since the defeat by Swansea in the tour opener.
Without Eales, the Aussies are not a potent a force in the lineout.
Barged
Garrick Morgan and Warwick Waugh were well matched by the Monmouthshire pair of Tony Rees and Mike Voyle yesterday, and the experienced Rod McCall made little difference when he came on to replace Morgan.
Those Roebuck penalties apart, the only other scores from the Australians came in the first half, when strapping winger Damien Smith barged his way through two tackles to notch the game's only try.
Roebuck added the conversion, and the Aussies were coasting 19–0 at the interval.
With the strong wind at their backs, Monmouthshire were able to apply some pressure in the second half, but their cause wasn't helped by Jonathan Westwood, who landed only three penalties from six attempts.
Fines fear for Windies
THE West Indies fear that fines aimed at enforcing the 90 overs-a-day rule for Tests could see them return penniless from their tour of Australia.
Captain Richie Richardson said: ‘We could go home without a cent.’
Rangers switch
RANGERS' second match in the ‘mini-league’ European Cup stages, against CSKA Moscow, is to be switched from Santander, Spain, and will probably go ahead at a German venue to another venue, probably in Germany, on December 9.
Bills pay-off
BUFFALO BILLS' defense starred in a 26–20 NFL victory over Miami Dolphins, taking the lead in the AFC East division.
Buffalo, 14–3 down at one stage, forced two turnovers and sacked Dan Marino four times.
London calling
FIVE England men — who helped beat South Africa — Will Carling, Rob Andrew, Jason Leonard, Peter Winterbottom and Brian Moore — are in the 34-strong London squad for the ADT Divisional Championship.
Sellars op
LEEDS winger Scott Sellars has had a hernia operation and is aiming to be back by Christmas.
He said: ‘I've had a miserable two years with injuries, but this latest op should do the trick.’
Whyte in shape to do job on Italians
By Graham Fisher
MIDDLESBROUGH defender Derek Whyte thanks his lucky stars that the English Premier League has licked him into shape for the toughest 90 minutes of his football life.
The 24-year-old replaces injured skipper Richard Gough in Scotland's World Cup test against the lira-laden Italians at Ibrox Park tonight convinced that he has already met the equal of their talented attackers.
Whyte, recruited with Chris Morris from Celtic for £1 million in August, said: ‘Playing against top class forwards every week has improved my game.
‘Take Dean Saunders and Dalian Atkinson — they scored three between them against Boro — and Mark Hughes and that fabulous Arsenal strike force.
And I haven't played Alan Shearer yet!
‘I don't think these guys lose anything in comparison against the Baggios and Lentinis.’
Whyte's five-match international career has been stunted since his debut as a teenager.
As manager Andy Roxburgh says: ‘We have been up to our elbows in accomplished defenders.
But Derek is the right age and tomorrow presents a great opportunity for the lad.’
Poised
That goes for the whole Scottish team, poised between the extinction of their American dream and a famous victory.
The mood is similar, somewhere between awe of their opponents and their colossal price tags and the usual infectious optimism.
You can always bank on Ally McCoist to defuse the tension.
Having failed to reach a cross about five yards over his head in training yesterday the irrepressible Rangers marksman clambered on the shoulders of towering team-mate Dave McPherson and chirped: ‘I'll get the next one!’
Scots preparing for conquest are a wonderful bunch, not much different I imagine from those bearded clansmen of the middle ages.
Roxburgh has enjoyed the hype and banter like the next man, but yesterday the job in hand concentrated his mind.
He said: ‘If we lose we shall have a mountain to climb.
I still expect Italy to win this group.
If leaders Switzerland keep the pressure on and Portugal have a good run, life for us will be very complicated.
‘But I'm not wearing a placard saying The End is Nigh.
This game could be won or lost by one piece of magic.
‘But it only needs one or two players to malfunction and we'll be in trouble.
The whole team must be on song.
‘Our preparation has been meticulous.
We have organised for every eventuality and the players feel comfortable with the roles they have been given.’
Scotland: Goram, Malpas, Boyd, McPhearson, Whyte, McLaren, McAllister, McStay, Durrant, Durie, McCoist.
Italy:(probable): Pagliuca, Mannini, Di Chiara, Bianchi, Maldini, Baresi, Lentini, Albertini, Eranio, Baggio, Signori.
Bingham blasts back at Jack
BILLY BINGHAM fired a broadside at Republic of Ireland counterpart Jack Charlton in a World Cup slanging match last night.
Bingham hit out after Charlton had written-off Northern Ireland's chances of qualifying for the finals in the United States in two years.
Northern Ireland, who face Denmark tonight, and the Republic are both in Group Three and Charlton said on Monday: ‘We are certainties to go to the States, the only question is which team comes with us, Denmark or Spain.’
But Bingham retorted: ‘When Jack's nervous he always seems to have a go.
Maybe he's a little bit worried that we are challenging his supremacy.
‘Of course he's entitled to his opinion, but I don't share it and it's too premature to talk about anyone being certainties, or anyone being out of the running.’
Meanwhile, Danish international Henrik Larsen has pleaded with Aston Villa manager Ron Atkinson to rescue him from Italian Serie B side Pisa.
The 26-year-old midfield player, rated at £1.8m, said: ‘I have spoken to Ron and would love to play in the Premier League.’
Northern Ireland (probable): Fettis, Morrow, Worthington, Donaghy, McDonald, Taggart, Magilton, Wilson, Clarke, Gray, Hughes.
Denmark (probable): Schmeichel, Sivebaek, Olsen, Heintze, Rieper, Jensen, Vilfort, Povlsen, Larsen, Laudrup, Christensen.
Pompey eye duo
FORMER Newcastle manager Jim Smith is heading the chase for two of his old players.
The Portsmouth chief is interested in striker Mick Quinn and full-back Mark Stimson.
Meanwhile, Ipswich yesterday signed two players from the Portuguese side Sporting Lisbon for a fee believed to be in the region of Pounds 200,000.
The pair are Yugoslavian Australian midfielder Vlado Bozinoski, who has been on trial at Portman Road, and Bulgarian international striker Bentcho Geuntchev.
Chelsea striker Joe Allon has turned down a record £275,000 transfer to First Division Brentford.
Trigger happy
By Geoff Thomas.
Interview by Mike Walters
SOME people are saying tonight is Ian Wright's last chance to prove himself as an England striker.
I doubt if he'll need another one.
Something tells me he won't pass up this opportunity to establish himself as an international.
To help him do that, manager Graham Taylor's best hope of Wright reproducing his Arsenal club form for England will be to let his free spirit roam across Wembley.
If you try to shackle Ian's natural exuberance, you are taking away one of his biggest strengths and the roving goalscorer will look uncomfortable in a rigid system.
I'm backing Ian to break his duck at international level against Turkey.
And if it happens, it will be the start of an avalanche.
He has already triggered a steep rise in transfer market prices by proving such a bargain at £2.5 million.
Now he must hit the heights with England.
In the dressing room before kick-off, Ian won't need anyone to dangle pieces of raw meat in front of him and make him strain at the leash because he'll be bursting to get stuck into the Turks more than anyone.
If anything, he'll need calming down — and the best way Taylor could achieve that would be to tell him, whatever happens against Turkey tonight, that he'll be in the team for the next five games at least.
Goalscorers are under the microscope more than anyone for England after the retirement of Gary Lineker and that reassurance of a definite period to prove himself would settle Ian.
Keeping the lid on his bubbly personality has always been an important part of managing Ian Wright.
On the team coach to away games when he was with Crystal Palace he couldn't sit still for five minutes.
He was always getting up to wander down the aisles, interfering with the card school or listening in to people's personal stereos.
And he loved to be the centre of attention — just as he will desperately want to be the star attraction at Wembley tonight.
His jokes were always punchy and well-timed — sharp one-liners rather than hackneyed music-hall gags — and his charisma will be a welcome addition to the England dressing room for such an important game.
People tend to forget he's 29 because he has got the enthusiasm and vitality of a teenager.
Hatred
Certainly, I've never met anyone in football with as big a will to win and with such a hatred of losing as Ian.
And although it's a year since he left Selhurst Park, his spirit lives on.
Many of our younger players have inherited his sense of enjoyment and that explains why our heads don't drop and why we're such a happy bunch even though we're near the foot of the Premier League.
That positive attitude is another of Ian's great assets.
Although there has been a great song and dance about his supposedly suspect temperament this season, I can't fault it.
True, he gets himself so wound up at times that he can't help himself.
But when you're a £2.5m striker who's living up to his price-tag as spectacularly as he has done, there are always going to be people out to bring you down a peg or two.
He has been a victim of his own success at Arsenal in terms of his public profile but he's professional enough to curb his celebrations when he scores a goal.
When I arrived at Palace five and a half years ago it wasn't only Ian's gold tooth and charisma that sparkled on the training field.
His skill stood out a mile, too.
Now that ability has been harnessed and he's an England player, it would be a great shame if he was undermined by jealousy or people trying to make an issue out of triviality.
I think a lot of commentators were surprised when Arsenal paid so much money for Ian but his phenomenal strike-rate for them is probably why transfer prices have gone through the roof.
He looks such a snip that it enabled Southampton to command £3.6m for Alan Shearer, Ian's partner in attack tonight and, in my opinion, the best foil for him in England.
There are players now valued in the £2m bracket who can't hold a candle to Ian in terms of ability and George Graham must be thinking he has bought himself a star on the cheap.
Pressure
And although Ian has yet to transfer his club form to the England scene, you can't question his ability to handle the big occasion.
Remember how he fought back from TWO broken legs two years ago and jumped off the bench to score twice against Manchester United in the FA Cup final?
That's his answer to pressure…he loves it.
And if Graham Taylor sticks with the Wright-Shearer partnership, England won't go far wrong in their World Cup qualifying group because both of them are international class.
No one should underestimate Ian's determination to be part of the England scene if we make it to America for the finals in 1994.
He hates the thought of missing out on a big occasion.
When Palace beat Liverpool in the FA Cup semi-final in 1990 at Villa Park, Ian was running up and down the touchline on the final whistle in his plaster cast, joining in the celebrations, broken leg or not.
We all knew then that he wasn't going to miss out on the Cup final for all the world.
That's the measure of the man.
BORN Woolwich, Nov 3, 1963.
HEIGHT 5ft 9in.
WEIGHT 11st 4lb.
Previous jobs Plasterer and labourer
Clubs Ten-em-bee (Sunday League side) 1980–1984
CRYSTAL PALACE 1985–1991 (213 games, 85 goals).
ARSENAL Since Sept 1991, for £2.5 million (49 games, 36 goals).
LEAGUE DEBUT Crystal Palace v Huddersfield, Aug 31, 1985.
ENGLAND DEBUT v Cameroon, Feb 1991. 6 caps, 0 goals.
IAN WRIGHT FACTFILE
Yorath saves best for last
From Ben Bacon in Brussels
RYAN GIGGS has to content himself again with being Wales' not-so-secret weapon here tonight.
Although Wales manager Terry Yorath hails the Manchester United winger as the most brilliant teenager in Britain, he can find no room for him in the starting line-up against Belgium.
So happy is Yorath with the way his team is shaping, he can afford the luxury of having the 19-year-old boy wonder on the substitutes' bench for the World Cup qualifier against the Group Four leaders.
He said: ‘Ryan's got pace, touch and technique — he just can't get into the side.
‘While we're on a run, it's better to have him on the bench.
He can sit there until there's half an hour to go, then we can gamble with the score at 0–0 by sending him on, knowing he's capable of winning the game for us.
He is the ace up my sleeve.’
Keeper Neville Southall, the most capped keeper in Welsh history, believes the Belgians will be scared just seeing Giggs among the substitutes.
‘It must be frightening for them to see Ryan on the bench.
I wouldn't want to be a defender and see him coming on with 20 minutes left after being run ragged by Ian Rush,’ he said.
Confident
Yorath believes it is Wales' most important match for a year and is confident they have nothing to fear from a team with maximum points from four games, having conceded just one goal.
He said: ‘We have seven players on the pitch who can score goals, eight if you include Ryan.
‘I'm not a fool.
I know playing Belgium in Brussels is going to be hard but we've been here before and drawn.’
The key battle is likely to be between brilliant Torino player Enzo Scifo and Welsh skipper Barry Horne, who said: ‘Schifo and Hagi of Romania are probably the best two midfield players in the world.
If I can make him play deep and keep him as far away from our goal as possible the more I'll fancy our chances.’
Football experts on the task facing the home countries
Rob Shepherd
ENGLAND — IF England are to reach the 1994 World Cup finals then they must see off Sepp Piontek's Turkey in style.
Anything less than a convincing victory by Graham Taylor's team will undermine their chances of qualifying from Group 2.
With Norway having taken control of the group, and Holland yet to discover their best form, it is important England get goals as well as two points under their belt.
And although England showed signs of improvement against Norway last month, following their debacle in the European Championship finals in Sweden during the summer, they still have some way to go to ensure a comfortable path to the United States.
If Paul Gascoigne performs, and Ian Wright and Alan Shearer click up front, then I believe England can romp to their best victory since Graham Taylor took over as manager.
My prediction is: England 3, Turkey 0.
Football experts on the task facing the home countries
Graham Fisher
SCOTLAND — SCOTLAND have qualified for the last five World Cup finals, but with only one point from two games they already face an uphill struggle to qualify for a sixth time.
A draw against the Italians at Ibrox will keep them hanging on, while defeat would surely end that proud sequence.
To win, Scotland must score goals.
To draw, they must defend like lions.
Neither premise bears close examination.
Free-scoring Ally McCoist has a modest international record — only 13 goals from 43 games — and no-one else can be relied on to fire the bullets.
And anyone who saw Richard Gough in action against Leeds in the European Cup will appreciate the enormity of his loss at the back.
The Italians are getting jumpy after drawing against the Swiss in Cagliari.
That's a small mercy, but it is unlikely to rescue Scotland tonight.
My prediction is: Scotland 0, Italy 1
Forget about Lineker, says Turk boss
By David Harrison
TURKEY coach Sepp Piontek last night warned England: ‘You'll never replace Gary Lineker.’
Much-travelled Piontek believes England's lack of goals in recent internationals has been caused by pressure on the new crop of strikers.
He said too many comparisons are being made with Lineker and that is unfair on players such as Alan Shearer and Ian Wright.
Piontek said: ‘People are expecting a new Lineker to come through straight away and that is not possible.
You only have to look and see what happened in Germany when Beckenbauer retired, in Brazil when they lost Pele and Holland when they no longer had Cruyff.
‘Lineker scored goals for England for six golden years and he's not there now and people must accept that.
‘There are others being compared to him and that puts pressure on players like Shearer, Wright and Paul Merson because the fans want them to score goals like Lineker did.
‘Maybe there will be someone to fill Lineker's shoes in years to come but at the moment the replacements must be given a chance to do it in their own time.’
Football experts on the task facing the home countries
Ben Bacon
WALES — WALES are confident they can at least produce a repeat of their performance in Belgium 20 months ago, when they earned a draw in a European Championship qualifier.
Defeat would virtually assure the Belgians of a place in the finals in America, while forcing the Welsh to join Czechoslovakia and the unpredictable Romanians in a mad scramble for the second qualifying place.
Romania looked world beaters when they thrashed Wales 5–1 last May, but they dropped a point to the Czechs at the weekend and are notoriously bad away from home.
Wales hope Cyprus, whom they beat last month, can do them a favour by pinching points from their main rivals in the run in.
At least the Welsh, who have taken four points from three games, can look forward to finishing their qualifying campaign with three home games.
My prediction is: Belgium 1, Wales 1.
Football experts on the task facing the home countries
Des Kelly
REPUBLIC OF IRELAND — JACK CHARLTON is certain his Republic of Ireland side will reach the World Cup finals, and right now there is absolutely no reason to question that optimism.
The unbeaten Irish lead Group 3 and have yet to concede a goal — an error-free level of consistency that main rivals Denmark and Spain have so far been unable to match.
Charlton's men have already overcome one hazardous encounter, escaping from Copenhagen last month with a valuable point — which left the Danes still searching for their first win after their opening three games.
The same outcome in Seville tonight would leave Spain with only one win from four games and put the Republic in an almost unassailable position.
Spanish manager Jabier Clemente is set to recall some of his more experienced stars for what is sure to be a closely-contested affair.
Charlton knows Ireland can afford one slip-up, but his side has every chance of upsetting the rhythm of the Spanish and coming away with a result.
My predicition is: Spain 1, Republic of Ireland 1.
Football experts on the task facing the home countries
Tony Kell
NORTHERN IRELAND — A QUIET belief is growing that Northern Ireland can, with the help of other results, push their way unnoticed into the 1994 finals.
Fourteen of the 23 Group Three games played so far have ended in a draw and they are a point behind joint leaders the Republic and Lithuania.
And while Northern Ireland remain unbeaten, they are optimistic.
Billy Bingham's search for new talent, particularly consistent goalscorers, is proving elusive and realistically they are unlikely to beat Peter Schmeichel too many times tonight.
Their strength is team work and a club-like atmosphere that took them to the finals in Spain and Mexico in the 1980s.
While Gerry Taggart, Alan McDonald, Nigel Worthington and Mal Donaghy provide the basis of a sturdy defence, success has always depended on breakaway goals as well.
Bingham's assertion that a draw tonight is ‘more probable than possible’ suggests he will be happy with that result against the European champions, who have yet to score in three games.
My prediction is: Northern Ireland 1, Denmark 1
Vinnie learns hard way
By Mike Walters
VINNIE JONES was last night stunned by a record £20,000 fine and six-month ban, suspended for three years, for lending his name to a controversial football video.
The Wimbledon midfield player was severely punished for his oration in ‘Soccer's Hard Men’, a video in which he describes a host of footballers' dirty tricks.
The shameful catalogue of foul play incidents included pulling the armpit hairs of opposing players, raking boot studs down calves, elbowing opponents, and pulling their private parts.
Jones later apologised over his 25-minute contribution to the tape and promised any profits would go to charity.
But he was still heavily hit by the fine, imposed by a three-man Football Association disciplinary panel, which smashes the record sentence for disrepute charges established by Paul McGrath's £8,500 fine in November 1989.
And the threatened suspension, which will be invoked if Jones is charged with misconduct again before November 1995, dwarfs the nine-match ban incurred by Arsenal's Paul Davis for breaking Glenn Cockerill's jaw four years ago.
After the hearing, Jones said: ‘They have taken their decision.
Now I've got to save up and get it over and done with.
Yes, it's a lot of money to pay — I don't know anything about an appeal.’
Wimbledon owner Sam Hammam and chief executive Dave Barnard accompanied Jones to the two-hour hearing at Lancaster Gate.
After Jones had left in a waiting taxi, Hammam said: ‘We will be appealing.
League regulations do not permit us to pay any money on behalf of Vinnie, except what is in his contract.
‘Vinnie was badly advised over this, and we will stand by him.
He was pushed into it and has learned a lesson.
‘The suspension is not merely hanging over Vinnie, it is hanging over me too.
After all, I am paying his salary, and we can't afford to be without him for six months.
I can't understand this sentence.’
And Hammam added: ‘Any aid for Vinnie has got to come from outside the club.
I feel the fine was highly unjust.
It does not reflect the way this whole thing happened.
‘Vinnie had an agent who did not take the necessary precautions of being able either to edit or vet what was said on the video.
‘Vinnie is only a football player, and he just went and did something which, ideally, he should not have done.
‘He was told in writing that he was only going to be narrating for five minutes of the video, which is not what happened.
‘I think all of this has to do with reputation, and because he is Vinnie Jones.
We had Paul Gascoigne pulling someone's shorts down the other night, and that was deemed to be a prankster at work.
‘When Vinnie Jones had his shorts down, not only did he got fined, but we were fined too.
‘When Vinnie swore the other day in the Blackburn game he became the first player to be sent off for swearing at a fellow professional.
‘But when Gazza said the word beginning with F while he was representing England on TV before the Norway international, nothing was done.
Muscles
‘The FA wanted to flex their muscles but, in this instance, they went over the top.’
Hammam, who dubbed Jones ‘Mosquito Brain’ for getting involved with the video in his Sheffield United days, added: ‘A lot of people have mosquito brains, not just Vinnie.
‘But I will always stand by him, whether he is right or wrong — in this case I think he was tucked up just a bit.’
Jones was paid just £1,600 for his involvement in the video, which has ironically shot into the top 10 and threatens to gross more than £1 million.
After the hearing, at which Newcastle director Gordon McKeag and FA officials Geoff Thompson and Jack Hayward presided, FA spokesman Mike Wilmore issued a statement saying: ‘Vinnie Jones admitted a breach of rule 26.
The FA cannot condone behaviour which inflicts damage upon the image of the game and conflicts with the efforts of the FA, UEFA and FIFA to promote fair play.
‘The FA has therefore fined Mr Jones £20,000 and imposed a suspension for a period of six months, suspended for three years.
‘In reaching its verdict, the commission accepted Mr Jones has issued a press statement apologising for his participation in the video and that he had been misled and badly advised, but that his actions were irresponsible.
‘The commission took account of the fact that Wimbledon Football Club had no part in Mr Jones's involvement in the video.’
Vinnie Jones (Wimbledon) Nov 1992, £20,000 plus six-month ban.
TOP INDIVIDUAL FINES
Paul McGrath (A Villa) Nov 1989, £8,500 for newspaper criticism of former club Man Utd.
Mick Kennedy (Portsmouth) Aug 1987, £5,000 (£2,000 suspended).
Newspaper article.
Brian Clough (Nottm Forest) Feb 1989, £5,000.
Striking spectators.
Graeme Souness (Rangers) May 1990, £5,000.
Breaking touchline ban.
Jim McLean (Dundee Utd) July 1988, £4,000 (plus three-year touchline ban).
Following Scottish Cup semi-final incident.
Give us a smile urges Taylor
By Rob Shepherd
IAN WRIGHT and Alan Shearer tonight go in search of the goals to put the smile back on the face of English football…and keep their fledgling partnership together.
So keen is manager Graham Taylor for Wright, in particular, to fulfil his international potential against Turkey that he has even asked a psychologist to help the Arsenal striker relax before his big night at Wembley.
Taylor wants everyone to be sunny side up after the World Cup qualifier to make up for the fact that no English club sides are left in Europe and give everyone — players and fans — a lift.
So much depends on Wright, still seeking his first England goal, and Shearer, who play together for only the second time.
In Wright's case, Taylor has had sports psychologist John Gardner attached to the squad, in an effort to ease his nerves and bring out his bright side.
‘Ian desperately wants to score,’ he explained.
‘Now I won't come down on him like a ton of bricks if he misses chances but I don't want to see him becoming uptight and letting other aspects of his game suffer if things don't go right — as against Norway.
‘Yes, we have a psychologist with us.
When Ian becomes uptight it can affect his game.
That is something we have chatted about and given him guidance on.
Arrogant
‘He is exciting and unpredictable and while that can make it difficult for others to play with him, it is also one of his great strengths.
‘Alan Shearer is not the same sort of natural goal-scorer as Ian.
He is a strong character, almost arrogant at times, who often looks to set others up.
‘Hopefully they can get to know and read each other 's strengths because I am sure we will create chances.’
England have only beaten the Turks 1–0 in their last two clashes and Wright admitted: ‘The manager has given me another chance, now I'm desperate to repay that faith.
People are bound to miss Gary Lineker but successors like me must score a few and establish reputations of their own.’
Shearer added: ‘I hope we can become a great partnership.
Certainly I feel there are plenty of goals between us.’
Taylor yesterday underlined the lighter mood in the England camp when he kidded journalists: ‘I am afraid Gazza's taken a bad knock and I've drafted in Vinnie Jones…’
He then laughed as the media momentarily gasped.
And at training Paul Gascoigne upstaged that prank after being warned there could be some standing around in chilly weather.
Prank
‘I noticed he had a few extra bits and pieces on.
It wasn't until he asked if he could take some off that I realised he had got himself well wrapped up — with 24 articles of clothing,’ said Taylor.
‘He had 14 shirts and 10 pairs of shorts on.
Still, at least he does what his manager tells him!’
The fun stops during the 90 minutes' play, though, because Taylor wants ‘a good win’.
Much rests on the mercurial skills of Gascoigne.
‘You can't underestimate the role Paul plays in this,’ said Taylor.
If England fail to get it right tonight — 3–0 represents a convincing result — then Taylor will find himself the butt of far harsher jokes.
We're underdogs — Campo
By Mike Allan
AUSTRALIAN wonder wing David Campese will be fully fit to face Wales at Cardiff Arms Park, but believes the world champions won't be going into the game as favourites.
‘I think we are the underdogs this weekend,’ said Campese.
‘We were world champions last year, but all of a sudden people are writing us off.
‘It's going to be very difficult against Wales because they are on the way up and we know we have got to play well to win.’
But the man who has amassed a world record 51 tries in 71 tests also had a warning for the Welsh team.
‘It has taken a long time getting Australian rugby to the top and we aren't about to throw that away in one game,’ he added.
Australia's defeats at Swansea and Llanelli, and only four tries in five matches in Wales, have given new hope to home players and fans only 12 months on from the 38–3 record home defeat at the hands of the Wallabies.
Campese believes Australia have been stifled by their billing as world champions, but he hopes they can shake off the shackles on Saturday.
‘Because we are world champions we don't go out and take as many risks.
We don't seem to go for it,’ he said.
‘We take the soft option.
I like to keep the crowd happy because that's what they pay for.’
Another worry for the tourists is the fitness of second row John Eales.
Although his jarred shoulder is improving, and he has been named in the side for Saturday, he is still only given a 50–50 chance of playing.
The job of taking over the No 10 jersey from injured Australia skipper Michael Lynagh has been handed to his Queeensland understudy Paul Kahl, who will be making his Test debut.
AUSTRALIA: Roebuck; Carozza, Little, Horan, Campese; Kahl, Slattery; Crowley, Kearns (capt), McKenzie, McCall, Eales, Ofahengaue, Gavin, Wilson.
Sevens heat put on England
ENGLAND'S preparation for the Dubai Sevens are amateurish compared with the steely approach of Scotland and Queensland.
Chris Sheasby's England squad yesterday had their first training session in the local conditions — a sand pitch and temperatures of 86 degrees.
By that time, the Scottish team had gone through three practice sessions, while the Aussies from Queensland expect their post-season training to see them to a successful defence of the tournament, which starts today.
‘We have trained for a month since the end of our home season,’ explained Mark Catchpole, son of Aussie legend Ken.
In stark contrast, Sheasby admitted England's build-up had been brief and random.
‘We do not have the chosen squad, and we are here just one day before the tournament,’ he said.
‘But I think we can do fairly well with this strong, young and speedy team.
‘This is another stage in finding players for the strongest squad possible for the World Sevens next April.’
POOL MATCHES: England: Ponsonby (NZ), CIS Bears, Hong Kong.
Scotland: Froggies (Fra), Canada, Orrell.
Crawshay's: Queensland, Grizzlies (US), Sri Lanka.
Scott's double mission
By Tom Lyons
Steffi stunned as Lori hits top gear
By Barry Lucas in New York
WIMBLEDON champion Steffi Graf was recovering last night from one of the biggest shocks of her career.
Lori McNeil, the lowest ranked player in the field, pulled off a 7–6 (7–1), 6–4 first round victory in the Virginia Slims Championships for her biggest triumph in nine years on the women's tennis circuit.
It was McNeil's first win over Graf and her first victory on the carpet surface of Madison Square Garden, while her German opponent went into the match having won her last four tournaments, including a victory over McNeil.
‘There was nothing I could do,’ conceded Graf.
‘Lori played very well and really deserved to win.
‘She played good tennis and I didn't play well enough in either set when it was important.
Tough
Bank on Billy
By Henry Rix
2.40:FORMER Champion Hurdle hero MORLEY STREET should not be opposed.
He was tremendously impressive when beating Granville Again at Cheltenham last Sunday, and has plenty in hand at his best.
I would not be surprised to see smart Flat performer Lift And Load make the hot favourite work hard for his success.
However, Richard Hannon's gelding cannot be fancied with any confidence after two disappointing runs on the level recently.
3.10:NORTHERN raider Sybillin was a very useful hurdler and hacked up on his debut over fences at Uttoxeter earlier this month.
But I prefer BILLY BATHGATE, most impressive on his chasing debut at Kempton in October.
He travelled strongly and jumped fluently that day, and looks sure to develop into one of the season's top novices.
What's In Orbit ran a blinder when runner-up to the useful Travado at Newbury, but was beaten when falling two out last time.
3.40:TOP weight Annicombe Run was not disgraced when fifth to the leniently-treated Mighty Mogul at Chepstow a couple of weeks ago.
But I can't see her beating the progressive NODFORM WONDER who has won with his head in his chest twice recently.
He bolted up by five lengths (could have been 20) at Kelso last time, and is very well in on just a 10lb higher mark.
Jenny Pitman's Mailcom is also not badly treated but is not certain to stay.
Oaks on Aintree trail
TRAINER Gordon Richards yesterday declared the Grand National as the principle long term target for Twin Oaks after the towering steeplechaser notched another victory round his favourite Haydock Park circuit.
It was a seventh Haydock victory for Twin Oaks from eight visits to the course, and the performance delighted Richards.
‘He's done it brilliantly again and he'll be better for that race I can tell you,’ he said.
Twin Oaks is likely to miss the Hennessy Cognac Gold Cup on Saturday week and come back to Haydock in three weeks time.
‘I'll be entering Twin Oaks for the three miles Tommy Whittle Chase,’ said Richards.
Remittance Man is a definite starter for the Peterborough Chase at Huntingdon next Tuesday.
Aussie boys need break
By Tony Roche
THE Australian Rolls Royce that purred out of Twickenham 12 months ago, the World Cup secured in its boot, chugs into Cardiff Arms Park tomorrow badly in need of a two-year service.
The once ‘Wonderful Wallabies’ are weary of touring, depleted by injuries and running out of gas.
Wales welcome their arch-humiliators with open jaws, the scent of an overdue kill growing in nostrils that are flaring again under the inspirational coaching of Alan Davies.
It was Bob Dwyer's quality machine that mowed down a pathetic Wales 18 months ago, a staggering 63–6 blitzing in Brisbane.
Enter Davies and fresh hopes, stilled by a record 38–3 home defeat during the World Cup.
Since then the Aussies have made the mistake of attempting one lap too far without a pit-stop.
Dwyer, however, disagrees: ‘Sure we have experienced an extremely demanding schedule, particularly over the past year which took in the World Cup, but this provides terrific experience for the younger players.’
And leaves the old ones clapped out?
‘A guy can suffer an injury on the first match of a tour or go through a tough schedule without as much as a bump.
I do not accept that the players are jaded.
I believe they are standing up to this tour well.
‘We've played some good sides and the young guys have learned some valuable lessons for the future.’
Tomorrow's international is Dwyer's 51st as Australian coach, one for every year of his to date and he kicks off his second half-century seeking his 31st victory.
His players will run through the pain barrier without question, but his players are feeling the pain of sustained combat.
‘We've become a travelling circus’, said David Campese, ‘moving around the world without taking a real break.’
The world's most gifted player, never afraid to speak his mind, added: ‘When you are world champions, everyone pulls out the stops, everyone wants to beat you.
‘Make no mistake, we will respond to the occasion again tomorrow.
We are the champions and people are entitled to expect us to play as such.
But you need to recharge the batteries now and again.’
Crushing
The Wallabies have become rugby union's version of the Harlem Globetrotters, playing 32 matches since that crushing of Wales, including 18 internationals.
A punishing schedule that has left the engine spluttering and the chief mechanic unable to furnish suitable replacement parts.
The heart of the team departed when scrum half and captain Nick Farr-Jones announced his retirement after the Springboks had been crushed 26–3 in Cape Town last August.
The soul followed when fly-half Michael Lynagh dislocated his left shoulder during the recent destruction of Ireland in Dublin.
The body needs a rest.
Eales exits
AUSTRALIA'S John Eales has pulled out of Saturday's international in Cardiff, giving Wales yet another huge shot of confidence in their bid to topple the troubled world champions.
The giant Eales, the undisputed No 1 line-out specialist in world rugby, will be replaced by the inexperienced Garrick Morgan after finally conceding his shoulder injury would not recover in time.
Wales coach Alan Davies admitted: ‘John Eales's absence will certainly disrupt Australia and it does give us a bit of an extra chance of winning some line-out ball.
‘But although he's been a key force for them, we have to remember that they have a number of good jumpers ready to come in as replacements.
‘They are still favourites for this game, whatever anyone says.
In a sense, as world champions, they have to win.’
Buzzing again
By Adrian Holloway
BARRY McGUIGAN is trying to fill the hole in his life.
Next week the feet that danced on canvas will stamp on pedals in the Lombard RAC Rally, but even the loudest engine roar cannot drown out the fear that haunts him.
Starting at Chester on Sunday, McGuigan will scuttle through Britain's forests in his Vauxhall Nova for four days, chasing away the thought that he may lose every penny he battled for in the ring if his appeal against £450,000 libel damages plus legal costs fails.
The former world featherweight champion has endured a traumatic eight months since the High Court awarded ex-manager Barney Eastwood damages following McGuigan's criticism of the ill-fated defence against Texan Steve Cruz in June 1986.
Pressure
McGuigan says his wife, Sandra, and their four children have been living on a knife-edge since Eastwood's libel action.
‘It's put tremendous pressure on me and on my family,’ he said.
‘I could lose everything I've earned and fought for all my life to get where I got.
It could all be taken away if I lose my appeal.’
Sinking back into his chair, McGuigan makes a conscious effort to suppress his emotions.
When Cruz, a substitute opponent, beat him in the Nevada desert, the Ulsterman could never have guessed that six years later, from a Belfast court room, he would receive a bigger blow than the Texan ever dealt him.
He admits: ‘The verdict was such a shock, but it's only as time goes by you realise what the implications are.
‘It's a worrying time for me.
This saga has gone on for quite some time.
I'm very concerned about the appeal and on top of everything my father-in-law has become seriously ill in Ireland.’
But McGuigan is still fighting.
He could have prepared for his appeal in the New Year by moping in his Kent mansion, but instead the man once hailed as the ‘Clones Cyclone’ wants to recapture the thrill of the ring in Britain's most gruelling motor-sport event.
‘I've got to get on with my life.
I'm putting my faith in these appeal judges and there's nothing I can do to alter their verdict.
Ideal
‘Rallying helps me forget about the possibility of losing the appeal.
It's ideal because this kind of driving requires total concentration and utter commitment.
‘I'm only 31 so I'm young enough to still have a career as a rally driver ahead of me.
I love the danger.’
The RAC Rally's 16,000 miles of rutted and gravel tracks are far removed from McGuigan's deafening fight nights in the mid-1980s, when he was applauded as the only man who could walk down the Falls and Shankhill Roads and be welcomed in both.
Few will could ever forget those primeval nights in the Kings Hall, Belfast, when McGuigan, the epitome of Irish charm outside the ring, would set about his opponent furiously, as his father Pat sang Danny Boy to the crowd standing on their wooden seats.
‘You see why there's so many comebacks?
You know why half of that is?’
McGuigan asks with an unfading twinkle in his eye.
‘Sure they miss the money, but one of the most important things is that they miss the buzz.
Nobody can replace that — buzz, but for me, rallying is the nearest thing to being high again.
‘Before I went in the ring, I had to spend half a day just cooling down my adrenaline.
Then when I entered the hall, everyone went clean bonkers.
And as soon as the bell went I could release my energy.
‘That was something I missed terribly when I retired and doing this race for the first time is a way of replacing it.’
A regular TV commentator and after-dinner speaker, McGuigan also passes on what he learnt in the ring through motivational seminars for businesses.
But he maintains that boxing is not his favourite sport, saying without hesitation: ‘If my father had had the budget for it when I was young, I would have been doing motor racing.’
Passion
McGuigan's passion for driving has taken him from circuit racing to rally cross, in which he achieved 12th place in the British Championships last year.
Nevertheless he faces a huge step up when he sets out from Chester in 123rd position in a race that will decide the final destination of the FIA World Rally Championship, which must go to either France's Didier Auriol, or Carlos Sainz of Spain, or to last year's RAC winner Juha Kankkunen.
The Manchester-based Alsecure team have backed McGuigan by giving him a free drive in the rally, plus an attempt at next year's British Championship, but experienced co-driver Allan Whittaker is cautious about the Irishman's chances.
‘He wants to give everything all the time.
In a boxing ring that's fine, but you can't do that day and night for four days.
We both know we've got to get round this event.
‘This is a team sport, and if he doesn't listen to me, I'll either get out of the car or I'll be physical with him, because that's the only language he understands.
‘I'm thinking of carrying a small baseball bat in the car.’
With McGuigan's steel resolve, it would probably disintegrate on impact.
Champ snubs £8m Lewis bid
By Frank Ward
WORLD heavyweight champion Riddick Bowe has turned down an Pounds 8 million offer to defend his title against Lennox Lewis.
Milt Chwasky, a lawyer for Bowe's manager Rock Newman, claimed Lewis's manager, Frank Maloney, had faxed an offer for the fight to take place in London in the spring.
But he added: ‘It's absolutely ridiculous.
There was a fax offering $12m.
Who ever heard of negotiating through a fax?
‘It's way too little.
There's much more money in the United States.
This guy's panicking.’
Offer
Many people connected to the heavyweight game in the US believe a Bowe-Lewis fight will take place next year — but in America, most likely in Las Vegas.
Before Lewis became the No 1 challenger by beating Donovan ‘Razor’ Ruddock, his camp had signed an agreement with Bowe's representatives stating the winners of the fight and last Friday's Bowe-Evander Holyfield bout would meet next for the undisputed heavyweight title.
‘The offer was faxed to Rock yesterday,’ said Kathy Duva, whose husband, Dan, is the head of Main Events, the promoter for Lewis and Holyfield.
She added: ‘It's more up to Rock than anybody else.
We can't schedule a fight between Lennox Lewis and Riddick Bowe until Bowe tells us he wants to fight Lewis.
At this point I don't think they have made that decision.
‘Because he turned down this one offer, I don't think that means he's turned down the fight.’
Even before Bowe took the title from Holyfield, Newman was threatening to break the agreement and have Bowe fight George Foreman before Lewis.
The WBC, one of boxing's three main governing bodies, said it would strip Bowe of its version of the title if the new champion did not honour the agreement to fight Lewis.
Reilly warning
By Ray French
MAL REILLY, the Great Britain and England rugby league coach, believes next week's Anglo-Welsh clash at Swansea will give the home players a chance to prove he was wrong for not taking them to Australia in the summer.
John Devereux and Kevin Ellis toured with the Lions, but there were a number of unlucky and disgruntled Welshmen left behind.
‘A couple of Welsh players went to Australia, but there were several others who missed out,’ said Reilly.
‘They will have a point to prove to me that they should have been on the tour.
This game is the perfect opportunity for them.
Paul Moriarty, Jonathan Griffiths and Ian Marlow in particular are outstanding players at the top of their form at the moment.’
Reilly added: ‘I've instilled into the England players that if they take this game lightly they could end up with egg on their faces.
‘Wales have got some quality players, especially up front.
We are in for a tough time.’
It will be the first meeting between the two teams since 1984 when England won easily at Ebbw Vale.
Salford wing Phil Ford is the only survivor from that encounter and he will be playing before a near full-house at the Vetch Field.
All seats have been sold and the 11,000 attendance from the games against Papua New Guinea and France are set to be exceeded.
The only problem facing Welsh coach Clive Grffiths is injury to key players.
Jonathan Davies and Barry Williams have been ruled out but Paul Moriarty and Kevin Ellis are likely to be fit.
‘We are always on a knife-edge with injuries because we have such a small squad,’ said Griffiths.
Salford prop David Young has been appointed to lead the side in the absence of Davies.
England in command
ENGLAND shrugged off the loss of injured captain Chris Sheasby to beat CIS Bears 24–10, Hong Kong 22–12 and Ponsonby (NZ) 26–0 and qualify for the quarter-finals of the Dubai Sevens rugby union tournament, where they face the Bahrain Warblers.
Grunfeld joy
AMANDA GRUNFELD enjoyed one of the best wins of her career yesterday when she beat top-seed, Italian Laura Golarsa, 6–2, 7–6 in the quarter-finals of the Texaco Challenger indoor event at Nottingham.
The 25-year-old Manchester left-hander fought hard for victory after losing control when leading by a set and 4–1.
Golarsa, a Wimbledon quarter-finalist in 1989, took four games running to move 5–4 ahead with her service to follow.
Linford tops
LINFORD CHRISTIE and Sally Gunnell, Britain's Olympic track gold medallists, have been voted top sporting personalities for 1992 by the Sports Writers' Association of Great Britain.
Ford sign on
FORD, rejected as sponsors by the Premier League, yesterday became part of a £1.2m package which will ensure ITV recoup almost a third of the £4m they paid for exclusive coverage of Rangers' European Cup ties.
Luton swoop
Luton last night swooped to sign Southend United striker Ian Benjamin after agreeing to sell Steve Claridge back to Cambridge United.
The fee for Benjamin will be settled by a tribunal.
Coach Ditka is a grizzly Bear
By David Tossell
THE Chicago Bears are doing coach Mike Ditka's dodgy ticker no good at all.
Ditka, with a history of heart problems, has seen his team's NFL record slump to 4–6 with three consecutive defeats — and he isn't taking it lying down.
During last Sunday's defeat at Tampa Bay, the fiery coach raged on the sideline at kicker Kevin Butler.
There were similar scenes earlier in the year involving quarterback Jim Harbaugh.
Butler has refused to discuss his run-in, other than to reveal Ditka called him ‘gutless’ and ‘mentally weak, the worst kicker in the league.’
Blamed
A forgiving Harbaugh, meanwhile, has attempted to explain his coach's erratic behaviour.
‘Coach Ditka can't walk across the lines and play football,’ he said.
‘He gets blamed a lot.
He's doing all he can, but we're not executing.
‘Everybody's battling.
We're so close to getting the job done, but we keep coming up short.
We have to stop the bleeding and get a win.
It's frustrating.’
Ditka, whose attacks on his players and the press are legendary, reacted to the latest setback by snarling: ‘At least we've made somebody happy — the malcontents and the lousy people in the media.’
He also had to be pulled away from the stands after getting into a shouting match with a fan.
‘He called me a name and I called him a name,’ said Ditka.
‘I'm not going to be a punching bag for any jerk.’
With his team having their worst season since 1983, Ditka's first as coach, speculation is growing he will bow out at the end of the year.
He appears unlikely to go quietly.
SUNDAY: Atlanta at Buffalo; Cleveland at Minnesota; Detroit at Cincinnati; Green Bay at Chicago; Houston at Miami; Indianapolis at Pittsburgh; Philadelphia at NY Giants; NY Jets at New England; Dallas at Phoenix; Denver at LA Raiders; San Francisco at LA Rams; Tampa Bay at San Diego; Kansas City at Seattle.
MONDAY: Washington at New Orleans.
Wharton woe
HENRY WHARTON, the British and Commonwealth super-middleweight champion, is expected to enter hospital within the next few days to undergo an operation on his troublesome right hand.
Quinn makes top flight move
John Wardle
MICK QUINN made a stunning switch from Newcastle reserves to the Premier League as he joined Coventry on a month's loan yesterday.
Quinn is set to make his debut against Manchester City tomorrow as he bids to clinch a permanent transfer to Highfield Road.
‘It would be a dream move at this stage of my career,’ said the 30-year-old striker.
Coventry manager Bobby Gould, who moved in after Quinn was transfer-listed earlier this week, would have to pay about Pounds 200,000 to land him.
And Gould said: ‘Quinn's scoring record speaks for itself.
He's got five in six games for Newcastle this season and has scored at every club he's played for.
I have discussed with Kevin Keegan the possibility of a permanent transfer.’
And Quinn added: ‘Bobby told me he needs somebody to put the ball in the net.
I told him I'm his man.
‘I honestly believe I can score goals at any level and I plan to prove it in the next month.
‘I had one season in the old First Division with Portsmouth and it's great to get another opportunity to show what I can do against the best in the country.
It will certainly be a dramatic change of scenery after spending the last few weeks in the reserves.’
Quinn has scored more than 70 goals for United since his £680,000 transfer from Portsmouth in 1989.
He said: ‘I've had three unbelievable years at Newcastle and take some marvellous memories away with me.’
Ace Goran plays new ball game
By Giles Smith in Frankfurt
GORAN IVANISEVIC last night won his way into the semi-finals of the ATP World Championships here with an impressive triumph over world No 1 Jim Courier.
The Croat world No 4 totally dominated a curiously out-of-sorts Courier to win 6–3, 6–3 in only 12 minutes over the hour.
The American looked shattered at the end — it was his third career defeat at the hands of 21-year-old Ivanisevic and easily the most decisive.
Afterwards a jubilant victor said: ‘Everybody always says I am just a big server.
Today I took on the world No 1, and that's not easy, and beat him from the back of the court.
‘I don't have to prove to anyone that I am not only a serve and volleyer.
I don't have to prove to anyone that I'm a good all-round tennis player.
Courier agreed, saying: ‘Tonight he was very, very good.
He really came up with the goods.
He played so well.’
Upset
Ivanisevic now joins Pete Sampras from the other group of four in the semis.
They'll be joined by the winner of today's eagerly-awaited clash between long-time Wimbledon rivals, Stefan Edberg and Boris Becker.
But who comes through as the fourth semi-finalist is much more complicated.
It could be the new wonderkid of world tennis, Richard Krajicek, who yesterday staged another major upset by beating world No 5 Michael Chang.
But only if he beats Ivanisevic today and Courier loses his match with Chang.
However, if Courier wins, it'll be decided on how many sets each has dropped during the competition.
But if both lose, even Chang could go through, again depending on sets lost.
As tournament organisers were getting out their calculators, spectators were still marvelling at Ivanisevic's superb performance.
While he's often only known for number of aces he blasts — 929 so far this year — last night his all-round game was on show and he served only six aces.
He frequently had Courier crashing to the ground or flailing hopelessly as the balls flew past him.
Almost as impressive was 20-year-old Krajicek's 3–6, 6–3, 7–6 (7–4) defeat of Chang, because he was hobbling with a knee injury for more than two thirds of the match.
Fell
He fell heavily when 4–1 down in the first set, needed several minutes of treatment before deciding to carry on, lost the first set, but then came back to win the next two — all the time nursing his knee with an ice-pack between games.
‘In a funny sort of way the injury helped.
I had to get more big serves in.
‘I had to play bigger points from the back of the court because I had to be more relaxed because I was worried about what I had done to myself,’ he said.
Knighton blasts United
David Alexander
MANCHESTER UNITED were yesterday accused of throwing away the League title because they are too concerned with making money.
United put profits before results last season and it cost them the Championship.
The attack came from former director Michael Knighton on the eve of what will be a stormy Old Trafford annual meeting.
Knighton, now owner of Carlisle United, blamed the board for allowing Leeds to take the title, saying: ‘United had money in the bank and should have spent it on a striker at Christmas.
‘If they'd done that, they would have won the Championship.’
United's goalscoring slowed significantly in the second half of the season, but no move was made for a striker until £1 million Dion Dublin arrived in August.
‘United have got to forsake the City view and forget profit,’ added Knighton.
‘The Stock Exchange is alien to what football is all about.
‘When you have money you have to spend it on players and forget profit.’
Rebel shareholders are expected to give officials a rough ride today, reflecting views of United fans angry over the club's financial policy.
Family trouble
BIRMINGHAM manager Terry Cooper last night sold his son, Mark, to Fulham for £40,000, four days after a blazing family row.
The 23-year-old midfielder was seen to be verbally at odds with his father after being substituted at Reading on Sunday during Birmingham's 1–0 FA Cup defeat.
Cooper jnr, who followed his father to St Andrew's from Exeter in September last year, had a trial with Liverpool earlier in the season.
Alan McLeary's proposed £400,000 transfer to Wimbledon following a six-match loan period has been called off because Dons manager Joe Kinnear has been told he must sell first.
But Wimbledon defender John Scales will make his comeback at Middlesbrough tomorrow after being out for six weeks with a groin injury.
Meanwhile, Oldham's £200,000 deal with Manchester City for midfielder Mark Brennan may be off — because they can't raise the cash.
Capriati puts win in focus
By Barry Lucas in New York
JENNIFER CAPRIATI, looking sharp as a pin in defeating Helena Sukova in straight sets, was actually lucky to see anything at all.
The 16-year-old forgot her contact lenses at her hotel and only a desperate delivery in the nick of time saved her from an embarrassing night at the Virginia Slims Championships.
‘What happened?
I just forgot them,’ giggled Capriati, acting every bit the part of a dizzy teenager.
‘The guy from the hotel had to make a mad dash over here, that's for sure .’
Capriati, the seventh seed, put her lenses in just five minutes before the start and went on to Madison Square Garden's blue carpet to beat Sukova 7–6, 6–1 to reach the quarter-finals.
Missed
‘I only wear them when I really need to see,’ said Capriati, who first used lenses about a year ago.
‘I just can't see far away at all, and at night everything is blurry, especially indoors.
‘I would have probably lost every point, swinged and missed if I didn't have them.’
Capriati showed a little bit of rust from an eight-week lay-off, but her big first serve consistently registered 100mph and she said: ‘I felt a lot better in the second set, I got into it a lot more.’
Staying motivated for matches has been a problem for the teenager, who is trying to juggle her tennis with more normal aspects of life in Florida.
‘I wasn't very motivated on a lot of my matches.
I think I could have done better if I had a different attitude,’ she said.
Aside from her gold medal triumph at the Barcelona Olympics, Capriati said it has been a disappointing year on the court and gave herself a ‘C’ grade for her results.
After reaching the semi-finals at Wimbledon and the US Open last year, Capriati did not get past the quarters at the Australian, French and Wimbledon championships and then made her earliest exit at the US Open.
‘I'd play a lot more if I wasn't in school,’ said Capriati, who won just one tour event in 1992.
‘If I could totally devote myself to tennis maybe that would help and I'd be more into my tennis, but I'm not that way.
‘I like to do other things.
I think I'd miss my friends and the school atmosphere and the chance to be normal.’
Crushed
Capriati now meets Gabriella Sabatini, who crushed American Amy Frazier 6–0, 6–2.
The Argentinian already has quarter-final victories this year over the young American in Sydney and at Wimbledon, but she said: ‘It will be a very difficult match.’
Arantxa Sanchez Vicario sent Zina Garrison to her 11th defeat in 13 matches, 7–6 (7–0), 6–1, to set up a last eight date with fourth seed Martina Navratilova.
Tiriac goes to war
From Giles Smith in Frankfurt
Shilts offer
PLYMOUTH player-manager Peter Shilton has offered to put his hand in his pocket to fund another loan signing at Home Park.
Shilton is known to have had transatlantic talks with chairman Dan McCauley, on a business trip Stateside, and offered to put his money where his mouth is.
‘I've made an offer to the club to pay for a player on loan myself,’ said Shilton.
‘It is clear we need to sell and bring in a fair amount of money before we can think of buying again.
‘But I would like to bring in another player on loan to cover our injuries in the short term.
‘If things are tight financially, I would be prepared to cover the wages of the new player.
‘I'm very keen to get success at the club, and I want to do everything I can to bring it about.
‘I'm like the rest of the fans.
I want to get to the top of the table as quickly as possible, and we need to add to the squad.’
Hignett hunt
David Harrison
CREWE are fighting a losing battle to hang on to Craig Hignett, their free-scoring midfield player who is being hailed as the new David Platt.
Newcastle United are among a clutch of clubs chasing the 22-year-old, who has already scored 15 goals this season.
Although Crewe are reluctant to sell, Hignett now seems certain to follow in the footsteps of Platt, Rob Jones and Geoff Thomas, who all moved on to win international honours after launching their first team careers at Gresty Road.
West Ham, Manchester City, Middlesbrough and Crystal Palace are in the hunt.
Fitting return
By Giles Smith
IF YOU want to be the Football League's top scorer, get yourself a top athletics coach to make you really fit.
That's the secret ingredient which sensational Portsmouth striker Guy Whittingham added to his armoury last summer — and with 20 goals this season, four ahead of nearest challenger Alan Shearer, it seems to have worked.
While most top footballers were taking a well-earned rest, Whittingham put himself in the hands of Port Solent manager Avrel Lowe, who helped guide Kriss Akabusi, Roger Black and Todd Bennett glory.
‘I scored 24 goals in my first season with Portsmouth, 20 in my second, but only 13 last year,’ explained Whittingham, 28, himself a former physical training instructor as an Army corporal.
‘That was mainly because of a lot of niggly little injuries.
So I decided to get really fit this season before pre-season training, and Avrel seems to have done the trick.
The goals just keep coming.’
Lowe put him through an intensive course of twice-a-week sprint training and night hill-running.
Whittingham says: ‘I got a real stamina bank built up during the summer and, once I started scoring goals, my self-confidence was sky-high.
It really made all difference.’
Whittingham joined Pompey four years ago after buying himself out of the Army for £450.
Now he unashamedly hopes his new fitness and the goal-glut will bring him Premier League football.
‘Whether that's with Portsmouth next season or with another big club, I don't really care,’ he said.
Elegance
‘But I came late into the first-class game, I'm 28 now and I really want to be in the big time before I end my career.’
Portsmouth manager Jim Smith has slapped a £1.75 million tag on his prize asset and has half-jokingly suggested the lack of interest might have something to do with Whittingham's ‘lack of elegance’.
But Whittingham countered: ‘It's got nothing to do with elegance if you are putting in the goals.
‘But to be honest, I am a bit surprised there hasn't been more interest considering how many I am scoring.
‘I think it may have more to do with my age — but I do feel I have got four or five years more at the top level in the game and I would love to perform at the top level of the Premier League.
‘It may happen anyway — Portsmouth are good enough to get promotion this year and we've had a number of really impressive wins.’
This story of a player's the striker's move to the top of nation's goalscoring charts doesn't fit the normal footballing script.
Joining the Army at 17-and-a-half, the young Whittingham was really only interested in playing sport for fun.
But soon his ability was noticed and a highly successful run in the Army team led to spells with non-League clubs like Oxford City, Waterlooville and, finally, Vauxhall Conference side Yeovil where he scored 20 times in just over half a season back in 1989.
That attracted Pompey, and Whittingham explained: ‘I decided to buy myself out for £450 and take the plunge — I'm glad to say Portsmouth did pay me back the money — and I've never really looked back.
‘If I'd started at 17 or 18, who knows what I might have achieved.
‘But I have no regrets.
The Army prepares you for life, it makes you grow up and learn discipline.
It certainly wasn't a wasted six-and-a-half years.’
Prepare
Nor has he wasted his spare time in the time with Pompey.
Two years ago he took a diploma in leisure management at Southampton University and last year added a course in computing at Portsmouth's Highbury College.
‘You have to look ahead to the time when you leave football, and I wanted to prepare for a life in sport and leisure management,’ he said.
‘These days everyone uses computers, and I didn't want to look an idiot if I told people I didn't have a clue how to work one!’
For the moment though — in between looking after 15-month-old son Joss while wife Martha works as a teacher — he's simply enjoying a fabulous season.
Tomorrow John Aldridge and Tranmere visit Fratton Park and you'd get decidedly short odds on the chances of a goal from either of them!
Dream Ticket
By David Alexander
HE'S currently the most successful manager in the First Division, though that remains one of football's best-kept secrets.
Forget the big names.
It's not Kevin Keegan, Glenn Hoddle, Billy Bonds, Brian Little or big-spending Arthur Cox at Derby.
It's Alan Buckley, a little fellow with a big dream that could yet become a startling Premier League reality.
Buckley's Grimsby Town have won five and drawn one of their last six to ease within sight of the famous names at the top — and nothing would give him greater satisfaction than to leave them behind at the end of the season.
Buckley's admiration for his players is immense.
But as a manager he's come up the hard way and is burning to make the point that little guys get no favours.
‘You know the manager I really admire?
Ron Atkinson.
Not because he's big time with a name and an image, but because he's learned his trade.
‘He did it at Kettering, at Cambridge and West Brom before he ever got to Manchester United.
His teams have always played football.’
There's not a trace of bitterness about Peter Shilton, Trevor Francis and Kenny Dalglish, who walked into top jobs, but he states a case for the unknown soldiers of football.
‘Look at John King at Tranmere, who's come from non-League.
He's taken them from the old Fourth to the top three in the First Division.
Grounding
‘He's worked bloody hard to get Tranmere where they are, yet do you ever here John King mentioned when a big job comes along?
It irks you sometimes.
I think managers should have a proper grounding.
‘You have to wonder how some of the big names would have coped if they had taken over at Tranmere — or at this place four years ago.’
That was when Buckley arrived from Kettering, with Grimsby in Division Four, just seven players on the staff and a debt of £850,000 that someone had forgotten to mention at the job interview.
Now they are eighth in Division One with the debt at £200,000 and big clubs tracking their young players like 18-year-old left-back Peter Handyside.
And it's all been done by getting the ball down on the floor.
Grimsby have built a reputation for playing the right way.
‘One thing about those famous managers, they like to watch us,’ Buckley smiles.
‘We beat Newcastle at their place and Kevin Keegan said nice things about us afterwards.
‘He didn't have to do that, but what he said was true.
They play good football but we were better than them on the day.
‘There's no team in the Leagues that tries to play football more than us.
I guarantee that.
That's how we train here, we play football — all the time.’
Now he wants to test himself at the top: ‘I'm as ambitious as the next man.
I'd like to manage at the very highest level and pit my wits against the best.
‘I love working with players, and I'd like to do that with the best, though I've got smashing players here.
‘I was asked for the first time last week what I'd do if we got into the Premier League.
It doesn't bear thinking about.
I think I'd have to pack up.
Sacked
‘Newcastle and Derby are on a different planet to us financially.
But not on Saturday's.
We're on the same pitch then, so we give them a game and that would apply in the Premier League.’
He first became a player-manager at 28 and in his time the 41-year-old Buckley has won three promotions, the Bob Lord trophy with Kettering — and been sacked by Walsall after making them the highest scoring team in the four Divisions.
That's what you call a grounding, and it's what makes him confident if he does get to meet Big Ron at Villa Park next season.
Saviour Paul put on a pedestal
Roy Collins
WHEN you've dragged two successive bosses from burning office blocks, you're entitled to expect more than a departmental memo by way of thanks.
Paul Gascoigne, having pulled both Bobby Robson and Graham Taylor from the flames, looked like still being viewed by the head man more as a fireman than a suitable chief executive for England Football Club Limited.
Very Limited before Gascoigne.
So Taylor's announcement that he's to put his tactical paperwork in the office shredder and hand over the complete accounts ledger to Gascoigne is the most encouraging statement for English football since the surgeon passed Gazza's knee A1.
Unlike Robson, who was uneasy with the concept of genius housed in a kindergarten, Taylor had already accepted that if you want his creative input, you take him water pistol and all.
Now Taylor has shed his prejudice and some of his own previously inviolate authority in a move that suggests a leap forward in his managerial style at Lancaster Gate.
Until yesterday, Taylor would concede only that Gascoigne MIGHT be England's best player, which is a bit like saying that Linford Christie might be our best sprinter.
This was compounded by an insane suggestion that rather than the England team owing their cheering 4–0 win over Turkey to Gascoigne, he owed his performance to them.
The other midfield players, it was said, were employed merely as Gazza's minders.
For a start, Gazza needs minders like Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Secondly, if England's minders were fit to work at a half decent night club, how come their client was left rolling in the gutter early in the game?
England, perhaps because of the muck-and-bullets, all lads together wartime analogy that continues to dominate our sporting thinking, are suspicious of anyone seen to be climbing above his station.
Now, finally, Taylor is urging someone to climb above the heap.
Other nations always have.
The Dutch, a team of brilliant individuals in 1974, had no problem deferring to Johann Cruyff as the brightest star of all.
Germany's merely aristocratic performers happily bent the knee to Kaiser Franz Beckenbauer.
More recently, France saw no contradiction between Platini's autocratic leadership on the field and the spirit of esprit de corps.
Diego Maradona of Argentina carried not just his team but the aspirations of a poor, struggling nation on his broad shoulders.
Given our increasing economic problems, Gazza's new position may soon be celebrated in the same light.
Gascoigne is the first Englishman to fill the role since Bobby Charlton, a man whose absence from a team sheet spread dismay among team-mates and supporters alike.
Equally, his inclusion lifted all around him.
And it's no coincidence that England captain Stuart Pearce and full-back partner Lee Dixon, showed signs of recovering from personal slumps with Gascoigne in the team.
It was no coincidence, either, that Paul Ince had his best game for England.
Nor that Carlton Palmer's running became more in context with the team pattern, rather than springing from maverick impatience.
Similarly, Ian Wright and Alan Shearer took encouragement from Gascoigne and the better service that his comeback has promised.
Any team must have balance.
But with Gazza at one end of the scales, even a pound of turnips at the other end will come close to achieving that.
Taylor pointed out that pride and eagerness to play for England had been restored these past two games.
He now clearly concedes that this, too, has everything to do with the man in the No 8 shirt.
Gascoigne, himself, shows signs of maturity on the pitch, if not off it.
He's needed to adopt a quieter, more thoughtful approach both to protect his knee on comeback and to adapt to Italian football.
It's a role that also brings team-mates into play more often and more decisively, most notably on Wednesday when a brilliant flick sent away Wright to make the second goal.
The Gazza of old would have been tempted to flick that ball in the air and juggle away an outstanding chance for his team.
Bobby Robson once said, more in defiance than belief, that Gascoigne could be his Maradona.
Now Taylor is openly inviting him to become so in what is a sign of both player and manager coming of age.
More precious than the crown jewels
By Rob Shepherd
PAUL GASCOIGNE has become the most indispensable player in the history of the English team…and, thankfully, Graham Taylor recognises the fact.
Not even the great talents of the past — Stanley Matthews, Johnny Haynes, Bobby Charlton right through to Bryan Robson — have held such a massive influence on their team as Gascoigne now exerts.
Taylor knows it and so do the players.
‘They should make him a national treasure,’ said Ian Wright.
‘He's more precious to us than the crown jewels.’
Co-striker Alan Shearer added: ‘We can't really do without him — he's irreplaceable.
He's a natural, a one-off.
No-one else has his skills.’
There is no doubt, despite the euphoria surrounding England's 4–0 disposal of Turkey and the impressive all-round team display that went with it, that if you take Gascoigne out of the equation, you are left with an ordinary team.
He might not have thought he deserved the Man of the Match award on Wednesday night, but there can be no denying that the return of Gascoigne has transformed Taylor's England from a farce to a force.
Impact
Taylor acknowledged: ‘I can't remember an England player having such an impact on a team.’
But lurking beneath his great admiration, and moreover gratitude for Gascoigne's gifts, remains a fear.
The worry that the self-destructive trait, common to highly-strung stars such as Gascoigne, might rear its ugly head once again.
Taylor confessed: ‘Paul has got that something about him — but still, if we are not steady, it can bring him down.
‘It is lovely in one respect, but by crikey you are on the edge all of the time with him.
That's what people like him are like.
‘But you have to look at it and say, ‘please God, don't let anything go wrong for this lad, in any way’.
Yet that sort of worry is the kind of thing that makes him so exciting.’
Well Taylor might pray that he does not lose Gascoigne through injury again, and to the manager's credit he is prepared to walk the tightrope with him.
Indeed, the belief that Taylor is the sort of manager who can't bear talent or personality to overshadow himself is now being proved wrong by the way he is treating Gascoigne.
Although it is clear that Gascoigne is way beyond his peers in what is an era of ordinary players, Taylor's predecessors — Don Revie, Ron Greenwood and Bobby Robson — all shunned the opportunity of building their teams around the most talented players at their disposal.
For instance, Glenn Hoddle played 53 times for England but never was a team really designed to bring the best out of his brilliant ability, albeit in a much different form to Gascoigne's style.
The same fate befell the likes of Alan Hudson, Rodney Marsh, Tony Currie and Charlie George — all of whom were discarded even before their qualities were allowed to flourish at the highest level.
Platform
Now at least we have a manager, who after two years of stumbling in the dark, has seen the light.
He is giving Gascoigne the platform to perform in the same way as France built a side around Michel Platini, and Argentina around Diego Maradona — the latter never more evident as when they won the World Cup in 1986.
And England are beginning to reap the benefits.
During Gascoigne's long absence Taylor attempted, to a degree, to do the same with John Barnes.
But Barnes so far has neither displayed the range nor passion in an England shirt that Gascoigne displays for the responsibility.
Taylor pointed out one of the things about great players who are given freedom is that they work very hard, and Gascoigne is prepared to do that, even in the knowledge that he has been given a special licence.
‘He appreciates what others in the team are doing for him, because what I've done is pick a team around him,’ explained Taylor.
‘I've selected a midfield umbrella to protect him with players and said, ‘look, this is your stage — now go and do it where it will really hurt the opposition’.
‘I don't want him to take the ball off the back four and stroll around in areas where play might break down.
‘Players like Paul Ince and Carlton Palmer are complementing Gascoigne because they are prepared to win the ball and give it to him in areas where he can be the most effective.
‘I want to see him take the ball from them, and the strikers, so that he can look to score goals like he did in Wednesday's game with Turkey.’
One of the reasons that previous managers have baulked at making an individual a special case, in the way Gascoigne has become, is the resentment of others who — despite being internationals in their own right — might have been asked to do donkey work.
That is one of the theories expressed by many why Hoddle was never given the freedom Gascoigne is now enjoying.
Taylor points out, though: ‘It's down to me to make sure that everyone sticks together, and from what I've seen there is no feeling of resentment among the other lads about the way I'm using Paul.
‘Against Turkey we saw a player of David Platt's stature putting on a wonderful performance, where he was prepared to work so hard.
‘And after all, every player wants to be in a winning team and they know how much influence Gazza can have on a game to enable them to achieve victory.
‘The other thing is that he so much is part of the scene.
‘He's one of the lads, and if you ask him to do something he will do it.
‘When I first took over, it was difficult to get close to the lad.
‘There was so much going on around him after the World Cup, I'm not sure even he knew what was going on.
Plans
‘But I've got to know him well now, and he is responding magnificently.’
Alan Shearer confirmed how the players feel about Gascoigne, saying: ‘We couldn't do without him really — no one 's got his amount of skill.’
Taylor maintains he has mapped out alternative plans should he be forced to go into a game without Gascoigne.
He still feels he could eke out a result without him.
He says he would shuffle the formation, using a more traditional midfield, and bringing in a wide man such as Barnes, Paul Merson or John Salako.
Talented as they may be, let's hope we don't have to find out too soon how an England team would fare without Gascoigne, particularly when the two games with Holland come up.
Defiant Dixon stands firm
David Harrison
ENGLAND full-back Lee Dixon last night revealed how he refused to buckle under the weight of criticism which has been hurled his way.
The Arsenal defender said: ‘As far as I was concerned I had nothing to turn around.
My form did dip last season and the criticism did begin to affect me, but I thought ‘Sod it.
Let it affect someone else’.
‘If I keep getting selected by Arsenal and England then I have to be doing something well.’
Strike duo prove point
Rob Shepherd
ALAN SHEARER believes both he and Ian Wright have proved their partnership can lead England to the World Cup finals.
‘I think we showed to those who doubted our ability to play together that we can,’ he said.
‘There were definite signs that we were able to read each other 's play — we linked well and looked dangerous.
I feel a bit sorry for Ian because he deserved a goal.’
Wright made a goal for Shearer in the 4–0 win over Turkey but still awaits his first England goal.
Nevertheless, he said: ‘I was very, very pleased.
It was definitely my best game for England.
I suddenly felt at ease and I'm just hoping I can stay in the side alongside Alan.’
Speed seeks change of fortune
Ben Bacon
GARY SPEED has set himself a double task — to resurrect the fortunes of club and country.
Speed has endured a miserable November, with Leeds being knocked out of the European and Coca-Cola Cups, and Wales crashing to Belgium in Wednesday's World Cup qualifying tie.
But the midfielder said: ‘If we can win our home games, Wales can still qualify for the finals.’
And on Leeds, he added: ‘Hopefully we can turn the corner like Arsenal did last season.’
Roxburgh pays price
Graham Fisher
SCOTLAND manager Andy Roxburgh yesterday defended the blunder that puts his World Cup campaign in grave danger.
Gordon Durie, suffering from double vision, was allowed to stay on the park and then missed the game's two clearest openings.
Roxburgh explained: ‘In a situation like this you act on three factors; medical opinion, the player's attitude and your own gut feelings.
‘In this case the doctor said at half-time that Gordon was fit to continue.
‘Unfortunately his condition deteriorated.
It was our bad luck that those chances should fall to him before we eventually had to bring him off.’
Him and a prayer
By Rob Shepherd
GRAHAM TAYLOR last night revealed for the first time what Paul Gascoigne's return means to him.
‘I can't remember an England player having had such an impact on a team,’ he said.
‘Please God, don't let anything go wrong for this lad, in any way.’
The England manager was reflecting on the exhilarating 4–0 World Cup qualifying victory over Turkey.
Fit-again Gascoigne was centre stage with a virtuoso display and two goals, and Taylor also soaked his other players in a sea of praise.
‘I have a settled squad, and I have a team who are performing,’ he said after the most convincing performance of his 27-match reign.
‘It was always my intention after the first two years of trying things out to get a more stable situation after the European Championships.
‘Now those players are saying, ‘we are producing the goods’— and while there are people knocking on the door, they've got to open it.
‘If the team keep playing like that, it's going to keep the door shut.’
That means, for instance, that players like Ian Wright and Lee Dixon, maligned in the past but are uppermost in Taylor's thoughts.
Conversely, ‘Now those players in the side are currently in possession.
They have claimed the shirts and while there might be those who are knocking on the door, because those who are in are producing the goods, it means they are keeping the door tightly shut at the moment.’
John Barnes — expected to make his first-team return for Liverpool at QPR on Monday — faces a tough battle to resurrect his international career.
And while Taylor recognises that, by the time San Marino visit Wembley in February, familiar injury problems may force him to change the complexion of his team, he has no thoughts about altering what has begun to evolve.
Furthermore, he agreed that after the trials and tribulations of the previous 29 months since taking over from Bobby Robson, he finally feels at ease with himself and the job.
Taylor said enthusiastically: ‘After the win against Turkey, it was the first time since I've been England manager that I've gone back into the dressing room and felt the emotions I did as a club manager.
‘It was a very nice, warm feeling.
Now that's partly due to having got a good result and performance, but more so because of the feeling of togetherness we now have in the squad.
It's just a pity we can't play the San Marino game on Saturday.’
Instead Taylor and his players must wait for 10 weeks to build on the foundations laid against the Turks — but, in an attempt to maintain some continuity, Taylor is planning an unscheduled pre-Christmas get-together.
Taylor said: ‘Of course the players must now go back to their clubs and do their jobs, while all I have to focus on is our next match.
Leisure
‘But because when we join up it will be on the back of a full weekend's fixtures of FA Cup matches — and by that time they will have played 15 games for their clubs — I've just asked them to keep a little compartment in their minds about England.
‘Because when we do join up on the Monday, I don't want them to be going into the game cold.
‘And to keep that feeling together I will try and make arrangements that we can all team up for a leisure day.’
England and Taylor can now look ahead to a profitable start to the New Year, with the visit of the tiny Italian principality, then the return against Turkey before the Wembley showdown against Holland in April.
That is when the strength of his emerging side, and England's case for making it to the 1994 World Cup finals, will be truly tested.
In the meantime, Taylor can dwell on one significant factor of his England career being accomplished.
Surprised
He added: ‘Scotland manager Andy Roxburgh said to me after the European Championship in Sweden, ‘You'll be surprised how you feel — it took me two years to feel they were my players.’
He was right.
‘It doesn't matter who you are, it has to take that period of time.
‘But yes, I do feel this is my squad now.’
Seville target Keane
By Des Kelly
ROY KEANE, Britain's most wanted young player, is in line for a staggering £3 million pay deal with Spanish giants Seville.
Club president Luis Cuervas confirmed last night he is ready to offer the unsettled Nottingham Forest midfielder (pictured right) a three-year deal worth a basic £15,000 a week.
Real Madrid are also on Keane's trail, but Cuervas watched the 21-year-old eclipse the cream of Spanish talent in Ireland's World Cup qualifier on Wednesday night.
Pledging that he will attempt to fight off all rivals with that incredible pay package, Cuervas said: ‘We would be very interested in bringing Keane to the club.
‘He was the number one player on the field against Spain.’
His enthusiasm was shared by Seville superstar Diego Maradona, who described the irrepressible Keane, happier in midfield than the centre back role he sometimes fulfils for Forest, as an ideal team-mate.
‘There was nobody to touch him on the pitch,’ he said.
‘I was very impressed.’
Keane, rated in the £5m bracket, is out of contract at the end of next season and has already rebuffed Brian Clough's first attempt to negotiate a new deal.
Arsenal are sure to monitor developments, but can obviously not match Seville's financial clout.
Double trouble
Mike Walters
STAN FLASHMAN'S Barnet have been charged with misconduct by the FA — just 72 hours before the controversial Underhill chairman goes before a League commission.
The charge involves Barnet's alleged failure to follow strict guidelines on the distribution of allocated Cup final tickets — two of which ended up with touts at last season's Liverpool-Sunderland Cup final.
On Monday, Flashman faces a League commission in London after a probe into alleged financial irregularities at the club.
Leeds hit trouble
LEEDS UNITED manager Howard Wilkinson's bid to take Swedish internationals Patrik Andersson and Joachim Bjorklund to Elland Road was on the brink of collapse last night.
Andersson flew home after 13 hours of talks saying: ‘If they pay peanuts, they can expect monkeys.’
Wilkinson had agreed a total fee of £1.1 million for the two defenders but was ‘astonished’ by the pair's financial demands and admitted: ‘We were miles apart.’
Becker blasts back to best
From Giles Smith in Frankfurt
BORIS BECKER blasted his way back to his booming best last night in a stunning defeat of his long-time Wimbledon rival Stefan Edberg.
Even the one-sided 6–4, 6–0 scoreline didn't reflect the German's supreme domination of a match that lasted only 65 minutes in front of a wildly excited home crowd of 9,000.
The win put Becker through to the semi-finals of the IBM ATP World Championship.
Becker said: ‘I produced super tennis.
If I keep on playing like that kind of tennis I have a chance of winning the tournament.
‘The expectations of the country are on me and sometimes I am not there.
But when I play that kind of match in Germany, it is great.’
Form
It was the 30th contest between the two great champions, with Becker now boasting a staggering 20–10 lead.
and it puts the score at a staggering 20–10 in Becker's favour.
Defeat also robbed Edberg of the chance of regaining his world No 1 ranking — which he would have done if he had won this final major tournament of the year.
It means Jim Courier retains the pole position he's held for all but 12 weeks of 1992.
With Becker in last night's form, it's doubtful if even Courier at his very best could have lived him.
‘He's back to his best,’ said a shattered Edberg afterwards.
‘There was nothing I could do about it.
He must be favourite for the title now.’
Becker now takes on world No 4 Goran Ivanisevic in today's first semi-final.
On Thursday the Croat swept aside Courier in straight sets, and the clash should be a cracker.
Cheered on by the huge German crowd, who'd given him a two-minute standing ovation when his record was read out during the knock-up, Becker was devastating in the first set.
He gave Edberg no chance of breaking him, serving four stunning aces and a massive percentage of first services.
When Edberg's serve wavered in the seventh game, Becker struck in deadly fashion, taking the game to love with a dazzling array of returns and passing shots.
His domination of the set was only threatened at the death when the Swede, trying anything in a do-or-die effort, pegged him back to deuce from 40-love when Becker served for the set at 5–4.
But Becker held his nerve and took the set in just 38 minutes.
The second was even less of a contest, as the 24-year-old German broke Edberg's first three service games — the second to love on an Edberg double fault.
Edberg had nothing to offer as Becker took the second set triumphantly in just 27 minutes to a great roar from the delirious crowd.
As he went to the net, he raised one finger in the air as if to acknowledge the banners that proclaimed him No 1 — he might not be but the way he played last night he could be again soon.
Earlier Courier beat Michael Chang 7–5, 6–2 and faces Pete Sampras in the other semi-final.
Holland's Richard Krajicek lost his chance of reaching the last four when he slipped 6–4, 6–3 to Ivanisevic.
Reveley treble
THE Mary Reveley-Peter Niven winner machine struck again at Sedgefield yesterday, notching a treble with Maudlins Cross, Firm Price and My Desire.
The star of the show for the Saltburn trainer was Firm Price, who proved too good for Dari Sound in the handicap hurdle.
‘He is my favourite in the yard,’ she said.
‘He had three years with John Edwards, but we bought him back for 5,600gns a year last June and he will be with me for the rest of his days.’
Monie shock at early lead
By Ray French
WIGAN coach John Monie, whose side are chasing a record four consecutive Stones Bitter Championships, admitted last night he was surprised by their start to the season.
Monie, whose side sit at the top of Division One, revealed: ‘We've never been at the top so early.
We were not playing well at the start and many of my players were tired after Great Britain's tour in the summer.
‘I'm rather surprised at our position but we are hitting form now and I fancy having a crack at winning a fourth title.’
Pushed
In Monie's final year of office and his fourth at Central Park, Wigan lead the pack with just one defeat from eight Championship outings.
And Salford, Wigan's opponents at the Willows tomorrow, will be hard pushed to stop them from continuing their 12-month unbeaten away league record.
Wigan's international second row, Denis Betts, faces a late fitness test on a knee injury but coach Monie welcomes back Great Britain prop Andy Platt after rib damage.
Senna sets Indy goal
AYRTON SENNA last night admitted he is ready to face Britain's Formula One world champion Nigel Mansell on the American IndyCar circuit.
Mansell hoped he had seen the last of the Brazilian after the two were involved in a high-speed collision during the final Grand Prix of the season in Australia.
Senna said yesterday: ‘It is possible that I will race IndyCars in 1993.
But if I reveal details it may compromise other possibilities.’
Meanwhile, next season's European Grand Prix will be held at Donington Park.
Krabbe loses drug appeal
KATRIN KRABBE'S four-year drug-taking ban was yesterday upheld by the German track federation.
Krabbe and two other German women runners had admitted taking the drug Clenbuterol, but claimed they did not know it was banned.
Super Scots
MARK APPLESON scored two tries to steer Scotland to a 22–12 victory over Natal in the Dubai rugby union Sevens final yesterday.
The Scots had earlier beaten injury-hit England 19–17 in a thrilling semi-final.
Waugh ton
ESSEX all-rounder Mark Waugh hit a majestic 121 as New South Wales reached 349–4 against the West Indies yesterday, ending a run of four successive ducks and proving his form to the Australian selectors.
McAuley no
DAVE McAULEY, Ireland's former IBF flyweight champion, has turned down the chance to challenge Welshman Robbie Regan for the European title he won from champion Salvatore Fanni last Saturday.
Seles switch does the trick
From Barry Lucas in New York
MONICA SELES was forced into a dramatic change of tactic to see off the stubborn challenge of Jana Novotna and reach the semi-finals of the Virginia Slims Championship in New York.
The top seed, who has missed out on just one final in 30 tournaments over the last two years, looked set for a shock defeat at 3–6, 0–3 down midway through the second set.
But Seles was forced to leave her comfortable perch on the baseline and attack the net as she fought back to win 3–6, 6–4, 6–1.
‘I told myself ‘try to change your game and go for it’,’ she admitted.
Suddenly, she seemed to wake up and put some sting into her shots.
Fought
Seles broke Novotna to reach 3–2 and two games later reached a turning point in the match when she fought off four game points to break the Czechoslovak again.
‘I felt I had the momentum coming back from 40–0,’ the Australian, French and US Open champion added.
‘I was lucky I escaped.
I was a little tentative in the first set.
When I lost my first serve in the first set, it threw me off a bit.
I don't know why it took me a long time to get into the match.
‘I was just pushing the ball, my passing shots were not going too well.
I was not thinking out there at all.’
Novotna had looked well in control, always seeming to guess correctly whether Seles was going to hit down the line or cross-court.
Her sharply hit volleys punctuated a lot of points, while her court coverage forced Seles to go for even sharper angles.
‘She was doing everything right,’ Seles said.
‘She wasn't making many unforced errors.’
And Novotna admitted: ‘I just kept playing as hard as I could.
I did everything right in the first set.
In the beginning of the second set, everything was working so well.
Unfortunately, Monica picked up her game.’
Seles was joined in the semi-final by fellow-American Martina Navratilova who beat Spain's Arantxa Sanchez Vicario 6–1, 2–6, 6–2.
Meanwhile, Jim Courier was last night hanging on to his world No 1 ranking and survival in the $2.5m IBM ATP World Championships by his finger tips.
He beat fellow American and world No 5 Michael Chang 7–5, 6–2, but had to wait for the result of the final round robin match in his group between big-hitters Goran Ivanisevic and Richard Krajicek to see if he would get through to the semi-finals of this last ranking competition of the year.
And he was waiting for the final match in the other group between Stefan Edberg and Boris Becker to see if his No 1 ranking could be threatened.
If Edberg wins and goes on to win the final, the London-based Swede will regain the top spot Courier has held for all but six weeks of this year.
Muse in the money
Jonathan Ramsden
TRAINER David Elsworth's pre-emptive dabble in the Champion Hurdle market received a major boost at Ascot yesterday.
Anticipating a bold show from Muse against former title holder Morley Street, he invested £50 each-way at 100–1 for next March's big race.
And Muse came up trumps, regaining the lead in the final strides to snatch a dramatic head victory over the 2–5 favourite in the Racecall Hurdle.
Muse is now a top-priced 25–1 with Corals for the Champion.
Ironically, Muse's mistake at the final flight may have helped his cause.
It left Morley Street, who went a length up, in front 100 yards sooner than his jockey Richard Dunwoody intended.
‘It gave us a second pop at Morley Street, and he was stopping,’ said Elsworth.
Aintree TV guide
1.15:IF this were over hurdles, Dawson City would have lumps in hand.
But his jumping has been far from foot perfect on two recent outings over fences, and I believe he is worth opposing.
I fancy STRONG BEAU, an excellent seven-length runner-up to the smart Forest Sun at Cheltenham last Sunday.
Vayrua, caught close home by Bonanza at Sedgefield 11 days ago, may well provide the main threat.
1.45:IMPROVING five-year-old BAYDON STAR is difficult to oppose.
He is very well in on a 7lb higher mark than when hacking up at Ascot in October, and has since bolted up in a conditions race at Newbury.
This is too sharp for Welshman, and Bollin Patrick cannot be fancied after disappointing badly behind Mighty Mogul at Chepstow two weeks ago.
2.25:GOLD CUP hero Cool Ground was beaten a long way behind Tipping Tim at Wetherby three weeks ago, and is best watched for the time being.
BROWN WINDSOR and Kildimo are the only others in the handicap proper, and the former is likely to take advantage.
He gained valuable experience over these fences when fourth in the 1991 Grand National, and made a most encouraging reappearance at Sandown.
The Antartex, successful over these fences last season, has an each-way chance despite being 24lb out of the handicap.
Steering Jop
Henry Rix
1.00:DAVID ELSWORTH'S Fragrant Dawn made an impressive reappearance at Newbury this month, but he is a bit in and out and cannot be fancied with any confidence.
I prefer FREELINE FINISHING, a comfortable Chepstow winner a fortnight ago.
This improving sort is well in on just a 5lb higher mark than his recent two-length success, and clearly has the beating of Fu's Lady on that form.
Last year's winner Setter Country faces a much stiffer task this time.
1.30:IMPRESSIVE Cheltenham winner JOPANINI has an outstanding chance of defying a 4lb penalty.
Nicky Henderson's gelding bolted up by seven lengths from Miami Splash last Sunday and looks worth backing to follow up at 7–2 with Corals and Ladbrokes.
Cheerful Times is in the grip of the handicapper following a string of consistent performances last season, and Easy Buck is well held by the selection on early-season form.
Sunday Punch, 25–1 with William Hill, is out of the handicap but could well run into a place.
2.05:TOP weight Bradbury Star, who fell at the first in this race last year, has an excellent chance to gain compensation.
But he does not represent any value, and his well handicapped stable companion DEEP SENSATION is a sensible alternative at 11–2 with Ladbrokes.
Josh Gifford's gelding, one of last season's leading novices, travelled like the winner but hit the front too soon at Chepstow last time when runner-up to Freeline Finishing.
Danny Harrold has each-way prospects.
Evans playing by memory
By Tony Roche
IEUAN EVANS will call up a treasured memory and attempt to bury a nightmare when he leads rejuvenated Wales against world champions Australia at Cardiff Arms Park today.
Evans, captain for the ninth time on his 32nd appearance, enjoys recalling the moment he scored the Test series-clinching try for the 1989 British Lions Down Under.
‘Not the most difficult try I ever scored,’ he admitted, ‘but probably one of the most important and, for me, unforgettable.
‘We won that series 2–1 and it was the Lions' first tour triumph in Australia.’
Tears
The Llanelli right wing returned to Aussie two years later but staggered away from Brisbane's Ballymore Stadium close to tears after being part of the most humiliating defeat in his nation's history.
‘We fell apart, lost 63–6 and it was probably the lowest point in the international careers of all 15 players,’ he said.
‘I still shudder when I recall it.’
The arrival from Nottingham of Alan Davies sparked a Welsh revival.
His positive coaching methods pulled together the warring provincial factions and his gentle but firm weeding-out resulted in Evans — who yesterday took an accidental blow to the head in training but will play today — becoming captain.
The omens were good, until Australia, en route to succeeding New Zealand as world champions, inflicted the heaviest home defeat in Welsh history.
That was to the tune of 38–3 in an Arms Park qualifying match and sent the Dragons tumbling out of the World Cup.
‘Much has changed,’ added Evans.
‘We have improved steadily, won two Five Nations games last season and pulled away from the lowest ebb anyone can remember.
‘But today we face the most successful Test side in the world and, despite their injury problems, we have taken note of what they did to Ireland in Dublin.
‘I believe there are two things in our favour.
‘We expect to win more line-out ball — an area that has been our undoing in the past — and we are all now encouraged to think for ourselves.
‘The spontaneous is applauded, not criticised.’
‘Alan Davies has restored confidence and helped to develop awareness.
‘Players know the choices open to them in set areas, which means we now have the inter-action as a team that Australia, New Zealand and England have had for years.’
While murmurs of hope return to the streets of Cardiff, Australian prepare for their 16th international against Wales with coach Bob Dwyer admits: ‘A win here would go down alongside the best of our achievements while I have been in charge.’
‘We have suffered some serious setbacks through injuries, but when you tour you do so with a full squad and they must all be up to the mark.’
It is something of a red-letter day for Dwyer — his 51st international in his 51st year.
Like Davies, Dwyer has the knack of inspiring his players, especially when the tide starts to turn.
But without the influence of Nick Farr-Jones (retired), Michael Lynagh and John Eales (both injured), Dwyer's all-conquering Wallabies suddenly look vulnerable.
With a huge influx from the nation's most successful clubs, Swansea and Llanelli, Wales possess pace, flair and, most importantly, shape.
And with Robert Jones — another triumphant Lion of '89 — the ace in the Welsh scheme, Australia are in for the biggest examination of their status since they acquired it at Twickenham last year.
Boks' world cheer
WORLD rugby officials yesterday risked a damaging political backlash by reaffirming their support for a South African-held World Cup in 1995.
Rugby World Cup committee men plan to visit South Africa again in January, when they are expected to offer the Springboks an early chance to sign the host-nation agreement.
RWC chairman Russ Thomas said: ‘We are satisfied that South Africa can stage it — we have already had two meetings with them.
‘We are taking a positive approach and our attitude is not that there might be problems.’
Life is full of concerns, but you work through them.’
And, despite the increased political tension in South Africa in recent months, RWC officers said they were not interested in setting up contingency plans.
South African cricket authorities recently dropped plans to stage that sport's next World Cup, also in 1995.
No-go Nigel
By Rob Shepherd
BRIAN CLOUGH has threatened to pull son Nigel out of future England sqauds.
The Nottingham Forest manager admitted recently his run-ins with the FA might have cost Nigel a regular international place.
But he has become increasingly frustrated the 26-year-old forward is being overlooked by his country.
Nigel went to the European Championship finals in Sweden last summer but didn't play.
He did appear in England's opening game of the season, a 1–0 friendly defeat in Spain, but has been a spectator for the World Cup matches against Norway and Turkey.
Clough said: ‘He is not going down with England again to do nowt.
Not to be named sub, to sit and give tea to people.
‘He can sit in a dug out watching our A team as comfortably as he can sit in London, not being involved for five days.’
But his outburst will not sway Graham Taylor, who said: ‘I see Nigel Clough as an important member of my squad.’
Shilton denied
PLYMOUTH chairman Dan McCauley has rejected player-manager Peter Shilton's offer to fund a new loan signing.
Speaking from America where he is on a business trip, McCauley said: ‘This is the first time we have refused a request from him.
‘There is no rift between us and no rift between the directors.
But the manager has brought in nine new players, including himself, and now is the time to put a brake on.
‘We just feel it is time to settle down.
There should be enough resources within the present squad.’
Shilton had said earlier: ‘I have made an offer to the club to pay for a player on loan myself to cover our injuries in the short term.
‘It is clear that we need to sell and bring in a fair amount of money before we can think about buying again.’
McCauley added: ‘I want to make it clear to everyone that the club is not in financial difficulties.’
FA erase video link
THE Football Association are to bring to an end a lucrative film contract after being embarrassed by the notorious Vinnie Jones video, writes Rob Shepherd.
Just days after giving Jones a suspended sentence and a £20,000 ine, it emerged that the makers of ‘Soccer's Hard Men’, Video Vision, had paid Watershed — who have a deal with the FA — for footage.
Watershed pay the FA advance royalty fees for the right to use and sell action of FA games.
The FA's commercial director Trevor Phillips said: ‘I am looking to end this deal with Watershed, tighten up the release of film, which will help prevent such ad hoc videos being made.’
Down in the dug-out
Duncan McKenzie
BRIAN Clough's Nottingham Forest and Steve Coppell's Crystal Palace meet in a bottom-of-the-table clash at Selhurst Park today that would have been unthinkable at the start of the season.
Clough's rock-bottom Forest have not won away all season, Coppell's second-to-bottom Palace have not tasted victory at home — but both managers can count on one thing…their jobs are safe as houses.
Instead, the finger of doom is pointing at Malcolm Crosby, a Wearside hero when he led Sunderland to the FA Cup final last season, but perilously close to getting his P45 if the players that love him let him down again today at Derby.
Ian Branfoot's head is being screamed for by Southampton's fans and Neil Warnock's heady times at Notts County have given way to days of whine and losses.
But there is more to successful management than just picking the team or being a gifted coach, just ask Ray Harford or Mel Machin, respectively sacked by Luton and Manchester City because their public image wasn't considered good enough.
I ran the rule over the prime candidates for Santa's early sack and under eight key ability categories rate their chances in the survival game: BRIAN CLOUGH, Nottingham Forest (Age 57, appointed January 1975.
Honours: Div 2 promotion 1977; Div 1 title 1978; European Cup 1979, 80; League Cup 1978, 79, 80, 89; Simod Cup 1989; Zenith Data Cup 92.
Current position 22nd.
Record: P15 W2 D4 L9 F11 A24 Pts10.
Today: at C Palace).
It's amazing to find Clough in a relegation situation but he'll have no problem getting Forest out of trouble.
Motivation is Cloughie's main strength, the key to how he operates and even though his coaching strengths are almost non-existent — Archie Gemmill and Ronnie Fenton put his ideas across — his handling of players is superb.
Clough has become Mr Football.
Although he's made a series of mistakes in the transfer market only he will decide on his departure from the City Ground.
No Forest board would ever dream of sacking him.
MALCOLM CROSBY, Sunderland (Age 38, appointed April 92.
Honours: FA Cup finalists 92.
Current pos 21st.
P16 W4 D3 L9 F15 A27 Pts15.
Today: at Derby).
The fact that Crosby fought tooth and nail to get the job in an area where the success rate is so limited and expectation so high, speaks volumes for his bottle.
But knowing Sunderland's history he's no chance of surviving.
It's not a question of if he's sacked but when.
Coaching is his big strength and that's why he made such a phenomenal start, taking a bad side all the way to Wembley.
STEVE COPPELL, Crystal Palace (Age 37, appointed June 84.
Honours: Div 2 promotion 1989; Zenith Data Cup 91; FA Cup finalists 90.
Current pos: 21st.
P15 W1 D8 L6 F19 A 26 Pts11.
Today: Home to Forest).
Not in immediate danger but I suspect he's built a monster he can no longer control.
Could be a case of familiarity breeding contempt — there are arguments and discontent in the background.
And don't forget Geoff Thomas was a £4 million player just three months ago and now he's in the reserves.
A great coach, very communicative on the training ground, and very astute in the transfer market but Palace, once a progressive and creative side, have adopted a dangerous route by becoming a selling club.
DAVID PLEAT, Luton (Age 47, appointed July 91.
No honours.
Current pos: 22nd.
P16 W2 D6 L8 F18 A37 Pts 12.
Today: Home to Millwall).
Don't expect Pleat to get Luton out of trouble because of his perfectionist approach, but he won't be fired because the board and supporters know he's never had money to spend and had to sell his stars.
A good motivator, although better with kids than old hands and the Luton fans love him.
NEIL WARNOCK, Notts County (Age 43, appointed January 89.
Honours: Div 3 promotion 90; Div 2 promotion 91 (relegated 92).
Current pos: 20th.
P17 W3 D6 L8 F20 A35 Pts15.
Today: at Southend).
Little chance that he'll dig County out of trouble.
He usually comes to a struggling club with nothing to lose but this time he's been part of the slump.
It's an alien situation and I question his ability to handle it.
As a motivator he's a bit of a sergeant-major type but that only washes for a year or two with players before it starts to breed resentment.
Good at maximising his resources on the coaching side.
Public image in Nottingham on the wane.
I think Neil should move on before he's asked to.
IAN BRANFOOT, Southampton (Age 45, appointed June 91.
No honours.
Current pos: 19th.
P15 W3 D6 L6 P12 A17 Pts15.
Tomorrow: Home to Black-burn).
Branfoot can save Saints.
He's a good motivator, has endeared himself to the players and if they're on your side as a manager you've got at least a fighting chance.
He's a good man in a crisis having experienced just about all his football at the rough end of the stick and he'll be prepared to battle — it just depends on whether the directors battle with him.
But I think his survival chances are slim.
His awful public image in Southampton could count against him.
Maybe his approach is too workmanlike.
He found it hard to integrate the required skills of Matthew Le Tissier into his side which annoyed the fans.
Man in black gets shirty
Ben Bacon
EVEN Joseph's amazing technicolour dreamcoat is not a patch on some of the jerseys now being worn by the country's leading goalkeepers.
Some of the designs are so outrageous — a bizarre mishmash of colours and patterns — they look more suitable attire for teenagers attending raves than keepers attempting saves.
But one man stands alone, and he's making his own fashion statement.
Neville Southall's talent has always set him apart from most of his rivals.
Now the Everton and Wales keeper's choice of shirts has added to his individuality.
Much to the annoyance and frustration of the sports-goods company which stitch him up, he has rejected the jerseys which resemble blurred traffic lights.
They are only too painfully aware how they could cash in on any multi-coloured shirt worn by one of Europe's best known goalkeepers.
For instance, Peter Schmeichel's rainbow-like shirt which he wears for Denmark costs around £35, and the slightly less garish one he models for Manchester United the same amount.
Top goalkeepers can earn up to £50,000-a-year from manufacturers for wearing their gear, including built-in bonuses for Cup runs and television appearances.
However, against Chelsea today at Goodison Park, Southall will simply wear black, and look an even more formidable sight for the likes of Mick Harford and Robert Fleck in a game which acts as a preview for their Coca Cola Cup clash.
Southall, delighted with the look made famous by the great Russian goalkeeper Lev Yashin, has even added to the macho image by pulling out all the padding which comes with today's goalkeepers' shirts because he thinks it gets in the way of doing the job properly.
On the eve of the match, the 34-year-old Welsh international said: ‘The simple reason I started wearing black was because I don't like all the colours the company are making.
‘When they came to me in the summer, some of the shirts they offered were horrible.
I looked at loads and told them I didn't like any and I wanted to wear just black.
‘They grudgingly agreed, but they are not producing them for general sale.
They don't believe there is a market.
‘However, I get lots of letters from kids asking where they can buy the black shirt, which suggests there is a market.
‘If you have a row of garish shirts in all sorts of colours on a rack in a sports shop and one in just black, which one is going to stick out?
‘I think it's a great shirt.
It's more traditional and very smart.
What's the point of wearing something you don't like.
‘I'm a traditionalist at heart and don't bother with the padding either because it just gets in the way.’
Although Southall likes to wear black — he was head to toe in it on international duty for Wales in Belgium on Wednesday — he hasn't lost his colourful sense of humour.
When asked who his goalkeeping hero was, he replied: ‘Pat Jennings…but I bet you were hoping it was Lev Yashin.’
Wright is promised hard time
Mike Walters
IAN WRIGHT was last night promised a World Cup hangover as champions Leeds prepared to defend their Elland Road fortress against this season's title favourites Arsenal.
Still bubbling after his irresistible display against Turkey in midweek, Wright is looking to inflict more damage on Leeds' porous defence, which has leaked 28 goals in 15 games — more than any Premier League side.
But England midfield player David Batty, who faces a late fitness test on his ankle warned: ‘Our lot can cope with Ian.
‘I am a big admirer of Arsenal and Wright in particular— his pace is phenomenal and his confidence must be sky-high.
‘But we're in no mood to surrender our title.
We've gone 30 League games unbeaten at home and beating Arsenal would be the ideal springboard for the rest of our season.’
Warned
And Arsenal manager George Graham last night warned his men not to be taken in by Leeds' run of seven games without a win, saying: ‘This is going to be the most open Championship race for years and I'm taking no notice of people who are writing off Leeds.
‘They have suffered a reaction to going out of Europe, just like we did last season, but they will bounce back.’
Meanwhile, Spurs coach Doug Livermore joined the growing army of tipsters backing Aston Villa for the Championship this season.
Villa are at White Hart Lane this afternoon with Livermore saying: ‘We have watched them closely and think they have a great chance of winning the League.
Like Arsenal, they are in form at the moment, so we must treat them with respect — but not too much.’
Spurs, unbeaten in six games, expect striker Gordon Durie to play with stitches in the head wound he sustained on international duty with Scotland.
Wimbledon manager Joe Kinnear insists that Vinnie Jones will bounce back tomorrow at Middlesbrough after his huge £20,000 FA fine this week.
‘I've had a long chat with Vinnie,’ said Kinnear.
‘He's a larger than life person with the character to put it all behind him.’
England striker Alan Shearer yesterday backed Southampton manager Ian Branfoot.
Shearer returns to The Dell for Blackburn tomorrow for the first time since his £3.6 million transfer in the summer, anxious to make life even more uneasy for Branfoot.
But he said: ‘The fans may not think Ian's the best man for the job but if they lay off him for a bit then he might get it right for them.’
Barnes blocked
Des Kelly
JOHN BARNES last night faced up to the fact that he must make speedy progress to avoid a long spell in the international wilderness.
After Wednesday's 4–0 World Cup victory over Turkey, manager Graham Taylor told Barnes that the route back was firmly barred.
‘Realistically England is a long way off for me,’ said Barnes.
Today's Changes
Coventry v Man City
Mick Quinn, on loan from Newcastle, makes his Coventry debut, but goalkeeper Steve Ogrizovic is doubtful with a ricked neck.
Manchester City are unchanged.
Last season: Coventry 0, Man C 1; Man C 0, Coventry 1.
C Palace v Forest
Palace winger John Salako (knee) is out, Lee Sinnott is suspended but John Humphrey is recalled.
Forest are unchanged.
Last season: Forest 5, Palace 1; Palace 0, Forest 0.
Everton v Chelsea
Everton skipper Dave Watson has a calf strain so Andy Hinchcliffe stands by.
Chelsea are unchanged.
Last season: Chelsea 2, Everton 2; Everton 2, Chelsea 1.
Leeds v Arsenal
David Batty (ankle) and Tony Dorigo (groin) could return for Leeds.
Arsenal add Mark Flatts, Ray Parlour and Andy Linighan to their squad.
Last season: Leeds 2, Arsenal 2; Arsenal 1, Leeds 1.
Man Utd v Oldham
Paul Ince (groin) and Darren Ferguson (hamstring) face late tests for United, who add Nicky Butt and Keith Gillespie to their squad.
Oldham include reserve keeper Paul Gerrard and striker Neil Tolson in their 14-man squad.
Last season: Man Utd 1, Oldham 0; Oldham 3, Man Utd 6.
Midd'bro v W'don
Boro are without Alan Kernaghan and Tommy Wright while the Dons miss John Fashanu (back).
John Scales (groin), Dean Blackwell (ankle) and Scott Fitzgerald (back) face tests.
Last season: No corresponding games.
Norwich v Sheff Utd
Gary Megson returns for Norwich after nine matches out with hamstring and ankle problems.
United include Chris Kamara, on loan from Luton.
Last season: Norwich 2, Sheff U 2; Sheff U 1, Norwich 0.
Sheff Wed v Ipswich
Carlton Palmer is Wednesday's doubt with a hamstring strain.
Steve Whitton returns for Ipswich.
Last season: No corresponding games.
Tottenham v Villa
Gordon Durie is fit for Spurs despite suffering double vision during Scotland's World Cup tie against Italy.
Defender Bryan Small (knee) is Villa's only doubt.
Last season: Villa 0, Spurs 0; Spurs 2, Villa 5.
S'thampton v Blackburn
Saints welcome back Perry Groves (toe) and Kerry Dixon (back).
Blackburn have no problems.
Williams is homing in on Forest
By Steve Acteson
CRYSTAL PALACE'S struggling squad did their bit for Children in Need yesterday — but today charity must not begin at home.
A first win at home is a must for Steve Coppell's boys against Nottingham Forest, the only team below them in the Premier Division who have yet to win away.
‘Something's got to give and it's going to be Nottingham Forest,’ said Palace striker Paul Williams, who has yet to score for the low-flying Eagles since trading places with Sheffield Wednesday-bound Mark Bright and a £1 million cash adjustment over two months ago.
Williams added: ‘At this moment in time it is a relegation match but it isn't one we particularly fear — I've played against them this season and I know they're not the Forest of old.
‘They still knock the ball about very well but like ourselves they don't score as many goals as they should and their defence isn't as good as it should be either.
‘On the other hand we're the draw specialists at the moment but another one isn't much good to us and I'm confident that we can go out there and beat Forest.’
Williams is anything but surprised that both Palace and Forest are in trouble, saying: ‘We've lost key players like Mark Bright and Ian Wright and they've lost people like Des Walker and Teddy Sheringham.
‘It's very difficult to replace that sort of quality, particularly by clubs who don't spend a great deal of money.
Problem
‘The mood in our camp is still good though, we're certainly not down in the doldrums.
But when Saturdays come and the pressure is on you can see that some players are not as confident as they should be and that's probably our main problem.’
Assistant manager Alan Smith believes the side's lack of goals — they've managed only 19 in 15 games — stems from the poor quality of crosses.
But 5ft 7in Williams won't benefit from the extra crossing practice Palace put in yesterday to end his barren spell after scoring 30 goals in two seasons with Wednesday.
He said: ‘Both Chris Armstrong and myself are fairly new in the team and perhaps Palace are not yet really aware of the service we want.
‘I'm not one for crosses, I need quality through balls to my feet, which isn't our strong point right now.
‘The goals I scored for Charlton and Wednesday were basically created by other players but I think it's just a matter of time before they start going in again and it should help my game when Geoff Thomas is fit,’ he added.
East Londoner Williams is certainly not ruing his decision to move back to Selhurst Park, saying: ‘It's familiar territory as far as I'm concerned, I had two good years here with Charlton and I'm hoping to spend a good few more here with Palace.
‘I'm glad I made the decision to come here and still fully back my judgement.’
Palace choose from 15 today, with John Salako expected to shrug off a minor knee problem but Thomas is still ruled out with knee ligament damage.
Hendrie's gunning for Vinnie
John Wardle
JOHN HENDRIE aims to heap more misery on his former Leeds colleague Vinnie Jones at Ayresome Park today.
Jones, reeling from a £20,000 fine and suspended six-month ban imposed by the FA for his part in a video nasty about soccer dirty tricks, has to pick himself up at Middlesbrough.
And while Hendrie has plenty of sympathy for the Wimbledon midfielder, ending Boro's 10-match run without a win takes precedence this afternoon.
Hendrie said: ‘Vinnie has a heart of gold off the pitch.
Some of the criticism is unwarranted.
It's just his name, nothing else.
‘He helps a lot with kids and does a lot of good work behind the scenes.
But having said that, this is a big game for us.
Loser
‘We have gone 10 matches without a win and it's time to get back on the road.
Three of our next four games are at home and we need to make them count,’ he added.
Meanwhile, Boro manager Lennie Lawrence looks like being a three-time loser to North-East rivals Newcastle in the transfer market as Kevin Keegan last night emerged as favourite to sign talented Crewe midfielder Craig Hignett.
United manager Keegan could push through a £750,000 deal for 22-year-old Hignett after the visit of Watford.
Gavin Peacock turned down a move to Ayresome Park to stay on Tyneside and Keegan, having pipped Lawrence for Charlton winger Robert Lee, is close to landing Hignett — who has also attracted West Ham and Manchester City.
Sunderland striker Don Goodman is hoping to outshoot Roker old boy Marco Gabbiadini at Derby today.
Goodman scored in the win at the Baseball Ground last season that kicked off Malcolm Crosby's managerial reign — now his goals are needed to help keep Crosby in a job.
‘That victory came in the middle of our best spell of the season,’ said Goodman.
‘It was arguably our best performance as well.’
Crosby, who failed with a loan bid for a defender, said: ‘It would be dangerous to concentrate on Marco too much, but we know he'd love to score.’
Bristol City manager Denis Smith restores Jacki Dziekanowski to the front-line against Swindon at Ashton Gate.
The mercurial Polish international has been left on the bench for the last three games following a 5–1 defeat at Brentford.
But Smith now concedes that without Dziekanowski his side lacks flair and style.
Harford is pulling all the strings
By Graham Fisher
BLACKBURN fans, back on bread and water after a spectacular diet, are praying that Kenny Dalglish's expertise and Jack Walker's cheque-book will be adequate insurance against a prolonged recession.
But there is a third hand on tap helping to protect their dream — that brilliant puppeteer Ray Harford.
Dalglish, whose side visit Southampton tomorrowsun, got his priorities right when he took on the former Luton and Wimbledon boss as his right-hand man soon after taking office just over a year ago.
Young Warren Barton, the Wimbledon full-back, rose from non-League novice to England B status under Harford's meticulous tutelage.
Barton says: ‘Ray is a super coach.
He was always taking me to one side, telling me what I should and shouldn't do.
He made me a much better player and he must go down as one of Dalglish's best signings.’
Now, along with the manager and the players, Harford and his diligence on the training pitch face the test that could shape the rest of Blackburn's season.
If Dalglish paces the forecourt at Ewood Park, then Harford is the chief mechanic.
Rovers attacker Roy Wegerle, who also knew the man at Luton, says: ‘He and Kenny Dalglish obviously work together but Ray's influence on the way we play is very big.’
Harford's skills were recognised at Lancaster Gate when he became guest manager of the England Under-21 side last season.
Wegerle was not surprised.
He said: ‘At Luton he was always under pressure to play football and win games.
‘But they were a small club and it was hard work.
Despite their attractive style, Luton always seemed to languish near the bottom.
‘Now he has the players who can put into motion what he wants and the results have been pretty amazing.
He is a very intelligent football coach.
‘He oversees the whole system of play and the way we move forward.
Everyone at Blackburn realises how valuable his work is.’
Harford took what many would consider a risk to his purist tendencies by assuming control at Wimbledon.
But he never bludgeoned the individuality out of any player, not even in Wimbledon's sometimes sordid interests.
Barton says: ‘I had a reputation at the club of always trying to play a bit of football.
Sometimes too much.
‘Ray told me never to lose my individuality, always to believe in what I did best.
When he left I phoned to wish him all the best and he said, ‘keep on picking people's brains’.’
After a modest playing career, Harford hit the headlines when his unfancied Luton beat Arsenal 3–2 with a last-minute goal in the 1988 Littlewoods Cup final at Wembley.
Slander
At that time it got around that he was a straight-faced, humourless character, which Wegerle regards as a slander.
‘He's a very likeable chap, always pepping people up in the dressing-room with a smile on his face,’ says the £1.2 million capture from QPR.
And you can bet no-one in football has been thinking or working harder than Ray Harford in the week and a half closedown of the Premier League — and Blackburn's dream.
Face the fax, United
By Graham Fisher
MANCHESTER UNITED were left with egg on their faces yesterday after another abortive effort to land Sheffield Wednesday striker David Hirst.
An extraordinary day even by Old Trafford standards began with a British record bid of £3.5 million faxed to Hillsborough at 10.28am.
Less than half an hour later the reply was back, telling United to get lost.
Fifty minutes later shareholders at the annual meeting of United's parent company were being assured by chairman Professor Roland Smith that cash was available any time Alex Ferguson wanted it — but no mention of the fiasco that had scorched the airwaves a short time before.
While the shareholders in Manchester's Armitage Centre, home of the Giants basketball team, were voicing their suspicions, Wednesday manager Trevor Francis was voicing his anger at United's persistence after being told categorically last week that Hirst was not for sale.
Francis, flanked by secretary Graham Mackrell, who was waving the fax above his head, said: ‘I didn't even refer the offer to my chairman because I have a mandate that David is not for sale.
That's what I told Alex Ferguson last week and what our chairman told Martin Edwards.
We are very annoyed about this because the matter was closed.
I faxed back immediately saying just that.
‘Hirst is not for sale at any price but they just don't seem to want to accept that.
This kind of thing has an unsettling effect on a player but fortunately David is a level-headed lad and I've told him about the latest situation.
‘He signed a long-term contract only recently and has made it quite clear he is very happy here.
All he wants is to score goals for Wednesday and win back his England place.’
United chief executive Martin Edwards assured me last week — after the first enquiry for Hirst — that he would not talk to Wednesday again.
Positive
He made the point that had the position been reversed he would not expect to be pestered after giving a straight answer.
The suspicion at Hillsborough was that United wanted something positive to present to their annual meeting but were left with nothing to say after the brisk response from Francis.
Edwards refuted that suggestion last night.
He told me: ‘We made a bid this morning and had an answer turning it down.
‘When I spoke to Wednesday chairman Dave Richards last week I didn't actually put an offer in.
Alex Ferguson thought we ought to at least register it formally and that's what we did.
‘I have not spoken to Wednesday again, just confirmed in writing what I said previously.
After the controversy over last week's leak I would not have announced our move and I did not reveal it at our annual meeting.
I have no wish to unsettle the player concerned.
‘Obviously Wednesday have let it out.
this time and the ball's in their court.
Now we shall have to look elsewhere.’
Sale fan John Flacks, a member of the fledgling Supporters Shareholders Association, said last night: ‘I was at a meeting with Alex Ferguson on Thursday and he inferred that something might be sorted out by today.
Obviously they were trying to build some publicity coup for the annual meeting.’
Flacks and his colleagues, opposed to the public company which they feel is designed to produce dividends for major shareholders rather than quality signings, said: ‘Every speaker at the meeting was against the plc.
We were deprived a show of hands because they knew they would be defeated and embarrassed.’
Professor Smith, chief of the parent company, insisted that cash was available for Ferguson.
He told the meeting: ‘There are no constraints on the manager.’
Return ticket for Webb
NEIL WEBB shows his ‘true colours’ with his wife Shelley yesterday after rejoining struggling Forest for an £800,000 fee.
Webb, signed from Manchester United, said: ‘Forest are too good to go down.’
Lamb: Justice is done
By Graham Otway
ALLAN LAMB last night claimed a victory for his integrity in the infamous Pakistan ball-tampering controversy.
The England batsman's TCCB fine of £5,000 with £1,000 costs for his newspaper revelations was more than halved on appeal to the Cricket Council.
A five-man committee, headed by Judge Desmond Perrett QC, reduced the fine to £4,000 — £2,000 suspended for two years — and cut costs to £500.
And, as officials at Lord's were criticised for their harsh treatment of the player, Lamb was celebrating in Cape Town where he is currently playing for Western Province.
Lamb told me: ‘I am absolutely delighted with the result of the appeal.
‘I pleaded guilty because I realised I was in breach of my contract and expected to be punished.
‘But I felt that the fine was harsh and I had to defend my integrity which has now been upheld.’
Lamb broke the TCCB's rules on player silence when he spoke out after the lunchtime ball change during the fourth Texaco Trophy international between England and Pakistan at Lord's in August.
Lamb claimed he spotted the Pakistani bowlers behaving illegally and brought it to the attention of umpires John Hampshire and Ken Palmer.
The appeal committee said the original £5,000 fine ‘was not in itself excessive in view of the facts of the case which the committee regarded as grave’.
Service
A statement said the TCCB had failed to take into account Lamb's previously unblemished record and ‘outstanding service and contribution to English cricket.’
Lamb's QC had told the appeal he felt harshly treated when Surrey, whose bowlers had actually been caught ball-tampering three times, had only been handed a £1,000 suspended fine.
After having the judgement faxed to him in South Africa Lamb was ready to celebrate with his wife Lyndsay.
He said: ‘It's good to see that justice has been done — the pressure on myself and my family over this has been intense.
‘During the whole affair I have had hundreds of letters from English fans, and I would like to thank them all for their support.
‘I feel great now.
I'm delighted.’
Calm Davis keeps his nerve
Mike Allan
STEVE DAVIS revealed last night how he has conquered his nerves and set his sights on a seventh UK Championship.
Davis, who won the last of his six UK crowns in 1987, reached the quarter-finals at Preston with a 9–4 win over 10th seed Steve James.
And he said: ‘I've been in a state of panic on a snooker table at various times during the past two or three years because I knew I wasn't playing well.
That's a big drain on your confidence.
There's nothing to get too excited about.
There's still a long way to go.
But I'm going about my job in a business-like manner and I'm on target.
‘I fancied I would improve as the season went on and I think that's proved to be the case.’
While Alex Higgins reckons snooker can seriously damage your health, Davis is positively thriving on it at the moment.
The 35-year-old Essex millionaire now has an 18-month-old son, Greg, yet still works just as hard at his game.
‘The one thing this game teaches you is control,’ added Davis, no doubt referring to the missing quality that has cost Higgins dear over the years.
Meanwhile, John Parrott beat Dean Reynolds 9–2 and Jimmy White completed a 9–4 victory over Willie Thorne.
White, the No 3 seed, said: ‘I put a new tip on my cue and I've got a lot more to offer.
I think I'm playing better than last month when I won the Rothmans Grand Prix.’
Windies struggle
OPENER Phil Simmons rescued the West Indies with a century against New South Wales in Sydney yesterday.
He scored 109 as the West Indies reached 225–3 in their second innings after being dismissed for only 183 and following-on.
New South Wales had declared their first innings after scoring a mammoth 473–5.
Bath boost Wasps
WASPS regained the Courage League Division One leadership as Leicester Tigers were toppled by resurgent champions Bath.
Bath's 13–3 victory at rain-swept Welford Road was achieved against a Leicester side who lost captain Dean Richards on the morning of the match with a calf injury.
England centre Jeremy Guscott sliced through the slush to set up two unconverted second-half tries for wing Adedayo Adebayo and lock Nigel Redman.
Wasps, defending the only unblemished record in Division One, lacked their usual buzz, but had former England international Huw Davies's try to thank for a 10–6 win over spirited London Scottish.
Northampton moved into fourth place after a hard-fought 12–7 win over Harlequins.
League targets
Ray French
ORRELL rugby union stars Martin Strett and England's Nigel Heslop are targets for rugby league second division promotion hopefuls Oldham.
Oldham boss Peter Tunks has, I understand, already held talks with Strett and, should he clinch a deal with the 24-year-old Orrell stand-off, then he expects to follow up with a tempting contract for England winger Heslop.
The 28-year-old Heslop, holder of seven international caps, is currently out of favour and has fallen behind Northampton's Ian Hunter and Leicester's Tony Underwood in the race for inclusion in England's line-up.
King Campese carries on
Tony Roche
Wales 6, Australia 23
DAVID CAMPESE, whose genius inspired Australia to the world title 12 months ago, is on course to help them in their 1995 defence.
Campese will be 32 when the Wallabies lay their crown on the line in South Africa and coach Bob Dwyer is beginning to believe in miracles.
On a day when wind and rain swept away any chance of a running game, the man voted the best player in the 1991 World Cup ran 70 yards for his 52nd try in 72 internationals.
Both are Aussie records and the try, an audacious last-minute explosion of pace and power, extends a world record beyond the reach of mere mortals.
The man's global standing was summed up by the fact that he had the whole of Cardiff Arms Park standing for an ovation that tingled your spine.
‘Campo has not mentioned retirement since we won the World Cup,’ said Dwyer, ‘when he told me he was retiring!
‘Now I can see him going on to the next one, the way he is playing.
‘I certainly would not rule out that possibility.’
Campese, who hopes to face the Barbarians at Twickenham on Saturday, is more direct, saying: ‘I play because I enjoy it and as long as I am enjoying my rugby and I am wanted — well, you are a long time retired.’
Campese was virtually surplus to requirements as the injury-torn and weary Wallabies showed their more practical face by kicking the leather off the ball.
Against a Wales side growing ever more confident and on a genuine curve towards recovery, the world champions had to produce one of their most gutsy defensive displays, with Willie Ofahengaue and Tim Horan outstanding.
The scoreline was cruel to a Welsh side who shaded a tight, tough first half in which they shook Australia in line-out and scrum, taking the lead with a Colin Stephens penalty after 32 minutes.
The great sides always capitalise on moments of good fortune and when Marty Roebuck made a hash of a simple penalty four minutes from the break it somehow ended up as a try.
The ball struck a post, rebounded to the Wallaby back row who drove flanker David Wilson over before Wales could regroup.
Fractured
On the down side for the Wallabies, Wilson fractured a collar bone later and will miss Saturday's end-of-tour showpiece against the Barbarians at Twickenham.
Ten points in five crucial second-half minutes changed the complexion, Rod McCall driving over for his first international try, Roebuck converting then adding a penalty.
Meanwhile, former Australian star Simon Poidevin has answered an SOS from the injury-plagued tourists.
Poidevin, covering the tour as a TV commentator, pulls on a Wallaby jersey again in tomorrow's game against Wales Students past and present at Bridgend.
Evans raps fan
DENIS EVANS, the Welsh Rugby Union secretary, has condemned the supporter who tried to trip David Campese as he left the pitch on Saturday.
Campese was nearly sent flying as he jogged off through the crowd to join the dressing-room celebrations.
The world record try-scorer rounded on his attacker and exchanged heated words.
Later he said: ‘I guess Welsh fans were pretty upset at losing, but you should not show bad sportsmanship.
‘The guy tried to trip me up, so I told him what I thought.
Wales rugby is supposed to be resurgent, so they had better look at things off the pitch as well as on it.’
And Evans said: ‘I will be studying video tape of the alleged incident to try to establish the full facts.
After that I will approach the Australian tour management with a view to speaking to David Campese.
‘This is exactly the kind of behaviour we want to keep away from rugby.
Good sportsmanship both on and off the field is vital for the good of the game.
‘It is an individual and collective responsibility of all Welsh rugby fans to behave in a courteous and acceptable way.’
Eagles swoop to take spoils
Sheffield 32 Widnes 30
THE Sheffield Eagles produced a powerful second-half display to grab the points in a thriller.
Sheffield raced into the lead with a Paul Carr try but Widnes stormed back with two tries from Andy Currier after 18 and 22 minutes.
A try from Richard Eyres put the visitors further in front before Sheffield turned up the pace.
Tries from Dale Laughton, Carr and Paul Broadbent put the Eagles in control before Currier ran in for his hat-trick.
David Plange added another try for the home side but Widnes fought back with further scores from Bobby Goulding and Stuart Spruce but the Eagles managed to hold on for victory.
Table-toppers Wigan staged a dramatic recovery at Salford to win 26–18.
The home side had taken an early lead through tries from Ian Blease and Arthur Bradshaw.
Wigan fought back with a Dean Bell try but trailed 12–8 at the break.
Tries from Ian Lucas and Sam Panapa put Wigan in front but a John Gilfallan try reduced the deficit to two points before Denis Betts' try wrapped it up for Wigan in injury time.
Leeds salvage a point
Leigh 12, Leeds 12
A BREAKAWAY try three minutes from time saved Leeds from an eighth successive away defeat against bottom club Leigh yesterday.
Leigh, with only one win this season, led 12–8 until former Great Britain winger Carl Gibson broke out of his own half and outflanked the cover to touch down.
John Gallagher pulled his conversion attempt wide — then Leigh had one last chance, but Dave Tanner missed a difficult injury-time penalty.
Leigh had looked likely winners when they went ahead just before the hour.
A kick-through by Jason Donohue ran kindly for the home side and teenager Simon Baldwin, on his debut, touched down.
Honours were even in an error-filled first 40 minutes but Leeds took their two chances to edge ahead 8–6.
Paul Dixon put Leeds ahead but Leigh came back well and snatched the lead when scrum-half Stuart Pugsley chipped through to touch down at the side of the posts for Tanner to improve.
Seven minutes from the break Leeds swept through again on the left and Jim Fallon slid in at the corner.
Fox finds Saints far from slow
Ray French
Bradford Northern 4, St Helens 16
BRADFORD coach Peter Fox was made to eat his words by St Helens pack pair John Harrison and Kevin Ward at Odsal yesterday.
Fox had described the Saints forwards as ‘slow and cumbersome’ after Northern's 35–18 victory three weeks ago.
But the giant duo strode imperiously through the mud during the second half to set up Saints' two match-clinching tries.
Veteran Ward, 35, back after a three-week absence caused by a neck injury, powered upfield in the 58th minute, slipped a pass behind him to allow Tea Ropati to kick the ball forward towards the try-line.
Northern full-back Roger Simpson fumbled, allowing Anthony Sullivan to pounce and score.
And, in the 67th minute, again after good work by Saints' forwards, a clever combination of passes between skipper Shane Cooper and scrum-half Jonathan Griffiths put centre Garry Connolly over.
Defence
The appalling conditions, with driving rain throughout, determined the style of play on a heavy, muddy pitch.
And it was Saints' mighty pack and the masterly kicking out of defence by £90,000 signing David Lyon which swung matters their way.
Northern's biggest setback came with the loss of midfield maestro Deryck Fox with pulled stomach muscles.
He will be out of action for a fortnight and misses Friday's Test against Wales.
Bradford went ahead in the 15th minute when Tony Marchant snapped up a loose ball and squeezed in at the corner.
But after a period of intense pressure Kiwi Ropati tried a speculative grubber kick close to the Bradford try line.
Northern prop Roy Powell's attempt to kick the ball dead miscued, allowing Ropati to dash through and touch down beneath the posts.
Lyon, who had a miserable afternoon with his goal-kicking, added the first of his two goals out of seven attempts, to give Saints a 6–4 half-time lead.
Aga back in Court
THREE years and five months after the Aga Khan's Aliysa was first past the post in the 1989 Oaks, the latest chapter in the saga of her disqualification begins at the High Court today.
In what amounts to a test case, the Aga is seeking a review of the Jockey Club's decision to disqualify Aliysa.
Ground's re-routed
Henry Rix
COOL GROUND is almost certain to add another twist to an already intriguing Hennessy Cognac Gold Cup at Newbury on Saturday.
The £50,000-added showpiece was not originally on the agenda for the Gold Cup hero, but trainer Toby Balding was yesterday considering a late change of plan following Cool Ground's premature exit in Saturday's Crowther Homes Becher Chase at Aintree.
‘The horse appears fine after the fall, but we'll see how he is later in the week before making a final decision,’ said Balding.
Cool Ground, set to carry top-weight of 12st, would be attempting to become the first since Burrough Hill Lad in 1984 to win the Cheltenham Gold Cup and Hennessy in the same year.
The news prompted William Hill to introduce Cool Ground into their Hennessy betting at 16–1.
French-trained The Fellow, beaten a short head by Cool Ground in the Gold Cup, is also a likely runner on Saturday unless the ground becomes too soft.
There will be no rise in the weights if either Cool Ground or The Fellow face the starter, putting several fancied horses out of the handicap.
With Richard Dunwoody claimed for Gambling Royal, Graham McCourt is poised to step in for the ride on Grand National winner Party Politics.
Hills latest betting: 6–1 Captain Dibble, The Fellow, Chatam, Jodami, 12–1 Gambling Royal, Latent Talent, 14–1 Party Politics.
Sainz sets early pace
Frank Ward
CARLOS SAINZ yesterday served notice that he intends to hang on to his precious but tiny lead in rallying's World Championship after a dominant drive on day one of the RAC Rally.
The Spaniard, who leads the title race by a wafer-thin two points from Finn Juha Kankkunen with Frenchman Didier Auriol a further point adrift, opened a 20-second lead over Italian Miki Biasion's Ford Cosworth.
Sainz produced a typically uncompromising display in his Toyota Celica around the stately homes and racing circuits of the north Midlands.
Flying Scot Colin McRae is third, but Malcolm Wilson showed his highly-rated compatriot that he is not the only Briton gunning for the Pounds 100,000 jackpot being offered by sponsors Lombard for a home winner.
The British challenge was always expected to be spearheaded by McRae's Subaru Legacy, but Wilson confounded the pundits by snatching fifth place overall — four seconds behind his domestic rival.
McRae, five seconds behind twice former world champion Biasion's Ford and 25 seconds adrift of Sainz, could have been much closer to the Spanish ace had he not collided with a bale of straw during the second of two Clumber Park stages.
Meanwhile, Bob Green was yesterday counting the cost of the car theft which wrecked his hopes of competing.
His Ford Sierra Cosworth was taken from a hotel car park in Chester on the eve of the event and he said: ‘I am utterly and totally hacked off.
I've spent six weeks with my axe to the grindstone, rebuilding the car and these thieving toe-rags have come along and taken it.’
This was to have been Green's fourth RAC campaign.
His highest finish was 41st in 1989.
Late double saves Barnet
HITMEN Dave Barnett and Derek Payne kept Barnet's Third Division promotion bandwagon rolling yesterday in the 2–1 win over Cardiff at Underhill.
Their unbeaten home record was under threat when Carl Dale fired the Welsh side ahead after 62 minutes.
Super Shastri
INDIA captain Ravi Shastri hit a fluid 63 to steer his side to 226–4 against a South African Invitation XI in Bloemfontein.
Manoj Prabhakar had earlier taken 4–41 to dismiss the hosts for 219.
Briton's joy
OLYMPIC finalist Mark Foster, who swims for Barnet Copthall, claimed his second medal at the European Sprint Championships in Finland yesterday, taking third in the 50m freestyle.
Flying Finn
OLYMPIC champion Finn Christian Jagge won the opening slalom event of the season in Norway yesterday with a combined time of 1min 40.01sec to win the event by .72sec.
Four see red
DIEGO MARADONA scored yesterday in Seville's 2–1 Spanish League victory over Celta — who had four players sent off as the game ended in chaos with fans invading the pitch.
Becker is back to top
Giles Smith in Frankfurt
BORIS BECKER last night gave himself the perfect 25th birthday present, demolishing Jim Courier to become ATP world champion and end a disappointing year in triumph.
Delighting a delirious patriotic crowd of 9,000 packed into the Festehalle — who sang Happy Birthday at the start — in honour of his 25th, Becker was irresistible as he overwhelmed the American 6–4, 6–3, 7–5 in 2hr 23min to take the title he last won in 1988.
It was an emphatic win and a remarkable turnaround in his fortunes.
Until he won the Paris Open earlier this month — where he also beat world No 1 Courier — he wasn't even certain to qualify for this ‘best eight’ in the world’tournament, having fallen to 10th in the rankings for the first time in eight years, and failing to make a Grand Slam final for the first time in five.
Becker now moves from seventh to fifth in the rankings as a result.
‘I have beaten the best in the world here this week — the No 2, the No 4 and the No 1,’ he said.
‘I feel like I am the No 1 again.
I am hungry for success again.’
Becker revealed that he'd considered quitting the game earlier in the year.
He said: ‘I lost to Michael Stich 6–1, 6–1 — can you imagine how that felt, losing to the German No 2?
‘I decided then I had to be fit and hungry when I next played.
I had planned to be No 1 again some time next year.
It seems to have happened a little bit quicker than planned,’ he joked.
Courier had never beaten the German in five previous meetings, never looked like doing so yesterday and said: ‘He just beats me every time we play.
‘It seems he just keeps winning the last point.
I've just got to figure out how to win that last point.’
Courier's only glimmer of hope came when he broke serve in the first game of the third set, but it was only a momentary lapse of concentration by the German, who so likes to win in front of his countrymen and women, as he broke back in the next game.
After that the delighted crowd sensed their man had it won, and he duly obliged.
Seles is too strong
Barry Lucas
WORLD No 1 Monica Seles downed Martina Navratilova in straight sets to win her third straight Virginia Slims Championship in New York yesterday.
The Yugoslav won 7–5, 6–3, 6–1 as the 36-year-old Navratilova faded in the last two sets of the unique five-set final after a bright start.
‘It was pretty close for a while, but in the last two sets I got run over by a Mack truck,’ said Navratilova, who told the crowd that next year will probably be her last year of competing on the tour as a singles player.
She will continue as long as possible playing doubles, saying: ‘I'll hang in there for as long as I can.’
Seles said: ‘It's been a great season, and a great way to end it.’
Seles raised her earnings to $2,622,352, eclipsing her 1991 record.
She also claimed a $500,000 pay-out from the Virginia Slims Bonus Pool for being top of the Kraft Point Standings.
Time machine
Rob Shepherd
Leeds 3, Arsenal 0:
TOO many games, no time to coach.
It has become a familiar complaint of managers this season, dissatisfied that the ‘brave new world’ of the Premier League merely offers them the same problems as the old.
Are they just moaning minnies looking for excuses?
Well, here was the evidence to the contrary, ironically thanks to last week's international commitments.
The frailty of the Leeds defence has already cost them dearly this season.
So, with none of his rearguard involved internationally, Howard Wilkinson, who has constantly highlighted the shortcomings of a congested fixture list, had the luxury of 11 free days to work on the problem.
Potent
The effect was dramatic.
Against the most potent forward line in the country, what had been a shambles became a solid spine.
They provided the foundation for a conclusive victory by the champions which suggested they might yet put up a spirited defence of their crown.
Wilkinson was in no doubt how his team had benefited: ‘The fact I was able to work so hard with them has definitely made a big difference and helped improve my back four.
‘I am a coach, but I can't coach people sitting on a bus, a train or an aeroplane.’
George Graham on the other hand, having lost players from all areas of his team to their countries, was not able to prepare his team so efficiently.
It showed.
With the exception of Tony Adams, Arsenal were outmanoeuvred, physically and mentally.
Graham reflected: ‘We didn't have the same desire as Leeds.
The centre of defence did well but I was not happy with the forwards, or the midfield.’
Arsenal's lack of genuine quality in midfield was made all the more painful by a fine display by David Rocastle.
Surprise
Starting his first League game since his surprise £2 million summer move from Highbury, he helped Leeds to their first win in seven games — clinched through goals from Chris Fairclough, Lee Chapman and Gary McAllister, who hopes to sign a new contract this week,— by dominating the middle of the park.
Rocastle said: ‘I've had to be patient, but hopefully this can be the start of my Leeds career and a turning point for the club.’
Leeds showed that give players a respite from games and time to work on their ability, they can produce exciting football with good technique.
Quality not quantity, was the promise which sold the Premier League.
It is about time chairmen and administrators started to listen to the managers and worked on fulfilling the pledge.
MoM: Rocastle, Leeds (Rocky's back!)
Dicks proves a point
Geoff Sweet
West Ham 5, Oxford Utd 3
JULIAN DICKS had the perfect answer after being stripped of the West Ham captaincy on returning from a five-game ban.
He sent two screamers past Oxford keeper Paul Reece and declared: ‘People have been slagging me off, saying I can't play and talking about my disciplinary problems.
This is my answer.’
Dicks has just finished his second suspension this season.
‘I had a chat with manager Billy Bonds and he said that, with all my problems, he didn't want the captaincy to be one of them.’
Clive Allen, Tim Breacker and Trevor Morley scored the other Hammers' goals while John Durnin, Jim Magilton and Andrew Melville netted for Oxford.
MoM: Dicks (brilliant return).
Roberts passes screen test
David Harrison
: Wolves 2, Charlton Athletic 1
BARGAIN buy Darren Roberts upstaged his illustrious partner Steve Bull yesterday to secure the points which lifted Wolves back into the promotion picture.
The 22-year-old striker, a £20,000 capture from non-League Burton Albion, scored the 48th-minute winner that sunk Charlton, who had striker Garry Nelson sent off in the 69th minute for swearing at a linesman.
Roberts, who scored a hat-trick in a TV game against Birmingham City earlier in the season, again came alive in front of the cameras to lift Wolves from ninth to sixth place in the First Division.
It was as well for Charlton that former England striker Bull was unable to find his scoring touch.
He had four chances of piling on the agony for the Londoners but could not find a way past keeper Bob Bolder.
The record-breaking Wolves' hitman had a 20 yard screamer touched over the bar in the first minute, shot against the keeper's legs in the 24th, was again denied by Bolder in the 76th and fired into the side netting six minutes from the end.
Wolves went ahead in the 29th minute when Mark Burke converted a low cross from Robbie Dennison and Wolves always looked good value for their lead.
But they were pegged back in the 41st minute when John Bumstead scored with a diving header from Scott Minto’ s centre.
But three minutes into the second half Roberts, who had a first-half header disallowed for off-side, was on the mark to convert a clever build up involving Bull and Paul Birch.
Nelson, dismissed for complaining about a tackle by Derek Mountfield, said: ‘I've played more than 550 games and this is the first time in my career I've been sent off.
Everyone saw that the original decision should have gone my way.’
Charlton co-manager Alan Curbishley admitted that his side were on a worrying downward trend but pointed out: ‘In the last three years we have sold players worth more than £4 million and spent only Pounds 450,000.
But it has meant we are able to finance our move back to The Valley so I suppose that justifies it.
‘Our brief has always been to get back to our home ground and stay in the First Division and I think we are capable of achieving both.’
Admirable Agnew
STEVE AGNEW played just eight minutes in Portsmouth's 4–0 win over Tranmere, and it could land him a permanent move to Fratton Park.
Pompey manager Jim Smith said: ‘We're very serious about buying Steve from Blackburn.
Everything he did smelt quality, even though he was on for such a short time.’
Portsmouth could have doubled their tally, but settled for strikes from Alan McLoughlin, Guy Whittingham, with his 21st of the season, Paul Walsh and Ray Daniel.
NEWCASTLE'S Gavin Peacock is on course for his best goalscoring season after his 11th goal in 20 games killed off WATFORD in a 2–0 victory.
The converted midfield player marked his 25th birthday with the 51st-minute opener and Robert Lee rubbed it in with his first League goal for Newcastle six minutes later after Peacock's penalty had been beaten out by Perry Suckling.
Coppell laughs it off
David Tossell
C Palace 1, Nottm F 1
IF only Crystal Palace were as sharp as their manager Steve Coppell.
Palace lacked the speed of thought, the wit and the crisp execution that their boss displayed in his post-match press conference.
After seeing Chris Armstrong's first half goal cancelled out by a late Gary Bannister equaliser, Coppell admitted his team missed the creative ability of England forward John Salako, whose rebuilt knee had become ‘scrunchy’.
‘We're just hoping the dead man doesn't ask for his tendon back,’ added the manager.
Goalscorer Armstrong was in a more sombre mood.
‘Forest took control towards the end of the second half’ he said.
‘We are all terribly disappointed because this was a game we desperately wanted to win.’
MoM: Roy Keane, Forest (Pure class).
In with a shout
David Harrison
Coventry 2, Man City 3
STEVE McMAHON is having a bawl as he reminds the Manchester City youngsters that they are not a Route One team.
The former England midfield player admits he does not have the running power to dominate games like he used to, but he uses his lungs to great effect.
McMahon revealed: ‘We know we are a good team when we pass the ball around.
But sometimes I have to scream at them to do that.’
Coventry's on loan striker Micky Quinn gave them a two-goal lead, but City hit back with goals from Mike Sheron, Fitzroy Simpson and a Keith Curle penalty.
MoM: McMahon (inspiration).
Mum's boy
Sheff Wed 1 Ipswich 1
CHRIS KIWOMYA pounced to earn Ipswich a surprise point and then revealed he owes his success to his mother!
After his 74th minute strike, he admitted: ‘My mum is my No 1 coach.
She's always telling me when I do things wrong and she is always right.’
Wednesday had taken the lead with a Neil Thompson own-goal.
MoM: Mick Stockwell, Ipswich (driving force).
Big Ron's showing true grit
Ben Bacon
Tottenham Hotspur 0, Aston Villa 0
IF tough-guy Shaun Teale is Ron Atkinson's John Wayne, then virtually everyone else in Villa's team is a member of the cavalry.
No-one actually bellows ‘charge!’, but seldom has a side attacked en masse with such dash, vigour and style and not been rewarded with maximum points.
Only a couple of desperate goal-line clearances from Neil Ruddock and Paul Allen and fine goalkeeping from Erik Thorstvedt, prevented Villa from romping to yet another victory.
No wonder Spurs rate them the best they have faced.
So formidable were Villa in the second half, their performance even got Spurs Chief Executive Terry Venables back on the shop floor issuing desperate instructions by the dugout.
Certainly, they look an irresistible force and fortunately Atkinson has again moulded a team around his own outrageous personality — entertaining, a bit flash at times, but tough as old boots.
Some managers loathe having individuals in their sides because they worry about personality clashes.
But Atkinson positively encourages them — and Villa have their fair share.
Take striker Dalian Atkinson, who joked afterwards that he got his speed by being chased by dogs as a youngster.
Or central defender Teale who limped out of White Hart Lane, also nursing a wound above his left eye.
Now Teale likes a bit of chat and isn't afraid to speak his mind — especially when the conversation centres around Tottenham's front two.
Crying
On Gordon Durie: ‘I wasn't surprised when he was substituted because he was already crying after one of my tackles on him.’
On Teddy Sheringham: ‘Mr Sheringham elbowed me in the face and I could see it coming.
It was a case of Goodnight Vienna.
You could say I had a few choice words with him.’
Teale and Paul McGrath provide the muscle — and their central defensive partnership is already rated the best in the Premier League by big Ron.
But championships are always won at the front — just ask Alex Ferguson at Manchester United.
And up front Villa have got the perfect artillery in Dean Saunders and Atkinson.
MoM: Garry Parker, Villa (superb touch).
Spurs refute rift rumours
Ben Bacon
TOTTENHAM last night hit out at claims of a rift between chief executive Terry Venables and chairman Alan Sugar.
The pair have reportedly clashed over who runs the commercial side of the club, and their relationship is not helped by a new book by former chairman Irving Scholar.
Venables, who freely admits he took on a huge financial burden for his 22 per cent stake, is alleged to want more say on the financial side, but Sugar prefers him to concentrate on coaching.
In Scholar's book he alleges that Sugar once told him: ‘Terry Venables thinks he's an entrepreneur — I don't.’
But last night a club spokesman said: ‘The board denies such a rift.
Frank and forceful views are exchanged on the running of the company between all board members, although football matters are referred almost exclusively to Mr Venables, where his talents are clearly outstanding.
‘Both Mr Sugar and Mr Venables are accepted as having forceful personalities.
This is considered a healthy state of affairs, and encourages free debate within the privacy of the boardroom.’
And Sugar also refuted Scholar's claims.
He insisted: ‘I could not have made that statement.
When I bought Irving Scholar's Tottenham stake in June 1991 I was not in any position to judge Terry's talent for business.’
Fergie finds old touch
Graham Fisher
Man Utd 3 Oldham Ath 0
MAYBE Alex Ferguson should give Trevor Francis a ring this morning and say thanks very much.
That celebrated refusal to sell David Hirst leaves Fergie with at least £3.5 million and now perhaps he can spend it in a different direction and under less panic-driven circumstances.
Because the Old Trafford show is back on the road.
So how many goals would Hirst have scored against Oldham?
I reckon he might have been too dazzled by the glitter around him even to shoot straight.
I've always had a feeling that United's goal crisis was not the fault of Mark Hughes or Brian McClair but of problems around them — not least the inability of the midfield to score.
It is no coincidence that hapless Oldham ran into a side containing both Ryan Giggs and Lee Sharpe on the wings, Bryan Robson behind them and McClair in his rightful slot up front.
Only once before has this riveting axis started a game and the first-half goal rush was an event waiting to happen.
Young wingers are like young spin bowlers; it is that much harder the second time around.
Sharpe discovered that before his long absences through injury and illness; Giggs has been finding out this year.
But the two together are something else.
Defences dare not lean one way or the other because the invasion is symmetrical.
Giggs and Sharpe were full of running, skill and ideas and McClair rejoiced in it all, tripling his season's output with a double, laying on a goal for Hughes and figuring in half-a-dozen close calls.
Even then, the wisdom and mystical presence of Robson was required to make it all work.
That was graphically illustrated after the break when, with the excellent Paul Ince injured and Robson feeling his lack of match-practice, it indeed stopped working.
The second-half power cut hardly mattered because Oldham, embarrassingly inept as three goals punctuated the first half, were not much better when they were allowed to play.
Everybody loves Oldham.
It was like seeing an old friend suffer as Joe Royle's men, still without an away win, stumbled into the bottom four.
This brave little club, always on its uppers, has survived on Royle's wits and its cheerful football.
The wit, at least, is intact.
‘I'm not getting anxious’ said genial Joe.
‘It's not Christmas yet!
No, we are still enjoying it and we will continue to enjoy it.’
But there was no attempt to disguise what he had seen.
‘United were way ahead of us, simple as that.
They scored first from what should have been our free-kick, but that's no excuse because they played some excellent stuff.’
Ferguson was justly proud of the teamwork that supplied victory, saying: ‘We played some marvellous football and the movement off the ball was brilliant.’
Arsenal's defeat probably pleased him almost as much.
They were the one side he dare not lose sight of and United are off to Highbury at the weekend only four points adrift.
All bets are on again.
MoM: McClair (back to his best).
Robins strikes down Blades
Tony Kell
Norwich 2, Sheff U 1
MARK ROBINS sent another reminder to Old Trafford with his latest stunning strike.
The 22-year-old Norwich forward sank the Yorkshiremen with his 80th-minute goal, after veteran substitute Alan Cork had equalised following an own goal from defender Paul Beesley.
It took Robins's total to 11 for the season since goal-shy United sold him for just £800,000 in the summer, and Robins said: ‘I suppose I felt I had something to prove.
‘I felt I never got a chance there, but I have been given the chance at Norwich and I'm very pleased with how well it has gone.’
Poor Dave Bassett and his side were left with nothing after probably their best away performance of the season.
Bassett, brave as ever, said: ‘We are disappointed but we are not despondent.
Sometimes you just don't get the luck you need.’
MoM: Robins, Norwich (deadly).
Thomas injury setback
Des Kelly
LIVERPOOL'S Michael Thomas was last night ruled out for a month after an Achilles tendon operation.
But manager Graeme Souness lifted the Anfield gloom by pledging John Barnes would make his first appearance in almost six months during tonight's televised clash with QPR.
Thomas has been unable to shake off his recurring injury and, when the problem flared again after a midweek reserve game, he was sent for surgery.
The appearance of Barnes will add an exciting dimension to an already intriguing meeting at Loftus Road.
He will start on the substitutes' bench and Souness said: ‘The chances are good people will see Barnes involved at some stage.’
Souness will also be without Paul Stewart (hamstring) and Mark Walters (thigh).
QPR manager Gerry Francis will be looking for consistency and said: ‘Rangers were always capable of beating the teams at the top one week and losing to the bottom side the next.
But we've lost only six or seven of our last 42 games and that's pleasing.’
Bridge boys are looking menacing
Des Kelly
Everton 0, Chelsea 1
THE only predictable thing about Chelsea used to be their unpredictability, but you can't even bank on that right now.
The erratic London club used to have all the staying power of the latest King's Road fad, as a flash of brilliance was swiftly followed by downright disaster.
But Ian Porterfield and that wise old bird Don Howe have now moulded a team that has allied flair with fight, a combination that has brought an impressive six wins in seven games.
They were certainly too much for a dismal Everton outfit and Chelsea should have had more goals as they eased on to the heels of the leading Premier League pack.
They are beginning to quietly fancy their chances at Stamford Bridge.
Captain Andy Townsend said: We have a more solid look now.
‘We don't want to start crowing because we're not up there yet, but if we keep on like this I believe this side can make a challenge.’
Robert Fleck, Chelsea's £2.1 million signing, scored his third goal of the season to steal the glory, but the clutch of young talent at the club deserve wider recognition.
Graham Stuart tormented and teased Gary Ablett mercilessly throughout, beating the ex-Liverpool defender at will.
Eddie Newton ran the midfield alongside Townsend, while the inexperienced centre-half pairing of David Lee and Frank Sinclair dealt admirably with Everton's admittedly lightweight attack.
MoM: Newton (midfield dynamo).
Boro's stroke of luck
David Alexander
Middlesboro 2 Wimbledon 0
VINNIE JONES was lucky to stay on the Ayresome Park pitch after producing a second-half cameo straight out of his video.
But at least he can plead the provocation of referee Joe Worrall's bizarre decision to allow Boro's first goal after 48 minutes.
John Hendrie's strike was originally ruled out for offside.
But Boro assistant manager John Pickering persuaded linesman Graham Grandridge to change his mind after pointing out Wimbledon's Roger Joseph lying on the ground.
Pickering said: ‘I just appealed to the linesman.
I didn't think he'd seen the lad on the floor.
I've never known them change their minds before.
It was a brave decision.’
Chris Morris scored Boro's second.
MoM: Hans Segers, Wimbledon (Saving grace).
Title bid booster for Lewis
THE chances of Lennox Lewis fighting Riddick Bowe for the undisputed world heavyweight title were enhanced last night by the failure of George Foreman to agree terms with the new champion.
As a result, Lewis's manager Frank Maloney has been called to a meeting in New York this week with promoter Dan Duva and Bowe's outspoken manager Rock Newman.
But Maloney is not flushed with expectation.
He will be keeping his options wide open following information from ‘reliable sources’ that the impending offer for Bowe against Lewis will not be acceptable.
Following the breakdown of talks with the 43-year-old Foreman, Bowe's handlers are also considering a first defence against either of the ex-champions Michael Spinks or Michael Dokes at Madison Square Garden, probably in March.
‘I hope they are not going make my trip across the Atlantic a waste of time,’ said Maloney.
Shackled
Mike Walters
Southampton 1, Blackburn 1:
ALAN SHEARER caught a worrying glimpse of the future yesterday as his return to The Dell degenerated into a bruising stalemate.
According to the script of Shearer's homecoming party, the £3.6 million prodigal son was due to compound besieged Southampton manager Ian Branfoot's unpopularity on the south coast with the winner which kept Blackburn on the tails of Championship leaders Norwich.
But fortunately for Branfoot, Saints' central defender Ken Monkou — a Dutch totem who could end up marking Shearer for Holland against England in World Cup combat — trashed the script.
Not only did Shearer fail to score, but Monkou also refused him licence for so much as a solitary shot at goal.
Branfoot has been inviting Holland manager Dick Advocaat to run the rule over Chelsea reject Monkou all season but Shearer, for one, will be happy if the Dutch continue to ignore him.
The British record signing, given a rousing reception by Saints' fans before kick off, admitted afterwards that Monkou had left him feeling the pressure of a marked man.
He said: ‘Things went no better or worse than I expected: I'm getting that sort of treatment every game now and it's up to me to overcome it.
‘I'm bound to be a marked man because of the goals I've scored this season, but there will be more along soon — I'm sure of that.
‘People are going on as if there is a crisis at Blackburn because we haven't won for seven weeks, but we've only been beaten twice this season and if that's a crisis God help us.’
Jeers
Branfoot, greeted by the now familiar chorus of jeers and an assortment of banners demanding his resignation, could scarcely contain his delight at Monkou's performance.
He said: ‘We all know how good Shearer is but Ken's growing in confidence and stature with every game.
‘He has been outstanding for several weeks now — and he's got real pace, which you can't find these days, never mind buy it.
At £750,000 we paid the market price for him, but he looks a snip now.
He's proved to be a very good buy and, to be honest, I was backing him to restrict Shearer in the way he did.’
Shearer's former strike partner Matt Le Tissier should have carried the match ball home last night as the hero who sunk Dalglish's expensive assembly of stars.
But the England B international dragged a glorious chance wide with his right foot in the second minute, and repeated the sin in injury time with his left.
In between, however, he did launch a thunderous drive into the roof of the net after 22 minutes when Iain Dowie helped on keeper Tim Flowers's clearance.
Southampton's joy was short lived.
Sixteen minutes later skipper Kevin Moran headed the equaliser from a Gordon Cowans free kick — notching Blackburn's first League goal in more than six-and-a-half hours football.
Vinnie bust-up
David Alexander
VINNIE JONES was at the centre of another row just four days after his record £20,000 fine by the FA.
An angry Jones was involved in an ugly confrontation with the Middlesbrough bench after Wimbledon conceded a controversial first goal on Saturday.
Wimbledon's hard man ran across the pitch to point threateningly at Middlesbrough assistant manager John Pickering.
Referee Joe Worrall, surrounded by protesting Wimbledon players, missed the incident.
So did Match of the Day cameras.
But Pickering said later: ‘What Vinnie said to me was unrepeatable.’
Another Boro official added: ‘I'm not telling you what he said, but his next video should be with Lennox Lewis.’
Middlesbrough do not propose to take the incident any further.
Wimbledon were furious after Boro's first goal.
Worrall gave it, then disallowed it for offside but the linesman changed his mind after Pickering made a long appeal and Worrall then allowed the goal.
Jones led the furious protest and clearly lost some control during the match.
He was warned after a clash with Jon Gittens and was booked after a two-footed challenge on the goalscorer, John Hendrie.
Jones was handed the biggest fine in FA history on Tuesday and given a suspended six-month ban for his part in the video ‘Soccer's Hard Men’.
Joke
Before the game Jones said he accepted that the FA's decision and said: ‘I told the FA I'll try to put something good back into the game and I mean it.’
But his composure cracked with Boro's first goal.
‘It was a joke,’ he said.
‘It was offside but this has happened because we're Wimbledon.
It's our reputation.
When I went to the linesman he told me to clear off.
He didn't tell their fellow to clear off.’
Meanwhile, Middlesbrough are hoping to push through a £500,000 deal for Crewe's goalscoring midfield man Craig Hignett this week.
Peacock party time
John Wardle
Newcastle 2, Watford 0.
GAVIN PEACOCK is on course for his best goalscoring season after his 11th goal in 20 games killed off Watford.
That's one reason why boss Kevin Keegan was prepared to off-load Mick Quinn to Coventry.
‘It may work out that I don't get as many as last year, but I'm happy to play up front and as long as Newcastle go on to win promotion it doesn't really matter anyway,’ said the converted midfield player who marked his 25th birthday with the 51st-minute opener.
Robert Lee rubbed it in with his first League goal for Newcastle six minutes later after Peacock's penalty had been beaten out by Perry Suckling.
Keegan raced away immediately after the game — reportedly to check out a striker on the continent.
Hoddle injury fear
SWINDON'S promotion campaign may have to continue without Glenn Hoddle, who hobbled out of their West Country derby at Bristol City.
‘It's a painful calf injury,’ explained Hoddle after the 2–2 draw.
‘I won't know until perhaps Tuesday how bad it is.
I hope coming off the field quickly has prevented it being too serious.’
SUNDERLAND rode their luck as they eased relegation fears with a 1–0 win at DERBY thanks to Don Goodman's 16th-minute strike.
Derby twice hit the woodwork, had two goals disallowed and leading scorer Paul Simpson shot wide of an empty net from six yards.
Sunderland defender Terry Butcher admitted: ‘If Derby had scored it would have been like the Alamo.
‘Fortunately for us they didn't and now, after this win, hopefully it will be a platform for us to build on.’
Still Keane
David Tossell
C Palace 1, Nottm F 1.
ROY KEANE could have left Selhurst Park with a scowl on his face, Even though Forest snatched a late point, Keane had seen his exquisite performance wasted by struggling team-mates.
But he admitted: ‘I'm still enjoying it.
The spirit at the club is high.
We have just not had the luck.’
Gary Bannister (84) equalised Chris Armstrong's opener for Palace.
MoM: Keane (Class).
Happy fellow
By Henry Rix
STRONG winds at Newbury yesterday improved the chances of The Fellow making the line-up for Saturday's Hennessy Gold Cup.
Trainer Francois Doumen has warned that his King George winner will not run if the ground — soft at the moment — is too testing.
But despite fears that rain over the weekend had all but ended The Fellow's cross-channel raid, yesterday's drying wind has encouraged connections.
Newbury's assistant clerk of the course Richard Pridham, who has been in regular contact with Francois Doumen, gave an optimistic bulletin on the current track conditions.
‘The course is drying up quickly and you could almost call it good to soft.
It is much better than you would have imagined,’ he said.
‘We escaped the rain and have had lots of wind.
The next three days will be crucial,’ he added.
The the recent rain has not deterred punters who supported the French star yesterday.
Ladbrokes cut The Fellow to 11–2 joint second favourite from 7–1.
The owners of both Cool Ground and Twin Oaks are keen to run their horses and the indications are that they are likely to get their way.
‘We are in total agreement and if Cool Ground pleases us enormously and the ground is bottomless he is likely to run,’ said trainer Toby Balding.
Clash
Of Twin Oaks, Gordon Richards said: ‘The owner is keen to run but I have an open mind.
I will make a decision later in the week.’
Ladbrokes latest betting is: 9–2 Chatam, Jodami, 11–2 Captain Dibble, The Fellow, 8–1 Gambling Royal, 10–1 Latent Talent.
Meanwhile, Staunch Friend, Mark Tompkins' improving hurdler, is likely to contest the Gerry Feilden Hurdle at Newbury on Saturday.
He has been entered in both the Gerry Feilden and the Fighting Fifth Hurdle at Newcastle.
But Tompkins said: ‘It depends on the ground though at the moment I would favour Newbury for Staunch Friend and Newcastle for Halkopous.’
Staunch Friend, who gained his latest success at Cheltenham from Al Mutahm, could clash with David Nicholson's progressive Mighty Mogul.
Hallett taking hiding
MIKE HALLETT was taking a hiding from Thailand's James Wattana last night.
Nothing went right for Hallett during his fifth round match, and at 7–1 down, he is facing almost certain defeat.
Hallett, who has slipped from seventh to 24th in the provisional world ranking list for next season, missed an easy green in the opening frame then took a back seat as rampant Wattana raced 5–0 ahead.
He could hardly believe his bad luck though in the sixth frame as Wattana fluked the first red and proceeded to compile a total clearance of 136, the highest break of the tournament so far.
Northern Ireland's Joe Swail reached the quarter-finals by beating New Zealand's Dene O'Kane 9–3.
Durie's appeal
TOTTENHAM striker Gordon Durie, banned for three games after being found guilty of misconduct by the Football Association, will have his appeal heard on December 16.
Strett signs
OLDHAM rugby league club last night clinched the signing of Orrell and England B rugby union stand-off Martin Strett.
Lewis out
WALES and Llanelli flanker Emyr Lewis damaged a shoulder during Saturday's Test against Australia and will be out for a month.
Morris axed
DONCASTER rugby league club yesterday sacked coach Geoff Morris and assistant Kevin Parkhouse.
Tony Fisher takes over.
Summer blow
PHIL SUMMER, the Warrington prop, faces a lengthy lay-off after breaking his leg in their 21–20 defeat at Halifax on Sunday.
Spruce springs Test shock
By Ray French
WIDNES full-back Stuart Spruce yesterday received a shock call-up for injury-hit England's rugby league Test against Wales in Swansea on Friday.
Experienced pack stars Denis Betts, Kelvin Skerrett and Andy Platt and half-back Deryck Fox are all injured.
And coach Mal Reilly looks to the future with youngsters Spruce, Paul Newlove and Steve Molloy all included alongside experienced campaigners Lee Crooks, Ellery Hanley and skipper Garry Schofield.
Settled
Spruce, signed just three seasons ago from Widnes Tigers amateur club, said: ‘After switching about a lot this season I've settled in well at full back and it's a position I really enjoy.
‘It's a big game for me, but I will not be overawed as I'm not the nervous type.
‘Maybe, if the game was against Australia or New Zealand Alan Tait would have been preferred, but Mal Reilly is building for the future and now I have my chance I intend to make the most of it.’
Former under-21 cap Spruce is one of three new caps along with Leeds prop Molloy and Castleford scrum half Mike Ford.
Welsh coach, Clive Griffiths, who names his team today, was hoping to clear up doubts over Widnes second row Paul Moriarty and Salford full back Phil Ford.
England: Spruce, Hunte, Connolly, Newlove, Offiah, Schofield (capt), Ford, Crooks, Jackson, Molloy, Eyres, Clarke, Hanley.
McRae on cash course
COLIN McRAE was halfway to a £100,000 jackpot last night after taking the lead in the Lombard RAC Rally.
The brilliant Scot left world title chasers Carlos Sainz, Didier Auriol and Juha Kankkunen in his wake as a first British win for 16 years became a real possibility.
If his Subaru Legacy is first back in Chester tomorrow evening, Britain's brightest rally star will scoop the cash prize being offered by Lombard — to mark their last year of sponsorship — for a home win.
McRae roared to the fastest times on five of yesterday's 10 timed stages through the rain-lashed Welsh forests.
Then the 24-year-old from Lanark, co-driven by Derek Ringer, claimed he wasn't even racing flat out.
‘I'm still not driving 100 per cent,’ he said.
‘I'm hanging back and I won't start attacking until tomorrow.’
Trailing overnight leader Sainz by 25 seconds at the start of the day, the British champion steadily whittled away the deficit and opened a 12-second lead on the penultimate stage, before easing up and finishing two seconds ahead of the Spaniard.
Frenchman Auriol and triple world champion Kankkunen, his Lancia team-mate, are third and fourth respectively, 47 and 62 seconds behind.
The day had begun gloomily for British hopes, however, when Malcolm Wilson, fifth overnight in his Ford Sierra Cosworth, suffered the double blow of a broken prop shaft and turbo.
It cost him three minutes and he fell back to 14th overall, but drove magnificently to recover much of the deficit and climb back to eighth by the end of the day, sharing two stage victories with McRae.
But former boxing world champion Barry McGuigan was knocked out of the event with a blown engine on his Vauxhall Nova.
Probyn aims to prove a point
Tony Roche
JEFF PROBYN returns to Twickenham on Saturday determined to prove what everyone — apart from England's management — already believes.
That he is the best tight-head prop in the world.
Probyn, 36, is just four internationals away from becoming his country's most capped prop.
But promising newcomer Victor Ubogu has taken his shirt leaving the older hand desperate to push his case for the Barbarians against the world champions, Australia.
‘This is a tremendous opportunity to prove a point,’ he confirmed.
‘I have been around too long to take anything for granted so when I saw which way the wind was blowing I just buckled down and got on with playing.’
Ubogu's selection against South Africa, after a tough baptism against Canada, was a surprise…especially to the opposition!
Their front row trio, Johann Styger, Willie Hills and Keith Andrews, admitted that they had prepared on the basis that they would scrum down against the most successful England unit in history.
Hills said: ‘Jason Leonard, Brian Moore and Jeff Probyn are a world class front-row team and in our positions you need to know each other very well.
‘We think much of England's success is down to their strong front-row so, yes, we were pleased that Probyn wasn't playing.
We saw him in action in South Africa for the World XV in 1989 and the guys who faced him said he is the best in the business.’
Probyn himself says: ‘I hold my own beliefs about front-row play and one of those is that there is no substitute for experience.
‘Another is that at international level, scrummaging comes first and activity which may become possible in the loose comes second.
Free
‘Victor does a marvellous job in the loose for Bath because they are the strongest club side in England and therefore their pack give him the chance to run free.
‘But at England level you are always up against the best from another country and unless you get the basics right you are in trouble.
A solid scrum creates a winning platform.’
England have been in trouble twice this season, upset by Canada's pack at Wembley and shunted alarmingly by South Africa during the first half.
‘I was worried by that,’ said Probyn, ‘and only magnificent work by our back row and Peter Winterbottom in particular, wore them down.
‘Once the Springboks tired, the tide turned in the second half.
But I don't imagine France will tire, nor Scotland.’
Probyn made his England debut in Paris in January 1988, the same day Geoff Cooke took charge, and since then has contributed considerably to Grand Slams either side of a World Cup Final.
On Saturday he will face Dan Crowley of Australia, nine years his junior in age, 90 in terms of experience.
‘We have a quality street team to welcome the Aussies,’ said Probyn, ‘and I intend to go one better than the last time I faced them — the World Cup final 12 months ago.’
And Probyn, who is in top form for Wasps, admits: ‘A good performance would do me no harm.’
Campo cooler
AUSTRALIA'S David Campese is to receive a written apology from the fan he accused of tripping him after Saturday's win over Wales.
But the teenager, whose identity has not been revealed by the Welsh Rugby Union, maintains the clash was an accident.
Officials of the club he plays for, Brynamman, contacted the WRU yesterday to explain his position after speaking to him.
WRU secretary Denis Evans said: ‘We have viewed the video recording of the incident, which is not conclusive.
‘The person shown on television having an exchange of words with David Campese has come forward and given his account of the incident.
‘The fan has confirmed that he was pushed on the field.
It was that, he claims, which caused the clash between the player and himself.
‘Consequently, he has written a formal letter of explanation and apology.’
Eubank meets his match in tax man
By Steve Acteson
MILLIONAIRE Chris Eubank has at last admitted to an opponent that he can't beat — the tax man.
On Saturday night at Manchester's G-Mex Centre, Eubank, who modestly styles himself ‘Simply the Best’, faces his 10th world title fight in two years when he tackles Juan Carlos Gimenez in a fourth defence of his WBO super-middleweight title since February and one he cannot afford to lose.
While Eubank would do well to respect Gimenez's aggressive, hard-punching style — the Paraguayan has lost five times but never been stopped — it is the preservation of his own lavish lifestyle that drives 26-year-old Eubank on to fight after punishing fight.
‘I cannot say when I will retire but when I do it will still be madness.
The tax man doesn't allow you to stop, he's a gangster and I'd fight every four or five weeks if I could,’ he said.
‘He's running a cartel to make you carry on with your particular activity and then take his 40 per cent— it's wickedness.’
The three million unemployed may consider the acquisitive Eubank's £4 million earnings in his 33 unbeaten fights and his ownership of three houses and a block of flats in Brighton equally obscene.
Recently he took wife Karron across the Atlantic on Concorde for a day's shopping in New York in a white Rolls Royce.
Eubank resisted attempts to be draw on whether he resented the prospect of some of his taxes going into another property, the repair of Windsor Castle.
His own unashamed, burning ambition is ‘to make money.
That's all I ever wanted to do in boxing after I'd learned the craft and now I want to make a little bit more’.
Gimenez should have fought Eubank last year but was bypassed and instead, the tragedy of Eubank v Michael Watson II was enacted.
Gimenez, who went the distance before losing to a 36-year-old Roberto Duran in 1987 is relishing his chance to make up for lost time.
‘Eubank has never fought anyone of stature so it's a straight forward fight for me, thanks for the chance and I fully intend to take it with both hands,’ he said boldly.
He added: ‘Colin McMillan is the best boxer in Britain, Nigel Benn is the hardest puncher and Paul Hodkinson is the best fighter.
As for me I'm the most successful because I can box a little, punch a little , strut a little and talk a little .
I can do a bit of everything.’
Human
But he is intent now on presenting Instead, he preferred to dwell on his newly manufactured a softer image and even turned up for his press conference in an, admittedly immaculate, white tracksuit instead of his normal £2,000 Saville Row variety.
‘I was told I should become more human, less aloof.
I used to be aloof because I didn't want people becoming too familiar.
‘But despite all the mishaps that have happened to me I've never lost faith in the inner man and that's why I'm still where I am.
‘But I've become a cult figure over the past 18 months, I have respect now; people don't walk up in the street and say ‘Hi Chris’ and clap me on the shoulder.
They shake my hand and say ‘Hello Mr Eubank’.
That's why I can be softer now.
‘But the character of the fighter has no changed.
That cannot be compromised in any way so I shall still be as hard as ever in the ring.’
Regan reject
Tom Lyons
ROBBIE REGAN, the new European flyweight champion, is considering giving up his British 8st title because of the lack of real challengers, Dai Gardiner, his manager, explained: ‘I understand the Board of Control are nominating Francis Ampofo of London and Scotsman James Drummond as contenders.
‘Robbie has already beaten them in championship fights and owns a Lonsdale belt outright so he has nothing further to prove.
We are ready to relinquish the British crown to concentrate on Europe and a world title chance.’
Foster runs show for Steelers
BARRY FOSTER is threatening to run all the way to next January's Super Bowl in Pasadena, taking the Pittsburgh Steelers with him.
The 24-year-old running back, the leading rusher in the NFL, turned in yet another phenomenal performance to lead the Steelers to a 30–14 victory over the Indianapolis Colts.
Despite the absence of injured quarterback Neil O'Donnell and suspended tight end Eric Green, it was business as usual for Pittsburgh as Foster ran for 168 yards and two touchdowns.
The Steelers now have a tight grip on the AFC Central Division.
Their no-nonsense style makes them a better Super Bowl bet than the Buffalo Bills, who routed the Atlanta Falcons 41–14 with reserve running back Kenneth Davis rushing for 181 yards and two touchdowns.
If Pittsburgh do go all the way, they could find their old rivals the Dallas Cowboys waiting for them.
Troy Aikman threw two touchdown passes in their 16–10 defeat of the Phoenix Cardinals.
Jerry Rice's 42-yard touchdown catch led the San Francisco 49ers to a 27–10 win over the Los Angeles Rams while the Minnesota Vikings continued their march to the NFC Central crown when Aundray McMillan's 25-yard interception touchdown clinched a 17–13 win over the Cleveland Browns.
Boucher happy on travels
CANADIAN Donovan Boucher's fragile features are as deceptive as his piercing jab and his manner as cool as his fighting head.
Tonight he defends his Commonwealth welterweight title for the sixth time, the fourth against a British fighter, when he meets Ballymena's Eamonn Loughran at the Dome in Doncaster.
Boucher, 31, has a habit of beating fighters in their home town.
‘My last defeat was in New York against Glenwood Brown in 1989 but, instead of putting me off going to a guy's home town, it seemed to encourage me,’ said Boucher.
‘I beat Gary Jacobs for the Commonwealth title in Glasgow but my British return was more satisfying when I beat Kirkland Laing.’
In 1991 Boucher knocked Laing out in nine rounds but was ignored by all the world champions and is still being avoided.
‘I deserve a world title shot but nothing's happened.
A fighter has to have power behind him or nothing will ever happen and that has been my trouble,’ admits Boucher.
Kiwis suffer defeat
NEW ZEALAND, whose tour of Sri Lanka was delayed by nearly a week and then rescheduled after a bomb blast near their hotel, yesterday lost their opening game by 17 runs in Matara.
The tourists were humbled by a Sri Lankan Cricket Board XI which included five Test players.
Chasing a target of 182 off 45 overs, New Zealand finished on 164–7 in the first of two one-day warm-up games before the first Test which starts in Colombo on Friday.
Draw
The Kiwis struggled after losing half their batsmen for only 44, including opener John Wright for a second-ball duck and skipper Martin Crowe for 18.
Meanwhile, Carl Hooper (124) and Gus Logie (99) steered the West Indies to a draw against New South Wales in Sydney.
Hooper, who top-scored with an unbeaten 81 in West Indies' meagre first innings total of 183 in reply to New South Wales's 473–5 declared, needed just 102 deliveries for his century.
Smasher Sanjay
INDIA'S Sanjay Manjrekar hit a timely unbeaten century as they drew with a South African Invitation XI in Bloemfontein yesterday.
He scored 102 not out, his third ton of the tour, as India decided to use the fourth and final day of the match as preparation for the second Test, which gets under way in Johannesburg on Thursday.
Manjrekar, who in the first Test struggled for 36 minutes for a duck, batted nine minutes short of five hours before India, 31 ahead on first innings, declared at 312–8.
Mandy Yachad and Mark Rushmere made half centuries and when both sides agreed to call it a day the Invitation XI had reached 129–1.
Teale blow
David Harrison
ASTON VILLA defender Shaun Teale is out of Saturday's top-of-the-table showpiece against Norwich.
Teale damaged knee ligaments against Spurs on Saturday which will bring an end to an unbroken run of 70 matches in the first team.
Atkinson said: ‘It's a blow to lose someone like Shaun, who has been so impressive for us.’
Meanwhile, Sheffield United manager Dave Bassett has raided the non-League market, paying £50,000 for Sutton midfield player, Andy Scott.
Hirst still United target
By Rob Shepherd
MANCHESTER UNITED are still confident they can land David Hirst.
United have not given up hope of signing the England international despite having a formally faxed £3.5 million offer for the striker thrown in the bin by Sheffield Wednesday last Friday, after a verbal offer had been refused the previous week.
They intend to keep up the pressure, because I understand that the player can be lured to Old Trafford.
Wednesday manager Trevor Francis insists Hirst will stay at Hillsborough.
But the longer United's interest hovers, the harder it will become for all parties at Wednesday to stand firm.
And United are still prepared to offer the attractive proposition of hard cash, plus quality players in exchange.
This bargaining power is likely to push the real value of a deal through the £4 million barrier.
Although United's goal-drought ended on Saturday with a 3–0 win over struggling Oldham, they are still keen to strengthen their forward line.
Although they have other options, the fact they have not yet given up on Hirst means they still feel they can sign their prime target.
And it is believed that Hirst may decide to seek advice over his future in the coming week.
Meanwhile, Dave Bassett last night made a typical raid on the non-League market, paying £50,000 for Sutton United midfielder Andy Scott.
It was from Sutton that Sheffield United boss Bassett signed Paul Rogers for a similar amount last season.
Rogers is now established as a United first-teamer, and Bassett said of 20-year-old Scott: ‘He also has the potential to make the grade.’
Platt's waiting game
By David Harrison
ENGLAND manager Graham Taylor last night was waiting on the outcome of a knee operation which will force midfield star David Platt out of action until the New Year.
The £6 million Juventus player has finally been forced to accept that the cartilage damage which has troubled him for several weeks requires surgery.
Platt said: ‘It has been niggling me for some time and, although it is nothing serious, it has been decided to sort it out sooner rather than later.’
He goes into hospital  tomorrowWed looking to return before Christmas.
But England boss Taylor is more cautious.
Taylor said: ‘Even allowing for the big advances in modern medicine, I've always been a big believer in waiting for an operation to be complete before making any assessment.
It's advisable to reserve judgement and I'm keeping my fingers crossed.
‘But if it's as they say it is and everything goes smoothly, David will only miss four or five matches at the most.
‘The Italian League season has a three-week break over Christmas and he should be able to come back after that.
‘That will help soften the blow a little.
There is nothing worse than being injured and watching all the games pass you by while you are out of action.’
Platt has become an integral part of a midfield unit which has been designed by Taylor to give Paul Gascoigne the freedom to display his full repertoire of skills.
But as well as sharing in the donkey work, Platt's goals have become a vital part of England's armoury and before last week's 4–0 win over Turkey he scored his country's previous five goals.
Taylor will not want his former Aston Villa protege to be missing from the next World Cup qualifier against San Marino at Wembley at February 17.
And provided there are no hidden complications, Platt should be back in action long before that.
‘David did very, very well to get through the Turkey game the way he did and if you were not aware that he had this problem with his knee, you wouldn't have known it was there.
‘Our midfield unit is working very well together.
There's a bit of everything in there and David is a very important part of it.’
Taylor was upset with Platt before the Turkey game for not informing him of the serious nature of the injury but the player surprised him by playing at Wembley with his usual effectiveness.
Platt had originally planned to undergo the operation during the Christmas break but felt a constant pain in his knee during his warm-up before Juventus' game against Torino on Sunday.
Meanwhile, Tottenham's England Under-21 player, Darren Anderton, hits the comeback trail today.
The 20-year-old returns to full training following his hernia operation, convinced he can further boost Spurs revival and has set his sights on a Coca-Cola Cup date at Nottingham Forest on December 2.
Anderton said yesterday: ‘I was just coming into some form when I had to have my operation.
‘A lot of young players are now susceptible to hernia problems with the pace of the game and the hard work you have to put in.
‘The recovery has been quite quick, just a few weeks, although I woke up one morning feeling terrible and drowsy’
He added: ‘The side has been doing really well without me but I'm out to convince everybody that I'm worth a place in the side.’
Hunt earns chance in Italian job
By David Alexander
STRIKER Andy Hunt is handed a chance to stake a claim in the Newcastle United gold rush tonight.
The 22-year-old earns his first game under Kevin Keegan's management in the Anglo-Italian meeting with Ascoli.
Hunt's appearance represents a career reprieve — he was dropped when Keegan arrived, and then practically written off by the manager.
But hard graft is rewarded at St James' Park tonight as the First Division leaders pursue a £1 million bonus.
‘He hasn't played a game for me since I came here,’ said Keegan yesterday.
‘And I didn't think he ever would play in my team.’
Hunt, a £150,000 signing from Kettering 22 months ago, scored 14 goals until he was dumped into the reserves by Keegan who added: ‘He has worked hard, he's knuckled down and he deserves his place.’
Hunt, who broke an ankle at the start of this season, said: ‘This is a good opportunity for me to show what I can do after a bit of a difficult time.’
Keegan also pushes 20-year-old Alan Neilson and 18-year-old's Steve Watson and Alan Thompson into the side.
‘These kids deserve their chance,’ he said.
‘They're good players but haven't sulked at being out of things.
‘I still regard this as a strong team.
In fact we played some of our best stuff of the season against Leicester in this competition with fringe players in the side.’
And Keegan, who transfer-listed nine players in midweek, added: ‘These kids were the reason the others went on the list.
They were being held back.’
Assure
Reaching the final of this competition at Wembley could earn Newcastle up to £1 m and Keegan said: ‘I can assure the fans we're not treating this as a public workout.
We're taking it very seriously, and I had a go at the players after our game in Italy.
‘Only one English side goes through from our group and we're going for it.
This competition is worth winning.’
Liverpool's late show
By Rob Shepherd
QPR 0, Liverpool 1.
JOHN BARNES made a dramatic return to English football last night when he set-up Ronnie Rosenthal to score Liverpool's winner at Loftus Road for their first away win in the League for 10 months.
Barnes, on as a first-half substitute, stole the game from Rangers when he released Rosenthal down the left flank in the 87th minute.
The Israeli international beat off the challenge of Darren Peacock before driving the ball beyond goalkeeper Tony Roberts.
It left Rangers ruing a series of missed chances in a game they should have won before half-time.
Rangers have shown a delightful disdain for reputation this season.
They took the game to Liverpool even after the arrival of Barnes for his first senior outing since rupturing an Achilles tendon during England's European Championship friendly in Finland six months ago.
He entered the action after 17 minutes when Ian Rush limped off with hamstring trouble.
But despite some lovely touches from him, Rangers kept the initiative.
Les Ferdinand, England's most recent recruit, showed why Graham Taylor has given him international recognition with a stunning first-half display of power and pace.
Snatch
The only thing he and Rangers lacked was a goal, but it was not for the want of trying.
In the sixth minute, Andy Impey released Ferdinand down the right flank.
The big centre-forward effortlessly strolled past David Burrows, moved into the penalty area and set up Bradley Allen — but his snatched shot went over.
Rangers continued to move forward and four minutes later Ferdinand latched on to a fine chip by Ian Holloway.
Again he beat Burrows, but this time decided to go it alone.
He committed Mike Hooper to his dive, but his shot spun up off the keeper's legs, giving Torbin Piechnik time to head away from under his crossbar.
Barnes managed to stem the tide a little by giving Liverpool a genuine attacking outlet.
However, his first involvement was to break up a scuffle between Impey and Burrows, which brought Graeme Souness running onto the pitch to complain to the linesman — strange behaviour from a manager who, last month, was given a five-match touchline ban by UEFA.
Luckily for him, referee Roger Milford ignored the tantrum.
When things settled down, Barnes led Liverpool back into the game and produced three excellent crosses which, fortunately for Rangers, the Liverpool attack failed to convert.
Rangers, though, deserved some fortune because they had enjoyed none at the other end.
In the 25th minute Ferdinand was again unlucky when he saw a deft flick picked off by Hooper.
Two minutes later Hooper pulled off another fine save from Andy Sinton's venomous shot.
From the resulting corner, Alan McDonald headed past Hooper but Rob Jones, back in the Liverpool side, cleared off the line.
Barnes remained Rangers' main concern and Liverpool's chief source of hope.
Just before the break he forced Roberts to shuffle across his line to block a curling free-kick.
Five minutes after the break it appeared he had forced Rangers into unexpected submission.
He opened up their defence with one of his typical runs and fed Rosenthal, who moved the ball into the path of Steve McManaman.
Lost
The young winger fired past Roberts, but referee Milford ruled Rosenthal had been offside.
Rangers had lost some of the invention they displayed in the first half, but still had Ferdinand eagerly searching for a goal.
For all his efforts, he lacked the final touch and in the 65th minute he glanced his header wide from Holloway's cross.
Anderton's mission
TOTTENHAM striker Darren Anderton hits the comeback trail today and has set his sights on a Coca-Cola Cup date at Nottingham Forest on December 2.
The 20-year-old, recovering from a hernia operation, returns to full training convinced he can boost Spurs revival still further.
Anderton, who has yet to score in the League, has missed the last five matches in which Spurs have extended an unbeaten run to seven games while beating the likes of Liverpool and Blackburn.
And he said: ‘The side has been doing really well without me but I'm out to convince everybody that I'm worth a place in the side.’
Charlton's players will be back at The Valley today — seven years after the club moved out to share with Crystal Palace.
The players will train on the new pitch for the first time in preparation for their ‘homecoming’ First Division sell-out fixture against Portsmouth on December 5.
The crowd capacity at The Valley remains uncertain but it will be more than 8,000 — at least 2,000 above the figure envisaged when Charlton announced the end of their ground-sharing scheme with West Ham.
Crosby eyes £1m Dodds
David Alexander
SUNDERLAND want Dundee striker Billy Dodds, but it will cost them more than £1 million.
Dodds is Scotland's second leading scorer behind Ally McCoist and Roker manager Malcolm Crosby said: ‘I'm very interested and would take him tomorrow if I could.
‘I've seen him play and liked what I saw.
Maybe Dundee will be interested in players here, or I might have to break the club's transfer record to get him.’
Dodds, 23, was sold to Dundee by Chelsea for £50,000.
He has scored 12 goals so far this season.
Crosby, fighting to keep his job at Sunderland, wants a goalscorer to replace John Byrne, who was sold to Millwall last month for Pounds 250,000.
But it is not clear whether the board will back him in the transfer market — a report out last night forecast a £1m loss at the club this year unless they enjoy a good FA Cup run.
Sunderland made a profit of more than £500,000 in the last financial year, which finished with a Wembley final appearance.
Cup blow for McCoist
By Scott McMunn
RANGERS' European Cup plans were thrown into turmoil last night with three key players in doubt for tomorrow's meeting with Marseille at Ibrox Park.
Worried Rangers manager Walter Smith revealed that Richard Gough, Stuart McCall and Ally McCoist are all injured.
Only McCall, who hurt his neck in training yesterday, has a reasonable chance of facing the French in the first game in Group A of the mini-league series.
Gough has been slow to respond to a groin injury which has plagued him since September and has been sidelined since the win over Celtic on November 7.
But the greatest potential damage to Rangers' hopes of victory would be the loss of McCoist with a calf injury.
Apart from scoring in both legs against Leeds, the striker's rich vein of form this season has seen him net 32 goals in 26 appearances.
‘Ally is very doubtful,’ admitted Smith.
‘He hurt his calf muscle in training — an injury he originally picked up against Portugal for Scotland last month — and had to stop.
Now we just need to wait and see how he progresses.
‘Of course we want him to play but we can't do any more than wait.
I will give him every chance of making it.
‘McCall hurt his neck in training but I'm hopeful he will be okay.
It is more difficult to tell with Gough's groin problem.
He trained today but still felt the injury and the final decision will be down to him.’
With a total of seven ‘foreigners’ at his disposal, Smith must know how many Scots are fit and available before selecting his three non-nationals.
If the injured trio — or even one of them for that matter — miss the game, Rangers may have to rely on goalkeeper Andy Goram more than ever.
Goram's displays in the last round against Leeds, especially at Elland Road, contributed enormously to the English club's exit from the competition.
The Lancashire-born keeper, capped 26 times by Scotland, believes that Rangers are ready to confound their critics once again.
Goram said: ‘Not many people in England believed we could beat Leeds and I don't suppose there are many Frenchmen who think we can beat Marseille either.
Concerned
‘However, we've beaten both Lyngby and Leeds home and away and see no need to be concerned about Marseille.
They beat us in a pre-season friendly at Ibrox but we are not even thinking about that game.
It was just that — a friendly.
‘If we spend our time worrying about what they can do we're as good as dead.’
Hignett on move
By John Wardle
LENNIE LAWRENCE last night snapped up the youngster tipped to be another David Platt.
Craig Hignett agreed a £500,000 move to Middlesbrough from Crewe, the club that also discovered Platt.
And Lawrence said: ‘The lad has enormous potential.
‘He's very versatile and has scored 15 goals already this season.
That's not bad for a midfield player.’
Boro's swoop will disappoint a number of Premier League clubs, including Manchester City and Crystal Palace.
First Division leaders Newcastle were also interested, but boss Kevin Keegan decided against making a move.
The deal rivals Crewe's club-record £525,000 sale of defender Rob Jones to Liverpool a year ago.
Wilko Swede storm
LEEDS manager Howard Wilkinson angrily called off his bid to sign Swedish World Cup central defender Patrik Andersson yesterday.
But he has left the door open to Andersson's international team-mate Joachim Bjorklund.
When talks broke down at a Leeds hotel last week, Wilkinson told both players to go home and think over his offer, but Andersson's later outburst left the Leeds manager fuming.
The 21-year-old Malmo defender, who carried a £750,000 price tag, first annoyed Wilkinson by calling out to photographers: ‘If Leeds pay peanuts they can expect monkeys.’
Wilkinson said: ‘I won't be throwing myself in the canal over the collapsed deal.
Keown is target
Des Kelly
ARSENAL have made the first move towards landing Everton's Martin Keown in a £2.5 million deal.
Gunners manager George Graham has informed Goodison Park of his interest in the England centre-half — and his approach has not been discouraged.
It is an amazing turnaround as, back in 1986, Arsenal let the young Keown go when contract talks failed after they refused to pay him a mere £50-a-week more.
But now I understand Everton would be willing to offload the 26-year-old.
Everton boss Howard Kendall is reluctant to allow a quality player to depart, but with the club almost £4 m in debt and gates falling it seems the only way he can gather sufficient funds.
The Merseysiders are well blessed with defensive talent and started the season with a central pairing of Dave Watson and Gary Ablett, a partnership disrupted to accommodate Keown's return from injury.
Elsewhere, however, Everton are crying out for new talent.
The arrival of Keown at Arsenal would put a question mark over the future of Steve Bould, although Graham has in the past employed a three-man system at the heart of the Highbury defence to great effect.
Last season was unquestionably the Keown's most successful.
He was handed his first full England cap against France in February and shut out Eric Cantona so comprehensively that he held his place for the European Championship finals.
Unfortunately he damaged his knee in Sweden and underwent surgery to cure the problem during the summer, delaying his return to the Premier League.
Keown started as an apprentice at Highbury, but made his debut while on loan at Brighton in 1985.
He remained there for the start of the 1985–86 campaign, but returned to Arsenal to make 27 first-team appearances.
Keown then left at the end of his contract after being unable to agree terms with Graham over a new deal — and alleging that the sticking point had been a request for £50 a week more than he was offered.
Aston Villa signed him in June 1986 for £200,000 and three years later Keown went to Everton in a £750,000 deal.
Now his fortunes are poised to turn full circle again.
Flash, bang, wallop
By Mike Walters
BARNET were last night fined a massive £50,000 for irregular payments — and controversial chairman Stan Flashman capped the club's ignominious day by brawling with photographers.
Flashman attacked cameramen — including TODAY's Chris Turvey — before and after the Football League inquiry into Barnet's financial affairs.
The three-man commission imposed the second biggest fine ever levied against a club for financial irregularities.
Only Chelsea's £105,000 bill in 1991 for payments to former captain Graham Roberts tops the penalty dished out to the Third Division promotion-chasers yesterday.
But the shame of Barnet's book-keeping, which breached various League regulations, was dwarfed by the conduct of Flashman — self-styled king of the touts — either side of the six-hour meeting.
Flashpoint No 1 came as Flashman arrived in mid-morning for the meeting at a West End hotel.
As freelance snapper Dale Cherry took pictures, Flashman threatened: ‘Take that and I'll smash that camera over your head,’ before lunging at the startled photographer.
Cherry tried to free himself from 20-stone Flashman, who tumbled to the ground, taking with him a handful of material from Cherry's ripped coat.
Flashman's wife Helen, the company secretary, helped winch him to his feet before going into the meeting, flanked by club secretary Brian Ayres and a team of legal experts.
Cherry said: ‘He came at me like a man possessed.
He's ruined an expensive coat and I'll be seeking legal advice.’
After the meeting, Flashman slipped out of a side exit to the hotel's underground car park — but not before he had pinned another photographer, Paul Welford, against a wall.
Welford said: ‘He grabbed me by the lapels and cuffed me across the face, but I shielded myself from the rest of his blows.’
Then Flashman turned on Turvey, who said: ‘Flashman grabbed the flash at the top of my camera and bent it deliberately.
By the time he got to me he wasn't ranting and raving, he just stared at me with mad eyes.’
Incredibly, Flashman then posed for pictures with his wife, smiling as though nothing had happened.
Flashman's lawyer Stanley Beller issued a statement afterwards saying: ‘Quite simply, Barnet have been found guilty of a number of technical offences.
There is no question of any impropriety whatsoever.
Guilty
‘In our view the fine is excessive and will be appealed against.’
The three-man commission — League president Gordon McKeag, Bury chairman Terry Robinson and Lincoln chairman John Reames — said in a statement: ‘Barnet have been found guilty of a number of breaches of Football League regulations, mainly in connection with the keeping of proper books of account and players' contracts.
‘The commission accepts there are a number of mitigating factors.
‘Nevertheless, these are serious breaches and must be treated as such.
Barnet will be monitored by a further book inspection at the end of April.’
QPR sunk by Barnes super show
By Rob Shepherd
JOHN BARNES last night inspired Liverpool to their first away League win of the season.
Barnes, playing his first game since rupturing his Achilles tendon in the summer, came on as a substitute and set-up the 87th-minute winner for Ronnie Rosenthal in their 1–0 victory over QPR.
And delighted Liverpool manager Graeme Souness said: ‘John Barnes is a determined man, and he's keen to prove that he can keep his international career very much alive, despite some of the things people said last week.
‘Now I'm hoping we can see the best of Barnes because since I've been Liverpool manager it is something I've not seen.’
Rangers manager Gerry Francis, disappointed that his side failed to capitalise on their outstanding first half display conceded: ‘Barnes was the difference, not just by the way he played, but more by his sheer presence.’
Murphy's mount
Jockey of the moment Declan Murphy ended Nick Gaselee's frustrating search for a big race rider when he agreed to partner Party Politics in the Hennessy Gold Cup at Newbury on Saturday.
Murphy, who landed last Saturday's H & T Walker Gold Cup on Deep Sensation, became the latest recruit for the Grand National winner when Graham McCourt turned down the ride.
‘Declan schooled him and the horse jumped brilliantly.
I am thrilled with the way they got on’, said Gaselee.
‘He is just as fit as he was 12 months ago and just as good’, he added.
Party animal
Richard Smith
IT WAS every jump jockey's worst nightmare.
A series of bad falls, a year and a half on the sidelines, and a promising career suddenly headed for oblivion.
Carl Llewellyn had looked as secure as any pilot could be on National Hunt's casualty-strewn road to success.
The Welsh farmer's son had the 1988 conditional jockeys' title already in the bag, and the ink was hardly dry on a retainer with Lambourn handler Captain Tim Forster.
Then disaster.
A catalogue of injuries included a broken left leg and a dislocated elbow, and left him a spectator on racing's sidelines for 18 months.
‘It was a real killer — you lose all your contacts and I knew it would be desperately difficult to come back,’ he says.
‘I deliberately cut myself off from racing as much as possible while my injuries healed, and ended up managing a village pub near Lambourn.’
Salvation, finally, appeared out of the blue one night in the shape of up-and-coming young trainer Nigel Twiston-Davies.
‘I was at a disco on crutches when Nigel asked me about my plans — and casually said I could ride for him whenever I was free.
That offer gave me a lifeline.
‘Nigel is so laid-back and a real joker but he works like hell and gets the horses very fit.
‘I think he is brilliant.
He makes training look easy and is a man with a terrific future.’
Backed
Indeed, the publicity-shy Cheltenham handler is currently topping the trainers' championship with £117,000 prize money won, a large chunk of which arrived when Tipping Tim and Llewellyn ran away with the Mackeson at Cheltenham ten days ago.
This season 27-year-old Llewellyn already has 23 wins under his belt and looks on course to top his previous best total of 53 achieved last term and capped with a Grand National triumph on Party Politics.
Ironically, the Aintree heroes line up as adversaries for the Hennessy at Newbury on Saturday — Llewellyn rides Twiston-Davies' well-backed Captain Dibble, while Party Politics will have stand-in Declan Murphy in the plate.
‘I'd love to have ridden Party Politics again but there was no question of a choice,’ he says.
‘You must get your loyalties right and if Nigel wants me I ride for him.
‘From the time I was a child my dream was to win the Grand National and the biggest thing I've gained from it is confidence.
‘It was one of the few races where I've been happy with my performance.
Usually I come back feeling annoyed with myself.’
Peter Scudamore still has first call on Twiston-Davies' string when he is not riding for Martin Pipe.
But Llewellyn's retainers with Twiston-Davies and Tim Forster, plus attractive rides for David Nicholson and Nick Gaselee, make those dark days when the phone never rang seem a long way off.
A Dibble helping
CARL Llewellyn will be tucking into a hearty breakfast of bacon and eggs before he sets out to win Saturday's Hennessy Gold Gold Cup on Captain Dibble.
Blessed with a perfect 9st 5lb race riding physique, he is immune from the lettuce leaf diet and stamina-sapping sauna sessions which are the bane of so many jockeys' lives.
The talented seven-year-old Captain Dibble, an impressive winner of the Scottish Grand National last season, has earned his place among Saturday's market leaders
‘Captain Dibble is a lovely horse and a real professional,’ Llewellyn said yesterday.
‘He is very strong and would love heavy going at Newbury.’
Man is only mortal
Henry Rix
REMITTANCE MAN emerged from his Huntingdon prep race yesterday as 5–4 favourite for the King George at Kempton.
But the Champion chaser, who was landing his 12th success from 13 starts over fences for Nicky Henderson (above), was far from impressive on the softish surface.
Uncle Ernie was apparently not finished when crashing out at the last fence, and at the line Remittance Man had only seven lengths to spare over handicapper Emsee-H.
‘That's not Remittance Man's ground,’ explained Henderson.
‘He was carrying a lot of condition, but he'll look hungry at Kempton,’ he added.
Corals quote last year's King George winner The Fellow at 2–1 second favourite for Kempton.
Ticket threat
Giles Smith
BRITISH tennis authorities are to consider banning clubs who do not organise junior development schemes from receiving Wimbledon tickets.
Announcing a £63 million, five-year court-building plan yesterday, Lawn Tennis Association chief executive Ian Peacock admitted that no current players are likely to make a major impact on world rankings.
‘That is why it is so important for all 2,500 clubs in this country to have junior development schemes as a priority,’ he said.
Asked why the LTA didn't use the ultimate sanction of stop Wimbledon tickets going to clubs which didn't, he said: ‘It's an interesting idea.’
Wattana is White on cue
THAILAND'S James Wattana booked his quarter-final place in the Royal Liver Assurance UK snooker Championship yesterday with a 9–1 win over Mike Hallett at Preston to set up a meeting with Jimmy White today.
King Eamonn
IRISHMAN Eamonn Loughran was crowned Commonwealth welterweight champion last night when he knocked out Canada's Donovan Boucher in the third round.
Off the Mark
BBC TV issued an apology to Saracens lock Mark Langley after wrongly linking him with an incident that put Gloucester's Marcus Hannaford in hospital at the weekend.
Colin called up
SCOTLAND'S Colin Montgomerie has gained a place in the World Championship of Golf in Jamaica next month as replacement for American John Cook.
Why he must go
Mike Walters, Ben Bacon and Steve Acteson
STAN FLASHMAN was the most unwanted man in football last night.
Rebel Barnet shareholders are set to ask the Department of Trade and Industry to investigate the club's finances in a bid to have Flashman kicked out of Underhill.
An angry councillor pledged to table a motion deploring the Barnet chairman's conduct at Monday's explosive Football League commission, when Flashman scuffled with photographers.
Fellow chairmen attacked Flashman's behaviour, with Millwall chief Reg Burr saying: ‘What do you do with a man like that?
He ought not to be in football.
I've never met the man…and I've no wish to.’
The Football Association, already probing allegations of FA Cup final black market tickets traced back to Barnet, threatened to charge Flashman with disrepute if they receive an official complaint.
Protests
And disenchanted fans prepared to stage their most vocal demonstration against his administration at tonight's FA Cup replay against Bournemouth.
The angry group of minority shareholders will even risk Barnet folding in an effort to unseat Flashman, whose undignified brawling blackened further the day his club were fined £50,000 for irregular payments.
Russell Delaney, joint chairman of the Barnet Shareholders Action Group, said last night: ‘We prepared a report for the DTI earlier this year on the way the club is being run.
‘Our legal adviser told us that using such a route could even lead to the club being closed down if their investigations opened up a real can of worms.
Obviously we don't want to see the club die but Flashman's latest antics are so disgraceful that we are nearing the stage where we call in the DTI.
‘Under the Companies Act, we are entitled to take such action if more than 10 per cent of the shareholders back the application.
We have at least 15 per cent of them with us.
‘If there are book-keeping irregularities, then he has breached the Companies Act, which is where the DTI comes in and it's the only way we can get rid of him.
‘There are bound to be more protests against Flashman.
I wouldn't be surprised if we had sit-down protests or boycotting of home games.
‘But ours is the only alternative whereby we can hope to get rid of him legally.’
Labour councillor Anita Campbell, whose Arkley ward includes Underhill, said last night: ‘Stan Flashman has dragged the name of Barnet through the mud.
‘Everyone wishes he would leave because of all the bad publicity he's brought to the borough.
We have a council meeting on December 15 and I shall be talking to the rest of the Labour group about proposing a motion condemning his antics.
‘If it were possible for the Football League to kick him out of the club, that's what I want.
‘It's such a shame because the team has done so well on the pitch and manager Barry Fry is trying to do his best.
‘Everyone I know wants to see Flashman leave.
The last thing we want is pictures of him on the back pages having a punch-up.
‘But Flashman doesn't care what people think of him and that's why he behaves in such a ridiculous way.’
Supporters, incensed by Flashman's comments on BBC Radio 5 earlier this month, when he alleged ‘fans don't matter — they just pay their entrance fee’, are bound to vent their feelings during the Bournemouth Cup tie.
And one player admitted: ‘If the fans feel strongly enough about something, they are entitled to pay their money and have their say.
The trouble with all these bust-ups is they get deflected to the players on the pitch in the end.
‘We can scarcely do any better in terms of results we're winning regularly, we're second in the League, still in the Cup…but given what's happening off the pitch, it's a bloody miracle we're not bottom.’
FA spokesman Mike Wilmore said: ‘We are concerned about the image of the game and if we receive a complaint it will be thoroughly investigated to see if it should be brought before our disciplinary committee.’
And Charlton chairman Roger Alwen joined the chorus of disapproval, saying: ‘Those photographs were just awful.
I can't believe that anybody in his position could behave like that — you can't go round hitting photographers, whatever the situation.
‘Other people have been disciplined for similar actions.
I think what happened to Vinnie Jones, for example, was a fair cop and club chairmen have to be as accountable as anyone else.
‘I'm surprised the Barnet fans haven't got together to try to get the club taken over and I'm also surprised that Barry Fry is still there.’
Fry last night warned Flashman he would walk out on Barnet if star striker Gary Bull was sold over his head.
Fry said: ‘Bully won't be sold to pay off a fine — if he is, I'll quit.
It's as simple as that.’
Crash of the the Everton empire
Duncan McKenzie
SEVEN years ago Howard Kendall was riding high, the highly successful manager of the richest outfit in football.
On Saturday I sat there watching his team lose at home to Chelsea and listening to an Australian Evertonian who was back at Goodison for the first time since he emigrated in 1985.
‘At least Neville Southall's still here — and thank God for that,’ he said after another stunning display from the man in black.
In that year, Kendall's Everton won the Cup Winners' Cup and the League and lost by the only goal in the FA Cup final to Manchester United.
They were a great side, the Mersey Millionaires backed by the wealth of the Moores family and the Littlewoods empire.
They were bigger, richer and better than anybody and looked like staying that way for years.
But Howard is presiding over a fallen empire now.
Two points off a relegation place and with no money to spend, they're on Skid Row and Kendall has gone from prince to pauper.
The change at Everton is as incredible as the transformation at Blackburn, in reverse.
The players aren't good enough and Goodison Park fans can't believe what they're seeing.
Instead of that great side, what have they got?
Up front, there's Mo Johnston and Paul Rideout, supposed successors to Graeme Sharp.
There's Barry Horne in place of Peter Reid, Robert Warzycha for Trevor Steven, Peter Beagrie for Kevin Sheedy.
It's like being told that Frank Sinatra can't make it but, don't worry, we've hired a punk rock band instead.
Kendall has to take some responsibility for this, because he bought Johnston and Rideout, but he's the victim of the decline more than the cause.
I played for Kendall at Blackburn Rovers and admired what he did there.
He's a great coach and organiser, and in my view there's nobody better qualified to sort out the Everton mess.
But he needs time or money…and there's no money.
Howard always started by getting the 'keeper and back four right first, and he's done that.
Sell
The trouble is, apart from Peter Beardsley and the recovering Ian Snodin, there are no Sinatras in front of them.
It's indicative of his desperation that he's prepared to sell Martin Keown, an England-class centre half, to raise some cash…but even that would be nowhere near enough to start re-creating the mid-1980s dream team.
There are others he didn't buy and wants to unload, like Tony Cottee who cost £2.2m, but they're on such big contracts other clubs can't afford their wages.
But that's where the manager's a victim, trapped in a sort of time warp, waiting to find out if those Moores millions will ever be available again.
Sir John Moores, a great Evertonian, is now well into his 90s and nobody has a crystal ball to tell whether the heir, or heirs, will have the same enthusiasm for the club.
His nephew, David Moores, is chairman at Liverpool but Everton are treading water, waiting to see what the future holds.
Right now, Kendall is not back at the aristocratic Everton he knew seven years ago.
He's actually back at the working class Blackburn Rovers he managed before that, where he had to scrape for money and look for bargains.
If there is an answer at Goodison, and I'm not sure there is, he's as near to it as you are going to get.
But the bottom line is that Everton are no longer big and ambitious.
Certainly not the Everton Kendall envisaged when he returned there.
He is Everton blue through and through, but if these doubts about money continue, you wonder if he'll stay.
Howard might have a seven-year itch over that wonderful side he built, and maybe the board should find some cash before it becomes a terminal rash.
Sad McRae crashes out of running
Graham Fisher
THERE is never a good time to kiss £100,000 goodbye — but with Christmas round the corner, Colin McRae must be wondering what he has done to upset St Stephen.
After two days McRae was two seconds ahead of the pack and a good bet for Britain's first win in the Lombard RAC Rally since Roger Clark in 1976 — and the sponsors' six-figure bonus.
Yesterday, though, was altogether different.
At special stage 20, the valiant 24-year-old Scot gunned his accelerator as the marshals gave him a five-second countdown.
The Lakeland Fells, seductive and peaceful in late autumn colours, echoed to his impatience.
McRae's Subaru coughed like a grizzly bear, went sideways into the first of a thousand bends, spitting grit in lacerating force at a lot of spectators, as brave as the men they had come to admire then disappeared into the foreboding conifers of Grizedale Forest.
But this annual nerve-shredder, as remorseless and cruel as it is exhilarating, had already struck.
Puncture
McRae had a minor prang — or so he calls it — on his way to the trees.
The damage appeared slight but a front-brake problem developed.
In next to no time a puncture cost him his lead and a further 11 seconds.
Appearing down Grizedale West, he had to override the transmission balance and after just two stages they were putting in a new gearbox.
Things did not improve.
MacRae dismissed his case notes for the third stage as ‘rubbish’.
It was perhaps as well I couldn't find the author — During stage four there was vibration from the front wheels and the drive-shafts were due for replacement.
By now McRae was down to seventh, four minutes adrift and close to tears.
World Championship rivals Carlos Sainz, Didier Auriol and Juha Kankkunen were in charge.
The brakes had gone at the same corner where he rolled last year.
‘What can you say?
I just hope they cancel Grizedale next time,’ he said bitterly.
Drama continued into the night.
Sainz had to pacify angry paying spectators when the Kershope leg was cancelled after a medical emergency in the crowd had delayed the timing and left drivers without spotlights.
Then Frenchman Auriol had to quit with engine trouble, leaving Sainz leader ahead of Kankkunen and Ari Vatenen with one day to go.
McRae moved back to sixth but is still nearly four minutes behind the leading Toyota Celica.
by no means was McRae the only driver to suffer misfortune.
A fully-grown stag leapt over the Toyota of Britain's Charles Golding in mid-stage.
He promptly went off at the next corner, punctured and limped the last five miles on a flat.
No venison for him at Christmas.
German Michael Kahlfuss, in his much-ridiculed 600cc Trabant, seemed more at home in the land of Wordsworth and Wainwright.
‘There is no reason why we shouldn't finish,’ said the affable driving instructor from Magdeburg, who is trying to cross the Atlantic in a rowing boat and the Statue of Liberty is not far off.
There was a bit of a snag when Gunter Friedmann lost his voice.
‘How,’ I asked the co-driver, ‘do you communicate?’
Gunter flicked his thumb this way and that and grinned like a Cheshire cat.
It is a bit like the London Marathon, this Rally.
At one end world superstars wrestling their megabucks motors round unnavigable corners at speeds to make your hair curl and, at the other end, Herr Kahlfuss and his chum tootling along on a nod and a wink.
Bishop shock
Ray French
DAVID BISHOP, who has played only seven matches in 18 months, is Wales' shock choice at hooker to face England on Friday.
But he warned: ‘There is no greater challenge in rugby for me than to play against England before my own people.’
WALES: Ford, Cordle, Bateman, Devereux, Sullivan, Griffiths, Ellis, Young (capt), Bishop, Jones, Marlow, Moriarty, Ackerman.
Vale's perfect Foyle
David Harrison
Port Vale 3, Stoke 1
MARTIN FOYLE last night erased a 36-year-old blemish from Port Vale's record books with a crucial double strike.
His two goals helped Vale beat local rivals Stoke for the first time since 1956 and for the first time ever in the FA Cup.
Full-back Lee Sandford gave Stoke a 24th-minute lead but Foyle equalised for Vale a minute later.
In an aggressive encounter, there were bookings for Stoke's Carl Beeston in the 16th minute and Mark Stein and Chris Sulley for a 35th-minute flare-up.
Vale went in front two minutes into in first-half injury time through midfielder Andy Porter.
fired a rising left-foot shot into the roof of the net.
Stoke were unlucky when substitute Dave Regis, faced with an open goal just seconds after replacing Graham Shaw in the 65th minute, saw his shot pull up in the water-logged goalmouth.
But Foyle sealed Stoke's fate when he rounded keeper Ronnie Sinclair to stroke the ball into an empty net with a minute to go.
Vale boss John Rudge said: ‘We had a bit of luck when that shot from Regis stuck in the mud but I'm overjoyed for our fans because I know how much it means to beat Stoke.’
Newcastle in mass brawl
NEWCASTLE'S Anglo-Italian Cup game against Ascoli erupted into a 22-man brawl by the touchline five minutes from time.
Newcastle striker David Kelly was sent off for a foul on Michele Menolascina and the fracas broke out.
The scuffling players were joined by officials of both sides, including Newcastle manager Kevin Keegan, who tried in vain to get his men away from the trouble.
Police, who were forced to intervene, said later they would not be taking any action.
Holders Newcastle lost 1–0 and will probably bow out, having taken just one point from their two games.
German striker Oliver Bierhoff grabbed the 63rd-minute goal for the Italians, relegated from Serie A last season.
Morley spoils magic show
Tony Kell
West Ham 2, Reggiana 0
CLIVE ALLEN scored twice, but Trevor Morley was sent off as European football last night returned to Upton Park for the first time in 11 years.
Morley went after appearing to head-butt Gianluca Francesconi in an 11th minute off-the-ball incident, drawn to Italian referee Graziano Cesari's attention by English linesman Paul Vosper.
And manager Billy Bonds admitted afterwards: ‘I was very disappointed with Trevor for retaliating.
He felt the Italian boy was going to have a go at him but I don't know whether it was a punch or a head-butt.’
Morley refused to discuss the incident, saying: ‘I don't want to say anything — it's best left alone.
I have been done anyway.’
Morley's sending-off, West Ham's fifth of the season, was just one flashpoint in an explosive first half.
The trend was set by a fifth-minute booking for Manuel Vivani after a late challenge on Martin Allen.
And there was almost a mass brawl 10 minutes before the break after Mark Robson was axed by Gianfranco Parlato.
Parlato was also booked after one rash challenge too many on the excellent Robson.
But 10-man Hammers, beaten in their opening Anglo-Italian fixture by Cremonese two weeks ago, still proved superior to opponents unbeaten in 12 Serie B matches.
Allen headed West Ham in front when the Italian goalkeeper Luca Bucci failed to hold a Kevin Keen cross.
And the much-travelled striker sweetly volleyed a second 15 minutes later from Martin Allen's free-kick.
Attila meets Boom Boom
Scott McMunn
HARDMAN Basile Boli has already left his mark on England's Psycho — and now he's gunning for the man they call Attila.
Millions of television viewers saw the French defender's brutal head-butt on Stuart Pearce during the European Championship in June.
And if Rangers striker Mark Hateley needs a preview of what he's up against at Ibrox tonight, he need only watch a video replay of that moment of madness.
Boli — Boom Boom to Marseille fans — was recently banned for four games after a fearsome tackle on Monaco's Jurgen Klinsmann and goes into the European Cup tie talking more like a boxer than a footballer.
He said: ‘It will be as hot as a world heavyweight fight.
I'm Tyson and he is Holyfield.
‘I know Hateley is known as Attila — well, tell him Boom Boom is waiting.
He, along with McCoist if he plays, is the No 1 threat to our chances.
Touch
‘My duel with him will be a key to the match.
He is a powerhouse, a battering ram, but also has touch and an eye for goal.
I will try not to frighten him physically.
‘He knows me — on the pitch he is a player I have often talked to.
I cannot forget one match, when he scored four goals at Sheffield when England Under-21s beat us 6–1.
‘Since then, I have always tried to make things even.
Now, perhaps, I get my chance.’
Hateley, of course, spent three seasons in France with Monaco However, earlier this month, and just smiles at the mention of the Frenchman's name.
‘People who say a lot don't normally do a lot.
It's the quiet ones you look out for,’ said Hateley, who struck a spectacular opening goal in the second round victory at Leeds.
‘In any case, Boli might think he is tough but we play against real hard men every week in the Scottish Premier League.
‘Obviously he is just trying to wind people up, but I think I'm too long in the tooth to take any notice of anything he says.
Personally, I think it's a cry of insecurity!’
Hateley added: ‘Yes, I scored those four against him at Hillsborough and another in the away leg.
‘I also scored for Monaco when he played for Auxerre and I was on target with Rangers' penalty when we lost 2–1 to Marseille in a pre-season friendly here in July.
So it's fair to say he doesn't bother me.
‘I'll have something to say to him, but most of it isn't repeatable.
He'll doubtless have a go back, but that is just typical of any battle for a striker and defender.’
The last Scotsman to score against the French giants has warned Hateley to watch out, however, because the knock-out blow can come at any time.
Fears
Ray Stephen scored for Nancy in a 5–2 defeat in Marseille's Velodrome Stadium last season.
And he fears Rangers could be virtually mugged into submission in the white-hot atmosphere of tonight's match.
He said: ‘I have never known a team who force you into a corner so much.
When you have the ball, three of them come at you — two to tackle you and the third to go away with the ball.
‘Then they burst into little groups of three or four to attack.
The only guy who goes his own way is Abede Pele, the Ghanaian who they just let roam free.
He is brilliant.
‘When they have a problem, they give him the ball and he does a few tricks.
Generally it ends with them having a crack at goal.
‘But they are a hard team, a really hard team.
Boli is tough as walnut.
When he hits you, you stay hit.
He comes through you like a train — but he's generally fair.
‘I quite fancy Rangers for a result in Glasgow — but their big problems come in Marseille.
It is the most frightening place I have every played in.
Rumble
‘The dressing rooms are underground and you can hear the rumble of the crowd above you.
As you walk up the stairs, the noise grows and you know it is going to be a hot reception.
‘But nothing prepares you for the blinding flash of flares and the noise of the thundercrackers as you run on to the field.
‘You have to run.
You think the fans are going to jump over the fences and grab you.
You are not playing 11 men — it is a team and 40,000-plus lunatic supporters.’
It is, of course, a new-look Marseille who tackle Rangers.
Spaniard Martin Vasquez, back with Real Madrid after an unhappy few months at the Velodrome, has left in the last year or so along with Chris Waddle, Trevor Steven, Dragan Stojkovic, Eric Cantona and £10 million Jean-Pierre Papin.
Vasquez said: ‘One of the great attributes of a great side is a settled team.
‘But Marseille — and in particular president Bernard Tapie — want too much too soon and make too many changes to try to achieve their ends.
‘I expected my times at Marseille to be measured in years and months, not weeks and days.
Tapie's dealings only succeed in creating uncertainty on the field and friction in the dressing room.
‘Marseille look like struggling to hold on to their League title and if their fans see things slipping, they will turn on Tapie and the team.
‘If they go out of Europe, I believe Tapie will go and take his bully-boy style of management with him.
‘For that reason alone, I hope Rangers beat them.’
Whittingham the villain
GUY WHITTINGHAM'S golden touch deserted him as Portsmouth slipped to a 3–0 defeat in Bari last night.
The £2m-rated striker missed three chances to add to his 21 goals so far this season as Pompey dominated the first half of this Anglo-Italian Cup tie.
His best effort was well saved by Taglialatela, and Colin Clarke hit the bar in the 33rd minute.
Bari punished Pompey in the second half when Caglianelli and Alessio struck twice in 40 seconds, with Capocchiano adding a late third.
Tel fury at Mabbutt claims
TOTTENHAM chief Terry Venables last night denied allegations about Gary Mabbutt made in a new book.
Former White Hart Lane chairman Irving Scholar claims Venables often singled out the former England international for criticism over his defending and once tried to sell him.
But Venables countered: ‘Gary Mabbutt was given a new three-year contract last January which illustrates my confidence in him.’
Tottenham directors also expressed ‘dismay’ at Scholar's version of events at White Hart Lane when he was chairman.
Gough plans to use brain over brawn
Rob Shepherd
RANGERS, having won the Battle of Britain by beating Leeds to progress to the Champions League, begin their quest to successfully invade Europe against Marseille at Ibrox tonight.
But their captain, Richard Gough, aware of the high expectations, warns: ‘We must avoid the danger of believing we won something by beating Leeds.
The European Cup really begins for us against Marseille.
‘The matches against Leeds were very British types of games, and we won the fight.
‘But we will now encounter different styles, so the matches will now be more a battle of wits.’
Gough has been suffering from a groin injury, but trained yesterday and should play.
Prolific
Leading goalscorer Ally McCoist, who needs one goal to become Rangers's most prolific striker in European competition, is more doubtful with a calf injury.
And manager Walter Smith said he would not play him unless he was fully fit.
Smith said: ‘We have players all over the park who can score goals for us.
Ally didn't train and must be rated very doubtful at this stage.
‘He has been scoring goals all season and will be a big loss to the side.
Even so there is no way I'll take a gamble.
It's the type of injury that could be made much worse if he plays.
‘A good start is important but we could risk our success in all competitions if Ally plays and is then out for three months.’
The French will wait until they know whether McCoist plays before deciding on their line up.
But it is sure to include African footballer of the year Abedi Pele, picked out by Trevor Steven as their danger man.
Steven, who re-joined Rangers from Marseille in the summer, says: ‘Pele is a very unpredictable player.
He has a lot of skill and pace, and could cause us problems.’
The England international reluctantly left France, because of Marseille's failure to honour his contract.
Revenge would be sweet for him tonight, and he feels the current Rangers side can make the final.
Steven said: ‘I think we are a stage ahead of the other Rangers teams I've played with in Europe.
‘We are not as naive as we were.
In the past we thought we were ready to take on Europe and were a little ahead of ourselves.
But now we have a good chance of going all the way.’
Seventh heaven
Cosenza 0, Derby 3
DERBY earned their seventh consecutive away victory last night with a convincing win over Cosenza.
Derby took control in a devastating 12-minute burst early in the first half.
In the eighth minute, Andy Comyn scored with a looping header after fine work from Tommy Johnson.
Paul Kitson had the simplest of chances after 19 minutes, nodding home a Mark Pembridge cross.
And within 60 seconds, Marco Gabbiadini made it three to the Rams, racing clear and firing home from 12 yards.
Cosenza had their moments but could not find a way through Derby's tight defence.
Some bad news for Derby was the loss of Darren Wassall through injury at half time following several hefty challenges from the Italians, who had four players booked.
Derby's keeper Steve Sutton was finally called into action in the 57th minute, turning a drive from Fabris round the post.
Allon's a hero
Brentford 1, Lucchese 0
JOE ALLON, Brentford's new signing from Chelsea, struck his second goal in four days to put the Brentford top of Group B of the Anglo-Italian Cup.
The Bees had to be patient before their winner came nine minutes from time.
Micky Bennett's free-kick was flicked on by Gary Blissett and Allon steered the ball in at the far post.
Brentford manager Phil Holder said: ‘Joe is a very whole-hearted player who will always give value for money.
‘He's had a tough 18 months because he hasn't played much football, but he will be very good for us and will get better.
We just need to work on his fitness.’
Board fury at Curtis salary
David Harrison
COVENTRY CITY managing director George Curtis was at the centre of a boardroom bust-up yesterday over his ‘staggering’ £163,000 annual income.
Curtis received the sum — half in salary and half into a pension fund — during a year when the Midlands club plunged £3.3 million into the red.
Now Coventry face an angry backlash from shareholders at their annual meeting on December 18 when their accounts will reveal a trading loss for the year of £1.4 m.
Chairman Peter Robins, who took over the Sky Blues last November, singled out Curtis's earnings yesterday claiming: ‘It is a staggering figure — a staggering sum of money in this day and age.’
Honour
But he added: ‘It was a contract signed by George Curtis and the previous chairman.
It expires in June 1994 and Coventry City intend to honour it.’
While there appears to be no immediate threat to Curtis's position, there is friction between himself and Robins over the size of his income, which rose from £138,000 in the previous year.
Robins is clearly annoyed by the wages package at a time when the Sky Blues are making heavy losses.
He is also believed to be embarrassed that one person should be earning so much when the recession and heavy unemployment has badly affected Coventry and the surrounding area.
Curtis, who refused to make any comment yesterday, virtually ran the club for previous chairman John Poynton.
who lives in Jersey and left Coventry's affairs to his full time staff.
But since the arrival of Robins, he has taken a backseat role with day-to-day business being handled by the new chairman.
It is understood he intends to retire at the end of his contract in June 1994 and had negotiated a deal with Poynton to boost his retirement proceeds.
It is not the first time Robins has been angry at deals negotiated by his predecessor.
He sacked Terry Butcher as manager last January after the former England defender refused to take a cut in his £250,000 salary.
In his report to shareholders, Robins described the club's losses as ‘totally unsatisfactory.’
He added: ‘We were certainly not aware just how much the club's financial situation had deteriorated.’
Bruce on move
Des Kelly
LIVERPOOL goalkeeper Bruce Grobbelaar was last night set for a dramatic move to Oldham Athletic.
Anfield's clown prince is top of a hit list drawn up by Latics manager Joe Royle to replace injured Jon Hallworth.
The 27-year-old Oldham keeper is likely to be out for the rest of the season after tearing wrist ligaments against Manchester United.
But Royle is now pursuing Grobbelaar (pictured) in a deal that could initially be on a loan basis, but may develop into a £400,000 permanent transfer.
Earlier this season Oldham made an official enquiry about the 35-year-old Zimbabwean, but their approach was knocked back.
However, with Mike Hooper currently in fine form at Anfield and £1.3 million signing David James available as a top-class understudy, manager Graeme Souness may be willing to listen to a new offer.
The timing could be right for Grobbelaar, too.
He has just received a hefty testimonial pay-out and is in the last 18 months of his current contract.
Flashman's a menace
Ben Bacon
STAN FLASHMAN went crazy again yesterday — but this time he attacked his own Barnet players, branding them ‘greedy bastards’.
The 21-stone club chairman, reported to police by one of the photographers he assaulted on Monday, was on the rampage once more, threatening to give free transfers to the entire squad whom he blames for the £50,000 Football League fine.
In a screaming match with manager Barry Fry, bullying Flashman ordered certain players to be dropped for tonight's FA Cup replay with Bourne-mouth.
Every Underhill player threatened to boycott the match in protest at his menacing approach if action was taken against anyone, and only the silver-tongued Fry prevented a mass walkout.
One member of staff called Flashman ‘an animal’.
A player, who did not want to be identified, said: ‘The whole place has gone crazy again.
Flashman has made us the laughing stock of football.
‘Before training, Barry called a meeting and said the chairman had accused us of being greedy bastards and blamed us for the fine.
‘He seems to hold David Howell, who's still owed three weeks' money, particularly responsible and wants him out of the club.
He wants to sack him.
‘We said that if David was out, then we were all out and wouldn't play against Bournemouth because we were sticking with the players still owed money.
‘Barry then telephoned Stan and they had a screaming match.
Stan told him we could all go, and what's more he'd give us all free transfers to go quickly.
‘Only Barry has persuaded us to play.
Flashman is just so bitter — he's blaming us, but we just wanted our money above aboard.
All this trouble is down to him.
‘Although the fine is severe, we were all hoping he'd be kicked out of the club by the League.
He's always said he has the PFA and the League in his pocket.’
Flashman, who made his fortune touting tickets, insisted yesterday that he was acting only in self defence when he struck out at three photographers, including TODAY'S Chris Turvey.
SUN man Paul Welford has reported him to the police, and Flashman said: ‘If people want to do that, then fair enough.
We will see what happens.
‘If a fellow comes at you and is pushing cameras in your face, what can you do?’
Another Barnet player said: ‘Why is he chairman of a club, when he clearly hates players?
‘We're all fed up with him, and we're disappointed with the League and players' union.
‘The League should have kicked him out of the game, and the PFA have not done enough to get back the money owed to men like David Howell.
‘Everyone seems scared of putting him in his place, and we feel powerless.
I feel sorry for Barry Fry, who's on the verge of just packing it all in.
‘Like us, he feels the players are being blamed for everything.’
Fry said: ‘This is the saddest day of my career, but I have got to pull the lads together for the replay against Bournemouth.
That's all that matters to me at the moment.’
When informed of the attacks on photographers, League president Gordon McKeag refused to comment.
When specifically asked if Flashman is fit to be chairman of a club in his League, he said: ‘I'm certainly not prepared to answer that question.’
Mac keeps his nerve
ALAN McMANUS held his nerve to beat Gary Wilkinson 9–7 and reach the last eight of the Royal Liver Assurance UK Championship at Preston last night.
McManus, who had led 6–2 overnight, now meets favourite Stephen Hendry.
The Destroyers
Tony Roche
Peter Winterbottom is relishing Saturday's Twickenham showdown between the Barbarians and Australia, and in particular the titanic clash of ‘two of the most ferocious head-on tacklers I have ever seen’.
England's most capped flanker spoke to Today rugby union writer TONY ROCHE on the classic confrontation: The irresistible force meeting the immovable object.
In the Baa-Baas' corner snarls Mick ‘The Munch’ Skinner, a cult figure during England's recent gallop to glory.
In the gold and green corner snorts Willie ‘Tongan Torpedo’ Ofahengaue, back-row batterer for the world champions, whose most recent display, against Wales in Cardiff last week, made the capacity crowd wince.
WILLIE OFAHENGAUE
Born: Tonga.
Age: 24.
Club: Manly.
Height: 6ft 4in.
Weight: 17st 5lb.
Occupation: Construction worker.
International debut: v New Zealand 1990.
International Caps: 17.
I KNOW that Baa-Baas games are traditionally open running affairs with the accent on skill, flair and high-scoring entertainment — a real celebration of open rugby.
The trouble is that when you include guys like Willie Ofahengaue then somebody, somewhere, is going to be made to feel his presence.
The Twickenham crowd will certainly hold their breath when he and Mick Skinner meet face to face in action.
And I should know.
I've faced Willie often enough to know the meaning of pain.
Willie ‘O’ is a bit stronger and a lot younger than Mick so you have to give him a slight edge when it comes to form and fitness.
But I would suggest that runners who have the vision to step off line can by-pass him, such is his commitment to a frontal assault.
His tackling this year has been phenomenal, even by international rugby standards.
I know from personal experience that there is nothing more wearing and wearying than continually being knocked backwards and sideways just when you think you have something on the go.
This guy consists of sheer power.
He is a head-on tackler who lines you up in his sights, closes down your space and — whack — you suddenly find yourself enveloped, smothered and smashed all the way back to square one.
When Willie Ofahengaue gets going he takes an awful lot of stopping, so the Baa-Baas need to prevent him getting into top gear.
MICK SKINNER
Born: Newcastle.
Age: 34 today.
Club: Harlequins.
Height: 6ft 4in.
Weight: 16st 6lb.
Occupation: Freelance computer consultant.
International debut: v France, 1988.
Caps: 22.
THIS is a major game for Mick Skinner, whom I consider one of the strongest and bravest guys I have ever played alongside.
Mick's problem right now is a lack of top-class match fitness.
But he believes that if Mike Teague can make an England comeback while playing for Second Division Moseley, why shouldn't he?
People like Mick are rare, the kind of guy you want to see in your dressing room before a game that makes your stomach turn to water.
I have looked around the faces before games in the past wondering who was going to go to the wire with a home crowd after your blood, never mind the opposition.
I will never forget the World Cup quarter-final in Paris last year.
The atmosphere was thick with tension but I looked at Mick and he glared back; here was a guy ready to go for it and nobody was going to stop him.
The turning point for me came when the French were coming at us, guns blazing and big Marc Cecillon was roaring towards our our line with the ball in his hands.
Mick lined him up, smashed him backwards, the danger evaporated and so did the crowd's passion.
It was a staggering hit and we all responded.
At this level you need people like Mick playing at their best — and he has known times when that has unfortunately not been the case.
Mick may find it tough to force his way back into the international arena, but this game offers a superb platform for him to relaunch his England ambitions.
I, for one, hope he makes it.
Farr-Jones still looks in good Nick
Tony Roche
Cambridge Univ 19, Steele-Bodger's XV 27
NICK FARR-JONES picked up a ball for the first time in three months and reminded everyone that he is the world's best scrum-half.
The former Australian captain, who retired from international rugby after the world champions' 26–3 victory over South Africa in Cape Town in August, inspired a guest XV to a convincing win over the Light Blues.
But he insisted: ‘There's no chance of me changing my mind.
I've done nothing since Cape Town except swing a golf club and sink a few tins and I'm enjoying myself.’
Farr-Jones was instrumental in all but the fifth try to Frenchman Jean Baptiste Lafond.
The other touchdowns were scored by Mark Evans, Darren O'Leary, John Wakeford and South African Theo van Rensburg.
Cambridge replied with tries to David Dix, Paul Flood and Alex Read.
Carling setback
WILL CARLING'S hopes of playing alongside Danie Gerber for the Barbarians were dashed last night.
The South African has withdrawn with a hamstring injury from the side to play Australia at Twickenham on Saturday.
His place goes to Wales international Scott Gibbs.
Full-back Tony Clement is also out after suffering a stress fracture of the right ankle and is replaced by Mike Rayer.
Bookies push for evening opening
Henry Rix
THE bookmakers are pressing ahead with their campaign for evening opening of betting shops by next summer.
Following a nationwide survey of 1,042 punters commissioned by the Betting Office Licensees Association and conducted by Gallup, Tom Kelly, director general of BOLA, said: ‘If the Government move quickly we could have evening opening in the summer.
‘We believe that we might have had it this year were it not for the election.’
Kelly believes the Gallup survey will accelerate the progress of the bookmakers' lobby at the Home Office, for it revealed potential benefits for racing and the Government.
Two thirds of those questioned said that they would visit a betting shop in the evening.
BOLA originally estimated that turnover would go up by 10 per cent if the current 6.30pm closing time were lifted, but Kelly believes the survey makes that figure look pessimistic.
He is pressing for an early meeting with Home Office Minister Peter Lloyd, who has been sent a copy of the survey.
Sainz surges to rally glory
Frank Ward
CARLOS SAINZ put the seal on his late, late world title surge with a comprehensive victory in the Lombard RAC Rally yesterday.
The 30-year-old Spaniard finished the final timed section near Dumfries 2min 16sec clear of second-placed Ari Vatanen and, most significantly, streets ahead of big rival Juha Kankkunen, who finished third.
Sainz's second RAC victory clinched the fiercely contested World Championship two years after he completed the same double in his Toyota Celica with co-driver Luis Moya.
The man known as El Matador by his rivals, for his uncompromising attacking style behind the wheel, had won only three previous World Championship events this year, but those have included the last two rallies, Catalonia two weeks ago and now the RAC.
Ultimately, it was all too easy for Sainz, who could afford to enjoy the scenery in yesterday's Scottish forest stages after Kankkunnen, the only man who could have overhauled him in the world title race, lost crucial time when his Lancia hit a rock.
And there was no repeat of the last-gasp disaster which struck the Spanish star three years ago, when a transmission problem robbed him of victory three stages from the finish.
‘This is a dream come true,’ said Sainz.
‘Three months ago it did not seem possible that we could take the Championship again but we never gave up.
‘The team has never stopped the hard work and the new Celica has improved over the year.
The proof of that was winning the RAC.’
Sainz, who had led Kankkunen by just two points in the World Championship, finished the season with 144 points — 10 ahead of the Finn and a further 13 in front of unlucky Frenchman, Didier Auriol.
Sainz added: ‘It's been a really difficult rally because we have had to keep trying since the first stage.
Only when Juha went off in the morning could we have a bit of a rest.’
Force
Britain's Colin McRae, the only driver other than Sainz to have led the rally, finished a battling sixth in his Subaru Legacy to confirm that he will be a force to be reckoned with when he returns to tackle his first full World Championship season next year.
And Malcolm Wilson made it two home drivers in the top 10 when he completed the last timed phase in seventh place behind the wheel of his Ford Sierra Cosworth.
Race's small wonder
TRABANT rally drivers Michael Kahlfuss and Gunter Friedmann were hailed as the unlikely heroes of the Lombard RAC Rally.
The two former East Germans were the butt of jokes when they entered the tiny 594cc car in one of the toughest tests for both man and machine.
But they completed the 353 miles of special stages 98th out of 102 finishers.
Kahlfuss coolly took his achievement in his stride, claiming not to be the slightest bit intimidated by the gruelling Kielder Forest.
‘Compared with roads back home, Kielder is like an autobahn,’ he said.
‘This car was built for such conditions.’
The dirty dozen
Mike Walters
THE Football League's imposition of a £50,000 fine on Third Division Barnet appears a harsh penalty for breaches of the statutory smallprint.
But the irregular payments for which Stan Flashman's club were punished may only be the tip of the iceberg.
For soccer's underworld is a web of intrigue like freemasonry — everyone knows it exists, but few know who's behind the secret handshakes.
Since Swindon were relegated for offering tax-free inducements to players in 1990, clubs' accounts — from non-League to the elite — have come under enormous scrutiny.
Stark evidence of this came via yesterday's announcement of a police probe into the financial affairs of Beazer Homes League outfit Weymouth.
TODAY has launched an investigation to uncover some of the methods used to make under-the-counter payments to players and managers.
It paints a sordid picture of bribes, scams and various money-laundering schemes.
Here are 12 ways of filling your boots in soccer's dirty dozen…
GATE MONEY FIDDLES (1)
THE oldest chestnut among soccer's cooking-the-books fraternity — and still the largest source of terrace scepticism.
Clubs have frequently been suspected of declaring attendances of several thousand below the real figure.
This enables them to stash five-figure sums of undisclosed gate receipts into a ‘slush fund’.
But computerised turnstile operations have made it almost impossible to fiddle the attendance figures in modern times.
GATE MONEY FIDDLES (2)
TO overstate the attendance is both a good public relations exercise — making it look as if a team is better-supported than it is — and a possible outlet for laundering ‘dirty money.’
One club is known to have ‘rounded up’ its attendance figures to bridge the gap between four-figure and five figure turn-outs.
Football mythology includes the unlikely tale of a First Division club laundering cash from the Great Train Robbery through its turnstiles back in the 1960s.
LOANS AS INDUCEMENTS
SWINDON'S Achilles heel in 1990 — the revelation of which led to the convictions of former chairman Brian Hillier and ex-County Ground accountant Vivien Farrar.
Unofficial payments made by Swindon included signing-on fees of up to £20,000 and a goalkeeper's £50 bonus for keeping a clean sheet.
The court hearing which convicted both men was told by ex-Swindon manager Lou Macari irregular payments were part of soccer routine.
FOREIGN TOUR RACKET
DESPITE England manager Graham Taylor's protests that too much football is being played in the country, clubs often undertake gruelling journeys abroad in mid-season to play in lucrative exhibition friendlies.
Normally, these trips are self-financing…but sometimes profits can be made, possibly in foreign currency.
And it is this money which can be channelled, undetected, into the slush funds via foreign banks.
LOYALTY BONUSES
NOT always what their name suggests.
One big club in the north is known to have offered a player signing from the Continent a loyalty bonus before he had kicked a ball for his new team.
It was an inducement to sign and, to prevent the club's wage structure being broken and a possible mutiny by higher-paid stars, the increment was included on his wage slips.
But it was not included as basic pay when the club's accounts were published.
OFFSHORE ACCOUNTS
OFFSHORE accounts are handy tax havens, and were more popular in the days of higher tax under Labour rule.
But they are still used as nest-eggs and, in particular, they could find favour among directors with substantial interests in multi-nationals.
Although beyond the means of most lower-echelon players, they are potentially lucrative magnets for get-rich-quick merchants who syphon illegitimate monies from their clubs through third parties.
MANAGERS ON THE MAKE
SHARP practice in the transfer market can extend to managers — even those on a guaranteed percentage of all outgoing and incoming transfers in their contracts.
If a fee is agreed between two clubs over the sale of a player for, say, £100,000, the manager could go back to his board and gain approval for a £120,000 deal.
The manager then splits the undisclosed £20,000 with his counterpart at the selling club or the player's agent.
INVISIBLE SCOUTS
ONE of the most prominent back-handers in the game — and one of the most difficult for the authorities to rumble.
Clubs will pay sums of four figures as secret bonuses or salary top-ups to their star players.
Then they present them in the accounts as monthly expenses to non-existent scouts abroad, such as Seamus Kelly, a fictional talent-spotter in Ireland, or Henrik Andersson, an imaginary Scandinavian contact.
BRIBING DAD
WHEN a host of clubs are chasing a leading schoolboy talent, the team who win his prized signature will sometimes offer his dad a telling inducement.
One club are believed to have clinched a teenager's services by paying his father £40,000.
The bribe may not be cash.
It could be a flash new car, stumped up by a wealthy director who can write off the cost of the car as a demonstration model from his own showroom.
Of course, token gestures often suffice to land unknown quantities from obscurity — Republic of Ireland striker Tony Cascarino joined Gillingham from a boys' club in Crockenhill for the cost of a new set of playing strips.
HOUSE SCAMS
CLUBS trying to sign a player offer to pay inflated sums for his current property in a bid to bridge the gap in regional house prices.
For instance, a player could be paid £50,000 for a property which his new club will sell on for only £30,000.
The spare Pounds 20,000, pocketed by the player, is regarded as a ‘relocation fee’.
Removal expenses are also subject to inflation, where a player whose transfer requires a move is paid several times the cost of hiring removal men.
Chelsea were fined £75,000 over the deal which brought Graham Roberts to Stamford Bridge in 1988.
Roberts allegedly received Pounds 100,000 in a house deal.
LAUNDERING FEES
SIGNING-ON fees, which now feature in both transfer and contract renewal talks, can often run into six figures these days.
One way of disguising them is to launder the sum through different accounts at the club, showing in one set of accounts as a private loan to the lotteries account, in the next under the Supporters' Club account…the list can go on and on.
These ‘loans’ can be difficult to trace and eventually become ‘lost.’
CASH UNDER COUNTER
THESE are more common at the lower end of the spectrum, but players are known to have received appearance fees from different sources.
Fifty per cent may come through the books, the other half tax-free and in cash either from bar takings, fruit machines or from non-existent ground repairs — such as replacing broken seats.
Top clubs don't need to get involved, but to non-League and lower-division teams it is a tempting alternative.
No Bowe for Lewis
Mike Allan
NEW world heavyweight champion Riddick Bowe is likely to refuse to fight top contender Lennox Lewis in the first defence of his title.
Instead, he is expected to surrender one-third of the Championship and opt for some easy money.
That was the impression Bowe and Lewis's representatives gave after more than three hours of talks yesterday aimed at trying to reach an agreement to have the two fight sometime early next Spring.
‘The odds are that there will be a split title, but we're still working on it,’ said Dan Duva, the head of Main Events, Lewis's promoter.
‘We're looking at a one-fight scenario or a two-fight scenario,’ said Bowe's manager, Rock Newman, referring to Bowe fighting Lewis first or after he has already had one defence.
‘Any way that it would go, Lennox would be guaranteed a shot at the title.’
Lewis thought he had a guarantee of a title shot against the winner of the Bowe-Evander Holyfield fight earlier this month.
Lewis became the top contender for the title after beating Canadian Razor Ruddock earlier this month.
Before that fight, Lewis and Bowe had signed an agreement stating the winner of the Lewis-Ruddock fight would face the winner of Bowe-Holyfield.
The World Boxing Council says it will strip Bowe of its version of the title if he refuses to fight Lewis next.
If Lewis does not fight Bowe next, Duva said Lewis's top choice as an opponent would probably be former heavyweight champion George Foreman, followed by Ray Mercer and then Tommy Morrison.
Britain's Frank Bruno would also be a possibility.
Jimmy is White hot
JIMMY WHITE thrashed Thailand's James Wattana 9–2 last night to reach the semi-finals of the Royal Liver Assurance UK Championship.
Title-holder John Parrott fired the fastest century break so far to lead Ireland's Joe Swail, 6–2.
Loser Linford
LINFORD CHRISTIE, Britain's athlete of the year, could only finish sixth in the international poll to find the world's top track and field stars of 1992, won by American hurdler Kevin Young.
Fraud probe
MOSELEY rugby union club have asked the fraud squad to continue investigating accounting irregularities.
Around £30,000 of a record £120,000 loss was unaccounted for.
Eagles swoop
SHEFFIELD EAGLES have moved for Leigh's stay-away star, Paul Topping.
The 27-year-old full-back, transfer-listed at £95,000, is out of contract.
On track
STEVE CRAM will make his debut at 5,000 metres next month when he becomes the first British athlete to compete in South Africa for almost 20 years.
Fowl play
LANCASHIRE fans have swelled demand for membership at Durham county cricket club after Graeme Fowler's switch to the north-east.
Salako flies out
JOHN SALAKO is to see the American surgeon who saved his career amid fears that he faces another lengthy lay-off with knee trouble.
The Crystal Palace winger, who returned this season after 10 months on the sidelines with knee ligament damage, travels back to the United States tomorrow for an urgent check-up.
Salako jarred the same knee in training with England before the 4–0 World Cup defeat of Turkey.
Palace assistant manager Alan Smith confirmed: ‘John flies out on Friday and we will know more after he has seen the surgeon over the weekend.
‘His knee is slightly unstable and we thought it best he saw the surgeon who performed the operation on him.’
Barnet on the slide
Barnet 1, Bournemouth 2
BARNET'S woes mounted as they slid out of the FA Cup last night.
Any hopes they had of a successful Cup run to take the heat off their internal worries disappeared in the mud at Underhill.
The north London club's preparations were far from ideal, entering the game just 48 hours after they had been fined £50,000 for a breach of League regulations and chairman Stan Flashman had been involved in a scuffle with photographers at the London hearing.
So it came as no surprise that the first chants of ‘Flashman out’ were heard just two minutes into a contest in which the long ball was essential in atrocious conditions.
Bournemouth must have felt at home on a pitch which resembled a beach after the tide had receded.
Referee David Axcell passed it fit an hour before kick-off after deciding the mud was no worse than on his hometown beach at Southend.
Former Welsh international Steve Lovell, on a month's trial, slid in to give Bournemouth a 19th-minute lead from Kenny Rowlands' cross, and Denny Mundee paddled in with the dexterity of a sculler to score their second after Mick Bodley's back pass stuck in a puddle.
The rain continued to pour down as substitute Mark Carter scrambled Barnet back into the match with a 56th minute goal.
But it was no more than a consolation, and Bournemouth easily played out time in the monsoon to earn a second-round trip to Cheltenham.
Handy Steve saves day
Chesterfield 2 Macclesfield 2 (aet)(Macclesfield win 3–2 on pens)
GOALKEEPER Steve Farrelly was the toast of part-timers Macclesfield last night.
He earned the club a slice of Cup glory by saving three penalties in a dramatic shoot-out after extra time.
The Conference outfit richly deserved their win after twice taking the lead through Richie Mitchell.
Lee Turnbull and Steve Williams were the Chesterfield scorers.
Durrant is the saviour
Rob Shepherd
Rangers 2 Marseilles 2
RANGERS produced one of the great European comebacks last night to leave them with stars in their eyes.
The smart logo for the mini-League stage is a star-spangled football.
But all seemed lost 11 minutes from the end, with Marseille two goals to the good and in total control.
Then suddenly Rangers' vision of success began to twinkle again, the inspirational figure of Ian Durrant engineering a remarkable revival.
Durrant, such an influence when they overcame Leeds in the previous round, had been struggling all night as the makeshift partner for Mark Hateley, in the absence of the injured Ally McCoist.
With the match apparently well beyond them, manager Walter Smith made one last gesture by hauling off England international Trevor Steven and thrusting on 22-year-old striker Gary McSwegan.
More significantly, however, that meant Durrant was able to drop back into his favoured deep-lying role.
The effect was instant — McSwegan tasting the glory of scoring his first goal for Rangers, in such a vital match.
But it was down to Durrant.
Assured
Marseille's dour defence — inspired by the belligerent Basile Boli — had been so assured, but finally succumbed in the face of the first really intelligent attack they had been forced to face.
Durrant, now looking forward on to the play rather than with his back to goal, used his vision to send Alexei Mikhailichenko down the left flank.
He looked up and spotted McSwegan unmarked at the far post.
The delivery was perfect, and so was the finish, a powerful and precise header directed well beyond the reach of goalkeeper Fabian Barthez.
Urged on by a renewed Ibrox roar, they stormed forward in search of an equaliser, and it came in the 83rd minute.
Durrant's determination won him the ball at the byeline just inside the Marseille penalty area.
His presence of mind saw him instantly cross to the near post, where Hateley, falling to his knees, headed emphatically home.
Perhaps a draw was more than Rangers deserved on the night.
At times the technique, and just as importantly, the physical attributes of the French, embarrassed them.
But even though Marseille were satisfied with a point, the sheer reserves Rangers displayed means they cannot be discounted, in a group which does not appear to have an outstanding team.
Rangers prospered so emphatically in their encounter against Leeds, but that was because the games were played within the confines of the British style.
Extra
And despite the valid excuses, Rangers still must find an extra dimension if they are to prosper in this competition.
Although Mikhailichenko should have given them a 15th-minute lead, Marseille increasingly controlled the game.
Richard Gough, struggling with a groin injury, found former German international striker Rudi Voeller an extremely tough proposition, particularly in tandem with Abedi Pele.
Voeller might have scored in the 24th minute had it not been for Andy Goram's fine save from a powerful 20-yard shot, but seven minutes later he set up Marseille's opener.
Capitalising on a slip by Gough, he pulled the ball back for 21-year-old Croatian striker Alen Boksic, who slid his shot well beyond Goram.
Gough, carrying an injury, went off and the Rangers defence looked even more unsure — not least because his replacement was inexperienced 19-year-old Steve Pressley, playing his first game of the season.
It could not have gone worse for him when, in the 57th minute, he froze.
Having lost his sense of direction, he attempted a foolish back-pass following a clever chip by Franck Sauzee, but only succeeding in touching the ball beyond the advancing Goram.
Voeller could not believe his luck and had the simple task of tapping the ball into an empty goal.
Posh face replay call
Peterborough 9, Kingstonian 1
TONY PHILLISKIRK bagged five goals as Peterborough thrashed non-league Kingstonian in their first-round replay — but the game could cost the Football League club dearly.
The Surrey team's goalkeeper Adrian Blake was helped off in the 57th minute, with his team already 3–0 down, after being apparently struck by a coin thrown from the crowd.
As he left the pitch he blacked out and fell through a glass door, cutting his hand.
He was then taken to hospital for observation.
Now Kingstonian will today demand that the tie be replayed.
Their chairman, Barry Chauveau, said his club would follow the example of Burton Albion, who won a replay after a similar incident against Leicester in 1985.
Magical Marco
AC MILAN striker Marco van Basten scored four goals as the European Cup favourites trounced Sweden's IFK Gothenburg in their opening semi-final Group B match.
The Dutch international went through his whole repertoire, completing his hat-trick with a brilliant overhead volley from the edge of the penalty box.
He had earlier slid Milan into a 34th-minute lead and notched his second from the penalty spot.
He rounded off the scoring with a simple fourth after rounding goalkeeper Thomas Ravelli.
Dutch champions PSV were denied victory in a tough 2–2 Group B draw at Porto after having defender Adrie van Tiggelen sent off.
It proved a costly foul.
Porto equalised from the subsequent free-kick when Brazilian striker Jose Carlos blasted the ball home.
Hero Freeman has last laugh
Altrincham 2 Chester 0
SKIPPER Clive Freeman cracked a brilliant goal and a few jokes after Altrincham's record-equalling 15th FA Cup triumph over League opposition.
‘I think we'll have to get some new suits for Wembley,’ he quipped.
It was 30-year-old Freeman's stunning last-minute goal that finally killed off any hopes of a Chester comeback.
The former Swansea City player unleashed a spectacular strike in front of the television cameras to put himself in contention for goal of the month.
‘It was nothing more than a tap in,’ he added.
His dazzling 10th goal of the season coupled with a 69th-minute opener from Ricky Harris set up a second round tie at home to Port Vale.
Chester boss Graham Barrow declared: ‘This is probably the worst moment of my career.’
Stafford surprise
Stafford 2, Lincoln 1
STAFFORD RANGERS took their first Football League scalp in 18 years last night by beating Lincoln City.
‘We knew we had to battle but the players gave me everything.
This is certainly one night we're going to enjoy,’ said Rangers boss Dennis Booth.
The first shock of the night came after 10 minutes when Darren Boughey scored a fine solo goal for the part-timers.
City equalised through Peter Costello after 49 minutes but then had Graham Bressington dismissed for a scything tackle on Tony Griffiths.
Rangers, without a win in their last eight league games, clinched a deserved victory when Mark Bradshaw scored at the far post.
After that there was no way back for City and Rangers now travel to Marine in the second round on December 5.
Rangers the brave
Ben Bacon
MARK HATELEY breathed life into Rangers' European Cup challenge last night, just as their hopes seemed to have been killed off by Marseille's foreign legion.
Hateley, whose football education included three seasons in France with Monaco, capped one of the bravest and most unlikely comebacks when he scored with seven minutes remaining to level the scores of this epic Group A encounter at two goals each.
However, even a solitary point looked a far-fetched dream for the Scottish champions until 22-year-old substitute Gary McSwegan grabbed his first goal for the club in the 79th minute.
Marseille's foreign stars, Croat Alen Boksic and German international Rudi Voeller had earlier fired the Frenchmen into what looked an unassailable lead, but they hadn't counted on Rangers' indomitable spirit.
Despite the absence of the injured Ally McCoist and Richard Gough, who limped off at half-time, Britain's best somehow clawed their way to a draw.
Hateley, who virtually single-handedly beat Leeds in the last round, said: ‘We could have been 4–0 down.
But even at 2–0, we felt we could get something from the game.
The last 15 minutes showed our character and self-belief.
‘I felt that if the game had gone on for just five more minutes, then we could even have won it.
‘We can take something from this game and be positive that we were down but came away with the point.
It was terrific because we had young boys out there.’
Relieved Rangers manager Walter Smith knew it would need something special to break Marseille's French resistance, and McSwegan provided it by finishing off a superb move started by Ian Durrant.
Smith said: ‘We needed something special, and we got it.
It was a great pass, a great cross and a great header.
‘I was delighted to get a point after finding ourselves 2–0 down.
It was a special comeback because we didn't really look as though we were going to score for much of the game.
‘This game told me that we need all our good players to be up and playing at their peak, but I felt that we didn't do that tonight.’
Marseille took the lead in the 31st minute through top scorer Boksic and increased it through Voeller in the 57th minute following an error by substitute Steven Pressley.
Stan ‘must go’
BARNET manager Barry Fry last night urged Stan Flashman to quit as chairman of the club.
Flashman missed the troubled Third Division club's FA Cup defeat by Bournemouth with a bad back — the result of his alleged assault on a photographer when the club were fined £50,000 for financial irregularities.
But Fry said his absence was best for all concerned and added: ‘For his own sake, for his family's sake, and for football's sake, he should sell his interest in Barnet Football Club and quit.
‘His antics have got to stop for Barnet's sake and for football's sake in general.
He does, in his own way, care for the club and football — he's just got a funny way of showing it.’
Fry, who revealed that he almost quit the club yesterday morning, added: ‘Stan's behaviour this week has been humiliating.
No-one wants to read about their chairman and the things that I've read this week.
‘I phoned him from the training ground yesterday and had a row with him because it was embarrassing for Barnet.
He has his good points, but his bad ones far outweigh them.’
But Flashman was unrepentant last night.
Britain's most famous ticket-broker said he will defy all his critics and remain as chairman, and claimed his problems were down to the media.
‘The meeting was not about Stan Flashman.
Barnet FC were the people charged yet the press made out that Stan Flashman was being charged, and that was not true,’ he said.
Chance
‘Barnet were charged with irregularities and that's all it was.
Supporters have only read what the press have said.
I have never had the chance to put properly my side of the story.
‘Hopefully, within the next couple of weeks, I will attend a supporters' meeting and put the full side of the story.’
Flashman is now the subject of a police enquiry as a result of a complaint by Sun photographer Paul Welford after a scuffle following the Football League hearing at a West End hotel on Monday.
Flashman also claimed a London newspaper reporter ‘must have been drinking’ to suggest that top scorer Gary Bull, valued at Pounds 500,000, will be sold to pay the fine.
‘He will never be sold while I am chairman — which will be a long time yet — or while Barry Fry is manager,’ he added.
Posh horror
PETERBOROUGH are offering a £500 reward to catch a coin-throwing hooligan who ruined their amazing 9–1 FA Cup triumph over non-League Kingstonian last night.
The missile pole-axed Kingstonian goalkeeper Adrian Blake, who had to be helped off the pitch.
Peterborough may now be forced to replay the tie.
Three Conference sides beat League clubs, Altrincham claiming their 15th Cup scalp by beating Chester 2–0.
Campo fury
OUTSPOKEN Australian winger David Campese last night hit out at the decision to stage Saturday's match between the world champions and the Barbarians at Twickenham.
‘We are playing at Twickenham against the Barbarians, with about 50,000 people watching and all paying lots of money which will go into the bank.
What I find strange is that England have got nothing to do with our tour of Ireland and Wales, yet they get the big game and all the money.’
And Campese again raised the question of players not reaping all the financial benefits of huge gate takings.
‘A game like the Baa Baas should put 10 per cent or whatever into the funds of the visiting team because it is nothing to do with England.
They are getting all the profits from us keeping them entertained.’
Meanwhile, South African Danie Gerber has pulled out of the game with a hamstring injury.
Athletes in money row
By Neil Watts
ATHLETICS was at war last night as top stars prepared to boycott next summer's World Championships in Stuttgart unless there is prize money.
Primo Nebiolo, president of the International Amateur Athletic Federation, was emphatic that athletes will receive no cash inducement to take part.
But the athletes are making an unprecedented demand for a slice of the lucrative financial action and Tom Jennings, the agent spearheading their case, countered: ‘We are not looking for a militant takeover, just a share of the wealth.
They cannot do without the people on the floor — the athletes.’
And John Smith, coach to US Olympic champions Quincy Watts and Kevin Young, who are also backing moves for change, warned: ‘A boycott of the Stuttgart games is still an option.’
Prizes But Smith added that he hoped the situation could be resolved by diplomatic channels.
Nebiolo, who has so far declined to enter into discussions with Jennings and his group, insisted in Stockholm that the IAAF did not have unlimited reserves to pay out prizes and said pointedly: ‘People are believing things that are not realistic.
‘If an athlete does not like our rules, he plays tennis or rides a bike.
They know our rules and must abide by them.’
Nebiolo has set up a commission to look into the thorny question of World Championship prize money.
But, as head of the IAAF, it seems inconceivable that he will not get his way.
John quick to impress
TITLE HOLDER John Parrott fired the fastest century break so far — taking just five minutes and 15 seconds for a 103 clearance — as he took a 6–2 lead in his UK Championship quarter-final with Ireland's Joe Swail.
Newcastle are given all-clear
By David Alexander
NEWCASTLE UNITED will not be punished for the touchline brawl with the Italians at St James' Park.
Their Anglo-Italian Cup-tie with Ascoli erupted in two minutes of fury — but the Football League will take no action.
And striker David Kelly, whose sending-off was the flashpoint of the battle, will not be suspended for any League games.
A League spokesman confirmed: ‘Nothing will happen that will affect United or Kelly in the Football League.’
Kelly will be banned for either one or two Anglo-Italian matches, but there will be no disciplinary measures by Newcastle.
‘I won't be fining him because I had a clear view of what happened and understand what he did and why he did it,’ said manager Kevin Keegan.
Melee
It was Kelly's tackle, near the two benches — which left Ascoli's Michele Menolascina writhing on the ground — that sparked an astonishing melee involving almost every player, Ascoli's coaches, police, stewards and Keegan.
The only people not involved were the crowd.
‘Kelly had been kicked all night and he thought it was going to happen again.
He jumped out of the way and the players collided,’ added Keegan.
‘The Italian referee let things go that don't happen in this country.
‘The tackle from behind has been stopped here for a long time, but they were doing it all night and getting away with it.
There's no reason to punish my players after that.’
Keegan, however, will not consider withdrawing from the competition, which has been littered with fights and sendings-off after being revived this season following a 20-year absence.
‘We've learned something from it,’ he said.
‘Young players have discovered one or two things already.
‘It's just a fact that not all people play nice football and behave like gentlemen.
‘When you get into European competition sometimes they do spit in your face, pull your hair and pinch you when they pretend to help you up.
‘It happens, and the sooner our kids learn about this side of football, the better.
I learned how to cope with it and they must do the same.
‘We look like going out and that's a shame because we might learn a bit more.
‘We have two more games at least against Italian sides and we'll be trying to win them.’
Hold
Keegan was at the centre of the brawl, trying to prevent Ascoli coach Massimo Cacciatori from reaching Kelly.
‘I was just trying to hold him back,’ said Keegan.
‘He had gone completely, I've never seen anything like it.
‘I was trying to get hold of their coach to stop him from going back to Italy in a casket.
‘I don't know what was going on in his mind but it wasn't going to do him much good.
‘If I ever get like that about a football match I'll shoot myself.
‘You keep thinking you have seen it all in football, but then you see something else like this.
In the back of your mind you know it is the Italian temperament against the English temperament, and you just know something is going to happen.
‘There were tackles going in out there that have been banned for two years, including the tackle from behind.’
Newcastle's 18-year-old Steve Watson, who had been substituted, also jumped off the bench to restrain Italian officials, who went berserk after Kelly's challenge.
A dozen constables eventually calmed the situation and surrounded both dug-outs as the match was completed.
But police will take no action.
Match commander Peter Durham said: ‘It might have looked bad, but nobody was hurt and the crowd didn't get involved — apart from one 11-year-old lad who joined in.
‘The referee will be making a report but we won't take it any further.’
Stoke rapped
PORT VALE chairman Bill Bell last night accused Stoke fans of acting ‘like animals’ during the Potteries FA Cup match.
Stoke supporters caused thousands of pounds worth of damage to a stand at Vale Park during Tuesday's first-round replay as Lou Macari's men lost 3–1.
And Bell said: ‘I expected some trouble but not on this scale — they acted like animals.
‘It's frustrating when we go to the trouble of providing better facilities for away supporters and then incidents like this happen.’
Ward lights the blue touch-paper at York
By Mike Walters
JOHN WARD was appointed manager of York City on Guy Fawkes' night last year with the brief to produce a few fireworks on the pitch at Bootham Crescent.
Just over 12 months on, they are leading Division Three by two points.
.. roughly what the directors had in mind.
Detractors of Ward's friend and former boss, Graham Taylor, deface the England manager through the primitive superimposition of turnips on his head — but the only object likely to adorn Ward's cranium in York at present is a crown.
Ward spent the best part of two decades living in Taylor's shadow, initially as a player at Lincoln and Watford and then as his assistant at Vicarage Road and Aston Villa.
Since the England manager acted as one of Ward's referees when he applied for the York job, it was no surprise when Taylor turned to one of his trusted lieutenants to take charge of England's Under-21 squad for the end-of-season international tournament in Toulon.
But that millionaires' playground in the south of France was a far cry from York's precarious predicament — eighth from bottom of the League, gates dwindling to below 2,000 and their bank balance in similar decline — when Ward answered the call.
‘I quickly realised the size of my task when I drove into York for home games,’ says Ward.
‘Everyone else was heading out of town, most of them bound for Leeds.
‘I don't see so many people going in the opposite direction now, so I hope that's a sign that we've persuaded a few of them to stay in town and watch their local team.’
York's renaissance under Ward is the work of a team costing just Pounds 50,000 — all of it spent on striker Paul Barnes, signed during the close-season from Stoke.
‘The players seemed to have much less belief in themselves than I had in them.
Apart from the odd positional change and a couple of new faces, that's all we've changed this season,’ says Ward.
‘Certainly the apprenticeship of working as assistant to someone of Graham Taylor's calibre has been invaluable, particularly when times were lean last season.
‘There are more difficult working environments than mine at the moment.’
Like, for instance, waking up to find your face the butt of tiresome vegetative humour.
Bobby is no Gould digger
By Tony Kell
BOBBY GOULD and his backroom staff are working without contracts to help cash-starved Coventry City through their financial worries.
The club announced on Tuesday that they made a £1.4m trading loss in the year ending May, 1992, and they owe the bank £2.2m in loans and overdraft.
And former manager Terry Butcher, who was dismissed last January, has taken out a High Court writ for the remaining two years of his contract — an estimated £500,000.
Problems Mick Mills and Brian Eastick, Butcher's coaches who were also fired, both sued the club, but have settled out of court.
But Gould said: ‘I knew the financial problems facing the club when I became manager in the summer and it was my idea that I should work without a contract.
‘I suggested the same thing to every other member of the backroom staff as I appointed them and they all agreed.
‘It is the first time in eleven years as a manager that I have not worked with a contract and it is like an air of freedom.’
Smith blasts defence
By John Davies
MANAGER Denis Smith yesterday counted the cost of Bristol City's 4–3 Anglo-Italian Cup defeat in Pisa on Tuesday.
‘We defended badly and threw away a game we should have won 3–0,’ he said angrily.
As a former tough-tackling centre-back with Stoke, Smith has worked overtime on a City defence that has lost heavily at Millwall and Brentford in the past month.
‘We have gone over the dangers from dead-ball situations repeatedly in training,’ he stormed.
‘But we are still conceding goals from them.
‘The trouble is I can't put my old head on my players' young shoulders.’
‘The only answer is work and more work on the training pitch.’
Smith's only consolation is that former England defender Russell Osman should be back to steady his defence against Notts County at Ashton Gate on Saturday when City try to extend an unbeaten run of five home League games.
The fact that Derby County have now beaten Cosenza and Pisa by 3–0 margins — the two Italian sides that have defeated City in the competition — emphasises Smith's problems.
But they now have little chance of making the Anglo-Italian semi-finals.
Grobbelaar deal falls on the rocks
By Des Kelly
OLDHAM'S attempt to capture Liverpool goalkeeper Bruce Grobbelaar appeared to have failed last night.
Latics' cash-strapped manager Joe Royle admitted he may still try to arrange a loan deal for the Anfield veteran, but it seems any transfer fee is beyond the range of the Lancashire club's purse.
Oldham are to continue their search for a replacement for the injured Jon Hallworth after also hearing that any move for Grobbelaar — rated at around £400,000 — would be beset by complications.
The 35-year-old has just had minor surgery to remove a floating piece of bone from his elbow and he intends to fly out of the country to represent Zimbabwe in an African Nations Cup tie next weekend.
That rules him out of any potential Premier League action.
Reluctant
But Royle refused to concede that the move was dead, saying: ‘I don't know yet whether it would be possible to arrange a loan.’
Chelsea's out-of-favour Dave Beasant is another target, although I understand the London club would be reluctant to let the keeper go to Boundary Park on a temporary basis.
So, in the absence of experienced cover, Royle will turn to John Keeley against Middlesbrough on Saturday following his recall from his loan spell at Chester.
Keeley, who cost £250,000 from Brighton in August 1990, last played for Oldham in the final match of last the 1991/92 season, when he conceded five goals to Manchester City.
That is his only League appearance to date.
Oldham are also waiting for official confirmation from the Football Association that they can bring in another goalkeeper, a course of action restricted under Premier League rules to emergencies only.
Oldham's other keeper, 19-year-old Paul Gerrard, has not played a game in nine months after two knee operations and made his comeback in the reserves last night.
The goalkeeping crisis is not Royle's only injury headache.
Centre-half Ian Marshall, who has been playing up front since the start of last month, is out for three weeks after breaking a finger and Neil McDonald is likely to miss the Middlesbrough game with hamstring trouble.
That means an almost certain debut for Mark Brennan, for whom Oldham agreed a £200,000 instalment-payment plan with Manchester City last week.
Liverpool, meanwhile, may have a luxury of goalkeeping talent to draw upon, with Mike Hooper and David James also on the books, but their attacking options could be cut to the bone next week.
Prolific striker Ian Rush is out of Saturday's League encounter against Crystal Palace with hamstring trouble and the club are desperately trying to hurry the Welshman back in time for Tuesday night's Coca-Cola Cup fixture between the two clubs.
If Rush is unable to make it, Liverpool may be forced to use John Barnes, fresh on the comeback trail, or Paul Stewart in the centre-forward role — Ronny Rosenthal being away on international duty with Israel next week.
Trouble
‘We'll do all we can to get Ian ready, but at this stage we don't know whether he'll be ready or not,’ said manager Graeme Souness.
Stewart is still battling to fully shake off hamstring trouble which has plagued him all season.
Meanwhile, Brian Horne could be in line for shock call-up by Sunderland.
The on-loan Millwall keeper comes into the reckoning at Southend on Saturday because of a fitness doubt over Welsh international Tony Norman.
Norman was rated ‘touch and go’ yesterday.
Horne has already been on loan at Middlesbrough and Stoke this season.
‘He has looked strong and sharp,’ said Roker No 2 Bobby Ferguson.
Sunderland manager Malcolm Crosby has cooled his interest in Dundee's £1 million striker Billy Dodds.
Last season's FA Cup finalists face a possible £1m debt unless they enjoy another Cup run or sell players.
And that clearly is restricting Crosby's hand in the transfer market.
Boro to consider merger
By Barry Lucas
HARD-UP GM Vauxhall Conference club Farnborough are thinking over a merger with their re-born Hampshire neighbours Aldershot Town.
Farnborough, who took West Ham to a reply in the FA Cup last year, are in desperate financial trouble with debts of £50,000 and crowds of less than 500 this season.
Manager Ted Pearce has not ruled out a merger with the reformed Shots who have been drawing crowds of more than 2,000 to the Recreation Ground after their blistering start in the Diadora League Division Three.
Aldershot Town 1992 was set up by fans of the original club when it folded earlier this year with huge financial problems.
Pearce has been told he may have to sell top players such as David Leworthy, the league's leading scorer, or Dean Coney in a bid to balance the books.
He said: ‘We know the money has been frittered away through gross incompetence and mismanagement.
We are on a downward spiral and unless it improves the club will be no more.
‘I will not rule out a merger with Aldershot.
They have done very well since starting up again and it is something we are thinking over.’
Grant aim
PREMIER LEAGUE leaders Norwich City are expected to renew their interest in Celtic's £500,000 midfield man Peter Grant.
Norwich were trailing Grant, who has turned down a new contract, last season and have maintained their interest.
Celtic manager Liam Brady said: ‘I offered him an improved contract, but the player wants to move south.
I appreciate his decision.’
Brady is to appear before the SFA Disciplinary Committee after an incident against Airdrie at Parkhead on October 24.
Salako jets off to see specialist
By Barry Lucas
JOHN SALAKO is to see the American surgeon who saved his career amid fears that he faces another lengthy lay-off with knee trouble.
The Crystal Palace winger, who returned this season after 10 months on the sidelines with knee ligament damage, travels back to the United States tomorrow for an urgent check-up.
Salako jarred the same knee in training with England before the 4–0 World Cup defeat of Turkey and was ruled out of Palace's clash with Nottingham Forest last Saturday.
The decision to return to the States was taken after a visit to a specialist this week, and Palace physio David West will accompany him on the trip.
Unstable Palace assistant manager Alan Smith said: ‘John flies out on Friday and we will know more after he has seen the surgeon over the weekend.
‘His knee is slightly unstable and we thought it best he saw the surgeon who performed the operation.’
Palace spent £100,000 on sending 23-year-old Salako across the Atlantic 12 months ago for revolutionary donor surgery.
The operation involved a tendon from a dead man's leg being grafted onto Salako's knee.
Salako battled back to full fitness this season and such was his form that he regained his place in the England squad for the World Cup tie against Norway last month.
Meanwhile, Birmingham City player-coach Ian Atkins will today be interviewed for the vacant manager's job at Cambridge United.
Atkins is well known in East Anglia, having previously captained Ipswich Town.
Degree of excellence
THERE'S no doubt Nick Faldo is top of the class at golf — and yesterday he received an Honorary Degree from the University of Hertfordshire.
The Open champion, who comes from Welwyn Garden City, used to practise his swing on the university playing fields at Hatfield in the early 70's.
His action was taped by a college technician for Faldo to replay.
It certainly paid dividends!.
Cup of trouble
By Tony Kell
THE Anglo-Italian Cup is under threat just weeks into its revival after exploding into a volcano of red cards and bad feeling.
Seven players have been dismissed in the latest intercontinental group stages and last night the organising committee of four officials each from Italy and England, chaired by Bristol City's Leslie Kew, held a crisis meeting in Pisa.
They studied referees' reports and may recommend pulling the plug again after the final at Wembley on March 27.
Football League spokesman Ian Cotton admitted: ‘The competition will be looked at at the end of the season.’
An FA representative added: ‘The Anglo-Italian Cup is purely the domain of the Football League but if serious matters are referred to us, there will be an investigation.’
The tournament replaced the Zenith Cup to provide a taste of Europe for the Football League's top First Division clubs, but Cotton said: ‘It is a clash of two football cultures and when that happens sparks are always likely to fly.
‘But no specific incidents have yet been reported to either of the national associations.
‘Obviously, there have been some controversies but we believe the competition is catching the imagination of the fans.’
The Anglo-Italian — also blighted by low gates — saw four players sent off in Birmingham's match with Bari two weeks ago, while West Ham's Trevor Morley was dismissed on Tuesday against Reggiana at Upton Park and Cremonese's Luigo Gualco was shown the red card at Tranmere.
At Newcastle, not only was home striker David Kelly sent off seven minutes from the end but the incident sparked a mass brawl between players of both sides and United boss Kevin Keegan helped police break it up.
And Phil Holder, Brentford's manager, congratulated his players for ‘keeping their cool’ in the face of some fierce intimidation by Lucchese at Griffin Park.
Keegan refuses to publicly condemn a competition that has already provoked a welter of criticism but has asked the Football League to re-examine the format of using Italian referees in England and vice-versa.
‘I don't suppose they could afford neutral referees,’ he said.
‘I still think the carrot of a final at Wembley is terrific but looking at the gates, especially in Italy, I don't know if the fans want this competition.’
Portsmouth director Martin Gregory, whose club have a chance of reaching the semi-finals, insisted: ‘I doubt if we would vote for it to continue.
It is nice to visit foreign teams but it means losing so much time in midweek to travelling when we could be concentrating on preparation for League games.
‘Our crowds for the Anglo-Italian Cup will probably be better than for Zenith Cup matches but you have to reach the final to make real money out of it.’
Versatile Petra still leads pack
PETRA KRONBERGER begins her campaign for a fourth consecutive title when the women's World Cup Alpine ski season opens in Park City, Utah, this weekend.
Only Austrian compatriot Annemarie Moser, who linked five championships in the early 1970s and six overall, has been more successful.
These races, to be contested on a rich mixture of natural and manufactured snow, offer a showcase for the versatility that has served Kronberger so well.
Kronberger is the reigning world downhill champion and Olympic slalom gold medal winner — a range of ability that explains the difficulty her opponents face in unseating her.
True rivals for the title are hard to find.
France's Carole Merle, runner-up last season, is nearing her 29th birthday, an age at which the competitive flame often begins to dim.
And Vreni Schneider of Switzerland, the 1989 champion before Kronberger's streak began, turned 28 yesterday on Thursday and does not score in the speed events.
Perhaps the biggest challenge will come from Katjza Seizinger, the 21-year-old German, who won the World Cup downhill title and finished third overall.
But until she improves her ability in slalom and giant slalom, she lacks the versatility to take the big prize.
American Julie Parisien, the top-ranked slalom racer, is strong in three events and seems to be in the best condition of her career.
Parisien ranks as joint favourite with veteran team-mate Diann Roffe-Steinrotter for the two Park City races, as Americans often excel on home snow.
This will be the fourth time the World Cup has opened at the Utah resort, the third time for women.
Park City received 71cm of snow earlier in the week, a bonanza for recreational skiers but causing a headache for organisers who had already constructed a firm course from artificial snow.
Such conditions will draw more attention to a new rule allowing racers to choose start positions based on their ranking in that event.
Previously, the start was determined by a blind draw within the first seeding group of 15.
The top 15 has hardly changed since last season.
Only Blanca Fernandez-Ochoa of Spain, the Olympic slalom bronze medalist has retired.
Deborah Campagnoni of Italy, who won the Olympic super-giant only to tear a knee ligament in giant slalom, is back in action.
Normally, the Italian is one of the two or three best in the world at the latter event and this opening race will gauge her recovery.
Other contenders include Pernilla Wiberg of Sweden, the Olympic giant slalom winner, and Annelise Coberger of New Zealand, silver medalist in the slalom.
Montana back on the ball for 49ers
By David Tossell
JOE MONTANA has taken his first steps towards an NFL comeback — by imitating Randall Cunningham.
The 36-year-old San Francisco 49ers quarterback, out for almost two years with an elbow injury, is back on the team's practice roster.
That has meant impersonating the Philadelphia Eagles quarterback to help the 49ers prepare for Sunday's match.
‘I'm throwing the ball with good velocity, good distance and with accuracy,’ said Montana, winner of four Super Bowl rings.
But with Steve Young the league's top-rated quarterback, and the 49ers compiling a 9–2 record, coach George Seifert has no immediate plans to make any changes.
Montana said: ‘Steve and the team are playing well so they are not going to take a chance of throwing me in unless they have to.’
SUNDAY: Chicago at Cleveland; Kansas City at NY Jets; Miami at New Orleans; New England at Atlanta; Phoenix at Washington; Pittsburgh at Cincinnati; Tampa Bay vs Green Bay at Milwaukee; Buffalo at Indianapolis; Minnesota at LA Rams; Philadelphia at San Francisco; LA Raiders at San Diego.
MONDAY: Denver at Seattle.
Local hero Tomba set to dazzle
By Mike Allan
ALBERTO TOMBA has the ideal stage to flaunt his phenomenal skills when the Alpine skiing World Cup season opens in Sestriere, Italy.
The Italian showman (left) will be roared on this weekend by a huge home crowd in the northern Italian resort as he launches his defence of the giant slalom and slalom titles he won with ease last year.
Tomba is clearly looking forward to his first race in Italy since winning a gold and a silver medal at the Winter Olympics in Albertville last year, to add to two golds he took in 1988.
Embrace
‘I want to feel the embrace of my fans, 100,000 of them, and I'm waiting to face my rivals with confidence,’ said the 25-year-old, who has been training in Sestriere for the past few weeks.
Paul Accola of Switzerland took the overall World Cup title ahead of Tomba last year and the Italian's refusal to compete in the super-G or downhill races mean the crown will probably elude him once more this year.
But Tomba will ski in his usual buccaneering style at the resort where he first tasted World Cup victory five years ago.
‘It's better to triumph in as many races as possible rather than winning the World Cup with a series of good placings,’ said the Italian, who has 28 career wins.
Tomba identifies Accola, veteran Marc Girardelli and fast-emerging Norwegian Kjetil-Andre Aamodt as his key rivals in a season which opens with a giant slalom tomorrow on Saturday and a slalom on Sunday.
Accola will be resplendent in a bright yellow costume, the product of a sponsorship deal with a cheese Accola would love to outshine his friend Tomba on his home soil while the Austrian-born Girardelli, who skis for Luxembourg, has his sights fixed on a record fifth overall world title, having kept clear of the injury problems which bedevilled his preparations last year.
And Aamodt, 21, already Olympic super-G champion, is perhaps the jewel in the crown of a talented Norwegian squad looking to continue their rapid progress ahead of the 1994 Lillehammer Olympics.
Twin Oaks on target
By Jonathan Ramsden
TWIN OAKS will make a rare appearance away from his beloved Haydock in tomorrow's Hennessy Cognac Gold Cup at Newbury.
Trainer Gordon Richards, who has sent out the veteran staying chaser to win seven times at the Lancashire track, last night confirmed him a definite starter.
‘All being well he runs and Neale Doughty will ride,’ Richards said.
‘I have agreed with his owner to let him run at Newbury because they have had a lot of rain down south.’
Richards's confirmation prompted William Hill to cut Twin Oaks from 25–1 to 16–1.
Favourite Chatam has been shortened to 7–2 from 4–1 and Jodami from 4–1 to 9–2.
Grand National winner Party Politics was cut two points to 12–1 by Ladbrokes.
Jodami's pilot Mark Dwyer bruised some ribs when taking a heavy fall at Nottingham, but expects to be fit to ride.
Cool Ground worked well yesterday morning, but no decision will be made on his participation until today.
Rain fell during the night at Newbury but gusting winds mean the going remains soft, with good to soft patches in the home straight.
On a less happy note for Gordon Richards, the Greystoke trainer is the subject of a Jockey Club inquiry after his hurdler Thistle Monarch showed greatly improved form to win at Carlisle yesterday.
Daz ready to dazzle
By Alan Biggs
POOL wizard Daz Ward potted a £100,000 windfall yesterday after being plucked off the dole queue.
The 22-year-old from Sheffield signed up as the sport's first big-money professional with a one-year contract worth £8,300 a month from the newly-launched Professional Pool Federation.
Ward, the world No 2 looking forward to being packaged as ‘Dazzling Daz’, has been unemployed since the sale of his father's butchery business and still lives with his parents.
The startled youngster said: ‘I haven't got a girlfriend, but I reckon I can afford one now.
I've been claiming benefits for 18 months and this offer is a complete surprise.
‘I hoped to earn a living out of pool, but I've hardly made anything until now.
I am so excited, I haven't slept since I was told about it a couple of days ago.’
The PPF insist pool is set to emerge from snooker's shadow and believe ‘Dazzling Daz’ can attract the necessary television exposure.
Gamble
PPF co-ordinator Ray Carter revealed that the huge retainer will be part-funded by the game's 350,000 subscription-paying league players, with the rest coming from promoters Cue Sport and Shoot Pool magazine, a new publication affiliated to the Federation.
‘Three million people play pool regularly so where's the gamble?’ said Carter.
‘We will get a return from magazine sales and television.
‘Sky are already interested in our plan to turn pool away from the snooker image and into a slick, fast presentation.
‘Daz will become a high-profile player, and we are looking for others.
The aim is to get our top talent to compete in countries like America, where the game is big.’
Geoff Freeth, another PPF official, said: ‘Pool hasn't been run properly.
More people play it in this country than snooker and yet even the top players can't make enough to live on.
‘Look at Daz.
He's ranked No 2 in the world and he's on the dole.
That's a disgrace.
Why can't some of these blokes be earning £1 million a year like snooker players?
‘When we've made celebrities of one or two of them, then people will want to watch.’
I'm quitting, vows Bishop
By Ray French
DAVID BISHOP is set to give rugby league the boot and make a sensational return to union.
Bishop, now on loan from Hull Kingston Rovers to London Crusaders, says his final rugby ambition is to coach Pontypool after serving a three-year ban to regain his amateur status.
Tonight, he is at hooker for Wales against England at Swansea in what could be one of his last 13-a-side appearances.
‘Clive Griffiths, the Welsh coach, may persuade me to play against France in a few weeks' time but I have made up my mind to call it a day,’ he said last night.
‘League is a fabulous game but I've never liked it and if I knew what I know now, I would never have left Pontypool.
‘The one ambition I have left is to coach Pontypool and put us back where we belong.’
Bishop has a reputation as a trouble-maker but it seems he will be welcomed back to the valleys.
Expertise
Pontypool chairman John Perkins also played in Bishop's only Welsh union international against Australia in 1984.
He said: ‘This club has a wealth of world-class former playing expertise and if that could be reinforced at some future date by David Bishop, I think Pontypool would only be the richer for it.
‘He possesses more talent than any other player I have seen.’
Bishop and his Welsh colleagues are seeking their first win over England in 18 years.
And Phil Ford insists they have a point to prove to England coach Mal Reilly.
‘When Mal picked the Lions team for the tour of Australia last summer he left out most of the Welsh players,’ said the Salford full-back.
‘Jonathan Griffiths, Allan Batement and Anthony Sullivan are class backs and Mark Jones and David Young are big, powerful forwards who deserved their chance on tour.
And I still feel able to play at the highest level.’
Ford, 31, with 15 tries this season in 13 outings, is the only survivor from Wales' 28–9 defeat when they last met England in 1984.
He believes if Jones, Paul Moriarty and skipper Young tame the visitors' more experienced forwards, Wales' gifted backline can upset England on home soil for the first time since 1949.
England boss Reilly, lacking the muscle of Wigan forwards Denis Betts, Andy Platt and Kelvin Skerrett, has opted for a blend of youth and experience.
If given sufficient room, three-quarters Alan Hunte, Gary Connolly and Paul Newlove can torment the Welshmen.
But Reilly will want old hands Ellery Hanley, Martin Offiah and skipper Garry Schofield to steady the side in the intense atmosphere expected in the opening 20 minutes.
One powerful break from Hanley or Schofield, or an electrifying burst of speed by winger Offiah in the opening quarter, could seriously undermine Welsh confidence.
Parrott hits peak
By Barry Lucas
HOLDER John Parrott yesterday pronounced himself at a career peak after reaching the semi-finals of the Royal Liver Assurance UK Championship at Preston.
Parrott, 6–2 up overnight against Irish professional champion Joe Swail, could not have been more impressive in completing a 9–3 victory.
The 28-year-old from Liverpool became only the third player to simultaneously hold both the world and UK titles when he triumphed at Preston a year ago.
Now pressing Stephen Hendry for his No 1 world ranking, he believes he has reached his peak, declaring: ‘The penny has finally dropped.
‘I have played in enough tournaments now to know what is required, what is needed to win.
I don't think I'm going to get any better, though my coach John Spencer may disagree.
‘I think it's just down to maturity.
I'm a slow learner and it has taken me a long time to get there.
‘I've been a lot harder as a character in the past couple of years.
I now know that you don't win at this level unless you sweat blood and tears.’
Swail's hopes of getting back in the match virtually disappeared when he lost the first frame of the final session.
Eubank master of disguise
CHRIS EUBANK is at his most infuriating when he puts his natural aggression on hold and appears to fight for only one minute in every three.
But trainer Ronnie Davies — tongue nowhere near cheek — insists Eubank's annoying habit stems partly from contempt for opponents and partly from the fact that he is blood brother, so to speak, to the greatest showman of them all, Muhammad Ali.
Tomorrow night in Manchester, Eubank makes the fourth defence this year of the WBO super-middleweight title when he fights Paraguayan Juan Carlos Gimenez.
The crowd and television fans will be thirsting for Eubank to be more positive than against Tony Thornton two months ago, when he simply shouldered arms and retreated during the last two rounds before nicking the points decision.
Eubank insists: ‘Thornton was simply the stronger man over the last two rounds.
To do what I did was good business sense.’
But Davies says that when Eubank is not obviously strutting and posing, his appearance can be positively deceptive.
Secret
‘Eubank trains very hard but the real secret to his success is that he is a very clean living boy,’ said Davies.
‘He's careful about what he eats, and he doesn't drink — he wouldn't have alcohol in his trifle.
‘Agreed, he did look tired against Thornton, but he still won.
Muhammad Ali was like that, he'd look weary and suddenly he'd produce one big punch and his man would be gone.
Eubank has done that a lot.
‘He'll coast, looking for an opening but the annoying thing is that sometimes he simply doesn't go in and take it.
‘Sometimes he just gets bored in a fight and then I have to slap his face and tell him to get on with it.
He starts treating opponents with contempt but that's what makes him so good, he makes class fighters look ordinary.
‘A normal boxer gets tired and stays tired, but why has Eubank gone 33 fights without losing?
‘It's because he's so strong, there is always something left in reserve no matter how tired he looks.’
That strength comes from the fact that Eubank knows how to look after himself in more ways than one.
Having earned around £4 million in the ring, and invested heavily in property, he also knows how to prosper in terms of his own ring longevity.
He eats sensibly but well in a strictly regimented year-round training regime, and Davies said: ‘He trains six days a week.
He might take three weeks off after a really hard fight, otherwise he's back in the gym after three days.’
Pride
But Eubank also has a huge ego to feed, and Davies revealed: ‘I know he's always going on about money, but the truth is his main drive is pride — he hates the idea of losing.
‘He was training last week and two little lads came in the gym, and immediately Eubank stopped what he was doing and started to teach them how to box — you've no idea just how much he loves being a champion.’
A TYPICAL DAY AT THE OFFICE
STORY:7.30am: Climbs out of bed in his luxury Brighton home and goes for his habitual five mile run, alone out of preference.
Can sometimes look awkward, even clumsy in the ring but trainer Ronnie Davies insists: ‘He's a natural athlete, a very good runner.’
8.45: Breakfast with wife Karron and children Christopher Jnr aged three and 15-month-old Sebastian.
Chris loves egg and bacon, cereal and fruit.
Rest of the morning spent as he pleases.
2.30pm: Wheels out mountain bike and cycles two miles to the gym.
3.30: Training begins with a series of yoga, aerobic and stretching exercises supervised by his martial arts instructor Walter Johnson.
He then moves on to 10 minutes of shadow boxing before Davies dons the hand-pads and waits for pain.
‘Most boxers use the pads to develop their hand speed.
Eubank uses them to develop his power punching and it hurts, my wrists are permanently swollen,’ says Davies.
After three ‘rounds’ with the speedball Eubank then tackles 6–8 rounds of flat out sparring with Welshman Simon Collins or WBC Interational middleweight champion Chris Pyatt.
This is followed by a 12-minute session on the heavy bag and Davies gets his own back, hammering Eubank's abdominal muscles with a medicine ball before the session finishes with 20 minutes skipping.
6.15: Back on the mountain bike and home for a gentle walk before dinner.
His favourite food is Jamaican, especially fish dishes, and he insists on cooking it himself.
And despite his pretended hatred for boxing, Eubank's favourite evening occupation is to watch hours of fight videos.
11.00: Bedtime — if in strict training.
Umpire blasted
UMPIRE Steve Bucknor came under fire yesterday for refusing to view a TV replay in a run-out incident which could have a bearing on the second Test between South Africa and India.
South Africa ended the first day at 226–7, recovering from 26–4 thanks to Jonty Rhodes' defiant 91.
But India insisted Rhodes should have been given run out when he was on 28.
At 61–4, Cameras clearly showed him to be out to Jawagal Srinath's direct hit but Bucknor refused to use the replay facility.
The Indian team, told about the replay by team-mates in the dressing room, made animated appeals to Bucknor to consult the third umpire Barry Lambson, but to no avail.
Match referee Clive Lloyd criticised Bucknor, saying: ‘The monitor is there as an aid to help umpires and he should use it.’
Campo at war
WILL CARLING and David Campese, the two highest-profile players in world rugby, continued their off-field sniping before tomorrow's clash between the Barbarians and Australia at Twickenham.
Campese — having a ball at training yesterday with an inflatable — said: ‘Will's a very good player.
England have some excellent backs.
If they could get it together they'd be a much better team.’
Baa-Baas captain Carling countered: ‘He is a brilliant rugby player.
But I can't say I've been happy at being on the end of his criticism.’
Carling is indignant at Campese claims that he refused to shake hands after last year's World Cup final.
‘Perhaps on Saturday I'll make sure a camera records such a routine gesture,’ he said.
Exiles returning to glory years
By Giles Smith on the London Welsh revival
TWENTY years ago, London Welsh contained seven British Lions and six more internationals and were probably one of the finest rugby clubs in Britain, if not the world.
Now, after plunging from Courage Division One to Four in successive seasons, the Exiles — top of their division and in tomorrow's third round of the Pilkington Cup — are on their way back.
Former British Lions captain John Dawes, brought in two years ago to halt the slide of the Richmond-based club, insists: ‘We had four dreadful years but I honestly believe we can climb back up again.’
And coach Bill Calcraft, a lock in Australia's 1984 Grand Slam-winning team, agrees: ‘If we can get promotion, and it's a big if because this season only one club goes up, I do believe the club, with all its superb facilities and tradition, can attract the players to put it in the top flight again.’
Both men point to one factor that makes the club unique: when they don't have Division Four matches, they play traditional fixtures against the best English and Welsh clubs.
Greats
Dawes, whose 1971 Lions — the only team to win a series in New Zealand — included greats such as Mervyn Davies, JPR Williams and Gerald Davies, says: ‘We have a break from League matches now and our next four fixtures are against Wasps, Northampton, Bath and Llanelli.
What other Fourth Division club could possibly consider facing that sort of challenge?’
Calcraft adds: ‘We can't hope to win many of those matches, even though they won't bring their top teams.
So we rest some people and target one of the matches and see how we go.
It worked earlier in the season when we beat Rugby.’
A more immediate priority is tomorrow's Cup clash at Third Division Redruth.
In the last round the Exiles knocked out Third Division leaders Havant and skipper Andy Tucker says: ‘If we can beat Redruth we could draw one of the big clubs at home.
That would be just like the old days.
‘The players of today are very much aware of the pressures of the club's history.
And, although we are in Division Four, other clubs still see us as a team they really want to beat.’
The biggest problem facing the Exiles management is keeping good players.
Tucker admits: ‘I have been approached by a big Welsh club and I know at least four others in the team who have too.
It's a big temptation because I still believe four or five of us are good enough to think about playing for Wales.
‘For the moment, though, I think we will all stick with it here and continue with the drive for promotion.’
Dawes blames the club's decline in the 1980s on changing social patterns.
‘The old side was mainly teachers and medics who came to London to train.
Now, with the M4 and high-speed rail services, they can still go back to Wales for rugby if they are working in London.’
In the John Dawes Room, with pictures of the glory days, the great man is optimistic.
‘I shall be very disappointed if we don't get promotion.
It wouldn't necessarily be the end of the world, though it would seem like it!’
And Tucker warns: ‘The hwyl is back in London Welsh.’
Bruiser Stan is tip of iceberg
Mike Crouch
DOWN the years Stan Flashman has brought dishonour to football in a variety of roles.
But, for crass disregard of decency, the brawling arrogance of the Wild Bull of the Pavements at the Football League inquiry, which fined his club Pounds 50,000, transcended even his own worst excesses.
There can be few people in football who do not think Flashman should be turfed out of Barnet at the earliest opportunity.
Even the club's own supporters, fearful that full disclosure of the books to the Department of Industry could threaten Barnet's very existence, now prefer to bury their frustration and go for broke, so to speak.
The Flashman incident may be the lowest point to which those who run our football clubs have descended but the shenanigans, admittedly not with fisticuffs as an accompaniment, are not confined to north London.
It is difficult to imagine anything the shape of Stan Flashman as being the tip of an iceberg but that's exactly what he is.
Legitimised greed is widespread and the ambition of the bigger clubs to monopolise the most profitable sponsorships and TV deals is only the most visible evidence of a disease which permeates the game.
Bloated
Loyalty bonuses for disloyal players, bloated payments to executives, contracts which give managers shares of transfer fees and other salary innovations may be above the law but they are rooted in the same dark subsoil which nourishes numerous rackets and scams.
But Football League action of the kind taken against Flashman is unusual and is seldom the result of their own initiative.
In this case the Barnet chairman was able to chalk up several bruising encounters with his own manager and players before the Professional Footballers' Association investigated his mishandling of the club's wages and brought matters to a head.
Other exposures such as the Swindon affair and the irregular payment to Graham Roberts have depended largely on the Press or dissident club officials.
Reliance on a reluctant governing body may be about to change, however.
Over the coming months I expect to see the Inland Revenue, the Customs and Excise and the DTI increasingly at work in an area ripe for their activities.
As soccer clubs edge towards financial collapse, and there are many on the brink, their accounts will become subject to ever closer scrutiny.
Then the scams will be uncovered.
By hook or by crook, football is being called to account for the years of profligacy.
Eu's new image a waste
Mike Crouch
CHRIS EUBANK has been wasting his money consulting a public relations company to improve his image.
And the worst thing he can do is follow their advice.
Of course he would not be as irritating if he appeared less aloof.
Maybe we, and those to whom he wishes to sell himself, would warm to him if he smiled a bit more.
But would it really make him more marketable?
Of course not.
Eubank has got where he is by aggravating public and opponents alike to the point that all they want to see is the object of their dislike brought down with a bump.
It is a sad truth that nice guys don't pack them in.
Poor Michael Watson was never as big a draw as Eubank or that other thoroughly disagreeable middleweight Nigel Benn.
Tomorrow Eubank expects to attract a reasonable crowd to Manchester to watch him floor another no-hoper, Juan Carlos Giminez of Paraguay, as he doggedly attempts to squeeze the last pound from his slight talent.
Those who attend will be there because Chris Eubank is a man they love to hate.
If he were to become anything else they would lose interest in him altogether.
Hendry hits new low
WORLD snooker champion Stephen Hendry's miserable season continued last night as he crashed out of the UK Championship in Preston.
Hendry, without a tournament win this season, lost 9–8 to fellow Scot Alan McManus, who now meets Londoner Jimmy White in the semi-finals.
Carling absent
ENGLAND rugby captain Will Carling will not play in the Divisional Championships next month.
Carling will miss the annual competition, used specifically by the England management as a series of trials, because he will be out of the country on business.
Lyle leads
SANDY LYLE rolled in a 100-foot eagle putt on his way to a two-under-par 70 and a share of the first-round lead with Yoshinori Mizumaki in the Casio World Open golf tournament at Kaimon, southern Japan yesterday.
Brazilian signs
BRAZILIAN Rubens Barrichello will drive for the Jordan Formula One team in 1993 and '94.
And Eddie Jordan insists: ‘I believe he is one of the brightest prospects for some years.’
Swinton sale
CRISIS-TORN Swinton are up for sale.
The administrators, called in three weeks ago to run their affairs, are now inviting realistic offers for rugby league's Second Division club.
Title hope £1.2m shocker
NEWCASTLE'S Paul Charters is hoping victory against lightweight world challenger Racheed Lawal in Denmark tonight will boost his bid for a European title challenge.
Coup, what a stunner
Duncan McKenzie
ERIC CANTONA won the adoration of the whole of Elland Road, apart from one man — Howard Wilkinson.
The Leeds manager always appeared to have a slight reservation about the gifted Frenchman's ability to adapt to England.
And now he has sold him.
The transfer is a great coup for Alex Ferguson and, at £1.2m has got to be classed as a bargain.
I would not be surprised, though, if Fergie's initial call to Howard Wilkinson on Wednesday was to inquire about Lee Chapman.
Big Chappie scores goals, has physical presence and is good in the air — all the things that Manchester United need up front.
If this is the case, and he has then asked about Cantona and been given the nod, he has still done well.
Cantona is still stuck in a bit of a culture gap, in mid-channel if you like.
But he's worked hard to adapt to the pace of things in England and because of that, his skill has suffered a bit.
But that very willingness to apply himself, coupled with the great skill he has, still makes him a great player in my view.
Immediate doubts surface: Cantona may not be able to play with Mark Hughes.
In many ways they are similar, both scoring spectacular goals, liking to hold it up, both with a lovely touch.
Are they like Rush and Saunders…too similar?
It could be a problem but I am certain of one thing: Manchester United's purist style will be much more to Eric's liking than the mix and match game at Leeds.
Leeds do play a lot of football, but they hit a long ball as well.
At Old Trafford it is all football, whether they dominate with it, or hit teams on the break through the pace of wingers Lee Sharpe, Ryan Giggs and Andrei Kanchelskis.
Their game will allow Cantona to become more involved in the middle of the field than he ever was at Leeds.
But Fergie will not want him there too much.
He has not been bought to play like Hughes, but to score goals — and he has a real chance of doing that.
He has scored for Leeds, and Manchester United get the ball into the box in a different way.
With their wingers, the ball is flashing across the face of goal as often as it is delivered in the air and Cantona will probably thrive on this sort of service.
No doubt Fergie would rather have signed his international mate Jean-Pierre Papin, but with the dearth of strikers on the market right now he will be well satisfied…
Cantona is as good as he is likely to get.
It could be a master stroke because one thing is certain, the Old Trafford crowd will love him.
For a start, they will just love stealing the favourite player of the Leeds supporters.
But Cantona is also what I'd call a Manchester United player.
This means he will get the backing of the crowd for 90 minutes and that is invaluable at Old Trafford where, if you don't score after 20 minutes, things can go quiet and even the boldest of players can become intimidated.
Trigger
It won't happen to Eric, which will benefit the team.
His arrival could trigger a better relationship between the players and the crowd.
United are having a difficult season, and there is antagonism towards the club because of what is happening off the pitch.
But Cantona could be the key to success.
Talking to Bryan Robson this week, the skipper was full of optimism, saying how well United are starting to play, and Cantona could turn that trickle of confidence into a tide.
When the Frenchman signed for Leeds at the start of the year, I said that he was more a Manchester United player than a Leeds man — and I still believe that now, and hope he will prove it.
Fry's sack fear
BARNET manager Barry Fry is expecting a phone call from club chairman Stan Flashman to tell him he is sacked.
Fry fears the bullet after publicly urging Flashman to quit the troubled Third Division club.
But he pledged last night that he would still be leading the team for tomorrow's League game at Darlington even if Flashman does sack him for the third time in a year.
‘Stan Flashman has never asked me to come back,’ said Fry ‘I just turn up.
I'll still be in charge of the team tomorrow.
I owe it to the supporters and the players.
‘I feel responsible for them.
If I walked out, they wouldn't be able to handle it.
They couldn't handle him.’
Eagle-eyed Lyle leads
SANDY LYLE rolled in a 100-foot eagle putt on his way to a two-under-par 70 and a share of the first-round lead in the Casio World Open golf tournament at Kaimon, southern Japan  yesterdaythurs .
Scot Lyle was joined by Japan's Yoshinori Mizumaki, who shot birdies on two of the last three holes.
Roy annoyed
ROY SKELDON, Britain's oldest professional boxer, is threatening to take legal action after being stripped of his Midland Area light-heavyweight title.
Skeldon, 40 next month, said: ‘The Midland Area Council tell me my licence to box lapsed three years ago.’
Allison to stay
John Davies
BRISTOL ROVERS are poised to appoint Malcolm Allison as their manager until the end of the season, writes John Davies.
Port Vale's FA Cup run has hampered Rovers in their chase for Vale boss John Rudge, who they had placed top of their shortlist for the managerial vacancy.
But the team has responded well to caretaker-manager Allison since he took over from sacked Dennis Rofe two games ago.
And after a meeting of the club's directors yesterday, Rovers vice-chairman Geoff Dunford revealed: ‘We are very pleased with the job Malcolm is doing and we are considering giving him the job until the end of the season.’
Is this a wind up?
By Rob Shepherd
A MANCHESTER United player picked up the the phone.
You've just signed a new striker, I told him, and I'll give you three guesses who it is.
‘David Hirst?’ came the reply.
No.
‘Brian Deane?’
No.
‘It's not Pancev is it?’
No, but keep trying.
‘Is he Scottish?’
No.
‘English.’
No.
I'll give you a clue, he's a top foreign player.
‘Does he come from Italy?’
No.
‘Sweden?’
No.
‘Yugoslavia?’
No.
‘France?’
YES!
‘What, a French striker?
Papin?’
Non.
‘Erm, it's not, no it can't be…is it Eric Cantona?’
Correct.
‘No, you're joking.
That's rubbish.
I don't believe you.
This is a wind up.
Have you got Jeremy Beadle outside my front door?’
The disbelief was common to all those at Old Trafford, who could barely take in one of the most dramatic domestic transfers of all time.
But once the news began to sink in, United's players welcomed a player whose arrival at Leeds in February gave Howard Wilkinson's team an extra dimension and enabled them to overtake United and win the Championship.
Defender Gary Pallister said: ‘It's a bolt from the blue, I'd never have guessed we were signing him if you gave me 300 goes.
‘The majority of Premier League defenders would rather play with him than against him.
‘The fans have been wanting a new face up front because of our recent goal drought.
It's a shot in the arm for our supporters that we have signed a player associated with skill and flair.’
Fight
Cantona's arrival clearly puts a question mark against the futures of Mark Hughes and Brian McClair.
But midfielder Paul Ince said: ‘Cantona's arrival doesn't mean Hughes and McClair can't still be in the side.
Like everyone, Eric will have to fight to get a place in our side.
But obviously our fans will be excited.
Having arrived in England virtually unknown, he has quickly become a household name.’
Defender Steve Bruce added: ‘The more good players we have the better it is for the squad.
Eric has proved himself a first class performer.’
But Ray Fell, chairman of the Leeds United Supporters' Club admitted: ‘It's a kick in the stomach, I'm shocked and amazed.
‘It's particularly disappointing that he's gone to another English club.
‘Eric built up a wonderful relationship with the fans and we'll never forget him telling us that he loved us when the team were parading the League trophy.’
Eric's Elland Road diary
ERIC CANTONA'S marriage with Leeds turned out to be more of a passing fling.
Nine months after walking into Elland Road to be acclaimed as a hero, he is gone amid a wave of Yorkshire revulsion.
Copies of the cassette ‘Ooh Aah, Cantona’ were sold out within six weeks of hitting record shops in the city; now they are likely to meet a sticky end on bonfires reminiscent of anti-Beatles protests in the 1960s.
When Manchester United visit Leeds on February 9, Cantona will find the adoration has turned to cries of ‘Judas’.
Cantona's nomadic journey though English football began last January, when Sheffield Wednesday manager Trevor Francis tried to sign him from Nimes.
These were his subsequent staging posts en route for Old Trafford:
January 27: Joins Wednesday on trial.
February 1: He snubs Francis's plea for an extended trial and joins Leeds.
February 8: His Leeds debut, a 2–0 defeat by Oldham.
February 29: Scores first Leeds goal, a brilliant effort against Luton.
April 11: His fabulous ‘juggling’ goal in the 3–0 win against Chelsea is hailed as one of the best of the season.
April 26: Wins a Championship medal as Leeds beat Manchester United to the tape.
August 8: Hat-trick in the Charity Shield against Liverpool at Wembley.
August 25: Another treble in the 5–0 thrashing of Spurs.
November 4: The dream turns sour — Leeds are knocked out of Europe by Rangers.
Venables may sue Scholar
By Rob Shepherd
TERRY VENABLES and Tottenham are investigating whether they should sue former chairman Irving Scholar.
Venables and the Spurs board have been upset over a series of allegations Scholar has made in his book ‘Behind Closed Doors’, which is published today.
And I understand Venables, now chief executive at the club, is seeking legal advice to assess whether he, supported by the club, ought to take action.
Although they have yet to fully scrutinise the book, sources close to Venables cite at least four areas in which action might be appropriate.
In a serialised version of the book under a headline: ‘Venables never made Spurs his top priority’, Scholar alleged: ‘Tottenham, alas, never seemed to get his full attention.’
Venables who has attempted to keep a low profile, hoping not to give the book credence, will point out that he invested £3½ million, and many hours of his day to seize control of the club, when his successful takeover bid helped solve Tottenham's financial problems, and oust Scholar as a consequence.
Scholar also revealed details of Venables's contract when he joined the club as manager from Barcelona.
It was stated Venables received a £500,000 signing-on fee but Venables says the figure was just £50,000.
Scholar also suggested Venables turned down the chance to sign Mark Hughes when he was released by Barcelona, having been on loan to Bayern Munich.
The intimation that Venables did not want Hughes at Tottenham was that it was a misjudgment by him.
Venables, though, maintains that Spurs were about to sign Paul Gascoigne, and it was decided to allow Manchester United to sign Hughes, thus weakening their financial clout to make a counter-bid for Gascoigne.
Kingstonian replay probe
THE Football Association will decide on Monday if Peterborough must play a third FA Cup first-round tie against non-League Kingstonian.
The Diadora Premier club's goalkeeper, Adrian Blake, was concussed by a coin thrown from the crowd at London Road on Wednesday night as his side trailed 3–0 in the 57th minute.
Midfielder Andy Parr took over and the part-timers lost 9–1.
But Kingstonian chairman Barry Chauveau yesterday appealed to the FA about the incident.
FA spokesman Mike Wilmore said: ‘Primarily, the committee will be purely concerned about the result of the game and how it was affected.’
It seems likely another match will be ordered because a precedent has been set.
Burton Albion were granted a replay against Leicester in 1984–85 after their goalkeeper was hit by a missile.
Chauveau added: ‘I know Peterborough are very upset about it but it doesn't change the fact that one moron behind the goal ruined it for everybody.’
Ludo pledge
KEEPER Ludek Miklosko has quit international football to concentrate on helping West Ham into the Premier League.
The giant Czech, capped 40 times by his country, pulled out of their recent World Cup qualifier against Romania because it was played on the day before West Ham's crunch derby at Millwall.
The 31-year-old said: ‘Because of my commitment to West Ham their League games have to be considered more important.’
Keegan keen on Swede
By Dave Alexander
NEWCASTLE want more physical power up front and 6ft 2in Swede Kennet Andersson could be the answer.
The European Championship star, involved in a contract dispute at his Belgian club Mechelen, is on trial at St James' Park for three weeks.
Andersson has not played for a month but trained with United for the first time yesterday and made an instant impression.
‘He looked excellent,’ said manager Kevin Keegan. who will watch Andersson for the next three weeks.
‘He obviously enjoys being involved in something which could mark a new stage in his career.
‘Kennet is a big man with plenty of pace and gives us something different to anything we have at the club.’
Andersson said: ‘I would love to join Newcastle.
‘I was disappointed when a move to the club fell through earlier in the season because I believe my style would be suited to the English game.
I'd love the chance to prove it at Newcastle.’
Newcastle have agreed a fee for Mick Quinn if his loan spell to Coventry becomes permanent.
Meanwhile, assistant manager Terry McDermott claimed Newcastle are good enough to take on the Premier League now and still be winners.
Dismissing suggestions the First Division is sub-standard this season and that Newcastle's 11-point lead is a false reflection of their quality, he said: ‘Ask Leeds whether it's rubbish.’
Leeds lost in the Coca-Cola Cup to Watford, beaten 2–0 by Newcastle on Saturday.
‘Ask Blackburn.
They left it late last year despite their money, but look what they're doing in the Premier League.’
Mo comeback is butchered
By Des Kelly
MO JOHNSTON, Everton's £1.5 million outsider, will be kept in the cold this weekend by former butcher's boy Stuart Barlow.
The former Rangers striker has failed to make an impact at Goodison Park and he must play second fiddle to the raw, 25-year-old prospect at Ipswich tomorrow.
While his former Ibrox team-mates bask in the glory of European Cup conflict, Johnston has slipped into obscurity on Merseyside after starting only four games this season.
Misery And there is no sign that the Scottish star's misery will ease, as he has been named in a third-team line-up to face Manchester City this weekend.
Johnston's last Premier League appearance was in the first week of October.
And although restricted by a virus, the Glaswegian-born centre-forward has only found the target twice this season.
French fancy
Ben Bacon
BASILE BOLI, the Marseille defender who head-butted Stuart Pearce, wants to play in England next year — for Manchester United or Sheffield Wednesday.
Boli, acknowledged as the best defender in France, is desperately keen to follow his friend, Eric Cantona, into the Premier League.
The 25-year-old, who played against Rangers on Wednesday, said: ‘I know Eric is very popular and I would like to achieve what he has done.’
Ooh!
Aah!
By Graham Fisher
ALEX FERGUSON last night stunned the football world by signing Eric Cantona from Leeds.
The Manchester United manager swooped for the Frenchman in a sensational bid to solve his goal-scoring problems after failing to lure England's David Hirst from Sheffield Wednesday for £3.5 million.
Ferguson declined to reveal the fee but it is believed to be Pounds 1.2m.
The dramatic conclusion to United's search for firepower was totally unexpected because Cantona, 26, a great favourite at Elland Road and the subject of their ‘Ooh!
Aah!’ anthem, was never considered a key target for Ferguson.
It is also a major surprise that defending champions Leeds, who signed Cantona for £900,000 from Nimes earlier this year, allowed him to go.
Best
A delighted Ferguson said: ‘It is all sorted.
We were disappointed when Sheffield Wednesday turned down our bid for David Hirst so we looked at the situation again and decided that Cantona was the best.
‘We decided to have a go and were a little surprised when Leeds agreed to the deal.’
Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson revealed the first approach was made on Wednesday.
‘As a result of a conversation on Wednesday afternoon, a deal was struck which, from my point of view, was in the best interest of all concerned,’ he said.
‘This is a move which gives Eric a better chance of first-team football than he would have at Leeds.
‘Obviously, at a club with aspirations to establish itself as one of the top names in the game, it is impossible to choose more than 11 players.’
Leeds may now use the Cantona fee towards a bid to buy Sheffield United striker Brian Deane.
The Elland Road club have previously shown an interest in Deane who was a £3m target for Chelsea last season.
Cantona will be presented at Old Trafford this afternoon then probably take a seat on the bench at Arsenal tomorrow.
Ferguson is unlikely to disturb the team that thrashed Oldham by three goals.
Debut
But he could give the new boy his debut in Lisbon on Tuesday, when United take on Benfica in a testimonial for Eusebio that also marks 25 years since United beat the Portuguese to win England's first European Cup.
Cantona, the one-time enfante terrible of French football, initially went on loan to Elland Road, where his inventive attacking play — mostly as substitute — gave Leeds a powerful bonus on their run in to the title.
He has 13 goals this season, with two hat-tricks, and is second only in the scoring list to Alan Shearer.
The unlikely deal was probably finally swung by the long friendship between Ferguson and Wilkinson, who work closely together in the League Managers' Association.
Ferguson added: ‘I'm delighted we've got a Manchester United-type player.
Cantona is exciting and he scores goals — something we've needed.’
Ray Fell, chairman of the Leeds United Supporters' Club said: ‘It has come as a kick in the stomach.’
Saints in Dane bid
Rob Shepherd
STRUGGLING Southampton are the new favourites to sign £1.5m-rated Henrik Larsen.
The Danish international has been linked with a move to Arsenal, but I understand it is the Saints who have made the most serious move to his Italian club, Pisa.
Although Larsen's agent Rune Hauge has made contact with Arsenal boss George Graham, he was left with the impression that the player did not fulfil the Gunners' requirements.
Hauge then contacted several other clubs, including Leeds and Blackburn, with Southampton the most interested.
They have talked to Pisa, and hope to conclude a deal before the weekend.
The only stumbling block is Larsen's former club, Lyngby, who are wrangling over their percentage of the fee.
Foreman for Lewis
Steve Bunce
LENNOX LEWIS is set to be crowned Britain's first heavyweight champion for 95 years — and to defend his title against George Foreman.
But Lewis is shattered it proved impossible to agree terms with new champion Riddick Bowe, who on January 2 will be stripped of the WBC version.
The crown will then be handed to Lewis, whose first defence seems certain to be against 45-year-old Foreman in Las Vegas on April 16.
‘It's bad for the sport because I wanted to win the crown in the ring by fighting for the undisputed title,’ said Lewis.
‘In an ideal world I would win the crown against the best fighter, the champion, but that does not look likely and I'm saddened by it.’
Lewis's manager Frank Maloney returned from fruitless talks with the Bowe camp in New York to say: ‘Bowe's manager Rock Newman offered an immediate crack at Bowe with the purse divided 90 per cent and 10 per cent in his favour.
I said no.
Prove
‘The second option involved us fighting somebody else for $2.5 million before a fight late next year with Bowe worth $9m.
I said no again.
‘George Foreman is the big fight for Lennox right now and the second defence could be against American Tommy Morrison — and perhaps the third against Frank Bruno in 1994.’
Lewis said: ‘By beating Foreman I can prove again I'm the best heavyweight, but I want to box people who'll give me a good workout — unlike Bowe I never avoid anybody.’
Beaten champion Evander Holyfield added a new dimension to the saga last night by demanding demanded a rematch with Bowe and a $15m purse.
Remittance is ruled out
By Colin Cooper
RISING star Remittance Man has damaged a tendon in his off-fore and is likely to be out for the rest of the season.
Nicky Henderson announced yesterday that the eight-year-old, who apparently hurt himself winning at Huntingdon on Tuesday, would definitely miss the King George at Kempton on Boxing Day.
He said: ‘It is a bitter blow.
The injury is half way down his off-fore and it looks as though he will be out for the rest of the season.
We had it scanned and it came to light the morning after the race.
‘The strange thing is that he has always been the soundest of horses and never taken a lame step in his life.
‘He could start back after Christmas but that would be too late for Cheltenham and there is always the risk that he could do more damage which would set him back for next season.’
Corals have promoted last year's winner The Fellow to 5–4 for Kempton, although that may well change again today after the Hennessy.
They then bet: 5–2 Bradbury Star, 6–1 Docklands Express, 7–1 Pat's Jester.
Piggott fit again
LESTER Piggott has declared himself fit to ride — less than a month after his horrific fall in the Breeders' Cup.
‘I feel fine and I could ride next week, but there are no horses for me and it's a bit cold,’ the 57-year-old said last night.
‘I haven't actually fixed a time when I will return, it just depends when I am made some offers.’
Piggott's latest comeback is most likely to be overseas.
Halkopous has Fighting chance
Jonathan Ramsden
1.35:A MODEST collection of novice chasers and PINK GIN will be very hard to beat.
Just about the best of these over timber, he made a successful debut over fences at Carlisle and further improvement seems likely over today's longer trip.
Dante's Inferno invariably spoils his chance by refusing to settle.
2.10:ONE of the surprises of last season was that former runaway Cesarewitch winner TRAINGLOT did not make an immediate impression at the winter game.
He failed to win in three starts and was particularly disappointing when runner-up here back in February.
However, with his stable's runners back with a bang this term, Trainglot is worth one last chance to show his true class.
2.40:LEADING northern hurdler Coulton gained all his successes last term over two and a half miles and back over the minimum I fancy HALKOPOUS to beat him.
Fit from the Flat, this one ran well in hot races at Cheltenham and Aintree last season.
3.10:TOP weight Shoon Wind has not shown his best form for quite some time, while recent Sedgefield second Galadine is nothing special.
I prefer the consistent VIKING ROCKET, who ran well for a long way behind Captain Dibble in the Scottish National at Ayr.
Chatam must be first choice
By Henry Rix
CHATAM can become the first horse since the great Arkle 27 years ago to land the Hennessy for a second successive year.
The Martin Pipe-trained eight-year-old gained an impressive four-length victory in the £50,000 Newbury showpiece 12 months ago but, after following up over course and distance a month later, he missed the remainder of the season through injury.
In normal circumstances there would be a serious doubt over Chatam's fitness after such a lengthy lay-off, but the champion trainer has a remarkable track record with horses returning from injury.
Gamble
There have also been some very encouraging noises from the Pipe stable, which has resulted in a major gamble from 14–1 to 4's over the last couple of weeks.
Chatam remains reasonably treated on a 12lb higher mark than last year, he acts well on soft ground, is ideally suited by Newbury's left-handed track, and the weight of ante-post money suggests he will be spot on for his reappearance.
I am sure he will take all the beating, and the 4–1 available with most firms is worth taking.
French raider The Fellow, hero of last year's King George at Kempton, would have a great chance with conditions in his favour but cannot be fancied on unsuitably soft ground.
Twin Oaks is not particularly well treated and has shown all his best form at Haydock, while Party Politics is held by Chatam on last year's Hennessy form.
The main threat should come from Captain Dibble.
The Scottish National winner is just 3lb higher than when successful at Wincanton earlier this month, stays really well and acts on this testing ground.
Brittain warns Friendly fans
By Colin Cooper
CLIVE Brittain warned User Friendly supporters not to put heart before head when his star filly goes for the world's richest race, the Japan Cup in Tokyo, early tomorrow morning.
The Newmarket trainer, who saddled Jupiter Island to win the event six years ago, said last night: ‘The quality of horses taking part in the Japan Cup has increased.
It's definitely higher than before.’
Although adamant that Oaks and St Leger winner User Friendly (3–1 favourite with Ladbrokes) is still in good form, he added:
‘I must say the Australian horses will be fresh, just starting their season, while the European horses are probably on the wane now.’
Tough Epsom Derby winner Dr Devious (10–1) ran a blinder to finish fourth to Fraise in the Breeders' Cup Turf but has been on the go since April.
However, the French are bullish about Dear Doctor (5–1), who has had a mid-season break and is the mount of Cash Asmussen.
Benn bonanza is Eubank aim
Steve Acteson
CHRIS EUBANK makes the fifth defence of his WBO super-middleweight title since February against Juan Carlos Gimenez of Paraguay tonight — but his real target is Nigel Benn.
Eubank has formulated a master-plan leading up to the fight of his dreams — a £1 million title unification fight next September with arch-enemy Benn.
A match with the newly-crowned WBC champion would silence the critics who accuse him of forever taking the soft option.
Eubank said: ‘Eubank v Benn II would be the biggest showdown in British boxing history.
‘I've told my promoter Barry Hearn that I want it to come off next September and I want it to be outdoors.
‘I challenge Benn to make it happen, to give the British public what they want.
I offered Benn the chance to fight me in September and he turned me down in favour of fighting Mauro Galvano in Italy.
Appeal
‘Now he's WBC champion and I congratulate him.
But, if all goes according to plan, we have the chance of a title unification fight with even more appeal.
‘Although Benn doesn't seem to want to fight me, surely he can see the commercial sense in what I am planning.
‘Neither of us are idiots and Benn must realise that the only way to make the really big money we are talking about is to meet each other here, when we are both scheduled to make a mandatory defence next September.
‘As far as I'm concerned there are absolutely no complications preventing Benn v Eubank II.
Anyway, what are the alternatives?
We could fight in America because we both have championship belts around our waists.
‘The other options are to fight in Europe or against another British fighter like Henry Wharton — but if Benn goes that way he would be offered money I wouldn't get out of bed for.’
Benn makes a first defence of his newly-won title against Nicky Piper of Wales at the Alexandra Palace on December 12.
He's then scheduled to give Galvano a rematch in March before planning another fight in May or June while Eubank fights in London in February and again in June.
‘Then we should both stop and groom for the final showdown, giving Barry Hearn three months to promote and sell the fight,’ said Eubank.
Deep down, though, Eubank suspects that only the loss of his bitter enemy's title during his next three fights could galvanise him into a repeat of their epic of two years ago — and commercially that would devalue the rematch.
But if money can't tempt Benn, Eubank hopes a reminder of wounded pride will, saying: ‘Benn will always rate under me in terms of seniority because I have beaten him.
Until he beats me he will always be in my shadow.’
Jaded
Eubank's plans could all be overturned with a shock defeat against the durable, tank-like Gimenez, though, and after looking so jaded against Tony Thornton two months ago Eubank admits he'll run if he has to.
It is high time Eubank put on another world-class performance, but opponents such as Gimenez simply don't fire him up enough to produce his best.
I take Eubank to win in four if he goes about the task like a true champion.
But it could easily be another points bore, Eubank admitting worryingly: ‘I'll win any way I can and if that means running then I'll run.’
England prove too strong
Ray French
Wales 11, England 36
WELSH hopes of their first win against the old enemy for 15 years were crushed by England's pack power and midfield organisation in Swansea last night.
But it was not all joy for England skipper Garry Schofield who suffered a recurrence of a hamstring injury.
He said: ‘I pulled the hamstring in my left leg as I picked the ball up to score a try.
I just felt the knot of muscle snap in my leg as I put the ball down.
I'll be out for at least a fortnight.’
Quick
Torrential rain greeted England's first appearance in Wales for eight seasons, but the visitors made light of the slippery conditions.
An early Lee Crooks penalty goal proved the forerunner of a disastrous opening for the Welshmen.
After wing Gerald Cordle left the field with a suspected fractured jaw in the eighth minute, they conceded two tries in quick succession.
Half-back Mike Ford sent Ellery Hanley racing through for the opening try.
And 10 minutes later full-back Stuart Spruce touched down.
Crooks converted magnificently from the touchline to give England a commanding 12–0 lead.
Roared on by the partisan Swansea crowd, Wales hit back with a brilliant two-try burst in the space of four minutes.
Stand-off Jonathan Griffiths took full advantage when Spruce spilled the ball 20 metres from his own line, racing round the cover for Wales' first try.
Centre John Devereux converted, with giant prop Mark Jones then brushing aside two tackles to crash over for the second try.
A Kevin Ellis drop goal in the 35th minute had England shaking as Wales displayed some of their best and most fluent rugby.
But disaster struck again when wing Clive Sullivan lost the ball close to his own line and allowed veteran prop Crooks to pick up and score.
England piled on the pressure and were rewarded when Martin Offiah struck in the 55th minute.
Newlove then dived over for a try of his own, with late scores from Offiah and Schofield rubbing salt in Welsh wounds.
Welsh coach Clive Griffiths said: ‘I hold my hands up to England.
They really did show us how to play rugby league.’
Umpire in TV switch
By Mike Allan
JAMAICAN umpire Steve Bucknor changed his attitude to trial by television on the second day of the second cricket Test between India and South Africa in Johannesburg yesterday.
Bucknor came under fire on Thursday when he gave Jonty Rhodes not out without consulting a third umpire with access to television replays — which clearly showed the South African had been run out.
‘It will be a sad day when the camera replaces the umpire,’ Bucknor said in response to the criticism.
But within an hour of play resuming on Friday, Bucknor called for a TV replay decision after Meyrick Pringle had been sent back and Sachin Tendulkar hit the stumps with a throw from square leg.
Consulted
Bucknor signalled to the third umpire — and the red bulb for ‘not out’ lit up.
After play, Bucknor said: ‘I consulted today after I was encouraged to do so.
If TV is here why not use it?
I have no problem with TV.’
Brian McMillan just missed his first Test century yesterday, then grabbed three wickets to put India in a shaky position, the visitors ending play at 128–6.
South Africa completed their first innings at 297 all out, led by McMillan's 98, 91 from Rhodes and 31 from Craig Matthews.
But South Africa's joy was marred when paceman Pringle was admitted to hospital after fracturing a bone close to an eye.
Battler Border
ALLAN BORDER held Australia together on the opening day of the five-Test series against West Indies but was run out for 73 just before stumps in Brisbane.
Skipper Border, who started the match needing 348 runs to overhaul India's Sunil Gavaskar as the highest run-scorer in Test history, helped the home side recover to 259–6.
Greg Matthews was unbeaten on 28, having shared a 72-run partnership with Border.
Paceman Curtly Ambrose took two wickets, off-spinner Hooper two and Ian Bishop one.
Meanwhile, New Zealand progressed painstakingly to 139–4 at stumps on the opening day of their first Test against Sri Lanka in Moratuwa.
Ken Rutherford (46 not out) and debutant all-rounder Chris Harris shared a face-saving fifth-wicket stand of 52 runs in 84 minutes as the tourists recovered from a precarious 87–4 soon after tea.
Bad light stopped play 15 minutes before stumps.
Barnes can move in
Tony Roche
STUART BARNES will have England and New Zealand firmly in his sights when he takes on world champions Australia at Twickenham today.
The Bath fly-half partners Wales scrum-half Robert Jones in a Barbarians line-up bristling with talent, but edged with steel.
The hugely talented Barnes, who won the last of his paltry eight England caps against Fiji in Suva four years ago, insisted: ‘I believe I have something to offer my country and the only way to fulfil that ambition is to play my way there.
‘This is a big occasion against the best international side in the world and a great opportunity to make a point.’
New Zealand is where Barnes wants to be next summer as part of the British Lions tour managed by England's Geoff Cooke.
And many at Twickenham today would put up a strong argument for Barnes and Jones, a triumphant Lion in Australia in 1989, forming the play-making partnership against the All Blacks.
‘Rob Andrew is the player in possession right now, but we are different in our style and approach.
For one thing, I like to play off the cuff now and again, and pull out a few surprises.’
That's just the type of magic necessary today to unhinge the most defiant defence in the world — and Barbarians and England captain Will Carling backs Barnes to call the winning shots.
‘Stuart will decide the plays,’ said Carling.
‘He is a very talented player who is currently pushing Rob very hard for the fly-half shirt.
‘Players of Stuart's talent are the reason why I believe England will get stronger, even when the older guys retire.
‘Australia are playing this game for keeps and so are we.
We have devised a game plan geared to winning more than entertaining.
Stuart is accustomed to that approach with Bath.
‘There will be no running at all costs,’ said Carling, the first Englishman to captain the Barbarians in 16 games against the three big Southern Hemisphere countries.
Confrontations to look out for include Carling and Scott Gibbs against Tim Horan and Jason Little, big-hit merchants Mick Skinner and Willie Ofahengaue and New Zealand's Ian Jones against Australia's Rod McCall.
Barbarians: M Rayer, I Hunter, W Carling (capt), S Gibbs, T Underwood, S Barnes, R Jones, N Popplewell, N Meek, J Probyn, I Jones, N Hadley, M Skinner, B Clarke, I Smith.
Australia: M Roebuck; D Campese, J Little, T Horan, P Carozza; P Kahl, P Slattery; D Crowley, P Kearns (capt), E McKenzie, R McCall, T Coker, W Ofahengaue, T Gavin, S Scott-Young.
Referee: J Fleming (Scotland).
I'll shackle Shelford
Tony Roche
NO-ONE else will believe him, but Martin Richards is convinced he has the edge on Northampton's Wayne Shelford in today's most fascinating Pilkington Cup third-round tie.
Tongue-in-cheek, the captain of tiny Tabard revealed: ‘I'm ready for Wayne — I've seen him on television.
‘He has a problem because I have seen him play more often than he has seen me!’
Richards, a 33-year-old Highgate estate agent, faces the former All Black captain in a Hertfordshire field where mighty Northampton know they are on hiding to nothing.
The Courage League First Division title-chasers, awash with international class, must lay their reputations before a 2,000 crowd — Tabard declined an offer to play the tie at Franklins Gardens — and Richards can't wait.
‘This is the biggest rugby day in Hertfordshire history,’ he added.
‘And certainly the biggest in the careers of any of our players.
Northampton won't be able to help themselves, they will feel complacent no matter how hard they try not to be.
‘We have strong links with Saracens.
A lot of lads started out here, went to Sarries, a few to Wasps then come home again.
Me, I defected from Barnet.’
Richards expects some interesting clashes, saying: ‘Danny Warner props against two England men, John Olver and Gary Pearce, and Dick Malone jumps against Martin Bayfield.
Danny and Dick both spent time with Saracens and Wasps, so have plenty of experience.’
Newcastle Gosforth, clear favourites for promotion to Courage Division One, have an early chance to gauge their real strength when they meet Gloucester.
Ironically, Gloucester look likely to be one of the sides they may well pass going in the other direction if the Tynesiders fulfil their three-year plan.
Dean Richards, who missed last week's Courage League clash against Bath with a calf strain, is fit for Leicester Tigers' match at London Scottish tomorrow.
Wasps hooker Kevin Dunn has not recovered from a bruised shoulder and is out of the tie at Rosslyn Park.
Return
John McFarland has withdrawn from London Irish's side to play West Hartlepool, replaced by Mick Leonard.
Harlequins are strengthened by the return of England hooker Brian Moore and Scottish lock Neil Edwards for their match with Blackheath at The Stoop tomorrow.
Barry Crawley, the Saracens No 8, has been suspended for three weeks after being identified as the player who punched Gloucester scrum-half Marcus Hannaford, out for five weeks with an eye injury.
Mark Langley had previously been wrongly identified as the aggressor.
White might
FAVOURITE Jimmy White, snooker's perennial bridesmaid, once again stands on the threshold of winning one of the game's major prizes.
White meets John Parrott in the 31-frame final at Preston this weekend in a repeat of last year's UK Championship final.
Having lost two UK and four world finals, White has never lost the belief that his day will come.
Last night, he gave himself another opportunity to set the record straight with a gutsy 9–7 win against Scotland's Alan McManus.
White preferred not to discuss the final and would only say: ‘No comment — action only.’
Parrott, meanwhile, dashed Steve Davis's hopes of a seventh UK crown with a 9–5 victory in the other semi-final.
The 28-year-old Liverpudlian, beaten in 14 of his previous 19 meetings with Davis, said: ‘This is a very satisfying victory.
I have taken it enough times from Steve.
Jimmy and I deserve to be in the final.’
Monty is left behind
SCOTLAND'S Colin Montgomerie shot a second-round 72 in the Australian Open at The Lakes, Sydney, yesterday to trail runaway leader Wayne Grady by eight shots.
Montgomerie's halfway aggregate of 141 puts him seventh equal.
Dallas dazzler
EMMITT SMITH scored two touchdowns, including a 68-yard run, as the Dallas Cowboys beat the New York Giants 30–3, improving their NFL record to 10–2, the best in the league.
Van Best-en
AC MILAN'S Marco Van Basten has been voted player of the year by World Soccer magazine ahead of Dutch team-mate Dennis Bergkamp and Manchester United keeper Peter Schmeichel.
Kemp recovers
SCOTLAND'S Johnny Kemp hit back from 3–0 down to beat Thomas Ang of Singapore 5–4 and reach the semi-finals of the World Amateur Snooker Championship in Malta.
Triple treat
BRITAIN'S Jo Durie, Clare Wood and Shirli-Ann Siddall beat No 2 seeds Italy 3–0 to reach today's semi-finals of the European Women's Team Tennis Championships in Prague.
Gazza laughs off big derby pressure
Ben Bacon
PAUL GASCOIGNE broke a thousand hearts last night when he revealed the name of the person he hopes to marry — Lazio captain Claudio Sclosa, the player he debagged at Spurs.
Despite the pressure of tomorrow's Sun local derby against Roma, Gazza has managed to retain his outrageous sense of humour.
The England international has been mobbed by Lazio fans this week, all beseeching him to shoot down their hated rivals, but he has kept his cool.
He said yesterday: ‘Everywhere I've gone, fans have asked me to do well against Roma, and some have just tried to touch me.
I like the adulation and one woman even asked me to marry her.
‘But I've already picked the person I want to marry, Claudio Sclosa.
He's my room-mate and we'll be celebrating in our pyjamas on Sunday if we win.
‘The game doesn't bother me.
I'm used to derbies and I know all about the pressure after matches against Arsenal.
‘The only difference is that in Rome everybody has been talking about this game for three months.
‘I'm not worried about the stick I'll get from the Roma fans.
It will have a positive effect on me, and make me play better.’
Although Lazio lost last week at Foggia, Gazza won rave reviews for his performance, and two superb England goals against Turkey and his wonder strike against Maradona's Seville have raised even bigger expectations.
The England international has yet to score a league goal for Lazio following his £5.5m summer move from Tottenham.
But Lazio's fanatical support will go loco if he can open his Serie A account.
However, should Gazza and Co. lose, there are bound to be immediate demands for the sacking of manager Dino Zoff.
I'd rather watch Coronation St
David Harrison
ENGLAND manager Graham Taylor last night blasted television's ‘saturation coverage’ of football and claimed: ‘I would rather watch Coronation Street.’
Taylor has a nightmare vision of the national game being dwindled down to two dozen teams playing in empty grounds purely for the benefit of the television companies.
Already a fierce critic of the Premier League's initial refusal to trim the number of clubs, Taylor has now gone on the attack over a television deal which has pumped more than £300 million into the game.
He said: ‘We are in the first stages of saturation coverage.
If I go to a match in Europe, I come back to a stack of videos and I can hardly be bothered.
What's going on in Coronation Street is what I want to know.
‘We have football on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday and by Wednesday we are round to the European games.
‘I can see the day when we are watching big-name clubs on television and the background will be empty seats, but the money will still be rolling in.
Insult
‘Not only are people starting to stay at home but the next danger is that there is so much football that viewers will start saying, ‘Do I really want to watch this?’’
Taylor added: ‘What is wrong with the Saturday tradition of a fan meeting his pals at the pub, then going to the game?
It was the event of the week, something to really look forward to.
‘But so much football on TV is putting an end to the Saturday afternoon tradition.
The final insult has been moving Coronation Street forward half an hour to show European Cup games.
I haven't a clue what's happening to Bet Lynch.’
Taylor had his own first hand problems with television during the European Championship when public relations, an accepted strength, became his Achilles heel.
The trouble began in an infamous televised row with the BBC's Desmond Lynam when, after a 0–0 draw with Denmark, Taylor felt he had to defend his team.
He recalled: ‘I certainly gave two very bad TV interviews that gave the impression that things were all wrong, all uptight, but that was because I felt it necessary to defend the players.’
Lynam lit the fuse by first questioning captain Lineker about the mood in the squad and then turning on Taylor, who now says: ‘I end up having a go at the ‘housewives' choice’ and it really wasn't me.
‘When I look back I wish that hadn't happened, because out of that comes the written situation and something develops that has nothing to do with the game at all.’
Taylor has since brought in a consultancy company to examine his public relations techniques.
Taylor also explained how, thanks to him, ‘Land of Hope and Glory’ now reverberates around Wembley again.
‘We're supposed to have this national reserve, but I was determined to bring back ‘Land of Hope and Glory’,’ he said.
‘It took the best part of nine months to do it because some people were worried about its connotations with ‘Empire’.
Worked
‘The other thing we've worked hard on is getting the players to sing the National Anthem.
I got more letters on that than anything else in my early days.
I've told them it really means something to people.’
Taylor wishes that in Sweden he had substituted the frustrated Gary Lineker with the pace of Tony Daley in the second match against France, rather than wait for the third and final game against Sweden to bring the curtain down on his captain's international career.
‘I was disappointed with how I handled and managed certain situations, but I know I've learned from that and I'm better for it.’
Darren boost
By Mike Walters
DARREN ANDERTON has given Tottenham's walking wounded a boost by launching a bid to join next week's Coca-Cola Cup crusade at Nottingham Forest.
Spurs are missing six first-teamers, including Anderton, Paul Allen and Gordon Durie, as they bid for a fifth successive clean sheet against Manchester City at Maine Road today.
But the £1.7 million winger has made an express recovery from a hernia operation and could return at the City Ground.
Spurs coach Doug Livermore said: ‘Darren has had no reaction.’
The 1–0 League Cup win at City was the start of Tottenham's revival, which also coincided with goalkeeper Erik Thorstvedt's return.
Thorstvedt said: ‘I've never played better for the club.’
Meanwhile, promising teenage winger Andy Turner has opted to go for international recognition with the Republic of Ireland rather than England.
Webb is warned
David Harrison
BRIAN CLOUGH yesterday warned new recruit Neil Webb: ‘Don't try and run the show,’.
The former England midfielder is back in the Nottingham Forest line-up following his £800,000 move from Manchester United.
But manager Clough is anxious to remove some of the pressure from the midfielder, so outstanding during his first spell at the City Ground.
The Forest boss said: ‘I watched him in five-a-side training and it was as if he'd never been away.
I just hope he doesn't try too hard to impress.
I'll be very pleased if he plays the game simply.’
Nothing but the best for Graham
By Ben Bacon
ARSENAL boss George Graham reckons he has the best job in football — but he knows even he could suffer a Brian Clough-like backlash if the Gunners fail to win a trophy for the second year running.
Like Clough, Graham has enjoyed virtual non-stop adulation as a manager, but he's realistic enough to know that today's fickle fans demand instant success.
Arsenal take on Manchester United this afternoon, and Graham outlined yesterday the kind of pressure the game's top bosses face.
He said: ‘If I'm not successful at Highbury, I'll leave or I'll get pushed out, and that's the way it should be.
‘I'm not surprised Forest fans have turned against Brian Clough because that's the way society is now.
‘Society demands instant success, and it's partly down to that little box sitting in your room.
If you don't like what you see, you switch it off.
People want instant results and if they don't get it, they voice an opinion very quickly.
‘The one thing you have got to give the fans is hope, and we've got the staff at Aresenal to get them believing we can win things.’
Graham, offered a contract for life at Highbury, added: ‘I'm very happy at Arsenal.
They let me get on with my job and the only time I see them is to get things rubber-stamped.’
Arsenal's clash with United inevitably revives memories of their Old Trafford brawl two years ago, and Graham insists any team managed by him will always be ultra competitive.
So far this season, the Gunners have accumulated 21 bookings, the third worst total in the Premier League.
‘They used to call southern teams ‘southern softies’,’ added Graham.
‘But we've got rid of that image here.’
Graham is likely to name an unchanged team despite Saturday's 3–0 defeat at Leeds.
United duo battle to partner Eric
Graham Fisher
MANCHESTER UNITED strikers Mark Hughes and Brian McClair will be playing for their first team places in Lisbon's Stadium of Light next Tuesday.
They will play half a game each with new signing Eric Cantona, and one of them will be picked to line up alongside the Frenchman in the Manchester derby tomorrow week — the other will have to kick his heels.
It all depends on manager Alex Ferguson's fascinating experiment in football chemistry.
Cantona, sensationally bought from Leeds for £1.2 million this week, will not be considered for this afternoon's battle at Highbury.
Instead, his debut in a red shirt will take place a few hundred miles away against Benfica.
Lean
The game is a dual purpose testimonial for the 50-year-old Eusebio and the first of two games to mark the 25th anniversary of United's European Cup victory over the Portuguese club.
Ironically both Hughes and McClair ended a long lean spell with goals against Oldham last week and both have the chance to stake a further claim against Arsenal today.
But Cantona was bought to score goals and excite United's impoverished fans, so one of them will have to make way against neighbours City at Old Trafford.
A beaming Ferguson opened yesterday's Old Trafford press conference with the words, ‘Mon plaisir presenter Eric Cantona.’
Cantona closed it with three words in English.
‘I hope so,’ he said, in response to the suggestion that, after going through eight clubs in his short career, he had finally arrived at his spiritual home.
He went through his medical test in the morning, signed a three-and-a-half year contract, then announced: ‘First I have to win my place.
Then I know it is my duty to score goals and to bring something to the team.
Together we have to aim at winning honours.’
Ferguson shed some light on the astonishing speed of the transaction.
A chance conversation with Leeds managing director Bill Fotherby opened the door to talks with boss Howard Wilkinson in midweek.
Cantona came into it on Thursday and quickly agreed terms.
Ferguson said: ‘I think Howard is looking to strengthen other areas of his team.
I had a gut feeling Eric was the right man for us and good value at the price.
And it all went so sweetly.
I had no need to persuade him because he was really keen to join us.
‘The challenge couldn't be bigger and that's something all top players need, and need all the time.’
Ferguson added: ‘Everyone can see that Eric is a recognised and prolific striker.
I think he was instrumental in Leeds winning the title and he has 11 goals already this season.
‘He has flair, class and ability and is an ideal candidate to play on our stage.
Also, at 26, he is coming to the peak of his career.’
Plunge
Cantona said: ‘Sure, I've had lots of clubs.
But the journey goes on.
I hope to stay here for a long time.’
I still feel Ferguson took the plunge partly to appease a following that felt estranged when United entered the world of big money institutions.
He said: ‘Eric will give the fans a big lift and I'm sure he'll be welcomed with open arms.’
Seaman in firing line
Andrian Holloway
ARSENAL keeper David Seaman and midfielder David Hillier are fit to face Manchester United today after being substituted in the Gunners' 3–0 crash at Leeds.
Seaman badly bruised a hip and came off early in the second half last weekend but has received extensive treatment.
Hillier has recovered from a virus and is likely to play in an unchanged side at Highbury.
Boss George Graham said: ‘We played badly against Leeds but I'm hoping it was just a hiccup after six good wins in a row.
There has been no big inquest and I'm confident we'll bounce back.
‘The players should not need motivating for a match against Manchester United.
It is always a big event and probably just what we want after a bad defeat.’
Crystal Palace winger John Salako left Heathrow yesterday for knee surgery in California, scoffing at speculation that his career is again in jeopardy.
The 23-year-old England star insisted: ‘I am not finished yet.
Obviously there is a problem but I don't know what it is — that's why I am going to America.
The doctor is the top man in his field and I am happy to be in his hands.’
Salako will be seen by surgeon Dominic Cisto, who did a £50,000 rebuild on the knee last season after two ligaments were severed in a horrifying tackle.
Dean Holdsworth last night pledged to end both his and Wimbledon's goal drought against Sheffield Wednesday at Selhurst Park.
Holdsworth, a £725,000 summer signing from Brentford, has not scored in six matches since a hernia operation.
And Wimbledon, third-from-bottom in the Premier League, have managed only one in five games.
‘I'm due a goal,’ said Holdsworth, ‘but I'm not worried.
I was bought to score and that's what I must do.’
Francis wants ban on moves
David Alexander
TREVOR FRANCIS last night called for a complete ban on transfers during the season.
The Sheffield Wednesday manager is still furious over Manchester United's public attempts to sign striker David Hirst.
And it was Francis who handed Eric Cantona his first opportunity in English football in February.
Francis has had to fight to keep Hirst — and believes there will be many more attempts to sign the England striker.
‘I feel there should be a ban on transfers in the season,’ he said.
‘I've always said so because of the problems it causes and the way it upsets people.
‘I feel sorry for the supporters here because they thought Hirst was going.
I've had faxes, letters, telephone calls — in fact I've never been off the phone all week because of the speculation.
‘You can even feel it inside the club, but it doesn't happen in places like Italy where there is a much better system.
Speculation
‘I'd be an idiot if I thought there wouldn't be more offers in the three-and-a-half years of Hirst's contract here.
It's bound to happen.
‘When people need a goalscorer they just get the cheque-book out and offer two or three million pounds or more.
‘That's what happened.
I would not make an offer if I was told a player was not for sale.
If I rang and was told ‘no’ I would accept he's not for sale.
‘It's not the first time it's happened this season, either.
There have been problems with Geoff Thomas at Crystal Palace and Roy Keane at Nottingham Forest.
Keane has 18 months left on his contract and the speculation does not do the game any good.’
Cantona's sale to Manchester United has provoked a storm of protest in Leeds, with local radio stations and newspapers bombarded with calls from angry fans.
One season ticket-holder said: ‘I think it's disgusting,’ and others threatened to send back their tickets.
Some Leeds players are sorry to see Cantona go, but remain confident of doing well without him.
Midfield man David Batty said: ‘When Eric signed it was a tonic.
He's a flair player and the crowd took to him right away.
It gave us a lift at just the right time.
‘He scored a few goals which were very important in our title push and it was a gamble that paid off.
‘We thought Eric would be here for years, but time will tell if we'll miss him.
The players we have are good enough to do well without people like him.
We are flexible.
‘I'm sure we'll do well without Eric — we proved that by beating Arsenal last Saturday.’
Welshman Gary Speed added: ‘Eric did a lot for us last season when the title battle was at a critical stage.
He lifted the crowd and created a special atmosphere at Elland Road.
That probably played a part in us winning the title.
‘Now it's up to the rest of us to keep the season alive, though I'm sure the fans will miss him.’
Luton vow
LUTON have vowed to play for centre-half Darren Salton in tomorrow's televised First Division match against Watford.
It was thought the clash might be postponed after Scottish Under-21 international Salton, 20, was badly injured in a car crash in which a woman was killed.
But Luton director Peter Collins said last night: ‘It has been decided to play our match against Watford.
It has been a difficult decision.
We shall play the match for Darren.’
Posh boss fury
By Tony Kell
PETERBOROUGH manager Chris Turner is considering quitting over the coin-throwing incident that may lead to the club being charged by the Football Association.
Posh hammered Kingstonian 9–1 in an FA Cup first round replay on Wednesday, but the non-league side's keeper, Adrian Blake, is still ‘very poorly’ after being hit by up to seven missiles.
The FA meet on Monday to decide what action to take.
They will either confirm the result or, more likely, order another match, possibly on a neutral ground and behind closed doors.
Turner said: ‘I was totally disgusted and went straight home after the game.
It made me wonder whether it was all worth it.
‘A handful of troublemakers have dragged this club's reputation through the dirt.’
Turner said he could quit if the club are to be dragged through the gutter again.
The FA prevented Blake discussing the incident.
Why Eric had to go
Des Kelly
HOWARD WILKINSON may have shocked the football world by off-loading Eric Cantona to Manchester United, but he has left Alex Ferguson clutching a dangerous timebomb.
The Leeds manager, I understand, was only too happy to let him go after a month of turmoil at Elland Road which culminated in a walk-out last weekend by the flamboyant Frenchman when left out of the Arsenal game.
The 26-year-old striker later claimed he had picked up a groin injury but then breached club regulations and widened the rift with Wilkinson by failing to turn up for training or treatment on Monday and Tuesday.
He then made two transfer requests and Wilkinson seized the first opportunity he could to unload the controversial star.
The first signs of a problem surrounding the ‘enfant terrible’, who joined Leeds for £900,000 from Nimes earlier this year after a career marred by disciplinary problems, arose early last month.
Antics
The eccentric Cantona jetted hastily back to France after being dropped from the side at QPR, although at the time the club claimed he had been given permission.
But Wilkinson considered this incident, along with subsequent events, as part of Cantona's ‘Le Brat’ antics — and was no longer prepared to tolerate them.
Wilkinson, though, was unwilling to get drawn into a slanging match yesterday.
‘I do not see the point in raking over old coals,’ he said philosophically.
And at Old Trafford yesterday, Cantona denied that he had asked for a transfer or that his working relationship with Wilkinson had suffered any breakdown.
He said: ‘From every standpoint, I spent some of my best footballing months at Elland Road.
As for the fans, I don't know why I love them but I do — and always will.
‘It upsets me that I still have this ‘enfant terrible’ reputation.
In any walk of life you make mistakes and learn from them.’
Sources at the Yorkshire club, however, provided an incredible behind-the-scenes insight into Cantona's deteriorating relationship with Leeds.
It seems Cantona believed he would be a permanent fixture in the side this season after his supporting role helped inspire Leeds to the Championship during the last campaign.
When this did not materialise, he confronted Wilkinson.
In reply, the Leeds manager highlighted the example of £2 million David Rocastle, who toiled in the reserves for months without complaint before seizing his chance.
Wilkinson said yesterday: ‘I cannot guarantee anyone a place here.
Eric has a transfer which, on the face of it, offers him a greater opportunity of first-team football.’
Wilkinson attempted to quell any possible protest by the Elland Road contingent during Sunday's TV clash at Chelsea by calling for trust in his judgement.
He said: ‘The supporters know I have always spoken to them in honesty and when I could not give them the truth I have kept my mouth shut.
‘But I can say this — the long-term interests of the club have to be served at all times.
‘During Eric's spell here, the team was very successful and his contribution is obvious.
‘His relationship with the fans was quite remarkable, which speaks volumes for his charismatic personality and probably speaks even greater volumes for their generosity and warmth.
‘But Leeds United's future is at Chelsea on Saturday and Eric's — for the moment — is at Manchester United,’ he added wryly.
‘During my time at Leeds there have been players who have left the club and some have questioned the wisdom of their departure.
‘But I would suggest that subsequent events have supported my decisions.’
Wilkinson's words are a clear warning to United that they have an explosive individual on their hands — and recent history confirms the view that Cantona may just be too hot to handle.
He quit French football when he was banned for throwing a ball at a referee, an incident allegedly compounded when he stared into the face of each member of the disciplinary committee and called them idiots, one by one.
Before that he was suspended from the national team for a year after a clash with coach Henri Michel, punished for fighting with team-mates at Auxerre and Montpelier and fined for throwing his shirt to the ground at Marseille when substituted.
Gosforth on way up
Frank Ward
NEWCASTLE GOSFORTH, favourites for promotion to Courage Division One next season, have an early chance to gauge their real strength when they meet Gloucester in the Pilkington Cup today.
Ironically, Gloucester look likely to be one of the sides they may well pass going in the other direction if the Tynesiders fulfil their three-year plan.
Mike Mahoney, Newcastle's director of rugby, set the target of promotion to Division One in three years when he moved into the Kingston Park hot seat.
‘A few people might be looking for my head if we don't do it,’ he said.
‘But if we avoid a slump in the second half of the season we should do it.’
Mahoney coached Newcastle, then simply Gosforth, to their second consecutive John Player Cup triumph in 1977, returning as their paid director three seasons ago.
And while promotion is the priority, he knows how important the Cup is to the Tyneside club, who have triumphed twice at Twickenham.
‘I've told the players if they look at results overall, I think we could have held our own comfortably in Division One this season.
Obviously, the Cup is different but the guys know having a home tie against Gloucester is a great opportunity to put themselves and the club back on the map.’
Mahoney would have been more confident of victory a month ago before injuries to Kiwi flanker Richard Arnold, former British Lions second row Steve Bainbridge and prop Paul Thompson.
Paul Smith, 42-year-old veteran Terry Roberts and last season's skipper Jon Curry fill in for that trio.
Gloucester have been reduced to naming centre Damian Cummins at scrum-half in place of the injured Marcus Hannaford and will be led by Andy Stanley with skipper Ian Smith playing for the Barbarians against Australia.
Meanwhile, London Division One outfit Tabard will have the crowd on their feet when they host First Division giants Northampton.
Not that most of the 2,000 expected at Tabard's Hertfordshire field will have any choice — the club does not possess a stand.
Situated in Radlett, midway between St Albans and Elstree, Tabard politely rejected Northampton's offer to switch the game to Franklins Gardens, despite the financial possibilities.
‘This is the biggest rugby event in Hertfordshire history,’ said Tabard president Dave Burrows, ‘and we hope Saints bring their full team to Cobden Hill.
‘If we are to go out of the Cup then let it be to a side packed with international stars.
Our lads will let nobody down.’
Bath will meet Waterloo without England No 8 Ben Clarke and fly-half Stuart Barnes, whose drop goal in the dying seconds of extra-time doomed Harlequins to defeat in last year's epic final.
Both on duty with the Baa-Baas.
Ehiogu hailed
David Harrison
UGO EHIOGU steps into Aston Villa's title-chasing team against Norwich today hailed by Ron Atkinson as a better defensive prospect than Paul McGrath.
The England Under-21 international replaces the injured Shaun Teale alongside McGrath, Earl Barrett and Bryan Small.
in a line-up Atkinson refers to as his ‘flat black four’.
Ehiogu, who wrote begging letters to clubs after refusing to sign for his first club West Bromwich Albion, will be making his first starting appearance in the Premier League.
And Atkinson believes he will become one of the stars of the game.
‘He's a better player at this stage of his career than McGrath was when I first signed him for Manchester United,’ said the Villa boss.
‘And we all know what I think of big Paul.’
Hackney-born Ehiogu, who has won seven Under-21 caps, has been one of the few successes in a disappointing England side this season.
He said: ‘If I am half as good a player as Paul McGrath I'll be satisfied — but obviously I am hoping to become better than him.’
Barnes can inspire
Des Kelly
RONNIE Rosenthal last night hailed John Barnes's comeback as the factor that could kick-start Liverpool's title challenge.
The Israeli striker, destroyer of Queens Park Rangers on Monday, is hoping the Anfield star can provide ammunition for an extended run of scoring glory.
‘It is fantastic that Barnes is back,’ said Rosenthal.
‘When I first arrived here on loan at the tail-end of the 1990 season, he was in brilliant form and inspired some great wins in the run-up to the Championship.
‘It's been a terrible shame that he's been out so long, but I have no doubt he will get back to how he was.
‘John has all the ingredients of a great player — ability, experience and personality.
He made a big difference when he came on at Loftus Road.
‘There is more danger from the wings when he is playing.
and he causes a lot of problems for the opposition.
Hopefully his return will mean chances for all of us.
‘I am certainly feeling confident.
When you are playing regularly you can show your ability in the best light and in the last two games I've done that.’
It will be Barnes's first Anfield start since April and manager Graeme Souness is expected to field the side which completed the QPR match.
Jamie Redknapp, named Young Eagle of the Month yesterday, and Don Hutchison retain their midfield places with injury-plagued £2.3 million midfielder Paul Stewart among the substitutes.
Meanwhile, Everton striker Stuart Barlow aims to break his scoring duck and condemn Mo Johnston to an extended exile.
The 25-year-old has failed to score in 14 appearances, but is still preferred to the £1.5m ex-Glasgow Rangers striker.
‘Once the first one goes in, hopefully I'll get a load,’ said Barlow.
‘I just need a bit of luck to get over that barrier.
‘It's unlucky for Mo right now, but there are five strikers going for two places and I've got to grab my chance.’
Tommo goes for broke
John Wardle
MIRACLE man Alan Thompson is back in business for Kevin Keegan — two years after a horror car smash threatened his career.
The 18-year-old Newcastle midfielder broke bones in his neck and back but today returns to Keegan's table-topping team at home to Cambridge.
‘I know about his background and I have seen the scar on the back of his neck,’ said Keegan.
‘But the lad has to get on with his life and to be fair he has done.’
Paul Boardman, son of Liverpool comic Stan, will tread the Home Park boards on his Plymouth Argyle debut against Bournemouth.
The 25-year-old striker, whose sister Andrea presents ITV's Disney Club, is on the soccer stage because record signing Paul Dalton has a back injury.
Argyle player-manager Peter Shilton said: ‘He has scored a lot of goals (25 in 28 games) for us at reserve level.’
Sunderland boss Malcolm Crosby is trailing Aberdeen's £300,000-rated midfielder, Paul Mason.
Crosby watched the 28-year-old schemer in the seven-goal rout of Partick in midweek and confirmed his interest yesterday.
Meanwhile, 18-year-old full-back Michael Gray stands by for his full League debut at Southend.
Transfer-listed Bernie Slaven could have played his last game for Middlesbrough.
Slaven can't get into the 15-man squad at Oldham and manager Lennie Lawrence said: ‘I'm working to get him fixed up.
He deserves it.
We've got 21 players in the squad when everybody's fit.
It's impossible to keep them all happy.’
Leaders Norwich City fear The Master could teach them another painful Premier League lesson at Aston Villa.
Mike Walker's men suffered canings at Blackburn and Liverpool — now Dean Saunders threatens another.
Saunders' Welsh team-mate, Dave Phillips, revealed: ‘Dean is known as The Master.
That's the nickname Ron Atkinson has given him.’
Wessels takes screen KO
SOUTH AFRICAN captain Kepler Wessels became the second cricketer to be dismissed by a TV replay yesterday, adjudged run-out against India on the fourth day of the second Test in Johannesburg.
Cyril Mitchley consulted compatriot Barry Lambson in the umpire's box and Wessels received the green light for ‘walk’.
With a first-innings lead of 65, South Africa made 252 in their second knock.
India then made 15 without loss.
Viv Richards has given up his lifelong pledge not to set foot in South Africa.
He will accompany Glamorgan on a pre-season tour to Cape Town.
Arthurton in charge
Mike Allan
KEITH ARTHURTON hit an unbeaten 157, registering his maiden Test century and the highest Test score by a West Indian at the Brisbane Cricket Ground, to give his side the edge against Australia yesterday.
Arthurton, who survived a strong appeal for a catch behind on 78, lifted West Indies to 371 all out for a 78-run first innings lead on the third day of the first Test.
Australian openers David Boon and Mark Taylor survived an 11-over bombardment to see Australia to 21 without loss at the close.
Arthurton denied the Australian attack for seven hours 45 minutes in his seventh test, hitting 16 fours and one six and overshadowed a fine bowling performance by paceman Bruce Reid, who took five for 112.
Arthurton's innings was interrupted for 30 minutes after lunch on 117 when a tropical summer storm rained hailstones as big as cricket balls on the pitch.
The previous highest West Indian Test score at the ground was 140 by Viv Richards in 1979–80.
‘I was just playing each ball on its merits and hoping things went my way,’ said Arthurton.
‘Once you have a lot of patience I think in the end you'll get what you want.
Pakistan scored a one-run victory over a West Australian Invitation XI in the opening match of their Australian tour.
After setting the West Australian team a target of 168 runs for victory, Pakistan managed to restrict the home team to 166–6 in their allocated 45 overs.
Opener Roshan Mahanama struck his maiden Test century with a classy 153 to put Sri Lanka in charge at 299–4 in reply to New Zealand's first innings 288 on the third day of the first Test in Colombo.
Aussies hail hero Probyn
Tony Roche
Barbarians 20, Australia 30
THE awesome roar which greeted Jeff Probyn's late try became a clamour for his international reinstatement after this thundering spectacle.
On a day when the Australians showed exactly why they are champions of the world, Probyn was outstanding both in the tight and loose as the Barbarians ran the Wallabies to the wire.
Dropped by England for the recent Tests against Canada and South Africa, Probyn has responded by helping Wasps to the top of the Courage League and impressing colleagues and opponents alike.
Shoving
Australia's captain Phil Kearns is a confirmed fan, revealing: ‘We talked about no shoving in the front row before the kick-off, but after five minutes that went out of the window.
‘Probyn had something to prove and he proved it — the guy is a world-class scrummager, ran around like a 21-year-old and scored the try that brought his side back into the match at 20–23.’
Ireland loose-head Nick Popplewell, a certainty for the Lions' summer tour to New Zealand, admitted: ‘If England pick Victor Ubogu for the game in Dublin, we won't complain.
‘Playing in the same front row as Jeff is an experience, and I admit I hate playing against him.
He is too bloody wily for my liking.’
Will Carling promised a packed Twickenham a real game and he delivered, captaining a side in which Stuart Barnes reminded the world of his quality, Robert Jones proved he is Britain's top scrum-half and Mick Skinner and Ben Clarke roared defiance to the whistle.
But the Wallabies, despite a shattering tour schedule and absent stars, were the better side, more cohesive in the loose and iron in defence, despite David Campese's moments of wonderful madness.
No try this time from the world-record finisher — but a parting shot at England, his favourite target.
‘I might be back if the Barbarians invite me,’ he said.
‘But the guys here must remember I still love to stir things up and England do not do justice to people like Will and Jeremy Guscott.
‘Their baffling, safety-first rugby is a waste of great talent.
And my mate Will?
Hell, I beat him to the handshake and it's on camera.’
Carling was quick to praise the Aussies, insisting: ‘I have tremendous respect for Australia, who are great world champions.
‘They have enjoyed another successful tour but we tried our best to give the crowd a victory.
‘Campo?
There has never been any animosity between us, that's total rubbish.
He is a great player and we shared a beer after the game.’
Ian Hunter, Ian Jones and Probyn scored the Barbarians' tries, while Tim Horan, Dan Crowley and Kearns crossed the line for Australia — the second two carbon-copy evidence of their extraordinary rolling-maul strength.
In contrast the Barbarians' tries owed everything to thrilling running, crisp passing and a surprisingly high level of understanding between what was a hugely-talented collection of players, but nevertheless a scratch side.
The try which brought the crowd to their feet also edged the Baa-Baas into an 8–7 lead and was sparked by Skinner, whose drive pulled enough Australian cover to nudge the door ajar.
A fabulous movement involving Jones, Barnes, Ian Smith, Carling, Scott Gibbs and Mike Rayer finished with Hunter scorching over in the corner.
Powerful
It came just when we thought the powerful combination of Horan and Jason Little had produced the try of the day, the latter making a typically powerful break to send Horan gliding between the posts with the Baa-Baas defence dismantled.
Barnes scored a penalty, Rayer — another great success — added a conversion and Marty Roebuck hammered over three penalties and three conversions.
A terrific game of top-quality rugby, spoiled only by the ultra-fussiness of referee Jim Fleming.
Quins are best bet
Giles Smith
Harlequins 72, Blackheath 3
HARLEQUINS, with arch-rivals Bath upset by Waterloo, are the Pilkington Cup favourites after this crushing third-round win.
Quins, who have won the Cup twice in the past four years and narrowly lost to Bath last season, look a good bet for another Twickenham triumph after a 12-try romp over Second Division Blackheath.
Without England skipper Will Carling, resting after the Barbarians' match against Australia, scrum-half Rob Glenister led the way with a hat-trick of tries and full-back Stuart Thresher added six conversions.
England hooker Brian Moore insisted: ‘After that sort of performance, we must be among the favourites.
Incisive
‘And after what happened to Bath, I think the whole country must be rejoicing!’
But he warned Quins must play better to go all the way.
‘We have to be a bit more incisive out wide but at least after our poor start to the League season we seem to be getting it together at last.’
From the moment Glenister pounced on the ball in the fifth minute for his first try as the Blackheath scrum were shunted over their own line, the writing was on the wall.
Three more tries to Andy Mullins, Simon Dear and Glenister gave the Quins a 24–3 half-time lead.
The second half turned into a rout with eight sizzling touchdowns by Andy Harriman, Gavin Thompson, Neil Edwards, Andy Parton, Mark Russell, Paul Challinor, Glenister and skipper Peter Winterbottom as Blackheath crumbled.
If the backs had taken all their chances, Quins might have beaten Gloucester's record 80-point Cup win over Exeter.
Bath missing Barnes boost
BATH coach Jack Rowell was left to rue the absence of Stuart Barnes after the holders finally met their Waterloo.
Barnes and club-mate Ben Clarke were appearing for the Barbarians against Australia at Twickenham while their Bath colleagues were sinking 9–8 at Blundellsands to Second Division Waterloo in the third round on Saturday.
‘We missed Barnes in particular,’ said a dejected Rowell.
‘Our game revolves around him and the backs just couldn't function without him.’
Bath, who have won the Cup three times before and achieved the double twice, succumbed to the boot of England Under-21 fly-half Paul Grayson, who kicked three penalties.
Newcastle Gosforth, currently boasting an unblemished record at the top of Division Two, added to the thrills and spills when they knocked out last season's semi-finalists Gloucester 13–10.
Tiny Tabard's hopes were dashed after taking a 7–0 lead as they were mauled 50–13 by mighty Northampton.
Scots coach blasts Dean
London Scottish 11 Leicester 20
LONDON SCOTTISH coach Alastair McHarg blasted Leicester's tactics.
Following two quick tries after the break from John Liley and Steve Hackney, Leicester were penalised frequently for offside.
And McHarg seethed: ‘I am not whingeing because we did not deserve to win, but Dean Richards exploited the offside law right up to its limit.’
But Leicester's coaching director Tony Russ hit back: ‘There was no element of deliberate cheating.’
Tomba tumble
ITALIAN Fabrizio Tescari won his first World Cup race as defending champion Alberto Tomba crashed out on the second leg of yesterday's slalom in Sestriere, Italy.
Tomba had led by almost a second on the first run.
American Julie Parisien overcame a stomach bug to win the women's slalom in front of her home crowd in Park City, Utah.
Sweden's Pernilla Wiberg finished second.
Jo and Clare take honours
JO DURIE and Clare Wood gave British tennis a welcome boost when they beat defending champions Holland 2–1 to win the European women's team event for the first time in Prague yesterday.
Lyle shares fifth
SANDY LYLE shot a final round 69 for a 282 total to share fifth place in the Casio World Open in Kaimoncho, Japan.
Local favourite Isao Aoki won the event by two strokes.
Second bite
ENGLAND have a second chance to reach the European men's basketball championship in Germany.
Four more teams will emerge from an additional qualifying tournament in June.
Steve's crown
STEVE ELKINGTON kept cool in wet and windy conditions yesterday to shoot a two-over-par 74 for a two-shot victory in the Australian Open golf championship in Sydney.
Eubank's imitation of world class
Steve Acteson
CHRIS EUBANK is now unbeaten in 34 fights — but this was ‘Simply the Best’ versus simply the worst.
Paraguay's Juan Carlos Gimenez was a shameful parody of a genuine contender for Eubank's WBO super-middleweight world crown.
‘I give value for money, I fight the best opponents in the world,’ Eubank absurdly claimed afterwards.
But Gimenez was simply a moving target, a straight man for Eubank to humiliate both with his occasionally delightful boxing and his outrageous showboating.
But the 7,500 punters at Manchester's G-Mex Centre were not fooled — there was scattered booing after the ninth and 10th rounds over Eubank's inability to deck this human punchbag.
And there were loud chants of ‘Eubank, Eubank…. off home’ from a crowd that, in the main, had become far more interested in seeing local hero Steve Foster try — and narrowly fail — to beat Leicester's Shaun Cummins to the vacant WBA Continental light-middleweight title.
Eubank has now won 10 championship fights in two years.
He's overcome some genuinely tough customers, but Gimenez was abject.
The nearest he came to winning a round in my book was in sharing the third, after delivering a heavy right hand that briefly staggered Eubank — whose ability to take a punch is well-documented.
On four other occasions Eubank was to be seen covering up under a hail of blows, but like so much of the 26-year-old from Brighton's act, it was an illusion.
He was simply suckering Gimenez in to waste his strength aimlessly punching Eubank's arms.
With a six-inch reach advantage and making better use this time of his wicked left jab, Eubank was hoping to become the first to stop Gimenez in 45 fights.
But he failed to follow up quickly enough after delivering a thumping right of his own in round four.
Courage
Then equally big lefts in rounds five and seven could not get rid of a man whose courage failed to make up for obvious shortcomings.
Eubank said: ‘I came to fight 12 rounds.
The man hadn't been stopped before and I wasn't about to try it on.
I was here to win at all costs and did so in rather fine style.’
Criticism of an unworthy opponent appeared to sting him harder than Gimenez had as Eubank, paid in excess of £200,000 for his night's work, rasped: ‘All the people I fight are world class.
I wouldn't be paid this sort of money if I was a fraud.
‘It's all about money, I'm looking for the heavy readies, not the glory.
Anyone who says they love to fight is a liar or a fool — it's a hard, nasty business.
‘If I'd lost tonight, where would I have put my face?
I'd have cried, I'd have brooded for a long time.
‘Money is my motivation, but what keeps me at the top is that I'm petrified of losing.
‘At 34 and zero the odds are getting thinner.
I have surely got to come unstuck sometime along the line, but don't bet any serious money on it.’
Eubank goes back into the gym on Wednesday to train for his next fight at London's Olympia on February 20, presumably against just another hand-picked mug.
‘I'll choose anyone that I can beat,’ admitted Eubank.
‘I'm a businessman first and a boxer second, and the reason I'm so successful as a pugilist is that I know my limitations better than anyone else.’
Dessie on the mend
DESERT Orchid had his first proper meal yesterday since undergoing emergency surgery for a twisted gut.
Owner Richard Burridge (above) reports his tough grey almost back to his old self and the horse may be well enough to be turned out in a paddock today.
Newmarket vet Andy Bathe said last night: ‘He's making good progress.
He was taken off his drip again overnight and has had his first proper feed.
Danger
‘He is being given rations of hay which will slowly be increased and hopefully we can cut down on the drugs.
‘We will have a better idea tomorrow as to whether he is out of danger but he is looking healthy.
‘He has been out three times today and hopefully we can turn him out in a paddock tomorrow.’
Worcester abandoned
TODAY's third scheduled meeting at Worcester was abandoned on Saturday morning due to waterlogging.
Course manager Jack Bennett said: ‘We have had up to nine inches of water on the chase course, and half the hurdles course is flooded as well.’
Friendly flops
Jonathan Ramsden
USER FRIENDLY's long, hard season finally caught up with her yesterday when she could manage only sixth in the Japan Cup.
Clive Brittain's triple Classic heroine was sent off favourite, but, after pulling hard early on, faded in the closing stages behind the locally-trained winner Tokai Teio.
Derby winner Dr Devious also raced freely before weakening into 10th and jockey Chris McCarron, who replaced regular rider John Reid, reported afterwards: ‘I couldn't control him at all.’
Tokai Teio, cheered home by a record 168,600 crowd, produced a storming late run to beat Australia's Naturalism by a neck with the John Hammond-trained Dear Doctor, best of the Europeans, half a length back in third.
However, the runner-up may have been an unlucky loser as it was later discovered that he had raced with a injured heel.
Jockey Mick Dittman said: ‘I wasn't happy with his action, but he stretched out really well to the finish and it was a great performance by him.’
The Fellow is now 5–1 clear favourite with Ladbrokes and Coral for next year's Cheltenham Gold Cup after his gallant third to Sibton Abbey in the Hennessy Cognac Gold Cup at Newbury.
Meanwhile, Richard Dunwoody, currently 16 winners ahead of reigning title holder Peter Scudamore, has been cut to 4–9 (from 4–6) to land his first jockey's championship.
Rovers crash to rampant Wigan
LEAGUE leaders Wigan ran in eight tries and Frano Botica landed eight goals from 10 attempts to overwhelm Hull KR 48–18.
A Mike Fletcher penalty goal gave Rovers an early lead, but Wigan grabbed two tries in five minutes through Ian Lucas and Andrew Farrar to open the floodgates.
CASTLEFORD moved to third place, beating BRADFORD 30–20 — their second win in 14 days over their championship rivals.
Two touchdowns in a five-minute spell early in the second-half from Tony Smith gave Castleford the cushion they needed as Northern came back with four late tries.
Inconsistent HULL finally got their act together with a seven-try 42–10 demolition of SALFORD.
White a winner at last 
Barry Lucas
JIMMY WHITE finally shed his nearly-man tag when he was crowned UK champion at Preston last night.
White, beaten in four world and two UK finals, at long last lifted the game's second most prestigious trophy following a 16–9 victory over defending champion John Parrott.
Now the 30-year-old Londoner will go to Sheffield next spring with fresh hope that he can win the World Championship.
Beaten 18–14 from 14–8 up by Stephen Hendry in this year's world final, White managed to hold onto his lead this time and take the £70,000 first prize.
In so doing, he avenged a 16–13 defeat by Parrott at Preston a year ago and prevented the 28-year-old Liverpudlian from knocking Hendry off the top of the world rankings.
‘Winning this tournament means so much to me,’ he said.
‘It hasn't really sunk in yet.
It was a horrible feeling being that far ahead and nursing my lead.
All the time I was trying to blank out previous situations from my mind.
‘I lost 10 frames on the spin to Hendry and you can't forget that.
I've proved I have the bottle to win the big tournaments.
‘Obviously the World Championship is the one I really want to win but this is my second favourite tournament.’
Parrott said: ‘It would have been a tragedy if Jimmy had never won either the UK or world titles.’
Injury gloom for Griffiths
Ray French
St Helens 30, Sheffield Eagles 20
ST HELENS' Championship hopes suffered a serious blow yesterday when Welsh wizard Jonathan Griffiths dislocated his shoulder.
Coach Mike McClennan admitted: ‘With all the tough games to come before and around Christmas, it's a real setback.
‘He'll be out for four to six weeks.
‘But I was delighted by the way Tea Ropati took over complete control and directed the play in midfield.’
The Kiwi Test star grabbed two tries and three goals after taking over the kicking duties from David Lyon, who went off injured at half-time.
McClennan added: ‘If Eagles' Aston had been more accurate with his goal kicking, he would have put much more pressure on us.
But with all the injuries and the disruption to the team I'll settle for the two League points.’
Saints, and man-of-the-match Ropati, began in sensational style.
Skipper Shane Cooper and full-back Lyon combined down the left flank to put Ropati over for a second-minute try.
And, four minutes later, Ropati's Test colleague, pacy prop George Mann, brushed aside a couple of tackles to put Gary Connolly over in the corner.
Lyon, playing only his third game of the season after a nine-week absence with a hamstring injury, added both conversions before retiring with an ankle injury.
Eagles enjoyed some lively attacking spells and were well worth their 20 points with tries to loose forward Anthony Farrell (2), Aussie second rower Paul Carr and former Kangaroo Test full-back Garry Jack.
But Aston's two goals from seven attempts proved costly.
Substitute Griffiths, with Saints ahead by just 12–10, set up the victory with a try in the 50th minute.
But it was a costly touchdown, which will also sideline him for Wales' match against France at Perpignan in two weeks.
Ropati pounced for his 13th try of the season nine minutes later and second rower Sonny Nickle scored in the 79th minute to ensure Saints share the League lead with Wigan.
Southall six sense
Adrian Holloway
Ipswich 1, Everton 0
EVERTON keeper Neville Southall predicted his side would end the season challenging for Europe, even after their seventh defeat in nine games plunged them into relegation trouble.
Southall said: ‘Anyone who knows me will know that I don't make rash statements.
But I'm sure we'll finish in the top six.
‘I've seen all the other sides and I can tell you I'd honestly rather be at Everton than at any other club.
Ipswich were lucky to win.’
But Gavin Johnson's goal was no fluke.
He swept the ball in at the end of a typical flowing Ipswich move.
Everton's Peter Beardsley made a less optimistic assessment: ‘When we get players injured there's nothing like the depth of talent in reserve here that I was used to at Liverpool.
‘Nevertheless, we're determined to avoid the end of season relegation dogfight.’
Ipswich playmaker Jason Dozzell said: ‘Gavin took his chance well.
He's our unsung hero.
Finishing like that will soon turn our draws into wins.’
MoM: Beardsley (brilliant).
Gunnar is so relieved
Oldham 4, Middlesboro 1
OLDHAM'S Norwegian international Gunnar Halle brushed aside any thoughts of a Boundary Park crisis.
But after plunging towards the relegation zone with just four points from the previous 21, he admitted: ‘We have been going through a bad time and We needed this win.’
Manager Joe Royle confessed he had that ‘here we go again’ feeling when Willie Falconer pinched an early lead for Boro.
The smile soon came back, though, as Halle, Neil Pointon and Graeme Sharp each found the target inside seven minutes.
Neil Adams added a fourth after the interval.
MoM: Pointon (rampaging full-back).
Hoddle horror as Swindon slip
Peterborough 3, Swindon 3
SWINDON squandered the chance to regain second place in the First Division yesterday.
A disastrous mix-up between Glenn Hoddle and Nicky Hammond gifted Peterborough an equaliser six minutes from the end.
A back pass from player-manager Hoddle seemed to catch Hammond by surprise and the goalkeeper hit the ball straight to the feet of Posh's Disappointed Swindon boss Hoddle said afterwards: ‘Fate really seems to have turned against us.
It was definitely a case of two points lost, but I am more disappointed that we played so well and did not win.’
Swindon are also hotly disputing a 55th-minute decision by a linesman that robbed Mick Hazard of a goal.
‘I was so far on side the decision was a joke,’ said Hazard, adding: ‘The TV people told me after watching a replay that I was at least two yards on side.’
Peterborough put worries over today's FA enquiry into last week's FA Cup coin-throwing incident against Kingstonian behind them, storming ahead after just three minutes.
Adcock broke clear to lift a beautifully flighted shot over Hammond.
Swindon hauled themselves back on level terms after 22 minutes, when defender Shaun Taylor forced in a storming header following a corner.
A quarter of an hour later Taylor's role changed from hero to villain when he was involved in a total misunderstanding with Hammond and headed a Steve Welsh centre into his own net.
Swindon drew level with Craig Maskell's 17th goal of the season — a 58th minute shot at the near post.
Then Taylor looked to have given Swindon a winning lead, heading in a Hoddle free-kick after 77 minutes.
Sitting pretty
David Harrison
Aston Villa 2, Norwich City 3
IT WAS manager Mike Walker's birthday but, more significantly, it was the day Norwich came of age as Championship challengers.
The pretenders became genuine contenders by showing how much they have grown up as a team.
They stretched their lead at the top of the Premier League to five points, beating an Aston Villa side who were gradually becoming the force everyone else feared.
But Norwich took them on and revealed a tactical superiority and strength of character to go alongside the flair that has always been their most endearing feature.
No longer can they be considered country bumpkins, there to make up numbers among the pacemakers until the springtime surge for honours begins.
As skipper Ian Butterworth said: ‘If we had been top after six games you could have called it lucky — but not after 17 matches.
‘We have come here and beaten the best form team in the country and we could have killed them off at half-time with a three or four-goal lead.
‘But I suppose if we had won 4–0, people would have said Villa had an off-day.
We are getting a bit fed-up of people saying how badly opponents play against us.
‘It's never a case of us playing well.
Harder
‘It's getting to us a bit but it's making us even more determined.
The bookies are quoting us at 40–1 and you can bet one or two of the lads have got a few bob on us at those odds.
But we would rather be the long-shots.
‘It takes the pressure off but we realise it's going to get harder.
Now we have to make sure after a win like this that we don't slip up at Wimbledon next week.’
Norwich's victory was a triumph for the tactical surprise sprung by manager Walker, who deployed a sweeper to curb the threat of Villa dangermen Dean Saunders and Dalian Atkinson, who have been running amok in the last two months.
His players carried out the plan to the letter and wrapped up the three points as a perfect birthday gift.
‘It was certainly better than a new pair of socks or underpants’ joked Butterworth.
‘He might even buy us a drink now.
In fact, I thought I saw him with his hand half in his pocket after the game.’
Villa's contribution to Walker's celebrations was their worst defensive display of the season and an embarrassing individual performance by England Under-21 international Ugo Ehiogu, who failed to live up to the big pre-match build-up given him by Ron Atkinson.
Only Paul McGrath held Villa together and even he admitted: ‘It was down to bad defending.
Concede
‘We handed them the points on a plate.
Norwich tend to concede too many goals but they'll be up there at the finish and we'll be up there with them.’
Goals from David Phillips and Darren Beckford put Norwich ahead but Villa hit back through Ray Houghton and Garry Parker either side of the interval.
But the visitors deservedly took the points with Daryl Sutch's 49th-minute winner.
MoM: Sutch (composed and creative).
Lift for Hatters
Luton 2, Watford 0
LUTON responded to tragedy with a battling performance to move out of the First Division's bottom three.
And they did it for 20-year-old centre-half Darren Salton, who is still in a coma and on a life support machine after Thursday's road crash in which Paul Telfer was also injured.
Goals by Ian Benjamin and Scott Oakes gave the Hatters the lift they needed, and midfielder David Preece said: ‘We played for Darren today and I think it showed.
He is a fighter, and hopefully he will pull through.’
In-form Allen's double delight
CLIVE ALLEN sank Birmingham with a double strike to make it five goals in seven days as West Ham triumphed 3–1 at Upton Park.
The 32-year-old striker said: ‘It has been a good week — one of quite a few I have had in my career.
‘The goals are starting to come — but I could have had about 20 by now.’
And a delighted Billy Bonds saluted Allen's week by saying: ‘He is just a great goalscorer — it's as simple as that.’
A classic Trevor Morley effort was sandwiched between Allen's double after Ian Rodgerson had given Blues the lead.
Derby County chairman Brian Fearn has refused to push the panic button after Tranmere's 2–1 win.
He and Derby's millionaire owner Lionel Pickering met with manager Arthur Cox after the latest disaster and later issued a pledge of ‘business as usual.’
Manager Colin Murphy was far from happy after seeing Southend crash to a late goal that increased their relegation worries.
Sunderland won 1–0 and Murphy admitted: ‘We were guilty of sloppy defending.
‘Twice we had chances to clear the ball but failed to get it away and paid the penalty.’
Tel looks to future
David Alexander
Man City 0, Spurs 1
TERRY VENABLES has had an uncomfortable week but at least it ended happily.
Venables endured days of cheap jibes from former Spurs chairman Irving Scholar…ye Unknown teenager Kevin Watson, in the youth team last season, grabbed a goal on his League debut.
And it must have stirred memories for his father, Colin, sitting just along from Venables in the Maine Road.
Colin was on City's books in the 1960s and the 77th-minute winner must have given him a kick.
‘My dad was in the reserves here for a season but his career was finished by an injury,’ said Watson.
‘He was watching today so it's special for me.’
Watson, who also scored on his Cup debut against Brentford, is the latest junior to rescue Spurs this season, following Nick Barmby, 18, and Andy Turner, 17.
‘They picked me up from a Sunday team near White Hart Lane when I was 11 and there are a lot like me,’ Watson said.
Keeper Eric Thorstvedt was outstanding but insists he doesn't know if Spurs want him to stay.
MoM: Thorstvedt (vital saves).
Jones saves Dons
Mike Walters
Wimbledon 1 Sheff Wed 1
WIMBLEDON'S extravagant celebrations suggested Vinnie Jones had won an Oscar for best supporting tough guy in ‘Soccer's Hard Men’.
Dons owner Sam Hammam stood behind the goal as video star Jones converted the last-gasp penalty equaliser and walked off Selhurst Park arm in arm with the man who inexplicably fills him with admiration.
Uncle Sam said: ‘We are a family who enjoy our good times.
We have proved you can have just as much fun living in a shack as on a luxury yacht.’
Jones crowed: It was all about having the bottle.
Mugged
‘That goal puts everything behind me and it's full steam ahead again now.’
Wednesday, sickened by referee Roger Milford's dubious penalty award, for handball against John Sheridan, were mugged.
Leading through Chris Bart-Williams, they were foiled by Milford's extraordinary ability to spot a handball without being able to identify the offender.
Milford said: ‘If I'd seen whose hand it was, I would have sent him off.’
Sheridan said: ‘The ball hit me in the face.
TV will tell us the truth.’
MoM: Sheridan (for putting a brave face on it).
Sinner saved
Nottm F 1, Soton 2
SOUTHAMPTON manager Ian Branfoot substituted hardman Terry Hurlock to save him from the red card.
Hurlock, already booked by referee David Elleray, was walking a tightrope as Southampton battled to quell Forest's fire.
And after pulling off the midfielder on the hour, Branfoot admitted: ‘I could see Terry being sent off and I didn't want him missing matches.
‘He had been shown the yellow card and the referee had had a word with him and although he didn't like being substituted, I did it for his own good.
‘Terry is not a dirty player and his competitive nature often overshadows the other qualities in his game.’
All Forest had to show for their attacking fury was Nigel Clough's first goal in two months, but Micky Adams emerged as the Saints matchwinner, creating the first for Matthew Le Tissier and heading the winner from Jeff Kenna's cross.
MoM: Adams (an inspiration).
Roman salute for Saint Paul
Rob Shepherd
Lazio 1 Roma 1
HAIL Gazza.
Last night in the Olympic Stadium, Rome bowed to Paul Gascoigne.
One half in jubilant homage — the other in mournful respect.
Just when it seemed Roma would inflict a humiliating defeat on their despised city neighbours in ‘Il Derby’, Gascoigne saved the game, honour of Lazio, and head of coach Dino Zoff.
Thus the clown prince of English football crowned himself as the football emperor of the Eternal City.
And such was the emotion of it all, that those famous tearducts burst forth again, as he accepted the acclaim.
With four minutes remaining of an ill-tempered game, Lazio were trailing to a 47th-minute goal scored by Roma favourite Giuseppe Giannini.
Amid the passionate cauldron generated by 80,000 supporters, who share the ground (on this occasion Lazio played hosts) the Romanista — the followers of Roma — were lighting their candles to celebrate a cherished victory.
Then Gascoigne, hitherto a pale shadow of himself and stifled by the physical attention of man-marker Walter Bonacina, made his heroic contribution and doused those particular flames.
Lazio midfielder Diego Fuser burst forward in a desperate last assault, but was brutally body-checked.
Gascoigne laboriously made his way into the penalty area, more in hope than expectation as he awaited the free-kick.
Such had been his increasing frustration at seeing precious little of the ball — and when he did so doing precious little with it — he could not have envisaged what was about to happen.
But suddenly the sight of Giuseppe Signori's invitingly lofted ball into the penalty area put a spring in his step.
Not noted for his ability in the air, Gascoigne sensed the kill and found it in himself to jump high, evade the challenge of tall defender Silvano Bendetti and meet the ball with power and precision, guiding it emphatically past goalkeeper Giuseppe Zinetti.
It was the sort of goal that Giorgio Chinaglia — the Welsh-born centre-forward of the 1970s who became a great Lazio and national team hero — was famed for scoring, and how they loved seeing their new idol produce some of the same.
All the tension Gascoigne had been suffering was suddenly released, and he celebrated by sprinting to the sidelines.
Then came the tears — Gascoigne simply could not stop himself from crying.
It was his first League goal for the club, and — as so often in his career — his timing was impeccable.
Indeed, on Saturday afternoon, as he had relaxed with his team-mates at their hotel hideaway he had confided: ‘I'm due to score, I want to score, I feel it in my bones that I will score.’
He delivered, and as the final whistle blew the celebrations continued.
Gascoigne, first embraced by his team-mates, went back to the faithful fans — the Laziali, and slung his shirt into their midst.
They then began to light bonfires, expressing their delight.
A few minutes earlier, however, and those flames would have been funeral pyres — such was the significance of this game to the club, who have seen their promising start to the season subside.
Now hope has been revived, as Gazza pointed out: ‘These games are a matter of life and death — and I'm alive.’
Indeed last night an eternal flame was burning, as Gascoigne became part of Roman folklore.
AC Milan won the clash of the Serie A giants 1–0 to go three points clear at the top after Juventus star Gianluca Vialli fluffed a last-gasp penalty.
A goal down with only two minutes to go, Juventus were awarded the spot-kick when striker Paolo Di Canio was brought down.
But Vialli's weak effort was saved by substitute goalkeeper Sebastiano Rossi.
Winger Marco Simone scored the only goal.
Juventus were without leading striker Roberto Baggio, recovering from a cracked rib, and England midfielder David Platt, out until the New Year after last week's knee operation.
King John back on Kop throne
Des Kelly
Liverpool 5, C Palace 0
THE placard-bearer ignored the jeers and waved his message high above the crowd with defiant zeal: ‘Fear Not.
Behold The Saviour.’
Perhaps he had someone other than John Barnes in mind as he paraded outside the ground, but the prophecy held true enough as Liverpool's Chosen One produced his own version of the Second Coming.
Barnes' return to the Kop for the first time in seven months prompted a rapturous welcome worthy of the Messiah himself and every touch, every pin-point pass only served to enhance that adulation.
Considering this was the England international's first full appearance since he ruptured his Achilles tendon in June, his contribution was little short of miraculous.
But make no mistake; this was a new Barnes.
His lengthy sabbatical and lack of match-fitness have combined to push him into a deeper, more thoughtful role.
And the player so often on the periphery of affairs with England is now the hub of a revitalised Liverpool.
During a second-half stroll, Barnes Mark II hit a total of 21 passes — and not one fell to a Palace player.
Suddenly everything was linked together in an effortless stream and the arrogant passing game returned to Anfield with a vengeance.
Targets
But Liverpool's inspiring light will not be allowed to rest on his laurels, as manager Graeme Souness has set Barnes fitness targets of Old Testament rigour.
‘It's no good for John to have the same fitness level as the rest of the team,’ he said after his fourth successive victory.
‘Everybody looks to give him the ball, so he's sees more of it and, in my thinking, he therefore has to be fitter than anybody else.
‘That has certainly not been the case in my time at this club.
Now it doesn't matter what I say to him or how hard Phil Boersma works him in the gym or in training — Barnes has to do it himself.
‘The motivation has to come from within and he also needs to take the right approach when he's away from Anfield,’ he added.
If Barnes follows this course, he will be rewarded with more responsibility, acting as shepherd for the flock of talented youngsters at the club.
‘John is not 20 anymore, so he's pacing himself,’ said Souness.
‘And if he's lost any of his sharpness, he has the ability and intelligence to adjust his game and become more of a supplier of goals than scorer.
‘He should then become more of a team player than just a superb individual, and maybe that shift will make him a lot more attractive to a lot of people,’ he added, apparently alluding to England manager Graham Taylor.
Barnes started the rout, bewildering two defenders before supplying the perfect cross for Steve Mcmanaman to head in.
Dynamic
The dynamic Mike Marsh blasted a searing 30-yard drive past Nigel Martyn before McManaman made it three by capitalising on a slip by the Palace keeper.
Ronnie Rosenthal and Don Hutchison clinically wrapped it up after the break.
And what about Palace?
Well, they were simply clueless and it could have been 9–0 again.
Steve Coppell's men return for a Coca-Cola Cup-tie tomorrow and I can only suggest they pray Barnes is too tired to take part.
MoM: Barnes (controlled genius).
Best advice you will get, Eric
Ben Bacon
Arsenal 0, Man Utd 1
ERIC CANTONA, not yet a rebel with a cause celebre, cut a solitary figure at the back of the United team bus, nibbling poisson and pommes frites by himself as he digested his new club's winning performances.
Ian Wright also had food for thought as he made a hasty exit from Arsenal's demoralised dressing room.
Frustrate
Apart from their capacity to excite and frustrate in equal measure, the pair shared a common bond as they meandered away from Highbury — and both would do well to heed the advice given freely to them.
Now to some, George Best telling Cantona to behave himself at Old Trafford is a bit like Stan Flashman lecturing on etiquette.
But Best is ideally qualified precisely because of his infamous escapades under Matt Busby.
And he is convinced the temperamental Frenchman — bought for £1.2 million — will have to conform to manager Alex Ferguson's regime or else he will be dispensed with just as quickly as he was at Leeds and his other clubs.
Best said: ‘Fergie's a tough man and he showed that by the way he's handled Ryan Giggs.
‘He's a hard man to deal with and Fergie won't stand for any nonsense.
He'll expect him to do what he's told.
‘He'll have to learn quickly or he'll be out, although I can't talk because I walked out of the club.’
But Best believes not even the addition of Cantona will help the club to their first Championship since 1967.
He has a tenner on Norwich at 25–1.
Effect
Although Cantona watched the game from the second row of the directors' box, his mere presence had an effect.
He plays in a special game for Eusebio tomorrow in Portugal and must wait until Sunday for his Premier League debut against neighbours City.
However, Mark Hughes, who scored for the second game running, and Brian McClair intend to make Ferguson's decision as hard as possible.
Hughes said: ‘Eric's a quality player but I don't feel any pressure because I'm scoring.’
Like Cantona, Wright was also a spectator, although he had his full kit on.
Arsenal boss George Graham feels he has not been the same player since he co-starred for England against Turkey.
He said: ‘I don't know why but he hasn't been the same player since coming back from Wembley.’
MoM: Giggs (had it all).
Weak refereeing was Shear hell, fumes Francis
Frank Ward
Blackburn 1, QPR 0
GERRY FRANCIS condemned the match officials after QPR's bruising defeat.
‘I thought all three were poor and that's not just for us!’ rapped the QPR boss.
Rovers manager Kenny Dalglish, whose joy at an overdue win was soured by an injury to England goal machine Alan Shearer, said referee Keith Hackett seemed more concerned with the back-pass law than stamping out the tackle from behind.
It was that brand of challenge by Darren Peacock in the fifth minute that damaged Shearer's ankle, though he struggled on before succumbing a couple of minutes after the interval.
Shearer, a tough nut not inclined to whinge, said his ankle was like a pudding.
He added: ‘I don't want to see anyone sent off but you can't have tackles like that flying around.’
At least he had the consolation of ending a five-game goal drought with a header in the 16th minute.
Shearer is now in doubt for tomorrow night's home Coca-Cola Cup tie against Watford.
The referee in the firing line, an experienced FIFA official, has a reputation for encouraging free-flowing play.
But it hardly needed an expert to appreciate that there were times when stern authority was needed.
Francis said: ‘We should have had a number of free-kicks in dangerous areas that could have produced things but they weren't given.’
Blackburn could have offered the same argument.
The upshot of it all, unfortunately, was that a game with all the makings of a classic suffered.
MoM: Shearer (cut down in his prime).
Bassett is bailed out
Alan Biggs
Sheff Utd 1, Coventry 1
DAVE BASSETT last night thanked old pal Bobby Gould for saving him from a possible FA rap.
The Sheffield United manager looked like talking his way into referee Phil Don's report after the dismissal of his right-back Carl Bradshaw.
He stepped a yard onto the pitch to confront Mr Don and had to be shoved back by Gould.
The Coventry boss, formerly Bassett's successor at Wimbledon, said: ‘Dave was on the pitch — a dangerous place for a manager to be.
I made it my business to get him off.’
MoM: Stewart Robson, Coventry (driving force).
Tears of triumph
Rob Shepherd
THIS time they were tears of joy…
The last occasion we witnessed Paul Gascoigne crying in Italy was after England's heartbreaking World Cup semi-final exit two years ago.
But last night he wept with delight after scoring the most vital goal of his career.
Gascoigne and his colleagues would have faced a fierce backlash had Lazio lost to bitter local rivals Roma in the Olympic Stadium.
But in the 86th minute of a frantic Roman derby, he produced a stunning headed goal as the game ended 1–1.
It kept Lazio's pride intact, saved coach Dino Zoff from the sack, and Gascoigne, after a poor individual display, from severe criticism.
Gascoigne admitted: ‘It was so intense, it was like a matter of life or death, and thank God I've come out of it alive.
With four minutes left I was worried — worried whether I would be able to go out and eat for the next week or so.
All I could think about was the terrible consequences had we lost.
‘I've never felt pressure like that, not even during the World Cup two years ago, because of what might have happened had we lost.
‘Ever since I have been here the fans have kept talking about the derby — and pleading for us not to lose it.
‘That's why I cried a bit when I scored, because I knew how much it meant to them.
Getting the goal was a wonderful relief.
‘I think I can now afford to have a glass of champagne on the strength of it.
‘I said before the match I did not know what pressure was — well I do now.
‘This is the biggest derby I've played in.
The atmosphere was stunning.
I know I didn't perform that well.
I have to admit I was affected by the occasion, which is unusual for me.
Townsend piles on the agony
Ben Bacon
Chelsea 1, Leeds 0
HOW we could have done with some frogs' legs among the dire fare served up for national consumption at Stamford Bridge yesterday.
Eric Cantona's to be precise.
And what's more, how Leeds could have done with the Frenchman as they crashed to their fourth defeat in five games.
Although Leeds fans didn't chant his name once — it almost seemed a case of: ‘Eric who?’— Cantona's extravagant skills were sorely missed by the champions in a match that rose only occasionally above the tedious to become mediocre.
With just four minutes remaining, though, the stalest of stalemates was broken by Chelsea captain Andy Townsend, who rounded off an immensely difficult few days for Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson.
It was just the sort of match that cried out for some Cantona-like ambition.
But in his absence no-one was capable of providing it and that must be hugely worrying for Wilkinson, who has taken the biggest gamble of his successful career by selling the striker.
So instead of a bit of ‘ooh la la,’ it was mostly ‘oh what dross’as Sky TV viewers joined Chelsea's biggest League crowd of the season for a game that had promised better things, even without the absent you-know-who.
However, Chelsea fans went home deliriously happy after the club's seventh win in eight games, a run which has moved them up to fifth place.
Against Rangers in the European Cup, Leeds' deficiencies and lack of subtlety in attack were fully exposed, and Cantona's £1.2 million departure to Manchester United will increase the load even more on Lee Chapman, 33 next month.
Sadly, much of the game was typical of the Premier League so far this season: fast and frantic, with little thought.
Even Gordon Strachan, that most magical of performers, was lost in the blur of blue and white shirts whirling around him.
Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson, who refused to confirm or deny an interest in £3m Coventry winger Peter Ndlovu, had clearly had better weeks.
He said: ‘For a lot of this season, it's been two steps forward and one step back.
‘We deserved at least a draw — their goal was the first strike in the second half and they had only one or two before the break.
When asked if it was inevitable that people will say ‘if only Eric was playing,’ Wilkinson said: ‘Let them say it.’
Townsend at least gave fans something to shout about with his well taken goal in the 86th minute when Dennis Wise cleverly controlled a Gareth Hall centre for his captain to fire in his fourth goal of the season.
Townsend, who once walked out on Wilkinson as a kid when he was on trial at Sheffield Wednesday said: ‘I was having a nightmare until I scored.
I was really chuffed because normally with those the fans are ducking in the Shed when I hit them.
‘It's important we keep our run going and why shouldn't we think ourselves genuine title contenders.’
Chelsea manager Ian Porterfield was just as happy saying: ‘It's now seven wins in eight and I want the lads to believe in themselves.
I want them to think we're good enough to beat anyone, but we must keep our feet on the ground.
‘The title race is one of the most open I've ever seen.’
Chelsea didn't deserve maximum points but very little is going right for Leeds this season.
Chapman had a couple of chances but he couldn't convert either.
Premier pot
THE Premier League could be set for a £30 million-plus windfall if negotiations to sell television rights worldwide are concluded this week.
Rick Parry, the Premier League's chief executive, is close to arranging a four-year deal that could bring the League more than £30m, which would mean over £300,000 each in phased payments to member clubs.
The new deal, if completed, will be presented to representatives of six Premier League clubs on Thursday for initial examination before it is ratified by the entire membership.
Parry is optimistic an agreement will be reached, saying: ‘Nothing has been signed yet, but hopefully it will be concluded this week.’
Geordie the amateur king
ENGLAND'S Neil Mosley won the World Amateur Snooker Championship in Malta yesterday, beating as he wrapped up a one-sided final 11–2 against outclassed Filipino Leonardo Andam 11–2.
Mosley, 23, from Newcastle, needed to win just one frame in the final session.
after a blistering six-frame run earlier in the day.
Aussies tops
AUSSIE tennis pair Todd Woodbridge and Mark Woodforde are ATP champions after beating John Fitzgerald and Anders Jarryd in the World Masters final in Johannesburg.
The top-seeded Australians battled nearly four hours for their 6–2, 7–6 (7–4), 5–7, 3–6, 6–3 final victory.
Swansea salvage job
HEINEKEN League First Division leaders Swansea had to come from behind to claim a 25–13 win over lowly Aberavon and maintain their 100 per cent record.
The defending champions were trailing 10–5 at half-time on Saturday, but second half tries from Mark Titley and Kevin Hopkins, to add to a first half touchdown by Paul Arnold, put them in charge.
Outside-half Aled Williams landed two conversions and also kicked two penalties, with Aberavon's points coming from an Ian Spender try, converted by David Love, and two Love penalties.
Second-placed Cardiff went on the rampage, crossing for six tries in an impressive 39–3 demolition of Newport at Rodney Parade.
Colin Stephens, the current Wales fly-half, took his points tally for the season into three figures with two penalties in the 11–11 draw at Pontypridd.
With Llanelli held to a draw, Neath took the opportunity to leapfrog into third place with a 27–15 home win over South Wales Police.
Maesteg suffered a blow yesterday when they learnt captain and centre Huw Woodland will be sidelined for another month.
Woodland, 26, watched by rugby league clubs Bradford Northern and Hull early in the season, has been out for over a month with a broken right hand.
The bone has failed to knit properly and his hand must remain in plaster.
Meanwhile, Pontypool have signed Neath's Welsh international scrum half Chris Bridges.
Lawrence lashes out
Oldham 4, Middlesbro 1 MIDDLESBROUGH manager Lennie Lawrence launched a blistering broadside after his side failed to halt a slump of just one win in 12 games.
‘If that is the best my players can do then they are not good enough,’ he fumed.
‘I am celebrating 10 years in management today and I am struggling to think of a worse away performance.’
Lawrence saw his side take an early lead through Willie Falconer, only for it to be wiped out by three Oldham goals in seven minutes from Norwegian Gunnar Halle, Neil Pointon and Graeme Sharp.
Neil Adams added a fourth after the break.
MoM: Pointon (rampant).
Clark fits bill as new Gazza
Report by John Wardle
Newcastle 4, Cambridge 1 FORMER Newcastle and England star Terry McDermott yesterday hailed the next Gazza.
Teenager Lee Clark is poised to follow Paul Gascoigne to the top, according to Kevin Keegan's right-hand man at St James' Park.
‘He's a better prospect than Gazza was at the same age,’ said McDermott after the 19-year-old tormented Cambridge.
‘I honestly believe that Lee is England material.
He has a lot to learn, but something happens every time he's on the ball.
‘You only get that feeling with top-class players.
The sky's the limit and I'd lay money he will go on to play for England.’
Even Clark's contribution was eventually overshadowed by striker David Kelly, whose hat-trick kept Newcastle on course for the Premier League.
But Kelly only completed the seventh three-timer of his career after a battle with Gavin Peacock, Newcastle's regular penalty-taker.
Peacock allowed him to complete his hat-trick from the spot in the 86th minute — after fans chanted for Kelly.
‘I took it by popular demand,’ said Kelly.
‘All credit to Gavin gave me the ball in the end, with a little persuasion.
The crowd had a lot of influence, and rightly so because they turn up week in and week out.’
Malcolm Crosby is fighting hard to keep his job at Sunderland, even though the directors are searching for a replacement.
The latest to be linked with Roker is Steve Coppell of Crystal Palace, but Sunderland players have made it clear who they want.
Successive away wins at Derby and Southend — beaten 1–0 on Saturday — prove they are battling to keep Crosby in the hot seat.
Big Mal a tonic
Leicester 0, Bristol R 1 BRISTOL ROVERS defender Steve Yates is convinced caretaker boss Malcolm Allison will lead them out of relegation trouble.
After the victory at Filbert Street, Rovers' first away win of the season, Yates said: ‘We've shown great improvement in the three games since he arrived.’
A superb 24th minute strike from Justin Channing, on-loan from QPR, earned the victory.
Rovers' victory gave them the Barclays Performance of the Week vote from Graham Taylor's panel.
Hoddle horror gifts point
Peterboro 3, Swindon 3 SWINDON squandered the chance to regain second place in the First Division yesterday.
A disastrous mix-up between Glenn Hoddle and Nicky Hammond gifted Peterborough an equaliser six minutes from the end.
A back pass from player-manager Hoddle seemed to catch Hammond by surprise and the goalkeeper hit the ball straight to the feet of Posh's Tony Adcock, who put it into an empty net.
Peterborough put worries over today's FA inquiry into last week's FA Cup coin-throwing incident behind them, storming ahead after just three minutes.
Adcock broke clear to lift a beautifully flighted shot over Hammond.
Adcock almost netted again with a header barely a minute later but Swindon hauled themselves back on level terms after 22 minutes, defender Shaun Taylor forcing in a storming header.
A quarter of an hour later, though, Taylor's role changed from hero to villain when he was involved in a total misunderstanding with Hammond and headed a Steve Welsh centre into his own net.
Swindon produced a display of superb possession football in the second half and deservedly drew level with Craig Maskell's 17th goal of the season — a 58th-minute shot at the near post from a hard-driven cross by David Kerslake.
Then Taylor looked to have given Swindon a winning lead, headed in a Hoddle free-kick after 77 minutes.
Reid faces tough task
David Alexander
Man City 0, Spurs 1 PETER REID will soon be signing a new contract at Maine Road, But the City manager could do with signing a player as well, if all the words about challenging for the title are to mean anything.
City start Manchester derby week with Reid threatening to make life lively on the training ground because of this failure — but the fact is, the players gave everything they had.
The truth was told by a second half in which they monopolised the ball and didn't make one opening.
Chairman Peter Swales insists there is no more money for signings — but City made nearly a million in the last financial year and gambling now could mean the difference between success and failure.
Reid said: ‘It was poor.
Somebody said the players now have a bit to prove against Manchester United but some of them better do that in training on Monday.’
The defeat was orchestrated by an 18-year-old from Hackney, whose father spent time in City's reserves in the 60s.
Kevin Watson's 77th-minute winner on his League debut, in off Terry Phelan's head, was watched by his father Colin in the stand.
MoM: Keith Curle, City (England class).