

PREFACE
On 23 March 1989 two chemists, Stanley Pons and Martin Fleischmann, stunned the world with their claim to have harnessed fusion — the power of the Sun — in a test tube of water at room temperature.
Coming within a day of the Exxon Valdez oil disaster in Alaska, and with the nuclear catastrophe of Chernobyl still fresh in people's minds, the sudden possibility of cheap, abundant, and pollution free energy captured everyone's attention.
At the time I was commuting regularly between Oak Ridge National Laboratory in the USA and the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory in England.
Thus I saw at first hand the developing excitement within the scientific community on two continents as thousands of us changed research programmes literally overnight and attempted to replicate the phenomenon.
As I became professionally involved in trying to understand what, if anything, was happening I realised that here was a rare opportunity for the public to experience science in action, feel the excitement that drives inquisitive minds, and see how discoveries are made, tested, replicated, proven and developed into a new technology.
Or if, as was soon clear to many, something was wrong with the claims, it would be possible to show how the standard workings of science can design experiments to answer specific questions, strategically closing in on the truth.
It would also show scientists as real people, with urges for power and glory, desirous to be first in the race and to win the prizes that this offered.
What I did not anticipate was that this would prove to be a matter as much of intrigue and scandal as of science.
The former is itself a fascinating tale that will surely be told in full elsewhere, of how interested parties helped to orchestrate the episode and stimulate financial investments in ways that have been widely criticised in the scientific community.
This led to calls for the resignation of the president of the University of Utah, and suggestions of unethical behaviour.
When Galileo found results that displeased the Pope, his reward was imprisonment.
A group of scientists whose data did not agree with the claimed ‘cold fusion’ received threats of legal action.
When  I made a television documentary that concluded that there was no evidence for nuclear fusion products, I received a letter from Martin Fleischmann alleging that there was a warrant issued in Utah for the arrest of the film crew, accusing me of having gained ‘illegal access to the National Cold Fusion Institute’ and of being a media person masquerading as a scientist.
My colleagues may offer their opinions on the latter; I can only assert that the first accusation is nonsense and if the allegation is true then I would love to know more about it but, regrettably, my request for further information has been met with silence.
There was much exposure during 1989–90 of maverick behaviour while the face of serious science was rather lost.
There were instances where some results were presented with a gloss they did not merit, and worse.
The editor of Nature among others has expressed concern that the young will equate some of the farce of test-tube fusion as typical of science and be discouraged from pursuing this career.
To be concerned is not simply pedantry.
Society relies on science and makes substantial investment in it, not least from you the taxpayer, in the trust that claimed discoveries have been thoroughly and carefully researched.
Parts of the test-tube fusion episode failed sadly on this score.
If these events became regarded as a norm for science then public confidence would be threatened.
It is important that the public see that the test-tube fusion story is not typical of normal science and that there is a received body of opinion in the scientific community that the episode was unacceptable.
I have divided the book into three parts.
Genesis and Deuteronomy tell the story in a style that will be accessible to any reader.
In Revelations I provide additional details which many scientifically-minded readers will demand although its content is still accessible to the general reader.
Some references have been added for those who wish to check on detail or proceed further although this work has not been written as a formal review of cold fusion.
The subject matter focuses on the work of Fleischmann and Pons for it was their claims that excited the interest and fuelled the passions.
For example, I have not concentrated much on the work of Steven Jones and related experiments that claim to see neutrons at levels near to background; if real, they are of interest to science but have nothing to offer as such solutions to the world's energy problems, at least not in the grandiose form claimed on behalf of Fleischmann and Pons.
The media often presented Jones' results as supporting those of the two chemists whereas in due course, if not already, his work will be seen as the first refutation of the some of their claims; his neutrons were orders of magnitude below theirs and he never made any direct measurements of heat.
In the final chapter I give a summary.
This is a personal perspective which is a considered opinion drawn from eighteen months of researches and over a hundred interviews, and built upon my own experiences over twenty years of what constitutes good science.
Any professional, in whatever career, gains an intuitive ‘feel’ for what their speciality is, how it operates, intuitively knowing when things are wrong.
Scientists, especially theoretical physicists, are all awaiting the next revolutionary breakthrough that overthrows the paradigms of theory and practice.
When a radical new result arrives, see how they all drop what they were doing and pursue the new promise.
That is what happened when the news of cold fusion erupted.
Even though their intuitive ‘feel’ sensed that it was too far fetched to be real, nonetheless it had to be checked.
Had there been a verification that nuclear fusion did occur in solids at room temperature, here is one theorist, and I am sure I speak for many colleagues, who would have taken up the new field to see what fundamental implications it had.
We crave new discoveries and the attendant excitement and promise — that is what drives many of us into science in the first place.
The idea that established science was somehow attempting to censor cold fusion research is utterly out of line with what science and scientists are all about.
An art in science is to judge when an outlandish notion is worth pursuing and when to ignore it.
As students we read the textbooks, attend the lectures and are guided into research.
But I have never forgotten advice that my research adviser gave me the first time that I was pursuing a dead end: ‘It is important to recognise when to quit.’
Given the detail of the account recorded here, we can safely say that it is time to move on, to pursue other routes for harnessing fusion.
I hope that this book provides others with insights, thereby enabling a scientific consensus to emerge.
I am grateful to my colleagues at Oak Ridge National Laboratory in the United States and the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory in Britain for the help and opportunities they have given me in the preparation of this book.
However, I should emphasise that the conclusions and opinions are my own and not necessarily those of the management of either institution.
There has been one undoubted benefit of the cold fusion saga: it has stimulated interactions among scientists from different disciplines and thereby brought together expertise that might otherwise have remained untapped on individual islands.
I have experienced this directly in researching this book and am deeply indebted to many new friends, in areas of science that would have remained foreign to me, for their time and patience in explaining things that I never knew and I hope that we all gained from the experience.
In particular I would like to thank:
THE GREATEST DISCOVERY SINCE FIRE
In a good adventure story the heroes are going to change the world almost single handedly against all the odds, and come through unscathed.
The tale has added bite if its characters appear to be real, its action plausible, if it could ‘happen to me’.
The following story seems to be far-fetched, unreal; yet it happened.
Civilisation is now threatened with possible destruction: the atmosphere is heating up and the seas are rising, trees are dying from acid rain, a hole in the ozone layer appears over the South Pole.
Pollution from the dregs of an ever increasing energy consumption threatens to poison everyone in their own waste.
Nuclear power, once thought to be a way to buy time while fixing all of the above problems, has become discredited following the Chernobyl disaster.
The only real hope for mankind in the long term appears to be fusion — the power of the Sun harnessed on Earth — because it is clean, cheap and available.
On four continents scientists have consumed the equivalent of billions of dollars trying to capture the dream.
Teams from the whole of Europe concentrate their work at a single lab in southern England where a huge torus of magnets containing gas at 100 million degrees tries to reproduce the Sun's power.
In the USA big name institutions are in the race: Princeton, Los Alamos, MIT.
In the USSR and Japan, national teams are also pursuing the dream, but to many observers it seems to be just that — a dream that may not be fulfilled.
Governments are beginning to question whether they can continue to afford this.
Meanwhile in a basement laboratory in Utah two chemists are working on their own and in secret.
They announce that they have found the holy grail.
It is so simple that anyone can do it, but everyone else has missed the key.
There is no need for extreme temperatures of hundreds of millions of degrees nor for expensive magnets: a battery, some water and palladium metal , the key ingredient, are all that you need, plus a few hundred dollars to buy the stuff.
In addition, all that is required is a chemical room-temperature mechanism which involves nothing more complicated than an experiment in a high school science lab.
Fusion in a beaker of water at room temperature: cold fusion or ‘test-tube fusion’ as it has become known.
The details remain secret until all the patents are sewn up.
Teams of security staff police the laboratory, guarding the precious property, protecting what potentially could lead to the greatest fortune ever; the combined wealth of Rockefeller, Vanderbilt and Onassis is a mere drop in the ocean compared to the promise of test-tube fusion.
The two chemists are cover stories in Time and Newsweek , appear on TV nightly, and their talks are attended by thousands with the fervour of an evangelical meeting.
Nobel Prizes beckon.
Scientists all over the world drop what they're doing and try to discover the secret for themselves.
From Hungary, Russia and Japan come rumours that they can do it too.
The President of the USA and other world leaders demand to know what is going on and government scientists are urged to get to the bottom of this — and fast.
Military strategists in the Pentagon, in the British Ministry of Defence and in India independently realise that table-top test-tube fusion should produce not just energy but also neutrons and tritium, crucial ingredients in making atomic and thermonuclear weapons.
National security agents in the USA start watching the two chemists.
The number of countries that have H-bombs is limited because the technology for making tritium is so hard to come by.
But with test-tube fusion, any tinpot dictator will be able to do it.
Middle Eastern states, whose oil based economies could be destroyed by test-tube fusion, will have nothing more to lose and could exploit the weapons potential of test-tube fusion devices to keep the oil burning.
India could develop test-tube fusion cells, using them as a source of neutrons to make weapons grade materials, breaking out of the stranglehold that the USA has held them in since severance of nuclear ties following the Pokran nuclear test in 1974; they set to work at once before the US classifies it as secret and corners the world market on the essential materials.
This raises another spectre: as palladium is the key, what power brokerage will it give the countries which have it as a natural mineral resource — USSR and South Africa?
There are many rumours that people in other countries are reproducing test-tube fusion, but in American government labs they are getting nowhere; however, many people do not believe them and assert that the big laboratories are seeing the phenomenon and keeping quiet because the oil companies with so much to lose have bought their silence.
In India too people are convinced that the Western nations are seeing test-tube fusion and are keeping it a secret because they have realised that not only does test-tube fusion have  great commercial potential, but could revolutionise military strategy.
Some US congressmen believe that the Japanese are secretly developing test-tube fusion technology and that the US is already losing the race for the economic bonanza of all time.
Finding out about test-tube fusion quickly becomes a cloak and dagger venture as desperate scientists and others resort to spying to find out the secrets in the Utah lab.
The fax machine is bugged and TV videos of their lab are scanned for clues.
And gradually the truth becomes clear.
In their haste to win a race for patents, mistakes have been made.
The two chemists have no nuclear evidence for fusion at all.
Governments, military strategists, thousands of scientists, millions of dollars of time and research budgets have all been on a wild goose chase.
It is a modern parable of the King and the Invisible Raiment.
If this were an outline for a novel it would probably be rejected as too far-fetched.
It would be unreasonable to expect the reader to believe that so many professional scientists and administrators could be taken in to such an extent as the tale required.
Surely it is a ludicrous notion to suppose that two scientists on their own in a remote basement lab could claim to solve the world's energy problems so that the scientific community would take up this claim, that world leaders would ask for regular briefings and that there could be nothing in it at the end.
Yet in the spring of 1989 much of this story was enacted in real life.
The two chemists were Stanley Pons and Martin Fleischmann who worked in a lab at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City.
On 22 March few outside of their immediate circle had heard of them.
On 23 March they held a press conference and announced ‘We have sustained nuclear fusion…’
The next day they were celebrities around the world.
Fleischmann and Pons believed that they had produced fusion in their test-tube because when they passed electrical current through it, more heat was produced than they could account for, and in amounts extending over hundreds of hours that seemed to be far in excess of what is possible in a normal chemical reaction.
Chemical reactions involve the atomic elements, such as when carbon in coal and oxygen in the air are combined in fire to produce carbon dioxide and warmth.
Nuclear reactions by contrast involve changes in the atomic elements themselves, such as the conversion of hydrogen into helium within the Sun, and vast amounts of heat are generated in such processes.
The uncontrolled liberation of fusion energy has existed for 40 years, ever since the detonation of the first thermonuclear or ‘hydrogen’ bomb.
The attempt to harness that power as a controlled source of  useful energy has occupied scientists and engineers ever since.
Presently available nuclear power comes from the ‘fissioning’, breaking up, of the atomic nuclei of heavy elements such as uranium and plutonium and has as byproducts both desirable release of energy and unwanted nasty radioactive contaminants.
‘Fusion’ on the other hand involves the joining together (‘fusing’) of the atomic nuclei of light elements such as hydrogen.
This is a relatively clean source of energy compared to chemical sources such as coal-burning power stations and to presently available nuclear power.
Moreover the raw materials are plentiful.
For example, there is enough material in a glass of water to run a car for ten years, enough in the top few centimetres of Lake Erie to power New York State for a similar time and enough in the oceans to keep us going indefinitely.
The only thing in the way is the fact that all nuclei are electrically charged and ‘like charges repel’: this repulsion makes it difficult to force those nuclei together.
To force together two protons that are initially far apart, for example those in two separate hydrogen atoms, is like trying to encourage the two north poles of a pair of magnets to join at a distance of less than a billionth of a millimetre.
One way to do this is to give them a hefty shove and hurl them together so fast that their mutual electrical repulsion cannot resist, as in the Sun where the temperature at the centre is so great that the protons are highly agitated and occasionally collide at which point the energy-liberating fusion mechanisms take over.
As you get more energy back when two light nuclei fuse than it costs to get them together it would seem that we are bound to win.
However a problem is that these nuclei are very small and only a few manage to collide and fuse.
You expend energy speeding millions of protons so that they can resist their mutual repulsion, but only a handful actually collide and fuse giving energy back.
The net result is that the total energy return is less than the input.
Huge pressures and temperatures will be needed to make fusion reactors give out more than they use.
Indeed, even at the pressures of the centre of the Sun, where the temperature is some fifteen million degrees, the conditions aren't extreme enough.
The Sun only just manages to keep alight and it tends to be those few protons that are moving faster than average that keep it going — which is just as well or it could have used all its fuel and expired before we arrived.
Overcoming this Catch 22 has cost modern fusion research billions of dollars so far, using arrays of magnets as big as houses in order to contain the fuel at temperatures ten times hotter even than those in the centre of the Sun, and making it dense enough and stable enough that a self-sustaining reaction can occur.
There has been great progress in recent years in this quest, but its attainment is still thought  to be decades away and the cost effectiveness of this research is being increasingly questioned.
Thus it was that the world took such note of Fleischmann and Pons' claim to have found a novel approach.
They knew that palladium soaks up deuterium (a form of hydrogen found in heavy water) like a sponge soaks up water, an electrical current from a battery forcing the deuterium atoms out from a solution of heavy water and into the spaces between the palladium atoms.
Deuterium is the most commonly used fuel in attempts to create controlled fusion and the two chemists believed that once the deuterium was crammed inside the palladium within their test tube, the nuclei of the deuterium atoms would undergo nuclear fusion generating heat and either being transformed — as in all nuclear reactions — into new elements like helium or being shattered into their constituent parts, such as protons and neutrons.
If fusion was really taking place, then these products should be found and from the amount of heat measured one could determine the amount of fusion products that should have been seen; the answer was calculated to be a staggering thousand billion neutrons per second.
While the media perceived test-tube fusion to be a solution to the world's energy problems, it was the possibility of these cells being an intense source of neutrons, and probably of tritium too, that meant that they could have significant military application.
In advance of the press conference the University of Utah had issued a news release announcing that ‘A Simple Experiment Results in Sustained Nuclear Fusion…’.
The release included statements that ‘the discovery will be relatively easy to make into a usable technology for generating heat and power’; and that ‘this generation of heat continues over long periods and is so large that it can only be attributed to a nuclear process’.
The announcement came within hours of the Exxon Valdez disaster where the coast of Alaska was devastated by oil spillage.
Everyone's environmental awareness was sharpened: ‘Pollution free energy from fusion’ was the cry; if there was a time ripe for exploiting the story, Easter 1989 could hardly have been bettered.
A premature release of the story in London, picked up by the BBC World Service and the news wire services, led to the University of Utah being inundated with eager news reporters for the press conference.
Television cameras, radio microphones and hundreds of fascinated spectators brought to remote Utah the sort of attention usually reserved for an important visiting head of state in Washington or New York.
And if what they were hearing was really true, then this was indeed more important than most of those East Coast press conferences.
Pons, the chair of the university chemistry department, told them ‘we have sustained a controlled nuclear fusion reaction by means which are considerably simpler than conventional’.
He also told them that a thin palladium wire, only ¼ inch in diameter and an inch long, had reached the boiling point of water within a few minutes, that the wire produced about 26 watts of energy per cm 3 , ‘about four and a half times what we put into it’ and that in an early stage of the experiments the apparatus suddenly heated up to an estimated 5000 degrees, vaporising a block of palladium, destroying a fume cupboard and damaging the concrete floor.
Martin Fleischmann, Fellow of the Royal Society of London, Britain's most prestigious scientific society through whose halls had walked Isaac Newton and Ernest Rutherford, held up a fist-sized tube and said ‘This experiment has to be approached with some caution.’
The audience laughed nervously but Fleischmann remained serious: ‘If this device worked as effectively as the small scale experiment we have done, it would be generating about 800 watts of power.’
The reporters were also told that ‘evidence that fusion was taking place was the fact that in addition to heat [Fleischmann and Pons had]detected the production of neutrons, tritium and helium — the expected by-products of fusion reactions’.
There was no reason for the reporters to believe other than what they were being told; the credentials of the pair were first rate.
However, Fleischmann and Pons were announcing their results at the press conference before they had told any of their scientific colleagues.
There was annoyance when it was learned that the claims had first appeared in the Financial Times and the Wall Street Journal , both prominent business dailies, not refereed scientific journals.
Many scientists were astonished at home that evening to see the faces of the two chemists appearing on the television as Dan Rather on the CBS evening news headlined the Utah work as ‘a remarkable breakthrough’.
This was the first that the community of professional scientists had heard about it, and it caused the pair much trouble during the subsequent months as it became clear that several of the claims were wrong.
But that only became known later, following intense scientific detective work; by the evening of 23 March the discovery of the millennium seemed assured.
Within 24 hours there was another astonishing development.
News broke that Steven Jones, a physicist at Brigham Young University (BYU)— 30 miles from Salt Lake City and rival of the University of Utah — and a team from BYU had been studying cold fusion for years independently of Fleischmann and Pons.
The BYU team had seen neutrons, a sign of fusion, and had discussed the experiment with the two chemists.
Careful examination of Jones' experiment showed that it had less in common with that of Fleischmann and Pons than the media advertised: Jones measured no heat and his neutrons were more than a billionfold too few to explain the amounts of heat that the chemists were claiming.
Accusations that one group had stolen ideas from the other were soon flying; Jones showed notebooks of his investigations going back to 1986 and cited a paper written in 1985; for their part Fleischmann and Pons insisted that their effort had begun in 1985, all of which added to the perception that the fusion claims were important and the patents worth fighting for.
(In the USA priority is given to the first to invent, not the first to file.)
The price of palladium rose.
Utah was suddenly the centre of the world's attention.
Local news reporters wrote glowing accounts of a world awash with clean power: ‘Goodbye CO 2  pollution; Goodbye Acid Rain; Goodbye Greenhouse Effect.’
The University seized the momentum that the press conference had generated and lobbied the Statehouse to get money for fusion research.
The State authorities did not need much convincing; with the world believing that Shangri-La was at hand courtesy of Utah, State politicians seized on this as a once in a lifetime opportunity to revitalise Utah's economy.
Governor Norman Bangerter immediately convened an emergency session of the State Legislature to appropriate five million dollars for fusion research.
The debate — if such a one-sided affair can be called a debate — took place on 7 April.
Speaker after speaker announced their hopes that the discovery would be the saving of the human race, would do away with environmental pollution and provide energy ‘too cheap to meter’.
The Governor even went further by paraphrasing the Bible in his urgings for the bill's passage: ‘He that doeth nothing is damned, and I don't want to be damned.’
There was the point that the scientific community had not yet had time to confirm the phenomenon but this was dealt with summarily with a warning that would, in the following months, become a knee-jerk response of Utah fusion aficionados.
It was Eugene Hansen, Chair of the University's Board of Regents, who first articulated the hidden threat: ‘’ waiting and seeing’could mean that the discovery of the century will be developed by Mitsubishi.’
The State passed the bill 96 votes to 3.
With State money in place, the circus moved on to Washington.
On 26 April, only one month after the press conference, up to 25 million dollars was the pot being chased in public, while in private the Utah lobbyists were talking about 125 million.
There were already misgivings in some quarters about the Fleischmann and Pons claims, the lack of details and sloppy  descriptions.
A leading scientific journal,Nature , did not publish the paper but none of this seemed to matter before the Utah steamroller.
Whether test-tube fusion was right or wrong seemed to be a secondary concern; test-tube fusion equated with cash flow into Utah was dominant.
The Office of Naval Research, for whom test-tube fusion could have significant benefits, awarded the Utah team 400 000 dollars for research during the subsequent three years.
Bud Scraggs, chief of staff to the State Governor, said that the State's plans wouldn't be dampened even if the Fleischmann and Pons paper failed the peer review process.
‘We are not going to allow some English magazine to decide how state money is handled.’
The University had by now hired a professional in the form of one Ira Magaziner, a business strategy consultant who also picked up the ‘yellow peril’ theme by telling the congressional enquiry: ‘As I speak to you now it is midnight in Japan.
Thousands of Japanese scientists are trying to verify…and develop commercial applications…of this new science.’
The keyword was fusion ; nothing else would have created such expectations.
But the foundations for this belief were like the Cheshire Cat in Alice of Wonderland ; the more one looked at them, the less substance they seemed to have.
There were many incorrect statements, false rumours and wrong inferences.
In the rush for funds or to exploit the fusion fanaticism, few had the time or inclination to look beyond the surface and see the shaky foundations beneath.
Rarely does such a window on the daily activity of scientific researchers and their ideas open 90 widely for public view.
And although this particular episode in the end solved no major scientific problem, it serves a crucial role in bringing to light the many aspects of what science is all about and what it means to do good science.
When I set out to write this story I thought that it would primarily show how scientists come up with ideas, design a strategy to test them, carry out the experiments, share experiences and attempt to replicate claimed discoveries, thereby establishing new natural phenomena.
It would show how the research process occurs, how one group of specialists reaches the end of its expertise and takes advice, how many mistakes are made and truth arrived at circuitously.
How there is rivalry, a desire to be first, but played out within established rules of conduct.
Many of these ingredients were indeed present, but as the months passed I became increasingly aware that there was much more than just science at work here.
There were accusations of plagiarism, of cheating, of fabricating data; there was name-calling in public as Fleischmann and Pons were called ‘incompetent’ and ‘deluded’; there were deep politics, paranoia and, by the end of the year, threats of writs being issued against the editor of a leading scientific journal and against one scientist whose experiments suggested that there had been errors in Pons' laboratory.
The pressures were money and patents, and how the competition of the market place can interfere with the more detached quest for truth in the laboratory.
It is a reminder of Richard Feynman's observation after the enquiry into the Challenger Space Shuttle disaster; ‘Nature cannot be fooled.’
All of which beg the following questions.
How did the news media, scientists and governments take on board a claim that made no sense within the laws of physics, was based in part on wrong data and that was shown to be flawed within days of the announcement?
With such lack of evidence, how did administrators decide it was worthwhile to pour millions of dollars of taxpayers’ money into this fanciful fusion fiasco?
How could two reputable scientists make such a claim and, even a year later, still insist that they had evidence for fusion when the credibility of important pieces of their ‘evidence’ had been destroyed?
Was this a delusion, an error or a fraud?
What can science and the public learn about scientific procedures from this; what ethical issues are raised; what murky aspects of science does it expose?
And when we have the answers to at least some of these questions, will they help prevent a recurrence?
For this is not an isolated incidence of confusion, though rarely are such errors played out in public view with such global excitement; similar things have happened before and some of the signs were already known but went unrecognised.
GENESIS
The race begins: events to 23 March 1989
NOTHING NEW UNDER THE SUN
The announcement of room temperature fusion in 1989 has some of the hallmarks of a detective mystery where appearances deceive.
Consider ‘the facts’.
Room temperature fusion has been discovered independently and simultaneously by two groups in Utah working within a few miles of each other.
One team consists of two chemists, Martin Fleischmann and Stanley Pons, in Salt Lake City; the other group involving Paul Palmer and Steven Jones at Brigham Young University consists of physicists.
The basic set-up consists of rather basic apparatus out of a school laboratory — battery, heavy water, metal electrodes and meters for heat or neutrons — which is so widely available that the discovery could have been made anywhere at any time in the preceding half century; but somehow it has been overlooked by two generations of scientists until suddenly in 1989 not one but two groups in the same location simultaneously announce their breakthroughs.
Coincidence in time, coincidence in space; as Sherlock Holmes remarked, ‘When two strange things happen, they are usually connected.’
Understanding how they came about is one of the challenges in this affair.
A first rule in any mystery is to check the facts.
This is as true in any detective novel as it is in scientific research or investigative journalism, and in supposing that the test-tube fusion idea had been overlooked for half a century we are already repeating a media ‘factoid’ that is incorrect.
Good ideas rarely come out of the blue; search carefully and you will often find that someone else has anticipated your inspiration or at least, thought of something similar to it.
Such was the case with the idea that hydrogen fusion might occur at moderate temperatures within solid materials.
This was first thought of not by Fleischmann and Pons nor by Palmer and Jones, but had been anticipated in Europe, India and the Soviet Union up to 50 years earlier.
An important part of the research process is to search through the  literature and find what ideas similar to your own have been investigated in the past, and then by learning what became of the earlier ideas you can avoid their mistakes and build on the successes.
The Jones collaboration in part grew out of such a quest, though there were aspects of their work that had been anticipated in India long before, unrecorded and so unknown to them.
Fleischmann and Pons set out on a different course initially, but one that had already been charted in Europe in the 1920s and 30s.
Let's begin by looking at what happened in the past, as it will give some insights into what took place in Utah in 1989 and help us understand better why people reacted in the ways that they did.
Helium and airships
Ferdinand Graf von Zeppelin launched his first airship in 1900, and so began the age of the hydrogen-filled craft in which Germany led the world for two decades.
In the aftermath of the First World War Germany was forbidden to rearm until restrictions were relaxed in 1926 and airship construction began again.
In the meantime an airship had caught fire in the USA, ending the use there of the lethal explosive hydrogen as a lifting gas; it was replaced by the safer helium.
However Germany was short of helium and the major industrial producer — the USA, who was extracting it from natural gas — didn't want to supply it so soon after the war.
Thus finding new and cheap ways of producing helium came to occupy the minds of two German chemists at the University of Berlin: Fritz Paneth and Kurt Peters.
And the recently discovered structure of atoms gave them the idea that they could make helium out of hydrogen.
The 1920s were in the interregnum between the discovery of radioactivity — the spontaneous transmutation of one element into another — and its detailed understanding.
Einstein's famous equation E=mc 2 already existed but its full import for the release of vast energies in radioactivity and other nuclear processes still lay in the future.
The fact that elements could change from one into another was the startling discovery and had renewed interest in an old idea of William Prout, the nineteenth-century British chemist, that hydrogen could be the primordial substance from which all other atomic elements, including helium, were constructed.
Ernest Rutherford had discovered the existence of the atomic nucleus in 1911 and this reinforced the vague idea: bring nuclei of light elements together and build the nuclei of heavy ones.
Atoms consist of a densely packed positively charged nucleus  encircled by negatively charged electrons all held in place by the electrical attraction of opposite charges.
The nucleus contains almost all of the atom's mass, the electrons contributing at most about 1/2000 of the whole.
Different atomic elements are distinguished by the amount of positive charge on the central nucleus, which in turn determines how many negative electrons encircle it.
The simplest atom, hydrogen, consists of a single electron encircling the nucleus which has a single positive charge; the positively charged particle that comprises the hydrogen nucleus is called the ‘proton’.
Helium, the next element in the periodic table, contains two electrons encircling a nucleus containing two protons.
In the close confines of the nucleus powerful forces take over, holding the protons in a tight grip and overcoming the disruptive electrical forces.
Add more protons in the nucleus and in turn more electrons can be entrapped around them.
It is the number of protons in the nuclear cluster that determines which element is which.
All elements are made of the same stuff — positively charged nuclei containing protons and encircled by negatively charged electrons.
So in the early 1920s some people conjectured that it may be possible that helium — element number two in the periodic table of the elements — could be built from two hydrogen atoms.
This was what and Peters decided to try to do.
They set out to create the conditions where two hydrogen nuclei (‘protons’) could get close to each other, collide and join to make a nucleus of helium.
The key that they thought would enable them to achieve this was palladium , a light grey metal similar to platinum in appearance.
You may have some if you have any dental fillings; it is also used as a contact in telephone circuits and its malleability makes it a useful substitute for platinum in jewellery.
The thing that made it attractive to Paneth and Peters, and years later to Pons, Fleischmann and Jones, was its great affinity for hydrogen — it can absorb up to 900 times its own volume of the gas.
The hydrogen pours into ‘empty’ spaces between the palladium atoms, expanding the metal by some ten per cent in all directions and putting it under great internal pressure-many thousands of times greater than atmospheric pressure.
Paneth and Peters knew about palladium's ability to absorb lots of hydrogen and they wondered whether packing so much of it in between the palladium atoms might increase the chance of the hydrogen atoms bumping into one another, thereby fusing and producing helium.
The Germans made a thin capillary out of palladium, heated it red-hot and diffused hydrogen through it.
The palladium absorbed the hydrogen and, glory be, they found traces of helium when they were finished!
Their idea seemed to be on the right track but the quantities  of helium were never going to fill an airship.
In fact, the amounts were only just measurable.
The new reached Sweden and John Tanberg, who later became the scientific director and manager of Electrolux, the world-famous manufacturer of household appliances.
He worked there for nearly 40 years and it was in their Stockholm laboratories that he immediately took up Paneth and Peters' idea.
Tanberg had for some time been interested in the way that hydrogen behaves in the presence of metals such as palladium.
The Paneth and Peters work was his speciality and he was enthused by the fact that some helium had apparently been found.
The palladium seemed to be helping the hydrogen to fuse but not fast enough, so if he could improve this, he might be able to make helium in amounts that would be industrially useful.
Thus it came about that Tanberg anticipated the second ingredient in the Fleischmann and Pons story: he introduced ‘electrolysis’ as a way of encouraging the hydrogen to come together.
The basic idea of electrolysis is that an electric current passes through some liquid, in Tanberg's case this was water, and the liquid breaks down into its constituent elements (in this case, hydrogen and oxygen).
You first attach a battery to two electrodes which are dipped into the water (it is necessary to add traces of acid or alkali to conduct the electric current through the solution — this is known as the ‘electrolyte’).
The voltage across the electrodes ionises the atoms (ions are atoms that have become electrically charged as a result of having gained or lost an electron from their periphery).
The hydrogen atom loses its electron, becomes positively charged and is attracted to the negatively charged electrode, called the cathode ; the oxygen gains an electron and migrates to the positive electrode, the anode , this migration of ions forming the current.
Whereas Paneth and Peters used hydrogen gas, Tanberg ‘made’ the gas from the water and, what's more, he used palladium for the cathode so that the hydrogen was attracted naturally to it.
The electrical forces that were the problem in getting the like-charged hydrogen nuclei together were at least being put to good use in attracting them into the palladium prison.
The electrical voltage forced the hydrogen into the palladium.
As more and more accumulated the pressure built up: under these circumstances he hoped that a really effective way of making helium might result.
He produced helium and also energy, or so he must have thought, for in 1927 he put in a patent application for a ‘method to produce helium and useful energy’.
The patent office replied with the comment: ‘received but not understood.’
By November 1927 the patent application had been rejected on the  grounds that the description was so sketchy that ‘an expert is unlikely to be able to practise the invention’.
Given what was to transpire with Fleischmann and Pons, 60 years later, neuthere is a bizarre feeling of déjà-vu in all of this.
Palladium and electrolysis, claims of helium and energy and ‘incomplete descriptions such that[even]an expert is unlikely to be able to practise the invention’.
In another piece of coincidence even the helium traces were explained; they had nothing to do with hydrogen fusion.l
The denouement in the 1920s is dealt with dismissively in the classic book Radiation from Radioactive Substances by Chadwick, Ellis and ‘Sir Ernest Rutherford, O.M., D.Sc, Ph.D., LL.D., F.R.S., and NOBEL LAUREATE’(the title pages of modem books tend to be more modest).
This appeared in 1930 and on page 315 we find what happened to Paneth and Peters (and most probably to Tanberg too).
Several other careful experiments looking for helium had been done but nothing was found.
‘The claim of Paneth and Peters was soon withdrawn and the appearance of helium in the experiments received a more prosaic explanation.
It was found that a glass surface…is able to absorb a detectable amount of helium…from the atmosphere (my italics) during only a single day's contact with the air.’
So all their efforts to create helium from hydrogen hat been fruitless; the traces of helium that they saw had been absorbed from the environment and were not a product of fusion.
Sixty years later others were to be accused of making this same oversight.
And the summary from Chadwick, Ellis and Rutherford in 1930 could equally well be applied to the events of 1989: ‘In all the cases reported, the presence of an element has been mistaken for its creation.’
Neutrons and fusion
One of the authors of that famous book was James Chadwick.
His moment of real glory came in 1932 when he discovered the neutron — a constituent of atomic nuclei that is the missing link in this story and will be both star and villain in later chapters.
The positive charge in a nucleus is due to the several protons it contains, but the protons are not alone; there is a second type of particle within nuclei — the neutron.
A neutron and proton are almost identical but while the proton has positive charge, the neu tron has none — it is neu tral.
With the sole exception of the simplest nucleus, namely the single proton at the centre of hydrogen, all nuclei contain both protons and neutrons.
Neutrons help to stabilise nuclei because  neutrons when closely packed also feel strong attractions, both to other neutrons and to protons, but being electrically neutral neutrons do not suffer from the electrical disruption, so the strong attraction effectively works better for them.
None of this was known in 1926 when Paneth and Peters attempted to join two hydrogen protons to make helium, as the discovery of the neutron only occurred in 1932.
We now know that two protons will not directly make helium; two protons cannot survive the electrical disruption on their own and the stable helium nucleus contains neutrons as well.
The hydrogen nucleus consists of a single proton; helium contains two protons and one or two neutrons, these two ‘isotopes’ being known as helium-3 and helium-4 (written 3  He ,4  He —He being the chemical symbol for helium and the 3 or 4 referring to the total number of constituents within the nucleus).
To make helium requires both protons and neutrons, so instead of hydrogen you use deuterium or ‘heavy hydrogen’ whose nucleus consists of a proton and a neutron tightly gripped without any electrical disruption.
It is ‘hydrogen’ because there is only one proton and ‘heavy’because it has twice the bulk of the usual variety, and was discovered by Harold Urey in 1931, a year before Chadwick proved the existence of the isolated neutron.
In the shorthand this would be written 2 H , but being so fundamental it has a special name and symbol of its own,d for the deuteron, the nucleus of the deuterium atom (symbol D ).
When deuterium replaces hydrogen in water we have what is known as ‘heavy water’, which occurs naturally in small amounts in sea water.
(There is a third and rarer form of hydrogen, known as tritium, where the proton is joined by two neutrons.
The nucleus of tritium — the ‘triton’— has the symbol 3 H or simply t .)
Paneth and Peters would never have been able to make helium from hydrogen as they were missing the neutrons; replace the hydrogen with deuterium and you may have a chance of success.
Immediately following these discoveries John Tanberg returned to his electrolysis measurements but with heavy water,D 2  O instead of H 2  O .
These experiments were essentially the same as those that Fleischmann and Pons performed 60 years later.
Tanberg told Torsten Wilner, his long-time collaborator, about his plans.
Tanberg had loaded a thin palladium wire with deuterium which that night he intended to connect to a high voltage and then discharge the electricity through it leading to a sudden increase in pressure and temperature.
He hoped that the tightly packed deuterium atoms would be set in motion, their nuclei bumping into one another and fusing.
By this stage the quest was no longer simply one of producing  helium but also of liberating energy.
Understanding of the atomic nucleus was progressing rapidly and awareness was dawning of the awesome energies latent within.
The rearrangement of electrons among neighbouring atoms involves the transfer of ‘chemical’ energy, taking in or releasing heat (as when carbon and oxygen combine to produce heat in a fire).
The rearrangement of protons and neutrons also involves changes in energy, ‘nuclear energy’, the only essential difference from chemical being one of scale; the energies involved in nuclear reactions are some millions of times greater than those in chemical processes.
When the nuclei of light elements join together or ‘fuse’, energy is released; what is more, the amount is more than the energy needed to push these nuclei into one another overcoming the electrical repulsion, so if we could accomplish this efficiently we would have a plentiful and dean supply of energy.
This is what is behind modem schemes to produce ‘fusion’ power.
That is what Tanberg was probably the first to try and do.
Tanberg had already realised that vast amounts of energy might be extracted from this process.
He informed Wilner that he had calculated the energy that would be released and it was over a million kilojoules, equivalent to a thousand grams of dynamite.
After thinking for a moment he added that Wilner should go home so that if anything untoward happened he could ‘tell people what it was’!
No disaster struck then, or ever.
Tanberg's notes record that he produced electrical discharges and occasional deafening bangs, but saw no radiation or radioactive residues.
And no helium!
Either there was no helium or it was too faint to detect with the equipment then available.
Nor did he ever measure more energy in the bangs and heat than he put in from the electricity supply.
Fleischmann and Pons' ideas had been anticipated though for all the wrong reasons, primarily a misguided attempt to make helium to fill airships, and all this because the USA would not sell the gas to postwar Germany.
Coincidentally restrictions on helium sales from the USA also enter the Jones story too, though this time it is India rather than Germany that is involved.
The story here also goes back some 50 years to S. K. Bose, the famous Indian physicist whose name is associated with ‘boson’ particles and with Bose condensation, a phenomenon connected with the behaviour of liquefied helium.
When liquid helium was first made it soon became an essential laboratory tool as a coolant in low temperature experiments.
Supplies of liquid helium are an absolute necessity in many modern science laboratories.
You aren't looking for quantities that will fill air balloons but, nonetheless, you need amounts that call on industrial preparation and, as was the case for  Paneth and Peters in Germany, the question was where to get it.
Any source would be useful.
In the 1920s a team of British geologists discovered hot springs while surveying northern India and the seismic faults around the Himalayas.
They noticed that there seemed to be a lot of helium gas in the vicinity.
Bose became interested in this and set his colleague Dr Shyamadas Chatterjee to work to see if there was enough to use as a source for liquid helium for their labs.
There are two springs in particular that interested them, 200 kilometres north-east of Calcutta and some 30 kilometres apart near Shantiniketan where the Indian poet Tagore lived.
They are about 72 degrees Celsius and Chatterjee found that one, slightly hotter, had 2 per cent helium in its bubbles, the other having about half this amount.
He also looked for signs of abnormal radioactivity in the vicinity while seeking for the source of the heat and gas but nothing significant turned up.
That was in the 1930s; today there is a helium collection plant at the springs.
Each spring is about the size of a swimming pool and produces enough helium for use, after liquefaction, at the Cyclotron (small nuclear accelerator) in Calcutta.
This helium source is very useful to them, both for its proximity to Calcutta and because most commercial helium comes from petroleum wells and the USA, the major producer, has restricted trade with India following disputes in the 1970s over India's development of atomic weapons from fissile materials that the USA had supplied for peaceful uses.
But in addition there remained the puzzle of how the helium came to be in the springs.
There is a jungle region in northern India where there are several more hot springs and here again there seems to be an abundance of helium.
Chatterjee wondered about this as it began to seem more than simply coincidence.
Then in 1978 he saw a paper by three Soviet scientists which reported that there were anomalous amounts of helium-3 in some metals; the Soviets suggested that it was being produced by fusion — fusion induced by cosmic rays.
Chatterjee then had the idea that maybe fusion could be acting within the Earth in the vicinity of the hot springs; that 50 kilometres down beneath the ground the pressure and temperature caused the Earth to be a fusion engine.
This would produce helium-3 and tritium; the tritium is unstable and decays producing helium-3 which would add to that directly produced.
The helium would seep up through fissures, and hence its natural occurrence near the hot springs.
Chatterjee told this idea to Bikash Sinha, Director of the Calcutta Cyclotron, during a car ride back from the springs in 1984.
At the time Sinha thought it wasn't very likely and forgot about it.
Halfway around the world, in Utah, Paul Palmer of Brigham Young University was fascinated by helium in the atmosphere.
Palmer originally specialised in acoustics but became interested in the physics of the Earth and in measuring ages by radiocarbon dating.
He developed a detector for decays of carbon-14, a radioactive form of carbon, that can be used to this end.
Though working at Brigham Young University he was a graduate of the University of Utah in Salt Lake City and knew Martin Cook, one of the Utah faculty.
Cook believed that there might be evidence for a ‘young Earth’ in the fundamentalist sense of literal biblical interpretation, due to the presence of helium-3 in the atmosphere in quantities whose origins are hard to understand unless they are from fusion.
According to the conventional wisdom, fusion required great heat and hence could only have happened when the Earth was being formed; however, if the Earth is five billion years old, all the helium would by now have risen away, yet it was there in amounts suggesting that it had appeared in the atmosphere only recently.
One possibility therefore was that the Earth is only a few thousand years old, a second theory is that ancient helium-3 trapped inside the Earth is being ejected by volcanic eruptions and the third idea, Palmer's, was that the Earth is indeed billions of years old and that fusion is taking place even now.
The question was where and how.
This remained only a vague idea until he read the same Soviet paper from the 1970s as Chatterjee had seen and which dealt with the abundance of helium-3 and helium-4 in minerals.
The paper claimed that there was no helium-4, the common form of helium, only helium-3.
The problem here, as in the case of the atmosphere, was how the helium-3 got there.
The Russians had suggested that muons — particles that arrive in cosmic rays and are in effect heavy versions of electrons — are the seed that catalyses the fusion.
Palmer did not discover the paper until 1986, but he was lucky because in his department at Brigham Young University in Utah was Steven Jones who had spent the previous four years doing custom-built experiments with muons, attempting to induce fusion in the lab.
Thus Palmer and Jones came together and started the collaboration which attempted to replicate fusion under pressure, cold fusion in metals, to see if the Earth's heat and the helium-3 could indeed be due to natural fusion in the rocks.
They did not know of the Indian hot springs nor of Chatterjee's ideas.
Nor did they know of the old Swedish experiments attempting to make helium from hydrogen in the laboratory.
They were also unaware that less than 50 miles away from them Fleischmann and Pons — who were also ignorant of these historical works and of the parallel developments at BYU — were beginning to muse about creating hydrogen fusion with the aid of palladium in a test tube.
In India Bikash Sinha had all but forgotten Chatterjee's remarks, when on 24 March 1989 he first heard the reports from Utah claiming that Fleischmann and Pons had performed fusion in a test tube.
Like many other physicists, Sinha's first thought was that ‘this must be nonsense’.
Then somewhere in the excitement Sinha remembered Chatterjee and it all linked together for him: hot springs, helium, fusion.
At this stage no-one in India yet knew about Jones and Palmer, nor what had motivated them.
So, quite independently, in India, ideas similar to Palmer's in Utah had emerged but the circumstances and the responses to the ideas varied widely.
Sinha flew to Bombay, home of the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, and returned to Calcutta with some heavy water.
He bought some palladium and set up an experiment.
It was the association of hot springs and helium that had made him think that there could be something to Chatterjee's idea after all, and maybe to the claims by Fleischmann and Pons.
It was after the Indian team had begun their experiments that they learned about Jones and how his experiments had been motivated by the same ideas as Chatterjee had had.
However, whereas Chatterjee had left it as an interesting hypothesis, Jones and Palmer had designed an experiment right away to try and simulate the effect in the lab.
So helium had, by a series of random paths, been the common ingredient: in Germany, Sweden and India, to Fleischmann and Pons and also to Palmer and thus to Jones.
The irony is that in all of the experiments on test-tube fusion that began in 1989 following the March announcements, and which variously claimed fusion evidence from heat or from radiant neutrons, no measurable production of helium ever took place.
Modern fusion
When Paneth and Peters tried to turn hydrogen into helium they were following in the traditions of the ancient alchemists who wanted to convert base metals into gold.
With the discovery of atomic structure and nuclear transmutation it is now possible to do that, but the cost is greater than for digging gold out of the ground, so nuclear physics has not undermined the gold standard.
The payoff is not in the end products so much as in the energy that can be tapped.
If this energy is converted into heat as the radiant particles pass through water, for instance, it can produce steam to drive a turbine and generate electricity.
So far the emphasis has been on fission, where the nuclei of heavy elements such as uranium fragment into smaller pieces.
This produces energy and also unwanted lethal products whose disposal is the source  of much political concern.
The materials for fusion are plentiful and deuterium, available in water, is relatively clean by comparison.
(Tritium, however, is radioactive.)
The interest in nuclear processes has occupied tens of thousands of scientists and engineers for over a generation.
They have devised sophisticated instruments to detect and measure the energies of even the smallest traces of the products.
Power stations have been designed and successfully operated on the basis of that knowledge.
The occasional and unfortunate accidents have been due to inadequate safety procedures, not to lack of understanding of the basic nuclear processes; had there been some previously unknown nuclear process taking place at room temperature in solid materials and that had been somehow overlooked, then it is likely that we would have discovered this long ago in some reactor.
It is worth bearing this in mind when assessing claims to have found ‘overlooked’ nuclear pathways.
The basic players in the attempts to produce commercial fusion on Earth are deuterium (D ), tritium (T ) and helium (He ); atoms whose nuclei have two, three or four constituents.
All nuclei consist of neutrons and protons, and it is the rearrangement of those constituents when nuclei come together and break apart that releases energy.
The figure on page 28 shows the make-up of these simplest nuclei and illustrates what happens when two deuterium nuclei collide.
They could simply bounce off one another but this does not liberate any energy.
Energy is released when either a neutron or a proton is shaken loose, the reactions being written (n referring to neutron and p proton): The combined mass of the final products is smaller than the combined mass of the initial nuclei.
The mass that ‘disappeared’ has been converted into energy as described by Einstein's equation E=mc 2  , which implies that a mass m is equivalent to an amount of energy E (where c is the velocity of light) and so mass can be converted into useful energy.
In these examples the energy is manifested as kinetic energy: the energy of motion as the products fly apart from each other.
These energies in nuclear reactions are enormous compared to the amounts involved in chemical reactions.
Atomic energies are written in units called eV, short for electron-volts, one electron-volt being the energy an electron gains when accelerated by a one volt potential.
Energies released and absorbed in chemical processes are about 1 eV per atom.
The nuclear processes liberate a million times more energy, which is measured in MeV for mega (million ) eV.
In the first reaction above the neutron carries away 2.45 MeV of energy, while in the second the proton has 3 MeV.
The names, symbols and make-up of the nuclei of the light atoms.
The products of nuclear fusion involving deuterons with hydrogen isotopes.
Some reactions between deuterons and lithium nuclei.
Figure 1
Another possibility is that the two deuterium nuclei combine to form helium-4; here again the mass of helium-4 is less than the combined masses of two deuterium nuclei and the ‘spare’ mass is manifested as electromagnetic radiation far beyond the visible spectrum and known as a gamma ray (denoted by γ).
This gamma ray carries away 24 MeV of energy but this process is very rare, occurring some ten million times less frequently than the neutron or tritium production channels.
These neutron and tritium production processes occur about 50:50 and modern attempts to generate useful energy in fusion experiments have tended to use beams of deuterons for which these are the fusion products.
If you can get hold of the rarer tritium you may liberate nearly 18 MeV through the reaction: A problem the problem in the attempts to fuse nuclei together and release their internal energy — is that all nuclei carry positive electrical charge.
It is the attraction of opposite charges that holds the negatively charged electrons in the atomic periphery where they encircle the positively charged nucleus, but the corollary is that like charges repel; two protons, each one positively charged,repel one another.
You want to force those nuclei together while nature is designed to prevent it.
At this point it must seem paradoxical that atomic nuclei containing several closely packed protons exist at all.
This is even more astonishing when one realises just how compact the nucleus is; for example, scale a typical atom up to the size of a football stadium and the nucleus will be smaller than the football.
The key is that when protons are touching they feel a strong attractive force, more powerful than the electrical forces that are trying to force them apart.
It is this ‘strong nuclear force’ that holds the nucleus together but protons only feel it when they are in close proximity; once apart they feel the electrical repulsion.
It takes only a few thousands of eV (keV) to bring two nuclei together and if they fuse you get over a million eV (MeV) in return.
In practice it is very difficult to get two such small nuclei to collide and fuse, in beams of billions most of them simply miss one another.
To make a useful fusion reactor needs high densities of the deuterium fuel and, it has been traditionally assumed, temperatures greater than those in the centre of the Sun so that fusions occur frequently enough that more energy is liberated than consumed.
This is the approach on which most of the effort — and the money — has been spent in recent  decades.
Recently some people have been trying a different approach, seeing if they can change the nature of the atoms such that fusion can occur at a useful rate even at room temperature.
The former, the world of the tokamaks — particle beams — and mega dollar budgets, may be termed ‘hot fusion’; the latter attempts to generate fusion at room temperature are known as ‘cold fusion’.
THE SUN ON EARTH
When I was a child my father would tease me with two conundrums: ‘What happens when an irresistible force meets an immovable object?’ and ‘If you discovered a substance that destroyed every solid, how would you contain it?’
I suspected that he was cheating, that the questions were based on false premisses.
There is nothing that is infinitely irresistible nor that is truly immovable, and as for the idea of a ‘substance impossible to contain' —that , I decided, was a fiendish invention designed to get me into a muddle as I was sure that such a substance would be a manifest impossibility in practice.
However I was wrong: the quest for fusion is perhaps an example of these problems.
The holy grail of limitless energy, ‘harnessing the power of the Sun on Earth’, is metaphorically an irresistible force and today, 40 years after the quest began and with over twenty billion dollars already spent trying to achieve it, the barriers to be overcome seem to be immovable.
But the truly irresistible and the immovable are abstractions; great prizes warrant intense efforts and so in the case of fusion the quest continues.
We know that fusion occurs: thermonuclear explosions or ‘H-bombs’ are uncontrolled examples of fusion, we have the Sun as evidence of a self-sustaining controlled fusion machine and in the laboratory we can replicate the nuclear processes that fuel it.
So the question is ‘merely’ one of engineering: can we replicate these extreme conditions and create controlled nuclear fusion reactions while using less energy than at present?
Energy is released when the nuclei of the light atomic elements join, so bringing them together is the primary goal.
However, incredibly strong electrical repulsions keep the nuclei at atom's length.
Tremendous pressures and heat, millions of degrees, are needed to overcome this.
The centre of the Sun where fusion occurs is at a temperature of around fifteen million degrees but practical fusion needs a much higher temperature than this — hundreds of millions of degrees.
At such a temperature the deuterium and tritium fuels  are so hot that they would vaporise every material known, stripping the atoms apart into a ‘plasma’ of electrons and nuclei roaming free of one another.
It is this that bears on my father's second question-how to contain the uncontainable: producing these extremes and then controlling and containing them are the problems.
To contain the hot fusion fuel scientists in the USA, Europe, Japan and the Soviet Union have built doughnut shaped machines of magnets (called ‘tokamaks’ from the Russian acronym for toroidal magnetic chamber) which bottle the deuterium in powerful magnetic fields.
One of the basic principles behind these attempts to achieve thermonuclear fusion in tokamaks was discovered inadvertently and in an unrelated context as long ago as 1905.
Two physicists at the University of Sydney in Australia had a piece of copper tubing, used as a lightning conductor, which had been crushed as the electrical current passed through it.
What had happened was that the passage of electrical current created huge magnetic forces which constricted the tube.
A similar effect occurs when electrical current passes through a column of plasma; the plasma contracts radially — known as the ‘pinch effect'-locally increasing its density to the point where ultimately thermonuclear reactions might occur.
In 1988 Princeton University attained a record 300 million degrees in their tokamak, but still used orders of magnitude more energy than they produced.
In the USA, Lawrence Livermore Laboratory and Rochester University are following an alternative approach called ‘inertial fusion’ where the deuterium and tritium fuel is in a small glass bubble which is momentarily blasted by powerful lasers, but here too practical economic fusion seems to be years in the future, and some 700 million dollars may be needed to upgrade the facility and keep the research moving forward.
In recent years, however, some scientists have been trying a new approach, ‘cold fusion’, which involves ‘changing’ the behaviours of atoms at room temperatures.
The main idea here has been to exploit the existence of particles known as ‘muons’ which in some ways behave like electrons, but are some 207 times heavier and are unstable.
Muons can replace electrons in atoms but the muon's greater mass causes the atoms to shrink (in the case of hydrogen by a factor of 207 in all directions) and the effects of the repulsive forces drop enough that the atoms can crowd together more easily and fusion can occur at low temperatures.
Among the several groups pursuing this route is that of Steven Jones of Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
Fleischmann and Pons thought that they could achieve cold fusion by another route.
They believed that packing atoms together inside crystalline solids could produce so much pressure that the atoms  would be squeezed together and hence fusion would occur in a test-tube.
Deciding which of these approaches to back is like entering a lottery, but informed prejudice gives some guide to the odds.
The cold fusion with muons, ‘muon catalysed fusion’,can occur and has been seen to happen; however, it does not seem to happen fast enough to be useful as an energy source.
In the 1970s it was only a curiosity but around 1980 it had a renaissance when people discovered that in certain complicated molecules, involving both deuterium and tritium, the presence of a muon caused fusion to occur much faster than had been previously thought possible.
Jones entered this reborn field in 1980.
Today muon catalysed fusion is still tantalisingly short of the ‘breakeven’ point where the energy given back equals the cost to run the reactor.
Muon catalysed fusion may be only one miracle short of practical realisation, but as yet we do not know where that miracle will come from, nor even whether it exists.
Since 1986 Jones has put most of his effort into solid state cold fusion, a similar approach to that also pursued by Fleischmann and Pons.
The betting odds here are extraordinarily long; theory suggests that it is not possible to liberate useful energy this way nor is there any natural phenomenon that gives us confidence that this can occur.
There is controversy over whether this sort of fusion occurs under pressure inside the Earth, or inside the heavier Jupiter, but even if it does it is at levels that are useless for commercial fusion.
Fleischmann and Pons claimed that they had produced net power output from this approach at levels that would potentially solve the world's energy needs.
Investigating their claims and describing how governments reacted to them form the theme of most of this book.
So at present the ‘hot fusion’ route, even though expensive, seems to be the best bet.
If controlled practical fusion is ever achieved, the investment will pay off.
The media love to compare controlled hot fusion with ‘harnessing the power of the Sun on Earth’, and I have used that idiom in this chapter heading; yet it is not really true.
Not only must the temperature be more extreme than the Sun to be practical, but the fuel is different.
The Sun's fuel is hydrogen nuclei — protons — which alone are useless for commercial fusion.
There is no nucleus consisting of two protons alone and so no energy can be liberated by a pair of protons making such an object.
Were this the whole story there would be no Sun.
However, the chance of two protons fusing isn't exactly zero.
There is a radioactive process — beta decay — which enables one of the protons to shed its charge, in effect becoming a neutron at the instant of fusing  (the electrical charge being carried off by a positively charged form of the electron, known as a positron), the proton and neutron fusing to make a deuteron and liberating energy.
Even so this sequence of events is very unlikely to happen and occurs some million times slower than would have been the case if there were neutrons there to start with.
It is this slim chance of two protons going through this sequence that limits the speed at which the Sun burns up its abundant fuel.
Were there not so much, so dense and so hot, the Sun would not light at all.
So for practical controlled fusion on Earth, protons alone are useless; for all practical purposes, two protons ‘cannot fuse’.
Once the deuteron has formed, the fusion in the Sun can race ahead.
Its copious protons fuse with the new deuterons forming 3 He and radiation.
The most likely fusion processes are then  (the two protons being returned to the Sun's supply to help keep the cycle going), the 4 He combining with 3 He to make beryllium and lithium which in turn fuse with protons to produce more 4 He .
The net result is that once the protons have overcome the initial fusion hurdle they are converted to 4 He , radiating energy in the process.
At no stage is tritium produced, nor do dd or dt reactions play any significant role in the solar cycle.
Contrast this with the search for practical fusion on Earth.
This is a hard enough task even without the added difficult of overcoming the proton-proton fusion barrier, and so dd and dt fusion is where the effort is being put.
Fusion of light nuclei is the common principle in the Sun and in tokamaks but the fusion fuels are rather different.
Even so, in the public's mind fusion and the Sun go together and the fascination with fusion is sometimes akin to ancient sun worship.
The promise of utopia has attracted the attentions of both charlatans and serious scientists.
On occasion even the latter have lost their usual reticence and blundered.
An extreme case of charlatanism occurred in Argentina during the Peronist era of the 1950s.
Later in that decade the British media announced, with some pride, that the eminent scientist Sir John Cockroft was ‘90 per-cent certain’ that controlled thermonuclear fusion had been achieved at the Harwell Laboratory.
Unfortunately some of these failings pervaded part of the test-tube fusion story of 1989.
Peron's fusion reactor
In science as in manufacturing, quality control filters the good from the bad.
In science it involves peer review — other scientists examine, criticise, and question your work and only when you pass this rigorous  vetting can you be truly confident that the work is valid.
In the funding and support of science and technology it is important that careful examination should take place and the advice of experts be listened to.
But if central government acts arrogantly, ignoring the advice of the experts, listening to the advice of favoured confidants to the exclusion of others and deciding that it ‘knows best’, the outcome can be devastating.
In Argentina in the 1950s the Peronist regime provided fertile ground for various nonsenses to flourish and this provides a parallel and a contrast to what happened in 1989 with test-tube fusion in the USA and Europe.
The saga began with a desire for Argentina to prove that it was as good as the major technological powers.
The regime decided that the man who would lead the miracle was Kurt Tank, an aircraft designer who left Germany after the war for a new life in South America.
Tank had what appeared at first sight to be good credentials, having designed the Focke Wulf 190 aircraft which had given Germany air superiority for eighteen months during the Second World War.
As a result of his past reputation, he was chosen to lead the construction of a new Argentine Air Force.
What the authorities failed to realise was that in the few years since the war had ended, aircraft design had moved forward a long way, and there had been a rapid development of jet aircraft of which Tank had little or no real experience — he had not been involved in this critical new phase.
Moreover, he seemed to have no awareness of his limitations.
He talked glowingly about nuclear powered aircraft but this was beyond Argentina's ability and so they settled for more conventional designs.
At least they chose the lesser of two evils, but even so Tank managed to create havoc.
He brought in the Pulqui Mark 1, which lost three test pilots in crashes before being scrapped as an idea to be replaced by the Pulqui Mark 2, which also crashed in trials killing more.
We do not know how much this was due to poor manufacturing standards or poor pilots, but in any event the authorities dispensed with Tank's services and he went off to Egypt and then India, where he designed the Hal-Marut, a plane suitable for twice the speed of sound but with engines capable only of less than half that speed.
He was still dreaming of nuclear powered aircraft.
For a brief period Peron was besotted with Tank until he started decimating the Argentine's supply of test pilots.
In this golden period Tank also sold Peron on nuclear ideas and brought even greater financial ruin as a result.
In pursuing his dream of nuclear powered aircraft Tank came to know an Austrian refugee named Richter who had been a nuclear physicist in Hitler's Germany and was another of the new generation  of South Americans.
Richter told Tank of his own revolutionary ideas — that three years after the explosion of the first hydrogen bomb, he knew how to make a controlled fusion reactor.
All he needed was the money and support and he could produce it for Argentina using local materials.
Richter's story was unearthed by Mario Mariscotti who wrote a book in Spanish called The Secret of Huemmel Island in which he tells how Argentina, during the Peronist regime, had mistakenly thought that fusion was its for the asking.
Mariscotti is a professor of physics at the University of Buenos Aires where he had become intrigued by the fact that the university had an old cyclotron, a primitive atom smasher built in the early 1950s, which would make it among the first half-dozen to have been built in the world.
The cyclotron was a research facility through into the 1980s, but was an expensive and remarkable piece of equipment to have appeared in the 1950s in a country where, neither before nor since, has there been much cash for anything scientific.
It turned out to have been bought by Richter, and as such was at least one good thing that came from his connections with Peron.
Mariscotti was intrigued and as there are no government archives he had to piece the story together.
He learned that Tank had introduced Richter to Peron and the physicist managed to persuade the dictator that he could project Argentina into the 21st century ahead of its competitors and, in turn, make Peron appear one of the most enlightened leaders of the century.
Needless to say, this argument impressed Peron greatly.
Peron gave him Huemmel Island, in a lake in the foothills of the Andes, to build the reactor.
How much money went with this is not known but the scale of the ruins — the shell of the reactor is still visible — suggest that it must have been several million dollars even in 1950s prices, perhaps 1 per cent of the gross national product of Argentina, or roughly the equivalent of a whole year's research budget for a developed country.
His experiment consisted of a huge spark-gap into which he passed a mixture of hydrogen and lithium gases.
The spark was supposed to ignite the fusion reaction or miniature thermonuclear explosion.
Contrast what Richter was doing with what happens in the Sun.
The centre of the Sun is at a temperature of fifteen million degrees and at a density 150 times that of water; in Richter's experiment, the density of the gases would be a mere fraction of water density and the spark that was supposed to ignite the thermonuclear explosion would have a temperature of only a few thousand degrees.
After only three weeks Richter announced his experiment to be a success.
No-one appears to have questioned this claim, examined the data, or checked whether any experiment had even been done.
Almost  before this ‘success’ was announced, Richter was building on Huemmel Island ‘The Reactor’that would power the nation.
He decided it should be ten metres high with four-metre thick reinforced concrete walls but the workmen were sloppy and the concrete cracked.
This first reactor was demolished and a second one begun, even larger than the first, and built in a hole in the ground — the same scale of construction as a U-boat shelter.
Before the reactor had a chance to work (or more accurately, fail) Peron fell from power.
The new military leaders realised that Richter and the entire enterprise was flawed, but didn't know what to do with him.
Then they discovered that Richter had tried to enhance the energy at the centre of his reactor by supplementing the sparks with acoustic energy.
To do this he had bought some loudspeakers from the government and the sparks had damaged them.
The regime thus charged him with damage of government property and jailed him for a few months until he was released under a general amnesty.
In the 1980s he was living in comfortable retirement in a suburb of Buenos Aires, still convinced that his experiment worked.
This happened because one man, Peron, had a dream.
Richter was taken on board because Tank was in favour and recommended him.
There was no consultation, no ‘peer review’, no controls built into the system.
We may compare and contrast this with reactions in the USA in 1989 to requests for funding of research into fusion following the announcements from Utah.
Achieving fusion as an energy source is a dream today made more urgent by the fear of impending environmental disaster.
‘The mighty ZETA'
Fifty miles west of London and fifteen miles south of Oxford in the English countryside is the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority's laboratory at Harwell.
During the 1930s and throughout the Second World War the site had been an isolated airfield and it was here, immediately following the end of the war and a clamp-down on the interchange of information with the USA, that it was decided to set up Britain's civil atomic energy programme.
The red-brick government-issue buildings stand isolated within a security fence, surrounded even today only by a few houses, fields, orchards and small villages housing some of Britain's finest racehorse stables.
In 1958 Britain's Sir John Cockroft, Nobel Laureate in Physics and Director of Harwell Laboratory, under pressure from the media hesitatingly announced that he was ‘90 per cent certain’ that the  laboratory's ZETA (Zero Energy Thermonuclear Assembly) machine had produced a controlled thermonuclear fusion reaction.
Both Sir John and the Harwell Lab had the highest reputations, and so the confident media were unequivocal.
The public wanted a story of national scientific success, to restore pride following the launch of the Soviet Sputnik.
These pressures led Sir John to speculate more than the scientific data allowed and the national reaction was out of all proportion to the real facts.
Here is a cautionary tale with some parallels repeated in the 1989 episode, and also some differences.
The early work on controlled fusion had begun in the s independently in the USA, USSR and Britain.
Among the people involved in these conceptual developments were Andrei Sakharov in the USSR, Edward Teller in the USA and in the British universities G. P. Thomson at Imperial College and Peter Thonemann in Oxford.
It was realised very early that the fusion of deuterium nuclei (deuterons) could prove to be a copious source of neutrons with possible military applications.
The work was classified secret and in Britain the university workers joined closed laboratories, Thomson's group moving to AEI (Associated Electrical Industries) Laboratories at Aldermaston and Thonemann moving to the Atomic Energy Research Establishment (AERE) at Harwell.
News of Richter's work in Argentina, claiming to produce energy from nuclear reactions involving light elements, appeared in the media in 1951.
Although these turned out to be insubstantial, for a while they created concern from a security point of view.
The 1950s were the height of the Cold War, and research into thermonuclear energy release was hardly discussed among different institutions in a single country let alone between nations.
The USA exploded its first thermonuclear device in 1952, and within a year the USSR had done likewise.
Work on controlled thermonuclear fusion proceeded secretly in both nations and in Britain.
But in April 1956 an unexpected development took place: Khrushchev and Bulganin, the Soviet leaders, visited Britain accompanied by the physicist Igor V. Kurchatov, Director of the Institute of Atomic Energy of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, who looked like a bearded patriarch.
He had led the team that developed the Soviet Union's atomic bomb and had begun seeking peaceful applications of nuclear power.
These included the USSR's first nuclear power station and the nuclear-powered ice-breaker Lenin.
Kurchatov visited Harwell and suggested that he might give a lecture on Soviet work into thermonuclear reactions in gas discharges.
This created a minor panic.
Work was going on in this specific area at Harwell, where it was classified secret, and now a leading Soviet was offering to come and tell all!
The offer was accepted and the talk given on 25 April 1956 in the main Harwell lecture theatre (now known as Cockroft Hall) was attended by laboratory scientists and G. P. Thomson's AEI team from Aldermaston.
However, Sir John Cockroft was in the USA at the time, did not attend the lecture and so was unable to get at first hand insights into what the Soviets had, and had not, done.
Among the products of the fusion between two deuterons (dd fusion) are neutrons.
None had been seen at that time in the Harwell experiments that preceded ZETA but Kurchatov announced that the Soviets were seeing some neutrons which were due to fusion occurring, but were unlikely to be from thermonuclear fusion because the rate of their production did not vary with current in the expected way.
Once this was in the open there was less reason to maintain such extreme secrecy about the fusion research programmes and some relaxation occurred.
Since 1955 at Harwell construction had been taking place of ZETA — a 3 metre diameter doughnut shaped vacuum chamber containing deuterium plasma.
Experiments with ZETA were underway in 1957 and Thonemann's team successfully demonstrated that they could produce quasi-stable highly ionised plasmas with densities of 1013 to 1014 (ten to one hundred thousand billion) particles per cm 3 , at temperatures of about 5 million degrees for times of milliseconds.
These times were long enough to enable them to study the behaviour of the plasma and its response to the magnetic forces, necessary first steps along the way to controlled thermonuclear fusion.
The team was systematically searching for neutrons, a sign of fusion, and it was in August 1957 that they first appeared.
That night the team changed the plasma, replacing the deuterium with hydrogen, and the neutrons disappeared.
This control experiment showed that deuterium was important in producing the neutrons and was suggestive that fusion between two deuterons (dd fusion) was taking place.
A more definitive test involved measuring their energies.
When two deuterons fuse together at low energy, the neutron is liberated with an energy of 2.45 MeV.
The ZETA team detected these neutrons using scintillation counters and boron counters, and by activating silver (neutrons have a large ‘cross-section’— propensity to interact — with boron and silver, hence the use of these elements to detect them) and showed that fusion was taking place in ZETA on a substantial scale.
This was a significant discovery in that fusion had not been seen in toroidal discharges before.
The question that  then needed to be answered was whether the dd fusion was being induced by collisions within the hot plasma —‘thermonuclear’ fusion — or from some other non-thermonuclear processes such as collisions between deuterons that had been accelerated to high energies during the initial pulse of current and other deuterons of comparatively low energies.
Only in the former case, where the plasma is in equilibrium, its particles randomly moving around with a distribution of energies, does the concept of ‘temperature’ have a true meaning and the possibility of sustained thermo -nuclear fusion exist.
In a thermonuclear fusion reaction, owing to the completely random directions in which the particles.
of the hot plasma move, the mean energy of the neutrons emitted will be independent of their direction.
However, in the non-thermonuclear fusion process above, a neutron emitted in the direction of the moving deuteron will have a higher energy than one emitted in the opposite direction, much as an object thrown from a moving vehicle travels faster when thrown forwards.
To tell which of these was the case required measuring the neutron energies precisely enough to get a sense of their distribution.
The energy of the neutrons had been measured by means of scintillation counters where neutrons knock on (electrically charged) protons, akin to H. G. Wells' invisible marl being detected in a crowd by his bumping into the visible people.
This technique is sufficient to measure energies and identify dd fusion, but does not have the resolving power to give the mean energy and its distribution.
This was stated clearly in the paper that Thonemann and his team published in Nature on 25 January 1958: ‘To identify a thermonuclear process it is necessary to show that random collisions in the gas between deuterium ions are responsible for the nuclear reactions.
In principle, this can be done by calculating the velocity distribution of the reacting deuterium ions from an exact determination of both the energy and direction of emission of the neutrons.
The neutron flux so far obtained is insufficient to attain the desired accuracy of measurement.’
Sir John Cockroft, the Director of Harwell, had won a Nobel Prize for his 1932 work where, with the prototype high energy nuclear accelerator, he and Ernest Walton had made the first artificial disintegration, or fission , of atomic nuclei.
Here with ZETA he was overseeing the first example of the reverse process — the controlled fusion of light elements and detection of the products, the neutrons.
His 1932 work had been greeted with great interest and in 1958 he rightly decided that the news from ZETA merited a press conference.
The publication of the paper in Nature was thus accompanied by a press conference at Harwell, which was held in the hall where Kurchatov  had spoken nearly two years earlier.
Although the paper stated that the measurements of the neutrons were not accurate enough to determine if the fusion was thermo -nuclear, there was a great desire that Britain's prestige should be boosted by the ZETA ‘triumph’ following the nation's ‘backwardness in Sputnik research’(the Soviet satellite having been launched in October 1957).
Cockroft dearly believed that the source of the neutrons was thermonuclear fusion.
When the media sought assurances that they were, and received no response from the ZETA team, they continued to pressure and asked Cockroft to quantify his expectations.
In one of the few misjudgements of his brilliant career Cockroft said that he was ‘90 per cent certain’ that thermonuclear fusion was occurring.
That was the ‘quotable quote’ which the media picked up and put into the headlines.
The Daily Mail proudly stated ‘The Mighty ZETA: Limitless Fuel for Millions of Years’, the Daily Telegraph was only slightly more reticent: ‘Hydrogen power 90 per cent certain; Energy from sea in twenty years; Machine will surpass heat of Sun’, and on television one scientist said ‘This discovery is greater than the Russian Sputnik.’
The British public gained an expectation that was out of all proportion to the facts.
None of the ZETA team had claimed this at the press conference or in the Nature article; though, hedging bets, the paper also said this is ‘not inconsistent with…a thermonuclear process’.
Yet the editorial in Nature said that a ‘thermonuclear (my italics) reaction has now been made’ and the article was headlined ‘Controlled Release of Thermonuclear Energy’.
At this stage there was still the possibility that the neutrons were indeed from thermonuclear fusion and the proof awaited precision measurements of the ZETA team's energy spectrum.
ZETA had been behind closed doors in Hangar 7, a huge aircraft hangar, 100 m long, which is now converted into a lab.
At the other end of the building some very different experiments had been going on involving nuclear physicists who knew of the existence but few of the details of ZETA.
Among these were Eric Taylor and Ted Wood who entered into a collaboration with Basil Rose, who specialised in rather different areas of low energy nuclear physics and was a member of the cyclotron group at the lab.
Rose had been present in the audience at the press conference and afterwards commented to Taylor that ‘What is needed is a detector of neutrons that has good energy resolution and is very efficient’(so as to be able to determine a distribution of energies of the neutrons and determine whether they were being produced uniformly in all directions — as in thermonuclear fusion from a static plasma — or instead were on the average moving in some particular direction).
By chance  Rose had spoken to the right person as Taylor had been working with a hydrogen diffusion cloud chamber which is potentially well suited for such a task.
So their collaboration was born and, as Rose remarked to me, shows ‘the importance of having people from different disciplines talking with one another and pooling their expertise.’
A cloud chamber is good for detecting low energy, electrically charged particles as they leave behind a trail of liquid drops as they pass through the mist in the chamber.
The resulting trail is similar to the vapour trail of a high flying aircraft, showing where the plane, or atomic particle, has been.
Neutrons, being electrically neutral, do not leave a direct trail, but when they hit protons in the hydrogen-filled chamber the protons recoil, and it is their trails that reveal the impact of the neutrons.
And as protons have essentially the same mass as neutrons the range of the proton trail and its direction with respect to the incident neutron beam accurately determines the energy of the incident neutron.
So this is what the trio took over to ZETA to make an accurate measure of the neutron energies.
A small hole in the shielding around ZETA allowed neutrons from a discharge to escape and to enter the cloud chamber.
Under the normal conditions of operation, the current in ZETA flowed away from the hole and the cloud chamber.
In the experiments of Rose's group, ZETA was also operated in ‘reverse’; where the current flowed towards the chamber.
The trails in the cloud chamber enabled Rose and his colleagues to determine the mean energies of the neutrons in the two configurations.
If the neutrons had been produced by thermonuclear fusion in a stationary plasma the neutrons' energy spectra would have been the same in both cases, peaked at 2.45 MeV.
However, what they found was that the peak was at around 2.3 MeV in the normal mode (current flowing away from the detector) and 2.6 MeV in the reverse case (current flowing towards the detector) -like the object thrown from the moving vehicle against or with the motion.
It was still possible that this was thermonuclear fusion taking place in a mass of gas moving in the same direction as the current, but other measurements made this seem very unlikely.
The explanation offered by Rose and colleagues was that the neutrons were produced by collisions between slow deuterons and deuterons moving with an energy of nearly 20 keV in the direction of the current.
ZETA was ‘the biggest low energy accelerator in existence’.
This result was an embarrassment following the headlines of January, but there was no hesitation about publishing it.
The media again dealt with this in mixed ways.
The Daily Express announced ‘Shock for Britain, ZETA is not the success claimed’.
It might more accurately have added ‘…claimed, by the media’.
In fact, the  scientists were making considerable progress.
The first controlled fusion reactions had been seen and their nature was now being clarified.
Thus Harwell scientists were, in effect, now able to ‘look inside’ ZETA and were learning more about the behaviour of the plasma.
The Times of 16 June was nearer the mark when it said ‘…comments have gone farther in the direction of pessimism than appears to be justified’ and reminded readers that ‘the objects of the ZETA experiments were to produce and maintain high temperatures and to study the conditions in which these temperatures are produced as an aid to later stages in design.’
Morals from this episode that may have some parallels with the test-tube fusion story of 1989 include the delicate balance between the world of science and the media.
When there is a great wish for something to be true but the evidence for it is not yet complete, it can require great strength to resist the pressure to say more than the data warrant.
Apparently innocent remarks, made parenthetically, can end up as lead headlines and the caveats can be lost, and ‘quotable quotes’ get quoted, distorting the real message.
The claims so built up the expectations for ZETA after the first conference that the subsequent news was perceived as ‘failure’.
However, there are also significant differences with both Richter in Argentina and the 1989 episode in Utah.
For ZETA none of the published experimental results was wrong, the limits of accuracy of the experiment were clearly spelled out and the main results were soon confirmed by other groups — Aldermaston in Britain and Los Alamos in the USA.
By contrast, in 1989 not one of Fleischmann and Pons' published claims of significant nuclear products stood up to scientific scrutiny.
Apart from the embarrassment, the exposure of ZETA was beneficial.
It became an essential research tool in the early quest for controlled thermonuclear fusion, helped to clarify the scope of the problem of heating, containing and controlling the deuterium fuel, and set the parameters for the development of the subsequent fusion research programme.
If practical hot fusion is ever achieved, ZETA will have helped it happen.
It also had some immediate benefits for the fusion programme in Britain.
Several of the people involved in the ZETA story, directly or as spectators, are still working or living in retirement in and around Harwell: many of them feel that the publicity and interest generated in ZETA made many politicians and administrators aware of fusion, and helped to gain support for the funding of Culham Fusion Laboratory which was built during the early 1960s.
Culham has been doing forefront work in the fusion field for over two decades, and today is the site of the Joint European Torus (JET).
The scale of the  enterprise is so large that fourteen nations combine their efforts at this single lab.
It has achieved temperatures of 250 million degrees in its fuel and plans a series of experiments into the early 1990s.
Its goal is getting nearer but is still tantalisingly out of reach.
Similar efforts are taking place in Japan, the USSR and the USA.
Culham is only six miles from Harwell; for many years a model of ZETA was on display in its entrance hall as a reminder of Britain's heritage in this field.
JET, the Joint European Torus
The European Fusion Programme is centred on Culham in Britain, home of JET, the Joint European Torus.
This tokamak consists of D-shaped magnets forming a doughnut 4 metres high and 2.5 metres across.
The fusion research programme at JET began in 1983 and will run until 1996 according to present plans.
There are three separate criteria that must be met before a commercial fusion reactor can be built: temperature, density and ‘confinement time’ must all exceed certain minimum values.
The temperature will have to exceed 100 million degrees (or 10 keV in the units the fusion scientists use; 1 keV corresponds to 11.6 million degrees).
Below this temperature any fusion is too slow to sustain.
Second, the plasma must be dense enough — enough particles in a given volume — that individual particles have a good chance to find each other; this critical density is of the order of 10 20 ions per cubic metre.
Third, the plasma has to retain its energy for at least a second in order that enough reactions take place to deliver more energy than was consumed in setting the system up.
By 1989 JET had been able to exceed each of these values individually but had not achieved them simultaneously.
Its highest temperature is 32 KeV, density 1.2 × 10 20 and energy retention time 1.2 seconds.
The problem is to achieve them together in such a way that the ‘fusion product’, the multiple of all three quantities, exceeds a certain critical value.
The fusion product has unusual units: keV sec per m 3 ; the keV is the temperature, sec comes from the confinement time and per m 3 gives the density.
The goal is for its value to exceed 50 × 10 20 keV sec per m 3 .
Progress at JET can be measured by the improving value achieved for the fusion product.
In the early 1970s when the idea of JET was first conceived, the best recorded value fell short by a factor of 25 000; by 1990 JET was within a factor Of 20.
JET heats the plasma with RF (radiofrequency) power, like a  microwave oven.
The ions in the plasma gyrate back and forth in JET's magnetic containment field, and by tuning the RF power to this frequency, the radio waves resonate with the ions, passing on energy and raising the plasma's temperature.
The technological catch though is that the confinement time drops as the RF power pushes the temperature up, and so the critical value of the fusion product is still out of reach.
In future machines the aim will be to raise the temperature without need for so much extra heating.
There are two stages to a working reactor.
First one must achieve ‘breakeven’ where fusion reactions produce as much energy as go into the plasma.
JET is very near to this and its present programme may achieve this.
However, this will still be a factor of five away from the full goal: ‘ignition’.
Ignition involves fusion which produces enough energy both to heat the fuel and to maintain the temperature of the plasma as new fuel is added.
Initially JET used only deuterium as fuel.
In the final phase of the project, which began in 1991, tritium was put into the machine.
On 10 November 1991, JET announced that this worked as expected, giving optimism for the future.
This will yield information on the behaviour of a genuine thermonuclear plasma, but has hazards in that tritium is radioactive and the reactions will produce so many neutrons that the machine will become radioactive.
Workers will be unable to have unprotected access to the device and remote handling will be needed for the innards.
European problems
Even though JET is moving the search for economic fusion forward, not all are convinced that it is worthwhile.
The European Panel on Science and Technology Options Assessment (STOA) commissioned a report on fusion in 1988.
Written by Colin Sweet of the London-based Centre for Energy Studies, it appeared at a sensitive time when budget wrangling threatened to delay fusion.
Sweet's report cast doubts on the eventual feasibility of fusion as a viable power source and implied that the large sums of money could be better used elsewhere.
It appeared while the European Commission had yet to approve the £600 billion fusion budget.
‘A full and proper economic evaluation is overdue and should be done as a precondition to the allocation of resources beyond 1991.’
This uncertainty hung over the European Fusion Programme at the start of 1989 and in Britain, home of JET, there were further questions being asked about the future of fusion and nuclear energy in general.
Electricity in Britain was then produced by the CEGB (Central Electricity Generating Board): a state-run organisation which the Thatcher government was preparing to ‘privatise’— turn into a public company.
In 1988 the CEGB spent 150 million pounds on nuclear energy research, of which twenty million went into studying environmental effects.
The UKAEA (United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority) is the biggest outside contractor to the CEGB, and the research cost the CEGB 65 million pounds a year.
Privatisation has now split the CEGB into three and the environmental research and development work is to be cut back.
The place of nuclear research in the relationship between the CEGB and the UKAEA was unclear at the turn of the year, and then in February 1989 the House of Lords Select Committee on Science and Technology published a report on Research and Development in nuclear power.
They saw little point in continuing home-grown fusion research and advised that future work should have a European dimension.
This reinforced the government's decision of October 1988 to trim five million pounds from the UK fusion budget; this did not affect JET but threatened 150 jobs at the adjacent Culham Laboratory.
The House of Lords Committee report was even more cause for pessimism, suggesting that the UKAEA should brace itself for major cutbacks including site closures.
The Committee noted that the UKAEA has a ‘magnificent record in scientific and technical achievements’ but stressed that future research and development in nuclear energy will attract considerably less resources than in the past.
Restructuring of the Atomic Energy Authority would have to be done, but there was concern whether it would be able to find enough non-nuclear work to take up the slack.
The promise of test-tube fusion could open up new avenues for them.
Hot fusion in the USA
The magnetic confinement fusion programme cost the US taxpayers 350 million dollars in 1984 and funding from Congress has remained at this annual figure ever since, even though inflation has continued to eat into it.
Salaries of the many scientists, support staff and engineers and the overheads all inflate, using up increasing amounts of the money even before any experiments begin, so real research dollars in 1989 were probably less than one half of what they were five years earlier.
By 1989 many fusion scientists in the USA were becoming increasingly nervous about their future.
Research programmes were being stretched out in time and slowed down, and experiments were having to be cancelled as priorities were reassessed.
One example is that of Princeton University, home of the Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor, or TFTR.
Experiments have been using deuterium alone, and the temperature of the plasma has been pushed up to 300 million degrees.
This is hot enough for fusion to occur but so far they have been unable to confine the hot plasma long enough and at high enough densities to generate more energy from fusion than is used to keep the machine working in the first place.
What they want to do next is to use deuterium and tritium together in the machine, since the dt reaction releases more energy per fusion than does the dd , and so Princeton hope that the faster energy release might enable them to cross the breakeven threshold.
But tritium is not easy to come by, nor is it cheap.
Due to the shortage of money, Princeton have had to postpone this experiment time after time.
There were further problems for hot fusion in 1989 with the arrival of the new administration of President Bush.
This brought in new people such as Robert Hunter as head of the Department of Energy Office of Basic Research, and one of his first acts was to reorder some of the research funds.l This caused some research activities to be trimmed at Oak Ridge, Los Alamos and Princeton, where the dt experiment was postponed for at least another three years.
It also led to some staff cuts and by the spring of 1989 the leaders of the fusion programmes were anticipating that after five years of no increases to match inflation, Congress would make a twenty million dollar cut in the fusion budget.
The labs were already trying to plan how to deal with that.
The Catch 22 problem was that for several years there had been few big headlines about fusion as no dramatic breakthroughs had been occurring.
So public and congressional interest was low and this in turn kept budgets tight, preventing the building of the new facilities or running the new experiments such as the dt one at Princeton that could produce the breakthrough.
Only then would there be the excitement that attracts new funds.
Even if fusion becomes an energy producer, realistic commercial production will not be until the mid-21st century, which is beyond the interest span of the average member of Congress.
One project that is in the balance is the Compact Ignition Tokamak, or CIT, that would produce the conditions for the plasma to ignite.
Its supporters claim that the first would be the first step towards a test reactor that would burn plasma for long periods.
There is general agreement in the hot fusion community that CIT will bring significant advances to the field, but the problem is that it will cost 700 million dollars which requires new funds and imposes new pressures both within and outside the community.
Within the community the question is which site will win the first, and both inside and outside  there is the question of ‘How much of my money will be sacrificed to support the CIT?’— areas of science that have no immediate connection to fusion nevertheless get funded from the same sources, such as the Department of Energy.
There is little doubt that some of the 700 million dollars would be at the expense of others and some practitioners of ‘small’ science, whose projects can sink or swim on fluctuations of tens of thousands of dollars, see calls for 700 million with less than total enthusiasm.
Within the fusion community there is argument over the siting of the CIT.
One argument is that if building the CIT involves cutting into present research programmes then it may be preferable to run the present experiments for longer.
Princeton, which is the dominant fusion lab with funding of 96 million dollars a year and which first proposed the idea of the CIT, is the natural site for it.
However, not everyone agrees with this.
As the overall budget shrinks, Princeton's star status causes tensions which will increase further if CIT exacerbates the financial disparities.
Ronald Parker of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has proposed that the CIT be built on a remote site rather than in Princeton town since it will use radioactive tritium, and while the amounts pose no threat, nonetheless people will protest and this could delay approval: best be realistic and avoid potential trouble at the outset.
Arguments against this include: ‘MIT want to keep power away from Princeton’, and ‘putting — it elsewhere costs another 250 million and there will be protests anyway’.
So in early 1989 the US hot fusion community faced some internal dissension and considerable financial pressure.
Self-protection was a high priority for these Goliaths when along comes David in the form of two chemists who announce that they can perform fusion in a glass of water!
Naturally the DOE takes notice since if this is true it will solve their financial problems.
Naturally the hot fusion teams sit up.
Within days of the Utah press conference Representative Walker convinced some members of the US Congressional Energy Research and Development Committee to shift five million dollars away from hot fusion into test-tube fusion.
So already the hot fusion community was under threat and facing possible redirection of its projects.
The full committee refused to redirect the funds and, paradoxically, the very fact that test-tube fusion is news has grabbed public attention and ironically could be the headline that revitalises interest and in the longer term attracts money from Congress — for hot fusion.
This was acknowledged in the US Congressional Hearings on test-tube fusion held on 26 April, 1989.
Mike Saltmarsh, Director of Fusion Energy at Oak Ridge National Laboratory said ‘Whatever the final outcome, the renewed discussion of the potential promise of controlled  fusion power has been very healthy’.
And Harold Furth, Director of the Princeton University Plasma Physics Laboratory made similar remarks: ‘Whatever the reality and utility of ‘test-tube fusion energy’, some progress may have been made…in focusing the world's attention on the potential value of a realistic long-term strategy for the achievement of the fusion energy goal.’
So as with the birth of Culham in Britain, there was again the possibility that fusion could profit.
Tritium and the military connection
Fusion takes place in the Sun — protons fusing to deuterons eventually producing helium and liberating heat.
Although the detailed processes and fuels differ from those in the hot fusion programme, the end result — self-sustained power — is the same.
Uncontrolled fusion has been achieved since 1952 with the detonation of thermonuclear weapons.
The end result, destructive explosions, differs from magnetic fusion but the fuel, tritium, is the same.
Tritium is an essential fuel in thermonuclear weapons; it is also a product of dd fusion — the very process that the Utah chemists claimed to be able to make happen inexpensively in a test tube.
The US military were already spending vast sums on making tritium for warheads and the reactors that were used for this process had been closed, pending repairs, in 1988 as a result of nervousness about reactor safety following the Chernobyl accident.
The repair and building new reactors would cost billions of dollars, so when test-tube fusion entered the scene the military took note at once, recognising the potential of test-tube fusion as a source of the much-needed tritium.
This sort of application of test-tube fusion also impressed Indian Government scientists who decided that the western nations would soon classify test-tube fusion as a secret; thus India mounted an immediate test-tube fusion research effort so as to ‘get in on the ground floor’.
The US owns about 100 kilograms of tritium, including what is stored in bombs.
Tritium has a 12.3 year half-life, which is the same as saying that 5.5 per cent of its atoms decay each year.
So to keep its 100 kg stock of tritium fresh, it has to manufacture 5 to 6 kg annually.
To make tritium you can fuse a neutron onto a deuteron, or alternatively add a neutron to 6 Li (lithium-6) which splits to yield one atom of tritium and one of 4 He .
The 6 Li reacts more easily and so this is the approach used the most.
The USDOE (Department of  Energy) has done this since the late s at the Savannah River Reactor on the border of Georgia and South Carolina.
There are four reactors which burn enriched uranium (containing 80 per cent 235 U ) as fuel.
This produces the intense flux of neutrons; heavy water flows through the reactor to slow down the neutrons so that they react better with the lithium.
The lithium is stored in aluminium, stays in the reactor for up to a year where it is bombarded with neutrons.
The tritium produced is held within the aluminium and released as gas after heating and then stored in metal canisters.
The military reactors at Savannah River are getting old, one having been closed permanently and the other three being closed pending extensive repairs.
Therefore the DOE may have to build new reactors at a cost of 8 billion dollars, and it will be ten years before these are ready.
The US military is worried about the long delay while the new facilities are being built and also that the US is selling tritium to civilian users in the US, Britain, Japan and Canada.
As a result sales have become limited, and in particular this affects the fusion programmes which want tritium for dt fusion.
In Britain too there are impending problems.
British Nuclear Fuels (BNF) makes tritium at Chapel Cross in South-West Scotland, using neutrons made in an ageing Magnox reactor.
This is due to close by the mid-1990s and BNF is unlikely to have replacement reactors ready until several years after this.
The military and political pressures to find new ways of making tritium and the vast amounts of money involved were stimulating early in 1989 new ideas on how to make fusion — for tritium production.
Bogdan Maglic, Director of the Advanced Physics Corporation in Princeton New Jersey proposed accelerating heavy ion beams in closed collision orbits.
This could make one gram of tritium in half a day and as a byproduct give back some of the electrical power — one megawatt — from the fusion processes involved.
This is a long way short of breakeven since much energy is needed to accelerate the ions in the beams, but breakeven is not the aim here; the goal is tritium for the military.
Other ideas were around and one cynic remarked ‘Everyone and their grandmother is trying to get money based on the US tritium shortage.’
Only a few months earlier the USDOE had decided that the prospect of nuclear fusion by the ‘conventional’ route was still too many years away to meet the Pentagon's urgent needs for tritium.
So when Fleischmann and Pons announced test-tube fusion as a source of energy — which was the ‘angle’ that the media took up and portrayed it as a clean source — the news that they apparently saw tritium as a fusion product was lost on most media, but it made many scientists concerned and others excited.
Hot fusion budgets on the line; tritium production for weapons; India believing that test-tube fusion would become a classified secret in the West.
So test-tube fusion was more than just a media event with dollars on the line for the University of Utah, there were many private agendas riding along with it.
As a result it was easy for protagonists to claim that opinions on test-tube fusion, particularly its validity or otherwise, weren't always made on purely scientific grounds, but that self interests were the driving forces.
COLD FUSION
Cold fusion is the brainchild of Charles Frank, who first came up with the idea in 1947.
He was at Bristol University in England where the physics department was leading the world in the study of cosmic rays, and whose head, Cecil Powell, was about to win the Nobel Prize for his role in this.
The Bristol team was in the process of discovering that in addition to the light electron and heavy proton and neutron there are particles of intermediate masses which they named ‘mesotrons’.
In particular they identified two mesotrons with nearly identical masses but different properties: the slightly heavier one they named ‘pion’ and the lighter one ‘muon’.
The pion is unstable and decays, producing the lighter muon in the process.
The idea of two particles so near in mass was troubling for some people and made them wonder if some misinterpretations had occurred; in particular Patrick Blackett, another Nobel Laureate, raised a question as to whether there might be other explanations of the pion decay.
Charles Frank looked into this and showed that the pion decay interpretation was correct, but it was in answering that question that Frank had his brainwave and stimulated a whole new field of research.
We are continuously bombarded by cosmic rays, atomic particles ejected by distant stellar catastrophes.
Whirled through the magnetic fields of space until entrapped by the Earth's own magnetic field, they crash into the upper atmosphere shattering the nuclei of atoms and projecting fragments and other particles down to Earth.
At ground level we are protected from their full force by the intervening umbrella of air but, nonetheless, some of these particles manage to penetrate.
Among them are muons, negatively charged particles similar to electrons in all respects but for the fact that they are unstable and are 207 times heavier; they are in effect ‘heavy electrons’ and can replace electrons in atoms to make ‘muonic atoms’.
The simplest example is muonic hydrogen, where a single muon encircles a proton.
In ordinary hydrogen the bulky proton is almost at rest relative to the flighty lightweight electron which encircles it.
The mean distance of the electron from the central proton defines the atom's size.
Now suppose that the electron's mass is increased 207 times (so that it is like a muon) while it remains subject to the same attractive force holding it around the proton.
Quantum theory implies that it would have to move 207 times closer to the central proton to maintain the stability of the atom.
Now we cannot change an electron's mass but we can replace an electron by a muon which, being 207 times heavier, is almost equivalent.
Thus muonic hydrogen is similar to ordinary hydrogen but for two important features.
First, the muon orbits the proton 207 times closer in, so muonic hydrogen is smaller than ordinary hydrogen.
The second difference is that muons are unstable, having a mean life of only 2.2 millionths of a second, so the muonic hydrogen atom doesn't live long.
Frank came up with his idea of muonic atoms and the consequent possibility of cold fusion as the result of a picture of the cosmic particles that the Bristol physicists had obtained.
Cecil Powell's contribution had been to take images of the particles by sending emulsions to the upper atmosphere in balloons, where cosmic rays hit them.
Then the balloons return to ground, and the pictures are developed.
Atomic particles in the cosmic rays show up as dark tracks, and then the hard work comes in interpreting them, deciphering their code, and learning about the basic entities of matter.
It was from this that Powell helped to establish the identity of the muon as a heavy sibling of the electron and distinct from another particle, the ‘pi-meson’ or ‘pion’.
In 1947 tracks of mesotrons (pions, muons and possibly other new particles) were very much the centre of attention in Bristol.
The physicists lived for the emulsion trails and double checked to see if they were interpreting them correctly.
One of the images showed the trail of a particle more massive than an electron which suddenly turned through a sharp angle making an L-shape, and whose thickness and character changed at the kink.
This suggested that a heavier mesotron (the pion) had died and that the second branch of the L was due to its progeny — a muon.
This image of a pion transmuting was as important to particle physics as Rutherford's discovery of the transmutation of the elements had been 40 years earlier.
But was this the right interpretation?
There was another possibility for this L-shaped trail: rather than showing the death of a new mesotron it might instead show a known muon that somehow had been captured by the matter around it, extracted energy from it and then shot off again: this was the suggestion that Blackett had made, and Charles Frank began to think about it.
He concluded that the  picture indeed showed the death of a pi-meson, which was important in the history of particle physics, but the idea of capture and energy extraction — not by the pi but by the muon — then began to develop in his mind.
He realised first that a muon in the vicinity of a hydrogen atom would orbit 207 times nearer to the central nucleus than would the electron, and so the muon would get inside the electron's orbit and take over the electrical attraction of the proton; it is an atomic ‘excuse me’ dance routine.
The electron now finds itself outside an electrically neutral system, namely the positive proton and the close-in negative muon; the electron escapes and where once was a hydrogen atom is now muonic hydrogen.
Figure 2.
Muonic hydrogen atom.
A hydrogen atom (a) is invaded by a muon, μ -;(b) which orbits the proton more closely than does the electron.
The electron's attraction for the positively charged proton is shielded and the electron is released, leaving a muonic hydrogen atom (c).
So it appeared that making muonic hydrogen would be straight-forward.
What's more, this would be so small that it would behave much like a neutralised proton, or ‘neutron’.
And here was the bonus: the positive charge of the proton is so effectively shielded that it will now be able to encroach much closer to the nucleus of a neighbouring atom without being repelled; the chance of bumping into it and undergoing nuclear fusion, ‘cold fusion’, thereby became a real possibility.
The fusion would be between the proton of the muonic hydrogen atom and the nucleus of one of the atoms in the surrounding material.
In the presence of deuterium, for example, the proton fuses with the deuterium nucleus making helium-3 and releasing energy — but no neutron this time.
This happens very quickly and the energy generated by the fusion can kick out the muon, releasing it to play its role as matchmaker again, acting as a ‘catalyst’: hence ‘muon catalysed fusion’ was born.
In 1947 when Frank had his insight the existence of muons had already been known for ten years and the existence of muonic atoms had also been predicted.
However, nobody had made the conclusive step of considering the consequences of this, namely the chain of muon catalysis reactions.
Frank had come up with his idea due to the accident of circumstances: the work surrounding him in Bristol, and the association of ideas — Blackett's idea for the pi-meson being applied successfully for the muon.
The possibility of fusion is the good news.
The bad news is the second difference from ordinary hydrogen that I alluded to, namely that whereas hydrogen is stable, muonic hydrogen is not.
Living only for a couple of microseconds on average, the muon cannot go from atom to atom catalysing fusion and liberating energy indefinitely; the dream of the ages isn't so easily fulfilled.
And further hindering the fusion is the fact that the produced helium nucleus has positive charge and attracts the muon to it, away from the deuterium where it is wanted.
The longer that the muon sticks to the helium, the less time is left for it to catalyse further fusions.
Nonetheless, two microseconds is a long time compared with many things that happen in and around the atomic nucleus, and the muon has a chance to initiate several fusions before it dies.
The crucial question is whether it manages to liberate at least as much energy from fusions as was expended in running a particle accelerator to produce that muon in the first place.
Today this ideal is tantalisingly just outside of reach.
It is trying to understand the details and hopefully finding the key to economic success for muon catalysed fusion that has occupied Steve Jones, and several others, for the last ten years.
His inspiration goes back to the early idea of Charles Frank, plus the fact that muon catalysed fusion was observed in 1956 by accident and the interest has grown in fits and starts ever since.
Frank's idea was taken up by Andrei Sakharov in the USSR.
In 1948 he wrote an internal report of the Lebedev Physical Institute in Moscow, a paper in which he considered the expected efficiency of muon catalysed fusion, and whether it could be practically useful for producing energy and neutrons.
The first theoretical calculations on various characteristics of muon catalysed fusion appeared during the 1950s, by Yu.
B. Zeldovich, Sakharov and S. S. Gershtein in the Soviet Union; the ideas were not much pursued elsewhere.
The idea had arisen for Frank through his location and questions that had come up about muons; Sakharov had been developing fusion in secret and picked up the notion because he would have been on the lookout for any papers about fusion, of whatever sort.
But the western world took note when, late in 1956, Luis Alvarez  in Berkeley California saw a weird track in a bubble chamber photograph of atomic particles.
At first he thought that he had discovered a new particle, but then an astrophysicist friend of one of Alvarez's colleagues recognised that it had the characteristics of proton-deuteron fusion —pd fusion-catalysed by a muon.
Edward Teller then worked through the implications with Alvarez and, unaware of Frank and Sakharov's works, they reported ‘a short but exhilarating experience when we thought we had solved all of the fuel problems of mankind for the rest of time.
While everyone else had been trying to solve this problem by heating…to millions of degrees, we had apparently stumbled on the solution involving low temperatures instead.’
The announcement of the discovery was made by the Atomic Energy Commission in Washington and the same day, 28 December, the scientists gave a public presentation to their professional colleagues at the American Physical Society (APS) meeting in Monterey California.
The New York Times headlined ‘Atomic energy produced by New, Simpler Method’.
Atomic fission had been known to the general public for a decade; the awareness of fusion bombs was only four years old, so the possibility of a ‘third and revolutionary way to produce a nuclear reaction without uranium, as in the fission reaction, or million degree heat as in the fusion reaction’ generated a lot of excitement.
The scientists stressed that it was little more than a laboratory curiosity, the energy coming from the fusion of only a few hydrogen atoms and ‘was scarcely enough to register on highly sensitive measuring instruments’; although the process had no immediate commercial value it suggested ‘possible industrial uses of immeasurable importance’.
Alvarez was fully aware of the ‘bad news’ part of the equation-the muon's brief life which only allowed it to catalyse a handful of fusions before it perished.
He commented that if the process was to have practical importance ‘we would have to find a different catalysing particle which has properties similar to the muon but has a lifetime of at least ten or twenty minutes.’
J. David Jackson, a young Canadian theoretical physicist working at Princeton New Jersey, read about this discovery in his New York Times (plus ca change!) and within a month had made a pioneering and thorough evaluation of muon catalysed fusion, including studies of the ‘sticking probability’— namely the chance that the muon sticks to the emitted fusion fragments rather than being released to catalyse more fusion.
The emerging calculations implied that muon catalysed fusion would not release as much energy as was needed to create the muons; even if the muon were as stable as Alvarez's ‘ten or twenty minutes’ the sticking makes the useful production of energy out of reach.
This seemed to kill the idea, and with no obvious practical use it faded from mainstream interest.
The calculations by Frank and the Soviet theoreticians had dealt with the fusion of proton and deuterium or of two deuterium nuclei.
The deuterium nucleus, ‘deuteron’, contains a proton and a neutron; the heavier form of hydrogen called tritium has a nucleus (‘triton ‘) consisting of a single proton and two neutrons.
Tritium is nasty stuff, and ingesting it can be fatal.
Its main use is as the fuel in thermonuclear devices.
Recently people have begun to contemplate it as possible fuel in muon catalysed fusion and it is from this that current interest derives.
Jackson's 1957 paper had made the first study of muon catalysed fusion in mixtures of deuterium and tritium but had concluded that there too the energy return did not offer much practical hope.
The renaissance of this subject was caused by some Soviet experiments in the mid 60s, where V. P. Dzhelepov and colleagues noticed that muon catalysed fusion of two deuterium nuclei depended on the temperature.
This was surprising because temperatures that we are used to in the room involve the motions of atoms and their electrons, but the nuclear processes occur on energy scales utterly unlike these; it is the muon that provides the seed, not the temperature of the room.
Some experimentalists publicly stated that, in their opinion, the measurements were wrong!
S. S. Gershtein and his student E. A. Vesman then identified the missing ingredient in the existing theories.
The implantation of muons into materials forms not simply muonic atoms, but also complicated molecules whose nuclei are surrounded partly by muons and partly by electrons.
The electrons and muons in these molecules can take up several different configurations, each with their own characteristic energy.
Gershtein conjectured that there could be a ‘resonance’— that is, if the energy released during muon capture coincided with an energy level in one of the complex molecular states, this molecule could store the energy and the overall chance of interactions occurring would shoot up dramatically.
Vesman developed this and showed that he could explain the temperature dependence of muon + dd fusion if there is a rather loosely bound state in a complex molecular system involving three deuterons where the nuclei were encircled partly by electrons and partly by muons.
It took ten years of experiments in the Soviet Union to find the definitive evidence and so confirm Vesman's resonance theory.
Leonid I. Ponomarev then applied the resonance theory to the case of deuterium —tritium (‘dt ’) fusion and discovered that in a complicated molecule where two deuterons and one triton were encircled by two electrons and one muon the theory predicted that  the fusion rate leapt enormously relative to what had been expected from the earlier simple theories.
Ponomarev's calculation implied that there were 100 million to a billion fusions per second, that is 100 to 1000 in a muon's lifetime, if nothing else (such as sticking) intervened.
This was so important that he and some colleagues spent the next two years computing and checking their calculations until they were totally satisfied with the correctness of the result.
Ponomarev then announced it to the world at an International Conference on Nuclear Physics in Vancouver during August 1977.
In 1977 when Ponomarev announced this possibility, no experiments on muon catalysed dt fusion had been done.
Each dt fusion released 17 MeV of energy, and so as few as eight sequential dt fusions are sufficient to release more energy than is contained in a muon at rest (its ‘rest energy’ or mass).
The dt route suddenly appeared to be promising, though there is still a long way to go as it takes 20 to 40 times this to make a muon in a particle accelerator.
V. P. Dzhelepov, who had earlier discovered the temperature dependence of muon catalysed fusion and stimulated first Gershtein and Vesman and now Ponomarev, organised an experimental investigation at Dubna (a nuclear laboratory near Moscow).
A crucial test was on 4 June 1979, when a decisive experiment involving muon catalysed fusion in a pure deuterium-tritium mixture started.
Ponomarev was at home and awaited news all night long.
At last, at 5 a.m., he received a phone-call which said ‘Go to bed; we see the neutrons’(the evidence for fusion).
Soon thereafter the machine was shut down for renovation and the experiments ended.
But now interest in cold fusion was beginning to grow and experiments began in 1982 at Los Alamos New Mexico.
Among the participants was Steven Jones of Brigham Young University.
Steven Jones
In 1839 Brigham Young, the US religious leader, visited Britain and established a mission that contributed many converts to the Mormon church in America; among the many who emigrated at that time were Thomas and Mary Jones from Llanaber in Wales.
The Joneses became Mormon pioneers who, at the request of Brigham Young, founded the town of Mink Creek Idaho just over the border from Utah.
Four generations later, in March 1949, Steven Jones was born nearby in Pocatello, Idaho.
Today he is a professor of physics at Brigham Young University (BYU) in Provo Utah, is a world authority on the experimental investigations of muon catalysed fusion, and is a quietly  spoken contemplative man with a dry sense of humour who describes his fair slightly greying hair as ‘palladium blond’.
His interest in physics developed at high school in Washington State where his family moved in 1953.
For an exhibition he built a small electron accelerator with a cloud chamber as detector for the particles produced by the electron collisions.
‘It did not work,’ he told me with a laugh.
In 1967 he entered BYU as an undergraduate student of science.
At the end of the first year he went to France and Belgium on a two year mission for the Mormon Church, returning and graduating at BYU in 1973.
Having decided that he wanted to make a career in physics he enrolled at Vanderbilt University in Nashville Tennessee to study for his doctorate in experimental high energy particle physics.
His thesis project involved experiments that had been anticipated by his exhibition model from school: he spent many months during his studies taking part in experiments at the world's largest (and working!) electron accelerator in Stanford, California, receiving his PhD in 1978.
His background and adherence to his religious code of conduct has moulded Jones' personality such that he presents a calm exterior yet can fight very strongly for what he believes to be right.
He found the fast-paced cut and thrust of particle physics, with its aggressive competitiveness, not to his taste.
As a result, after graduation he set out into an area of research which was more leisurely paced, where there was time to reflect and find the answers without the pressures from perpetual competition.
He found his niche in Idaho at the National Engineering Laboratory and, soon after he arrived there, news of the Soviet interest in muon catalysed fusion reached the West.
Thus Jones became involved in its renaissance.
The scientists of Idaho were designing a gold-lined stainless steel container that could hold a mixture of deuterium and tritium gases at up to 3000 times atmospheric pressure and at temperatures ranging from hundreds of degrees centigrade to freezing and below.
The ‘bomb’ was sent 700 miles south to Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico where it was exposed to a beam of muons produced in the laboratory's particle accelerator.
They discovered that the rate of muon catalysed fusions grew as the temperature and pressure increased.
Near the end of 1982 they achieved the first interesting number of eight fusions per muon, where the energy released exceeds the rest energy of a muon.
After the Fleischmann and Pons press conference in 1989 Jones recalled this early achievement of ‘breakeven’ in muon catalysed fusion and joked that they had wondered whether to call a press conference in 1982 and announce that energy output from fusion had been accomplished.
That they did not was because they had achieved only conservation  of energy in the sense that the amount released exceeded that contained in the mass of a muon.
Self-sustaining fusion requires much more than that.
One must take account of the inefficiencies such as the fact that many muons fail to initiate fusions at all, they are produced in an accelerator that has to be kept running and only a fraction of the power input ends up in beams of muons and energy is expended in the motion of the neutrons and alpha particles produced in the fusion reactions.
To produce practical breakeven some 300–1000 fusions per muon will be needed (estimates of the number vary) in contrast to the eight.
By 1985 the fusion rate achieved in their experiments was improving, but still remained tantalisingly short of practical breakeven.
The way forward needs better detailed understanding of the ‘sticking’— the unwanted occasions where the muon attaches to the produced helium instead of initiating further fusions.
The experiments show that this seems to depend both on temperature and pressure, but other experiments show different results; when these matters are fully resolved then it may be possible to design experimental circumstances where optimal fusion occurs.
In 1985 Jones moved back to Provo to take up an appointment in the physics department at his Alma Mater, BYU.
He began in the autumn term and just before starting this new career he and Clinton van Sieclen wrote a paper on the theory of cold fusion, which concentrated on the muon catalysed fusion but had some prescient remarks about the possibility that fusion might be influenced by pressure and materials.
In this paper they coined the phrase ‘piezonuclear fusion’ from ‘piezo’meaning ‘pressure’.
It was published in March 1986, five months after Jones' arrival at BYU, and he decided to give a talk about it in the departmental weekly colloquium.
In the audience was Paul Palmer, a geophysicist, and it was from this that Jones became involved with solid state fusion and set out on the road that led to his interactions with Fleischmann and Pons.
Ironically, having entered muon catalysed fusion initially to get away from the frenzy of high energy particle physics, Jones was about to be catapulted into greater media attention and controversy than a career in particle physics was ever likely to have given him!
The Brigham Young experiments
Jones has given talks about muon catalysed fusion all over the USA and in Europe, so it is ironic that it was after speaking at his new  home institution, Brigham Young University, on 12 March 1986 that the seminal interaction occurred with Paul Palmer.
Palmer had become interested in the anomalous presence of helium-3 in water near thermal vents where superheated water gushes up from the Earth's mantle into the ocean depths.
He had already begun to wonder if fusion could be responsible for the helium production when he discovered the Soviet paper on helium in metals — the same paper that the Indians had read.
L. Khabarin, B. Mamyrin and V. Yudenich had discovered in 1978 that when they heated several metals to drive out helium trapped within, the gases were almost entirely helium-3 rather than helium-4; normally helium-4 is much more abundant, the helium-3 being the rare form.
Another surprise was that the helium-3 was not distributed uniformly throughout the metal, but appeared to be highly concentrated in small clusters as if it had been formed there.
They suggested that it had been created by fusion within the metal and that muons from cosmic radiation might have been the catalyst.
As a result of this, Palmer had in the back of his mind been thinking about muon catalysed fusion, and when the newly arrived Jones announced his talk, Palmer naturally took notice and went along to listen.
Palmer was inspired by what he heard, as his notebooks record:
Colloquium yesterday by Steve Jones set me thinking.
He talked of spontaneous fusion under pressure e.g. .
Well, when sedimentary material at a continental margin gets pulled down in a subduction zone at a plate, fusion could take place as the pressure increased.
I looked in a table of isotopes and found that the concentration of deuterium is 1.5 parts of 10 000 (parts of ordinary water).
If all this fused…it would give 2 million calories (of heat) per gram.
One thousand calories is enough to heat one gram of rock to 3000 degrees, so the deuterium in one gram of water could make two kilograms of rock red hot!
There is always some moisture around, many rocks containing more than a gram of water either crystallised or trapped in the spaces between the rock's atoms.
So if all the deuterium fused it could generate substantial heat in the Earth.
But does all of the deuterium fuse, or even any of it?
Palmer now thought about testing the idea, and this brought him back to his original thoughts about the helium.
Palmer believed that the helium-3 in the atmosphere comes from the fusion of two deuterium nuclei or ‘deuterons’.
Each deuteron  comprises a single proton bound to a single neutron, so a pair of deuterons is a total of two protons and two neutrons.
These fuse together and then break apart, releasing energy in the motion of the products.
One of the products is helium-3 which consists of the two protons bound to a single neutron; the spare neutron from the original gang of four particles speeds off.
When a proton and deuterium fuse they also give helium-3, accompanied not by a neutron this time but by radiant energy, a gamma ray.
So the basic fusion mechanisms of deuterium fusing either with another deuterium or with a proton give helium-3.
(See the figure on page 28.)
Palmer then notes ‘Measure the 3 He that outgasses from the lava.
It's simple!
These data must be available.’
The ratio of hydrogen to helium-3 that outgasses would allow computation of the fraction of spontaneous fusion per average water molecule, since hydrogen is in the pristine water whereas helium-3 is produced by any fusion.
His last remark that day mused on how it might happen: ‘Maybe the rock catalyses the reaction!’
Here was the germ of the idea that fusion may be aided by deuterium being compressed within solid materials.
He was excited enough to pursue it further.
His notes the next day were headlined ‘Catalysis of DT (deuterium-tritium) fusion in the Earth’.
He had talked with two colleagues about the possibility of fusion occurring when water is drawn down into the Earth's mantle at boundaries between tectonic plates.
They had found a paper in the literature describing the ratio of helium-3 and helium-4 in volcanic regions and were unknowingly getting close to the origins of Chatterjee's ideas in India.
Palmer's notes read: ‘It is exciting.
When gas comes from volcanic regions the ratio of 3 He to 4 He is eight to fifteen times greater than found in the atmosphere and crustal rock.’
This looked promising:3 He is produced by fusion, there is an excessive abundance of the substance in volcanic gases so maybe here was the evidence staring him in the face that fusion is taking place among the volcanic rocks.
However, the paper in which Palmer had found the news had an explanation of its own, namely that helium formed in the early Universe, and trapped inside a new born Earth four billion years ago, is being released in volcanic plumes.
Palmer recorded this fact:
[They]attribute this to primordial helium…being released…
I attribute it to the generation of helium-3 by the fusion of deuterium and tritium by something or other.
I would guess that the ‘something or other’ are negatively charged ions of fluorine, chlorine and maybe oxygen.
Maybe under pressure free electrons do it.
This was a guess.
There seemed no doubt that the helium came from deep in the Earth but ‘at this time the data do not indicate the cause…
Is it primordial or fusion generated ?’
There was the crucial question.
How could he test it?
‘Is there a mantle probe that is not contaminated with possible fusion-generated helium-3?
How about meteorites?
How about the Soviet deep wells?’
Palmer continued:
The best test might be a lab experiment, squeezing hydrogen and deuterium with catalysts in a diamond cell.
The trouble with this is that if it didn't work it might be because the conditions and catalysts are wrong.
How to proceed?
Search all leads and write a proposal?
Or do the work and write a patent and proposal?
Palmer discussed his ideas with Steve Jones and the pair wrote up memoranda.
Palmer's paper entitled ‘Experiments in Cold Fusion’ was dated 28 March 1986, and Jones wrote ‘Comments on Catalysed Fusion’on 1 April.
To plan the strategy Jones and Palmer got together on 7 April with Bart Czirr, a physicist from the University, and Johann Rafelski, a theorist who had been interested in Jones' work on piezonuclear fusion since 1985, and who was about to move from Cape Town to the University of Arizona.
(Rafelski later made theoretical input into the project and was a co-author on the paper.)
Palmer's guess, recorded in his notebooks of 13 March, was that the rocks had catalysed the fusion, and so at the 7 April meeting the group discussed various metals that could be prime candidates for the process.
These elements are common in minerals and Jones' notes of that day mention aluminium, nickel, lithium, platinum and, significantly,palladium ‘because it dissolves much hydrogen' .
They discussed ways of simulating the turmoil or ‘non-equilibrium’ conditions of the Earth and among these ideas they considered electric discharges.
It was this that later led them to build an electrochemical cell.
Already they were aware that if this turned out to be true, it would be revolutionary for geophysics and possibly for fusion research.
What had started with Jones as a search for muon catalysed fusion, then theory on piezonuclear fusion in his paper with van Sieclen and with Palmer as a puzzle about the gases emitting from volcanoes, was now turning into a search for entirely new routes to fusion.
Enthused by the tantalising clues that Palmer had unearthed they gradually realised that they could be onto something big here.
Now it happened that a few days earlier Jones had called up Lee R. Phillips, an attorney associated with Brigham Young University, in order to file a patent arising from his muon-fusion work.
Jones and Rafelski went to see Phillips following the discussion.
The patent for the muon work came to nothing, but then Rafelski suggested that, seeing as the attorney was present, they might as well get him to notarise the logbook in case the discussion should one day prove seminal.
Thus it was that Jones' notebooks are signed by Phillips with the statement
The catalysed fusion process outlined above was explained and formulated on or prior to 4/7/86 (April)
The US convention is to put the month before the day in dates.
In view of the subsequent disputes over who thought of what and when, this notarisation turned out to be most prescient.
Up to this time Jones had been concentrating on his muon work for which the DOE had been providing the funding.
The new ideas were an outgrowth from this, but were sufficiently novel that they couldn't be pursued within the terms of his research contract with the DOE.
The agency provided funds for a specifically approved line of research only, so Jones now decided to tell them of the new ideas.
Ryszard Gajewski, the administrator in charge of basic energy research, was enthusiastic: ‘The work was promising in the sense that it identified a new way of effecting nuclear fusion even though there was no strong indication that it might be practical.’
Jones and Palmer's BYU team were focused on geophysical questions and, in particular, the abundance of helium-3.
In the course of their literature search, on 16 April Palmer found a 1978 paper by the three Soviets — B. Mamyrin, L. Khabarin and V. Yudenich — in which they reported finding excessive amounts of helium-3 in various metals.
This encouraged the BUY group as it suggested that metals, in minerals such as rocks, could indeed play an essential role in catalysing the formation of helium, presumably through fusion.
What excited them even more was that, surprisingly, no one seemed to have followed this idea up (and indeed no one had, as B. Mamyrin confirmed in 1989).
On 22 May 1986 Palmer built their first electrochemical cell to try and force hydrogen into metals.
The idea here is similar to that used by Tanberg many years before, namely to fill a beaker with water and pass an electric current through it by connecting a battery to two terminals that are dipped into the liquid.
The negative terminal is called the cathode and the positive is the anode.
They added a small amount of hydrochloric acid as ‘electrolyte’ to carry the current, the oxygen from the water bubbles off at the anode and the hydrogen appears at the cathode.
Palmer made the cathode of copper and hoped  that migration of hydrogen to the cathode would result in some of the gas entering the metal simulating the passage of ocean water through minerals of rock.
As all water contains some ‘heavy hydrogen’(deuterium), where the single proton of the conventional hydrogen nucleus is accompanied by a neutron, there should be some deuterium produced at the cathode too.
Deuterium and hydrogen can fuse and so there was the chance that fusion might take place within the cathode of the cell.
If a proton and deuteron fuse, the products are helium-3 and a gamma ray, a burst of high energy light (no neutrons are produced here).
The helium-3 is what Palmer was trying to produce as it was the presence of this gas in the atmosphere that had stimulated his idea in the first place, but detecting it would not be easy.
So instead, Palmer looked for the gamma ray which would be produced in association and as such would be proof that the fusion process was occurring.
When gamma rays hit sodium iodide crystals, they deposit their energy, exciting the atoms which re-emit the energy as visible light.
This is then amplified by photomultiplier tubes and converted into electrical impulses.
So by turning gamma rays into electrical current a recorder can then measure the current and hence in effect the number of gammas.
This number in turn is a measure of the amount of fusions that have taken place.
They ran the cell all day, after which time a green crust had formed on the cathode.
Something was happening certainly, as the discoloration proved, but was there any fusion?
To answer this they brought the sodium iodide detector over to look for the tell-tale gamma rays.
First they measured the background — the number of gamma rays in the natural environment such as those produced by the concrete in the laboratory and compared it with the number of gamma rays when the electrochemical cell was present.
The rate appeared to go up very slightly when the cell was there, but by such a small amount that Palmer wrote in his logbook ‘You wouldn't bet on cold fusion on the basis of these results; but neither would you bet against it.’
The next day they tried again but this time they added ten per cent of heavy water to the liquid, thereby increasing the amount of deuterium — the fusion fuel.
However, they still had no luck as, here again, there was no clear signal.
But Palmer's log that day contains a significant remark: ‘Bart [Czirr]suggests that we use palladium as the metal cathode as it has the ability to let hydrogen diffuse through it at will.
It should work fine.’
With this new development, the Brigham Young University team were replaying Paneth and Peters' and Tanberg's tactics of the 1920s and  were moving towards the same road that, unknown to them, Fleischmann and Pons were following.
By increasing the amount of deuterium they were raising the chance that two deuterons fused together.
Half of the time this gives rise to tritium and a proton, and (almost) the rest of the time gives helium-3 and a neutron.
The neutron seemed to be the easiest of these to detect as proof that fusion had occurred and so Jones' colleagues Bart Czirr and Gary Jensen set about building a neutron detector, working on the project throughout the summer of 1986.
Meanwhile Palmer was experimenting with different electrolytes-acids and alkalis that carry the current through the cell — including sodium hydroxide, sulphuric acid and traces of other impurities in attempts to mimic the elemental make-up of seawater in the presence of minerals.
If fusion was at work, then something catalysed it, and until they knew precisely what the ‘something’ was they would have to try all combinations.
By September 1986 a crude neutron counter was working and recorded a slight increase in the amount of neutrons relative to the background when the cell was present.
But was it significant?
The amount being recorded was at the limit of the detector's sensitivity and the scientists felt that it didn't (yet) prove anything one way or the other.
The detector was recording neutrons all right, but they couldn't be sure if there were neutrons coming from the cell over and above those coming from natural sources, such as cosmic rays and general radioactive ‘dirt’ around the lab.
To settle this, they decided that they would have to improve the detector still more.
Bart Czirr and Gary Jensen worked on this for the next several months in between teaching duties as the new university year had now begun.
Jones meanwhile returned to his major field of muon catalysed fusion.
Building and testing the neutron spectrometer — capable of both counting neutrons and measuring their energies — took all of 1987 and much of 1988.
During the early part of 1988 the focus of research gradually moved back towards the piezonuclear fusion.
In January Jones, Palmer and a third colleague, Prof. Larry Rees, organised a student research topic around this and in March one student, Paul Dahl, made a presentation at the University about his work.
Around this time they sent away some samples from the metal cathodes for examination.
Although they had been unable so far to be sure whether or not either neutrons or gamma rays were being emitted from the cell, if fusion was indeed occurring then there should be evidence within the cathode — helium or tritium should be present, though in very small quantities.
These specimens were sent to Harmon Craig of University of California, San Diego, whose paper  on the helium abundance in volcanic atmospheres had stimulated some of Palmer's early thoughts.
The samples were later sent to Al Nier of the University of Minnesota, a leader in the field of helium isotope studies, but if there were any traces of helium-3 or tritium, they were too small to detect.
Energy applications for muon catalysed fusion, Jones' main research line up to that time, were appearing to be very remote and in August 1988 Jones decided to mount a vigorous effort to pursue the piezonuclear fusion.
The pace of events now quickened.
Rafelski visited Jones and on 24 August the various members of the fusion team met at the University.
They decided to make piezonuclear fusion their primary aim with detection of gamma rays (by a sodium iodide detector) and neutrons both on the menu.
In a tantalising coincidence of dates, Pons' and Fleischmann's proposal to the Department of Energy was date-stamped 23 August.
However, it was not sent out for review until mid-September, Jones receiving it on the 20th.
Rafelski was also consulted about their proposal.
In view of the subsequent interaction between the Brigham Young and Utah University groups, with accusations from some Utah administrators and from Pons that Jones had stolen ideas from them, it is important to ask where the BYU programme had reached by this stage.
It is clear that they had already formulated their ideas and been moving towards confirming them, but the definite proof still awaited the energy sensitive neutron spectrometer.
Jones' notes, which he has circulated to show the BYU version of events, do not directly address this issue.
First he notes that as the gamma ray detector was easiest to set up they started with that but, as before, obtained only inconclusive results.
The improved neutron detector was finally ready ‘later in the year’ and ‘within a few weeks’the results were positive enough that they formed the basis of the paper that was sent for publication on 23 March 1989, the paper that should have been sibling to that of Fleischmann and Pons.
The sequence of the research that led to the final publication is as follows.
The dates are relevant in that they merge in with meetings and other interactions between the BYU and the University of Utah team and with the developing programme of the latter group.
The definitive experiments began on New Year's Eve 1988.
These consisted of a series of individual runs lasting about a day apiece with and without cells forming ‘foreground’ and ‘background’data, respectively.
They then plotted the ratio of the number of neutrons seen in the two cases whose energies were consistent with that  expected for neutrons produced by dd fusion.
A ratio significantly larger than one would imply that an excess amount of neutrons was being detected when the cells were being operated, and hence be evidence for fusion taking place.
Figure 3.
The BYU spectrum showing the difference between the signal and the scaled background.
Note the tendency for an excess in the region indicated (channels 50 to 150), which is the energy region where neutrons coming from dd fusion should appear.
Three of the first five runs showed ratios between 1.5 and 2, implying excess neutrons of between 50 and 100 per cent.
Then in run number six, taken towards the end of January, the ratio hit 3.5; a very dramatic outburst of neutrons had been detected from the cell.
The neutron production rate appeared to rise after about an hour of electrolysis and then dropped dramatically after eight hours.
Jones showed these data to Fleischmann and Pons on 23 February.
He then   made several shorter runs, which thereby accumulated fewer neutrons and had correspondingly larger uncertainties.
These data were all to hand by early February and he prepared to speak about them at the APS (American Physical Society) meeting set for 1 May, sending in an abstract for the announcement of the talk.
In the remaining weeks he refined the calibration of the detector by exposing it to beams of neutrons of known energy, produced by a van de Graaff accelerator.
However, the publication of the abstract for his talk was claimed by some in the University of Utah as having brought the cold fusion work into the public domain and excusing their own subsequent announcement.
Figure 4.
Ratio of foreground rate to background rate for each run, in the 2.5 MeV-energy region of the spectrum.
Reproduced by courtesy of Nature.
CHEMISTS
In the phone directory there are the barest summaries of thousands of lives — a name, place of abode and the occasional glimpse of intrigue.
You may find a rare name whose five or six entries must be related, so giving insights into a family structure advertised by their addresses.
A number reveal more of themselves in the pages of Who's Who .
Martin Fleischmann is a Fellow of the Royal Society, Britain's premier scientific society.
His entry in Who's Who shows that he has won The Palladium (sic ) Medal of The Electrochemical Society and has been professor and head of the chemistry department at Southampton University since 1983.
These are the bare bones of a long and distinguished scientific career.
The family portrait reveals more: father of three children and approaching his ruby wedding with his wife Sheila, whom he married at the age of 23.
Out of five billion lives on the planet, the shape of one begins to emerge.
These are the surroundings of a man.
Insights into the actual personality are restricted to a few words under the heading ‘recreations’.
What these are and how they are written can tell much or little.
On the same page of Who's Who as Martin Fleischmann's entry there is a barrister whose recreations include ‘coping with multiple sclerosis’, a surgeon who enjoys ‘history, literature, art and indulging the senses’ and an energetic biochemist keen on ‘tennis, squash, sailing’.
Characters begin to appear.
Fleischmann's entry reports ‘music, cooking, skiing, walking’— nothing very remarkable here perhaps, but they helped to bring him to the most intense period of his scientific career.
Fleischmann was born in Karlsbad, Czechoslovakia, on 29 March 1927.
He attended primary school in Czechoslovakia, had a year off school in 1938–39 due to the troubles with the rise of fascism and the impending threat from Nazi Germany, and as life in Central Europe became increasingly precarious the Fleischmanns joined the growing band of refugees who settled in England.
Whatever effects these traumatic events may have had in forming his world view and  concerns about military adventurism, they can hardly have limited his intellectual growth.
He went to high school in Worthing, a pleasant town in the south-east of the country, where he was equally interested by science and arts.
‘I seriously thought of studying English literature — or becoming a cook!’ he told me with a laugh, ‘but then Imperial College London offered me a place in mathematics.’
Imperial College had a style that appealed to him.
At school the students were never given standard equipment and had to make things in the lab for themselves.
At Imperial College there was a similar emphasis.
‘We were taught to design an experiment of a size that was best suited to what you wanted to measure.’
In scientific experiments ‘scaling’ the apparatus optimally can sometimes affect one's ability to see an effect accurately or at all.
Fleischmann graduated in 1948 and began to study for his doctorate in chemistry which he obtained in 1951.
With his wife Sheila, whom he had married during his doctoral studies, the new Dr Fleischmann took up his first post at King's College, University of Durham, in north-east England.
In 1952 Durham University had two campuses, one in the ancient cathedral city of Durham nearly encircled by the River Wear and the other twelve miles away in the industrial city of Newcastle on the River Tyne.
It was at the latter that Fleischmann worked, initially as a fellow sponsored by Ia, the major chemical company, and then as a lecturer.
In 1957 the University of Durham split in two; the college at Newcastle became a university in its own right and today Durham and Newcastle are two separate institutions.
Fleischmann stayed at the new University of Newcastle and was promoted to ‘reader’, one rung below the top post of professor.
(In England the title Professor is usually reserved for one or two members of a department.
‘Reader’ corresponds to Full Professor in North American usage while Lecturer corresponds roughly to Associate Professor.)
He stayed at Newcastle for fifteen years.
By this time his international reputation was well established.
He had a gift for coming up with innovative ideas, suggesting links that others would never dream of, and testing them in a rough way to see if they were flawed or might instead lead somewhere.
If they appeared likely to do so he would then map out a strategy and advise students or co-workers on how to refine them and carry them through to fulfilment.
Thus it was no surprise that in 1967 he was chosen to become the Faraday Professor of Electrochemistry at the University of Southampton on the English south coast.
A colleague at Southampton, Dr Alan Bewick, described Fleischmann as ‘more innovative than any other electrochemist in the world’.
As can be the case with such creative minds, many of the ideas are regarded as crazy, but occasionally one is crazy enough  to lead to real breakthroughs.
Fleischmann has had some excellent ideas including methods to measure the surface diffraction of X-rays and he has made a detailed study of electrolysis in solutions that do not conduct electricity.
One of his discoveries was originally thought by some to be wrong as no one was able to replicate it for nearly two years; however, Fleischmann was eventually proved to be correct.
His stature increased and with such international renown it was natural for him to serve for two years, 1970–2, as the President of the International Society of Electrochemistry.
It was this reputation that attracted Stanley Pons to Southampton in 1975, and it was Pons' passion for skiing and his interest in cooking which overlapped so well with Fleischmann's and brought the two men close.
Stanley Pons
Bobby Stanley Pons was born on 8 February 1943 in Valdese North Carolina.
In the late nineteenth century his family helped to found this small town in the foothills of the Blue Ridge Mountains and by the time that Stanley Pons was growing up it had a thriving textile industry, his father owning several mills and employing over 1000 workers.
Stanley Pons was the eldest of three sons and had a scientific urge very early, experimenting with a chemistry set and doing minor mechanical work on his father's car.
He graduated from Valdese High School, studied chemistry at Wake-Forest University in North Carolina and then had to face a hard choice between his parents' wishes that he return to work in the family businesses and his own strong interest in chemistry.
Paul Gross, a chemistry professor at Wake-Forest, recognised Pons' ability and recommended that he go to graduate school.
Chemistry won and Pons enrolled at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor.
He was totally committed to his research, his hard work and enthusiasm moving him rapidly on.
Within two years he and his supervisor, Harry Mark, had completed a controversial piece of work pioneering a way to measure the spectra of chemical reactions on the surface of an electrode.
They submitted a paper for publication and the editor sent it for reviews before deciding whether to publish it ask for revisions or reject it.
As Prof. Mark recalled, ‘the reviewer said we were out of our minds but within two years people conceded that we were correct.’
The papers was published in 1966 but Pons left Ann Arbor, his PhD work uncompleted, lured back to the family businesses.
His father owned several mills, not just in North Carolina, and Stanley Pons worked in one of these in Louisiana where he met his present wife, Sheila, and then he became manager of a restaurant that the family owned in Palm Beach Florida.
Here he developed his interest in cooking, a passion later shared with Fleischmann.
Although he had terminated his PhD course and left active research he nonetheless kept abreast of developments in chemistry.
From 1967 to 1975 he worked in the family businesses and then decided to return and finish his PhD.
To start again from scratch in the USA would mean that it would be five years or more before he had any hope of receiving his doctorate, but in England, with his early research experience behind him, he could complete the degree sooner.
Friends of his knew of Fleischmann as an eminent electrochemist.
Moreover by then (1975) Fleischmann had become chair of the chemistry department at Southampton University.
Through this introduction Pons enrolled at Southampton and though formally supervised in his studies by Alan Bewick, Pons and Fleischmann soon became good friends, sharing their common interests in cooking and skiing.
By 1978 Pons had completed his thesis and received his PhD from Southampton.
He returned to North America, first lecturing at Oakland University in Rochester Michigan and then from 1980 to 1983 at the University of Alberta in Canada.
He was eager to make up for lost time and published prolifically.
There is no simple guide as to how many publications impresses committees the most.
Do too little and no one takes any notice; do a vast number of papers and you may be accused of superficiality or lack of care.
It was in this period that Fleischmann and he began to discuss projects, but they did not start working on any until Pons joined the University of Utah, moving to Salt Lake City in 1983.
The year 1983 was seminal for the English universities, under financial pressure from the Thatcher government to economise, and also for Martin Fleischmann.
In order to meet the financial cutbacks the universities were forced to encourage staff to retire early.
This was a popular option and, at 56, Fleischmann was in an ideal position for it.
He retired from the University but retained an honorary professorship.
It is ironical to contemplate what this economy measure could have meant to the University had the test-tube fusion work succeeded: of the billions of dollars in royalties, Southampton — where Pons had got his start in the field and where Fleischmann had spent over twenty years — would have had claim to none.
Now that Fleischmann was retired he had no teaching commitments and in consequence had much free time for research.
He started visiting Utah regularly —‘Stan's attitude to cooking is similar to mine  and, of course, the snow is good!’— staying in Pons' home sometimes for several weeks at a time.
Pons' list of publications shows no direct overlap with, or preparation for, the test-tube fusion programme.
Fleischmann by contrast had studied hydrogen and precious metals for several years.
They co-authored three papers together in 1985 — their first work together though not related to test-tube fusion.
In the following years the number of papers rose, culminating in sixteen in 1988 (during which Pons wrote 36 papers but still none relating to test-tube fusion).
It is interesting that, according to media reports, their idea to pursue test-tube fusion goes back to 1985, the year that they first did published research together.
To produce so many papers jointly, plus scores more separately, during 1985 through 1988 can have left little time for intensive work on the test-tube fusion project.’
An idea is born
For most of us the mental picture of an experiment goes back to school laboratories.
Clean the test tube, add the right amount of chemical according to the textbook instructions, heat it up, watch the colour change on the litmus paper, a straightforward sequence of steps that has been performed by thousands before us and will be repeated by as many after.
Occasionally the unexpected happens.
I still remember the dirty liquid in my school test tube suddenly turning a brilliant turquoise, then shocking pink and then back to grey all in the space of a few seconds.
This wasn't ‘supposed’ to happen; it was much more exciting than what the textbook had promised!
Unsuccessfully I tried to repeat it and asked the teacher for an explanation.
It was clear that he didn't know, nor did he seem much to care; ‘Oh it's probably something or other.
Now stop wasting time and get on with what you're supposed to be doing.’
It was definitely ‘something or other’, but what?
The excitement of delving into the unknown was mine for the first time that day.
I suppose that some trace of a previously used chemical was still in the tube which had not been properly cleaned.
It was a sensation to me, a novice, but the experienced experimentalist learns the tricks of the trade, knows what mistakes to avoid and when weird things happen tries to investigate or to file them away in the memory — just in case.
Every professional experimental researcher, in whatever field, has their own private list of fluky data, things that didn't happen quite in accord with expectations and are likely to be due to uncontrolled  circumstances — such as the dirty test tube — rather than signalling a major discovery.
The real world is more quirky than the idealised laboratory of the school textbooks.
Charged particles from outer space (cosmic rays) are bombarding us all of the time and occasionally cause the electronics in the sophisticated detector circuits to misfire.
Everything is radioactive.
We are all emitting gamma rays as a result of radioactive decays of potassium nuclei within our bodies.
Invisible to the eye, these rays can be picked up by sensitive custom-built detectors.
If not accounted for they could contaminate a specimen under study or be mistaken as an important signal of something happening within the experimental investigation, whereas they are actually part of the ‘noise’— the ‘background’.
‘Background’ is the bane of experimentalists' lives.
If not correctly understood it can be the Achilles' heel of a complicated chain of investigations.
Unexpected responses of the detectors may be background — not every burglar alarm that sounds signals a break-in; ‘something else’ triggered it.
However it may be a genuine ‘signal’ as when an intruder trips the alarm.
Experience teaches.a lot as to whether or not a phenomenon is likely to be a genuine signal or background noise, but there is still a twilight zone, the tantalising occurrences which are probably noise but might possibly be signal.
Such things deserve a second look.
The genuine effects are reproducible; the quirky — such as UFO sightings — are filed away but rarely prove significant for science.
Unless, that is, two groups happen to tell each other and it turns out that both have had the same or similar experiences.
That in essence is what started Pons and Fleischmann on their quest for test-tube fusion.
But misunderstanding the ‘background’ plagued them and many other of the experimenters trying to replicate their work.
Both Fleischmann and Pons are electrochemists, experts at studying the effects of electric currents passing through liquid conductors (an ‘electrolyte’), the most familiar example being electroplating.
In electrolysis you attach a battery to two metal electrodes which are dipped into a sodium chloride solution.
Four volts of electricity will split the sodium chloride into its constituent sodium and chlorine atoms, whereas a temperature of 40 000 degrees would be required to do it by heat alone.
Fleischmann and Pons in their lectures liked to use this example to present electrochemistry as ‘high energy chemistry’.
The effect of undirected heat energy of 40 000 degrees being achieved by the directed use of a mere 4 volts illustrates the ‘efficiency’ of the technique; they also realised that electrochemistry can induce the effects of high pressures-high temperature and pressure being two of the conditions for achieving fusion.
Figure 5.
Electrolysis cell and water bath.
A battery is connected to the anode and cathode via leads A and C respectively.
The anode is a coil of platinum wire surrounding the cathode rod at the base of C. G is a hole in the seal to let out gases.
The cell is filled with heavy water (shown as dots) and is surrounded by a bath of ordinary water to maintain constant temperature.
If fusion occurs inside the cathode, at F, a neutron may be emitted which enters the water bath, slows and is captured at γ, emitting a gamma ray of energy 2.2 MeV.
When you electrolyse water it splits into its constituent hydrogen and oxygen: positively charged hydrogen ions are attracted to the negatively charged terminal, the cathode , where they react to form hydrogen gas, and the oxygen forms at the positive terminal, the anode .
They knew that palladium has a natural affinity for hydrogen and that if palladium is used as the cathode the hydrogen ions  initially migrate into it; as more and more hydrogen goes in so it gets under ever greater pressures.
Martin Fleischmann told me that he had always been puzzled by the behaviour of hydrogen in palladium.
Some earlier research in 1972 had led him to believe that very high pressures could be attained, and also that the hydrogen ions behaved as free in the palladium crystal lattice, moving around and probably bumping into one another.
He also knew about work in the USA and USSR from the mid 1970s on metallic hydrogen.
Some theorists believe that hydrogen becomes a metallic solid where its electrons freely flow when compressed by two or three million atmospheres pressure; there have been speculations that metallic hydrogen could be useful as a fusion fuel.
The gravity of Jupiter crushes its hydrogen so much that pressures of this magnitude might occur at the centre of the planet, forming metallic hydrogen which undergoes fusion thereby generating heat within it.
Here we see some similarity, though remote, with the motivations of Palmer and Jones.
There are other, less well publicised reasons for interest in attempts to make metallic hydrogen and in the hydrogen-palladium experiments which bear on some subsequent responses to Fleischmann and Pons' work.
Metallic hydrogen could have applications as a room temperature superconductor, and could be a powerful fuel useful in nuclear devices and as an explosive.
Fleischmann has been particularly worried about possible strategic implications of their research, believing that much of the negative reactions to it are prejudiced by this and that national security interests have orchestrated attempts to suppress or trash their work.
Fleischmann told me more about the background to his work with Pons.
‘There was this idea about metallic hydrogen, but also the idea that hydrogen or deuterium might cluster and fuse within the palladium had been in the back of my mind for some time.
One has many ideas all one's life and there are many points where they can come together cleanly enough to design an experiment.
Then you need an area of laboratory in which to do the work.
I had always intended to do it at some stage.’
One of the problems facing him was that one cannot simply set up any experiment in a public building; health and safety regulations have to be obeyed.
The exact wording of these regulations varies from place to place and, having retired from Southampton, he was freer to do ‘way out research’.
Setting up the experiment in Utah and keeping it secret turned out to be easier than in Britain.
‘I could show you exactly where we were when we first discussed it,’ he continued.
‘We were hiking in Milcreek Canyon in Utah.
If I had been on my own I probably would not have done it.’
In forcing deuterium into the palladium host, the energy of the system changes.
Fleischmann and Pons estimated that the chemical potential of the deuterium could be raised by 0.8 eV through application of electrical potentials to the palladium cathode.
They estimated the sort of pressures that would be required to achieve such conditions by compression and the answer astonished them.
Their calculations came up with the number of a thousand trillion trillion times atmospheric, 1027, a number larger than the number of atoms in your body.
What had started out as a quest for metallic hydrogen now became a serious hunt for fusion.
Temperature — an intense degree of heat — was the route that the big machines, the hot fusion tokamaks, had been following in their attempt to induce the nuclei to meet; Fleischmann and Pons believed that they had stumbled on another way — intense pressures provided by the natural make-up of solid palladium.
If nature has indeed provided a miracle key to solve every problem, this certainly looked promising.
Martin Fleischmann told me how over a whiskey in Pons' kitchen he remarked, ‘It's a billion to one chance, shall we do it?’ and Pons replied, ‘Let's have a go.’
First attempts
Fleischmann and Pons started their experiments with the hope that fusion of deuterium —‘dd fusion’— would occur when deuterium ions were forced into palladium by electrolysis.
They were in effect about to repeat the experiments that had been done, unknown to them, by Tanberg in Sweden 50 years earlier, passing electrical current through a solution of heavy water, splitting it into its constituent oxygen and deuterium.
But to make the current flow you first add a little acid or alkali (electrolyte).
Some people who later tried to replicate the Fleischmann and Pons experiment — before full details were circulated thought that the specific form of electrolyte was not important and guessed its form incorrectly.
We do not know even today whether or not this is the case, but Pons certainly felt very strongly that it should be lithium deuteroxide, LiOD.
Having deuterium in the electrolyte clearly was a useful strategy; as for the lithium, Fleischmann said to me: ‘There are a lot of reasons for choosing this.
The surface of the palladium is better preserved, allowing the deuterium to infuse better; it is easy to prepare clean solutions; and if I look you straight in the eye and say ‘If you think of any nuclear phenomena what would you choose’— well, it is obvious isn't it?’
This was said to me a year after the announcement at the press conference when Fleischmann and Pons still did not know what  caused the heat.
Fleischmann was alluding to the strategic importance of lithium-6, which is present as 7.5 per cent of all naturally occurring lithium and is an important ingredient in thermonuclear weapons as it can be cleft by neutrons to make tritium, the essential fuel, and can fuse with deuterium to make helium-4, releasing energy in the form of gamma rays without accompanying neutrons.
Wanting to keep their plans secret, and convinced that ‘no one would fund such a crazy idea’, they paid for the initial experiments out of their own pockets.
They began with some exploratory tests to see what effects if any were there to be measured and to help design an optimal experiment-to scale it properly, in the idiom that Fleischmann uses.
The project suddenly became interesting when they were forcing deuterium in to a 1 cm 3 block of palladium (‘charging the palladium’) by means of a 1.5 amp electrical current.
It took considerable time to charge the palladium fully and Fleischmann was in Britain when, one night, Pons' son was sent to the laboratory to reduce the current.
Whether he carried out the instructions correctly or not we do not know, but the next morning the block had disappeared, vaporised, and part of the fume cupboard housing the experiment and the floor nearby had been destroyed.
This excited them — maybe the idea was right after all-and also made them nervous, both for their awn safety and for what might happen if the news leaked out.
Pons called Fleischmann who said ‘We had better not talk about this on the phone,’ already acutely aware of where this might lead.
Was this a nuclear explosion or a mundane one caused by a build-up of pressure as the deuterium flowed into the palladium and filled some cavity within?
A 1 cm 3 block of cast palladium will almost invariably have some ‘voids’ inside.
Another suggestion was that the electrolysis caused the liquid level to drop as more of the liquid turned into gas; this exposed the top of the palladium above the liquid surface and gas began to leak out, releasing in a rush the considerable energy that had been stored with the trapped deuterium, sending the temperature up above the melting point (1554 degrees Celsius) or even boiling at 3000 degrees.
I asked Fleischmann what was known about this and he laughed as he said ‘Not enough!’
Early after the press conference Fleischmann and Pons advertised the explosion of their palladium block as prima facie evidence for fusion, but a year later Martin Fleischmann presented it to me in a more detached way.
‘That experiment was an indication that we should continue.
If you had that sort of phenomenon occur you have to take note of it.
A nuclear explosion is what it could have been, but you do not know that that is what it was .’
Naturally this event made a big impression on them.
In their paper on test-tube fusion they wrote of it ‘WARNING.
IGNITION!’ while in talks they stressed ‘Under no circumstances use large current densities in big samples and subject to large sudden thermal shocks.’
Whatever the real cause for the explosion of the block in Pons' laboratory may have been, the event focused their expectations and also urged increased caution and security.
The dangers of creating a miniature nuclear device worried them and also increased their concerns for safety.
They decided to scale down the experiment and worked with a thinner piece of palladium, an 8 cm × 8 cm × 0.2 cm sheet rolled into a cylindrical shape, and also lowered the current to less than 0.2 amps instead of the 1.5 amp current that blew up the block.
The basic idea was to keep a careful accounting of the power input and output, including all the known chemical reactions that will transfer electrical energy into heat, and then see if the sums balance or whether, as they hoped, ‘excess’ power was being produced by ‘fusion’reactions in the cell.
At any particular moment the books might not appear to balance (for example electrical energy input could be stored to be released as heat later, or energy taken up while forcing the deuterium into the palladium may be returned later U the deuterium leaks out and recombines in the atmosphere), so the relevant question was whether there was a net excess output of energy over a long period of time.
The essential principles are as follows (a more detailed discussion of some of their results follows in the appendix ‘Excess Heat in Calorimetry’ on page 364).
You put a certain amount of power into the cell.
If the cell was sealed off and no gases escaped then all of the power would go into heating the electrolyte.
You measure the temperature rise and from this determine how much power has entered (to make this conversion it is necessary first to have calibrated the cell by, for example, placing a small resistance heater in the cell, putting in known amounts of power, measuring the temperature rise and determining the relationship between temperature and power).
Fleischmann and Pons spent many days pre-saturating the palladium with deuterium.
They then began to take measurements to see if any heat was being generated, suggestive of fusion occurring.
For nearly two weeks they used very low currents, about 0.05 amps, and discovered that the cell cooled down more than expected.
This was because the deuterium was continuing to be dissolved into the palladium and this takes energy out of the surroundings, acting like a refrigerator.
After this time they doubled the amount of current and found that the energy books almost balanced.
After checking this balancing they increased the current further to three times the starting  value, and discovered an excess heat output of ten per cent over and above what they could account for going in.
Finally they upped the current to 0.2 amps for another two weeks and found that the heat excess rose to 25 per cent.
If this heat excess was due to fusion, then there should also be some proof in the form of electromagnetic or nuclear radiation, such as the production of neutrons.
They noticed that background radiation in the laboratory appeared to rise by up to 50 per cent while the experiment was running but they had no means of knowing whether or not this had anything to do with the experiment as the natural background radiation from cosmic rays can vary substantially during long time periods.
But already one thing was clear: the heat could not simply be due to deuterium dd fusion as this process should produce neutrons at a rate a billion times larger than they were recording.
This would have triggered their detectors dramatically, yet all they saw was a small increase in the background level of radiation.
Had they seen billions of neutrons as well as the heat then they would have known for sure that fusion was occurring; and may already have begun to worry about their health from prolonged exposure.
So they were left with a tantalising hint: heat, yes; neutrons, no.
This decided them that more work was needed to verify whether there was indeed fusion, and so they began to plan out a detailed strategy and designed an experiment —‘scaling it’ in the sense that Fleischmann had learned in his days at Imperial College.
At this stage they were in a similar position to Jones in the sense that both groups had suggestive hints of phenomena whose confirmation would require more sophisticated detailed experiments.
Unfortunately at this point Martin Fleischmann entered hospital for a serious operation which interrupted the project for almost a year.
It was not until 1988 that they set out a detailed strategy for carrying out a series of experiments to confirm their preliminary observations that nuclear fusion may be possible at room temperature inside metals.
This involved varying the experimental conditions in all possible sensible ways, trying out different amounts of electrical currents, and changing materials, the shapes and sizes of electrodes, and the electrolytes, studying how the heat production varied with the mean temperature of the cell.
In effect, they wanted to vary the experimental conditions enough to clarify the source of the heat and confirm if it was fusion.
If this proved successful then they would, in the longer term, extend the experiments to find out what conditions were best for building controlled fusion reactors.
They decided to use palladium rods, a few centimetres long, with diameters ranging from 1 mm up to 20 mm.
They estimated that it would take them four months to build the cells, the measuring  equipment and constant temperature baths.
It takes longer to saturate large rods with deuterium than to saturate the smaller ones; the latter took up to a fortnight and they estimated that the largest rods could take up to a year.
As a result of all this they realised that to complete the measurements on the range of electrodes and to see how they depend on the other experimental conditions would take nearly three years.
This had now become a major programme that would need external funding.
They drew up a detailed proposal and submitted it to the Basic Energy Research Programme of the DOE (Department of Energy) in Washington DC, which has it dated ‘23 August’.
The DOE sent it out to referees for opinions, one of whom was Steven Jones, who received it on 20 September.
The days of innocence were nearly over.
Referees of DOE proposals usually remain anonymous, and Jones could have done so had he wished.
However, as his work was so similar and geographically near by, he suggested to the DOE that there should be contact and openly advertised his presence.
The work had already begun when, late in the year, Pons first learned about Jones.
It may help us to understand some of the subsequent developments better if first we have an impression of what was going on in the University of Utah chemistry department in 1988, up to and around the time of the interaction with Jones.
Pons was chairman of the chemistry department, and, as noted earlier, his name appeared as co-author on over 30 papers in the first eight months of 1988 alone.
This is an astonishing output from a single individual if detailed concentrated effort was put into all of them.
His name also appeared on over 100 papers during the five years when the fusion experiments were reportedly in process.
In fact, the fusion experimental programme was sporadic until 1988: the main experimental fusion programme began in the latter part of that year.
In October Pons assigned this as a project to his research student, Marvin Hawkins.
By November Hawkins was working on it seriously, operating the cells, taking readings with Pons showing supervisory interest.
Martin Fleischmann came to Utah at the turn of the year and, during January in particular, put a lot of effort into the experiments.
These experiments involved thin rods of palladium and formed the bulk of the data in the paper of March 1989.
Pons was much occupied as chair of the chemistry department and the detailed day to day work with the fusion cells was carried out by Hawkins and Fleischmann.
THE DISPUTE
How far had Jones and also Fleischmann and Pons reached in their researches by late 1988?
Jones had been doing research funded by the US Department of Energy (DOE) since May 1986, had hints of neutrons and by September 1988 was in the process of starting to use a neutron detector sensitive enough to measure their energies and determine whether indeed they came from fusion.
So his results were preliminary but it would only take a few weeks' work, using the neutron spectrometer, to know for sure.
It was on the last day of 1988 that he began the experiments whose data were to appear in the published paper.
By the beginning of February 1989 he had enough to convince him that it was real, and he agreed to go public by talking about it at the American Physical Society meeting in Baltimore the following May.
Fleischmann and Pons had done very different things.
They had a vaporised block that led them to an idée fixe about test-tube fusion being real.
Their observations that nuclear fusion may be possible inside metals at room temperature were also only preliminary, as were those of Jones: they had 25 per cent heat imbalance at best, were at the start of their real research and estimated that a full three years would be needed to do what was necessary.
This included having to study rod sizes, materials and changes in the amounts of electrical current to see how the effect depended on these, which was all for the future.
Jones had already used a variety of materials, one of which was palladium, and was preparing to obtain the final proof with his detector that he had just spent two years building.
So both groups had come a similar distance in the sense of having the indications that there was something interesting to pursue further.
The essential difference is that Jones was nearer to the finishing line, as his route was different to that of the chemists.
Jones had tried various materials and what he now sought was rather clearly defined — are there neutrons of a specific energy or  not?— and his apparatus was almost completed and ready to go; the chemists by contrast had to do a broader range of experiments as their problem was more subtle — is there fusion and if so by what process?— and the necessary materials and apparatus had yet to be assembled.
That was the situation when the DOE sent Fleischmann and Pons' application to referees, including Jones, for opinions.
The theoretical underpinnings of the proposal were weak.
Practical fusion needs a combination of high temperature — to hurl the nuclei together against their electrical repulsion — and/or pressure, so that there is a greater density of them and so the chances of bumping rather than missing are increased.
Traditionally it has been believed that both are needed, as in the Sun for example where fifteen million degrees and a central density more than 100 times that of water are only just enough, or high pressures and temperatures exceeding 100 million degrees aimed for in the hot fusion programmes.
The chemists believed it would be possible at room temperatures because the electrolysis forced the hydrogen and deuterium in the palladium creating conditions that Fleischmann and Pons regarded as equivalent to 1027 times atmospheric pressure.
But this figure can mislead, as was pointed out by many people as soon as the Fleischmann and Pons paper saw the light of day, and by some, at least, of those who had sight of their DOE application.
The true pressures are a few thousand times atmospheric, which may sound a lot but is quite normal in solids and will not give you any fusion benefits on its own.
Secondly, and this was not so widely appreciated, the deuterium nuclei are farther apart in the palladium than in the heavy water, and being further apart are even less likely to fuse when in the palladium than in the heavy water!
As heavy water does not spontaneously give off heat from its deuterium fusing, so is it even less likely that it would when inside palladium.
The pressure might help but not enough to make commercial fusion, not at the level to create measurable heat.
The fusion rate in D 2  O is calculated to be at an unmeasurably slow rate of 10 -65 per pair per second at room temperature.
However matter itself is predicted to be intrinsically unstable on such a scale: the quantum theory implies that evaporation of matter through gravitational interaction with black holes would occur at a rate of around 10 -50 per second, a thousand trillion times faster than spontaneous fusion.
It was from comparing numbers such as these that the majority of scientists suspected that watts of power from test-tube fusion was an impossibility.
Nonetheless, it is experiment that decides, not theory, and Jones recommended to the DOE that the chemists' proposal be funded despite his unresolved reservations.
One of the referees was  sufficiently negative about the proposal that Fleischmann, at least, was nervous about the idea.
Jones also suggested to Ryszard Gajewski, the administrator of the Advanced Energy Program at the DOE, that he inform Fleischmann and Pons that the BYU group had been doing similar work on piezonuclear fusion since 1986 and that cooperation between the two universities, which are only some 50 miles apart, would be a great benefit.
As Jones pointed out, his neutron detection was the missing ingredient in the Fleischmann and Pons proposal which was almost exclusively on their particular expertise, namely, measuring the heat output.
Gajewski passed this on to Pons who phoned Jones in December to discuss the matter.
There were several subsequent contacts, with Pons seeking written information about the Brigham Young University neutron spectrometer.
Jones mailed all the details to Pons as the detector was now working and beginning to gather the data that would be the basis of the Brigham Young University-Rafelski paper.
Jones even offered to let Pons use the neutron spectrometer for himself and remarked ‘Pons seemed pleased with the offer.’
At least, that is how Jones remembers it.
Pons’ version is somewhat different in colour.
Pons disagreed about the neutron detector.
Whereas Jones believed that Pons was pleased with the offer, Pons reportedly said ‘We never needed Jones’ spectrometer, never wanted it.
Pons agreed that Jones originally argued with the theoretical aspects of their proposal but later became convinced by them and only then offered cooperation.
‘Jones called up.
Said ‘tell me more’, then revealed himself as the reviewer of the DOE proposal and only later suggested that we collaborate…
In all my scientific life I have never seen [such]a situation.’
Fleischmann told me that in his opinion Jones should have declared his interest to Gajewski more explicitly, not merely that he was interested in the problem, and should have informed Gajewski of his results at that time so that there would be no ambiguity about claims for priority.
This is where some of the conflict began.
Jones' best data did not exist until 1989; by the time that he met with the two chemists he had measured ‘run number 6’(see Figure 4, page 69) which is shown in his paper as the most dramatic signal and which proved to the BYU team's satisfaction that they were right.
However, in September when he first saw the chemists' proposal the ‘good’ data did not yet exist, indeed, did not exist until early in the new year.
It is in this sense that the criticism in the above paragraph has its substance.
I will assess this more in the conclusions, by which time the evolving events will have enabled us to understand the pressures on the  participants better.
However, although one has some sympathy with Fleischmann's point, and with hindsight might wish that more explicit details had been known, in reality this was not so clear cut.
First, at the time Jones had no idea what a storm was going to erupt about test-tube fusion and in notifying the DOE of his possible conflict of interest he was already being exceedingly conscientious and could, for example, have chosen instead to have remained an anonymous reviewer as far as the chemists were concerned.
Second, Jones' experiment was at the stage where its results were moving  forward the fastest.
Could Jones have been urged into ‘fast forward’ mode in a desire to beat the chemists?
I asked Jones this and he replied ‘Hardly.
We were going as fast as we could.’
Indeed, Jones took time out in October 1988 to visit Europe, speaking at a meeting on muon catalysed fusion and having a brief vacation with his wife, hardly the behaviour expected of someone who is frenziedly responding to the sudden emergence on the scene of competition.
Initially the communications between Jones and Pons were by telephone and mail; a formal meeting did not take place until February 1989.
In the meantime a significant development took place.
In December 1988 the American Physical Society (APS) had invited Jones to talk about muon catalysed fusion at their May 1989 meeting.
On 2 February 1989 Jones sent in to the APS an abstract of his intended talk which stated in part‘We have accumulated considerable evidence for a new form of cold nuclear fusion which occurs when hydrogen isotopes are loaded into various materials, notably crystalline solids (without muons )’(my italics).
These sudden developments in a period of five weeks when Pons and Jones had been having discussions, culminating in the above public claim that could have influenced patent priorities, fuelled the suspicion in the University of Utah camp that they had been upstaged.
How had Fleischmann and Pons' programme been progressing since September?
In the autumn of 1988 Pons had set his graduate student, Marvin Hawkins, the task of measuring heat produced in cells containing small cylindrical rods of palladium, 1 mm, 2 mm and 4 mm in diameter and 10 cm in length.
Hawkins collaborated with Fleischmann during the latter's visits to Utah and they planned to extend the data samples to include rods of 8 mm up to 2 cm diameter.
At this stage Pons was involved primarily with his job as departmental chairman and was following progress relatively remotely; Fleischmann and Hawkins were making the detailed investigations.
Charging up the smallest rod with deuterium took only two days, the 2 mm rod took a week and the 4 mm one took a month; an 8 mm rod took several months to charge before any detailed experimental  measurements could begin.
In each case, after charging, measurements of heat had to be made for several hundreds of hours and repeated at several different levels of current, between 0.05 and 1.5 amps corresponding to a current entering each square centimetre of surface of the rods of 8 and 64 mA. (mA means a milliamp or thousandth of an amp, not a million amps as incorrectly stated in one newspaper.)
They also wanted some data at higher current densities,, but were nervous that increasing the amount of current could lead to another disaster — the vaporised palladium block still haunted Fleischmann — so they decided to achieve this by keeping the total currents approximately unchanged but using rods that were only 1.25 cm long instead of 10 cm, the effect being to increase the current density eightfold.
Given the long times required to charge the larger rods, you can see that after getting a first qualitative result with the smallest rods within a few weeks, a proper quantitative analysis to test the variation with rod diameter and current, and so establish the nature of the effect would take a long time.
When the news of Jones' work first came to Pons' attention late in 1988, the 4 mm diameter rod was not yet charged and ready for test, nor were all rods giving heat — the chemists referred to these rods as being ‘dead’.
In particular no heat came from 8 mm rods, one of which they started charging at Christmas and which was still being charged in March.
What is more, at this stage they were concentrating on what they knew best, namely the heat measurements, and were giving little attention to nuclear effects, though some search for tritium — which can be done by a chemical process — was made on a 1 mm rod that produced heat.
This was interesting; some tritium was occurring naturally in the heavy water and when they measured the tritium levels after the experiment had been running for some hours they found that the tritium level had dropped .
They decided that this was because tritium from the heavy water had fused with deuterium in the rods.
No measurements of neutrons or other signs of nuclear processes had been started.
Indeed, even by February 1989 when the first meetings with Jones took place, where Jones was claiming to see neutrons — a sure sign of fusion — Fleischmann and Pons were seeing only heat.
Fusion was the word that would excite the world following the press conference, and although they were convinced from their heat data and also from their vaporised palladium block that fusion was occurring, they would have to see neutrons to convince the scientific community of it.
The problem was that as late as February 1989 they had no suitable neutron detector to use.
BYU left hand column; University of Utah right hand column
On 14 February, Fleischmann had visited Harwell laboratory in England where he has a consultancy.
Harwell is one of the world's leading nuclear laboratories and, as such, owned state of the art neutron equipment combined with high level expertise in electrochemistry.
He asked to speak confidentially with Ron Bullough, the Chief Scientist of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) whose office is at Harwell, on the grounds that he (Fleischmann) had something ‘very important that might require a major decision’.
Fleischmann told him that they were seeing heat coming from their cell in amounts that could only be understood if nuclear fusion was happening.
His belief that it was fusion was due primarily to the heat, but he also told Bullough that since October there was some evidence in Utah that neutrons were being produced too.
(It is not clear if this refers to his own experiment or to the fact that Jones had by then made his work known to them.)
Fleischmann then showed a proposal that he and Pons had submitted to the Department of Energy (DOE) in Washington requesting financial support for them to carry through a definitive series of experiments over a period of three years.
The DOE had sent this out to five referees for opinion.
Fleischmann said that one of the referees had said that it was nonsense and that the reaction of this referee had made him nervous about the validity of their experiment.
Nonetheless he believed that they were seeing genuine effects that were inexplicable unless fusion were taking place.
What Fleischmann and Pons needed was their own proof of the neutrons and Harwell was well equipped with the necessary measuring instruments.
Fleischmann discussed radiation with them, aware that if fusion was indeed happening in the cell there could be significant health risks although he did seem to be feeling all right.
He then bought a health physics monitor to help his neutron detection and returned to Utah with it the next day, 15 February.
So in the last half of February Fleischmann and Pons had a detector with which they could count neutrons.
By this stage they had a 4 mm rod that was running with a 0.8 amp current.
As the efficiency of the detector was very low (it was small and, they estimated, only recorded less than one in a million of any neutrons emitted by the cell), they counted neutrons at the cell for 50 hours.
Then they counted neutrons 50 metres away from the cell to get an estimate of the background level due to neutrons coming from cosmic rays or the natural environment of the laboratory.
They compared the readings taken remotely with those at the cell and found that the rate at the cell was three times that of the background.
This they decided was evidence for neutrons coming from the cell.
When this became general knowledge later, there was general unease at this way of measuring the background; the neutron flux 50 metres away from the cell measured for 50 hours could be very different than that at the cell site, even if the cell had been absent, measured for a different 50 hours.
The cosmic ray flux varies and the different materials around the laboratory can produce very different amounts of background neutrons from one place to another.
To get a realistic background measurement required, at least, taking readings at the cell site when the cell was not operating.
A problem was that they did not have the time to do this; cells were being charged up and time was running out, every spare moment being needed for preparing and measuring active cells.
There is a natural time scale to the experiment, charging the cells, inducing the phenomenon for hundreds of hours and monitoring at different currents; you cannot hurry science.
To do everything properly would take time — time that they no longer had.
They did this over two weeks, but there was no means of knowing the energies of the neutrons, the essential information that would tell them whether they were from the fusion of deuterium and be the final proof.
Fleischmann and Pons worried that the numbers of neutrons that they appeared to be seeing were billions less than should have been the case if their heat data were correct and due to fusion.
Each watt of power from fusion should release a thousand billion neutrons.
There was already conflict behind the scenes.
Earlier in February, while Fleischmann was away in Britain getting the health monitor from Harwell, the University of Utah attorney, Norm Brown, had spoken to the Brigham Young University attorney Lee Phillips and suggested that Jones had pirated ideas from his sight of the proposal that Fleischmann and Pons had sent to the DOE.
This accusation (which followed after the submission of Jones' abstract to the APS on 2 February) was reported to Jones who in turn passed it on to the DOE funding agent Ryszard Gajewski.
Gajewski questioned Pons about this and Pons apologised for the lawyer's insinuation, both to Gajewski and to Jones on 21 February.
Immediately after this unfortunate incident Fleischmann and Pons paid a visit to Jones on the morning of Thursday 23 February to see what his experiment was producing.
For their part Fleischmann and Pons took along one of their palladium cells (but one that never produced heat — their heat producers were at that moment fully occupied in gathering data).
Fleischmann and Pons by now believed that they were seeing neutrons, though they were puzzled by the numbers.
Then they saw Jones' underground laboratory, the neutron spectrometer and its data, which were much more extensive than  theirs.
In particular Jones had a complete count of neutrons and also of their energies, so he could tell which neutrons came from cosmic rays and which were possibly the result of fusion.
Fleischmann and Pons couldn't do this and Jones invited them to bring their (working!) cells over to Brigham Young University so that his neutron spectrometer could measure a detailed spectrum.
They agreed and set the following Monday, 27 February, as the test date.
It was clear that Jones could do much more detailed neutron measurements than could Fleischmann and Pons, but his data weren't particularly impressive.
His evidence for fusion neutrons consisted of what to the eye looked to be only a moderate increase of neutrons in a small range of energy, though admittedly in the right region to be from fusion.
Fleischmann and Pons, who did not realise that they had measured their neutron signal incorrectly, thought that their cell was producing 10 000 neutrons per cm 3 of palladium each second (in fact the totality of neutrons from cosmic rays, from the concrete in the laboratory, from radon and other gases seeping through the air vents may have been responsible for almost all of these and the fusion neutrons, if there were any, were far fewer), and so Jones' data didn't appear very impressive.
So it was a shock to them when, during lunch that Thursday, Jones announced that his Brigham Young University team was preparing to publish its data and offered to let Fleischmann and Pons publish simultaneously.
When Jones made the offer he said he was ‘attempting to establish an open and cooperative relationship’ and to help mend the broken fences of the previous day's rancour.
Fleischmann recalled this period to me.
‘We were given a long account of tritium generation at Mount Mauna Loa and all that and then ‘by the way here is the neutron spectrum’.
Jones gave the impression that he intended to write a paper which was going to be on the Mount Mauna Loa business with a bit on the neutron spectrum but it did not turn out that way at all.
The Mount Mauna Loa thing got completely obliterated.
I thought their data were interesting but marginal.
I said, and it is engraved on my mind, ‘you should get an inorganic chemist to make some interesting compounds that might possibly show the dd fusion and wait .
And we should wait too.
It is premature this thing.’
But no, they had to go ahead with this rather inadequate data.’
On Monday 27 February Fleischmann and Pons were due to bring their working cell to Brigham Young University for the neutron spectrum to be measured, but a graduate student had to go to a funeral and so they suggested it would be better to come at the end of the week instead.
However, by the end of the week they still didn't show.
Instead a meeting was proposed by the Utah University President Chase Peterson in a long phone call with the Provost of Brigham Young University during Friday 3 March.
What had happened in the intervening five days?
Fleischmann and Pons believed that they were seeing ten thousand neutrons per cm 3 per second and on 1 March Fleischmann phoned Ron Bullough, the Harwell Chief Scientist, to tell him the news.
Harwell had much more sophisticated neutron detectors on site, able to measure energies with better precision even than Jones could.
Bullough offered Fleischmann their facilities as Fleischmann and Pons would be able to develop their work much faster and still retain control and priority over it.
Fleischmann decided to send over all the equipment, cell, fluid and palladium, by air to Harwell for them to do the neutron measurements.
So by 1 March Fleischmann and Pons believed that they were on course to getting immediate confirmation of the neutron energy spectrum from Harwell independent of Jones, whom they were increasingly viewing as an unwanted competitor.
Thus they had ‘no need of Jones’ neutron detector'.
And on 2 March their confidence received a further boost with the news that the DOE had approved funding of their research programme.
On 3 March the heads of the two universities spoke by phone, and discussed the importance and complexities of the test-tube fusion research at the two institutions.
Brigham Young University and the University of Utah are great rivals and the presidents saw this as an opportunity to ‘fuse’ the two institutions to their greater mutual glory.
In particular Peterson of Utah reportedly claimed that ‘there are billions of dollars at stake and Nobels in the offing’.
Thus it was that on Monday 6 March the summit took place at Brigham Young University involving administrators and scientists from the two  universities.
Before the meeting began, at 9 a.m., Chase Peterson met with his opposite number at Brigham Young University and with Joe Baliff, the Brigham Young University Provost, to discuss the agenda.
Peterson already had an agenda of his own drawn up and this was agreed to with the proviso that it included a brief historical summary of research done at Brigham Young University.
The significance of all this is that Utah had already convinced themselves that test-tube fusion could be an economic bonanza of unimaginable magnitude, and the first shots in the skirmish for priority had already been fired in February with the accusations that Jones had pirated the Utah chemists' work.
Peterson began by pointing out how wonderful an invention practical test-tube fusion could be and that the potentially vast proceeds from the invention could be extremely valuable to the University of Utah.
Already the hyperbole was out of all proportion compared to the evidence.
Fleischmann and Pons were seeing 25 per cent unaccounted-for heat sometimes and had not yet more than the hope of proving that there were neutrons proving fusion; Jones claimed to have seen a few neutrons at levels which, while interesting for science and understanding aspects of the Earth, bore no large scale practical benefits — what use is a billionth of a watt?
Jones made this point by taking a small flashlight out from his pocket and making a strong cautionary comment that he would be ‘extremely surprised if enough power could be generated by the process to power even a flashlight.’
Jones then remarked that, even if there were some commercial benefits, he failed to see how they could be vouchsafed for Utah, and reviewed the history of his own group's work at Brigham Young University.
He showed the notarised notebooks of April 1986 demonstrating the range of materials, including not just palladium but several other metals, that was being used two and a half years before they learned of the work by Fleischmann and Pons.
Jones' record of that meeting notes that ‘None of these dates were questioned or challenged by Fleischmann and Pons or anyone present, nor did anyone raise any questions about the proposal-review process.
They did not allege that the Brigham Young University work had pirated any ideas from their own work.’
The reception was positive.
Peterson commented to Brigham Young University President Holland, generously, on the ‘remarkable coincidence that such similar research had sprung up independently at the two universities.’
The focus of the meeting now turned to the question of how these results should be released.
The University of Utah team made it clear that they still had a long way to go and would like another year to  eighteen months to continue their research before announcing it.
Jones responded by reminding everyone that the DOE had been funding his work for nearly three years already, that he had positive results ready to publish, that the DOE funding agent had encouraged him to go ahead and that he was due to speak about them at the Spring Meeting of the American Physical Society in Baltimore during 1–4 May.
Fleischmann and Pons knew that they had no hopes of completing their work by May and that they could lose the race if Jones went public so soon.
Peterson suggested strongly his hope that Jones would not give the talk.
This shocked Jones considerably.
He pointed out that the American Physical Society had invited him to give the talk, that he had completed a three — year research programme, having done all the necessary cross checks and controls, and had definitive results to present.
Peterson backed off and said he would not ask Jones to cancel his talk.
It was agreed instead that both groups would submit papers simultaneously to a journal, and within three to four weeks in order to have them accepted and hopefully published before Jones' scheduled talk in May.
At this point there is once again dispute about the nature of any agreements.
Jones believes that ‘it was also agreed by all that no public disclosure of the research would be made by either group prior to the simultaneous submission of the papers’: Pons, by contrast, asserts that there was no agreement not to publicise.
Indeed, it would be hard to forge such an agreement given the tricky detail that Jones had already submitted an abstract of his talk to the APS, the wording of which appeared rather explicit to knowing eyes.
However, believing this to be the agreement, Jones cancelled a previously scheduled talk in the Brigham Young University physics department set for 8 March, only two days hence.
The two groups prepared to write their papers and got ready for joint submission, which was set for Friday 24 March.
The arrangement was that they would all meet at the Federal Express Office in Salt Lake City Airport and send the papers off together to Nature .
But during the week immediately following the meeting two fortuitous things happened to the chemists that at the time looked too good opportunities to miss.
Fleischmann's hope of 1 March that he would fly out his cells to Harwell had not worked.
What he had not bargained for was that the ‘fusion’ cell would be deemed a radioactive hazard and so be prevented from getting the urgent clearance for transport across international borders.
They were therefore still needing the measurements of the energies of the neutrons, which were necessary  as a proof that they were indeed neutrons produced by dd fusion and not somehow spurious.
Their first piece of fortune in mid-March was apparently finding a way to do this.
Any neutrons produced within the palladium will shoot out of the cell into a surrounding water bath.
As they slow down they are captured by protons in the water and in the process emit a gamma ray, which can be detected by crystals of sodium iodide,NaI — standard procedure for detecting and measuring the energies of gamma radiation.
Pons called in Bob Hoffman, a radiologist, to take a spectrum in the laboratory supposedly for health and safety reasons, and to identify the prominent signals.
There are a series of peaks that show up in the detector like a range of mountains as there are lots of gamma rays at different energies coming from the many naturally radioactive materials that are all around and within us.
In particular there are prominent naturally occurring peaks at 1461 keV caused by gammas from potassium-40 (40 K ) and at 2615 keV from thallium-208 (208 Tl ) which provide important landmarks when identifying the various peaks appearing in the detector.
Any gamma coming from the capture of fusion neutrons should therefore give a peak between these two, at 2224 keV.
Hoffman was under great pressure to work fast and took measurements over two full days.
What made it worse was that he had a terrible cold at the time.
His data showed clear peaks caused by the gammas from potassium and thallium (or so he thought, see Chapter 15) and gave a hint of another peak between the potassium and thallium peaks.
Interpolating between these two markers gave the energy of the peak as 2.5 MeV (2496 keV) which is approximately the energy that neutrons produced by dd fusion have.
The range of peaks, as portrayed months later in Nature , is shown in Figure 6.
The sharp peaks are what Hoffman identified as the markers for 1461 and 2615 keV; the signal that interested Fleischmann and Pons consists of the dotted structure around 2500 keV.
When they submitted their paper and Fleischmann gave his first public presentation on 28 March it was this peak alone that was exhibited; it is shown enlarged in Figure 7 with the number of counts in the vertical axis and the energy scale along the bottom.
Such was their purported evidence for a gamma ray from a neutron capture, an essential piece of the case for fusion taking place in their test-tube.
Then fate played its hand with the entry of the second player in the drama of that week.
On Friday, 10 March, by which time Pons was becoming convinced that their hopes were at last being confirmed, Ron Fawcett, the US editor of the Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry , called him on    a personal matter.
The journal is published in Europe and its editor there is based at Southampton, Fleischmann's home institution.
Pons mentioned the manuscript on test-tube fusion that he and Fleischmann were planning to write.
Fawcett said that this sounded   very important and that if Pons sent it to him he would rush it through.
Pons sat down and hastily wrote a manuscript for a ‘preliminary note’ entitled ‘Electrochemically Induced Nuclear Fusion of Deuterium’.
This was written so quickly that several errors occurred, one being the omission of the name of the person who had done much of the work since September: Marvin Hawkins, the graduate student.
Figure 6a.
Portion of gamma-ray spectrum as measured by Fleischmann et al.
Figure 6b.
The region near the signal peak in more detail.
The solid lines are the background spectrum and the dots are the spectrum measured over the cell.
Figure 7.
The signal peak as measured and originally presented by Fleischmann and Pons.
The position of the nearby peak at 2615 keV has been added in this figure for reference.
The paper (published in volume 261, page 301 of the journal) contained a table of numbers for excess heat from the few cells that had measured ‘positive’ but gave no details of how many cells had balanced, or in their definition were deemed to be ‘dead’.
Careful reading showed that at best there was 10 per cent heat unaccounted for, but big numbers appeared because Fleischmann and Pons had ‘extrapolated to rods 10 cm long’(their actual rod in this example had  been only 1.25 cm) without saying what rule they had used to make the extrapolation from measured to assumed .
And they had also made guesses as to what might be possible if the deuterium and oxygen gases that were bubbling off from the cell could be recombined and their latent energy recovered and used as heat.
But very little of this was actually measured , much was theoretical and, it later transpired, much or all of the claimed evidence for radiation was incorrect.
This paper was one of the controversial centrepieces of the affair.
Was it properly refereed or passed through at the urgings of the editor?
Did it break the agreement of joint publication?
Did its appearance signify a scientific publication and so excuse a subsequent press conference or was it, as many scientists claimed, a badly written uninformative document of limited scientific credibility that did little to support its authors' claims to have found fusion?
There was another feature of the accumulated data at this time that would cause problems later, namely their mistaken belief that the 2500 keV peak was evidence for neutrons; a true neutron capture peak should occur at 2224 keV.
Had they checked with a knowledgeable nuclear physicist — and there were several in the nearby physics department who could have helped — or held a technical seminar before the press conference, they would have learned this before events overtook them.
But they did not, and the 2500 keV peak went into their initial submissions to journals.
Optimistic that they were on the right track, but aware that much still had to be done, first thing on the morning of Monday, 13 March Fleischmann sent a fax to Harwell and then talked on the phone the next day remarking that their information was incomplete, that they had much more to do before they would be confident enough and expressing irritation that they were being ‘rushed into premature publication’.
Hoffman's measurement of the gamma spectrum was their third signature for neutrons: first there had been their own relatively crude neutron measurements with the dosimeter, then they had seen Jones' suggestive neutron spectrum and now this (erroneous as it turned out) gamma peak.
These gave them some confidence that they were indeed seeing neutrons from fusion, but they were by no means definitive.
A complete energy spectrum of all neutrons was needed but Fleischmann's earlier hope that he could send cells to Harwell for them to make measurements on had been thwarted by customs and excise regulations.
So on 13 and 14 March the best that could be done was for him to give Harwell full details and let them get on with it themselves (see Chapter 7).
Events were by now overtaking the scientists almost daily.
Also on 13 March Fawcett received the ‘preliminary note’ at his editor's office and gave it top priority.
Within a few days he had received some  opinions on it which he transmitted to Pons immediately.
Pons revised the paper over the weekend and rushed the new version back to Fawcett for publication.
So by that weekend of 18–19 March Pons knew that not only was the DOE happy to fund the proposed research programme, but that the preliminary note had now received some measure of approval, which gave confidence in the fusion hypothesis.
Moreover he knew that Harwell were looking for the crucial neutron spectrum which, surely, would clinch everything.
During the week leading up to 18–19 March the University of Utah authorities started increasing the pressures.
Renewed accusations had been made against Jones on Friday 10 March by James Brophy, the Utah vice president for research, who made allegations of piracy to Prof. John Lamb of Brigham Young University, and this was followed up the next week by Pons making general accusations against Jones to Dr Gajewski at the DOE.
Pons was also concerned that Jones had enlisted the aid of Doug Bennion, chair of the Brigham Young University chemical engineering department and a leading electrochemist.
Pons says this was as a result of seeing his and Fleischmann's work, whereas Jones insists that the DOE suggested it.
Pons said ‘I had no idea when Jones was going public.’
I asked Fleischmann why there was so much concern.
I summarised the conflict as follows.
‘The essence of the patent for you is surely that you believe the heat is there and if it can be scaled up, as you hope it can,that is something that could have manifest benefits to everybody.
However, Jones claimed to see only neutrons, and a few of those only at levels that might be interesting to science and geophysicists but of no relevance to making commercial fusion reactors.’
Fleischmann replied that with hindsight that might be true but ‘in the situation we were then in, we were obliged to tell the university of the work that we had done and they perceived that they were obliged to go for patent protection at that time.
We could not tell whether Jones had heat data or was planning to look for this.
How could one tell?
He was certainly thinking about fusion as a source of heat in the Earth.
If he was going to say that in the paper, which was surely his intention to do, it would almost certainly destroy any possibility of patent protection.’
So it was Jones' motivation — the possibility that fusion was at work within the Earth and possibly responsible for its heat , even though he saw none directly, that the University of Utah felt could derail priority for their own heat measurements.
Moreover, it would be very easy for Jones to check out the heat by collaborating with an electrochemist.
Also one cannot overlook the fact that by this time (18 March) the  chemists believed that they had evidence for neutrons and that those neutrons had the energies expected for fusion products .
The number of neutrons was not enough to account for all the heat (a fact that they had been aware.
of for a long time) and this was a puzzle still to be solved, but at least there seemed to be some evidence that fusion was happening, proving their original hypothesis.
The University of Utah now decided to go ahead with a press conference.
They were getting worried that news was leaking out.
Brophy said that he was being questioned about leaks, and that rumours and false information were circulating.
The University had filed for patents, believing that millions of dollars could accrue if test-tube fusion were commercially practical, and the patent lawyers were concerned about what would happen if other groups found out the results and duplicated them.
The paper was written and accepted so why delay and risk losing everything?
Pam Fogle, the university news director, advised against a news conference until the paper was actually published in a journal, this being the usual course of events and a prior condition of several journals, in particular Nature .
Brophy however insisted that if test-tube fusion holds up it would have such a major impact on society that ‘Sometimes one has more responsibility to society than to the scientific community.’
Getting in first with the patent application was what the university authorities regarded as the top priority.
Imagine yourself in the position of one of the university administrators.
You hesitate as you are not convinced of the quality of the scientific work; test-tube fusion later turns out to be real and your university, your employers, lose billions of dollars in royalties.
How would you view your career prospects?
And it was easy to believe that the evidence for test-tube fusion was fairly solid, good enough that it would be only a matter of time before it was proven definitively, especially with the BYU people already claiming to have some independent evidence.
Thus it was that on Friday, 17 March the university press officer interviewed Fleischmann and Pons, who were even then in the process of revising their preliminary note, and the office had a press release ready by the Monday morning.
A lot took place the next day, Tuesday, 21 March.
The decision to go ahead with the press conference two days later was finalised; Pons edited a note alerting his staff to this effect, called Jones on the phone to reconfirm the joint submission for Friday the 24th but, according to Jones, said nothing about the press conference planned for the day before nor of the 11 March submission by Pons to the Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry .
And Fleischmann received a fax from  Harwell and learned that they were seeing nothing at all.
Fleischmann certainly was concerned about the momentum of events; the news from Harwell magnified this and he expressed to some colleagues his nervousness and wish that the press conference could be stopped.
But apparently it was all out of the scientists' control.
He tried to contact Sir George Porter, the President of the prestigious Royal Society of London, in the hope that he would be able to use his influence in the USA and have the conference called off due to its potential security implications, but Fleischmann was unable to reach him.
At this point Fleischmann decided that as the whole thing was going ahead, then he should make the best of it and then get away for home in England immediately.
He booked a flight for the afternoon of Friday, 24 March with Delta to San Francisco to connect with the British Airways flight for London.
His hope was that he would be able to spend the Easter weekend in peaceful anonymity away from the media, not foreseeing that the press conference would merely be the beginning to a story that grew and grew.
Fleischmann's home base was in England and Harwell were already in action on his behalf.
He thought that it would be nice if the BBC could be present at the press conference in their own right instead of getting a ‘home grown’ story at second hand, and so he contacted Richard Cookson, a close friend and retired Professor of Chemistry at Southampton University, whose son Clive was science correspondent with the BBC Radio.
However, Clive Cookson was no longer with the BBC but had instead become the science and technology correspondent of the Financial Times .
He immediately recognised the immense potential for the story but was faced with a major problem: the press conference was arranged for 23 March and the next morning was Good Friday — his paper would not be published that day.
Here he was with the journalistic scoop of his career and everyone else would be able to run it before him!
So he asked if he could publish it on the morning of press day; appearing in one paper in London would not undermine the American publicity.
Fleischmann consulted with Pons and they agreed; Cookson got permission to carry the story.
However the two chemists did not discuss this with the Utah press office and that is how the Utah authorities ‘confirmed’ their paranoia that word was leaking out.
The Harwell connection was also exploited in placing the story.
David Fishlock, science editor of the Financial Times , told me that the FT ‘took it seriously’ because of being told that Harwell was looking into it.