

The Melin
My story has been called ‘extraordinary’, ‘bizarre’ and ‘surrealist’.
It didn't seem so to me, at least not at the beginning: just another frustrating case of the consumer uncatered-for.
However, one did need a well-developed sense of the ridiculous — particularly at such a time: you see, my husband, Nigel, was dying.
This is how it happened.
Long before, when he was in perfect health, we had watched a television programme concerned with the high cost of dying and had sent for the accompanying booklet, entitled, appropriately,It's a R.I.P. Off .
This we read with great interest, but at the time my husband merely made enquiries about leaving his body for medical research and was told there was not a teaching hospital near enough to accept him.
Apparently the cost of transport would be out of the question when there was a plentiful supply obtainable locally.
He then enquired — not too seriously, I feel — about the practicality of being put bodily on the compost heap, thereby incurring no cost and contributing, in time, to the fertility of the soil.
However, our GP persuaded him that such a course would be against the public Health Act.
So there the subject rested for a while, except that we agreed to purchase coffins at some future date to put by in readiness for the inevitable, but owing to the usual pressures of day-to-day living we never got around to it.
Nevertheless the subject was not forgotten, and we   agreed that the average funeral was a complete waste of money which, instead of mourning the dead, should be spent on celebrating their lives.
In other words, a jolly good booze-up.
Also we discovered in conversation that we were not the only people who felt that the usual procedure was a wasteful and gruesome affair.
We were, at that time, living in an old water-mill in North Wales, near the small town of Bala.
Bala is a big tourist attraction in the summer season — indeed, almost all the year round, mainly because of its lake, which is the largest stretch of natural water in the principality and ideal for many water sports new and old which become more popular every year.
We were both southerners.
Nigel had been born and reared in Bath and I in Bushey, Hertfordshire.
The reason for our settling where we did was because Nigel, being an electrical and water engineer, had always believed that by the time he reached retirement the world would be starting to run out of power.
He had been in the lighthouse business for most of his life and was chief engineer in a firm which also made other marine signals, such as buoys and tide gauges, many of which were his design.
Nigel and I had been together, as the saying goes, for ten or more years, and as he was approaching sixty — at which age he proposed to retire, we had, for more than a year, spent many weekends searching the British Isles for a dwelling with water-power which, with Nigel's expertise, would supply all our heating and lighting needs and, in Nigel's words, ‘free us from the vagaries of Scargill and the Oil Sheiks’.
We had spent much time looking for the right place and seemed to have explored almost every corner of the country, from Devon to Cumberland, and had almost settled on a disused mill at Fisherton-de-la-Mare, near Amesbury.
We would have had to rebuild practically from scratch but nevertheless my mind was already way  ahead and planning the furnishing and decorating of the place.
It was, therefore, with a certain displeasure, that I received, one Friday evening, Nigel's announcement that he had been sent details of a converted mill in Wales and we'd better drive up the next morning to take a look at it.
I knew it was no use protesting.
Nigel had that far-away look that the words ‘water-mill’ always produced.
During the journey north I was, I admit, slightly sulky.
Wales, to date, I knew naught of — apart from a week at Cardiff in The Maid of the Mountains , and one at Swansea with Agatha Christie's Murder at the Vicarage , both appearances as a young actress many years before.
On the first occasion, I remembered, I had found a highly personable stray kitten and before the week was up had delivered it to what promised to be a good new home adjacent to that jokey castle.
On the other, the only memory was that I had chosen as my lodgings, from the Equity good-digs book, an establishment under the auspices of a Madam somebody or other, under the mistaken impression that she was French and therefore bound to produce the most delicious cuisine for which her country was rightly famous.
Wrong!
She was a piano teacher (most piano teachers give themselves the title Madam in South Wales), and the food was as tasteless as any I had encountered.
These two incidents hardly added up to a minimal knowledge of the principality.
So there I sat, my mind still in Fisherton-de-la-Mare, hurtling north-west up the motorway, feeling most unco-operative.
I had hoped that these weekends of dashing about Britain with estate agents' details in my lap were a thing of the past.
And then we saw it.
Standing back from the lane and slightly below it, at the bottom of a weed-covered drive.
In fact, the weeds were the most notable feature at first glance — more than waist-high in places, and Nigel soon disappeared among them, heading uphill to check the height of the fall of water, which I had learnt was described as ‘the head’.
Nigel never looked at any building before examining the head, and I had learnt  never to become too enthused about interiors until this had been done.
So this time I wandered round, taking in the house from the outside.
It was far from the idealized water-mill beloved by greetings-cards and table-mat manufacturers.
Large and uncompromisingly rectangular, it was built of granite, or what is known as granite in these parts.
Attached to the mill was the mill cottage, an attractive virginia-creeper-covered three-up and three-down affair, I discovered, having collected the keys as instructed from the small stable which adjoined it.
A glance inside showed that someone had taken trouble, and there was a really friendly feeling about the place.
Downstairs, on one side of the front door was a large sitting-room and on the other a bathroom which had certainly started life as the front parlour and had probably been used only on occasions of wedding parties and funerals.
Through the slate-floored living-room, with its exposed beams, open grate and massive heart-of-oak mantelpiece, was the kitchen.
I noticed the attractive terracotta-tiled floor and another open fireplace which at the time housed the refrigerator.
This description, I realize, is starting to sound like the eulogistic ravings of a highly imaginative estate agent, but I can't help it.
I was in a state of complete enchantment.
Above my head was a half gallery which I later discovered had been traditionally the sleeping-quarters of the miller's apprentice.
At this time it was filled with the sort of junk that might come in handy one day if one could remember where one had put it.
The back door of the kitchen led out onto a slate-paved path at the foot of three steep terraces giving much lebensraum to many varieties of voracious weeds and scrubby elder bushes.
My mind's eye saw it well tamed and abloom with all kinds of ground-cover plants.
Heathers?
Why not?
The soil was suitably acid, I suspected, judging by the proliferation of rhododendrons I had seen.
Stop it, I thought.
Nigel wasn't back yet and I must curb my wilder fantasies.
Continuing along the slate path with the back of the mill on my left, it widened under a wooden bridge, with the terraced land on my right.
Nigel explained later that the bridge was where the water had descended from the millpond onto the wheel, which sadly was no more.
On the top terrace was a line of cypress leylandii trees, quite small as yet, eight rhododendron bushes — obviously fairly recent plantings, and on ground level a grinding stone four feet across which had been set on a granite plinth and made into a table with slate seats supported on bricks at right angles to it.
A huge, heavy, panelled oak door faced it, and peering through the windows I saw that it led into the mill kitchen.
Above was a low-walled sun terrace.
I continued my way around to the front and hesitated.
There were four steps at each end of a loading-bay which ran the full length of the house.
In the centre was inset yet another millstone seeded with yellow stone-crop.
At each end of the bay, the steps led to a half-glass panelled front door.
I tried a key in the right-hand one.
It turned.
I was inside the mill.
The ground floor was tiled, and two-thirds along the length of this massive forty-by twenty-foot room was a magnificent fireplace — the chimney breast built of huge granite stones with access on either side to what was obviously the dining-area.
On one side of this access the stones had been continued to form an archway which immediately suggested the childhood joys of caves and visits to Father Christmas's grotto in the bigger Oxford Street department stores.
From the dining-area another archway led into the kitchen, a long, narrow, galley-type room with two deeply recessed windows — the sills tiled, under one of which was a modern stainless-steel sink, I was pleased to note.
Continuing on past the huge oak door I had observed from the outside was another passage leading to a cloakroom, as the euphemism goes, otherwise a loo and wash basin and turning right I was back in the main area.
Opposite the front door I had come in by was a staircase which I proceeded to climb.
At the top I found myself in a wide gallery looking down onto the floor below.
Ahead of me was a glass-panelled oak door which led out to the sun terrace.
The terrace, I decided, I would investigate later.
I walked along the oak-railed gallery, looking both down and up at the magnificent chimney.
Until now my only objection to living in a water-mill had been a conviction that it was bound to be dark, water-mills having a habit of being in valleys, Nigel explained, but it was wonderfully light up there, with two large, deep-set windows.
Goodness, the walls were thick — nearly three feet deep, I guessed.
I was again walking along the length of the building and through another archway into an area with yet two more large windows and another fireplace built into the opposite side of the chimney from the one below, with a raised slate hearth.
I had now turned right across the width of the mill where another staircase led up to the top floor.
Past it and through yet another archway was a small vestibule, off which was a perfectly adequate bathroom, and another door to the sun terrace.
I was pleased to see that the bathroom was fitted with a perfectly conventional door and even a bolt!
I retraced my steps and climbed the second flight of stairs.
They rose steeply and led to a fair-sized landing with a bedroom at each end, with a wash basin in each — bliss!
The landing itself was fitted with two large, double-glazed skylights in the sloping ceiling, which I now realized were responsible for the light and feeling of airiness throughout the upper floors.
Looking over the oak rails, I could see the gallery floor and, further below, the ground-floor area, the spectacular chimney continuing upward and out of sight above the sloping-beamed ceiling.
The walls not of stone had been plastered and whitewashed, with here and there a grey stone protruding where it had been too large or awkward to remove and cover.
And that was it — only two bedrooms in all that space.
But then my eye caught a pair of heavy wool embroidered curtains drawn across an angled alcove.
Very curious.
Further investigation revealed a small space which would nevertheless accommodate a pair of bunk beds, a chest of drawers and a rail for clothes.
It also incorporated a tiny iron-framed window with thick bubble-glass panes which opened and closed on nothing in particular.
How children would love it — well, this one did anyway.
They would probably play that disgusting game of spitting on people from a great height.
Such jolly fun at a certain age.
I set off to look for Nigel — quite a long way down, as the staircases didn't connect and one had to walk the complete length of the first-floor gallery before descending the second.
This, I must admit, became a bore in time but now nothing could spoil my enchantment.
I felt like Dorothy in The Wizard of Oz on first seeing Munchkinland — the scene when the screen changed from sepia to glorious Technicolor and Judy Garland spoke that immortal line, ‘You know, Toto, I don't believe we're in Kansas any more.’
Crossing again to the fireplace, I gazed at it with awe, and had I been of a religious bent I would have fallen on my knees and prayed that the water would meet Nigel's requirements so that on winter evenings, when we were doing our Darby and Joan bit, we could sit and worship the spirit of the fire, the hearth, the very essence of our home.
In most city homes the television is now the focal point of the room, many dwellings being built without a grate at all.
How sorry I felt for them as I stood with my images of a future of crackling kindling and bringing the pine logs hither and other rustic carry-ons.
The back-to-nature cult had really got me — but with heat and light and hot baths at the turn of a switch.
Would we be merely playing at being bucolics, I wondered.
No, not really, not if we were creating our own heat and light from natural renewable sources.
And I was determined to grow our fruit and vegetables.
I was already vegetarian, and Nigel just liked food.
That it should be fresh and well cooked was all he asked.
I started dreaming again until I heard footsteps outside.
A big grin appeared at the door, followed by the rest of Nigel, his trousers sodden to the waistband.
In spite of his expression, my mouth was dry.
‘Well?’
I said.
‘Possibilities,’ was the reply.
‘Distinct possibilities.
How about the house?’
‘Come and see for yourself,’ I said.
I completed another tour of the mill and cottage, this time with Nigel in tow, trying to sound as objective as I could, as if I, too, saw mere possibilities, but as our tour progressed I could see that Nigel had warmed to it almost as much as I. He pointed out some ‘interesting features’ that I had missed, such as some of the wooden working parts of the mill machinery set high in the plastered walls, and told me what they had originally been used for.
I was disappointed that the water-wheel had gone — the kitchen had been built over the pit which had housed it.
It would have been nice to have it, even if not actually turning.
I knew Nigel had other plans.
Some years before, when he was hunting for a mill in the West Country, and I was on tour with some show or other, he wrote me:
The only wheel I found on this trip is still very much in business, grinding corn on two pairs of stones.
With true Devon courtesy the miller abandoned his accounts and we spent the afternoon discussing the relative merits of apple and yew for pit wheel teeth.
He conceded that apple was a useful wood, provided the tree had grown cooking apples — the sweeter the apple the softer the wood he said.
Earlier in my visit I had spotted some castings on his scrap heap which I was fairly sure belonged to a turbine.
Knowing a bit about Devonians I expressed no particular interest but commented on their rustiness and on the difficulty of getting spares for such old equipment.
By the time I left, I'd beaten him down to about twice the price he probably had in mind.
He had added that his new possession would need ‘a bit of doing up’, but other engineers working at Nigel's firm seemed almost as fascinated as he himself, and once it arrived on the premises Nigel remarked jokingly, ‘Not too many lighthouses were made for a couple of years.’
So we were really looking for a home for the turbine (which needed a thirty-foot head of water), as well as for ourselves.
Nigel assured me that it would be more efficient than the wheel and produce considerably more electricity, and I had to be content with that.
He had once said that he didn't know whether his passion for water-power was a result of meanness or had some deeper Freudian significance.
I think I can tell you.
It certainly wasn't meanness — he was the most generous of men with his money, his time and his affections.
It was abhorrence of waste of any kind of resource that motivated him.
He hated to see a dripping tap, and nothing made him angrier than Blackpool Tower blazing with, what to him was, utterly squandered energy.
Back to the moment.
Nigel was almost as impressed with the fireplace as I had been, and really it inspired a feeling that was almost reverent.
He was particularly delighted by the hearth — a seven-foot-by-three slate slab — probably a gravestone, he thought.
It was magnificent and would come up a treat with a rubbing of linseed oil.
We had arranged with the agents that if we were interested we would stay the night in a local hotel and the next day meet the builder who had done much of the reconstruction of the place.
He would be there the next morning if summoned, and Nigel could have a general discussion with him and leave him some sums to do regarding the all-decisive head.
The first thing though was to get Nigel into some clean, dry clothes.
The White Lion in Bala agreed to accommodate us, and over dinner I was glad to realize that Nigel's fantasies were equalling mine, though of a different nature.
It had always been one of his Walter Mittyisms to run a restaurant, and this we discussed with extreme  earnestness.
We would be open in the summer only and serve the many holiday-makers who swelled the local population from June until the end of September.
There was a large, two-storey garage that when adapted would house a couple of students who would wait at table, and Nigel and I would cook.
I would also grow all our own organic vegetables for the table.
We completely ignored several facts.
First, that Nigel would refuse entry to anyone to whom he took a dislike, and the ones he did like he wouldn't want to charge, a distinct disadvantage from a business point of view.
Second, that having worked hard in the acting profession all my life, the last thing I would enjoy was working the clock round every summer when I could be sunbathing and swimming in Bala Lake.
Also, it later transpired, the scheme would have been doomed to disappointment, because we wouldn't have been granted the necessary planning permission for change of use.
Nevertheless, it was a sublimely happy evening, although, as we kept reminding each other, ‘nothing was settled yet’.
After breakfast we drove back to Melin Meloch, as it was called.
‘Melin ’ is Welsh for ‘mill’, and the Meloch was the river which ran through the property, from which the diversion from the weir through the millpond, under the road and out into the famous River Dee would supply our needs.
‘The weir will last a lifetime,’ Nigel said, ‘and the millpond only needs a bit of clearing out.’
This proved an understatement but in essence was true.
The builder, a cheerful Welshman who was justly proud of his work, met us.
We discovered that he, single-handed, had built that chimney without the use of mechanical lifting-gear.
Our respect knew no bounds.
He described the heap of rubble from which it and the rest of the building had risen and how he and the owner, who came up for weekends, had taken eight years to finish it and turn it into the Mirimar which we now perceived it to be.
Nevertheless, we, probably unsuccessfully, tried to hide our enthusiasm, in the manner of those who have several properties to view of which this was only one in  which we felt a mild interest.
After all, the genial builder was still the vendor's representative.
The only problem was that we had envisaged a tumbledown affair that we would rebuild over the period of time while we were still living and working in London.
But this place was practically ready to move into, ‘Just a few finishing-off jobs,’ Nigel said optimistically.
On the other hand we had watched the dismal faces of friends who were resuscitating old cottages and who spent their weekends streaking down to the country to see how the builders were getting on — and they weren't.
But obviously a place not already converted would cost less initially, and the price of rebuilding would be spread over a longer period.
We readily agreed that the conversion had been carried out with more imagination than we would have been able to bring to it, but could we afford it?
Nigel's comment after first viewing the interior was, ‘Well, it's a trifle Hollywood baronial but I like it.’
It was after one o'clock when Nigel finally returned his notebook to his pocket and we were on our way back to The Smoke.
We'd decided to have a ploughman's lunch or some such at a likely-looking pub we'd seen in the next village.
Herewith came our first culture shock.
It was closed.
We tried the next couple of villages also before the truth dawned.
This area was in one of the five Welsh ‘never-on-Sunday’ counties.
Back in the car, map out.
What and how far was the next county, and could we make it to the border before closing-time?
The next county was Denbigh, in those days before the ‘bigger-is-better’ shuffle took place, and we arrived there just in time to have the door of the first pub shut in our faces with the sort of clank against which pleas and arguments would be obviously unrewarding.
Two hours later and ravenous, we settled for egg and chips at a motorway service station.
Later that week, back home, the figures regarding the water, its fall and the general layout of the land arrived, and Nigel, like God in the creation, saw them and saw that they were good.
Then began lengthy discussions on ways and means.
We owned no property, as we lived in a rented flat and in any case needed a home in London for at least two more years.
We were determined not to start off with a mortgage round our necks if we could possibly avoid it.
We did, however, both have a certain number of securities, and a good few hours were spent deciding which to sell.
It seemed that we could just about raise the amount of the offer we had decided upon and still avoid bankruptcy.
We offered.
If ever I was asked what Nigel ‘did’, I would reply that he was a designer, or sometimes I'd say an inventor, but he always spoke of himself as an engineer.
This was in no way false modesty — he considered engineering one of the highest possible callings.
After he died a colleague wrote,
In the lighthouse field I am sure he will be remembered as having made one of the important inventions.
He knew, as we all did, that power on lighthouses is very expensive due to inaccessibility.
He realised that the power required to rotate an optic, even the large ones, was less than anyone had assumed.
The significance of his gearless pedestal has not yet been fully realised but it so influenced engineer's thinking that solar powered lights are feasible even in the higher ranges.
There is no doubt that the significance of his invention will be recognised more clearly in due course.
These people are rarely honoured in their lifetime.
I must say that all this was news to me, but then Nigel never voluntarily discussed his work at home.
When I have, on occasion, remarked upon this to other company wives, their reaction has been one of near disbelief, followed by looks of passionate envy.
(Once a 14-year-old son of a friend asked him if he didn't ever get nervous building lighthouses with the sea pounding ferociously on the rocks below him.
Nigel explained that he merely designed the lights, which were installed later.
‘Oh, I see,’ said the young man.
‘You just put the bulbs in.’
Nigel  was delighted.
‘Yes, yes,’ he said, ‘that's exactly what I do.
I've never heard it described better!’)
In our flat the telephone rang.
For the past week I had been learning lines in preparation for an appearance in a new play due to start rehearsing later that month, and I loathed interruptions.
‘Is that Mrs Miller?’ enquired a male voice.
‘No,’ I said shortly, ‘there's no one of that name here.’
‘Hang on a minute, stoopid,’ said Nigel in his normal tone.
‘We've got it!’
Our offer had been accepted.
We were the millers of Melin Meloch.
There had never been a moment like it.
So that was how it all began — the life, or rather the new life, or better still the Good Life.
(I had a part in that —The Good Life TV series, I mean, and proud I was to play it.
It must have been almost everybody's favourite comedy series of the time — possibly of all time.)
For the next 2½ years we spent as much time as we could at the melin.
Sometimes Nigel on his own, sometimes I on mine.
When our time there coincided, it avoided friction such as the weekend when Nigel returned and described to me the site where some new tunnelling had started.
From his excited account I was able to tell him that that was the exact area in which I had, on my last visit, planted a hundred daffodil bulbs.
There were a few dodgy moments.
The tunnelling was necessitated by having to rediscover the channel of the watercourse after it had come by pipe from the millpond above and turned the wheel.
The outlet into the Meloch was obvious once we had slashed down a bit of undergrowth, and so was the confluence with the Dee, but where, under the sizeable area euphemistically called the drive, was the tunnel?
If only there remained some sort of plan of the former layout; but it could hardly have been anticipated when the conversion was begun that a modern miller would be the buyer, who proposed to grind not corn but electricity.
It was fortunate that Nigel was never happier than when given a problem.
After a frustrating week or two of digging and delving, it was realized that mechanized aid would be needed, and Massey Ferguson arrived in force.
By now the drive resembled the face of a slate mine, having been surfaced with slate chippings, and was indescribably muddy.
We were there in early December, and the work carried on after dark very often, lit only by the exterior lights of the melin, which were scarcely adequate illumination.
It was consequently a memorable moment when one of the fellows employed on the prospecting knocked on the door and, when I answered, said excitedly, ‘Tell sir we've found it!’
They were marvellous men.
Totally involved and identified with the scheme, as chuffed as Nigel when things went well and as disconsolate as he when they didn't.
That Christmas we spent in Wales working in the melin by day but sleeping in the cottage, as it was still furnished.
I had spent a long day in the autumn bargaining with the previous owner over the furniture and carpets and ended up having bought most of it at a reasonable price.
One night — I think it was the night before Christmas Eve — we had just returned to the cottage after a hard day next door doing some of the ‘few finishing-off jobs’ Nigel had earlier specified.
I was starting to think about cooking some supper when I heard music.
The radio was silent and I realized that it was coming from outside.
I went to the window.
Standing in a semi-circle round a lanthorn — yes, really — was a brass band, eight of them, playing away like mad.
I ran to the door, and Nigel joined me.
They finished ‘Christians awake’ and we begged them to come in and have a glass of wine and a mince pie with us.
The leader hesitated and looked at the bandmaster, who said that they'd like to but after they'd played a request for us.
I plumped for ‘Hark the Herald Angels’, which was duly performed, filling the chill night air with enchantment and the surprise of it all.
It was like a joyous welcome to Wales.
Over the mince pies and wine we learned that the Bala  band had been formed many years before and had faithful musicians and followers.
One further surprise that was that the bandmaster was not a Welshman.
When the previous one departed, there was no other available locally and the job had to be advertised.
The present incumbent was a retired Yorkshire miner and after many thanks and good wishes for the festive season the ensemble played themselves out with a lively rendering of ‘Ilkley Moor’.
It was a treasured experience.
After we moved up permanently, they continued to come each Christmas for four or five years until one year there was silence.
We enquired and were told that they had been disbanded.
There wasn't enthusiasm from the young people to join these days, and the dwindling numbers had rendered it impossible to carry on.
We grieved greatly but were glad we had known it.
The next stage of our enterprise was to convert the little stable at the end of the cottage into a turbine house.
The turbine itself was still being ‘done up’ at Nigel's works, and there was much talk of something called the alternator which was being shipped from Ceylon.
Nigel had been out there several times for the commissioning of lights which he had designed, and I gathered that the alternator was a piece of equipment redundant to their present requirements.
‘What does the alternator do?’
I asked.
‘It makes the electricity, of course,’ said Nigel.
He could be quite maddening at times, but I had my own concerns and had to leave it at that.
We had decided that, in order to defray at least some of the escalating costs of Nigel's hydro-electrics, we must let both houses to holiday-makers.
At least, I had.
Nigel viewed the scheme with gloomy foreboding.
Who on earth would want a holiday in Wales if they had the slightest knowledge of the climate?
‘After all,’ he said, ‘we came for the rainfall, which can hardly be a prime attraction on holiday.’
In fact, it made no difference.
They came in abundance; the reason being, I suspect, that there was so much more to do than just lie on a beach, for which, indeed, the first requirement is sun.
We could supply sailing, wind-surfing, fishing and swimming in Bala Lake, endless glorious walking country, pony trekking, golf and tennis, and latterly the swift-flowing rivers have made Bala an internationally famous canoeing centre.
Few of these activities, for keen participants, required particularly good weather.
I started attending auction sales both locally and in London and gradually got the melin into shape for letting.
We realized that we needed a letting agent who would not only take the bookings but generally oversee the properties, plus a cleaner for the days on which they changed hands.
Our builder suggested a lady whom he referred to as ‘Barney’, who lived in a nearby village and had holiday cottages of her own.
We telephoned her and made an appointment for her to come and see what we had to offer.
Barney arrived promptly, and we were on our very best behaviour.
We really needed her and were anxious to present ourselves and our properties in the best possible light.
She was a large lady, dressed in a tweed suit, with a pleasingly direct manner.
Upright, downright and forthright and above all efficient, we felt sure.
Having thoroughly inspected the two houses and made various suggestions — such as, ‘You must provide electric blankets for all beds in this climate’— to our great relief she took us on.
She even knew of a cleaner she was sure would be able and willing.
Barney became, and still is, a great chum.
Even after we moved up, we still begged her to carry on letting the cottage, and later we built another one, up the hill, on the site of a collapsed pigsty for which we had inherited planning permission.
We were certain that, left to us, the places would get double-booked and lead to all kinds of tangles.
She had her own yardstick by which she measured complaints as either trivial or needing attention.
A loose leg on a dining-chair was dealt with immediately but a charge of two spiders in the bath was met with, ‘Have you made a mistake in booking?
This is the country.’
Among all our other irresistible attractions we had  advertised free fishing in the River Meloch and the millpond, and a prospective holiday-maker asked, over the telephone, what kind of fish were to be found there.
Barney wasn't often stumped but she knew less than nothing about the sport.
‘I told him, oh the usual kind, you know.’
‘Like cod and haddock and kippers,’ said Nigel.
‘You didn't , Barney, did you?’
I asked.
Barney changed the subject.
Every year, in late October, she would arrive with her annual accounts, and she and Nigel would settle down at the dining-table with a bottle of wine and go through them.
Her method of accounting was unusual, but Nigel finally got the hang of it, and it was always exact.
Except for one year when she lost a pound; I think she's only recently given up searching for it.
We particularly liked one entry.
It said: ‘To removing one dead mouse from storage radiator — 50p.’
‘I think the tax inspector is unlikely to query our expenses,’ said Nigel.
‘Nobody could have invented that.’
On our first meeting we had told Barney that we wanted to book the melin for ourselves for two weeks in June, and both it and the cottage for Christmas.
We had unforgettable Christmases.
The open plan made it possible to have a twelve-foot tree, and we were able to hang presents, quite heavy ones, without its collapsing.
The finishing-off jobs were taking longer than even I thought, but gradually both houses were furnished and fitted to a standard I wished I had met myself in holiday homes.
Only one of Barney's suggestions was firmly turned down by Nigel.
Television.
‘Let them look at the fire,’ he said.
‘The pictures are better.’
He changed his mind later.
In bad weather it kept the children off the beds, which otherwise they were inclined to use as substitute trampolines.
The excavations were now complete, and the drive at least was rolled and tidy again, ready for the expected visitors.
In May our banishment began.
It was hard, but we  badly needed the money the holiday lettings were bringing us.
Not that the preparations were halted.
The construction of the turbine house continued and the large, fertile, though overgrown kitchen garden on a raised, walled piece of land in front of the cottage, between it and the river, was ploughed and early potatoes were planted.
All had now to be arranged long distance but it seemed to work remarkably well.
Our neighbours the Williams at the farm were very helpful.
They had a key and saw in deliveries of this and that — a couple of times, large van loads of furniture — and gave willingly of their time.
They made friends with the families who stayed and who bought milk and eggs from them, and they said more than once how good it was to see the lights on across the river again.
In relatively unpopulated areas such as ours, the word ‘neighbour’ has a meaning unknown in town.
We longed for late June and our two-week holiday.
When it arrived, Nigel hacked his way round the millpond with a hand scythe and saw, clearing years of unwanted growth and very nearly finishing the job.
It was very hot and I worried that he might be overdoing it, but he seemed to be wonderfully adaptable, and the sudden transmogrification from desk-bound boffin to agricultural worker seemed to have no effect at all on his physical well-being.
I'd never seen him so happy.
I spent my time weeding, raking and sowing my vegetable patch.
The early potatoes were well up and looking very healthy, I was happy to see.
In the evenings we trundled a wheelbarrow down to the banks of the Dee and collected driftwood for the fire, because at 500 feet above sea-level, even after roasting days, when the sun went down it was cool enough to need it.
Wooding, as it was called, became a way of life.
On trips into London after we'd finally moved to Wales, I would raid skips and bring back the booty on the car roof-rack.
And yes, that fireplace gave me as much pleasure always as I had imagined it would on first sight.
We spent two summer holidays and three Christmases  at the melin before at last we were able to claim it for our own occupation.
In April 1975, we abandoned London without regret, for our new life in the valleys.
‘Wales’ means ‘valleys’, as does Vallais in Switzerland and Wallis in Germany.
It was easy to see why they go on so much about them.
‘How green was my valley’ takes on a new meaning when you see it.
You drive along a narrow, twisting road half-way up a mountain of rocks and boulders, supporting nothing but scrub and heather plus a few of the tougher and more foolhardy breed of sheep, round a bend and then, suddenly, you look down and there is the valley, with its winding river, fertile fields, a village tucked away at one end, and a verdancy that knocks you for six with its lushness.
We had come not only to Wales but, according to the guide-books, to ‘the heart of Welsh-speaking Wales’.
Would we be understood?
There was no danger.
All spoke English, although some were more fluent than others.
It was interesting that, although Welsh was widely spoken, it was less widely written.
This was because Welsh was traditionally ‘the language of the hearth’, and not until fairly recently was written Welsh taught.
Many farmers whose English was, on the whole, very limited, nevertheless filled in all the inevitable forms from the Ministry of Agriculture and Milk Marketing Board in English.
Very few could cope with the writing of their language.
Now, of course, it is taught in schools along with English — which most children don't speak until they start their education.
There was above our famous hearth, inserted into those massive stones, an inscription on a piece of slate that the previous owner had had placed there, I imagine with the aid of an English-Welsh dictionary, which can be fraught with pitfalls.
He had meant it to read, ‘The mill is not grinding tonight’, no doubt considering it an apt motto for a winter evening by the fire.
The reaction of the locals varied from an ill-concealed smirk to a barely suppressed guffaw.
It appeared that by some quirk of Celtic syntax the inscription can mean, ‘The miller is not grinding tonight.’
‘Quite possibly true,’ observed Nigel, ‘but I feel not exactly what had been in mind.’
Our new neighbours were very polite.
One day before we had moved up there I was at the melin for a few days with an actress friend from London when I announced my attendance at a jumble sale that afternoon.
Jumble sales are my passion, and I was amazed to hear that my friend had never been to one.
However, not one to miss a new experience, she agreed to come.
I explained that we must lunch early and be in the queue at least fifteen minutes before the doors opened if we hoped for bargains.
It was pouring with rain.
The sale was in the sports pavilion and there was a small porch at the entrance.
When we arrived, it was filled by five women chattering away in Welsh.
They kindly squashed up to let us into the shelter, whereupon all conversation ceased.
We were strangers.
I daren't look at my friend.
I knew I couldn't last out fifteen minutes of such silence and that I, at least, would get a childish attack of nervous giggles.
After about two minutes the ladies resumed talking, but this time in English.
Apparently it is considered ill-bred in the extreme to speak Welsh in front of English people who don't understand it.
If you want an example of perfect manners, that was undoubtedly it.
Many incomers, as the English immigrants are called, younger and more intrepid than I, are learning or have attempted to learn Welsh.
I know without being told what a difficult language it is to pronounce with English oral equipment, but they also beat their brows in anguish wailing, ‘Oh, the mutations.’
For instance, take the word ‘melin ’(which incidentally is not unlike the French word for mill —moulin ): in certain situations, which I can't begin to understand, this becomes felin , the F being pronounced V. If you want the F sound, that's two Fs.
See what I mean?
In London it was afternoon before the furniture van was fully loaded.
The men were going to stay the night in Llangollen, thirty miles from their destination, and hoped to be with us around ten the next morning.
After  having to make three attempts to turn the huge pantechnicon into our lane, they finally succeeded.
I then, and only then, believed in our new address.
The next few weeks were the usual scurry of fitting and fixturing.
The first thing that Nigel got down to was, as I expected, fixing up his hi-fi, and on our very first evening that vast area reverberated with the great big beautiful noise of ‘Also sprach Zarathustra ’, so I felt truly at home.
The kitchen was transformed with pine units cleverly designed to be fixed to the walls so that one could have them at the height best suited to whomever was to use them, and then the dishwasher was installed.
I'd never owned one before and I adored it.
On the day we first saw the melin Nigel said, ‘This is a place about people.’
I agreed.
Then, almost in the same breath and contemplating all that space, he added, ‘You're not going to fill it up with furniture are you?’
I pointed out that people liked to have something to sit on but promised that I'd leave him plenty of scope for pacing, which was the way he did his thinking.
Now he was thinking about dishwashers.
‘What one really needs,’ he said, ‘is to have two.’
His reasoning, as ever practical, was that it was a chore having to empty the thing, and if one had a second, it would be unnecessary.
The finished one would act as a cupboard, full of clean dishes and utensils, which would also save on storage units.
We never did in fact get another, but the idea has remained in my mind as a good one.
I got on with my kitchen garden.
The theory, stated firmly in most gardening manuals, that planting potatoes the first year on neglected land helps to clean it of weeds was erroneous — at least as far as ours was concerned.
We bought a  rotovator .
This is a great piece of garden machinery but only if your land is already free of perennial weeds such as dandelion, dock and, the worst pest of all, creeping buttercup; if not, all it will do is to chop them into little pieces, and where you had one when you used it, you'll have a hundred or more next year.
Every bit of those chewed-up roots will develop into a flourishing new plant the following season.
I have already commented on the fertility of the plot, and the weeds loved it.
There was nothing for it but to attempt to dig them out by hand.
Incidentally, it was the only part of the so-called garden that had any depth of soil at all; the rest was very sparsely covered.
This fertility, according to Nigel, was due to the miller's no doubt having for years, when clearing the millpond of silt, put it straight on the land, nothing being more nutritious.
‘That would be hard work without a tractor,’ I said.
‘Oh yes,’ Nigel replied, ‘but he wouldn't have done it himself.
He'd have paid a small army of little boys a penny or two a day to run up and down the hill with buckets of the stuff.’
Oh little boys, where were you now?
I could have done with a few.
Never mind, they'd done a good job, and I had one plot of depth and richness on our otherwise bald mountain.
Bald, that was, but for grass and brambles, which nevertheless produced some of the most luscious and well-flavoured blackberries I have ever tasted.
The rest of the garden — the terraced part — I upgraded slightly during our time there, but the main improvement came from following written instructions on what to plant on poor, acid soil.
I knew nothing of growing before Melin Meloch, but when we left, it didn't look half bad.
Nigel used to say, ‘If you can read, you can cook,’ and I would say the same of gardening.
I know that the sages often give conflicting advice, that the shrub or bush that you are about to prune looks nothing like the diagram in your hand, and as for the picture on the seed packet — well, enough said, but you do learn from their experience and your own what will and won't do well in your particular spot and even, if it doesn't sound too fanciful, for your own particular temperament.
I leaned that my soil was too heavy to grow decent carrots or beetroot and that parsnips always forked because, although the soil was deep and good, the amount of stones could be only marginally reduced at  each forking over.
There were always more lurking below, and this is no good for the production of root vegetables.
However, the crops that failed seemed to be the ones that were cheapest to buy; French beans, mange-tout peas and Swiss chard would proliferate way beyond predictions on the packet.
On a sunny wall I grew tomatoes and found that they needn't be, after all, red bags of tasteless liquid but firm and sweet and tasting of — I could just remember it — tomatoes.
Oh, the cleverness of me!
There's a photograph of me sitting cross-legged in the drive proudly displaying my first bumper crop of onions which Nigel learned to string à la français .
I thought I was the greatest.
Nigel once remarked that if the meek do inherit the earth, I'll be lucky to get a window box!
My jubilation those first few years was due to the fact that, since I had never grown anything before, any edibles would have been a miracle, let alone this bounty.
Friends were unbelieving.
It won't last, they said.
Her whole life was acting — she'll never settle down in the country.
Well, she did.
The reason being that she had found something as satisfying, if not more so.
Also it was something new about which there was much to learn, and that was truly exciting.
And the people Nigel had spoken of came and sat on the chairs and helped us.
They seemed to find the place as fascinating as we did, luckily.
Colleagues of Nigel's helped with the waterworkings, and my friends got dug into the soil and helped whitewash, and one made most of our curtains, and they really seemed to enjoy it.
But the evenings were sacrosanct: we all knocked off at six for a happy hour round the fire with our drinks in winter and on the sun terrace in the summer.
Nigel or I, sometimes both, cooked, and even friends tackled it from time to time.
I have never been known to turn down a volunteer for any project.
After dinner we would gossip, play cards or perhaps walk along the Dee, idly picking up a piece of driftwood here and there along the way.
We so enjoyed having friends to stay and got to know  them so much better than in London.
There one met at each other 's homes for dinner, one eye on the clock on the way — cursing the traffic, having to watch the drinks as one was driving and mustn't be too late as Nigel had to be up early for work.
But here it was so different.
Being over 200 miles from town, I told them it was scarcely worthwhile coming for less than three days — preferably more; so they did.
It was interesting to observe how they arrived full of animation and determined to be good and entertaining guests and then to watch the slightly false vivacity fade away as the melin had its usual effect.
This usually happened after lunch on the day following their arrival.
They relaxed and started doing their own things.
One would hear, ‘I'm going blackberrying.
Anyone want to come?’ or, ‘I saw a fallen branch over the road this morning.
Want to give a hand to drag it in?’ and, ‘Where's the mushroom basket?
There are some in the field at the back.’
There developed a saying, ‘If it's Tuesday or Wednesday, it must be Melin Meloch.’
Such was the timelessness of our life there.
Meanwhile Nigel's installations were coming on apace.
The turbine had arrived from the works, and also the alternator, which by now I had learned was merely another name for a generator, though of a fancier kind as it made AC whereas a generator made only DC.
Cor!
Both pieces of equipment had obviously been rebuilt with meticulous and loving care and shone with glossy new paint of the dark green picked out with gold which I always associate with the more impressive railway engines.
A sluice gate was installed up the hill where the water that would create our power was diverted from the Meloch into the millpond, and another at the other end of the pond above the terraces at the back of Melin Cottage.
By raising or lowering these gates, one could control the flow of water both into and out of the pond and thence into the sluice, at the other end of which was the pipe which fed the turbine in its house below.
The sluice gates also acted as a safety measure to guard against flooding  when the river was in spate.
I was at last learning some general principles.
By now the cottage lettings were in full swing.
Starting at Easter, the bookings would continue more or less uninterrupted until after the autumn half-term at the end of October.
The change-over day from one occupancy to the next was on a Saturday, when our admirable Jane Jones arrived to clean and prepare it for the next lot.
Very occasionally she would come and tell me that it had been left so immaculate that she'd had almost nothing to do and instead would remove some of the dust in the melin for us.
On one of these days Nigel commented that he had observed that grandma had accompanied the family that week, so he wasn't surprised.
I asked him what bearing that had on the cleanliness of the cottage.
‘Oh,’ he said, ‘I saw her.
She obviously thoroughly disapproved of holidays and spent all her time polishing the plastic.’
I always looked hopefully for grandmas after that, and I must say that this theory proved right time and time again.
My memories of the tenants are hazy and episodic.
The abiding impression was how little trouble they were, which greatly surprised Nigel.
His dismal forebodings of being continually disturbed by knocks on the door requiring information and complaining were not realized.
Some lessees we hardly saw except when they arrived to pick up their keys and left to return them.
In between they were too busy enjoying themselves on the beach at Barmouth, or down by the lake or clambering up Snowdon.
Others we chatted with when we met them around the grounds, and some became temporary friends who asked us in for coffee or drinks, invitations which we pleasurably returned.
One or two families came back several times, and we exchanged cards and news at Christmas.
Nigel had a problem.
He had an appalling memory for faces, although he did remember cars.
The problem arose if our visitors had changed them between one trip and  the next, when he would be completely foxed.
Often when a car drew up and an occupant approached to collect the keys he would hiss desperately to me, ‘Is it ‘How nice to see you’ or ‘How nice to see you again’?’
I would hiss back that the former would cover either situation, whereupon he would advance with a broad smile.
Quite unfairly, it was the few who did cause a hiccup in the smooth turnover of the lettings that I remember best.
Like the Dutch family who came for the half-term holiday in late February one year.
On the Friday evening, their last night, I came downstairs after a bath and was on my way to the kitchen to get supper when, in glancing out of the windows at the front, it seemed that a dense fog had developed.
A closer look and I realized that it was not fog but smoke, and very thick at that.
I opened the front door, and the merest sniff — choking and sulphuric — told me that a chimney was on fire, and it wasn't ours.
I called urgently to Nigel to go next door to see what was happening, as I was unsuitably dressed.
He was back quite soon and looking distinctly puzzled.
Apparently the scene in the cottage was entirely normal, not to say cosy.
Mum, dad and the three children were sitting round the fire, cracking nuts and watching TV and the atmosphere inside was as clear as a spring dawn — not a puff of smoke to be seen.
Nigel asked what fuel they were using.
They seemed surprised and told him that they had been burning their rubber boots.
Nigel was baffled but, as the view from their window was now clearing, apologized for disturbing them and withdrew.
We sat long over the supper table pondering the incident.
They were not short of logs and surely, if one wished to dispose of one's wellies, the dustbin was the simplest solution?
We finally gave up, agreeing that it was perhaps an old Dutch ritual performed always on the last night of a holiday.
Well, we'd heard of burning one's boats, but really!
Nothing further was said either to or by our guests, and they drove off the next day with many felicitations and expressions of gratitude.
Neither of us ever forgot the Dutch family van Spud either, although they were charming.
They just had a problem.
Van Spud' wasn't their real name, of course.
We called them that because about half an hour after they moved in, the head of the household knocked and enquired of Nigel, ‘Please, how do you cook potatoes?’
Nigel started to explain.
‘Well,’ he said, ‘you can peel them and boil them or cut them up and fry them or…’
Our new tenant cut him short.
‘No, no,’ he said, ‘pray come with me.’
Nigel accompanied him to the cottage.
The predicament turned out to be the cooker, at which his wife was staring blankly and with a certain nervousness.
Nigel explained the workings of the hot plates and turned one on to demonstrate.
Minheer Spud was still puzzled and asked, ‘But where is flame?’
He had never come across an electric cooker before, as in the Netherlands the cooking and heating are done by natural gas.
He nevertheless adapted well to this new-fangled contraption and made the most excellent coffee on it, of which we drank many cups with him and his family during their visit.
By now the millpond had been lined with heavy-duty polythene to avoid leaks, and the installations in the turbine house were completed and ready for T-Day, as we called it in June 1976.
In theory.
1976, it may be remembered, was the year of the great drought, and we had to wait a frustrating three months until there was rain in sufficient quantity and enough water in the river to try it out.
This was not until mid-September, and Nigel, I and two of his colleagues foregathered in the turbine house for the big switch-on.
I was in charge of what is known as the governor, which I felt might be an error, but I did exactly as I was told and all went well.
There were tears of ecstasy all round.
We should have had champagne.
The old mill was grinding again.
From that moment Pollyanna had nothing on us: we always had something to be glad about.
There was no lovelier place to be in fine weather, and we also rejoiced in the rain, because rain equalled kilowatts.
Without  water-power we could never have afforded to heat the place.
For those of my readers who have a taste for figures, we produced 7½ kilowatts when there was plenty of water, which there usually was in our climate.
It was seldom in an average summer that we were unable to supply at least our needs for hot water and cooking.
The latter was done on an old cooker which was based on the storage principle.
It was GEC's attempted answer to the Aga, and to my knowledge there is only one other still in existence, which is in the Science Museum in London.
I believe that it never really took off but it was ideal for use with water-power.
It took only half a kilowatt and was permanently ready with a large rectangular hot plate which was kept under a heavy, well-insulated lid unless in use.
If one needed a hotter oven, one simply flicked a switch which directed some extra heat in a downwards direction.
We also had a modern electric one which ran off the mains and which was known as ‘The Pay Cooker’, whose use was frowned upon except in cases of drought and when Nigel was making bread, for which the free oven didn't, to be honest, get quite hot enough.
We had, to the uninitiated, a bewildering assortment of electric sockets throughout the house.
Friends kind enough to offer to do the ironing or a bit of hoovering could be alarmed by cries of, ‘No, no!
That's a pay socket.
Put it in the other one!’
Drought was not the only condition that created a shortage of free power.
Heavy and prolonged frosts could reduce the normally steep and swift-flowing river to a mere trickle.
Those were the only times when we used a bit of coal.
With the underfloor heating at a bare minimum, it gave out considerably more heat than wood, and I loathed it.
Any puff of smoke ejected was so foul-smelling compared with the evocative aroma of a log fire.
When I had been away, I would swear, even if I were blind, I'd have known I was home again the moment the door was opened, from the smell of the wood-burning fire.
This was the case whether the fire was lit or not.
It was the smell of Melin Meloch.
We adopted a redundant sheepdog named Fly — sorry Ffly; ‘redundant’ because she was too deaf and too blind to be worked any more.
A more loving and loved animal it would be hard to imagine.
She went everywhere with us and could be fast asleep in the back of the car when we turned into our lane, whereupon she would sit up and start sniffing the air.
She, I have no conception how, also knew we were home.
Still on the subject of pets, I mustn't forget Mrs. I found her under the millstone table outside the kitchen on a cold November evening.
Nigel was in Japan for a conference, and she and I both needed a bit of company.
She was also very hungry and was drinking from a muddy puddle.
All I had were some trout in the freezer by courtesy of the millpond.
We were pretty unsporting.
We didn't fish in the accepted sense, which I've always thought was a ghoulish thing to do anyway.
I mean, you know how it feels at the dentist when he puts an injection into the roof of your mouth?
Well then, look at some of those three-pronged hooks used to catch fish.
Someone once said, ‘If fish could scream, there would be far fewer anglers.’
Anyway, Nigel, who loved trout, used to drain the millpond from time to time to rid it of some of the accumulated silt and then just pick them up.
So Mrs had a fish dinner and, you'll never guess, there she was next morning under the millstone table doing her Oliver Twist bit.
Naturally she took up residence, and by the time Nigel came back she was well established.
She was a highly decorative and characterful cat.
We were glad she had chosen us.
I have spoken of the feeling of timelessness at the melin.
In many ways this was so, but we were, of course, also bound by the cycle of the seasons, which quickly developed an unchanging patten.
Christmases were wonderful and greatly looked forward to by us both, but they were also tiring, and in early January, when all danger of further jollity from New Year had receded, we  took ourselves off for a couple of days.
Our choice was invariably Lake Vrynwy Hotel, a large Gothic edifice in which it was easy to imagine all kinds of Agatha Christie-like goings-on, although we never actually encountered any.
The hotel was high above the lake itself, with a fabulous view.
The light over the water and on the folds of the mountains which formed the banks seemed to change almost by the minute and was an unending delight until nightfall.
Having completed our ‘good for us’ walk, we settled down by one of the two huge log fires with our paperbacks in the happy anticipation that tea would arrive promptly at four and would consist of improbably thinly cut home-made bread and butter and other bakings, whose smell had been pervading the lounge for some time with forecasts of gratifications to come.
Later, after leisurely baths, we would go down to the bar for our aperitifs and continue reading or play cards until dinner, which was always excellent and ended with a savoury — an almost obsolete course, sadly.
They also, I remember, served grapenuts for breakfast.
Hedonism could go no further.
The bar closed during dinner but a delightful custom prevailed which consisted of arranging all the bottles on a table in the hall below a notice inviting guests to help themselves and enter libations imbibed in the book provided.
Such trust arose from the implied assumption that, ‘Our guests are gentlemen.’
As with the Bala band, we had caught the end of an era.
It doesn't happen any more.
After we returned home it was time to order seeds for the coming year and get stuck into renovations of Melin Cottage.
It was a job I loathed.
An old building, unoccupied for months, festooned with gungy cobwebs and dust which, when removed, revealed our tenants' indiscretions of the past season.
Chipped paint, flaking walls, loose handles and the annual bathroom problem.
The bathroom, having been converted from the front parlour, was downstairs and backed onto a small room at the rear of the cottage in which we kept the hoover, other  cleaning materials and spares of this and that, such as light bulbs and rolls of loo paper.
This was kept locked from tenants who couldn't have used it anyway owing to the condition of the two inside walls, which were crumbling alarmingly.
Half-way down these walls, one of which backed onto the bathroom, slightly below waist-height there was a wide slate slab on which the pig used to be salted to preserve it through the winter.
The trouble was that the salt had permeated the walls and penetrated through to the other side, where beads of moisture coming through the plaster accounted for the detachment of the wallpaper, which by this time was hanging loose in a depressing and derelict manner.
No expert could tell me of a product to cure the problem.
‘Once you get salt into a wall…’, they'd say and shrug hopelessly.
At these times with, ‘just me and my radio’, as the old song has it, I developed a close, though one-sided relationship with Jimmy Young.
We spent many hours alone together in that cottage.
It was then time to dig over the kitchen garden, although we now had help.
Raymond, husband of Jane Jones, would come at the weekends and in summer some evenings as well.
He was, apparently, tireless and very strong.
He would trench the ground and dig in the cow dung which was kindly supplied by Mr Williams across the Meloch.
In no time, it seemed, the Easter holidays were with us, and with them the start of the visitor season.
Jane would come and give the cottages — we built the second one in 1977 — a final clean and polish, and we would replace any damaged or soiled furniture or utensils.
Replacements such as furniture and curtains which I picked up in auction sales we kept in what we called the dry store.
This was part of the big garage at the top of the drive by the road.
It was an extraordinary construction — for a garage, that is — on two floors which Nigel said had been used to dry the corn.
A portion of the top floor we'd completely sealed off with walls of polythene  sheeting, and a powerful dehumidifier had been installed.
There was no heating but, as Nigel pointed out, it isn't cold that destroys — it's damp.
So, in theory, all should have kept in the same condition as when first stored.
Then one day, when searching for a mattress, because I had put one of ours from the melin into one of the cottages, we were confronted with a problem we hadn't anticipated.
Mice.
They had eaten their way into a trunk of bedding which had to be thrown out in entirety.
Not only that but when we found the mattress we were searching for, one corner had been completely eaten away.
I think that was the first time I uttered the words, ‘Never mind.
It's only for us’, which subsequently became yet another motto at Melin Meloch.
The best of everything always went to the tenants.
We retrieved the dented, cracked, chipped and broken and repaired what we could and used it ourselves.
The chair with the wobbly leg, the dented saucepans, the knives with loose handles, all were gathered up and restored if possible, mainly by Nigel, who, when I produced new casualties almost weekly as the season wore on, would sigh and say patiently, ‘Put it on my bench, darling.’
I developed what amounted almost to a fetish about toasters.
I couldn't pass one up at any jumble sale.
Nigel, who in any case really delighted in sows' ears which had the faintest possibility of turning into even cotton purses, beavered away with them for an hour or more before unceremoniously dumping them in the dustbin and banging down the lid.
He would then enquire how much I'd paid for the latest irreparable objects, and if it had been 20p or less he'd say, with satisfaction, ‘Well, at least it had a decent plug’, and the decent plug would go into the decent plug box.
Sometimes he got them going, and usually when he did, his repairs would last for years.
From then on it was seeding and weeding.
The only time I took off was the last week of June and the first week in July to watch Wimbledon — yes, we finally bought a TV, and a coloured one to boot, which seemed  the height of posh.
Nigel remarked gloomily that he didn't suppose it would make the programmes any better, but in a way it did.
It was easier to see the ball during that sacrosanct fortnight.
During this time I would stifle all feelings of guilt.
After all, everything was sown and the harvest was still some weeks away, so I could afford a little time off.
However, unconsciously I must have been riddled with remorse for so neglecting my duties.
I remember a horrifying dream I had during one Wimbledon wherein I was sitting on top of a tall step-ladder half-way down the garden in the umpire's position — not awarding points to the thrusting vegetation below but conducting them with a baton.
They were changing their shape and form as I did so, and some, the McEnroes of the plot, were becoming very ugly indeed in their behaviour.
I was desperately trying to keep control but felt horribly threatened.
It sounds amusing, I know, but I awoke with a pounding heart and sweating with fear.
After the finals it was time to pick the redcurrants and raspberries, which was no one 's favourite job, but the consolation of the thought of summer puddings, not just in summer but all the year round, goaded us on, because if there exists a more ambrosial delight I don't know of it.
August was a very wicked month.
Friends with children and those in the teaching profession all wanted to visit us then, in the school holiday time.
Useless to tell them to book early for the peak period: they came in droves.
Some arrived with tents or caravans.
Both cottages bursting with paying guests, ours just had to take their chances and when all our beds were full to bring sleeping-bags.
At least there was room on the floor of the gallery — which curtailed Nigel's ‘pacing space’ somewhat but was counterbalanced by the advantage of more than adequate free labour for harvesting.
Our friends would pick and pod the peas and beans, and Nigel and I would complete the operation.
He blanched and I would chill and bag them and put them in the freezer.
It was an excellent system.
We had moved  with one small freezer and had bought two more mammoths — one of which was housed in the garage.
This was an exhausting but very happy and satisfying time.
All was safely gathered in and Mr and Mrs Squirrel Nutkin's hoard was laid up for winter's sustenance.
One product I found did not freeze well.
Runner beans.
I tried blanching and not blanching, cutting them every which way and freezing whole.
No dice.
They were flabby and boring.
They ended up in soup, as we wasted nothing.
Well, a lot of things did — end up in soup, I mean.
I still see our long pine table groaning with food, a large oil painting of Nigel's only respectable ancestor (’ All the rest were cattle-rustlers,’he said), one John Spottiswoode Archbishop of St Andrews, gazing benignly down upon us.
I would dispute this claim, saying that no one could be archbishop of a golf course, but Nigel showed me family records to prove his point.
Anyway, to return to the harvest supper table: I would admonish the company to eat up or, ‘It'll all go in the soup.’
It all did.
Our lunchtime potage was usually a treat.
Only once did our guests mutiny and that was when I served up pastry soup.
I didn't blame them.
It was fairly disgusting.
Ffly ate it, but then she would eat anything but mushrooms and there were seldom any of those up for grabs.
In a good year a gathering of twenty pounds would not be at all unusual of the largest and most succulent imaginable.
The freezers sagged with them.
The autumn, for the first few years, brought our greatest problem.
‘Autumn Leaves’ is a beautiful and haunting song.
The fall, identified for so long with a sweet, sad nostalgia, a magnificence of gold and crimson under startling blue skies, became for us a nightmare.
We hated it.
The reason for this was that the fallen leaves blocked our sluice and had to be removed manually with a hay rake at least three times a day and often at night as well.
The night shift was no trouble to me if Nigel was at home, but he was just as likely to be thousands of miles  away, doing something with lighthouses.
On these occasions I would be awakened at night by a gurgling sucking noise reminiscent of a saliva ejector of gargantuan size.
But I knew that it was no massive dental operation in progress but that the sluice itself was blocked by leaves, that the water going into the pipe which fed the turbine was at a minimum and that if I didn't get up and deal with the problem the turbine would shut down and the melin would be pretty cold in the morning.
So up I'd get, wellies on, anorak over nightie, and stump up the steps which led to the sluice to start work.
And it was work.
A hay rake full of wet, rotting leaves can be very heavy, and it took around twenty heavings as a rule to clear enough to stop the pipe gasping for breath — or, rather, water.
I would then return to bed, setting the alarm for 7 a.m. for a repeat performance.
Later we tried wire netting over the sluice and then mesh screens which rested each side and after a heavy snowfall collapsed into it, unable to bear the weight.
Nigel was in New Zealand.
I had to summon Mr Williams that time.
I just wasn't strong enough to lift them out myself.
After that Nigel had some fine mesh screens made to measure and bolted in, but the leaves soon managed to block them too, so the labour resumed.
This leaf fall would continue for three or four months every year and took much precious time from other projects.
It was then that a friend who was also a water-power enthusiast suggested a compressor.
This was duly installed in the turbine house with an air line running up the hill and was programmed to blow air under the leaves every so often.
This stirred them up and prevented blockages.
Later on, Nigel automated the system, so that when the water level fell low enough, the compressor would straight away go into action.
So no more nocturnal sorties.
Autumn again became a glory of mists and mellow fruitfulness etc.
And how fruitful it was — our valley.
Apart from what we had sown and grown ourselves, there was the bounty  of the fields and hedgerows.
The mushrooms I have already mentioned but in addition and all for free were blackberries, elderberries, crab apples, bullaces (the original plum — rather like a damson but sweeter), hazelnuts (if we could outwit the squirrels and get in first), bilberries and sloes.
So October was now devoted to preserving this munificence.
Jams, jellies and purées of all kinds, along with sauces, relishes and ketchups, were bottled or frozen; nothing was going to waste as far as I was concerned.
It became an obsession and, looking back, I realize this and am not proud of it.
Often I didn't get to bed until 2 a.m., so busy was I adding to the stores.
I was trying to do, single-handed, what in previous days would have been accomplished only by several women in a family all working together.
It was crazy, Nigel said, and he was right.
His contribution, apart from general cooking throughout the year (he had a small but excellent repertoire), was to make our bread, which he did each week unfailingly, and also the wine.
It must be admitted that Château Meloch was a great deal better some years than others, and although it was often possible to be amused by its presumption, it was equally likely to be pronounced fit only for cooking — and on one occasion its only possible use was as a substitute for vinegar.
But, I recalled, the word ‘vinegar’ was a corruption of the French vinaigre , meaning sour wine.
It was good vinegar.
With all that activity accomplished, suddenly it was time to order the Christmas tree again, and another cycle was complete.
There were, of course, variations in the pattern of our year.
Unexpected exigencies, alarms, excursions and celebrations occurred as in any other household.
I still did some acting from time to time for short periods.
A television play or four weeks away in repertory was OK, but I finally lost my agent when I turned down an interview for a job in June, ‘because I'll be picking the gooseberries’.
I couldn't blame him.
I did several plays at  Cheltenham in that lovely wedding cake of a theatre in Regent Street, now sadly and mundanely called ‘The Everyman’.
There, as there was no performance on a Monday, I could get back to the melin on Sunday morning and not have to leave before Tuesday afternoon.
I had a natural ability to entirely forget the theatre when at home, and vice versa, which was extremely useful.
I looked forward to these breaks in routine.
To do my hair and my nails and to forget my role as head cook, bottle-washer, laundress and housekeeper for a while was refreshing, and each job increased my pleasure in the other.
I feel more people could benefit from changes such as I was lucky enough to have in my life.
When I was a child, my family had a housekeeper of uncertain temper and Thurberesque character.
I well remember hearing her stamping up the hall one afternoon shouting, ‘I hate the bloody lot of you.
I'm going to run away and be a lady gardener!’
Well, I didn't hate anybody, but the change of running away to be a lady actress was every bit as good as a rest.
Nigel approved of these occasional excursions of mine.
He appreciated women who had interests outside the home, and in any case had always loved theatre.
A friend of mine who accompanied him to a play disputed this, but it was true.
He loved theatre so much that he became very angry if it were bad.
During one of my absences our open grate was replaced by a wood-burning stove.
That is the bald fact.
Before this was done, at least three winters of argument had taken place.
Nigel had loved it as much as I, but it wasn't ‘efficient’.
I had come to dread that word — not that I wasn't all in favour of efficiency generally but I did feel that there were times when other criteria applied.
I won't go banging on about the open fireplace again, but to my mind that was certainly one of them.
However, I could see his logic, which was that not only did it burn about three times as much wood as an enclosed stove but the draught from the chimney sucked up a considerable amount of the underfloor heating, and even though it cost  us nothing, it was poor economics.
It also created a circulating draught which could be faintly felt all around the fireplace area, coming to its peak on the back of the neck of the person unwise enough to be sitting on the right of the grate.
We did supply shawls neatly folded on the back of that particular armchair as a defence, but nevertheless there were comments.
One particularly cold winter I gave in but stipulated that I mustn't be around when it happened.
So the deed was done.
When I came home from one of my theatrical capers, it was there — sitting in the hearth looking smug — and, I must admit, snug too.
It was much warmer, and I kept my sorrow to myself.
By this time everything connected with the turbine was automated.
When I turned on the dishwasher or washing machine, the power required was taken out of the underfloor heat and returned to it immediately the machines were switched off.
To me, who on a good day just about understood that there was no danger of the water's getting into the wiring system and fusing everything or worse, and was amazed that the record-player didn't run erratically, the whole set-up was a major miracle.
Although we always spoke of our ‘free’ power, the installation, the building of the turbine house and all the tunnelling had, in fact, cost quite a bit.
While still in London I would wake in the night to find the bed devoid of Nigel, whom I would find in the kitchen, drinking tea and pacing the floor.
The costs were escalating alarmingly but he felt that he was too far committed to stop.
Nevertheless, it was a worrying period, and for the first time in his life he occasionally resorted to taking one of my sleeping-tablets.
One evening he asked for one with his coffee, which I gave him.
The following morning he told me what a wonderful night's sleep it had given him and was fulsome in his praise of what he called his ‘beautiful lady’.
This wasn't me, I hasten to add, but the pill, which was based on belladonna.
After he had left for  work I found it, unmolested, under his coffee cup.
He was very suggestible.
Associated with this, I feel, was the fact that he never suffered from jet-lag.
He lived so much within his own head that the times at which he ate and slept were entirely arbitrary.
Anyway, somehow we managed the financial crises and, having done so, every time electricity costs increased, the broader were our smiles.
Two occupiers later the turbine is still doing its job and, I'm sure, with proper maintenance it will continue doing it for the next century.
In 1978 we married.
This was in strict opposition to our beliefs.
We had nothing against it for others but, having both had fairly disastrous marriages previously and having lived together in reasonable harmony for so many years, it went against the grain.
The reason for breaking our vows were pecuniary and made financial sense.
Anyway we had the brief ceremony in London to avoid all possible scandal!
Nigel had been summoned for jury duty on the date fixed for the event but his excuse of a prior engagement, whose nature he described, was accepted and he was excused.
I think he secretly always wondered if it might have been more entertaining.
Another engagement he was hoping to be offered was from Her Majesty — to be detained at her pleasure.
This was on account of the fact that not long after the big switch-on of the water power there arose a scare which threatened to ruffle the smooth surface of the millpond.
This was caused by the sudden interest of the water authorities in privately owned schemes using waterpower which, owing to the abundance of steep-flowing rivers in Wales, were proliferating at quite a rate.
They decided to invoke the Water Resources Act of 1963, which stated that in order to abstract water from a river to create power an annual licence would have to be purchased.
This would apply equally to abstraction for private or commercial use.
Nigel's case, for which he was fully prepared to be imprisoned if necessary, rested on four points:
1.
That he was not abstracting water but merely utilizing it and returning to the river the same amount in improved condition, because contact with the turbine had aerated it, and it was better for the fish.
(There were salmon in the Dee, involving extremely lucrative fishing rights.
Sometimes there were salmon in the millpond too which had lost their way — but that's another story.)
2.
That as miller, albeit milling electricity not corn, he was in possession of ancient rights to the use of water.
I think even Nigel thought he was on dodgy ground here, but it was worth a try.
3.
That the Act made a nonsense of the government's much-vaunted and widely advertised ‘Save it’ campaign.
4.
That what the Act was in fact attempting to license was gravity.
Nigel having made his views clear by letter and having gained the support of the National Association of Water Power Users, no summons was issued.
‘They realized what complete idiots they'd make of themselves,’ said Nigel complacently.
The Falklands War affected Nigel deeply.
When the islands were first invaded, he sent a telegram to Mrs Thatcher.
As I remember, it went, ‘Do not heed the siren voices of the appeasers but seek ye the enemy within.’
Shortly afterwards the lady herself started using this latter phrase.
I have often wondered…
He cared terribly and became very ‘Rule Britannia’ about it.
I think he would have sent the task force to liberate a single British sheep if necessary.
He argued, ‘How would we like to be invaded by a foreign fascist dictator and compelled to speak Spanish and drive on the wrong side of the road?’
He was riveted by the newsreels of the intrepid yompers shown every night on television.
He would dearly have loved to be with them and greatly regretted that age precluded any such thing.
His reason was, in its way, romantic, I think — it was: ‘It's all chaps, you see, the armed forces — no civilians involved.’
When it was over, he offered any unlet weeks in our cottages free of charge to any serviceman and family who had been there.
We met some nice people that way.
A petty officer, his wife and three incredibly well-behaved children were first.
He was from the Sheffield and was followed by an officer from the staff of the operations ship of Admiral Woodward, who was accompanied by his wife and little daughter.
Nigel invited them all in for food and drink and listened spellbound to feats of derring-do, asking endless questions and reminding me slightly of the painting The Boyhood of Raleigh .
Luckily they seemed to want, even need, to talk, so it wasn't necessary for me to try to head him onto other subjects as I had felt might possibly have been the case.
It would have seemed strange to those who had known Nigel in his early days as a conscientious objector to find him cheering the prime minister through the Falklands War.
Inconsistent?
Perhaps; but I've never seen any particular virtue in consistency, and it certainly made for variety.
Variety indeed was the theme of our lives at the melin.
When we first bought it, Nigel had said, ‘Well, at least we'll never be bored.
There'll always be plenty to do!’
This was spoken with a gleeful rubbing of the hands.
He wasn't joking!
Changes
For fourteen years this life continued.
Busy and happy — tiring certainly but a night's rest producing renewed energy and enthusiasm for the coming day.
However — and it seemed to happen, or I became aware of it, quite suddenly — fatigue was setting in.
That energy and enthusiasm didn't, alas, spring from a perpetual renewable source.
The stairs seemed to be getting steeper and more numerous.
Nigel's arrangement of the white slaves, as he called the domestic machines, positioned as they were on the first floor, entailed many journeys upstairs to inspect their progress.
Was the washer finished or was it merely thinking?
And the tumble dryer, was it still turning or was it the sound of the Meloch that was always with us?
Nip up and see — I didn't want the clothes to lie there and crease.
The trouble was the nipping was quite certainly taking more effort now.
Nigel had reasoned that, as most washing originated where one divested oneself of one's dirty clothes and bed linen, i.e. the top floor, it was poor time-and-motion study to have the cleaning apparatus on the ground floor.
It seemed like a good idea at the time, but that time, I could feel, was running out, and I could see that in a very few years it would have run.
The mending and making good, the painting, papering and patching of Melin Cottage each winter were jobs I approached with diminishing verve also, and the climbing  in connection with the weeding and maintenance of the terraces were frankly becoming an enervating bore.
I thought it over very carefully before broaching the subject to Nigel.
We were going to have to move.
There was no desperate urgency, I said, but wheels should be put in motion.
After all, the greatest disaster would be to delay the decision until we were too inert to do anything about it.
This I had seen happen in the lives of others, resulting in the despairing situation of looking on hopelessly at all the work and tender loving care lavished on a place being relentlessly returned to rampaging nature, and unable to muster the physical strength and mental resolve to do anything about it.
I was adamant that this wasn't going to happen to us.
Nigel was not pleased.
Yes, that is an understatement.
We talked for many weeks, and gradually he genuinely came to see my point of view and to agree that it made sense.
We had achieved our object.
We'd created our own power, fed ourselves and our many guests from our own soil, and the cottages were letting well.
To have quit in failure would have been unthinkable but it was triumph all the way.
Melin Meloch went on the market.
Prospective buyers came and went.
Sometimes the turbine daunted them; sometimes, I suspect, the stairs but more often the size of the place.
Well, there were three houses, three garages and 1⅓ acres, which, of course, was reflected in the price.
Nigel became despondent but I didn't.
‘One day,’ I told him, ‘someone will walk in and fall in love with it just the way we did.’
Nigel wasn't convinced.
‘There aren't that many madmen about,’ he said.
But I was right.
After eighteen months it happened as I had foretold.
One morning a man walked in clutching our details; we showed him round, he professed great enthusiasm and by early evening we had sold.
The date for completion was agreed at three months ahead, and that was that.
So now where?
Nigel felt he'd like to stay in the area, and I, who always imagined I'd end my days in Brighton, yielded.
In fact, we did go down there for a week to explore the possibilities, and I admitted that it wasn't what it was and that the rosy glow that still suffused me at the very name was probably nostalgia for my touring days, when it was the most prestigious of all the dates.
A girl friend in the same show once remarked, ‘I always pumice-stone my heels for Brighton.’
That put it in a nutshell.
We would have liked to build, but planning permission in Snowdonia National Park was practically nonexistent.
The authorities had become very protective, and one hardly blamed them.
We finally settled for a modern house in a village three miles away, where I am still living.
I have forgone character for comfort, and I don't regret it.
Memories of Melin Meloch are numerous and vivid.
It was so very much the right place at the right time.
A time for sowing and for reaping, for plotting and planning, of the joy of friends, of warmth and love and the pleasures of achievement.
In short, the realizing of a dream; one could ask no more.
In October 1986 Nigel seemed slightly down.
Nothing one could pinpoint — just not quite himself.
I put it down to a lingering melancholy and sense of impending loss at leaving the melin, even though by now he was in full agreement.
He had had a long-lasting bout of influenza early in the year which antibiotics didn't alleviate, and the attack had weakened him somewhat.
But he recovered after about five weeks, and I thought all was well again.
In fact, it seemed so for several months.
And then the pain started.
It was in his shoulder blade and was promptly diagnosed as muscular.
He was prescribed pain-killers and a bottle of embrocation and, when these proved useless, stronger pain-killers and various sprays.
Looking back at this time, Nigel was surprisingly patient, but he was worried that, if he didn't improve, he'd be unable to help with the move as almost any  movement of his right arm increased his suffering.
Only in bed could he find any ease, and he started to spend most of his time there.
Obviously something more must be done.
An appointment was made for him to see an orthopaedic consultant who had a monthly clinic in Bala.
X-rays were taken, his condition was pronounced not serious, and he was told to attend the next month if he wasn't better.
After two weeks with no sign of improvement, a friend told me of an excellent new rheumatologist who had just come to work in Chester.
I more or less demanded that Nigel be referred to her.
An early appointment was arranged.
We were both greatly taken with this lady, who after much questioning gave Nigel a thorough physical examination, and more X-rays were taken.
She told us that the best thing for him would be to have some traction sessions three times a week at Wrexham Hospital.
This would entail a sixty-mile round trip for us, but who cared if he could be freed of that perpetual pain he had suffered for so long?
The following Sunday, having not yet received an appointment card, I was certain, quite suddenly, that Nigel's pain was not muscular.
He spent his time in bed, lying on his left side as it was the only position in which the pain was slightly eased.
He still liked to come down for meals but often couldn't last out and would leave his food and return.
This happened on the Sunday in question, and as I watched him climb the stairs, dragging himself up by the banister, I saw that he was sweating heavily.
As soon as I had settled him down, I rang the doctor.
The younger partner was doing duty that weekend.
His wife answered and told me that he was out on a call but she'd give him my message.
My message was unequivocal: ‘This man is seriously ill.’
The GP appeared, and the news wasn't good.
A note had arrived at the surgery from the lady in Chester saying that after careful study of the X-rays she thought that Mr Spottiswoode's pain might be connected with a chest problem.
Two days later we were at Wrexham Hospital — not for Nigel to undergo traction as anticipated but to see the chest specialist and to be told that he had a fatal disease.
I felt that the news was broken to us in a very inhumane manner, but perhaps there is no way to sweeten the statement, and the sooner the news is conveyed the better for both the giver and receiver.
In any case, I wouldn't want the job.
‘You have an inoperable cancer of the right lung,’ said the great man, and he pointed to a large X-ray photograph blown up on a screen in front of us.
All I could see, as usual, with my untrained eye, were blobs and shadows.
The consultant pointed to one of the blobs, which appeared no more remarkable than any other.
‘There, that's it,’ he said.
But curable surely?
My mind automatically shying away from a truth that I couldn't accept.
I mean, they've made such strides…
We were sent to X-ray.
Nigel was taken in and I waited.
The consultant joined me.
I popped the question.
‘He hasn't long to live,’ was the answer.
‘What do you mean by ‘not long’?
Months, weeks?’
‘Oh, months,’ he answered, ‘about five, six at the most.’
I can't explain what I felt.
I don't know what I felt — even now.
The man was still talking.
Saying that he had a clinic the next day in Bala, and I could come to see him there if I liked.
I believe he wanted to be kind but I didn't go.
I didn't see what we'd have to talk about.
I cursed myself for not realizing what the trouble was.
Nigel had been a very heavy smoker but had given it up eight years earlier, as had I.
I'd tried hard for many years to get him to stop, in the face of informed professional opinion, but he had always shrugged it off.
‘Never trust an expert’ was one of his famous dinner-party conversation-stoppers — or sometimes starters.
But the fact that, in the face of the overpowering evidence against the addiction, he had finally managed to give up all that time ago, combined with the fact that the pain was in the shoulder blade and not the chest, had contributed to putting me off the scent.
Nigel rejoined me, dressed, and we returned to the car.
I didn't turn the key.
We sat staring at the rain streaming down the windscreen.
It was two weeks before Christmas.
At last Nigel spoke.
‘This is extremely inconvenient,’ he said.
This reaction was typical of the man.
He had the wriest, driest sense of humour I have ever encountered.
Not long after we met, I remember telling him that in my opinion his only fault was that he was too predictable, that, although no doubt perverse, I enjoyed being kept guessing a bit more often.
Nigel considered this for a few moments and then he said, ‘Tell you what.
In future I'll be unpredictable on Thursdays.’
But I wasn't laughing this time.
We drove home.
That evening — still numb — a new but already dear friend, Gabby, telephoned to hear the verdict.
I told her and mouthed to Nigel who it was, and did he want to speak to her?
He did, and I heard him say, ‘Well, at least I lived long enough to meet you, love.’
Speaking to me later she said, ‘That really broke me up.’
Me too.
The next day Nigel was calm and very pulled-together.
He made appointments to see our solicitor that afternoon, and the bank manager the next.
His affairs and will were in good order but there were odd points that he wanted to check.
We received a call from the hospital, which had by this time received the results of the X-rays.
They asked us to go back to see a doctor from the Christie Hospital in Manchester in two days time.
The Christie Hospital is one of the foremost cancer treatment hospitals in the country, and Nigel was admitted the day after Boxing Day and given four X-ray therapy treatments.
These produced the most miraculous result.
The pain, which was due to the pressure of the cancer on a nerve, was entirely relieved by the shrinking of the growth, to the extent at which it caused no further suffering.
Back home again, with Nigel free from pain, I tried to make everything as easy as possible for him.
Nigel himself vacillated between belief in and total rejection of death, and busied himself with sorting out his desk and jettisoning surplus papers.
It was a day or two before I realized that his behaviour was becoming more than a little frenetic, to say the least.
He would go up to his desk, work there shredding paper, come down and in no time rush up again to check on some figures and return bringing more paperwork with him.
He'd write lengthy letters to his accountant, stockbroker, bank etc, most of which I tried to convince him were quite unnecessary to do at that moment — if indeed at all.
I started keeping any post connected with finance away from him, and myself dealt with the usual household accounts such as the telephone and electricity, because even they sent him into a frenzy of checking and referring back to previous demands, an attitude completely alien to his normal temperament.
He wanted to pay the TV licence, although it wasn't due until July, and sent off a post-dated cheque which, incidentally, was how I found out they don't accept them.
(If there is a reason for this, I can't think of it.)
Figures bothered him, and the fact that he had always found them easy bothered him still more.
Wherever he went in the house, he carried reams of calculations and sometimes would get up in the middle of a meal because he suspected that his calculator was at fault.
He became very bitter and cursed the medical profession.
I could hardly blame him here — at least his feelings; but even if, with an earlier and exact diagnosis he could have been spared a great deal of pain over a considerable period of time, I realize that nothing could have saved him.
A five-year survival rate in lung cancer is still less than ten per cent.
This particular cancer is so late to show its existence.
But Nigel was disturbed and angry.
There came a day shortly afterwards when I could no longer ignore the fact that he was losing his mind.
He had been awake nearly all the night with an attack of hiccups — something he had never been prone to.
It was frightening and exhausting for him, and as early as I dared I telephoned the doctor, who came quickly and prescribed Largactil.
This stopped the hiccups and  calmed him down, and that night he slept for sixteen hours.
The next morning, although he felt better, his hands were shaking so much that I refused to let him shave with a safety razor and told him that a friend was bringing his own electric shaver to lend him.
‘What time is he coming?’
Nigel asked.
Around eleven, I told him.
‘Well, in that case,’ he replied, ‘I shall certainly need some more piccolos and probably a couple of flutes!’
I thought he was joking but it was a far from laughing matter.
That same day he not only thought we were in Denmark but decided that it was imperative to write three letters to his cousin Marianne in New York — simultaneously!
He had three pieces of paper in front of him and was writing a line at a time on each — a different line on different aspects of his recent battle with lung cancer, which, however, he stated was now completely cured.
As the days went by, his behaviour and thoughts became more and more bizarre.
He heard electrical impulses behind a large, old-fashioned enamelled flour bin on a high shelf in the kitchen and got out the step-ladder to investigate, bringing down the bin, which hit and broke a jar of clear honey in its descent; he ended up with a mixture of flour and honey all over himself, the fridge and the floor.
On returning downstairs after a much-needed bath and shampoo, he was wearing his underpants outside his trousers, and an argument ensued as to the inappropriateness of this.
I gave in — after all, we weren't going anywhere.
He also insisted that I put a notice in the local paper in order to thank ‘…all friends, Welsh and English, for their kindness and support during his recent attack of lung cancer and was happy to report that he was now well on the way to recovery’.
I stared helplessly at the announcement, written now in a very shaky hand, and did as he asked.
It wasn't the time for normal feelings, such as embarrassment.
Clearly a brain scan was needed.
Wrexham Hospital had only that month installed one, after years of jumble  sales and coffee mornings on its behalf, and Nigel was among the first patients to (I nearly wrote ‘benefit’) be diagnosed by it.
The result was not unexpected.
The cancer had spread to his brain.
This, I discovered, is common in lung cancer; in fact, quite often it is the first symptom to show itself — well before any pain or cough develops.
Our GP told me that a drug called Dexamethazone, although in no way a cure, would probably help Nigel's state of mind by reducing the pressure of the growth on his brain.
However, he said that he himself could not prescribe it, and it would all depend on the Christie consultant's view the next time we saw him.
With relief I realized that this was only a day or so away.
I was taking no chances.
I scribbled a note telling him what our doctor had said and begging him, if he saw fit, for the drug that promised the chance of an easier time for us both.
This I handed to a nurse, asking her to give it to the doctor before he saw Nigel.
We waited, sitting on the long benches in the out-patients' waiting-room, Nigel staring straight ahead in what seemed an almost catatonic trance and ignoring any of my attempts at conversation.
At length we were called to an ante-room, where he was told to strip to the waist and wait.
He sat on the examination table in his underpants, and I noticed how desperately thin he was getting.
I felt lost, lonely and helpless.
The consultant came in.
I whispered, ‘Did you read my note?’
He nodded and with professional cheerfulness addressed Nigel with, ‘And how are you feeling today?’
Still staring into space, Nigel replied.
‘I live in Bala,’ he said, ‘and my wife is out all the time.’
‘What?’
I said, utterly staggered by this statement.
Nigel turned his head to look at me for the first time and smiled in a kindly manner.
‘Correction,’ he said.
‘My wife is out most of the time.’
I looked helplessly at the doctor.
‘I never leave him,’ I said.
He nodded and wrote a prescription for Dexamethazone.
The result of this was remarkable.
Within twenty-four hours of starting to take the drug he became very nearly himself again — his very nicest self, gentle, amusing and above all calm.
Unfortunately there are side effects, and I gather the drug is given only when death is inevitable.
That Nigel was on an even keel again was a double comfort.
With our moving day getting closer; it had been arranged that until the move was completed, he and the cats would go to stay with friends Gavin and Rita Miller, who lived near Dolgellau.
They had for many years been letting cottages — although many more than we — and were just starting to think of selling up and living a quieter life.
(It comes to all of us in time.)
Their house was in one of the most beautiful imaginable positions above the Mawddach river valley and with truly panoramic views in all directions.
They were deeply fond of Nigel and he of them.
A similar relationship existed in the case of the cats and was equally important.
To have inflicted upon them a guest displaying anti-social and eccentric behaviour could not have been considered.
I had telephoned various nursing homes in the vicinity whose staff would, I thought, be more conversant with these vagaries of conduct, but they were all full up and I'd been starting to feel desperate.
But, hosannas in the highest, all was now well.
The move itself could have been worse — but not much.
However, everyone has experienced it, though not, I dearly hope, in the same circumstances.
I had sold the contents of the cottages to the incoming purchaser, as well as several large pieces from the melin which would have been quite out of place in a modern house.
Owing to the scale of the former, artefacts needed to be the size of pantomime props to appear remotely in proportion, and I had acquired them accordingly.
One such was one of those oval rattan wicker chairs which hung from a beam far above.
It was planned to be permanently in position — replacing an armchair by the fire.
In fact, it didn't work out as, when not controlled by a sitter, it would revolve slowly on its axis fourteen times  one way and then reverse and repeat the exercise.
It seemed to be competing in the age-old quest for the secret of perpetual motion and drove everyone bananas.
One evening, quite late, when an old girl friend was staying, I was sitting cross-legged in my Oriental cradle feeling wise and Confucian when my friend could stand it no longer.
‘I've had quite enough to drink,’ she said, ‘without you rotating like a top all night.
I'm going cross-eyed.’
It was time to think again.
Nigel bought a pulley, and the offending object was banished — hoisted skywards, where it hung immobile except when lowered, which became mainly for the amusement of visiting children who nevertheless were informed that any bad behaviour would be punished by hauling them up twenty-five feet into space and leaving them.
A modern oubliette.
Naturally we never carried out our threat — although greatly tempted by the kids who thought that actually it would be a great treat.
Nigel had arranged that his son-in-law (his daughter Caroline's husband), who was living and working in Denmark, and his nephew James from California would come over and help me with the move.
Help they most certainly did.
Sensible, practical and tireless, they got on well together and were beyond praise.
Gabby, who, with her husband, was preparing to run a guest house and had quite enough to do at home, cooked and brought down to the new house a hearty and beautifully cooked meal each evening, and filthy and exhausted the three of us would wolf it down.
Then around eight we would get cleaned up a bit and drive over to see Nigel, a forty-mile round trip.
But just to see his face when we walked in was well worth it.
He was avid for news of how it was all going, and regretting that he couldn't be part of it.
He was happy with his friends but, even so, longing to see the new house again.
We managed to get the kitchen, sitting-room, dining-room and our bedroom in order before his return.
The other two bedrooms were piled high with ‘don't  knows’ and ‘perhapses’, and there I intended to leave them while I recovered.
Gavin drove Nigel back one snowy January day.
He looked so frail as I watched Gavin help him out of the car, followed by the cat basket.
There was already a cat flap in the back door, and having thoroughly inspected the house Deano and Pandy disappeared to explore outside.
We had a couple of bottles of champagne to greet the travellers, and Gabby and her husband came in to help us with them and we all toasted Nigel's ‘recovery’.
Anyway, that's what he thought it was, which was all that mattered.
He was delighted with all we'd done to make the house habitable in under a week and greatly enjoyed partying with friends.
The boys and I agreed that it had all been so worthwhile.
James and John left with our undying gratitude, and Nigel and I enjoyed — if it doesn't sound too absurd — an idyllic week.
But the following Sunday — it seemed to be always on Sunday — he experienced violent pains and was rushed into hospital.
I had been told that the new drug had side-effects.
Among them was a lack of warning of the pain of inflammation in other organs.
It was acute peritonitis, and he was taken back to Wrexham hospital — this time, obviously, as an in-patient.
Later he confessed to me that he had been feeling a certain unease in the region of the colon; when I asked him why on earth he hadn't told me, he answered, ‘I'd never discuss my plumbing with ladies!’
He was operated on and survived — just, and in passing I must comment on the dedication and skill of the Indian surgeon and Sri Lankan woman anaesthetist who performed the operation.
As it was a weekend, all the bigger-wig doctors were not on duty but, knowing of Nigel's condition and that he had only a short time to live, they brought him through.
I gather that this is regarded as a controversial procedure in certain circles, but any criticism on the lines of wastage of resources on a dying man would have me to contend with.
Enough to say that, after he had recovered from the operation and came  home, Nigel and I had forty-eight days together in which he was serene, happy and free from pain, which I regard as beyond price.
During Nigel's second period in hospital, in between the times I spent there, I set about arranging his funeral.
Referring to the Open Space booklet (Section E, ‘Doing it Yourself), I refreshed my memory.
Richard Buckley, a retired funeral director stated, ‘Nothing says you must have a funeral director to carry out a funeral — nothing says you have to take a body to the crematorium in a hearse.
You can use an estate car.
You can provide your own bearers and naturally you can arrange for a minister.’
Nothing says you have to have one of these either.
He goes on: ‘Any wholesale firm will provide you with a coffin as long as you pay; they're not fussy who they provide.’
Great, I thought.
Armed with the yellow pages and a mug of coffee, I settled down by the telephone.
Coffin wholesalers or manufacturers, forward please!
Strangely, none was listed.
I tried undertakers and was instructed to ‘see Funeral Directors’.
Yes, of course— how silly of me, they'd gone up market now, and it was funeral directors' suppliers I needed.
There were several listed.
I dialled.
I kept on dialling — firms within a reasonable distance, but none was prepared to do business with me.
Apparently the sale of one coffin, retail, was out of the question; they supplied only the trade.
My request, they implied, was at the least questionable, not to say outrageous!
This was a setback I'd not expected.
There was nothing for it now but to try the undertakers themselves.
The results were the same.
Coffins were supplied as part of their full service only.
Again and again this phrase was repeated.
So: utter refusal, and refusal couched in terms of the most unctuous, sanctimonious cant imaginable.
I had reached an impenetrable blockade.
My fingers had not merely done the walking but felt as though they'd run a marathon.
This was the moment at which I came near to giving up.
I went to bed very depressed, but it seemed my subconscious had other ideas, because I woke with the remembrance of the Humanists.
They had to have an organization, I thought, and perhaps they could help.
Directory Enquiries told me that the British Humanist Association lived in Prince of Wales Terrace, in Kensington.
I wrote asking if my information still applied or had some legal restrictions been imposed since the programme had been shown?
The answer came in a very few days and was as follows:
I am very sorry to hear that your husband is dying of cancer and we can at this stage only send you our best wishes and understanding.
It remains factually correct that you can buy a coffin direct from the undertakers.
They cannot insist that you only have their full service.
It is for them to accept your instructions in this matter.
Also there is no legal obstruction to you taking the coffin to the crematorium in a station wagon.
The letter ended by wishing me luck but adding the proviso, ‘If you, having thought about the matter very deeply, are convinced you can emotionally handle the situation.’
I could .
It would have been defeat over what I now knew for certain was a perfectly reasonable and legal procedure which I would have found hard to handle.
In passing, I would like to say how grateful I was for this friendly and sympathetic, as well as informative, advice from the Humanist Association.
It gave me the encouragement I needed to carry on trying.
After breakfast I started afresh.
There were still a few funeral directors within a thirty-mile radius I had not, as yet, contacted.
It was the same story with the first three but the fourth told me that I would be certain to get a coffin from a firm of suppliers in Birkenhead and was kind enough to give me their telephone number.
I dialled and this time decided to try a little subterfuge.
I said I wanted it for an amateur production of James  Saunders A Scent of Flowers — a play I knew well and which required a coffin to be positioned downstage during the entire action.
A brisk, efficient-sounding female answered.
I explained my requirement.
‘Oh no, we couldn't possibly supply one of our coffins for that sort of thing!’
‘Why not?’
‘It might offend our customers,’ came the prim answer.
I pointed out that, their firm being in Birkenhead and my production scheduled for one-night stands in village halls in North Wales, it would be unlikely that any customers for her wares would be among my audience.
‘They are all potential customers,’ came the sepulchral reply.
Afterwards I wondered if I had offered to paint the name of her firm on the coffin for all to see, it might have helped her business and consequently her attitude towards my custom.
However, wry humour was not a quality I detected in the lady.
But back to our conversation.
I tried to reason but succeeded only in further ruffling her feathers.
‘Who told you that you could buy a coffin from us?’ she demanded.
I told her; I could almost feel the bristles down the phone.
‘Then why don't you buy yours where he buys his?’
‘Well, where is that?’
I asked.
‘S. and S. Joinery, Stoke-on-Trent,’ she snapped and down went the receiver.
Was this it?
Directory Enquiries was ringing.
Be still, my beating heart, as T. Wogan was wont to say.
Hope was making my head spin.
Cannot insist on full service.
How far Stoke-on-Trent?
No matter, I and my Metro would make it.
Number obtained.
Dial again and the miracle happened.
It was obviously an unusual request but the young gentleman didn't see why not.
I asked the price of their cheapest coffin for cremation.
These apparently  were made in veneered chipboard and would cost me £24 50.
What was the height of the deceased?
I told him Nigel's height and asked if the coffin would be supplied with any kind of container or cover.
No luck there but a duvet and dustsheets would disguise the shape perfectly well from the eyes of the squeamish.
I was asked when I would be collecting it.
I wasn't sure, I said, but soon, very soon; I'd phone and tell him within the next couple of days.
We bade each other a very goodbye.
I found that I was trembling.
I could hardly believe it.
Oh, well,
Patience and perseverance Made a Bishop of His Reverence,
I quoted out loud, light-headed with triumph as I opened a tin of lunch before setting off on the thirty-mile drive to the hospital.
The next day I was chatting to friends — Joy and Alan Byne.
As with Gabby, we hadn't known them long — almost unbelievably less than two years, but they already seemed to be old friends.
Like Nigel, Alan had retired early, and they had enlarged and modernized — quite beautifully — a cottage nearby which had been their holiday home for many years.
They had both been so kind, caring and helpful during the whole of Nigel's illness — staying with him so that I could get out to shop and have a break, taking him to his hospital appointments because their car was bigger and therefore more comfortable for him, and in dozens of other, smaller but no less important ways.
It's not easy to find words for what the two of them meant to me at that time.
I just remember the all-pervading feeling of reassurance that they gave me throughout.
I suppose I would have managed to get through without them, but it's hard to imagine how.
On that morning I was giving them the latest news of Nigel.
I told them of my plans — a little hesitantly, I admit, as they are practising Christians and I wasn't  sure how they would take to the idea of a DIY funeral.
Their reaction was immediate, surprising and heartwarming to say the least.
It was that in no way was I going to bring a coffin from Stoke-on-Trent to Llandderfel on the roof-rack of a Metro and that they were driving north for the weekend and would stop off and pick it up on the way home.
Then started the discussion about where to store it until the inevitable happened, during the course of which the doorbell rang and an elderly neighbour was revealed who had kindly called to introduce himself and to ask if there was anything he could do to help me, as he had heard my husband was ill in hospital.
I was compelled to ask him in, although it could have scarcely been less convenient.
However, he already knew Joy and Alan, and the kettle was boiling, so I asked him to sit down, and would he like to join us in a coffin?
It came out so matter-of-factly that even Joy and Alan didn't notice and our new guest was, luckily, slightly deaf.
I wished I could have told Nigel: he would have loved it.
Eventually the three of us were alone again, and I remembered that I had a large loft.
The fact of the recent move plus my mind's having been engaged elsewhere might, I hoped, explain this otherwise crass stupidity.
The loft covered an area the size of the house, with unused and shadowy places under the eaves which were unlikely to be investigated — particularly by Nigel, who, sadly, even if he came out of hospital would nevermore be able to climb the ladder.
Alan checked by telephone and arranged to collect the coffin the next Monday afternoon.
Regretfully, the young gentleman told him that he had quoted me the price to the trade, and for a retail sale it would be slightly more expensive, i.e. £36 plus VAT.
All this agreed, there was nothing more to do until it arrived.
On Monday evening Alan telephoned.
They and the coffin were safely back — the coffin in the Volvo, its outline well disguised by an old car cover, and he would bring it round after dark the next evening.
Come the following night, I was sitting at home with Caroline (Nigel's daughter by his first marriage, the wife of the ‘moving’ John, who had not long returned to Denmark).
She was in Wales for the second time that year.
The first time was in February, when she spent ten days with us when her father came home after his X-ray — therapy treatment.
This time she had been sent for urgently because Nigel had taken a turn for the worse — in fact, had nearly died after his peritonitis operation.
We had both spent three days and nights at the hospital the previous week.
People are forever knocking the National Health Service — I admit I am not myself guiltless in this — but we couldn't have been treated with more consideration.
We were given a room with a wash basin and which had a shower next door.
Admittedly there was only a single bed but that was fine by us; we kept it warm for each other as we were doing shifts of two hours each.
I insisted on taking the two till four in the morning watch, as I had read somewhere that this is the time when one is at one's lowest ebb, and therefore when death is most likely to occur.
During this time I noticed a definite regression in his mental state.
He would become irate and irrational, shouting at Caroline and me and from time to time even at the nurses, who were patient and sweet and had done nothing to deserve it.
After three such days the night nurse told us she thought that Caroline and I were exciting him and that it would be better if we went home and merely visited during the day.
I agreed, so long as the houseman would assure me that he was out of immediate danger.
This was confirmed the following morning, and that evening, not devoid of relief, we went back to our own beds.
Nigel in 1984
The author
Melin Meloch from the mushroom field
The kitchen in Melin Cottage
The cottage sitting-room
The first floor gallery with hanging chair hoisted aloft
It's working!
Nigel and I in the turbine house after the big switch on
The ground floor
Melin Cottage
The turbine house, Melin Cottage and the melin
The next day, on our arrival back at the hospital, there were bars up on the sides of Nigel's bed.
He had apparently been very obstreperous during the night — trying to get up, demanding to go home and so disturbing the other patients that he had been moved, temporarily  to a private ward.
So much for our exciting him, I thought.
I had queried his dose of Dexamethazone with a nurse earlier, and she assured me he was getting it in his drip, but I have a suspicion that it had been reduced or even forgotten.
They were all extremely busy.
When he came home and I was able again to administer the tablets, he returned to normal.
He even said once of that period, ‘I was quite mad, wasn't I?’
As we heard the Volvo backing up to the house, Caroline jumped up and said, ‘This is nothing to do with you, Jane.
I'll help Alan up to the loft with it.’
I felt my eyes filling.
What a splendid person she was.
I wondered if I'd ever appreciated her properly before.
The coffin stowed away in the loft and discreetly covered so as not to alarm the plumber, we all had a coffee with a small touch of something stronger, and Alan recounted how he and Joy had arrived to collect it.
‘In this back street,’ he said, ‘they were making coffins like they were going out of fashion.’
I remember thinking that I wished they would.
With the number of trees lost in the gales of autumn 1987 and again in 1990, surely we can devise some material other than timber products, to end up burnt or rotting in the earth?
Later a sketch of a reusable coffin was sent to me by an interested correspondent.
Primitive in design, maybe, but greatly advanced in thought.
This practical idea was put to a local crematorium by Diana Davidson, manager of the Citizens' Advice Bureau in Chichester.
She said that she had had people come to her office in tears, not knowing how they could possibly meet the cost of a funeral.
In the Chichester area, she said, the minimum cost of a hardwood coffin is £300, which, ‘seems a lot of money to be burned’.
Ms Davidson suggested to the crematorium manager that they might use a wooden coffin with a hole in the bottom.
‘So,’ she explained, ‘the body could drop through and the coffin could be used again.’
She added that such a design would cut costs considerably.
The manager was shocked.
‘Oh no,’ he said, ‘people  wouldn't like that!’
One would like to know how that conclusion was reached.
Had he taken a poll?
If not, perhaps he should before making such presumptuous statements.
Sketch of a reusable coffin from a short story by Ludwig Bemelmans published during the Second World War.
His text explains:’‘And with this funeral goes a rented coffin — it saves you buying one.’
A working drawing of this imaginative, melancholy piece of black carpentry was attached, also photographs showing its economical performance.
It looked like any other frugal coffin, but had an ingenious device — two doors at the bottom opened when a lever was pulled.
Once occupied and having been carried to its destination, the coffin opened at the bottom and the occupant was dropped into the grave.
So the rented coffin could be used over and over again.’
There are occasional glimmers of enlightenment filtering through the more hidebound attitudes.
At a recent trade exhibition staged in Paris, a Spanish firm was featuring a new idea in coffin materials made from moulding reconstituted wood pulp from agricultural waste.
They are looking for partners to develop the idea throughout Europe.
One hopes they come forward in  sufficient numbers to make such an item available to all ecologically minded funeral-arrangers before too long.
Nigel really was a fighter.
Shortly after all this, he was out of hospital and home again, convinced he had beaten his cancer and with a most positive attitude towards recovery.
Due to modern miracle drugs, he was positively euphoric.
We talked of all we would do when he was strong enough, and I put everything else out of mind and concentrated on being positive and cheerful myself, which was not always easy but I was determined to behave normally and to treat him as a convalescent and not as a sick man.
It was not too difficult.
Nigel had been very healthy all his life and, apart from a slipped disc and the odd bout of ‘flu, had never been incapacitated for more than a day or so.
He once said that he was not at all fit but was terribly well.
This distinction was made after two of his friends who were really into fitness dropped dead — one on a tennis court and another in a gymnasium.
However, he did know that he nearly died at the time of his peritonitis operation, and so it was easy to convince him that it would take quite a time before he was really strong again.
He had indeed gained strength since he came home but was nevertheless prone to stumble and even fall, as the drug which was keeping his mind rational was also weakening his muscles and bones.
I felt guilty every time I gave him his tablets, and discussed it with our GP.
The outcome was a decision to continue with the same dosage, because what is the use of physical strength without the brain to direct it?
For example, Nigel had started to do a little cooking again, and there's no point trying to prepare a dish without the wit to understand the recipe when one needs it.
(This indeed was starting to happen before he was prescribed Dexamethazone, and the results were less than appetizing.)
On 4 May 1987 a bank holiday Monday, we had just settled down to lunch before watching A Man for all  Seasons .
Nigel had never seen the film and, as it was shown rather late, we had recorded it and intended to watch it that afternoon.
We were discussing the order of Henry VIII's wives when suddenly Nigel started to make extraordinary labial noises, like a baby.
I was about to say ‘Stop mucking about’ when he fell forward into his soup bowl, unconscious.
I was terrified — both of leaving him and also of not leaving him, in order to go for help.
Luckily he was sitting in a grandfather chair with sturdy arms which would prevent his falling, so I removed the soup bowl, turned his head on one side and rushed out of the front door, picking up our ‘frog horn’ on the way.
(A frog horn is a gas-powered small-craft warning which was used at the melin to get Nigel down from the millpond to the telephone.
It was purchased because the sound of the river made reaching him by any other means quite impossible.
Car horns had no effect, and we were beginning to think that shanks' pony was the only way of attracting his attention when someone came up with this idea.)
I went out into the drive and blew up my horn like mad.
The neighbours came to their kitchen windows better to see the antics of this strange lady, and I managed to yell, ‘Get Trudie, quick!’
(Trudie being Miss Prescott, who had just, with her partner opened a residential home a couple of hundred yards away, and is a nurse.)
She was with me in no time, and while she and a neighbour carried Nigel to his bed, I phoned the doctor, who arrived very soon.
Nigel had had a brain haemorrhage.
He didn't know the doctor and was very disorientated and frightened for the rest of that day and the next; but on the following one it was as if it had never happened.
I'd told him that he had fainted, which he found fascinating.
He continued to ask visitors for quite a while about their fainting habits.
I told him he was lucky to be where he was when it happened, as when I first fainted it was in the middle of Watford High Street!
The doctor had told me that it was probable that he  would die from either an infection or a brain haemorrhage.
I had been repelling all visitors with even the slightest suggestion of a cold but had no power over the internal workings of his cancer.
Anyway, that one didn't arrive stamped ‘fatal’, and the speed of his recovery seemed almost incredible.
Eventually, though, I could no longer manage him at home — he was so weak; so I arranged for him to go into the residential home, where Miss Prescott and Mrs Whitaker did everything they possibly could to make him happy and comfortable — and succeeded.
It was, in the circumstances, an ideal situation.
His room overlooked our house, and he could watch the comings and goings — we were having some turf laid at the time in which he was taking a great interest — and I used to drive round there every evening at half past five and bring him home for a meal, after which we would chat or watch television.
Sometimes he would last out until the end of Newsnight , and other nights it would be earlier when he said, ‘I think I'd better go home now.’
The fact that he was already at home never hurt or worried me.
It meant he was happy in his room at Tirionfa, as it is called, and in any case ‘home’, to Nigel, was always where his bed was.
Whatever time I ran him back, there was always a smiling, cheerful member of staff to greet him, strap him into the stair lift, help him to undress if necessary and even bring him a last cup of tea if he felt like one.
During our evenings together we would talk about all we were going to do when he was better and were even planning a trip to North Devon to stay with our friends Steve and Iris Pugh.
I said we'd better take two days over the trip and make a stop-over on the way.
Indeed, it didn't seem quite impossible even to me, as he seemed to have reached a kind of plateau — no better but certainly no worse, free of pain and very happy — often informing me that he was getting stronger every day.
One evening he said he'd like me to fetch him the following morning, as he wanted to make some bread.
This I did around eleven.
He no longer made  conventional bread with all the kneading and rising stages, but soda bread, which is a simpler and much quicker process.
When it was in the oven, I asked him if he'd like me to clean up, wash the pastry board etc, and for the first time he let me.
Usually it was, ‘No, thank you, darling — I can manage.’
After he'd taken out the bread, I took him back for lunch and he rested as usual in the afternoon, lying on his bed and listening to the radio.
About five that afternoon Miss Prescott arrived with him in her car.
It seemed he had become confused over the time I'd said I'd pick him up, although it was always the same, and Miss Prescott thought he was a little agitated and so brought him round herself.
She also brought two double-sided tapes of Phantom of the Opera for us to play.
This was one of the shows that was most definitely included in our plans to see, ‘when I am better’.
Our friend Gabby was bringing round our meal that night.
She phoned to say that, having only just returned from Chester, it would be around nine before she could get over with it, and would that be all right?
I said, ‘Fine,’ as we were going to listen to Phantom and that would just about give us time.
We listened and loved it, and Gabby arrived with her usual deliciousnesses and stayed and had a glass of wine with us as we ate it.
It was a lovely evening.
Gabby was at her most amusing and we laughed a lot.
About eleven I noticed that Nigel had dozed off with a smile still on his face.
Next morning I had a call from Tirionfa.
Nigel wasn't very well and was asking for me.
‘No; no mad rush,’ I was told, but Miss Prescott had sent for the doctor.
I dragged on some clothes and ran over.
‘I'm all right, darling — quite all right,’ he told me.
I asked if he wanted a drink.
‘Perhaps a cup of tea,’ he said.
The doctor came.
‘He's quite poorly,’ he told me, ‘but knowing Nigel…’
He shrugged and spread his hands.
I knew what he meant.
Having survived peritonitis and a brain haemorrhage on top of an inoperable cancer, who was to speculate?
The doctor came three more times that day.
Morphia was injected and oxygen arrived.
I rang Joy and Alan, who came immediately and stayed, apart from a quick lunch break, all day.
Nigel seemed quite happy, dozed a lot and knew that the three of us were there with him.
Once he suddenly opened his eyes and said, ‘Isn't everything lovely?’
Huskily I agreed and smiled.
So did he.
Nigel was wont to say, ‘Before knocking the iniquities of present-day science and talking about the good old days, think about dentistry, and modern pain-killing drugs and anaesthetics.’
I was .
Around five o'clock I dashed back to feed the cats and to see the electrician who had arrived to fit a new ceramic hob which Nigel had ordered.
All this took about four minutes.
As I returned, I heard him say to Joy, ‘I'm dying!
I'm dying!’
This was said without fear but with considerable surprise, as most certainly such a thought had not crossed his mind for months.
He didn't speak again and shortly afterwards became unconscious.
Joy, Alan and I stayed with him, and Miss Prescott left his side only to get us coffee and sandwiches, and later scotch and sandwiches, as we waited.
The doctor came for the last time and said, ‘Yes, he's going now.’
His breathing became more and more laboured, but I was assured that he was feeling no discomfort.
Nigel died at 7.30.
It was 21 May 1987.
In the end it was that valiant heart that gave in.
‘It had had enough thrown at it,’ said the GP.
He'd gone without pain and surrounded by love.
I hope that I may be so lucky.
Leaving Joy to help Miss Prescott with what are called the last offices (Joy is also a trained nurse), Alan and I went back to the house and between us brought the coffin down from the loft.
He then telephoned Nigel's relations for me, for which I was most grateful — it had been a long day.
He then proceeded, at the same time as refilling my glass rather regularly, to produce all the necessary forms which, bless his heart, he had already collected, for me to fill in and sign in order to have the cremation.
This, according to Nigel's will, was to be done as quickly and cheaply as possible.
Alan had also arranged that he would take Nigel's body to the chapel of rest at the crematorium until the cremation could take place.
He then went back to Nigel's room to see how the women were getting on — and met the first snag in the arrangements.
There was no way that Nigel, in his coffin and with the coffin in a horizontal position, could be carried out of the room and around all the corners and down the stairs to where the Volvo was waiting.
Perhaps the professionals could have done it, I thought, but we couldn't.
(Since then I have learned that the way it is done is in a body bag, which is much easier to handle, and then transferred to a coffin either in the pick-up vehicle or at the undertakers.)
Joy and Alan came back, and it was decided that we would wait until dark and then bring him down the fire escape; luckily there was one right next to his room.
Joy told me to find some sort of a lining, and off they went.
I put an old eiderdown and a small pillow in the coffin and waited.
In five minutes or so they were back.
Nigel was strapped into a light commode in a sitting position and had been carefully carried down the fire escape to the waiting car.
(I learned from this experience that rigor mortis takes much longer to set in than I had supposed; quite some time, in fact.)
Thus Nigel, in the Volvo, came home.
We laid him in his coffin on the spare-room bed.
I was glad it was all over for him — and, it must be admitted, for me too.
Knowing that he was unquestionably going to die, and not knowing how or when, had been a strain, and the fact that it had been so much easier for him than might have been the case was a great relief.
He looked serene — I know that is always said about the dead, and after all, how else would they look?
But nevertheless, that was a comfort too.
In reflecting on the day, after Joy and Alan had gone home, I was surprised that it had seemed so unfrightening.
Being ‘in on it’, so to speak, had dissolved fear; and death, for the first time, seemed as natural to me as birth.
I made myself a coffee and went to bed, pausing to look in and say goodnight to Nigel on the way, which at the time, and since, didn't seem at all an unusual thing to do.
Much later it struck me as odd that I experienced no superstitious fear or repugnance in the presence of a dead body, although I am so squeamish that more than once I have had to ask a neighbour to deal with a dead rabbit that one of the cats had brought in during the night.
I slept soundly, a good thing in view of what the day was to bring.
On waking I had a look at Nigel and then telephoned Alan, to find out when he would be ready to drive him to the crematorium mortuary.
Alan had been busy and had arranged the cremation for the following Wednesday morning.
The unusual delay was because Nigel had died on the Thursday before a bank holiday weekend, but as soon as our GP had signed the death certificate he would be on his way.
Then began a day of great anxiety, to put it mildly.
On telephoning the surgery, I discovered that before a cremation can take place the death certificate has to be signed by two doctors — one of whom must come from outside the area.
The dilemma arose because the doctor coming from outside the area could not get there until 6.30, and the crematorium mortuary closed at 4.30 and didn't reopen until the following Tuesday.
Another setback.
I had known, of course, that the signatures of two doctors were necessary for certifying the insane, and found myself saying, ‘But he's not mad.
He's only dead!’
But there was no bending the law, even though Nigel had been ‘under the doctor, on tablets’, as they say around here, for many months.
I realized the reason, of course.
A cremated body cannot be exhumed should there be any suspected need for re-examination at a later date.
I phoned Alan and explained the problem.
He said he'd phone me back.
At that time I didn't pause to wonder if he'd realized exactly what he'd taken on when he first became involved with Nigel's funeral arrangements; I did later, and often, with deep and loving gratitude.
After a short time he called back.
He'd found out that there was a  public mortuary in Bala and to get on to my GP about it.
So back to the surgery.
The ladies in reception knew of no such thing.
‘Please ask the doctors,’ I said.
The answer came back: ‘Not to their knowledge!’
I put the phone down.
I was practically screaming with frustration.
It rang again almost immediately — Alan again, asking if I'd had any luck.
He said that there was definitely a mortuary in Bala and had been told that the key was kept at the police station.
The police, most of whom I knew, because of the great help they had given us when we had been burgled a couple of years earlier, said no, they didn't have the key, and in any case it was the council who must be approached.
The sergeant offered to phone Mr Jones for me, and told me to stay around because Mr Jones would no doubt ring me back.
There followed what must have been the longest two hours of my life.
I paced the house for an hour or so and then got on to the council office.
Mr Jones was out but would most certainly be in touch when he came back, and yes, the police had phoned and Mr Jones would be given the message as soon as he came in.
I waited.
Alan phoned again.
Neither of us spoke of what failure would mean.
Obviously it was not a good idea to keep Nigel at home for what was little short of a week.
Around lunchtime Mr Jones was on the line.
‘Hm!
You have a problem,’ he said and (blessings on him always) said he thought he could help.
The mortuary was a one-slab affair, intended, I think, for coroners' cases and situated in the large council car-park next to the public conveniences.
(Incidentally, this building was a stone's throw from the doctor's surgery and within sight of the door.)
Mr Jones didn't have the key; it was kept at the ambulance station, whose staff would be told to lend it for the purpose required.
I put down the receiver and wept.
I realized that I had a splitting headache and that my knee joints were uncertain of their purpose when I stood up.
But the glow of achievement soon cured all that.
Much later I recited the story of ‘my day in search of a morgue, to a friend who runs a residential home on the south coast.
I asked her what on earth happens to people who don't live in a small town where they are known and therefore helped.
She replied, laconically, ‘The undertakers deal with all that.’
‘Not any more,’ I said.
‘I'm starting a new trend!’
‘You'd better not,’ she replied.
‘Many of my best friends are undertakers!’
I supposed that they would be, in her job!
It was quickly arranged that Alan would come at two and, with another friend, Dei Roberts, would take Nigel to the car-park mortuary.
Alan and I put the lid on the coffin and screwed it down.
I was touched to see that Dei had changed from his working overalls for the operation, although he would have to change straight back again after completing it.
So Nigel was leaving home at last.
Combined with my relief that a resting-place had finally been found was satisfaction that I'd had him with me for those first few hours and that he had not been whisked from his bed by complete strangers and reappeared, repackaged, at the crematorium a week later.
Back in the spare room there were problems.
It had just been decided that it was not possible that the coffin in a horizontal position could be manoeuvred around the many angles of doors and walls between there and the front door.
The window was not wide and was fitted with secondary double glazing.
After a heart-stopping few minutes it was realized that it could be just squeezed through with about three-quarters of an inch to spare.
Now the difficulties were almost overcome.
It wasn't easy to get Nigel out of the window — and the large oval bed of rose bushes with the most vicious imaginable thorns, immediately underneath the window, didn't help — but eventually he was again steered into the back of the Volvo, and Alan drove off with Dei at his side.
I followed in the Metro.
Once in the car-park I waited while the men unloaded  the coffin.
We didn't have to stop at the ambulance station for the key because Dei already had it — one of the ambulance drivers being a cousin of his.
(Everyone is someone's cousin in Bala, and a great help it has been on several occasions.)
While I was waiting in the car (I thought the men would only be a few moments), Alan suddenly appeared at the window.
He had left the Phillips screwdriver in the spare room after we'd put the lid on.
There was nothing for it but for me to drive the ten miles there and back and pick it up, because the doctors would need to examine him and sign the certificate at 6.30.
Before setting off I had a thought that just possibly there might be such a tool at the surgery that would save me the extra journey.
There wasn't, but at least I was able to supply the information that there was indeed a mortuary in Bala and, ‘Look, there it is.’
The reply, which has mystified me until this day, was, ‘Oh! we didn't know you meant that one!’
So back to the house, screwdriver delivered to surgery, and home yet again.
I slept and slept and slept!
Gabby and her husband arrived around 7.30.
They said they were going to the local pub for a meal if I'd like to join them.
I realized I was hungry — very — and accepted gladly.
The following morning saw me back at the surgery in order to collect not only my screwdriver but also the death certificate, duly signed by two doctors (yes, they had managed to find the mortuary), without which I could not obtain a Registration of Death certificate, without which Nigel could not be cremated.
It was, by now, Saturday, a day on which the registrar's office was normally closed, so special arrangements had to be made and the registrar had to open up just for me, which, I imagine, hadn't put him in the best of moods, which manifested itself when I couldn't remember the date on which Nigel and I were married.
I was doing quite well in the quiz up to that point, but my mind went a total blank on that one.
This apparently was so serious that I had a sudden joyous  hallucination.
If I couldn't produce a marriage date, and Nigel couldn't officially be registered dead without it, perhaps he wasn't, because legally he couldn't be, and when I got home I'd find…
I came down to earth again.
The registrar was saying that I must at least remember the year.
I didn't, but I remembered the month: it was September.
This piece of information I gave him with a triumphant smile.
My satisfaction was short-lived.
The year of the ceremony was most definitely required.
The registrar was regarding me over the top of his spectacles and trying not to look at his watch.
I recalled Nigel's telling me that he got tired of signing his name, which was a long one, on forms required by local government each week and for which his office was responsible, and started signing Karl Marx and Adolf Hitler and other such notable figures of history.
I was most impressed and asked him if there was ever any comeback.
‘Oh no,’ he said.
‘All they need to see is a squiggle on the required line.
Nobody ever reads them.’
Smiling broadly again, I said, ‘1976’, which was duly entered.
Later I told Caroline, who said, ‘Rubbish!
That was the year I was married.’
I knew it had something to do with weddings!
The rest of the bank holiday weekend passed slowly.
I remember buying food and drink for the funeral buffet, and also attending a twenty-fifth wedding anniversary party on the Saturday evening.
The hostess rang and asked tactfully and hesitantly if I felt like it.
I found myself considering the protocol — an absurdity in the face of my determination to flout convention with regard to the funeral arrangements!
I accepted and enjoyed it.
Everyone was so sweet and warm and natural with me, and I felt a deep glow of affection and thankfulness for my friends.
It seemed I had so many.
The long weekend also gave me time to myself to rest and ponder on all that had gone and was to come.
I was glad that I knew exactly where Nigel was.
If he'd gone to  the crematorium mortuary with Alan, there would have been a blank in my mind, as I had never seen it, and anyway it was thirty miles away.
This was important somehow.
I could get to the car-park in a few minutes if I wanted to and be near him, thinking of him — his problems over, lying on the brown eiderdown in his blue pyjamas.
I'd been asked how I wanted him dressed.
It seemed an odd question.
‘As he is,’ I said.
I remembered that sometimes men are decked out in their best suits with collars and ties.
The thought to me was faintly obscene.
No, it was clothes for the living as far as I was concerned.
I'd take them all to the Salvation Army — if they'd have them.
I thought I should start packing his clothes straight away but decided to wait till after the funeral.
Instead I tidied the spare room, glad again that I had been forced, through circumstances, to have him with me the night after his death, because to me he wasn't Nigel one moment because he was breathing and not Nigel the next because he'd stopped.
Not something to be removed as quickly as possible so that all is decent again and the proper rituals of mourning can begin.
This sanitization of death is, of course, comparatively recent.
Many people today can remember well when the bodies of relations were kept in the front room until the funeral, to be visited by family and friends if they wished, for a last goodbye.
I pondered also on the question as to why it matters so much to most of us what on earth (literally) happens to human remains?
Christians believe that the soul goes marching on — they hope to a better world, and atheists in eternal sleep.
So what the Dickens is it all about?
I am aware that these two attitudes are contradictory, but they exist side by side in my mind and, I would guess, in the minds of many others.
Where death is concerned, rationality doesn't necessarily fly out of the window but does appear to hover rather uncertainly over the sill.
Later I was questioned by a journalist as to how I would reply to those who spoke of lack of respect in the  way Nigel's body was handled during the twenty-four hours after his death.
I answered, after some consideration, ‘Respect for what?’
Meaning that, if he hadn't managed to earn respect during his lifetime, no amount afterwards was going to do him any good.
On Tuesday, the day before the funeral, Alan reminded me that I should check with the crematorium organist that he would play the music I had requested, which was Prokofiev's Winter Bonfire .
(This had no bearing on the incinerable nature of the occasion; it was merely a great favourite of us both.)
The organist had said that if there was an organ, or even a piano transcription of the music, he would play it.
I thought that he could have telephoned me if it were unobtainable but apparently he hadn't bothered, and the sheet music was indeed not to be had.
I said, ‘In that case, what about Phantom of the Opera ?’
Yes, he would play that if there was a copy in the library; if not, would I like his general opera selection?
I wouldn't and said so; to avoid it, I told him I would try to get the album and bring it to the Wrexham crematorium that evening.
Yellow pages again.
Wrexham music shops did not have it.
In Chester one shop had one copy left and would save it for me if I could get there that afternoon.
It was by now after two, and I had to get the album to the crematorium by five.
This entailed an eighty-mile drive in all, at a time when I should have been making sandwiches for the post-funeral bun-fight.
All this effort turned out to be a total waste of time because, in the event, only a few bars of ‘Music of the Night’ wheezed from the instrument, and that so sotto voce that it could scarcely be heard.
I should have specified forte .
This is something to be aware of: say you'd like it loud if you would, otherwise as a mistaken token of respect you'll hardly hear it.
Another point to bear in mind is that, although many hours of agonizing are often spent by relations over the choice of music, the actual time  given to tapes or organ-playing in crematoria averages sixteen seconds.
Some will not allow tapes and insist that if music is required it be played by their contract organist.
Either way, if you blow your nose, you may well miss it altogether.
Wednesday, the day of the funeral, was dry and bright but with a chilly breeze.
I had arranged my pall-bearers (all close friends) sometime earlier and instructed them to meet Alan and Joy in the car-park at 9.45.
With the drinks set out and the food at the ready, I set off with Caroline, who had arrived from Denmark the night before.
It was the third trip she had made that year, leaving husband, sons and job to visit her father.
The Volvo was already there when we arrived.
The journey had not been entirely uneventful, I discovered later.
Alan had put a sheet of laminate in the back, so that the coffin could slide in and out easily and the bearers would not be involved in an undignified struggle outside the crematorium doors.
Unfortunately, this had the effect of making it also extremely mobile during transport, and it was sliding about at every bend in the road.
Joy said that this really wasn't on and that they must pull up at the side of the road and try to find some stones or something with which to wedge the coffin.
They stopped and another friend bound for the same place, who had seen the problem, pulled up and walked over to them.
‘Having trouble with Nigel then?’ he said.
A quick consultation and some hefty briefcases were produced, which answered perfectly.
Alan had asked me to arrive in good time with the Registration of Death certificate and, equally important apparently, the cheque, without which the cremation could not take place.
As costs rise, there are several schemes whereby you can pay now and die later, but not the reverse.
I imagine this is on the grounds that there can be no profitable reclamation of the goods in default of settlement!
Owing to my single-handed battle with the sandwiches, I was not late but cutting it a little fine, and Alan  was already in the office writing a cheque when I panted in.
I couldn't resist, ‘Are you treating him then?’
The cost was £105, including the organist and £3 for the box for the ashes, which, I was told, could be collected the next morning.
Alan had seemed impressed when he made the arrangements that the crematorium officials had been helpful and raised no objections to the DIY aspect of our undertaking, though on the whole preferring a coffin to a cardboard carton or a plastic bag.
I couldn't see that this was especially praiseworthy.
After all, they were paid the same sum whether Nigel arrived by Rolls Royce or dustcart.
It was, however, a month or two before they gave up sending me colourful brochures with inducements to have a rose bush planted in his name or an attractively calligraphed entry in their ‘Book of Remembrance’, to be opened every year on the date of his death to commemorate his passing etc, etc, none of which was cheap and I'm sure that neither I nor anyone else who knew him will need that kind of reminder.
Nigel's will had specified ‘garden flowers only’.
He'd at first said, ‘wild flowers’, but I reminded him of what had happened at Caroline's wedding.
We had held the reception at the melin, and I had conceived the pretty idea of decorating it throughout with wild flowers.
It was July and the pollen count was high.
Need I say more?
If so, imagine the suffering of those poor souls subject to hay fever, of whom there seemed to be a perversely larger than average number among our guests.
One met them at every turn asking plaintively, ‘Has edyone god edy andihysterbine tableds?’
A repetition of that episode would not, I felt, have been seemly in the circumstances and would have reduced me, for one, into a fit of nervous giggles.
However, no money was to be spent on florists' bouquets or wreaths, and in any case we'd both always hated to see flowers wired and thrust into stiff, unnatural arrangements.
So all attending had brought their freshly picked bunches with them and laid them on the coffin as they arrived, and I must say that it looked — and smelled — lovely.
So the previous party of mourners safely out, our procession started off.
I had picked my pall-bearers carefully, so that, for obvious reasons, they would be of more or less uniform height, but one of them was late, and the fourth corner had to be hoisted onto the shoulder of Nigel's nephew, who was six-foot-four-plus-a-bit.
At a slightly uneven stagger the coffin set off down the aisle.
Two thoughts were uppermost in my mind.
When would the fourth pall-bearer arrive, because, although the labouring side of his assignment was being carried out, he was the first to be called by Alan to say a few words, and also why was the organist playing in such a muted fashion?
Music was always played at concert pitch in our house.
Nigel was a little deaf, but in any case that was the way he liked it.
I was just wondering, having reached my seat, whether I could whip back and tell him to belt it out a bit, when it stopped altogether.
The coffin had reached its resting-place and had landed, without disgracing itself, on the catafalque awaiting it.
At that moment my fourth pall-bearer and his wife, who had suffered traffic problems, scampered to their seats.
And so began what was, to me, a most moving ceremony.
Gavin Miller (late pall-bearer) began his address.
‘My dear Jane and friends,’ he said, ‘I am greatly privileged to have been asked to say a few words today.
Indeed, all of us here today are privileged by the fact that we knew Nigel.
You and Nigel were the first friends Rita and I made, nine years ago, when we came to live in North Wales.
Just as we fell in love at first sight with our new home, so we fell in love with you and Nigel at first meeting.
At the time you do not analyse the reasons for love-affairs — they are just instinctive — they just happen.
‘Yet today, if I must give reasons for the love-affair we all shared with Nigel, it is not difficult.
There was his keen sense of humour; his hospitality; his wide knowledge of so many subjects; his concern for dumb animals; and his contempt for not so dumb humans.
‘Recently he showed me a form he had had printed; the  form to stop all forms.
It is very funny — a dig at over-pompous officialdom in true Nigel style.
One thing I had in common with Nigel was our National Health hearing aid.
If I have a criticism of the National Health Service, it is that, by mistake, his was tuned into the right while mine was correctly tuned to centre left.
‘So what can we do now that we have lost Nigel?
Might I suggest that we ask our MPs to use their influence to stop all advertising and sponsorship of smoking products which are now largely directed at young people?
‘And so we express our deep sympathy to Jane and our thanks for the life of Nigel, a life we shall miss very much.
‘Gentleman’ is not a good enough word with which to describe him.
Might I say, on your behalf, goodbye to a gentle prince?’
Then it was Alan's turn.
‘It was Nigel's wish that his family and friends should, as far as possible in this specialist world, themselves carry out his funeral.
That has been faithfully done.
‘I met Nigel only a few years ago.
During that time he proved to be a wonderful companion.
His first-class education, his wide experience of engineering around the world, combined with the speed and clarity of his mind, made conversing with him a delightful privilege.
I'm sorry I didn't meet him much earlier.
‘He had great hopes for the future development of science and technology and the contribution they will make to the well-being of humanity, on the artistic side, as well as the material world.
He revelled in music and had reached a well-matured view of life and people, and was happy.
‘The following poem by Tennyson describes perfectly for me both Nigel's life story and his philosophy.
’‘Mechenophilus’ by Alfred, Lord Tennyson, written in the time of the first railways:
‘Now first we stand and understand,
And sunder false from true,
And handle boldly with the hand
And see and shape and do.
Dash back that ocean with a pier,
Strow yonder mountain flat,
A railway there, a tunnel here,
Mix me this zone with that!
Bring me my horse — my horse? my wings
That I may soar the sky,
For thought into the outward springs,
I find her with the eye.
O will she, moonlike, sway the main,
And bring or chase the storm,
Who was a shadow in the brain
And is a living form?
Far as her Future vaults her skies,
From this my vantage ground
To those still-working energies
I spy nor term nor bound.
As we surpass our Father's skill
Our sons will shame our own;
A thousand things are hidden still
And not a hundred known.
And had some prophet spoken true
Of all we shall achieve,
The wonders were so wildly new
That no man would believe.
Meanwhile, my brothers, work and wield
The forces of today,
And plow the Present like a field,
And garner all you may!


You, what the cultured surface grows,
Dispense with careful hands:
Deep under deep for ever goes,
Heaven over heaven expands.
‘Jane made Nigel a happy, tranquil man.
Our thoughts today and in the future are with her and the rest of his family.
‘Much of Nigel's working life was spent making beacons for navigators.
His light lives on in our hearts.’
Well, follow that, I thought.
I'd been having to dig my nails into the palm of my hand very hard in order to stop the tears streaming, which I couldn't let happen as I was to speak next and needed to keep steady.
I must explain here that, as neither Nigel nor I had religion, I had arranged the two speakers and then planned to say a few words myself, to thank everyone, in and out of sight.
I wanted to include his doctors and nurses at both hospitals in which he had been a patient, and our friends in the residential home.
I hoped it wouldn't sound too much like an Oscar acceptance speech, but I was determined not to leave anyone out.
That was the plan.
But at the eleventh hour I heard that Nigel's stepbrother would be attending, driving up from Somerset and coming straight to the crematorium.
He is a retired reverend, and I thought that, as he had made the effort, it might be nice to ask him to say a prayer to round off the proceedings.
Also it would be a gesture towards the Christian believers in the congregation, who might otherwise have felt a little cheated.
I sent a message via others of Nigel's relations that, should he do the bit about it ‘pleasing Almighty God to take unto himself our dear brother Nigel’, he would run the risk of an immediate and very angry protest from me.
In the event he said two or three short prayers, which I hope and believe were appreciated.
So I spoke, and the reverend prayed and we all trooped out again.
The sun was now high and I noticed how very beautiful were the surroundings.
The crematorium had  been built in the park of a stately home with cultivated and wild parts, a lake and many mature trees.
It covered a large area, and I really wouldn't have minded leaving Nigel there, but the compost heap was what he wanted, and the compost heap was where he was going.
As we filed out, Joy noticed ill-disguised interest on the faces of the undertaker and bearers of the next party waiting for their ceremony (they don't waste time in these places, and you may be penalized if you are late).
Their usual professionally lugubrious expressions slipped markedly into stark astonishment, almost disbelief, hoping, no doubt, that this was not a glimpse of the future.
We drove home.
Friends came in for a drink and a snack and kept on coming and going for the rest of the day, which was useful as well as friendly because they brought their appetites with them, and most of the refreshments were disposed of.
There was a lot of laughter, not the least when someone asked the whereabouts of Alan and Joy, and I said that Alan had gone to be induced!
Words had failed me.
What I had meant to say was that he was being inducted as a churchwarden, and the two of them had gone off for the ceremony — my friend was having a busy day!
They were soon back, however, to share the joke.
It was altogether a very jolly wake.
At last, when they had all gone home, I started woozily and happily to clear up.
A great sense of peace descended upon me.
It was a perfect summer evening.
And we'd done it —ourselves .
No strangers in black coats, no false pomp and ceremony; just his family, just his friends.
I was content.
The Broadcast
And so it was all over.
A blankness settled over me.
Not happy — not unhappy — just blank.
All my thoughts, actions and energies for the last four months had been concerned only with Nigel.
What Molly Keane, in her novel Good Behaviour , calls ‘the anaesthetic of busyness’ had ceased.
It was as if an addictive drug had been withdrawn and I was faced with the reality of life and had forgotten what to do with it.
There were, of course, the inevitable forms to fill in and letters of condolence to answer, but I realized that I had not for a moment, since before the previous Christmas, given a thought to the prospect of life for one.
Joy and Alan set off on one of their marathon walks, this time a coast-to-coast sponsored effort to raise money for our local church, one of the oldest in North Wales.
I had known that this was pending but when, over the last few weeks, I had enquired when they were going to start out, the reply was always the same, ‘Oh, I think we'll wait a bit and hope for some warmer weather.’
Actually I had come to realize that they were, in fact, ‘waiting’ for Nigel.
I hoped that the walk was the pleasant relaxation they always claimed that these expeditions were.
How they deserved, and must have needed, it.
Among the many ‘thank-you’ letters I wrote, I sent one to Alan Shell of the Humanist Association, who replied, ‘We are very glad our letter was of help to you and you will be interested to know that I propose to send copies of   your letter, with your name deleted, to our funeral officiants in the hope that they will take courage from it and help any others who might be in similar difficulties.’
I wasn't too sure what ‘officiants’ were in this context but have since realized that they perform in place of ministers of religion in humanist funerals.
I had duly collected Nigel's ashes.
This was a shock.
For some reason I'd thought I'd be given just a sample in a small box — like those used to send out wedding cake.
The parcel with which I was presented was the size of a  largish shoe-box and surprisingly heavy.
Of course, I thought, it's the ashes of the coffin as well , so it would be quite a weight.
I put the brown paper parcel on the chest in the hall, waiting, I told myself, for a less rainy/windy/busy day, but really because I was funking it.
I knew I must soon arrange the memorial party, and the perfect opportunity arose with a letter from one of my closest friends, Margo, now living in Australia, who was planning a trip to Europe with her husband later that summer.
They would be with me for four days in July.
I had known Margo since she was fifteen.
She was a talented ice-skater who was then playing her first principal role in the Wembley pantomime Dick Whittington On Ice .
I dubbed her voice.
For those who do not know, the voices of skaters in these huge arenas are always dubbed.
Recording had proved to be useless, because if a skater fell or was late on an entrance the sound of his or her voice carrying on the dialogue with unaware insouciance was pretty bizarre.
It was a new source of work for actors and singers for which there was much gratitude.
I did many such shows.
Margo went from strength to strength, with bigger and better parts, but after a few years turned to acting and much later married an Australian singer/actor, Rod McLennon, and went to live in Melbourne.
She was an attractive, kind, intelligent and above all practical person whom I was particularly glad to have around at such a time.
Margo and Nigel had always been very fond of each other, and she was upset to have missed him.
I got cracking.
I realized I'd no experience of organizing a memorial party and didn't know anybody who had.
I began to make a list.
I started with the drinks.
That was easy — lots of everything.
‘A jolly good booze-up,’ Nigel had said.
Well, we'd have it.
What about a cake?
Did one in such circumstances?
Well, it was a celebration of his life, wasn't it?
I decided to order one — a fruit cake — from a local café, the Sospan Fach (Little Saucepan).
I explained what I wanted and arranged a date on which I would collect it.
When I did so, I was told there was no charge.
Now this was a lady who hardly knew me and had met Nigel only once, and briefly, at a party.
The now-familiar lump in my throat welled up again.
A nurse who had cared devotedly for Nigel when he was at home agreed to ice it for me.
It was simple and, to my mind, quite beautiful.
White with deep red roses, his initials, N.L.S., on the top and the dates of his birth and death round the side in silver.
The party, which was confined to local friends owing to the remoteness of our village from the metropolis, was, I think, very successful and just the kind of gathering Nigel loved.
The following morning, under the guidance of Margo, Nigel was sprinkled onto the compost heap and we said our final goodbyes.
The engineer with the irreverent sense of humour who wouldn't give houseroom to a defunct machine but who would carefully dismantle and put by any parts that might be of use later on would — this time next year — be helping to nourish the rose beds.
In September BBC Radio 4 announced the planning of a new programme.
Consumer-orientated, it invited listeners to write in about anything they had found difficult to buy or do and were wanting to know why.
The BBC would then give them help to find out.
‘It's your programme, just the way you want it,’ and ‘the programme in which you set the agenda,’said the announcer.
The third time I heard this trail (as they are called), I dashed off a quick letter about my coffin  difficulties, asking, at the same time, that if the producer considered my problem worth airing, could I be provided with a tape-recorder so I could get some of the more pompous prevarications dished out by the trade on permanent record?
I then went off on holiday and forgot all about it.
My destination was Welcombe in North Devon, a place introduced to me by Nigel, who had lived there during the early part of the war.
During his time there, ostensibly farming, Nigel restored, almost single-handedly and certainly single-mindedly, a decayed waterwheel at Docton Mill, not far from Welcombe in the parish of Hartland, which belonged to his friend Ronnie Duncan's mother and sister.
Long after he left to become a flight engineer it continued to light them through the war and for many years after.
Following their deaths, Ronnie sold Docton to a man who was keen to get the wheel going again and, with Nigel's assistance and local labour, the second restoration was started and we both made new friends in Steve and Iris Pugh.
Nigel was, by this time, unable to do much in the way of hulking and heaving, owing to having suffered from the fashionable slipped disc eighteen years earlier, which still had to be watched.
Nevertheless, he designed and wired the control panel and delighted both in his consultant capacity and also in being again involved in his life's obsession on what to him was virtually home ground.
Nigel has left more than one thumbprint of his time in North Devon.
The other is a motor of highly original design (for the conversant, one without commutator or armature), one of which now carries the great lens on Lundy North lighthouse that warns sailors of the savage coastline of the area.
I had been visiting Welcombe with Nigel since 1960.
I knew it wasn't going to be easy, as it was so very much his world, but I realized I must do it soon, because the longer I delayed, the longer I felt I would go on doing so — like facing up to the ashes.
I was glad I did.
All his old friends seemed pleased to see me, and the place lived  up to its name.
It wasn't really as hard as I thought it would be.
Again, just like the ashes.
When I got home I found, among the mountain of letters (mainly telling me I had filled in a blue form when it should have been a yellow one or asking for information I had already given), one from the BBC asking me to get in touch with the Punters office in Bristol as soon as possible.
I telephoned the next day, and the producer, having chatted with me awhile and ascertained that I was not a nutter (I think), asked me to make a programme.
I was to have not only a tape-recorder but a minder as well to guide me through the intricacies and, I imagine, the possible legal hazards of broadcasting such an item; he and his lady assistant would arrive and spend a day with me the following week.
I would also be required to go to Bristol a couple of days later to do some work in the studio and, I assumed, to help with the editing.
It sounded interesting.
The day came — it was 19 October 1987 — and my minder/presenter and his young lady assistant arrived.
He explained the format.
He also explained that I must talk freely and not be intimidated by the recording machine.
‘Tape is very cheap,’ he said kindly.
Was this the point at which to say that I had been a professional actress for over thirty years and was well aware of the mechanics etc?
I thought not.
It had little relevance.
After all, in my job I had learned and spoken another people's words, and here I was, reduced to my own.
Luckily I turned out to be reasonably fluent and uninhibited when expressing my own thoughts and feelings.
I told my story with the help of Joy and Alan, who arrived for coffee and contributed greatly with their humanity, humour and charm.
Joy retold how the problem of how the mobile coffin in transit was resolved, and Alan spoke movingly about his feelings for Nigel and about the whole concept of a DIY funeral.
He said, ‘I'd talked so much to Nigel about his thoughts on so many things that as far as I'm concerned he was with us all the  way through.
It was a question of faith — keeping faith all the way.
There were times when it was a strain, but you had in the front of your mind that this was for your friend, and that deepened the friendship.’
After a pub lunch we did a bit outside the car-park mortuary and then settled down with the telephone to record some attempts to buy a coffin, one of which resulted in agreement, which was the last thing we needed at the time, although it came in very handy later.
The rest of the traders, however, again expressed shock/horror at the very idea and were usefully sententious with it.
Then we set off by car to tape some face-to-face interviews with funeral directors.
These performed just as required, with pious platitudes followed by prevaricating and tut-tutting in a most gratifying manner.
The BBC and I finally bade each other goodnight at 6.30, with what seemed to be a good day's work on the cassettes.
Perhaps I should take up this investigative journalism.
Eat your heart out, Roger Cook!
I often have this type of fantasy when very tired, and that certainly I was.
In the morning I remembered that Roger Cook sometimes gets thumped — quite hard, and abandoned the idea.
The day in Bristol was also busy.
I drove down the afternoon before and was put up in a small hotel near the studios.
Called to attend at 10.15 in the morning, we started in the time-honoured way of civilization with a coffee break.
Then more telephone calls.
First an interview with Richard Buckley, a retired funeral director, who had written the paragraph in It's a R.I.P. Off which first aroused our interest in the subject.
He explained that, since he wrote that advice, it was getting more difficult to arrange a DIY funeral because of the growing number of takeovers; in fact, three companies between them had large parts of the southern half of the country sewn up.
They now not only conduct funerals but have their own joiners and monumental masons making coffins and headstones, and some even own their own crematoria.
It is easy to see that would-be  DIY funeral undertakers would be as welcome as a swarm of greenfly at the Chelsea flower show.
Next to Howard Hodgson, who has been called the tycoon of funeral directors.
Hodgson Holdings was then the biggest quoted funeral director in Britain, handling one in every twenty funerals nationwide, although the Co-op is still the biggest throughout the British Isles, doing about twenty-five per cent of all funerals.
It seems there is an impression that the Co-op is, if not exactly a charity, is certainly some kind of philanthropic organization, so it must follow that their funerals are cheaper.
This is not the case.
Nevertheless I have since been informed by Richard Buckley that (if the concept is not entirely meaningless in the circumstances) the Co-op gives ‘the best value for money’, in terms of materials used in their coffins and the general finish and quality of the handles and name-plate etc.
Mr Hodgson explained that in buying up so many small firms, who really could no longer make ends meet, he, Howard Hodgson, could do better and cheaper funerals and that no one need worry about the cost any way, because if the deceased or whoever was taking the responsibility of next-of-kin possessed less than £300, the DHSS would pay for the whole thing.
(This figure has now been increased to £500.)
When he finally paused for breath, I said, ‘Hold on a moment’ and explained that, although obviously nobody wants to spend more than they have to on anything, in my case it was a matter of principle, because I wanted my husband's funeral to be a personal affair in which he would be ministered to by his loved-ones, not strangers.
His reply was rather off the point, I thought.
It was that if I wanted to set up in the business of manufacturing coffins, he would have no objections.
I felt that this conversation was adding little to my, or my listeners', knowledge of how to buy a coffin, so I thanked him kindly for his time and said goodbye.
In the event, none of the interview was included in the broadcast.
Perhaps the producer thought the gentleman  had had enough media exposure for a while, as I was given to understand that he had been granted quite a bit of air time one way and another in the recent past.
Back in the BBC studios there came next some interesting telephone interviews with the press and public relations offices of DIY superstores on the subject of their considering adding coffins to their other self-assembly furniture.
Two refused to talk, having been told they were being recorded (which is mandatory procedure at the Beeb and quite rightly).
Sainsbury's asked for our number and said they would call us back.
Full marks for training there — after all, anyone could say they were calling under the auspices of the BBC.
A fourth, after asking if it were April the first, collapsed into giggles and hung up.
I had a quite reasonable chat with a manager of Texas Home Care, who said the suggestion was ‘a little offbeat’ but agreed to put it to his bosses for consideration.
(Since then I have been in touch with Texas four times and been promised an answer for which I am still waiting after nearly two years).
Perhaps if, as I am told, they are a branch of Ladbrokes, they are hedging their bets, i.e. waiting to see if any other company takes the first step!
In my letter applying to the BBC I had said that I would also like to telephone several undertakers for quotes, stating my exact requirements and then taking the lowest, getting back to them and seeing if they could be beaten down.
This was now attempted, but I got nowhere near finding out, because none of them would estimate over the phone.
Obviously this kind of shopping around would not be tolerated: ‘your place or mine’ was the drill in every case, with, I inferred, a preference for yours.
The reason for this, I later discovered, is that at yours there is likely to be a selection of friends and relations, one of whom in the course of discussion is bound to say, ‘Come on, let's give him the best!’ and although he or she is very seldom the one who is paying for it, no one likes to appear mean at such a time — an attitude, I might add, of which the undertaker thoroughly approves!
After a further telephone interview — this time with  myself as the interviewee — for the Radio Times , it seemed I was finished.
No mention was made of my helping with the editing, and when I enquired, I was told the programme was nowhere near that stage yet; in fact, the producer had not yet had time to listen to the — what must be by now— at least four hours of tape.
So I collected my expenses and went home.
The programme was scheduled for mid-November.
I wondered what the reaction would be, if any.
There was a distinct possibility that it could sink without trace, weighed down by listeners' indifference, or, of course, it might possibly cause a public outcry, disgusting not merely Tunbridge Wells.
On 12 November the programme went on the air.
There were parts I would not have selected and others left out that I would have included, but as the whole thing had to be condensed into twenty minutes, I was reasonably pleased with it.
The reaction of friends and relations was generally quite favourable and, as it came my way, an interesting and unexpected fact started to emerge.
It was the committed Christians who were, in the main, sympathetic, and the dedicated atheists who thought it ‘in rather poor taste’.
This was not invariable, but common enough to be worthy of note.
I hope one day some research may be done on the subject.
One point about the recording worried me.
There was no mention of Nigel's final destination, i.e. the compost heap.
After all, it was, if not the crux of the whole enterprise, an extremely important component, because his purpose in this was no eccentric whim but a sincere manifestation of the philosophy which had pervaded most of his adult life and which was clear to all who knew him — namely, the conservation of our precious resources.
Did the producer, perhaps feel it to be in poor taste?
She should maybe have heeded the lyrics of ‘On Ilkley Moor Baht'at’, which I discovered, only a very short while ago, I admit, is all about recycling.
It goes:
Verse 1 Where has tha' bin since I saw thee?
On Ilkley Moor baht'at.
Where has tha' been since I saw thee?
Where has tha' been since I saw thee?
On Ilkley Moor baht'at,
On Ilkley Moor baht'at.
Verse 2 Tha's bin a courtin' Mary Jane etc .
Verse 3 Tha'll go and catch that death o'cold etc .
Verse 4 Then we shall have to bury thee etc .
Verse 5 Then worms'll come and eat thee up etc .
Verse 6 Then ducks'll come and eat up worms etc .
Verse 7 Then we shall come and eat up ducks etc .
Verse 8 Then we shall all have eaten thee.
etc .
Also Cruse, The National Organization for the Widowed and their Children', publishes an anthology for the bereaved called ‘All in the end is Harvest’.
Looked at in this light, and with conservation so constantly impressed upon us, I really can't see that the idea could be so shocking.
Perhaps I should be charitable and put the omission down to some other reason.
One surprise offer came my way as a direct result.
I had decided that, much to my regret, it would not be possible to plan a DIY funeral for myself as it was not a job I would bequeath to friends, and my nearest close relations who might have co-operated were overseas.
However, out of the blue came the offer of a friend to do it for me, and naturally I accepted gratefully.
I remembered the name of the manufacturer who'd said ‘yes’ on the telephone, and two days later drove off in the Metro and picked out my coffin.
To my surprise, by dint of my putting down the front seat, it fitted inside the car, so the public was spared the probably unusual sight of a coffin on a roof-rack.
Once it was home, the stalwart Alan helped me up to the loft with it, where it awaits my occupation in due course.
I wondered, when I set off to get it, if my notoriety had been communicated on the jungle drums and if the promised purchase might still elude me, so I was especially glad to have it safely at home.
I was asked once if it seemed real to me that one day I would be lifeless inside it.
In other words, could I truly visualize my own death?
I tried to think about this but didn't succeed.
It seemed remote to the point of impossibility.
Also, what was there to think?
It wasn't like visualizing a holiday — even a place one hasn't been before; after all, there are certain immutables: land, sea, sky and clouds (not too many of these, please); and even should one have chosen a more unusual location, such as the Arctic or the Gobi Desert, there are photographs.
Man knew more about the landscape of the moon before the first landing than we know about ‘afterlife’.
I would defy even Elizabeth Kubler-Ross, an American ‘death expert’, who was shown on TV recently, to know much about it.
All we have are conflicting beliefs — no solid facts, so thinking about one's death seems an impossibility.
When one tries, one finds oneself a spectator at the event.
The deathbed scene; the funeral; the sadness of friends, and the smugness of certain relations who never liked you much and have outlived you (just wait till my will is read!).
Dying is, of course, different.
For myself, I hope to accomplish it without too much pain, and with present-day drug developments this seems probable.
But death…?
One can only speculate, and surely there's a more constructive way to spend one's time?
A week passed.
So that was that.
It caused a bit of a buzz locally but, I thought, would soon be deposed as a talking-point by the next raffle to be drawn in aid of renovating the Pavilion or the latest radiation figures on Chernobyled sheep.
Yes, that really is what I thought.
The Response
‘The broadcast was amazing — astounding!
The impact seems to have been far and wide.’
‘I sat absolutely riveted.’
‘Such courage and good sense.’
‘Enormous admiration for showing us what a ride we are taken for by the funeral directors.
After all, we don't pay to be born — why so much to die?’
‘I hope something will be done now your programme has highlighted the fact that we don't have to conform.’
‘An amazing story told with great skill and restraint.’
Very funny and incredibly moving.
Her courage, determination, wit and gift for life were beyond praise.’
Gosh!
Well!
I mean…well…
Gosh!
The above quotations are part of a large batch of letters forwarded from the BBC which arrived on my mat ten days after the programme went out.
They were enclosed with a letter from the producer of the series, who wrote: ‘As we answered the phones to a delighted public I realized that you have said what masses of people always wanted to hear.’
I was very pleased, naturally, but the task of answering them all, which I was determined to do, was daunting, to say the least.
I decided to do half a dozen a day until I'd got through them.
The trouble was they kept on coming.
Many were quickly dealt with, just a ‘Thank you so much’, but others seemed to regard me as some sort of authority and requested: ‘Further details, please.
SAE enclosed.’
I did my best.
Certain information asked for, I simply did not have.
I could see there was more work looming.
In the midst of life I was unquestionably in the midst of death.
There were requests for interviews from journalists.
Two correspondents wanted to write plays — one for TV and the other radio.
A third fancied a documentary reconstruction, and the more the publicity, the more the letters came thumping onto the mat.
A centre spread in the Evening Standard brought a new cascade.
People were realizing that they had a choice.
Central Television came and made an interview/ documentary film for their weekly current affairs programme Central Lobby , during the course of which I was seen driving around the neighbourhood, first preceding and then followed by the camera crew.
It was useless to protest that the coffin fitted comfortably into the car with the back door closed.
‘We can't see it like that, Jane,’ I was told.
So the not-every-day sight of a coffin sticking up out of the hatch-back of a Metro was duly recorded.
Next morning the compost heap was photographed, and off they went back to Birmingham.
When it was shown, I booked into an hotel in Shrewsbury, not being able to receive it in my area, and watched it in the seclusion of a pleasant bedroom.
It was well done, I thought, without sensationalism or sentimentality.
I had become a current affair — how odd!
I was interviewed by Living magazine (no, the irony did not escape me) and also by The Independent , which published the feature in a section under the same name!
It is just not realized that it is possible or even legal to arrange a funeral without employing undertakers — a gap in public knowledge which, of course, the undertakers do little to fill.
The phrase ‘It never occurred to me’ was repeated in letter after letter.
The many other points made, and reasons given, are best, I think, left to my correspondents themselves to express; here is a further sample of the most recurrent.
From a gentleman in Hornchurch:
In our own recent experiences of three family funerals, the actions of the Ministers, and attitudes of funeral directors only added further grief and distress to the proceedings.
Next of kin and mourners are treated like morons who really shouldn't be there, as they only delay things and interfere with their role, and any change suggested, or interest expressed in the proceedings by the mourners, is totally unacceptable.
It was like a factory line to which we all had to conform.
Given scant information, one is expected to accept their procedures without question, and then pay inflated bills because everyone else does.
I so wish that our love and respect for the deceased could have been expressed openly, and with joy and gratitude the way yours was.
Your suggestion of flat pack, self assembly coffins on sale in supermarkets is marvellous.
I do hope the idea catches on, with other requirements purchased separately, as needed, as you did.
And from a lady in Putney: ‘Why kill trees for coffins?
Surely heavy plastic bags would do just as well?’
Another in Sutton, Surrey, said: ‘I would only want a bunch of wild flowers and the simplest departure possible.
I'm sure your husband appreciated from afar the care and ‘antics’ of you and your friends, the personal and loving touch that one would give to any loved one going on a long journey.’
Then a mother from Clwyd in Wales: ‘I am fully in agreement with her motives.
When our second child was very ill, the most distressing thought was that total strangers would be the last to touch him.
Has she thought of setting up in the coffin business herself?
Someone should.’
And a lady writing from Bristol, who achieved a DIY funeral herself: ‘Keeping the funeral in the family made it warm and home-like.
The home-made aspect makes the relinquishing of the dead much easier and much more a part of life.
My man had an abhorrence of show and pomp and hypocrisy, and would have so enjoyed the moments  of absurdity and humour.
Also, it was good to be busy at such a time.
It must be awful to have it all taken out of one's hands and have nothing to do but wait — and for what?
A macabre and hypocritical circus.,
A clergyman's wife in Sheffield said: ‘A DIY funeral — why not?
For far too long the undertakers have had the monopoly.
They seem to prey (forgive the pun) on the bereaved at a time of distress.
If it catches on it will certainly be one in the eye for greedy undertakers — after all, you never see a poor one, do you?’
Also from a like-minded member of a large family, all of whom intend DIY funerals: ‘I am one of eight children.
My parents are alive and have thirty grandchildren.
We all intend to have DIY funerals and our coffins made by a carpenter.
My father will be buried at sea.
I hope you get a positive response from listeners.
We all have to die.
Why is everyone so coy?’
A wife in Shrewsbury said: ‘My husband and I are both cynical about the monopoly of funeral directors and their sincerity.
For instance one even billed for a glass of sherry partaken in his office!
It seems that the essential ingredient in all this is a Volvo.
A purpose for which I guess even Volvo have not taken into account in their advertising budget!’
(In this last sentence the lady is not quite accurate.
A large percentage of hearses are indeed diesel Volvos sprayed black.)
And this correspondent, to whom, sadly, I could not reply because she didn't give her full address: ‘Fantastic, exactly the way I would like my funeral arranged.
Over the counter coffins?
Yes, definitely.
How wonderful to think only friends and family need be involved.’
And this gentleman in West Yorkshire would certainly have the blessing of many if he carried out his idea: ‘Having taken early retirement, I am casting about for some way to supplement my pension.
It occurs to me that ‘mail order coffin supply’ might be a suitable avenue to explore.’
And one from Scotland represents the philanthropists' view: ‘We would prefer to depart in plain, ‘off the rack’, coffins and so allow the savings to be devoted to charity.
This is the age of change.
Come on somebody, be enterprising!’
And this one from a most complimentary lady in Northampton: ‘I hope the programme will give lots of people the determination to persevere as you did.
I'm sure your husband is proud of you.
With much admiration and I hope you are inundated with letters.’
Yes, well, the hope of that writer was fully realized!
Some of the most gratifying comments referred to Nigel — such as, ‘How you achieved that much wished objective said as much about your late husband as it did about you.
He must have been a quite remarkable man.’
Another greatly pleasurable result of the broadcast was that it put me in touch with colleagues of his, and their wives, in the lighthouse business, several of whom wrote me the kindest letters expressing the most heart-warming comments.
To quote again: ‘Nigel would have been so proud of you.’
And: ‘Nigel would have been delighted at your success and I was very moved by your point that at no time was he attended or touched by any but those close to him.
I venture to add that this must be the greatest labour of love that anyone can render to a friend.
I wish I had been able to help.
Also you struck a whacking blow on his behalf against the sort of people he particularly disliked.’
‘I have a feeling you have begun something that will keep you busy for quite some time to come.’
No kidding!
I had that feeling too.
There were letters offering practical help.
Among them a man who turned out to be an embalmer and whose advice and information were most useful.
He told me some hair-raising stories of the casual, careless way in which bodies can be handled at the undertaker's and in transit, the most common being losing the coffin on the way to the funeral because the doors have not been properly secured or the wrong name-plates having been attached, resulting in great distress to the relations of the deceased and confusion for the minister concerned, all of which made our dealings with Nigel seem positively reverential!
Nor are undertakers alone in careless and callous behaviour.
Hospitals must also take their share of criticism.
A correspondent told me of her visit to a hospital mortuary to identify her 20-year-old daughter, who had been killed in a car crash.
This she was required to do from behind a glass screen and, having done so, was immediately ushered out.
It did not occur to her until later that she could have asked to touch her daughter or kiss her goodbye, as her instinct urged.
She was, of course, within her rights to do this, but the fact that this courtesy is not offered is customary and, in my opinion, unfeeling in the extreme.
In this situation the next-of-kin really is in a state of total shock and incapable of cogent thought and should therefore be given every opportunity to express whatever grief is felt that will help to assuage their loss.
However, the reverse of this experience was reported to me by a woman who lost her lover in a drowning accident.
She told how she was encouraged to go to the hospital mortuary each day and sit with him until, as she said, ‘I felt ready to let him go.’
But this was in Australia.
In a recent study,Matters of Life and Death , South Birmingham Community Health Council carried out a survey of bereavement experiences.
Several examples of lack of sensitivity and support were reported in the Guardian .
One parent was told by a consultant, ‘We all have to go sometime,’ after her 16-year-old son had just died of leukaemia.
Another was told to ‘snap out of it’.
Yet another to ‘hurry up’, when taken to see her husband's body.
Another statement quoted — and this, to me, is in a way the most shocking — was: ‘It was obviously just part of their job…
No one seemed to appreciate that the ‘body’ they were discussing was actually the person I loved.’
My vet, Jackie, has a great deal more empathy.
When she finally had to put down my old cat Mrs, she said afterwards, ‘Would you like to stay and be alone with her for a while?
I've no one coming for half an hour.’
The dying themselves will nearly always let it be  known, albeit tacitly, whether or not they want the truth.
The signs are not at all difficult to pick up.
Jackie told me, regarding my old and much-loved sheepdog Ffly, ‘Don't worry, she's in no pain, and she'll let you know when the day comes.’
She was right.
The intimations were unmistakable, and I telephoned Jackie to come and administer the last rites (so to speak).
There is, at the present time, a movement to tell the patient when they have a terminal illness.
‘The dying have a right to know’ is the attitude.
Admittedly over ninety per cent of people who took part in a survey said that they would want to be told; but it is important to stress that the respondents were all healthy people, and in illness attitudes may change.
The need to survive is, after all, the most basic instinct we have, and it is necessary to use one's powers of intuition to detect the change of mind which may well accompany the facing of possible extinction.
Modern drugs, developed to mitigate some of the more distressing symptoms, can often effect a change of attitude to the extremely hopeful and positive, as was the case with Nigel.
The nice embalmer who wrote to me told me, greatly to his credit, of the totally unnecessary embalming that is frequently carried out, so that the first the next-of-kin knows about it is when he or she receives the bill.
If the bill is itemized (which is most unlikely), embalming will probably be entered as ‘preservative’ or ‘hygienic treatment’, and if it is discussed with relations when arranging a funeral, an undertaker will often push it as necessary to health.
This is total rubbish, as if the body is to be buried or cremated within a few days after death, no such risk exists.
Embalming is a method of temporary preservation, by which process the blood is replaced by a solution of chemicals.
In a mortuary, bodies are preserved by refrigeration, which is equally effective and, to be fair, some undertakers use this method.
But for an undertaker to insist that both, or even either, are  necessary for public health, except in a tiny minority of instances, is not true.
The only occasion when you won't get far without it is when the deceased is being sent abroad.
Here again, it is not a legal requirement, but most airlines insist on it, and a certificate stating that this has been done must accompany the coffin.
The transport of such cargo is an expensive undertaking, and some airlines charge twice their usual rate for the service.
It is true that embalming improves the appearance of a corpse if it is to be viewed by friends and relations.
The normal hollowing and shrinking of the flesh are arrested, and it appears firm and lifelike again.
The skin colouring is restored by the use of cosmetics, and the hair shampooed and set.
But once this glitzy transformation scene is set and the curtain goes up, there is a problem.
Few, in Britain, want the ‘open casket’ so beloved of the North Americans and many Continentals.
Where is the audience for this sleeping beauty?
Whatever our conscious reasons (’ No, I want to remember him/her the way he/she was' or ‘Not in front of the children’), a dead body is not considered to be spectacle for display in Britain, and the rationale which dictates it can sometimes disguise feelings of embarrassment that such a thing could occur in our death-defying, well-regulated households.
If the death takes place in hospital, the same will apply.
The undertaker will, as a rule, be instructed to take the body straight to his premises and screw the lid down, firmly and finally.
This attitude is often, albeit unconscious, a fear of infection.
Not infection in a literal sense of catching whatever killed Not her — after all, she may have died perfectly peacefully from old age — but the fear of infection of death itself, an unpleasant reminder of our own mortality.
So out of sight and out of mind go the innocent wooden box and its equally innocent contents.
Therefore, if there is no risk to health and no one to see the deceased, what is this embalming — sorry, ‘hygienic treatment’— business all about?
After all, embalming is  strictly forbidden by the Jewish religion, and the Jewish laws on hygiene are among the most stringent in the world.
Well, it's about making money.
When Jessica Mitford wrote her informative and wonderfully funny The American Way of Death , embalming was not common in Britain.
It was not, she said, easy even to obtain embalming materials.
There was a distinct risk that an import licence might be refused, for one thing; also the medical profession was, and is, against it, if only because it could prolong the, to them, archaic practice of burying the dead.
To doctors, cremation is the only ‘hygienic treatment’ of corpses which they fully approve.
Since the publication of Miss Mitford's book, unbelievably, more than twenty-five years ago, some things have greatly changed.
In a recent catalogue of a large funeral directors' suppliers firm I counted 309 embalming preparations.
These were in sections headed ‘Embalming fluids and chemicals’, ‘Embalming instruments’, ‘Embalming sundries’ and finally ‘Cosmetics’, which included Velvatone skin lotion, Soft Touch liquid powder, lip wax and Surface restorer in twelve ‘complexion co-ordinated shades’.
All we lack now is the mechanism to turn these highly decorative cadavers into walkie, if not talkie, zombies, to enable them to give a truly remarkable mannequin parade and show off their mortuary gowns in white polyester and cotton, trimmed with lace and ruffles for ladies and satin quilting for the gents!
How we managed without all these aids — in fact by merely buying a coffin and getting on with it — I can't imagine, but I know that we were lucky to be living in the UK and not the US, where the open coffin, or at least one quarter open at the head end, is de rigueur .
But the embalmers are gaining ground fast, probably because the public does not realize it is happening.
A contributor to the Funeral Service Journal who declares himself to be ‘a devoted and qualified embalmer and tutor’ is a funeral director who has recently been giving advice to readers.
He suggests that the word ‘embalming’ should, whenever possible, be avoided and that ‘sanitary preparation’and ‘hygienic treatment’are little better by way of description.
He recommends the phrase ‘care of the body’ to be used in discussion with clients and continues to surprise us by telling us that in his experience of funeral-arranging he has never yet had anything but a positive response to, ‘Would you like us to look after mother in our usual way, so that you will be assured of having an everlasting memory of her sleeping peacefully and at rest?’
It would take a very determined and practical mind to say ‘No’ or even ‘How much?’
The sooner the embalming can take place, the easier it is to carry out.
Those advocating embalming lose little love for doctors who ask relations for permission to do a post-mortem examination and get it.
This cadaver will call for more extensive ‘treatment’ by the embalmer, due partly to the delay it causes and partly because what is perceived by him to be often unwarranted mutilation.
In fact the writer goes on to say, ‘It would be the embalmer's dream never to see another ‘posted case’, and he would like to see the usual procedure altered with regard to the requesting of a post-mortem examination.
He maintains that, ‘So soon after the death of a relative in hospital the next of kin are in the early stages of severe grieving, and often do not understand what is being asked of them.’
Referring back to his own audacious euphemisms with regard to‘looking after mother’, this is a bit rich.
The following month, in the same journal, a swift refutation of these tenets came in the shape of a letter from a consultant histopathologist by name of J.V. Clark, who responds to the last point regarding the relations' not understanding what is being asked when a postmortem is requested, by pointing out that in all probability funeral directors do not explain the procedure of embalming to the next of kin and, more seriously, maintaining that delay would reduce the maximum benefit of an autopsy and also delay the funeral.
Hospital post-mortems, he goes on, are requested as a method of monitoring diagnostic technique and refining  clinical skills.
It is living patients who benefit, and therefore granting permission for a hospital autopsy on one's deceased loved-one is a responsible and publicspirited act, which may benefit other patients.
He adds that, unlike the autopsy, ‘I can see no benefit in embalming to anyone but the embalmer.
Provided there is no prolonged interval between death and the funeral, and provided bodies are kept refrigerated, then embalming, as a hygienic measure, is totally unnecessary.
It would be better if all funeral directors provided refrigerated body storage rather than resorted to embalming.’
This correspondence, it appears, could continue for some time.
In the USA, I discovered from a report by Dermot Pungavie in the Daily Mail , for those mourners who wish to view but are short of time, one funeral director in Chicago has come up with the novel idea of drive-in viewing.
It works like this.
A carload of friends and relations drive up to his premises, sign a visitors' book and ring for service.
A technician using the speakerphone will ask which of his residents you wish to view.
The head of the deceased then appears on a television screen which is tastefully draped in white silk and discreetly illuminated at night.
This picture remains on the screen for an initial three seconds.
If longer is required, further to admire the art work carried out by the local mortician/beautician, you merely press a button and are then given another three seconds.
There is no limit to the number of times the button may be pressed, and it seems that mourners in cars queueing behind can get somewhat restive.
Another snag, which it appears was not anticipated, concerns viewing by busload.
One deceased of advanced years was visited by many elderly friends, some of whom were not too mobile, and a specially adapted bus was engaged to accommodate their wheelchairs.
Having driven past in the usual manner, the driver then had to go through a second time in reverse so that the mourners on the other side could also take a look.
However, I'm  sure that it will be only a short time before the imaginative gentleman of this funeral business (or after-care service, as it apparently now likes to be called) will overcome these problems that in any case may be outweighed by one great advantage to which he points with pride: namely, that it is above all discreet, in that the girlfriend of the departed may view at any time, giving any name, and the wife and family will be none the wiser!
The BBC telephoned.
Could I let them have the exact name of the coffin-manufacturers who had supplied me, as they had been inundated with calls asking for it and, having no success with the number supplied by Directory Enquiries, were needing further information.
Odd, I thought, as I confirmed the number which they had been given.
I suggested they try again and this time ask for the man who had signed my receipt, and please — come back to me and tell me what they say.
Perhaps it will come as no surprise to my readers to hear not only that all knowledge of selling me a coffin was denied but even that they were now, or ever had been, coffin-manufacturers.
The funeral directors' lobby is very strong; I suppose it was naïve of me not to have realized before that they would clamp down hard on any wholesaler who dared to step out of line and supply the public direct.
Perhaps they would feel differently if, instead of an average order of ten or twenty coffins, one of the superstores came up with one for a thousand.
With so much interest in my activities, it seemed only fair to try to help others to have a go also.
To that end, I felt, it must be back to the DIY stores.
Somehow they must be made to realize that it would be meeting a demand, a creditably innovative idea and not immoral, illegal or fattening, which really would make life, and death, a lot easier and cheaper for many.
I had, by this time, had a design for a coffin in veneered or melamine-coated chipboard sent to me by an interested listener.
It is a straight-sided ‘casket’ type, the  kind preferred on the Continent.
This would be easier to flat-pack and cost the maker exactly £22, constructing it entirely by hand and purchasing all materials at retail prices from his local DIY store, thereby, I hoped, proving that a very comfortable profit could be made while still considerably undercutting the funeral directors.
This model would, of course, be the cheapest possible for cremation; anything more elaborate would require to be of a different design and materials.
A DIY coffin designed by David J. Barton.
Here it might be worth pointing out that handles are necessary only for burial, for lowering the coffin on ropes into the grave; for cremation they are quite superfluous.
Also the lining, the types and varieties of which are many, is quite unnecessary!
The coffin itself should have the joints sealed with either bitumen or paraffin wax on the inside, and no more is needed.
Everything else is just an embellishment.
The coffin design I had photocopied and planned to enclose, along with quotes from correspondents, to several of the DIY superstores.
Incidentally, I telephoned Harrods to enquire what their cheapest chipboard coffin would be, to which the answer was £190!
I spent an interesting afternoon on the telephone trying to elicit the names and addresses of the managing directors of the half-dozen or so biggest DIY chains.
One switchboard operator said that at this moment in time she didn't know.
I pointed out that it would be difficult to find a moment out of time, even if I could wait for it, and could she find someone who would know?
On only one occasion was I given an address, and had to be content with those of head offices.
Quite often I was asked why I wanted it.
I said I wished to write to the gentleman.
The next question was invariably, ‘What was it with regard to?’
I then replied loftily that I wished to make ‘a certain suggestion to him’.
I wasn't questioned further!
Along with the certain suggestion I enclosed the casket design and a typed selection of quotes from my letters approving the idea of ‘over-the-counter coffins’ and giving the address at which the originals could be inspected, in the time-honoured manner with unsolicited testimonials.
The answers were not long in arriving.
All negative, which was not unexpected considering the novelty of the idea.
Argos's and Sainsbury's replies were the most thoughtful and in the case of the latter really seemed to believe there was a future in such a project but not in their Homebase, House and Garden centres.
I thought it particularly nice of them to write at such length, as I had mistakenly called Roy Griffiths Mister!
Sorry, Sir.
So I was not too down-hearted.
But it seemed that I was really ‘into’ funerals in a big way.
Was it, I wondered, for that reason that it seemed suddenly that the media were too?
Perhaps I just hadn't noticed before, but now that I did, it seemed that funerals, and allied subjects, were very much the in thing.
There was the scandal of the Westminster Council's sale of cemeteries for 15 pence; a report of an enterprising Yorkshireman, Edgar Dakin, who, shocked at the prices charged for memorial headstones in the conventional marble or granite, had patented his design for thermoplastic ones at a tiny fraction of the cost; and yet another that was virtually a half-hour commercial on BBC television for the ubiquitous Hodgson Holdings.
I learned a lot from other BBC programmes.
I was incensed by one on ‘What to do if someone dies’, in the Advice Shop series, during which, in explaining the procedure involved on registering a death, the narrator said, ‘The registrar will ask you what funeral director you are using.’
Not ‘Are you using a funeral director?’
I wrote to say so and received a courteous reply from the producer, who said, ‘I'm interested in the DIY approach you suggest and in our next series perhaps we'll look at this more closely.’
I do hope that they may.
Also Margo Macdonald in her Ask Margo series explained more about arranging funerals.
From the two programmes I learned that, if cash is really short, the DSS will pay for a funeral.
A low-income funeral, it appears, costs around £510.
Without a grave it costs £390/£400 (presumably this means cremation).
A grave costs an extra £120.
(These prices were quoted in February 1988).
Here one meets with what I would deem quite a drawback.
The DSS will not pay for an ‘individual’ grave, so a ‘common’grave (that's with companions, either already waiting or pending), is what you'll get.
You won't be allowed to erect a headstone, have a name-plate or put flowers on a common grave, so is it any wonder that the whole thing smacks of the dreaded ‘pauper's burial’ and that, however poor, people will make monumental sacrifices to raise the money somehow for the ‘something better’that they feel they should provide?
Unless…unless they face the truth — the truth ‘that will make ye free’, according to the Bible — which in this case is that the love and/or respect that was earned by the deceased during their lifetime is there for ever in the minds and hearts of those who knew them.
No amount of display or pomp is going to increase it, or lack of it detract.
And here is the immortal opening paragraph from Winnie the Pooh , A.A. Milne's eternally beloved teddy: ‘Here is Edward Bear coming downstairs now, bump, bump, bump on the back of his head, behind Christopher Robin.
It is, as far as he knows, the only way of coming downstairs, but sometimes he feels that there is really another way if only he could stop bumping for a moment and think of it.’
The bumping produced by taboo is subtler and more insidious than that felt by Pooh's head and, although painless, is just as potent in its power to inhibit thought.
Habits of thinking are hard to break.
It's so much easier to fall back on ‘That's the way things are done’ or ‘It's the way I was brought up.’
Put up a sign, ‘No through road’, and few will venture to ask ‘Why?’ or ‘Are you sure?’
And if I achieve nothing other than to make people realize that they have a choice if they wish to exercise it, I shall be satisfied.