

Separatism: a look back in anger
Janet Dixon
Separatism is to feminism what fundamentalism is to Christianity.
It is the centre, the beating heart, the essence.
The dogma is of absolutes, the lifestyle is of attempted purity and the zealot is subject to continuous  derision .
My involvement with separatism lasted five years, but in a very real sense it will never leave me.
Separatism is not acquired politics.
Clearly, you cannot inherit a taste for it by coming from a separatist family, nor by living in a separatist neighbourhood.
Equally, you cannot read about its history and be moved to sympathy by those revelations.
Separatism is an exhausting act of faith, and because of insistent pressure on you to repent, it requires almost daily reaffirmation.
The faith is in the belief that women, left to themselves, would make the world a beautiful place to live.
It claims for all women a far greater potential in terms of powers and skills than any woman has ever demonstrated.
Women are seen as the source of compassion, love and harmony.
It was ironic that as we deified womanhood, we unleashed more anger, suspicion and even, I think, hatred — woman for woman — than any issue had aroused since feminism began.
So what caused this anger and mistrust?
Why were heterosexual feminists outraged and repelled by us and all we stood for?
Why did socialist feminists accuse us, at best, of being hedonistic female chauvinists, and at worst , Fascists?
Why were lesbians angered when we questioned the sense of working with gay men in order to counter gay oppression?
It had, in part, to do with the nature of separatism being highly offensive to those who held traditional broad left views.
Prior to this time, the early seventies, there was no real precedent for autonomous women's groups organizing around a woman-only issue.
The definition of socialism which I can grasp most readily, because it is so simple, is the one given by George Bernard Shaw in 1928: ‘Socialism is an opinion as to how the income of the country should be distributed.’
I include it here because at no point was it ever put to me in such bald and comprehensible terms.
We saw the goal of feminist socialists as raising the status of women and to include them in the share-out.
In any case, however crude my understanding of it, socialism to its everlasting credit, is about including everyone.
Separatism is anathema to this.
We saw socialism as yet another squabbling position in male politics.
We thought that the women in socialism would never be seen by their men as anything except an ‘uppity’ lump stuck on their side.
Not only were we not interested in how socialism was realized, we didn't believe it would make the slightest difference to the position of women even if it were.
We didn't want an equal slice of a male cake, we wanted the men and their cake out of our lives.
Gay oppression is class oppression: the people can't be free until the women are free.
We saw this as a lot of sloganizing nonsense.
This class dumping on that class, this class more oppressed than that class.
As far as we were concerned, if you removed the architects and managers of the system then the whole thing would collapse, and who, we asked, in the massive majority of cases were they, if not men?
Separatism is shamelessly exclusive.
The rules are simple: whatever your race or class, provided you are a woman, you are a potential separatist.
Whatever your race or class, if you are a man you are irredeemably the enemy.
The separatist position was clear.
It was not that men held the power, but that men were the power.
Something inherent in maleness necessitates its expression in systems of oppressive hierarchies.
Competitiveness, aggression, brutality and maleness are all one in the same.
That Y chromosome, that mutated afterthought, was the cause of it all.
In the winter of 1970 I attended the second national conference of the Women's Liberation Movement, held in a grim out-of-season holiday camp at Skegness.
I was, to put it mildly, wet behind the ears, politically.
In my first year in a London art school my two major preoccupations were whether you really could see William Turner's late  canvases as a precursor to French Impressionism, and how the hell I could afford to clothe myself in the right gear to make a stunning impact on my new friends at the Gateways.
I went to the conference armed only with a general feeling of being pissed off that men seemed to have it all their own way.
Along with taking LSD and deciding after some very unpleasant attempts never to fuck again, attending Skegness was one of the most powerful and formative experiences of that part of my life.
On the Saturday morning we shuffled into the camp's concert hall for a ‘plenary session’.
As I took my seat it dawned on me.
Amongst the couple of hundred or so there, were some twenty or thirty men.
Not only that, on the stage was a long table, and yes you've guessed it, among the dignitaries were several men.
We sat through some very boring speeches which attempted to make the thoughts of Mao, Marx and Lenin exciting and accessible to a bunch of dumb women, and then broke for coffee.
In the camp canteen I looked for the woman who had encouraged me to come to what, by the minute, I was beginning to feel was a god-forsaken hole.
I wanted to know why she thought I would be the least bit interested in all that drivel I had just had to sit through.
It turned out she was just as fed up as me, and we were not the only ones.
A group of us hastily slung together a plan and went back into the concert hall in an effort to oust the ruling junta.
The bravest of us raised her hand and asked by what authority the Maoist Women's Liberation Front had commandeered the stage, and seen fit to hand out reams of papers as proposed discussion documents.
The famous stuff hit the fan.
After trading what were to become stereotypical insults about bourgeois middle-class women and hard left male domination, a very large number of us walked out and from then on abandoned the formal conference altogether.
I spent the rest of the weekend in small discussion groups  with women from all over the country with a wide variety of ideas and opinions.
I was excited and happy and enthused with the thought of becoming more involved in both the WLM and GLF.
As a codicil to this I should tell you that at the same time in another part of the camp, the National Union of Miners were holding some sort of conference themselves.
On the Saturday evening they were having a social and were to watch a striptease.
Some of us decided to get into the social and talk to the men.
As it turned out, productive discussion proved impossible.
Abuse followed insult and eventually the police were called.
The gutter press version went something like, ‘Libbers storm miners' social’.
If only we had.
In the early seventies I was active in both the Women's Movement and in Gay Liberation Front; more of GLF later.
Of those very early times in the Women's Movement, I am left with a memory of two distinct feelings.
The first is one of a self-conscious confusion, the second of discomfort at being a lesbian.
The first arose because even though I myself and the women I was involved with, called ourselves feminist, I wasn't really clear what we were doing about it.
I went to national and regional conferences and attended all sorts of local workshops.
I went to Grosvenor Square and abused ‘American Imperialists’, I got thumped about a bit on Troops Out demos, and I dutifully handed out time and money in support of‘the  miners' wives’.
Although I was convinced of the correctness of all these issues, I harboured unspoken doubts about their relevance to me, and I couldn't help wondering if the sight of our banners on the demos was always welcome.
As for my discomfort at being a lesbian, now that was much more painful.
The public reaction to the reawakening of feminism was to dismiss us all as bra-burning lesbians.
The reaction of WLM was strenuously to deny this ‘insult’.
Heterosexual feminists argued that we had to be taken seriously as women, and if the media got away with the label of lesbians, then ‘the women out there’ would be alienated.
But wait a minute, I thought, hadn't I been a woman out there?
In any case, if the business of women's liberation was what we were about, then shouldn't that mean all women, even those of us with embarrassing sexual habits?
I was told that what I did in my bedroom was a private matter.
I was made to feel that wanting to have it openly discussed was just exhibitionist boat-rocking.
As the seventies wore on the numbers of lesbians in the WLM increased dramatically, the rumbles of discontent turned into roars.
Lesbians put their weight behind issues such as child care, abortion, race, battered wives and rape.
In return we wanted the skeleton of sexuality wrenched from the closet and flesh put on its bones.
The WLM had begun to come of age.
We had stopped trailing around after the men in the left, contorting ourselves in the hope of receiving some grudging crumbs of approval.
We had our own campaigns and set of demands, and what's more, amongst them was a woman's right to define her own sexuality.
The inclusion of this demand, in the context of feminism, may seem now to be obvious, but the struggle to make sexuality a respectable platform was an acrimonious one.
At national conferences such as Acton and Edinburgh, the lesbians in general, and the separatists in particular , were accused of being elitist, divisive, of tearing the women's movement apart, and taking energy away from ‘the real struggle’.
Even at lesbian conferences such as Canterbury, Nottingham and Bristol, separatists were castigated for being smug extremists.
In both these settings, women who had been toiling in their communities came to conference to exchange ideas and information, and to gain strength by being together.
Because of the in-house nature of separatism, we saw the conferences as opportunities to disseminate our beliefs to huge numbers of women.
As you can see, I am once making great claims on behalf of separatism.
Were separatists really responsible for making lesbianism, eventually, respectable inside the WLM?
Wouldn't it have happened anyway?
(Some might even say sooner!)
Did separatists really lift feminism from under the coat-tails of the male left and establish autonomous women's political activity?
Wouldn't heterosexual women have tired in the end, of explaining why Marx ignored women and how rape was the result of capitalist oppression, and found less contrived answers?
I don't think so.
You only have to read what women in emerging feminist groups and  movements are writing, to see that these patterns repeat themselves time and again.
But, of course, the question of just how much in terms of autonomy can be attributed to separatism can never be definitively answered.
Nevertheless it is my belief that without us, feminism would never have been more than a caucus of the broad left.
Separatism was right there in the middle, influencing all women, and, despite themselves, even those who were most vociferous in their resistance to our ideas.
What separatists did was to reduce the very complex set of circumstances which combine to oppress women, to a single uncluttered issue.
That is the stark injustice of the total humiliation of women on all levels, by men.
Separatism was the source of this theme and the means by which it spilled into every area of feminist activity.
To make the language of separatism less cumbersome, I want to call this central theme, pure separatism and the effects that pure separatism has caused, graduated separatism.
Let me return to my own experiences to illustrate the relationship between pure and graduated separatism.
At the same time as I was being bundled in and out of police vans for telling the troops in Northern Ireland exactly where they should go, I was also attending GLF meetings.
I just can't remember when I found the time to wash my hair and iron creases into my flares.
The weekly meetings, held on Thursdays, were megalithic in proportion.
Upwards of four and even five hundred people attended.
We hired halls at the London School of Economics, the Middle Earth Club in Covent Garden, and the church hall of All Saints in Notting Hill.
Of the hundreds who went, we were lucky if twenty-five of those were women.
With the best will in the world, and there was initially a lot of it, lesbians found it hard to make their voices heard.
Inevitably the inequality in numbers was reflected in the priority given to issues.
Against the backdrop of queer bashing and police harassment, the more disguised problems associated with lesbianism, fared badly.
Even in the smaller specific groups, women often felt that they were struggling against thinly-disguised misogyny.
Gay men who had been shown a stiff cock in a public lavatory by a policeman, and were then promptly arrested for showing an interest, weren't slow to remind us that, thanks to Queen Victoria, lesbianism was not illegal.
The fact that none of the lesbians I knew wanted to pick up a woman in a public toilet underpinned those very basic differences in the sexuality of gay women and men, at that time, which eventually led to the split.
There were those men, lots of them, who quite simply ignored us, viewing our presence, I'm sure, as an intrusion.
There were those men who made strained efforts to submerge their mistrust, dislike and fear of us.
And there were those men who encouraged us to reprimand them for sexist thoughts and deeds.
In the end, once again, women were servicing men, women were raising the consciousness of men, women were giving their energy to men.
We, the lesbians, began to abandon the GLF dream.
We gave up expecting GLF to solve our problems because we could see that it was essentially a movement built around the freedom to choose and practise your own sexuality.
Further, in terms of heterosexism, whatever your sexuality, if you are a woman you are always second best.
Gay men, under pressure, could return to the closet and regain all the privileges of being male.
Where could lesbians go?
We became increasingly angry and frustrated, feeling more and more that to work politically with men, whatever their sexuality, was simply a debilitating exercise.
In 1972, a group of us, finally exhausted by our tokenist existence, announced at one of the mega-meetings, our intention to leave GLF and work politically only with women.
This decision, inspired by pure separatism, was graduated separatism.
Not all of the women who took that decision were separatist by any means, but the fact that we had rejected men was not a gesture of feminism alone.
After all feminism alone does not exclude men.
Some of the men in GLF had called themselves feminist, as had the Mao-ist men at Skegness.
Graduated separatism on the other hand draws a line beyond which men cannot go.
Pure separatism involves a woman taking steps to remove men from her life.
She must live with women, be a mother only to girl children.
Male culture in all its manifestations is shunned.
She must abandon all relationships with men, lovers, fathers and brothers.
Sexually she is either celibate or lesbian.
Politically and socially, her contact is confined to  women.
The music she listens to must be composed and played by women, the books she reads must have a woman author.
Her morality is not dictated by patriarchal norms, but rather guided by the belief that women's needs are her sole concern.
To steal from men is not theft, it is reclamation.
Graduated separatism, the acceptable face of separatism, can be seen as the ripples which pass outwards from this.
Graduated separatist spaces, women-only spaces, can be moved into by all women.
You do not have to be a separatist or even a lesbian to enjoy the benefits of graduated separatism.
It has meant that women's groups of all kinds, even those outside mainstream feminism, can now quite legitimately organize around women-only issues.
Having said this though, it is what goes on in the woman-only space, which defines it as graduated separatism or not.
Groups of women working or socializing together are not automatically separatist.
Of course, there are many precedents for women-only societies.
The Women's Institute is devoted to the service of husband and family, a convent of nuns to the service of a male god: their very existence depends on this element of male service.
Can you imagine how  long a convent of sisters devoted to the worship of Hecate would have survived?
Women-only groups are active in local and national politics, at work, in job training and skills courses, in youth work, in sport.
The existence of Greenham Common, women's refuges, rape crisis centres, health care projects; women-only workshops at mixed events, and lesbian-only bars at gay gatherings: all these and more are examples of how the energy of pure separatism has filtered through to affect the lives of many women, including those who have no interest in politics of any kind, let alone separatism.
Graduated separatism creates a space where women and girls can be free from the burden of men and their persistent sexism long enough to gain confidence and a skill, which would otherwise have been impossible.
Had separatism confined itself to a political context, then however violent the discussion, its impact and effects would not have been a fraction of what they are.
Those of us who ‘became’ separatist in the early seventies carried our politics  into our lifestyle in a way that, to us, obviated our beliefs and put teeth into our thrashing gums.
To our zealous eyes, hypocrisy was everywhere.
A white  anti-racist was only a guilt-ridden ex-colonial WASP.
A car-driving, home-owning, polytechnic lecturer with a fake northern accent, was a bleating guilty liberal, not a socialist.
Equally, a feminist who left a meeting, went home and jumped into bed with hubbie or boyfriend, was no better than a member of the fifth column.
It was easy enough to demand racial equality, fair distribution of the wealth of the world, or equal rights for women: none of those would happen tomorrow, and none of them involved more than the most superficial cosmetic surgery to make yourself credible.
Dialectic, however moving and seductive, was just words.
To us, lesbianism and feminism were synonymous, either one without the other was untenable.
A non-feminist lesbian was just a failed heterosexual.
A non-lesbian feminist was just a male apologist.
We demanded proof of intent, and that could only be achieved through living a separatist lifestyle.
That was the revolution here and now.
On leaving GLF in 1972 I didn't realize that I was now a separatist; those of us who were didn't use the word.
We called ourselves proudly the extremists, the vanguard, but it wasn't until we read the American CLIT papers in 1973 that we knew we had a name other than men-haters.
In her SCUM (Society for Cutting Up Men) manifesto, Valerie Solanus outlined a matriarchal utopia with men as a slave class.
This was not what I wanted.
For me, men had to disappear altogether.
I didn't want a geographical solution — a women's farm or island or country.
I didn't want, either, a sexual apartheid or to use violence or magic.
All these solutions were current and much discussed.
But I accepted what G.K. Chesterton had put so well in 1911: ‘A woman putting up her fists at a man is a woman putting herself in the one position which does not frighten him.’
The first stage in the process of making men disappear was to ignore them totally.
One by one the men in our mixed household left or were thrown out.
We stopped going to GLF, and to mixed gay discos and on mixed demos.
We sold all our male records, stopped reading the newspaper and watching the telly.
When I wrote letters home I  addressed them to my mother only.
I sat alone in the canteen at college, I stopped drinking in pubs and chatty male bus conductors and shop assistants were met with blank stares.
To ignore men was to cut the umbilical cord once and for all, to deny them their very lifeforce.
Men could only wield power if we, the women, let them.
Without our minds and bodies to leech from, men would eventually shrivel and die.
William Golding's book Lord of the Flies was to me an apt exercise in male self-disclosure, chronicling as it does what happens when the civilizing female influence is removed from the life of the male.
Without women men revert to animals, without men women could heal and restore to harmony a world raped and ravaged.
We further argued that this mass withdrawal of support from men had to happen quickly if the world were not to be destroyed by pollution or holocaust.
We couldn't wait around for the magic day when the men turned to us and said, ‘OK girls, now it's your turn.’
Anyway we didn't have to wait, we didn't have to persuade, we had simply to stop conspiring in our oppression.
In A Room of One's Own , Virginia Woolf describes how,
Without the telly, the pub, and most gay social life, I had time to read and study.
I experienced a personal Renaissance.
Layer after layer of male confusion cleared away from my eyes.
I had almost daily visions of a cathartic kind, with the total and even religious intensity of those experienced by Paul on the road to Damascus — an unfortunate comparison!
You could not properly take account of my experience of separatism without acknowledging my feelings of being swept away by this sort of fervour.
It had all been lies, everything men had ever told us!
I reconstructed my life and all other women's in the light of male distortion and women's stolen potential.
Nothing men had said or written was to be trusted.
I read  women authors voraciously, and when you consider this was in pre-Women's Press and Virago days, it meant I read a strange variety of subjects: history, travel, witchcraft, politics, poetry, theology, philosophy, even Victorian novelettes on the evils of alcohol inspired by the Temperance League.
When, in 1974 an American friend brought me over from the States a copy of Elizabeth Gould-Davis's The First Sex , I had a scholar's confirmation of my conclusions.
The squat we lived in was falling down, but like Patience and Sara, we tackled our problems with a pioneering spirit.
We saw it as an opportunity to demystify the male worlds of plumbing, electricity and carpentry.
We read and experimented until we could stride into builders' suppliers and ask for one-way cistern inlet valves, 1.5 mm triplecore insulated or three-inch steel angle brackets, just as though we had been born knowing all about it, like men!
I stopped wearing Tampax (cotton wool pricks), and I stopped eating meat in case the chunk of sizzling corpse I was about to sit down to had come from a male animal.
At first it was men who were not allowed into the house and although this position resulted in a lot of criticism and ridicule, most feminists had some sympathy so long as we didn't seriously advocate separatism for all women.
But of course this was inevitably what we did do.
It happened initially because at that time separatists were few in number, and across the country we all knew each other more or less.
As a result of the huge curiosity our stance aroused, we had to continuously explain and defend our politics.
We had literally hundreds of almost identical conversations.
These were often emotional and traumatizing, and left us exhausted.
We would often find out later that these conversations had been reported in a distorted way.
All sorts of rumours spread about what went on in our house.
We had, ‘shaved our heads so as not to be sex objects, and boarded up our windows so that men in the street couldn't see in’.
We also ‘drowned male kittens, beat up the man who came to read the meter, and held covens where we stuck pins in male voodoo dollies’.
We were easy targets for ridicule, and because we were angered and hurt by all of this, we withdrew further into ourselves, and stopped having  contact with heterosexual women almost entirely.
At one point a group of us decided that the best way to stop being hassled about separatism was to publish instalments of the CLIT papers in the weekly newsletter, which was mailed to women all over London and beyond.
We thought that if women wanted to know about separatism they could read this, and then leave us in peace.
It didn't work, and by about the third instalment the outcry was such that we abandoned it.
Over the next few years the numbers of separatists grew.
Women began to leave the cities and to establish women's houses in the countryside and in Scotland and Wales.
We had contact with women from America, France and Scandinavia.
I began to read pieces about separatism written by women who I didn't know.
All this meant that I no longer felt personally responsible for separatism.
Sometimes many weeks went by without me having to defend my politics.
I had time to think about where I was going and what I had become.
I look back on 1975 as a year of the most painful self-scrutiny.
I had made so many enemies.
Had the means justified the end?
In the winter of 1975 the council evicted us from our squat and those of us who formed the nucleus of that original women's house were dispersed around the country.
I felt very stuck.
I was trapped by a set of dictates I had imposed on myself and others, and my aggressive public image doggedly intruded itself into my personal relationships.
I was frustrated by my ghetto, sickened by my reputation.
I needed a fresh start.
I had to let go of separatism.
In the spring of 1976 I decided to act on a need I had felt for a very long time.
I wanted a child.
By June, after one attempt at conception, I was pregnant.
(This, in the days before widespread artificial insemination, meant a public climb down from separatism.)
My separatist friends said I was selling out, and taking on the role of mother was just doing what the patriarchy had trained me for.
In any case they would never sanction sex with a man for whatever reason, not to mention taking the risk of giving birth to a male child.
Women who I had attacked for bringing up boy children wanted to know if it had been an immaculate conception or simply parthenogenesis, and what was I  going to do with it if it were a boy?
Although I did what I could to try to conceive a girl, I couldn't be sure that I had.
In any event both sets of protagonists were right.
My aggressive five-year ego trip along the path of separatism was over.
I had to face the music, I had to face myself.
By the autumn of 1976, halfway through my pregnancy, I fell asleep one afternoon and had a very powerful dream.
In it I saw my child's body inside my own, but it wasn't curled up like a foetus.
It wasn't a baby either, it was a child of about three, and what's more it was a boy with a shock of fair hair.
When I woke up I was almost as amazed by the fair hair as I was by the sex, because both his ‘father’ and I are very dark.
In the spring of 1977 I did indeed give birth to a boy who later grew that shock of fair hair.
So, what do I feel about separatism now, ten years on, and the mother of sons?
How can I claim any loyalty to separatism after what has happened to me?
Well, most obviously I have learnt that what is good for me cannot necessarily be applied to everyone, although I still tend to dish out unsolicited advice.
But, more importantly, I have learnt not to see any stage of my life as the final one.
Politics, sexuality or whatever, must be a framework to build on, not a rigid cage which restricts change.
All women who come to separatism do so as a reaction to the brutality and institutionalized sexism of men.
The rage and sense of injustice, for a separatist, is not powerfully enough voiced anywhere else.
But let me make the point here that separatism and man-hating are different things.
A man-hater is someone (and it can be another man) inspired by revenge.
A separatist, by definition, lives separately from men, although hatred of men does occur.
The man-hater is locked into the initial stage of separation, where repressed hurt and previously unarticulated anger are explored.
Many man-haters, in my experience, come fresh from a traumatic relationship with a man, or a recent realization about men.
The overwhelming need to return the hurt, although this seems to be a necessary stage, can become the overriding passion, It can lead a woman into almost daily aggressive confrontations with men in order to sustain high levels of hatred.
In some separatist spaces time and energy were spent in endless discussion on the evils of men.
Here is the  first uncomfortable contradiction of separatism.
Whereas separatism should result in women devoting all their time and energy to women, in fact and probably inevitably, men manage to exhaust us even in their absence.
If my withdrawal from separatism had in part to do with feeling unhappy with a surfeit of hatred, which is mentally and spiritually very depleting, it had also to do with how you go about communicating feelings of being cleansed and enlightened.
In contact with other women the separatist becomes more and more impatient with women who to them seem stubbornly bogged down in male values.
As I have already said, it can reach the point where you have virtually no contact except with other separatists.
This is an unreal place to be, because if you can't talk to other women, yet you believe all women must in the end come to separatism, then either those women have to be born separatist or they have to come to it through isolation, pain and struggle.
The process of separatism growing into a global force would thus take a very long time.
In this sense, separatism doesn't address itself to the business of making life better for all women, and is then restricted in large part to acting as a channel for the energy of women once they have become embittered by heterosexism.
Finally, I think the issue which more than any other led me to break with pure separatism, was women's compassion.
In defining the source of women's oppression being pro-male sexism rather than capitalism, separatism shifted the emphasis of the whole of feminism.
But, having done this, separatism went on to offer only one solution, an all-women world.
Here separatism dissolves, at best, into romantic/cosmic/evolutionary answers, or at worst into violence and male genocide.
Separatism, despite any protestations to the contrary, came up against the age old problem of how to transpose the idea onto the material world.
However men are ‘are gotten rid of’ many women would be immeasurably hurt in the process.
For separatists to impose their solution on all women, even if it was viewed as being ‘for her own good’, you cannot escape the fact that you are simply replacing male domination with female.
Women have massive amounts of love invested in fathers, lovers and sons, and many of these women despise the systems their  own men may be helping to sustain.
Haven't women always so been torn?
But to insist that women somehow amputate their love and compassion is to ask them to destroy the very thing which in my view favourably distinguishes us from men.
Patriarchy has shown women that there is no such thing as peace, there are just gaps in the wars.
To me, we were not offering anything different.
If we were to solve our problem by disposing of our enemy, we would set a very disgusting precedent in terms of separatist problem-solving.
Graduated separatism accepts pure separatism's definition of the problem, but not the solution.
Apart from anything else it is self-defeating to nurture girl children, to teach them self-respect and self-defence, and then have to watch them go to war with men and boys whose ideas are left unchallenged.
Having said this, I don't mean that it is the job of women to re-educate men.
Once a woman has decided what and who she wants to be, it is for the men in her life, if there are any, to re-educate themselves to take account of her.
Because I lived away from men for so long, part of me is now permanently closed to them.
I can honestly say that I feel at least equal to them, often above them; and I don't enter any relations with them that aren't on my terms.
I don't need men to make me feel secure, to be a mother, to frame my morals, to pay my bills, to organize my life, to give me self-esteem.
I do not want matriarchy to replace patriarchy as an interim measure because I retain unshakeable faith in women's ability to organize, to be caring and to be, just in so many ways, superior to men.
Eventually men could probably be readmitted to positions of influence, provided they had somehow overcome their taste for violence, greed, rape and power for its own sake.
Although this may sound harsh and unreasonable, experience has made it hard for me to trust women who have never been through some form of separatist reaction.
If, as a woman, you can see clearly what men have done to us, how can you stay calm?
If you don't explore your anger how can you stop internalizing it and shed the costume of the victim?
So long as heterosexism continues, it will continue to spawn separatism.
My hope is that we could develop the kind of separatism which doesn't make women, both on the inside  and the outside of it, feel attacked, vilified, stuck and lonely.
To feel compassion for men without having been a separatist is dangerous.
It is a love which has been kept in ignorance: haven't women been kept uninformed for long enough?
Faltering from the closet
Terry Sanderson
Rotherham — what a dump!
It's the sort of place where the pigeons fly backwards because they don't want to get muck in their eyes.
Someone once told me that even breathing the air was the equivalent of smoking twenty cigarettes a day.
It's a mean place for anyone to live, but particularly bad for gay people.
I grew up in a small mining village on the outskirts of Rotherham during the fifties and sixties.
It was all pits and steelworks in those days and there was a resultant machismo about the place.
Men were men and women knew their places.
Homosexuals were unheard of.
I was quite effeminate in my youth, but no one mentioned this fact to me.
I was just thought of as ‘spoiled’ or ‘like a daft lass’rather than being gay.
I suppose it was considered such a terrible thing to say about anyone that it had become a totally taboo concept — even for your worst enemy.
I was well into my teens before I even knew there was a word to describe these secret feelings I had, let alone that they had been legislated against.
But when I did find out I was profoundly relieved to know that all these troubling fantasies which had been playing twice nightly in my head were, in fact, shared by others.
But where were these others?
How could I find these rarities who wanted what I wanted?
According to the Sunday papers of the time there was a ‘twilight world’ somewhere where gay vicars and school teachers and scout masters ‘assaulted’their youthful charges.
It didn't sound very pleasant, but I was still anxious to find it.
During my sheltered youth I had two fleeting experiences which gave me some indication that I was not alone.
The first happened at the local cinema.
I was in the habit of going in there each Sunday with my (straight) friend Kenny to see the horror double-bill.
We were both sixteen.
On one occasion a man sat next to me and after a preliminary bit of footsie, he invited me to slip my hand into his pants.
I was most happy to oblige.
All this happened in total silence with Kenny sitting on the other side of me, totally unaware that my life was changing.
At long last it was happening and I was receiving confirmation that the exotic and rare species, The Homosexual, existed somewhere else other than in my imagination.
My second gay encounter was quite soon afterwards.
In my first job I was required to wear a suit.
My mother insisted on accompanying me to the tailor to ensure that I got something sensible.
She knew that I was perfectly capable of having the whole thing made in black leatherette if left to my own devices.
The man who measured me — he had red hair, I remember — lingered over my inside leg and when he realized I wasn't going to object, gave me a comprehensive fondling.
I was thrilled, of course, but this was tempered somewhat by the knowledge that my mother was standing in full view, three feet away, leafing through a pattern book.
Then I got a job in a camera shop in the High Street.
It became apparent very soon that I had not been employed because of my skills as a salesman.
It turned out the manager of the shop, Mr Farrer, was gay and it wasn't long before there was a different kind of developing in the darkroom.
This, as far as I was concerned, was the great romance of the century.
Regrettably, he did not feel the same way.
Whilst I was mooning about singing ‘I'm in love with a wonderful guy’, he was entertaining just about half the gay population of the town.
However, this job revealed to me the big, wide, illegal world of the homosexual.
I came to realize that the twilight world actually existed unseen, but in parallel, with everyone else's world.
The manager of the local department store used to come to the shop regularly, so did the butcher from three doors up.
Mr Farrer seemed to know so many people, and the reason he knew them was because they were all gay.
What a revelation!
But this was too soon in my own development for me to be able to grasp the opportunity and eventually the shop closed down and Mr Farrer moved on.
It was in 1972, when I was twenty-five, that I decided that something had to be done.
These occasional chance encounters could not in any way be said to constitute a satisfactory emotional life.
It was around that time that I spotted an advertisement for CHE (Campaign for Homosexual Equality) in the personal column of the Sunday Times .
So I wrote off.
Back came the reply.
To my disappointment I realized that the nearest group was in Manchester, which was too far away to be useful.
‘Isn't there somewhere nearer?’
I asked.
‘No,’ they replied, ‘so why don't you start something?’
They put me in touch with a few other people in nearby Sheffield and we arranged to have a tentative first meeting in someone's flat.
It was a fraught time.
We were all very wary of each other, not really knowing that we wanted, what was possible or even what gay people could do together besides have sex.
In Sheffield (Britain's fourth largest city) the only gay facility at the time was an upstairs bar in a pub called The King William.
To get to this bar you had to pass through a billiard room full of jeering straight men.
It amazed me to think that even though the gay bar had been situated up those dark stairs for many years, the straight men downstairs managed to keep up the impetus so that no queen should pass without an insult.
Indeed, the only people willing to endure this ordeal on a regular basis were the screaming queens who had already decided that the best way to cope was to flaunt it.
It took another year before the group felt confident enough to organize its first semi-open event — a disco.
We hired the Cemetery Road Vestry Hall, organized a bar and some records and the show was on the road.
For one lovely evening — one very important evening for the gay people of Sheffield — Cemetery Road Vestry Hall was paradise.
We had a convener of the group who was energetic, out, and determined to make CHE a dynamic group.
His name was Dave Brown and he eventually went on to establish one of the first clubs in the country to be licensed as an openly gay establishment.
I was amazed that someone should have such  big ambitions for a group like ours, but the ideas were getting through and soon my own expectations increased.
After the success of Cemetery Road the group hired the City Hall for another disco and soon the whole thing became a regular event which still occurs today.
Indeed, over the years it developed into one of the largest regular gay events in the country.
One of the best aspects of it was that gay men and lesbians were represented in almost equal numbers.
The concept of a ‘gay community’ was born in Sheffield through those discos.
Suddenly there was somewhere where you could ‘be’ in peace, where plots could be hatched, messages got across and, best of all, where romance could be safely experienced.
Having made such progress in Sheffield, I felt it was time to move back to home ground, so I set up a CHE group in Rotherham.
It was soon clear that this was an entirely different kettle of fish.
Gone was the anonymity of the big city, gone was the support of the hundreds of people who were prepared to get involved, as they were in Sheffield with its university and other cosmopolitan influences.
What I now faced was a small town with a strongly macho bias and an inbuilt resistance to change.
However, fired with enthusiasm from the successes in Sheffield, we opened for business in a church hall rented to us by a sympathetic vicar.
The group was slow to get off the ground, despite an encouraging article about the group in the Rotherham Advertiser .
Prospective members seemed reluctant to present themselves.
After all, the only tradition of homosexuality in the town was in the cottages, and stories in the local papers about court cases for ‘gross indecency’ indicated that they were well patronized.
By this time — the early seventies — homosexuality was no longer a taboo subject.
The Gay Liberation Front and CHE had laid the foundations.
The subject was occasionally aired on TV or in the press and Gay News had hit the streets.
But there was still a strong feeling among the citizens of Rotherham that the whole thing didn't really concern them.
It happened somewhere else.
After about a year, and with a paid-up membership of about fifteen men and five women, we decided that we would try to organize our own disco at the town hall  Assembly Rooms.
We would try to do for Rotherham what Checkers discos had done for Sheffield.
But the local councillors in Rotherham lacked the political sophistication of their neighbouring big-city colleagues and they turned down our application to hire the room.
I was angry as hell at the time and disappointed, too, for this was a strongly Labour-controlled council, but looking back now I realize that this was the best thing that could have happened to the group, for now we could present ourselves to the people of Rotherham as a genuine minority with a grievance.
The local press and radio picked up the story and carried it week after week — for a couple of years the gay struggle was big news for the folks back home.
The citizens of Rotherham were, at last, being confronted with the topic in their own town, in a way that was difficult for them to ignore.
They were forced into formulating an opinion.
It was at this point — a year or so into our campaign — that I realized that my efforts were not always appreciated by the other members of the group.
Many of them were feeling distinctly insecure at having taken the first step out of the closet and they kept the escape route in sight at all times.
This was a dilemma which was never really resolved.
I was arguing that gay people have nothing to be ashamed of and yet my troops remained invisible as though they needed convincing too.
CHE was a campaigning group, but it was also supposed to be a support and social outlet.
I wasn't fully aware at the time of just what profound personal changes were taking place in the lives of some of the members.
Those who were nervous and struggling with their own feelings did not want to expose their gayness in the way that I had done.
I understood this.
I had, quite deliberately, burned my bridges — there was no returning to the closet for me.
I was fighting my own terrors in public, but others wanted to do it more gently.
And so I became the single, visible manifestation of homosexuality in South Yorkshire.
Whenever the papers wanted a quote they came to me, when the local radio wanted an interview I was the spokesperson.
For three years it went on.
A sympathetic local media helped us harass and embarrass the silly burghers as they repeatedly refused to let us use the Assembly Rooms.
Then  they also turned down our application to have Gay News in the library, which provided us with further ammunition and an unexpected new member.
One of the councillors on the libraries committee took a copy of Gay News home to study so that he couldn't be accused of being uninformed when the time came for him to vote for its rejection.
Whilst GN was in this councillor's house, his twenty-year-old son read it and saw the contact number for the CHE group.
Within a week he was a member, within a fortnight he'd come out at home and within three weeks his father was at the CHE group wanting to know what the hell was going on.
But we had at least one vote in our favour when the application was considered.
I had been very naive when we started out in Rotherham and it came as a shock to me to realize that not everyone can see the justness of a just cause.
I had been hurt by the crude insults, deliberate distortions and sheer venom that had been directed at us.
It brought home to me that even tinpot local councillors will ruthlessly exploit irrational prejudice if there is political mileage in it.
I also had a rather childish trust in the police until the day they turned up on my doorstep to question me about a murder.
It was then that I discovered that they had been keeping our group under surveillance and noting down the registration numbers of cars parked outside the meeting place.
My rather innocent trust crumbled when I realized that as far as the police were concerned, I was little better than a criminal on whom they must keep tabs.
It frightened me to think that my name and address and those of the other members were on police files for no other reason than that we were gay.
We were referred to as ‘sinister’ and this made me see how little impact we had made upon the establishment and how much further we needed to go.
All around me, as this was going on, dramatic personal transformations were taking place.
More and more people contacted the group; very few actually joined, but an awful lot were metamorphosed by it.
Some needed only to know that we existed — that was enough for them to throw themselves wholeheartedly into the gay life.
Others were diffident, unable to cope or come to terms with their sexuality.
Some found the conflict too intense and retired  back to the closet, perhaps for ever.
There had never been any doubt in my own mind.
The prospect of a heterosexual involvement on any level was simply out of the question for me.
Coming out was the key issue then as it is now.
I remember the first TV documentary I saw about gays — the participants appeared only in silhouette and questions were couched in hushed and tragic tones.
Many of the older people found it difficult to throw off the ‘criminal, associations which had carried over from the fifties and sixties.
Many long-standing personal crises were brought to a head because of the existence of CHE.
A sizeable reservoir of homosexuality, which had been held in abeyance, suddenly stirred in the town.
I was astonished, for instance, at the number of married men and women who contacted us.
So many of them had married simply because they had no idea that homosexuals could have relationships .
Many of them had had sex with other gays, but few of them had accepted that you could make a way of life out of it.
Then suddenly there was this group of people who asserted that not only could you commit yourself to a member of your own sex, they were actually doing it.
Reactions from people were not generally hostile.
Except for a few stereotyped responses from the wilder churches — Pastor David Powell of the Rotherham Pentecostal Church actually banned gays from his services — and a few jibes from the local National Front, we were always treated politely, listened to with interest and generally well received.
This surprised me somewhat.
I was always waiting for the day when I would be beaten up, but it never came.
And then when the invitations to speak to the Housewives’ Register and Parish Council started rolling in, I realized that CHE had been noted as a part of the life of the town and it had a lot of potential friends.
Rather belatedly the local Labour Party got its act together and, along with the Trades Council, passed resolutions condemning its own councillors.
But still the council wouldn't move over the issue of hiring rooms to us.
It was after the third year of struggle that we decided to go militant.
We arranged a disco at the Assembly Rooms under a false name and invited two hundred gays to come along.
They did.
The local papers got wind in advance of what was happening and I was petrified that the police would come bursting in to arrest us all.
But the disco passed pleasantly and our point was made.
The following morning the local paper headlined ‘Gays Lead Council a Lively Dance’, which made the mayor very angry indeed.
Then the local government ombudsman put his boot into the council by issuing a report which said that CHE had been treated unjustly.
The local vicar and local MP Stan Crowther added their names to a petition of local worthies calling for the council to change its mind.
Under all this pressure, the council simply had to relent and change its policy.
No one should get the impression from this that Rotherham had taken the gay community to its bosom.
Things didn't change all that dramatically.
I went along to the surgery of Rother Valley MP Peter Hardy, who was resident in one of the safest Labour seats in the country, and despite all that had gone before he was able to say, ‘This has nothing to do with the people around here — it all happens in London’.
As far as he was concerned, homosexuality did not exist north of Hampstead (or perhaps south of it, either) and despite the fact that its local manifestation was sitting in front of him he would not be convinced.
But lots of things were falling into place for me.
I had come out relentlessly to my family, my friends, colleagues and everyone else who came into my life.
At every step I was told not to do it because I was bound to suffer from the kind of prejudice I was always talking about.
It didn't happen though.
I was never assaulted, never kicked out of my home or sacked, even though I seemed to be inviting it.
I was, for my final seven years in Rotherham, working at a hospital for the mentally handicapped.
This was supposed to be a ‘sensitive’ job and if I came out I would automatically be adjudged a danger to the patients and given the elbow.
In actual fact, I got nothing but support, encouragement and — dare I say it?— love from my colleagues.
They must have been sick and tired of my harping about gay rights, but by the time I had decided to move to London in order to set up home with the man of my dreams, my workmates organized a leaving party which was a touching celebration of the relationship between Keith  and myself.
About thirty of us gathered in a hotel in Rotherham — all people I'd worked with including the cleaner and the consultant, and those who had them brought along their own partners, girlfriends, boyfriends and husbands and wives.
They toasted Keith and me (Keith had come up for the day to join in) and bought us a slow cooker for our new home.
I wept buckets, but it wasn't until later that I realized what had happened.
These people — ordinary working-class folk like me — had come together to celebrate a gay relationship and to wish it success and happiness.
What I had been fighting for for all these years — the right for gay people to live their lives openly with dignity and respect — was actually happening, and in the most unlikely of places.
I could not have had a better send off, and I realized that the public battles had played only a marginal part in it.
The slogan ‘the personal is political’ made perfect sense to me.
I could see that only by changing our own personal worlds will we change the world at large.
The happiness we are all seeking isn't granted by politicians, although I accept they can create circumstances that make the achievement of happiness very difficult.
At that time, of course, unemployment was not the major issue it is today, neither did we have the burden of AIDS, but I still maintain that the most important changes we can make are the ones inside our own heads.
The importance of being lesbian
Eiliś Mhara
This piece is about coming out in Dublin in the early seventies.
It is a personal, highly subjective account which seeks to relate my experience as an Irish lesbian, my involvement in political action at that time and my subsequent emigration to England in the mid-seventies.
I would like to thank the following women for their support and encouragement as I was writing this piece: Anne Collins, Linda Stepulvage, Tricia Darragh and Lisa Hunt.
In 1973, I was living in Dublin in a teeny bedsit with three other women.
It was the kind of rabbit warren in which you could not swing a cat and there were thousands of them in the city.
Our beds touched but we never did.
Arm-in-arming for Saturday shopping was permissible but the finer more subtle expressions of love between women were channelled into food, presents and a particular kind of teasing that conveyed the messages of knowing each other on different levels in ways which neutralized the intensity.
We got up every morning and went to our routine, boring and badly-paid jobs, some of us hoping, some of us dreading the advent of Mr Right: he who would relieve us from, God forbid, the tedium of having to rely on each other for company, comfort, support and stimulation.
We went dancing on Saturday nights with a kind of patient horror, anticipating the humiliation which accompanied these expeditions.
I often stood and just watched the women, the mascara-ed, the pansticked, the lacquered and the lonely, line the walls and wait to be asked to dance.
We were not allowed to dance with  each other.
If you did, you risked verbal or physical abuse, derision and expulsion.
Women policed each other, stopping rebellious acts with cold and disapproving stares.
Apart from the occasional drunken foray into heterosexual foreplay, we remained within the girls together fold in all other areas of our social and domestic lives.
I was working as a tele-ad girl with the Irish Press Group.
I sat day in day out with headphones over my ears, ‘Irish Press , can I help you?’ nearly losing my job once because the owner of the newspaper, Vivian De Valera, thought I was too forward on the telephone…my manner was not subservient enough.
It was in that office on the fourth floor that I heard and felt the city of Dublin roar and shudder with the explosion of three massive bombs which ripped through the heart of the city and its people.
It's a day I will never forget as the death toll rose and office workers were told to give blood or go home.
I did both.
People were crying in shock and smoke billowing above Pearse, Talbot and Parnell streets marking the spots where a few hours earlier, country women and men had hurried past to catch trains home for the weekend.
We all knew that this carnage was the work of Unionist Fascists bent on teaching the Republic a lesson — stay out of our affairs.
Six months prior to this horrendous attack, I had come out.
During the lead-up to my emergence as a fully-fledged lesbian, I suffered unspeakably as I steered myself through a minefield of heavily internalized Catholic dogma.
At night I tossed and turned to dreams of such emotional intensity that I went to work as tired as I was the day before.
The urgency of coming out was precipitated by contact with the ‘real thing’.
I was part of a small group of women who met regularly above a shabby public house in Baggot Street to talk feminism and discuss the current state of Irish politics.
Sitting in this seamy room one evening waiting for the meeting to begin, I was startled by my friend exclaiming, ‘My God, there's a man coming up the stairs.’
I looked over the bannister and saw two women, one holding the other by the hand.
My stomach contracted and my heart went into a somersault.
I spent the rest of the evening pretending  riveted attention on the discussion while all the time  practising ways of looking at the two women without them catching me.
It was deliciously terrifying.
I wanted to follow them home, ask them a million questions.
Instead I kept silent, but inside I was singing in a very loud voice.
Over the weeks that followed I noticed more of them.
I could not use the word though; its power caught in the back of my throat and held me, voiceless.
The urgency of coming out was building and I felt like a firecracker about to go off.
The anticipation and joyous feelings were continually offset by my fear of great social  ostracization , loneliness, exposure, ethical confusion and the permanent threat of moral damnation.
On the streets, in meetings and in work, I began to dread women's perceptiveness and intuition for fear they would penetrate my three-dimensional protection, silence, an accepted assumed heterosexuality and aloofness.
It was not to work for long.
My hetero-dithering, which might have continued indefinitely, was abruptly ended one day over lunch with a good friend.
At one point during the meal, she reached over to me, put her hand on mine, looked me straight in the eye and said, ‘I think you are a lesbian.’
As I bit through the clingwrap on my sandwich, I gulped, and summoning indifference said, ‘Oh why do you think that Brenda?’
Every intonation in my voice was struggling to disguise the yes, yes, yeses that were bubbling under the surface.
‘It's just the way you are when you are with the lesbians in the group.’
She had hit a note of such deep truth in me that I just sat looking at her.
And, of course, it was true.
I was a lesbian dammit.
I had known it for a long time, ever since I had confided to my Mum at age fifteen that I fancied the other girls at school, the ‘it's just a phase,’ syndrome.
I had instantly buried the intense feelings hoping that with time they would decompose or reform and grow into normal healthy heterosexual longings.
Of course, they did not and now when I wake up in the morning and thank God that I'm a lesbian, I remember to thank myself as well .
Brenda's direct statement pushed me to act, to move and to go to where my energy had always been.
Coming home to the lesbian in me, my joys and fears were of a different nature from those posed by continually having to straddle the mutually hostile worlds of lesbianism and  heterosexuality.
All my senses were heightened and f dwelt in a sort of kaleidoscopic twilight zone of longing, terror, political affirmation, sexual discovery.
Overnight, almost, I became a voyeur.
I sat in cafés or stood in bus queues observing the phenomenon of heterosexuality.
From the unsafe distance of my perversion I could, at last, allow my real reactions to emerge.
I was me and it was both frightening and exciting, like driving very fast round a precipitous bend with someone now and again taking my hands off the wheel and forcing me to trust.
One of those times when you wish that varieties of public screaming were a permitted social outlet without the perpetrator risking, at best, hospitalization and, at worst , incarceration.
Now when I look back on that part of my life, I want to make a film and call it The Loneliness of the Long Distance Latent Lesbian .
And I had been lonely.
There were other lonely women too.
Especially isolated were lesbians living in the country in Ireland.
Without the safety of numbers and the resources, however limited, that Dublin provided, many women were too frightened to come out.
They fled to Dublin or England or came out in very small numbers and lived in closeted fearfulness of exposure, job loss and increasing isolation.
In my own backyard, friends who could not cope with their own homophobia deserted me…
I became the kind of woman that my friends, mother, sisters and other friends warned them about.
A couple of years after coming out, I met a heterosexual woman with whom I had been particularly close before I had blasted our cosy set up out of the water.
I watched her shuffle, wriggle and avert her eyes while we made stilted conversation about our lives.
She carefully avoided the personal for fear she might learn more about me…a lesbian, a woman who loved other women.
After all, I might trigger off some of those well-repressed feelings in her and what would she do with them?
They were not the sort you could put out in a black bin bag and hope they would be gone in the morning.
To this day, I still marvel at the fact that, in a country where even the most seasoned and recalcitrant dyke can be made to feel truly perverted in a very short space of time, women found, and still do find, the courage to step into the breach of difference and come out.
During those early seventies, despite the avalanche of heterosexism that constantly slid in our direction, including the virulent expressions of women-hating propounded by Father Church, a group of us waged our own war at the patriarchal system.
The overt and crudest manifestations of Irish misogyny were our first target and we vented our rage and flexed our lesbian muscles in a myriad of dangerous and daring ways.
The Forty Foot at Sandycove was our first port of call.
A bastion of male privilege on the rocky Dublin shoreline, so called because of the water depth.
A beautiful non-tidal cove where Dublin's finest flaunted themselves at an indifferent sea while their wives, children and girlfriends sat half a mile away on what was an excuse for a beach amidst the polluted debris of the capital and not a wave to be seen.
The only movement was an occasional flock of intrepid sea gulls foraging through the mess.
A huge sign at the entrance to the Forty Foot, ‘Men Only’, barred all Irishwomen from what was legally part of their national heritage.
We were resolved this nonsense had to stop.
A number of previous attempts to penetrate this male club had been unsuccessful, with the raiding parties being driven back by irate men.
Agreeing that precision timing and strategic planning was essential to our success we assembled a group of twenty indomitable dykes.
A co-ordinated land, sea and air attack appealed since the element of surprise would considerably affect the outcome and would probably produce the most dramatic results.
This plan was no sloppily organized affair, aware as we were of the lengths to which threatened men will go to protect their most prized territory.
However, the extraordinary pleasure of seeing a bunch of terrified men running in all directions and in complete disarray spurred us into action.
At precisely two thirty on that fateful Saturday, two sinewy dykes climbed into an old-fashioned rowing boat in a small Dublin harbour and began their arduous row towards the Forty Foot and victory.
Back on terra firma, fifteen others bundled into an assortment of cars and drove slowly towards the unsuspecting target.
With fine timing we arrived, parking under cover of some distance so as not to arouse suspicion.
Reaching the ‘Men Only’ sign, we laughed loudly  and one of the women painted a massive women's symbol at the entrance, a sort of ritual ‘open sesame’.
We ran in the rest of the way and lo and behold, what a sight met our eyes.
Naked men of unbelievable varieties were standing, sitting or lying all round the cove.
Their bodies, although all different, had a sort of common denominator ugliness which only a group of undressed men can produce.
As we came into view, hairy male legs moving like pistons beat a hasty retreat to the nearest available nook where they crouched and huddled in speechless terror.
Others, clutching large and not so large towels to their exposed crotches, stood rooted to the spot appalled.
All were transfixed by this group of laughing and exultant lesbians as they walked resolutely towards the rocky promontory stripping off their clothes with Amazonian brazenness.
On cue, the rowing boat appeared from around the coastal bend and in it two topless dykes roaring and cheering were urging their little craft into the cove.
Suddenly, they both jumped up, pulled off their remaining cotton restrictions and plunged straight into the water.
It was a gorgeous sight.
On the diving board armed with umbrellas, a bevy of beauties in fashionable bathing attire dropped one by one into the cove…splish, splosh.
Some of the men had run for their lives by now.
Others too mesmerized and trapped in their nakedness stood aghast watching their male sanctuary being defiled by a bunch of lunatic lesbians.
As remaining male stragglers dragged their shocked bodies out and past the ‘Men Only’ sign, the women relaxed and, for the first time in over a quarter of a century, Irish women's bodies felt the pleasure of sea and hot rocks in the Forty Foot at Sandycove.
The sweet taste of this victory lingered a long time on the lips of Dublin dykes.
On the broader political front, Irish women were also fighting.
Equal pay claims were brought and lost by several groups of working women, bakers, confectioners and factory workers.
Women who could carry a child under each arm on a day's shopping trip were told they were not strong enough to do men's work; that lifting and lugging were better left to the lads after all.
In the kitchens women bakers seethed as they watched their male colleagues lift dough trays into the ovens, the lifting  warranting a third more pay than the women.
Other more stout-hearted women resorted to testing the powers of the newer European legislation.
But to no avail.
Ireland was told to pull its equal pay socks up or else.
At the same time, the fathers at home were given years to implement the law and still the women suffered and raged.
Irish Women United formed in the early seventies, a radical counter to the government sop, the Council for the Status of Women.
This was a liberal middle-class reformist cop-out guaranteed to give the right women a step up in the power stakes as well as provide appeasement for male consciences which were getting a bit ragged at the edges from the constant battering of Irish feminists.
Many of the smaller radical politically active women's groups reformed under the Irish Women United umbrella.
Disaffected women from the male-dominated left, women from single issue campaign groups like Contraceptive Action Programme (CAP) came together.
Acknowledging and dealing positively with political differences was vital to our continuance and effectiveness as we struggled and worked on fundamental issues of feminism and socialism, the emphasis of our commitment being governed to a large extent by our differing political histories.
Classically, the majority of the women I met and worked with in Dublin in those days were lesbians.
Irish Women United targeted rape and all other forms of violence against women, contraception, equal pay, political censorship, union rights for women, etc.
We campaigned, picketed, called public meetings, organized actions, held conferences, disrupted government meetings, created opportunities for educationals and talks, embarrassed government ministers and challenged the church.
We linked ourselves in solidarity to other nationalist struggles.
Visiting women from other countries struggling under the yoke of imperialism spoke to and advised us.
I remember one meeting six months after the CIA had murdered Allende.
Irish women cried as they heard from two Chilean women of the horrors being committed in post-Allende Chile.
Abortion and divorce were two other issues of grave concern to Irish feminists but the climate was too hot politically and our numbers too small to effect change in  those areas at that time.
Given that the sanctity of the Irish family is rigidly built into the Irish constitution, it was going to take years to break down and change the incredible legislative and political barriers.
Nationalist and feminist women in Northern Ireland were organizing around basic issues of survival.
The early and mid-seventies were a time of ‘no warning’ bombs and sectarian killings were escalating.
Women prisoners in Armagh had political status until 1975 but lost it in the following year and the numbers in Armagh rose dramatically during the late seventies.
Campaigns to secure decent housing, health and employment brought women together to organize.
The Women's Movement in Northern Ireland developed out of the twin oppression of class and imperialism.
During those years, especially in the early part of the seventies, political contact between women from the North and the Republic was limited.
This stemmed largely from a lack of political analysis and clarity in relation to nationalism and feminism on the part of Southern feminists.
Women's Aid Centres were set up in Dublin and other major cities as I was preparing to leave Ireland.
The Dublin Rape Crisis Centre came into being a year or two after I had left.
Many of these organizations were self-financing and depended heavily on donation, feminist patronage and solidarity from other better-resourced groups.
just shortly before I departed, I attended a small inaugural meeting on the quayside in Dublin.
It was the first meeting of the Irish Republican Socialist Party of which Bernadette Devlin was a founder member.
Some weeks after this Party launch, one key member was shot and a major split created the Irish National Liberation Army.
In describing some of the political action Irish women took, I hope to reach those English feminists who think, erroneously, that feminism got its name from them.
Feminism has lived in the bellies of Irish women for hundreds of years.
You might even say we are gut feminists.
I remember one particular conference held in Dublin in Ballyfermot, around 1973.
They were called Women's Liberation Conferences in those days.
Ballyfermot is a high-rise architectural nightmare on the outskirts of Dublin, a  working-class ghetto sufficiently distant from the bourgeois elegance of the city centre as to pose no threat to the burgeoning middle class, absorbed as they were then in the mild stirrings of environmentalism, as Georgian Dublin vanished up its own pastiched arsehole.
About one hundred women attended the conference but local women were conspicuously absent, forbidden to attend by their husbands who feared the power of women's words, their wives' innate feminism and the possibility of lesbian contagion.
Nell McCafferty, Bernadette Devlin and other notables vented their feminist spleen at an appreciative audience.
We were reminded of the artful political ruse of a band of women who, flouting the Republic's law on contraception, returned from Northern Ireland by train having procured hundreds of contraceptives.
On reaching the Customs post and the point of confiscation, the women flung packet after packet at red-faced customs men, while alerted press and other media looked on gleefully.
Thereafter the event was known as the Pill Train.
We heard from the few local women who did attend how they took the law into their own hands and arranged regular supplies of contraceptives from the North.
The Pill Train aroused much publicity and it proved extremely effective in forcing the issue of contraception into the front line of public consciousness.
Along with other actions it became the springboard towards legislative change in Ireland.
As the conference afternoon wore on, two Gardai were noticed at the back of the hall standing, ears bent listening to the speeches.
Little did they know that shortly after the conference their services would be required in the lounge of a local public house by a group of frustrated dykes and an infuriated publican.
Needing a well-earned drink after the afternoon's work, ten or twelve dykes repaired to a nearby bar.
In those days, if you were a woman or recognizably so, it was wellnigh impossible to procure a pint of beer in a public house.
The logic of this defied Irish women who were forced to deduce that the spectacle of women wielding pints must offend male sensibilities at a very deep level, especially those who equated pint-downing by women with lesbian leisure.
After all, if we were allowed to wield pints what else might we wield and where would it all end?
Not being averse to a challenge and imbued with extra fervour from the conference, the women, all dykes, ordered fifteen hot whiskies.
Upon completion of the hot whisky order the women planned to ask for fifteen pints thereby coercing a reluctant publican to serve women pints.
It was not possible to resell or rebottle hot whiskies.
As soon as the pint order was lodged it was brusquely refused.
The women remained firm that unless the entire order was completed they would not pay for the hot whiskies.
At this point a puce publican, determined to make the scene a battle-ground of the sexes, threatened the women with the law.
The challenge was accepted and amidst cheers from a group of semi-inebriated local husbands, the offended owner headed out the door in search of a couple of friendly Gardai.
He found them quickly enough and returned to the pub.
What he had not bargained for was the fact that these two Gardai had been listening to well-articulated feminist rhetoric all afternoon and were still reeling from the effects.
They took one look at the group of adamant women and ordered the publican to complete the round.
It was the women's turn to cheer while the surrounding men scowled and muttered obscenities.
In 1976 with the Tories gaining votes I left my friends, my lover, my job and my political life in Ireland.
I came to England — Ipswich — to study for the social workers' qualification, a CQSW in Community Work, believing that I could work with women in the ways I wanted, provided I had the necessary qualifications.
With the required piece of paper in my hands, I planned to return home to work.
At the time of qualifying, however, I realized that I had the choice of working for the Eastern Health Board or the Catholic Church (the two are interchangeable).
I reluctantly decided to stay and came to London knowing one lesbian.
My natural instinct once I reached the rather intimidating environment of London was to seek out other lesbians.
Having been wintered out on the heterosexual plains of Ipswich I longed for the company of other dykes.
Finding this rare breed was to prove a long, uphill struggle.
I learned, too, that English lesbian feminists expected you to become one of them…you either assimilated or you disintegrated.
Over the years I was to meet Irish women who, unable to  stand the barrages of racism, distorted and changed their accents in order to pass.
Hundreds of us were isolated from each other.
Those who could not stand it returned home worn out by the virulence of anti-Irish racism which they experienced from English people.
Many Irish women, including myself, who had come to England for the first time were truly shocked by the levels of anti-Irish racism directed at us.
We simply did not know the extent to which English people are taught to despise us.
For those of us who focused our energies on lesbian and feminists issues we were to find ourselves marginalized and isolated in English feminist groups, amongst women whose racism mirrored the population at large.
These women ran and organized all the groups and I remember often being approached as if I were a rare species of animal.
Not to be trusted or even understood but to be treated with caution and sometimes indulged.
It took time to translate the political terms and conditions being imposed on me by my colonialist sisters, heavily disguised as they were under a veneer of, ‘Of course we know the issues are different for Irish women’.
Behind this superficial and meaningless acknowledgment lay the galling assumption that Irish women had come to England to learn about ‘real’ feminism.
Seldom in my experience did English women demonstrate the slightest interest in learning from us, from our struggles and from our political experiences.
After all, we did all want abortion on demand and rape in marriage was a central issue for concerned Irish women.
Meanwhile in Ireland, at that time, women were being arrested and harassed for reading Spare Rib and the war in the North was raging on with ever-increasing numbers of Republican women being imprisoned without trial.
These facts escaped the attention of our radical sisters and thereby so did we.
It was a strange land to find myself in and one in which I observed many phenomena.
One of these was the worship of the superstar.
These tended to be white, middle-class academic English women who expounded on the latest dogmas of feminist political theory with a vigour reminiscent of evangelism.
Women who lacerated young feminist apprentices at conferences if they made the mistake  of admitting confusion or heretical leanings.
Women who talked from their heads while their guts and hearts ached for tenderness.
Women who through their racism, collusion and a profound lack of political intelligence, made my sisters and me completely invisible.
Women who had long since stopped listening except to their own ossified ramblings.
Women whose respect for and understanding of difference extended only to the marginal realm of their lesbian sexual partner.
Slowly I began to stumble across other disaffected Irish women and I felt like a traveller finding a friendly inn after a long, cold journey.
What a relief to be among women who approached me positively and whose language and way of being I shared.
Of course, we had many political differences but the twin oppressions of being Irish lesbians and immigrants brought us together and gave us a strong framework upon which to build our own movement and within which to begin articulating our anger at English feminism.
In my experience I was acutely aware that Irish lesbians had been active within the English women's movement for many years.
Attempts by Irish women, lesbian and heterosexual, to voice our oppression and to struggle for support were largely ignored.
As an Irish lesbian, I was expected to denounce my Irishness in favour of acceptability as a token English dyke.
Feminist organizations and the media appeared almost impenetrable to us.
Coverage of Irish women's issues was considered dangerous and potentially lethal to rising circulation figures.
So English women went on being under-educated with nothing to counteract the filth and lies and daily racism of the English media.
Lack of political motivation to change on the part of English feminists and increasing racism, combined with determination and effective networking of Irish women, resulted in our permanent separation from the mainstream of English feminism.
It was untenable for us to continue to support and put energy into a political movement which in no ways respected or reflected our separate identity and struggle as Irish women.
Over a period of years and with a fierce amount of energy and commitment from Irish women in London and other  parts of the country, our dedication to build a political organization of Irish women began to pay off.
Work to develop and accumulate resources, to create effective ways of bringing Irish women together was slow and unsupported.
We were actively thwarted by English women who flung accusations at us.
An arsenal of political treacheries was employed to impede our progress, from the medium-range one of accusing us of lacking the right political perspective, to the more insidious long-range ones of accusing us of divisiveness, bringing men into feminism by speaking about the war in Ireland and, even on one occasion, attempting to show an exhibition — the famous, ‘Bin Lids and Barricades’.
The final salvo was that of jumping on the bandwagon, a wagon we were informed which was already jam-packed with Black and Jewish women: women whose political history among white gentile English women, in some ways, paralleled our own.
It should be noted that Black and Jewish women consistently supported our struggle towards political autonomy.
British imperialism in Ireland, whilst an erratically popular issue for the left, albeit as a practice ground for the more exciting nationalist struggles further afield, was certainly not a serious issue for concerned English feminists.
This situation had only marginally changed but now Irish women no longer look, with the same expectation, to English women for support and solidarity.
In the spring of 1987, as I write this piece, a very different political climate prevails.
The Tories are about to enter their third term of office having driven a knife through the heart of much of the more advanced social legislation of the past few decades.
Fascism, racism, anti-Semitism and attacks on lesbians and gay men are on the increase and gaining ground year by year.
Because of the continuous pressure exerted by Irish, Black and other women over the years, some English Women's Movement has died and that if they want must wake up to the fact that the middle-class, gentile English Women's Movement had died and that if they want to go on referring to us as ethnic minorities then they will have to include themselves as a separate group.
If this does not happen then sooner or later we can all dig a hole and get in.
For those white English women who are still in doubt, hear this…we are all over here because you have all been over there.
With several well-attended Irish women's conferences behind us, a well-resourced and staffed Irish Women's Centre, many autonomous groups and campaigns operating all over London and in other parts of England, I will say with strength and pride that Irish women, whether heterosexual or lesbian, from Anne Devlin to Bernadette, remain the ‘unmanageable revolutionaires’ they/we have always been.
Living on the fringes — in more ways than one
Yik Hui
How do I begin describing myself so that anyone could understand where my politics were coming from?
My experience in England has led me to the conclusion that most people are unable to see me whole.
That is — if you're a lesbian you're white, and if you're Chinese you're exotic, passive, inscrutable, and the whole pack of racist stereotypes which I'm sure you could fill a page with without any help from me.
As a result, I have spent many early years in this country perfecting what I call my chameleon act: fitting into whatever environment I found myself in; making myself, my Chinese self, invisible in order to avoid hostility.
However, I had already begun the process, long before coming over, of minimizing and dismissing my cultural identity.
I am a product of the British legacy of colonialism: the reason why I ended up here, why I stayed, and why I still have one foot out the door.
Both sides of my family left rural south China for Malaya to get away from the grinding poverty, encouraged by the British to fill their need for cheap labour in their colonies.
My paternal grandfather started his working life as a water carrier — selling water house to house; by the time I arrived my father's family had ‘made it’.
On my mother's side, my grandfather and his family emigrated when he was offered a job as interpreter in the law courts.
My mother had a Chinese education, returning to China for part of it.
She saw at first hand the imperialist arrogance of the British in her mother country, aptly illustrated by the signs in the parks which baldly  stated ‘no dogs or Chinese allowed’.
She was involved in some of the student protests against them during that period; but at the end of the day she still felt that an English education was a necessary tool for survival for her children.
As immigrants in a British colony, the way to get on was through an English education.
The price they paid was my cultural heritage.
At school we were taught an obscenely distorted history of my people, as well as that of all the other exploited colonies.
The recurring message drummed into our young minds was of the ‘civilizing influence’ of the British Empire and the superiority in values, behaviour and culture of the British.
Never mind the exploitation and atrocities wreaked on whole countries in order that the British could plunder and fill their coffers from our raw materials and the sweat of our cheap labour.
The British also used the well-worn principle of divide and rule to run the country — keeping the Chinese and Indian settlers in Malaya from joining the Civil Service and administration which ran the country while nurturing the traditional ruling class to one day take over.
Consequently, both the Indians and Chinese were confirmed in their immigrant status, discouraged from having a stake in our adopted country.
Among my contemporaries at home — mostly middle class but not all — three quarters of them have emigrated: to Australia, Canada, USA and Britain.
And as race relations worsen at home (the roots of which British colonialism planted) the drift away continues.
With this background of ‘westernisation’ it was considered natural to come over to England to complete my education.
It was therefore a shock to face such hostile and patronising attitudes when I arrived.
I had been fed on a diet of Enid Blyton and her boarding school series, so I was eager — even excited — to be joining one when I came over to take my ‘A’ levels in the late sixties: I was not at all prepared for the harsh realities of English middle-class racism.
I was bewildered and numbed by it.
My only support at the time came from a Nigerian girl and a Ugandan Asian girl who were also in my class and shared my deep sense of alienation from our environment.
We all had a similar colonial background and were desperate to ‘fit in’ and be accepted — so we never talked of  racism directly.
We had all been brought up to invest our hopes and future in the ‘western way of life’ and were learning to develop thick skins against the blatant institutionalized and individual racism we faced every day.
The only outlet through which we dared to express our distress was sharing our fantasies of burning down our school!
It took me a long time even to begin to look at what I was going through.
In the intervening years I allowed myself to be gradually undermined and finally succeeded in losing most outward traces of my cultural identity.
I lost my accent very quickly and my style of speech which betrayed a cross-fertilization of three cultures — Chinese, Malay and Indian.
I learnt to sit formally at table and to eat three inedible courses of stodge with an incomprehensible array of surplus cutlery; to whisper when I spoke as I was considered ‘too loud’; and to stop gesturing with my hands or to touch in conversation, as people inevitably shrank away from me.
I did draw the line at giving up the spices I cooked with even though for years I continued to receive remarks about my stinking of garlic, yuk, with monotonous regularity.
By and large, though, I attempted to imitate the ways of the English.
However — although these contortions saved me from the worse excesses of daily racism, my face kept giving me away.
I was endlessly patronized on my ‘amazingly good English’ at dinner parties and told in buses and in the streets to ‘go back where you came from, chink’.
In my early years here, I had a small group of friends from home who were also studying or nursing.
They buttressed me to some degree from the isolation I felt.
But, one by one they left, for home or elsewhere.
I stayed.
I came across feminist politics while I was at college in London in the mid-seventies.
I was mostly bored by the degree course I was doing and spent more and more of my time skiving off to extra-mural classes in Women's Studies, which were just beginning to happen, and devouring feminist books.
Out of one of my women's courses I attended, a consciousness-raising group was formed.
There were about six of us and we were eager to talk about — for the first time — the reality of our lives as women.
It sounds passé now, but it was breaking new ground for all of us; putting into words the taboos in our lives — sex, sexuality, relating to  men — and the bonus, our new found enjoyment of each other 's company without men.
I was still at the time in a relationship with a man I had lived with for four years and was emotionally dependent on, in more ways than one given my immigrant status in this country.
But we were moving in different directions and it had been clear for some while that we stayed together out of habit.
As I explored more of the inadequacies of my relationship with him through my group, and made friends independently from him, he began to feel more and more threatened by my increasing feminism.
The inevitable happened.
But it was not painless: he had been, after all, my main emotional support through my middle years in this country, however flawed.
But I was now finding a whole new community I felt more comfortable with.
Going to my first feminist conference in the late seventies: the thrill of seeing so many women together, and, even more so, seeing so many lesbians openly showing their affections for each other.
The atmosphere was electric, it all seemed so natural, effortless: the joyous relating, the sensuality, the emotional sparks flying everywhere and the encouragement to participate in workshops…so different from the male structures of chairman, standing orders and platform speeches.
It felt like coming home, in a way.
I had never been politically active before in-any organized way.
With my friends from home we had discussed Third World politics and our growing awareness of exploitation globally.
At college I had been thoroughly disgusted with the male egos that dominated the left-wing student politics.
I had peripherally helped out at anti-apartheid offices, even gone on CND Easter Marches when I first came over, but it was always on the sidelines.
Their structures and attitudes alienated me from participating more fully.
The Women's Movement changed all that.
For the next few years I threw myself into a whirlwind of activities — involving myself in a Women's Aid refuge, women's centres, campaigns, demonstrations and conferences.
I felt part of a movement.
At first it all seemed so simple: the discussions, the unfolding of new ideas, the boundless energy we seemed to generate in each other, the solidarity we felt in working towards tearing down patriarchal structures and attitudes.
In those early days it seemed the sky was the limit!
We were naïve, the cracks began to show.
The political infighting between radical, revolutionary, socialist, separatist — women tearing each other apart at conferences and in our magazines and newsletters.
Much later issues of race and class began to be addressed more seriously, after years of being ignored or side-stepped.
I mostly stood on the sidelines, watching the heavy-weights raging at each other.
My own political education was rooted in the more down-to-earth practical realities of the day-to-day running of a refuge for women who had suffered domestic violence.
It was there my consciousness of class, race and sexuality grew, as heated arguments took place, in weekly collective meetings between the residents of the refuge, workers and support group.
We challenged and supported each other through the stresses of daily living, where women, who were at a particularly vulnerable point in their lives, had to make hard choices about their future and gain the strength to struggle through and survive.
But I was still invisible as a Chinese woman.
Something was still missing.
The feminist and, increasingly, the lesbian community had become my haven in this country.
It was hard to acknowledge their continuing denial of my Chinese identity.
Their understanding of racism was that it was about Afro-Caribbean people and maybe people from the Indian sub-continent.
I didn't feature on the agenda.
I remember many occasions when friends would reassure me that I was like them, there weren't any differences.
I had become totally invisible.
I was accepted — but only on their terms.
Around that time I wrote a piece in a journal which I co-wrote with a friend.
It was in 1980, and I would like to share some of it with you.
It is revealing in how clear f was and yet I managed to stop short of naming it as racism.
Coming out as a person
I suppose I have been thinking rather a lot lately about my reluctance to stick a label on myself politically — as a lesbian.
What really am I?
Am I simply a lesbian?
Why do I baulk at it?
Because I feel strongly that I am much more than that…perhaps many more nameless things, but valuable to me nonetheless.
And I insist on their  recognition.
I refuse to be fragmented, yet I feel so.
I don't feel whole, and labels just make it so much more difficult for me to understand myself.
Sure, being a lesbian is intricately woven into the web of my identity.
But so is that part of me that feels alien in this country, lonely behind my wall of defences, inarticulate in my deepest pain.
These are also part of my inner core.
So when women talk of coming out as a lesbian, I want to ask — can I come as a person first?
If I cannot come out soon — much of me will die, and only I will know enough to mourn its passing.
You may ask — but why didn't you say?
We would have wanted to know.
But would you really?
You made assumptions which made those parts of me invisible, that shamed it into retreat, that said, ‘You're really like us.
We don't see any difference.’
But I am you know — I am alien, other, under this façade.
I have learnt over the years to talk your way, behave your way, and even to think and feel your way.
Speechless — in order to be acceptable.
To hack to death all that didn't fit in.
It hurts me now to realize how much I numbed myself from the searing pains of those years.
And now, so many scars have grown over where it hurts that I'm not sure I'm clear anymore about what I've lost.
The part of me that is a lesbian has always had a lot of support and nurturing from friends around.
It was recognized as valid.
My other self — my Chinese self — has not had such understanding.
That part of me feels negative and trodden over, wiped out.
I want to reclaim it — so I can stop being a casualty of this war that has no name.
It was another two years before I was able to break through the painful years of silence and begin the fragile, tentative process of making myself whole again.
It was the emergence of the Chinese Lesbian Group which allowed me to start this process of healing and accepting myself.
Three of us met at the Lesbian Sex and Sexual Practice Conference in London in 1983.
Although it felt like a miraculous coincidence for us at the time, it was more that we were all ready to grapple with this issue in our lives.
The rest of the conference was humming with the anticipated  controversy over sado-masochism, and with the anger of women with disabilities over non-accessibility to the venue and to the discussion papers.
Meanwhile a momentous event took place in the lobby.
Three of us exchanged telephone numbers and the Chinese Lesbian Group was formed.
Two of us had already previously met, but we were nervous and shy and wary of each other.
Making overtures towards another who mirrored our own disquieting and long-buried Chinese identity was both a fearful and exciting prospect, and neither of us quite got up the nerve to take the initiative.
However, with three of us we felt we could start a group!
The early days of the group were both strange and oddly familiar.
Sharing our experiences allowed parts of ourselves to surface which were both painful and joyous.
It felt fragile at first, but it was as if I had finally come up for air after nearly drowning in a pool of lies.
There were occasions when we would get hysterical with delight at uncovering yet another layer of our much maligned identity, and find the words to talk about it.
We also discovered the richness and variety of our backgrounds and a growing understanding of our shared roots.
All of us are living in a diaspora twice removed — that is, our ancestors were already immigrants when we were born, and we, or our families, have repeated it again, going this time to the country of our past colonial masters.
Between us, our ancestors have travelled through three continents for us to arrive here.
This group is my family in this country now, it is my anchor in an insecure world and it has expanded and grown in confidence.
With our increasing clarity of the racism we faced daily, we made tentative overtures to involve ourselves in Black women's activities.
The response to us was and still is ambivalent.
On an individual level I have been supported and validated by many lesbians of Afro-Caribbean and Indian sub-continent descent.
However, as a political issue, it has so far not been properly thrashed out.
Are Chinese people included in the political term ‘Black’?
Are Chinese people's experiences of racism different from but similar to what is experienced by those from other backgrounds?
Over the last few years I have actively participated in various  Black women's activities.
But I still have twinges of uncertainty about my place within the wider Black women's struggle.
There are differing levels of acceptance at different occasions.
However, I do feel optimistic that our growing understanding of our diverse cultures and histories, which exposes the myths and stereotypes we have been force-fed by the British for too many generations, will forge an increasingly powerful alliance in our struggle against racism in this country.
Equally, the lesbian and gay movement needs to make far more serious and energetic efforts to rid itself of racist assumptions in its political agenda.
The recent political activities of Haringey Black Action has succeeded in raising the profile of Black lesbians and gay men.
We can no longer accept marginalization.
We are here to stay.
Oi!
What about us?
Kirsten Hearn
I was born in South London in 1955, the fourth child and a twin.
The history of my birth is unclear because NHS records have now been lost, so doctors in later years could only guess at the cause of my disability which became evident a few week after I was born.
I was partially sighted and doctors talked about scarred retinas.
My twin brother appeared by the age of about ten to have some hearing loss.
I have strong memories of feeling different from a very early age.
These were compounded by my recollections of a series of visits to Moorfields Eye Hospital and at least one incarceration there when I was about four.
My mother soon began to drum into me the notion that I was different because of my eyesight, and therefore that I should not expect too much out of life.
By the age of five I was given glasses which had no effect, serving only to restrict my field of vision, since I could only really see to read with one eye.
Reading was difficult for me, especially when it involved looking at the chalkboard, and I soon found myself being classed as ‘thick’.
This was the second disappointment for my mother, who prided herself on her own intelligence and wanted her children to succeed academically, because she felt it would be the only way we could be successful in life, there being no money at home.
Despite this, my parents found the wherewithal to send me to a cheap fee-paying dayschool.
This was justified on the grounds that, having failed to get into grammar school, I would be educationally disadvantaged further by attending the local comprehensive.
Her excuse for this piece  of academic snobbery was that classes were held there in lecture theatres and that the first desk would be too far away from the chalkboard.
There had been talk of sending me to a special school, but my family were not ready to accept such an open acknowledgment of my disability, and the excuse was again made about academic standards.
I was already aware at the age of eleven of my mother's political background: she had been an active Communist until 1965.
I found it hard therefore to understand why she should act so far outside her own political ideology.
I also found it hard to deal with the petty bourgeois outlook of all but a few of the girls at that private school.
I was already identifying as a socialist and spent a lot of time arguing politics with the other girls.
This made me even more of a social outcast since most of the other girls already regarded my disability, my lack of money, my accent and the council estate on which I lived as reasons to ignore me.
I couldn't get rid of my disability, became more staunch in my socialist politics, got rid of my accent and was thankful when my parents put themselves into enormous debt and bought a tip of a house in Croydon.
I had begun to experience increasing difficulty with reading from about the age of thirteen.
Knowing that to say anything about this would lead to further ridicule and isolation at school, and open disbelief from my family, I decided to ignore it.
There were days when the world was shrouded in a mist and I would feign headaches and period pains to get me out of awkward situations such as reading in class.
There came a day when the vision in my left eye suddenly almost disappeared.
Since I didn't use this eye I again ignored it.
It was about three weeks later when I happened to notice that the pupil of this eye had dilated to such an extent that it was now noticeable to everyone.
Suddenly I found myself in hospital clinics being peered at by hundreds of doctors, all making interested sounding noises and saying long biological words.
I was now labelled.
It was at last obvious that my learning and social problems were caused by my disability and not by my stupidity.
Now that I had this label —‘partially sighted’— and it was clear that my disability would become more acute, the  teachers and girls at school found some semblance of the tolerance and understanding that they had previously lacked, and I slowly began to edge my way up the academic ladder.
I was sixteen, the year of ‘O’ levels, and ii was beginning to look as though I would gain a respectable number of passes which would send me on my way to art school and my chosen career as a painter.
During the summer of 1971, soon after the ‘discovery’, for the second time, of my disability, I spent some time in hospital.
A second routine examination under anaesthetic in January 1972 resulted in the decision to operate.
f was told that it was in order to save the rest of my sight: a new laser beam method was to be tried.
I woke up in the afternoon of the ninth of February to tennis-ball-sized sore eyes and a dirty pink mist, and searingly painful lights.
The sight-saving operation hadn't worked; the doctors hadn't reckoned on a rebellion in the form of a massive eye haemorrhage.
As the pink mists began to clear, my world turned into an out-of-focus elongated distortion, seen through yellow cellophane.
I had lost all my reading vision, and could now only read individual characters with a strong magnifier.
On Easter Monday 1972, I woke up to a new view of the world.
A pale white opaque gungey mist had invaded.
It took me all day to convince my mother that there had been a change, but by the next afternoon I found myself flat on my back in the hospital again with injunctions not to move.
I stayed there for five weeks and after another operation was pronounced ‘partially sighted’ enough to be registered as blind.
Every day I lay there and repeated an exercise of counting how many branches on the tree outside I could make out.
Each day they became fewer until my image of the tree became a pink and brown blur, it being blossom time.
With my new label of ‘blind’ came the object which was to stigmatize me more, a shiny new, long white cane.
The girls at school were horrified: all their collections for presents and prayers after announcements at morning assembly had been wasted.
I had come back blind.
It could almost be considered as an extreme act of defiance, and many of them showed their disapproval by refusing to have  any more contact with me.
My small circle of friends stuck with me, choosing to support me and risking their own popularity.
Whilst I believed their feelings and actions were genuine, I was also aware that they were as steeped as I was in the romance of blindness: the helping hand, God's purpose for us all.
But blind people were ‘out there’, begging on the streets, bumbling along with their tip-tap sticks, staring sightlessly and pathetically out at nothing behind dark glasses.
I survived in the school until after ‘O’ levels and into the sixth form, but only for one term.
By this time I had begun to learn braille and a more constructive use of my white stick, other than tripping up people who got in my way.
Discussions about my future took place behind closed doors, and sometimes in my presence as though I wasn't there.
It was decided I should go to special school and my mother's objections were mollified by the proof of the academic success that many girls achieved there.
In January 1973 I found myself, and the grey metal trunk my eldest brother had used to take to university in 1967, dumped in an austere fifth form dormitory in the main block of the school.
Being forcibly confined with other blind girls in a school which thought it was a public school soon turned me into a staunchly outspoken socialist.
I decided to be unconventional; dressing differently ( stripy socks and outrageous make-up), wearing trousers at every opportunity and trying to organize the other girls into a socialist club.
This was the era of the Little Red Schoolbook which I attempted to transcribe into braille with the assistance of a partially-sighted Young Socialist called Katey.
My open support of the Irish struggle, reading pro-Sinn Fein poems at school assembly when it was my turn to choose a reading two weeks after the Birmingham pub bombing caused more than a little outrage and several stern pep talks, culminating in threatened expulsion from the headmistress.
The school ethos was mainly concerned with turning out well-educated, potential wives of professional able-bodied men.
With the influence of my older brother and his wife (he was active in the International Socialists and she was a raving feminist) I continued to challenge these expectations of my future career.
I identified closely with the other girls  at school making strong relationships which, although they were not sexual, were emotionally very intense.
I was also aware that some girls and even some teachers were involved in lesbian relationships.
I knew that I wanted a free and independent life although I secretly subscribed to the idea of marrying a professional, sighted man.
It was by chance and with the support of a visiting teacher of drawing who also happened to be a lecturer at Goldsmiths College that I succeeded in getting a place at art school, the first and last totally blind student to have ever done so in Britain.
Goldsmiths College was not just an art school.
The various buildings on the New Cross site also held a part of the University of London, a teacher education college, and in the late seventies the Laban School of Dancing.
The art students were mostly a bunch of individualistic, head-in-the-sand poseurs.
It was not cool to be political.
In any case if I had wanted to get involved in student politics I was effectively prevented by the piles of print material that littered the coffee bar and canteen.
No one had heard of access to ink print information in those days and as I was the only blind student there I didn't feel I had any support to ask for it to be made available.
Therefore I didn't know what was going on to the point where I carried on working in a prefabricated hut hard by the administration block during a very successful students' occupation in summer 1976.
I hadn't even noticed the pickets and I can only presume that they had parted before me as I walked towards them as they still do today.
The social pressures of my peers precipitated me into a frenzied bout of heterosexuality, usually accompanied by drunkenness.
It was only in 1977 that I became even vaguely aware of gay liberation.
This was from the basis of a new found security in a relationship with a male student who managed to last out more than the usual six weeks of all my other relationships so far at college.
For the first time since I had come to the college I had access to student political material because my boyfriend was reading the posters, leaflets and student newspapers to me.
I got myself elected onto the Students' Council where I muddled through, never having read the agenda papers and often not knowing what on earth everyone else was talking  about.
I also joined Gaysoc, partly out of respect for a close friend (and former boyfriend) who had come out as gay, partly because we had a gay president.
Also, Tom Robinson was in the charts with ‘Glad To Be Gay’ and there was a general atmosphere of tolerance towards gays.
From the safety of my heterosexual relationship I wore my Gaysoc badge out on the streets.
I believe I didn't get gay-bashed partly because of the heterosexual relationship and partly because no one took my sexuality seriously because I was blind, and obviously didn't know what badge I was wearing.
At the end of my final year I stood as a sabbatical officer for the Union.
My platform as an Independent Socialist was ‘put the U back into the Union’ and I believe I mentioned my disability once, but only in passing.
I lost, of course, hardly surprising since the elections were carved up by the various political groups, most of which I didn't even know existed.
Like every other aspiring young artist, I wanted to go to the Slade or the RCA (Royal College of Art) to do a post-graduate degree.
The plan was to get through postgrad. school, get a part-time lecturer's job, a studio in Wapping and become a Real Artist.
Very few women ever made it through, as evidenced by the handful of women art tutors at Goldsmiths.
My failure to even get interviewed soon demonstrated to me that, even though Goldsmiths had accepted me despite my disability, I would have to fight very hard to get any further.
Being on the dole in 1979 was becoming a very common occupation.
The woman at the employment exchange wouldn't even register me on the Professional Executive Register.
She told me, ‘Blind people don't need that register,’ and that no one would ever employ me as anything other than an audio-typist.
Realizing I couldn't hang around on the dole forever waiting for the Tate Gallery to offer me an exhibition, and also that my boyfriend, also on the dole, was not likely to be able to support me, I decided to go for further training.
Since the postgraduate schools wouldn't have me, it had to be audio typing.
Determined not to re-enter blind institution life, I headed for the nearby technical college who wouldn't have me either.
After another series of battles with the employment exchange, the  Royal National Institute for the Blind and various principals of local technical colleges, I eventually got myself onto a TOPS typing course at a college in south-west London.
During the summer of 1979 I had moved into a collective house whose occupants were libertarian hippies, socialists, Christians and noisy heterosexual feminists.
It was the latter who inspired me on my first day at the tech.
to walk into the Students' Union office and demand to know where the Women's Group met.
I was told there wasn't one but was invited onto the executive where I could form my own women's group.
On my way out of the office that first day I fell over the only other disabled student in the college who was a wheelchair user.
I had never spoken to anyone who used a wheelchair before, and we soon found ourselves immersed in a conversation about our mutual ‘problems’.
I got hooked on student politics as there were many problems in the tech.
Seventy per cent of the college students were Black, a significant number of the other 30 per cent were active in the National Front.
There was rabid Thatcherism and an increase in popularity of the Fascist movements, both outside and inside the college.
There was a feeling of hopelessness because of the prospect of unemployment facing most of the young people but also a great deal of anger and frenzied organizing arising from this.
I was sent as a delegate to National Conference in Blackpool.
It was a wild four days, full of speeches, fringe meetings and late night boozy caucuses.
But one evening sticks in my mind: an evening of hysterical debate including a heated row on the Irish struggle.
There was a phrase screeched into the microphone by a hoarse-voiced member of Socialist Workers' Students' Organization: ‘The government must be deaf, dumb and blind if they do not see the madness of this war.’
I had never really noticed before this common use of the label that identified me as a means to imply wilful ignorance.
As the debate continued I was to hear it again and again.
It suddenly became clear to me that I was assumed to be equally as wilfully ignorant.
It defiled my whole status as a person passionately concerned about politics and socialist ideologies in particular.
These phrases  denied me my right to participate in the very same way that the socialist movement refused to recognize my rights to have access to information that would dispel my ignorance on such subjects.
I heard no more of the debate and to the astonishment of my fellow delegates I stormed out of the auditorium and locked myself away in the Ladies to howl out my rage, alone.
As a result of a chance meeting in a Blackpool bar with a student journalist, I was featured in National Student in an article about disabled students.
Suddenly out of the blue I received a tape from one of the members of the self-organizing group, the Liberation Network of People With Disabilities.
A few months later someone in my house told me about an article in Time Out about the Liberation Network.
A woman's number was at the bottom of the Time Out piece and it was with some feelings of fear that I decided to ring it, not knowing who or what I would find.
Micheline sounded excited to hear from me and I was invited to the group's meeting a few weeks later.
On a Saturday in November 1980, I entered Micheline's cluttered flat.
It was full of people with disabilities, deaf people, people in wheelchairs and all manner of others.
There must have been about twelve of us.
As we began to talk I began to realize that these people were just like me.
We shared our battles and our triumphs through our life stories.
Everyone was given equal space and care was given to those of us who found it more difficult because of being deaf or having a speech difficulty.
I spoke about my frustrations, about not being able to read socialist and feminist books and magazines.
The groups discussed my problems and in the empowering atmosphere it came as quite natural that someone should suggest I start up my own campaign.
I wrote to Radio Four's ‘In Touch’ programme, venting my frustrations and asking for like-minded people to contact me.
As the letter was in braille it was never broadcast.
Happily, however, Jenny, a braille transcriber at the RNIB who herself was blind and had socialist tendencies, intercepted it.
Most unethically she discussed the contents of my letter with other blind friends.
The result of this was a surprise telephone call from Jenny herself suggesting that we should call a meeting.
I  wrote off to Time Out and in early February 1981 found myself surrounded by eight or nine other blind socialists discussing the formation of the Alternative Talking Newspapers Collective.
I had left the technical college in February 1980 and within a few weeks had landed an audio typist's job with a trendy voluntary housing organization.
Within hours of being in the office I was already hating the drudgery of being plugged into a machine.
Words came into my ears and my fingers made the appropriate movements.
I had no idea what I was typing and would leave the office each day disorientated and dizzy with the effort.
Determined not spend my life in this manner, I continued to reapply to the postgraduate art courses.
My persistence paid off when the RCA relented and grudgingly allowed me to take my place on a joint MA course in the departments of Environmental Media and Design Education.
The other students were horrified at my appearance in the college, unable to understand what on earth I could be doing there.
I fled to the Students' Union where, within a very few days, I found myself co-opted onto the Students' Council.
At this college there was a small but active women's group.
Here I found an amazing group of women, full of caring and support for me.
One woman in particular went out of her way to help me out.
I felt ostracized by most of the other able-bodied students and so was more than just glad of her company.
Back in the Alternative Talking Newspapers Collective we'd started up our own taped socialist magazine,Left Out .
A women's magazine,Women's Tapeover , was soon to follow, preceded by many pleasant evenings spent in the company of Jenny and her friend Sue.
In September 1981 the magazine duly appeared, coinciding with the start of my office as the sabbatical Deputy President of the students' union at the RCA.
In recounting my coming out story in later years I have always  sited this period of my life as extremely important to my subsequent emergence as a lesbian.
I had not recognized my feelings for one of the women in the women's group as being of any significance.
I had worried about this over-aged schoolgirl crush.
Lesbianism wasn't in it.
I couldn't be  a lesbian, they were butch pipe-smoking women in suits.
And in any case, I had a boyfriend.
We reproduced articles on Women's Tapeover which spoke about the lives of lesbians.
Their stories were like my own.
Their feelings were like mine and they weren't the stereotypical bulldykes I had previously imagined them to be.
I became heavily involved in far left politics, becoming a member of the Socialist Students' Alliance, the student leftovers of the IMG's (Internation Marxist Group's) move into the Labour Party.
It was at one of their conferences that I first came across organized lesbians and gays.
They called a caucus for lesbian and gay activists and I went along, tentatively saying, ‘I'm an, erm, bisexual, can I come in?’
I left that meeting with the phrase, ‘I am a lesbian,’ ready to be spoken at any moment.
I was now faced with a real dilemma.
I had just moved into a flat with my boyfriend and I was beginning to feel very guilty.
Once having framed the thought in my mind that I was a lesbian I found myself unable to keep silent about it.
I told my boyfriend who was horrorstruck and took myself off to a lesbian students' conference.
The Labour Party had won the Greater London Council (GLC) elections.
Ken Livingstone was now in power, and the Women's Committee had just been formed.
In August that year I found myself elected as co-optee for Women with Disabilities, loudly proclaiming my lesbianism in my hustings speech.
I juggled my college work with attendances at committee meetings which included the Women with Disabilities Subgroup.
Frustrated by the bureaucracy of democratic representation in its convoluted GLC version, I talked with other feminists with disabilities about forming an organization for women with disabilities.
The same thoughts had been going through the minds of two other women with disabilities.
A friend of mine called Sue from the Liberation Network had moved to London and was now living next door to Patricia, another stroppy feminist with a disability.
Before I knew where I was we had begun our organization, choosing Sisters Against Disablement as its name.
We were fed up with the sexism in self-organized disability movements and even more fed up with the  ableism of the women's movement.
Our attempts to participate had been accidentally and sometimes deliberately obstructed.
I was just beginning to get to grips with the Campaign for Ink Print Information, but Women's Tapeover could not keep up with the steady stream of new feminist writing that was emerging week by week.
Patricia and Sue were more than fed up with being constantly left out in the cold, usually on the pavement outside women's events because of lack of physical access.
We were very, very angry and more than ready for a fight.
We took direct action: battles such as the one over access to the Lesbian Sex and Sexual Practice Conference in 1983, the Feminist Bookfair in 1984, and the general battle to get the SAD access code used in public listings of events in feminist publications…and much more.
Still active in the students' movement, I continued to struggle for recognition of our oppressions as women, lesbians and gays, and people with disabilities.
I was elected for two years running onto the NUS Lesbian and Gay Committee and served for one year on the London Students' Organization executive committee.
During this time we organized two national conferences for students with disabilities and more than a handful of steadily more accessible conferences for lesbians and gays.
I found it hard to balance out these activities with my other commitments to the GLC Women's Committee.
Then I was relieved from student and GLC battles and rewarded for all those years of unpaid activity by what some people considered possible selling out.
I got a job after graduation in 1984 at the GLC in the Disability Resource Team.
It was a pleasure to be paid for what I had up until then been doing in my spare time.
As more of us activists with disabilities benefited from the equal opportunities policies of the GLC and other local authorities by getting jobs with them, our activities in the Liberation Network and in SAD diminished.
We were all burned out, exhausted by the battles and the fights within and outside our various movements.
Some of us made a final effort and formed Feminist Audio Books — a library exclusively providing audiotapes of feminist writing for blind and partially-sighted women and women with reading difficulties.
This  was the first self-organized disability group to receive major funding from the GLC Women's Committee.
Sadly, because of abolition, it was also the last.
It is sadder still that the weight of being given funding may soon be lifted from FAB by the London Borough's Grants Unit proposal to cut FAB's grant.
Although many of us are now working around disability issues professionally, the lull in activity by self-organized disability groups such as SAD and the Liberation Network feels as though it might be coming to an end.
Women with disabilities are beginning to meet regularly again and there is talk also of reactivating the Liberation Network.
Most excitingly of all some lesbians and gays with disabilities are beginning to organize through groups such as Gemma (lesbians with and without disabilities), Gay Men's Disabled Group and the Brothers and Sisters Gay Deaf Group, to fight back from within the lesbian and gay movements.
The first national conference for lesbians and gays with disabilities is currently being organized to take place early in 1988.
It feels like there are more of us coming together in all our groups to continue challenging our various communities on their continued exclusion of us.
Towards the end of the GLC a conference was held for Black people with disabilities.
The white-dominated self-organized disability movement shows some signs of beginning to think about racism from within.
We know that we can't fight any more battles without involving all sections of the disability movement.
We must now make anti-racist strategies a central part of the way in which we organize.
Without this we will go nowhere.
‘Irrespective of race, sex, sexuality…’
Gerry Ahrens, Ahmed Farooqui and Amitha Patel
Gerry, Ahmed and Amitha work for the co-ordinating body of a voluntary advice organization, where they have been centrally involved on the Equal Opportunities Policy Working Party.
Gerry : I'm a woman with a white father and a South-East Asian mother, brought up in the army as the daughter of an NCO.
Because of my very varied upbringing I have found that I have never been able to analyse the political effects of any discrimination.
My first political awareness of oppression was when I was discharged from the nursing corps of the army over lesbianism.
Being eighteen and losing my job, my career, friends and being forced to come out to my parents in extremely unpleasant circumstances, profoundly influenced my life and identity.
My first taste of oppression was not that of being a woman or Black but over homosexuality!
The gay scene was pubs and clubs full of role-playing lesbians into ‘butch’ or ‘femme’and was just as alienating as the straight world.
It was just by chance that I turned up at one of the early meetings of the first lesbian liberation groups in London and found myself involved in the early debates around socialist feminism, radical lesbianism, the Women's Movement and the sixth demand which named women's right to a self-defined sexuality.
It was through this involvement and my direct experience of lesbian oppression that I found myself wanting to be a part of creating a new lesbian feminist identity along with other  lesbian sisters.
By the time I entered university two years later, my involvement in the student left politics and the local and national student, women, and gay campaigns was automatic.
My lesbian socialist feminist identity was fully consolidated and formed the basis of my support network and closest friends.
Any involvement in the race issue was around the anti-Fascist campaigns of that time.
Not until the late seventies and the occupations around the overseas students, was I confronted with the issue of identifying as a Black person and the politics thereof.
My personal experience of racism was common: that of ignorance and non-recognition.
White feminist friends would not even accept the fact that I was Black!
After I left university, I worked for a Black community project and joined a Black socialist group.
But even this didn't dispel some of the confusions that I was feeling.
I found the sexism and heterosexism of the Black movement difficult to cope with and felt at that time that I wasn't considered Black enough either in my colour or my politics.
At the same time the issues around heterosexual/lesbian women and socialist/separatist lesbians had created deep and painful divisions in the Women's Movement.
In all the senses I felt that there was little support in helping me integrate my identity as a Black lesbian and ended up feeling totally alienated and with a complete loss of my self-confidence.
I could only resolve the confusion by refusing to be involved with any political activity.
By the time that I began to work with Ahmed and Amitha, I had resolved within myself that I couldn't be anything other than a Black lesbian and that was in itself its own political identity, one that did not require validation from either the women's, gay or Black movements.
Ahmed : Ever since I was very young, I remember having very strong political views, mostly derived from my Father, but a weak sense of political direction.
I had no sustained involvement in any kind of political activity — mainly, I think, because there weren't any models of political organization that I could identify with.
I was involved at an abstract level with the struggles of the Vietnamese and the  Palestinians far away, or the miners (in 1974) nearer home.
But there was nothing around that moved me enough to go out and change things.
I came out as a result of sexual frustration and a desire to be honest with myself.
Surrounded as I was by supremely negative images of homosexuality such as‘the man in the dirty mac living out a lonely old age in a filthy garret’, I still felt that there was for me a clear choice between expressing or repressing my homosexual desire.
Expressing it would entail at least the possibility of a glimpse of happiness and fulfilment.
Repressing it, on the other hand, would mean existing in a drab, twilight world of pretended affections out of which I could see no escape.
Even the awareness that I had a choice was of course a product of the way that I was brought up.
My parents are broadminded, liberal and understanding to the extent that I probably could never match.
It was because I was subconsciously sure of them that it never occurred to me that I could be rejected.
So I made my entrance into a gay world which emphasized the politics of personal and sexual liberation to the exclusion of every other commitment and loyalty — familial or social.
I became assimilated into the gay community and my identity as a Black person sloughed off me.
On reflection, those first few years on the gay scene hold a certain unreality for me.
They seemed to have been lived by a different person.
I have changed enough now to be shocked by the ease with which I let go of my Black identity, situated as it was in my real subordination on the basis of race and class, in exchange for an illusory equality with white men on the sexual plane.
Sexual stereotyping of Black people, conscious or unconscious, was, and is, prevalent on the gay scene.
In the final analysis, it isn't much fun to have your personal and sexual identity derived from the fantasies of white men.
Black ‘macho’ studs, or passive ‘orientals’, clones and leatherboys….
They all represent the obsessional, neurotic and fetishistic sexuality of a gay scene, created by and for white men.
In 1980, I and a number of other Black gay people came together to form the Gay Black Group.
We wanted to situate  our experience of being gay in the Black community, and being Black on the gay scene, into some political context.
We came together as a group almost by accident, but there was a convergence of our experiences and a symmetry to our ideas which made the first few months of our existence one of the most stimulating and electrifying of my life.
Without knowing it we became a political organization in that we shared an experience of oppression, a sense of direction, and the will and the confidence to act.
We took issues of race and sexuality to the Black and gay communities, again and again, occasionally with some success.
It was at this point that I met Gerry.
I had finished with just being ‘gay’.
For me it wasn't just a question of being at ease with my homosexuality: I was more concerned with the way in which that sexuality expressed itself.
I felt that I had progressed from just wanting to ‘be gay’ to being ‘Black and gay’.
The Gay Black Group also made me think much more of the implications of being a man, of being an oppressor as well as someone who is oppressed.
It made me reappraise my attitudes to oppression and the politics of domination and subordination.
So, when issues of equal opportunity were raised in the organization where we also work together, I was naturally interested in participating in the debates and in the attempts to change the things around me.
But the actual impetus to ‘act’ only came when I met the right people in the right context…that is, Gerry and Amitha and the rest of the Working Party.
Amitha : I suppose, if asked, I would describe myself as a Black Gujarati lesbian.
Born in India, raised mostly in the close-knit Gujarati community in England.
My first big act of rebellion against cultural expectations of what an Indian woman should or shouldn't do was when I left home in the face of family opposition to go into higher education.
For many years I was conscious that I was the first woman in my very large extended family to do this.
Feeling like a pioneer I was also conscious of the responsibility that I felt that I had.
I thought that my conduct, dress, attitude were used as a measure of what the other young women of my family were or later would be  allowed to do.
I was also very anxious not to become what my family said that I would become if I left home — you know, a westernised harlot with no respect for traditions.
In many ways that act gave a pattern to my life — the deep need to straddle the east-west in everything I do.
Strangely, once done, this single act of rebellion elevated my position in the community.
Many women admired my strength and the men, slightly awed, treated me as an honorary male.
Eleven years on, this continues, though now there is perhaps more than a tinge of pity for my ‘lonely’ existence.
I am what the English would call ‘on the shelf’: eccentric in their eyes.
Yet in the eyes of the western world I am a young ‘professional’ queer.
This does have a funny side to it.
I admire the strength of my kinswomen who stayed at home and who later on embraced arranged marriages.
That's what they wanted to do.
The story of those who didn't want this is often not a pleasant one and there the rigidity and the oppression of our traditions are exposed.
I escaped with a few scars and I have no doubt that my greatest support was the knowledge that I wasn't economically dependent on my family.
In choosing my own path I recognized that I may indeed be isolated, lonely and rejected by my family in a racist, sexist, homophobic country.
But at least in the midst of my misery I can own what I have instead of feeling I am a pawn in another's game with rules that I cannot stick to or change.
Now I still have a large family composed of the family I was born into (some of it) and also of a family of friends, sisters, brothers, mothers and children that I have chosen.
In leaving home I became involved in student union politics, particularly round the issue of overseas students.
I learnt how white activists can use other people's oppression to their own political ends by wresting the control and direction of sit-ins and occupations and so on, from the hands of those it clearly affects.
I fell in love with a woman and went out with a man.
It was a time of discovery and experiment.
In my spare time and during vacations, between 1976 and 1978, I set up what later came to be called the Standing Conference of Asian Youth Organizations.
This group was  set up to bring together young Asian people who could organize around issues affecting them — not least the worrying trend of the National Front gaining increasing numbers of votes, and in some cases Asian votes.
In the by-elections, I rapidly became disillusioned by the men who not only ended up taking credit for the Group's existence but who also displayed a total lack of understanding about issues affecting Asian women in Britain.
They could not grasp the value of setting up refuges for Asian women and to these men consulting with the community always meant consulting with other men.
From 1980 onwards I went on to become involved in the Black Workers' Group, unions — NALGO and ACTTS — and more recently, the Lesbian and Gay Workers' Group in our workplace.
Over the years I have kept my distance from the white women's movement.
I can't relate to their starting point and assumptions about my oppression.
Things that they see as blanket oppression, I would see as possible sources of strength, such as arranged marriages.
Having said that, I have never got involved in the Black Women's Movement.
Perhaps because I was involved with other things, perhaps because at that time I was still trying to find my feet as a bisexual and felt isolated by straight sisters and excluded by some Black lesbians.
Today I would say that I am a Black Gujarati lesbian which sums up my politics and my identity.
This feels wholesome and gives me the confidence to take up issues of racism and sexism in the Lesbian and Gay Workers' Group and issues of sexism and heterosexism in the Black Workers' Group, within the organization we work for.
Gerry : When I started with the organization in 1982 there were no Black or gay groups.
You knew who was Black if they were a colleague, and who was gay if they had come out at work.
Amitha : I was appointed in September 1984 under the Race Relations Act and there was little or no idea why they wanted an ‘Asian’ worker.
One of the first things that I noticed in my workplace was that there was an entrenched, hostile division between Black and white colleagues.
What  made things particularly difficult was that I felt I wasn't Black enough for my Black colleagues and that white workers picking up on the division used this to their advantage by divide-and-rule tactics.
In the midst of the roaring debate about ‘Black’ as a political concept, and the work done towards eradicating racist practices in the organization, homosexuality did not get a look-in.
Ahmed : When I joined the organization in March 1983 I had the impression that though my colleagues could deal with my ethnicity as a factor in our relationship, they were rather baffled about how to incorporate my sexuality into our work relationship.
My blackness was seen to be a public and political fact, whereas my gayness was seen as a purely personal matter.
I became involved with the Union (ACTTS) when an Equal Opportunities Policy Working Party was set up by them in 1984.
I joined in the debate because I felt that this was one issue to which I could meaningfully contribute.
But the Working Party had a traditional management v. union approach, and there was very little opportunity to inject our personal experiences into it.
Everything was argued round the premise that existing union members should not have to pay the price of an EOP, and we shouldn't be expected to do management's job for them.
Amitha : That's because the Union was too traditional and only involved in negotiations over pay and working conditions.
There were very few Black or gay workers involved in it, and no attempt was made to recruit new members.
Gerry : I was a steward and felt isolated being the only gay/lesbian steward for two years, and for a lot of the time, the only Black person on a committee dominated by white male heterosexuals.
My active involvement and participation was due to my previous political experience.
I don't believe my being a Black lesbian was of any political significance until I was elected chairperson on an EOP platform.
The Union reflected the workforce, as the whole organization is white female dominated and infused with a  liberal social conscience.
It had an EOP policy that it had not implemented and a proportionally higher percentage of men in ‘leadership’ positions.
Amitha : I don't think that the organization had thought very much about race and racism until it was forced to.
Gerry: Two reports on ethnic minorities had been produced and management had completed an extremely comprehensive draft EOP Employment Code of Practice.
In the wake of a media flare-up over community advice agencies refusing to advise National Front activists, which affected both Union and the organization, a number of friends and colleagues, including us, took the issue to our National Conference and helped to get an anti-racism motion through.
It felt as though anti-racism had become an important issue over a period of just one year.
Amitha : Then the Union Working Party on EOP in which the three of us were involved came up with a very well worked-out response to the EOP Code of Practice on Recruitment and Selection Procedures.
Management amicably accepted our response.
Looking back I suppose it was in their interest to have a happy, accountable workforce.
In any case, codes and policies are only as good as people's commitment to implementing them.
In the political climate we found ourselves in, EOPs made sense and were interpreted in their widest sense as applying to attitudes, behaviour, recruitment, training — through to the content and manner in which we delivered our service to the public.
Ahmed : I think that the GLC, as well as some of the radical London boroughs, did much to put EOP on the agenda of all voluntary organizations.
They made it respectable to talk about it by linking grants with the proper adoption of equal opportunity policies.
They gave power and legitimacy to those workers who, like us, were pushing our respective organizations to take issues of oppression and disadvantage seriously.
Amitha : As a result of all these events the Union also had to  take the issue of oppression seriously.
There was a greater flow of information, more exciting debates internally, and with the formation of the Black Workers' Group and later on the Lesbian and Gay Workers' Group, more politically aware people began to organize around issues of their own oppression.
Gerry : It's really strange how the special interest groups of oppressed people came into existence.
Management organized a Black workers' meeting because they needed our response to a report on ethnic minorities.
What amazed me was the number of Black workers who turned up.
Though small in comparison to the size of the total workforce, there were 33 of us, but it felt like it was 66.
Amitha : There was a great feeling of solidarity between us all and a common suspicion as to why management had called the meeting.
Ahmed : At the meeting, what made the most impact was the situation in which we found ourselves.
Here we were 33 Black workers, called together by two white men, who were to tell us how to go about discussing the issues of racism and ethno-centricism.
Our reaction wasn't surprising.
We threw the two white men out of the meeting.
Gerry : Even though we talked about the report on ethnic minorities for a bit, more importantly we discussed setting up an independent Black group with our own structures and demands.
Having been given the opportunity to come together, we didn't intend to let it go.
That decision to organize ourselves as a group was a really important step forward for us as workers and for the organization.
Setting up the Lesbian and Gay Workers' Group was very different.
Partly it was in response to the Black Workers' Group and because Ahmed and I were both Black and lesbian/gay.
It had its first official meeting after a Union talk on heterosexism.
There were not many of us in the group to begin with, and so the issue of having two separate groups for lesbians and gay men wasn't considered to be organizationally viable.
Ahmed : I must say that I didn't think much of the group when it was first set up because f felt that it wasted a lot of time whinging about all the things that were ‘being handed to the Black workers on a plate because anti-racism was currently fashionable’.
There was a considerable under-current of racism in our early discussions.
I felt that no attempt was being made to arrive at an analysis of our situation based on the specificity of our experience as lesbians and gays.
Gerry : Politically speaking, though, there wasn't the same organized pressure over the heterosexism issue, and management couldn't initially see any reasons for our existence.
The disparity in numbers between the BWG and the LGWG meant different tactics.
Both needed time to develop their separate objectives and political identities — which, by the nature of their oppressions, were different, even though they both were under the umbrella of EOP.
Amitha : I wasn't involved in setting up the Group, having then not accepted my lesbian identity, but from what I could see there was a lot of resentful and suspicious comparison between the BWG and the LGWG.
I saw the formation of the Black Workers' Group and the concessions that we had won as a lever or a rolling stone which would have a knock-on effect.
In setting a precedent, the BWG created the opportunity for others to make their demands and needs widely known from an organized base.
Since the formation of the BWG and the LGWG, the administrative workers and the volunteers have set up their own autonomous groups, and Disabled Action has just taken off.
Correspondingly, there is now less suspicion between the LGWG and the BWG.
I think this is because we have our own distinct identity and proper base.
There is far more talk of building bridges.
Gerry : Friends have said that many members were suspicious of my political motives, and perhaps Ahmed's as well.
Amitha : Yes, and later when I came out as lesbian, suspicious of me too.
But I found it really helpful to have known you both because you were in both groups and involved in the Union and the EOP Working Party.
Apart from some of our managers, the Union was noticeably fearful of the new autonomous groups, probably because some members were afraid of losing the Union's power base through divide-and-rule tactics.
I guess we dealt with it by changing the traditional union structures.
All oppressed groups were able, if they wished, to elect their own shop steward to represent their interests in the Union.
This didn't endanger either the Union's negotiation rights or the groups' autonomy.
There was nothing novel about the idea, but that alongside with liaison meetings of all the groups and the Union around specific issues, helped to strengthen links between us all.
Gerry : Having a Black lesbian worker as chairperson and more Black/gay stewards played an important role in changing the Union.
The potential for other oppressed groups to be autonomously organized also put pressure on the Union to question its structures and attitudes.
Ahmed : I don't think that the Union actually changed in any fundamental way.
I think that what happened was that a lot of traditional union members, that is, the white, heterosexual male stewards who normally formed its backbone, for once took a back-seat, and allowed us to get on with it — to organize in our own way which we did.
Now, this may be a very pessimistic analysis, but there it is.
Amitha : In a way that's right.
There was and there still remains a feeling that some Union members feel as though they have ‘allowed’ us to exist autonomously and have special union representation.
Gerry : But the Union cannot now afford to go back on its decisions.
I do believe that the debate round grievance/disciplinary issues and discrimination by members will really test both the Union's commitment to EOP and to fighting oppression, as well as how different oppressed groups tackle their own attitudes towards other oppressions.
Gerry : Unions could have a role in organizing workers with specific oppressions by acting as a buffer between groups and management; providing a wider political context tor organizing in; and for providing liaison, information and support.
But the Union must be clear about the demarcation between their role and the self-determination of oppressed and disadvantaged groups, otherwise autonomous groups will be sucked in and dissipated.
This would weaken the fight against oppression and allow a continuation of oppressive practices.
Ahmed : I think that the Union should support developments towards workers organizing around issues of oppression as long as it is within a progressive ideology.
It should be receptive to pressures for changes in its structure to take account of what oppressed groups say — for instance, it should move away from the very formalized committee structure towards a participative workshop-type framework.
The Union should also be aware that EOP has a price tag for its existing members and that you cannot achieve equal opportunities on a no-cost basis.
As far as other union members' attitude towards us, I think that we did get an enormous amount of support from like-minded colleagues in organizing around issues of race and sexuality.
Without their support we could not have gone very far.
But it is important to remember that there were those colleagues who expressed their hostility not through obstruction or outright opposition, but through silence.
Amitha : It wasn't just through silence.
Their hostility and antagonism was shown through non-attendance at meetings and by their obstructive behaviour when they did turn up.
Ahmed : Being in at least two oppressed ‘specific interest’ groups we were able to mediate differences and act as a bridge between the two when necessary.
Let's face it, both groups had, and still have, people who have no understanding of the other's oppression, or in many cases, no sympathy either.
But the fact that each group came into existence in its own time and for its own reasons, and found  its own identity and direction, means that we need have no fear about it losing its autonomy vis-à-vis the other groups.
What would be more difficult would be for each group to resist both poles of power (management and union) and not become a caucus or adjunct of either.
Gerry : Autonomy is fundamental but so is unity.
Without both, divide-and-rule tactics will open the way to ranking oppressions and putting the groups against each other.
Ahmed : When you are Black and gay and you open yourself up to the realities and contradictions inherent in this combined identity, it provides a better basis for understanding other people's experience, both intellectually and intuitively.
I think you can be oppressed through being exploited, harassed, discriminated against; or through being ignored and looked straight through.
The important thing is to be open about yourself — both in terms of where you are oppressed and where you oppress others.
It makes you aware of how much power there exists within yourself, not only to resist oppression, but also to oppress others.
We all have capacities to do both — sometimes we forget one in our concentration on the other.
Gerry : In my case, it means that I am always aware of the political and personal contradictions in being a Black lesbian.
Wearing so many ‘hats’ can be very manipulative because of being involved in everything but it also opens one up to being oppressed within the different groups.
Gays can be racist, Blacks can be heterosexist and sexism is rampant in both.
The pressures to be either Black or lesbian make it very difficult and confusing to develop being Black and lesbian.
Amitha : It was the Equal Opportunities Policy which cut through all the contradictions.
The comradeship, energy and commitment of the core of the Working Party, comprising as it did a lot of very different people, was an example of the possibilities of uniting diverse interests and oppressions to the mutual advantage of all concerned, including management.
It was in their interest to have an efficient, mutually  agreed Code of Practice.
Instead of wasting energy arguing over contentious issues and different oppressions, we used the issue to clarify and increase our understanding and feelings about our oppressions and those of others.
The Working Party helped me to express my lesbianism in a positive way in that I could come out, and it helped me to deal with the suspicion and fears of colleagues Black and white, gay or straight, male or female.
It has confirmed my belief in the snowball effect around EOP issues, but also made me aware of, and have strength to cope with, backlashes — such as the question ‘which group or interest are you representing?’
Gerry : The EOP Working Party was also an amazing learning experience.
Working so positively and with such support with different people confirmed my belief that oppressions shouldn't be ranked against each other; and that an EOP debate could act as a central focus around which a unity between different oppressions could be achieved while recognizing and accepting our differences.
Having to tackle procedures restricted by legislation also forced us to apply political theories to practical realities without too much compromise.
It was rare to have six Black gays working politically and personally together in the same workplace and that helped me integrate my identity as a Black lesbian.
Ahmed : What I found really exciting and stimulating about our Working Party was that there was a great deal of openness, a willingness to listen and learn on the part of all the people.
People didn't try and score points off each other— contributions were acknowledged and applauded, rather than criticized or tested to destruction.
The warmth and affection that we felt for each other will always be with me.
Voices in my ear
Lisa Power
I was standing in the Hemingford Arms one Friday evening, minding my own business, having a drink with a few friends, when Simon introduced me to someone he knew called Keith.
‘Keith's a volunteer for Gay Switchboard,’ he told me.
‘That's interesting.
I've been thinking about doing something like that,’ I said, more out of politeness than accuracy.
Seven years later, I'm still a volunteer.
I don't exactly have a clear sense of perspective on the subject myself.
Paradoxically, it's very easy to talk to other volunteers about the calls, the personalities, or the organizational dramas; it's a standing joke amongst Switchboard volunteers that whenever two or more of us get volunteers have been known to refuse dinner invitations unless Switchboard as a topic is banned, and lovers often jokingly refer to themselves as ‘Switchboard widows’.
The organization is infectious; many people have joined intending to make a small, easily-managed commitment and ended up doing three or four shifts a week and taking on extra work until sometimes their whole life becomes bound up in the organization.
That can bring its own dangers.
It's a problem common to lesbian and gay organizations that there is often a handful of stalwarts without whom things seemingly would not survive, and yet reliance on such martyrdom leads to over-involvement, resentment and burnout for the martyrs and under-involvement, resentment and alienation for others.
If  organizations don't manage to balance the two, they can topple.
Keeping some sort of balance is something I suspect to be close to the corporate heart of Switchboard, though usually unspoken.
Though at any given amount it looks as if it isn't going anywhere, it's always on the move, lumbering from crisis to crisis.
Volunteers constantly tug in all directions while others bewail the imminent end of the organization — just as they did last week, last year and (in a few cases) last decade.
Change is slow and unspectacular but nevertheless constantly occurring, allowing the organization to keep its balance where most of its contemporaries — Icebreakers,Gay News , GLF and many others — have slipped and lost their footing.
Despite the hype, Switchboard is very special; not because of its size, or its range, or its particular achievements but because of the way in which it has endured and grown and responded to a perceived constituency.
Of course, in reality there is no united lesbian and gay community with a common set of needs and yet Switchboard attempts a near-unique balancing act of serving some of the needs of all of the people as much of the time as possible.
The changing history of Switchboard is in many ways the history of changing needs of lesbians and gay men and a reflection of a growing understanding of our diversity.
I really only went along to the interviews for a lark, as company for a friend.
I found I was the only woman in the upstairs room of the Albert in Kings Cross, listening to a man in a leather jacket giving an introductory talk which seemed to assume that we were all men.
Later, two men took me into a corner and fired questions at me for what seemed like ages, but can only have been about half an hour.
They seemed embarrassed at having to ask a woman questions about sexism and feminism.
It wasn't till years later that I realised they hadn't even remembered to ask if f was a lesbian.
I remember a lot of questions about gay men, Heaven, leather bars and the geography of London.
Since I was living with the most out gay man I know, I wasn't short of an opinion on anything to do with anything in faggotdom, or at least the social side of it.
Getting onto Switchboard was the easy part.
In December 1979 I became one of two lesbians and sixty-five gay men providing a twenty-four-hours-a-day information service and helpline for the gay community.
You didn't say lesbian and gay then.
Although we were officially the London helpline, we got calls from all over Britain and from all over the world.
We still do, because of the amount of information we carry on just about anything gay (and lesbian too now) anywhere.
In fact, we probably carried more information then about social and campaigning organizations — a myriad world of Chipping Norton GLFs and  Llandrindod Wells CHEs that no longer exists, replaced with a few regional commercial meccas and a London explosion of hotels, plumbers, shops and other services.
In many ways, that's what's happened to the lesbian and gay helplines too.
Then there were new Switchboards springing up all over the place, sometimes with more enthusiasm than resources and occasionally with decidedly dubious intent or policy.
Now there are fewer each year as they suffer from dwindling finances and members.
The National Association of Gay Switchboards has fallen into disuse.
Only London Lesbian and Gay Switchboard seems to grow, still balancing on a tightrope — a difficult and dangerous trick.
Partly, it's survived because of its very size and range; with hundreds of thousands of people calling us every year, there's a clear demonstration of need for the service.
It's always there to answer the phone and the number is easy to find — these days it's even in Thomson's Local Directories.
But also it's survived, I think, because of the motivation that the constant flood of callers provides the volunteers with — everyone in the organization.
No matter what else they do within the group, every volunteer must do at least one shift on the phones every fortnight.
All of them have to hear people's needs regularly and at first hand, and judge for themselves how well they (and other lesbian and gay services) are meeting them.
So far, that's prevented the organization from losing itself too much in theoretical debate or argument.
It's prevented the volunteers from losing sight of the multiple realities for lesbians and gay men in this society, until they lock ideological horns or lose organizational drive — the twin causes of many groups collapsing.
I was sitting in the office recently, finishing a shift.
The night shift volunteer was standing next to me getting ready to come on to the phones and as I came off a call he started to chat to me.
I explained that I hadn't been around as much as usual lately because I was pissed off with the way some people were behaving.
‘Oh, take no notice,’ he said, ‘That sort of thing isn't really important.
I just consider it a privilege to be answering the phones and sometimes to help people.
That would keep me here whatever the problems.,
Another of the major difficulties which beset lesbian and gay organizations increasingly, apart from the motivation of current volunteers and members, is the getting of new ones.
Even when there is clearly a need for the service provided, there are often far too few people willing to involve themselves in providing it, so that when the originators leave, the service dies.
Throughout its existence, London Switchboard has always had more would-be volunteers than it could take on.
(One of the originators once told me that his memory of the first few weeks of the organization was of people literally waiting in turn to answer the phone every time it rang.)
This luxury has meant that the group has been able to evolve a fairly sophisticated selection and training procedure.
Though this comes in for constant robust internal criticism and revision, it is more thorough than that of many professional advice and counselling organizations and is increasingly used as a model by other organizations.
It's certainly come a long way from the upstairs room at the Albert.
The numbers may partly be due to the reputation Switchboard enjoys as a good training ground for employment, mainly in the voluntary social services (every time the organization manages to build up a core of daytime volunteers, half of them find jobs) but the largest group of prospective volunteers are past callers, people who, having found the service useful, want to contribute to its continued existence.
I can't tell you more than the bare bones of what happened before I arrived, though the polite version is available in old back copies of Gay News and Annual Reports.
Switchboard was formed in 1974 out of an alliance between the old Gay Liberation Front office collective, who donated the office, and Gay News , who donated the  publicity and energy to get it off the ground.
The story runs that Gay News were having trouble getting any work done because of the number of people who used their phone line as a combination information service and helpline.
Having some information on helplines in other areas and countries, they realized that such a service in London would both take the pressure off them and be an asset to the community.
The idea, once publicized, took off like a rocket and from the start the service ran seven days a week.
Just over a year later, it went to a round-the-clock service.
The real explosion in calls, particularly from isolated people, happened in 1977–8 when Switchboard began to advertise in local papers and Tom Robinson put the phone number on the single sleeve of ‘Glad To Be Gay’.
At around the same time, after a number of bitter arguments, all the remaining women in the group left to join with women from Icebreakers to form Lesbian Line.
It was at a time when many lesbians, angry at the lack of weight given to women's issues within the mixed movement and at the continuing sexism of many gay men, chose to prioritize work with the women's movement.
The decision of most lesbians with any political sensibility at that time to do this left many mixed gay organizations in a quandary.
Should they accept the verdict of their women ex-members and work as single-sex organizations?
Or should they take a hard look at themselves, try to learn something from what had happened, make the necessary changes and hope to attract more lesbians?
Those with a clear commitment to serve the whole community opted, at least theoretically, for the latter and in the early eighties a token lesbian was worth her weight in gold as a range of groups struggled to maintain a semblance of political balance.
It wasn't just a matter of image for Switchboard though, or a way to make a few right-on gay men sleep easier in their beds.
Even with no lesbian volunteers, some women continued to call; women who'd never heard of Lesbian Line, women who couldn't call during the hours they were open, women who'd swallowed media distortions of separatist groups, women who preferred the service or needed information Switchboard had.
With the wide and growing publicity for the service, more and more women  called.
Their needs alone would have been enough reason — were enough — for a number of us over the next three to four years to stay in a male organization, with largely male resources for mainly male callers and to join with some of those men to change it.
In my first few years in the London activist network I was several times courted (it seems the only appropriate word) to join currently all-male organizations as a token lesbian but none of them offered, alongside the assumption that this would be a privileged or welcome position, the incentive that Switchboard did: the callers.
At one point I left Switchboard for a few months.
The break was intended to be a long one, possibly a year or two.
I felt disillusioned, stale and cynical and I wanted to take a break before I started taking it out on the callers.
Too often over-involved people burn out without realizing it and end up damaging their cause and themselves.
I thought that if I didn't get out I might end up being thrown out.
I went along to other organizations, joined one or two things, went out a lot.
For some reason (and I really can't remember what I was doing there) one day I found myself rather out of order at the opening of a new leather shop in Hoxton.
I'd been muttering unhappily to a couple of friends about how hopelessly disorganized a particular campaign I'd got involved with seemed to be when a strange man next to us started a similar but louder tirade about how useless Switchboard was, how everyone knew they were ripping off money from their fund raising and what a lousy job they did in his (extremely small and third-hand) experience.
A couple of volunteers started to argue with him and I joined in with anger.
When I calmed down I realized I was defending an organization I refused to be in, though I had nothing good to say for the one I'd left it for.
I reapplied to Switchboard the next day.
It took a long time for the penny to drop with me about why I was so apparently popular in men's organizations in the aftermath of so many women deciding to work separately.
I'd not been in London long and those lesbian and gay friends I had were involved in squatting more than gay liberation.
In Lancaster, where I'd come out, there had always been a mixed scene; in many places outside the big towns, most of the lesbians and gay men continued to hang  together for at least part of the time because there didn't seem enough of us to consider doing much else.
I'd helped to start up a mixed-sex Lancaster Gay Switchboard and learned a lot from radical faggots.
They taught me bravery in the face of bigotry, the way that anger intelligently channelled can move mountains, the use of laughter as a weapon and a source of strength.
They taught me what I still believe (and no amount of misogyny or gynophobia or general bad behaviour on either side can shift me) that though there is much that is different for lesbians and gay men, there is also much that is common.
As far as much of the rest of the world is concerned, we're all just a bunch of queers.
It seems to me that we're stronger fighting that together than apart and in the last few years a growing number of successful campaigns have strengthened this belief.
I remember my early shifts as tremendous fun.
I realized early on how much I was getting out of the callers and the fact that some of them seemed to get something out of me too increased my confidence in other areas of my life.
I wasn't a particularly happy person at the time; lonely, in a rather dead-end job and with few personal relationships.
In a funny way, it helped me a lot to find that there were people worse off than me and to learn through the callers that there were a lot of different ways of being strong.
Many of the calls were for information, but many of them were from people who were confused or desperate.
Despite the current fear of AIDS and the moral  backlash increasingly in evidence in the late eighties, most callers now take far less persuading that homosexuality can be part of a valid lifestyle.
They may be worried about how to be gay, but far fewer of them are as desperate not to be and though they may be afraid of reaching out to the gay world, mostly they know it exists.
As near ago as 1980–1, many didn't.
I remember sending far more callers on then to general befriending and support organizations (of which far more existed) and fewer to specialist social groups and youth groups (which have blossomed since).
Violent abuse, death threats, bomb warnings and evangelical types were also far more common on the phones then, though received Switchboard wisdom says that's because they have more  trouble getting through now and tend to get discouraged and give up quicker than genuine callers.
I soaked it ill up, even the abuse.
I know it's something a Samaritan would consider unprofessional, but I enjoyed getting verbal queerbashers to hang up on me because they couldn't handle what I was telling them.
But the genuine callers were always far more interesting and more testing.
‘I don't know how to put this — you won't be embarrassed about this will you?…
I'm sorry to waste your time…
It's difficult to say the words…
I don't know why I can't just pull myself together…
I've thought about this for years and never told anybody…
I suppose I've always known that I was a bit different…do you understand what I mean?’
Oh dear, don't tell me to go to one of those dreary little do-gooding tea groups.
I don't want to learn macramé or flower arranging, either.
all I want out of this life is to meet a few men with something more between their ears than the latest Donna Summer hit.
Is that too much to ask?’
‘I'm sorry, I can't speak louder.
My husband's asleep upstairs and so are the kids.
You don't mind, do you?
I often ring at this time of the night for a chat, it helps to stop me from going spare.
I knew I made a mistake, marrying young, but it took me a while to work out what was wrong.
I want to do right by the kid, give them a good home.
In a few years…
I'll have my own life then.
it's kind of you all to spare me the time.’
‘Hello darling, what's on tonight then?
Nice to hear another girl's voice.
The fellers down there are always good for a laugh but they don't know what any of the places are like.
have you been there?
Got a girlfriend?’
‘The others at school keep making fun of me and saying things.
I don't know how they found out.
They keep picking on me, but I can't ask a teacher to help.
They'd want to know why and then they'd tell my parents.
My dad says that queers are all sick in the head and he'd kill one if they ever touched me.
What will he do to me?'
Working on a Switchboard — particularly London, where the phone rings as soon as you put it down even now they  have five lines — is a continuous education and a continual reminder of your own privileged position and relative security in the gay ghetto.
Trying to dissuade a father from sending his gay teenager to a psychiatrist; calming someone who's just been beaten up in a police cell; sharing someone's joy at discovering that there's another lesbian in the next village, all serve to remove some of the complacency which can so easily set in.
Despite its shortcomings and my own, working on Switchboard gave me the tools to work out some sort of political consciousness, the level of articulacy required to stand up for what I started to believe in and the confidence to take the sort of shit that comes to any woman who does that, anywhere.
One of the most positive aspects of Switchboard that I've seen over the past seven years, apart from the callers, has been the way that many of its members have continuously struggled to put their politics and convictions about gay and other rights into practice (though some of them might not care to put it that way) and the strength that working on it has given some people to do so elsewhere.
Ex-Switchboard volunteers didn't just help to found Lesbian Line.
Others left for a wide range of other organizations throughout the world.
In particular, the Terrence Higgins Trust — employees, hierarchy and all its different work groups — has a strong flavour of Switchboard past and present.
But there's a depressing flipside, too, in the way that in some areas the organization has continually fallen short of its own ideals through an inability to admit that such shortcomings could and do exist.
Switchboard is still almost as white dominated as it was male dominated when I joined.
The inability, so far, to properly confront issues of race is largely due to the huge number of white volunteers who simply find it too painful to accept that, because of their culture and upbringing, they tend to behave in a racist manner.
It's interesting that gay men on Switchboard found it much easier to accept that they didn't automatically know best for lesbians than white people on Switchboard find it to accept that they might not know best for Black people.
I suspect it's an assumption Switchboard shares with the wider white-dominated gay community — a reflection that, for once, the organization ought to be ashamed of.
Perhaps the major requirement for change on Switchboard is a combination of the overt needs of the callers, and the needs of a group of self-interested and highly-motivated volunteers who find a reason to stay in the organization.
Lesbian issues came to be taken seriously only when there were a number of lesbian volunteers (and quite a few men supporting them too) who were prepared to be loud-mouthed, difficult, overworked and sometimes thoroughly disliked within the organization.
Without that we wouldn't have a selection and training procedure which demands that all new volunteers give equal weight to understanding of lesbian concerns and knowledge of lesbian information as well of that of gay men.
Nor would we have a public image that clearly conveys the mixed nature of the organization: in early 1986 the name changed to Lesbian and Gay Switchboard which confirmed our status.
Nor would we have an information system which carries every piece of lesbian information any of us can find, lesbian benefits to balance up the years of drag show fund raising, and a closed Women's Caucus which supports whatever work we do in the organization.
Previous attempts to open a dialogue on race issues (let alone institute anti-racist practices) have ended with anger and hostility on all sides and, unsurprisingly, there are few current Black volunteers…but the calls are still coming in.
Policies won't be enough — practical action needs to be taken.
Since Switchboard policy and response is shaped by the callers as well as the volunteers, there is bound to be an emphasis at any given time on whatever issue looms largest amongst the calls.
In 1983–4 there was a sudden upsurge in legal calls, mainly centring around ‘pretty police’ activity in the London area and a spate of cottaging entrapments.
Switchboard became a vocal opponent of the tactics, providing material for parliamentary and media attacks upon the practices.
The death of Gay News provoked a considerable growth in out-of-London calls for information no longer available in that magazine's supplement, while at the same time making it far more difficult for us to obtain the information the callers needed and throwing an internal emphasis on that side of our work.
Simple pressure of calls has taken us from one to five lines over the years and the  only reason we have stuck at five is because the office is simply too small to take any more.
Now that the calls are almost constant, allowing little time for relaxation and getting to know other volunteers, the group is having to explore the possibilities of support groups and regular discussion weekends.
The best example of this and of the way in which Switchboard tends to mirror the mainstream gay (and still mainly male) community lies in the organization's response to AIDS.
From what seems now like an almost total lack of concern when the news of the virus first reached the organization, there is currently a major emphasis within the organization and a constant campaign of re-education of both callers and volunteers.
Everyone is required to attend inservice training providing factual updates, bereavement-counselling techniques, safer sex discussions; all AIDS and HIV related calls are monitored and there is constant discussion on shift about how we handle the calls.
I remember the first inservice training on AIDS that Switchboard held.
The discussion went round and round in circles as many of the men present refused to face the reality of the issue.
Two men held a long argument about whether the whole thing was an establishment plot to repress gay men's right to a freely expressed sexuality.
Another said, ‘Well, if I cross the road I might get run over, and if I have sex I might get AIDS.
It's just one of life's risks.’
Fury was expressed at the idea that some gay men might have to change their sexual habits and scorn poured on the idea of trying to tell that to the callers.
One man who spoke about already having made the decision to only have safer sex was ridiculed by some of the others.
I myself was grimly unsympathetic, pointing out the years of government and social inaction on cervical cancer, a sexually-related disease from which only women suffer and which could be drastically reduced by simple health education and changes in heterosexual male habits.
I don't think I'm the only volunteer who's ashamed of their early attitude to AIDS and I'm only glad that we had the sense, collectively, to listen to reason before the calls began.
It was Switchboard volunteers who eventually organized the first London public conference on AIDS.
AIDS has changed the whole face of Switchboard.
It's no exaggeration to say that almost half of our callers now either raise the issue or need to have it raised with them.
It increases the pressure on volunteers and on the phone lines dramatically, because whereas any other sort of information call may take a minute or two, an AIDS call can take half an hour or more because the information may lead into a discussion of the caller's lifestyle, moral attitudes and emotional needs.
The general level of pain and fear for all gay men who call is now higher and just below the surface, as many of them seek to come to terms with the virus and its effect on their lives.
For those just coming out onto the scene, it's an established fact that many can come to terms with, but for those who have set patterns of sexual behaviour or who've put themselves at risk in the past, it's a great problem.
Many people who have been out for a number of years have friends and lovers who have died or may die.
Volunteers need greater counselling skills and better personal emotional support than ever before.
Every shift, they face people who have lost lovers, lost jobs or lost families through AIDS or (more often) the fear of AIDS; every shift they have to help people think through the new consequences of future sex or face the possible results of past ignorance.
It brings a new light to conversations about matters such as sexual dishonesty in relationships.
I personally find it hardest to deal with married men, still sexually active with their wives while seeking casual unsafe sex with gay men and refusing either to change their sexual style or to consider the possible results.
Early on, someone said to me that nobody really took AIDS seriously until someone they knew died through it and when the first ex-volunteer died, many of us felt the shock waves.
With AIDS and HIV, the balance on Switchboard has shifted from Cloud-cuckoo-land to grim reality.
There's so much more that I could say about the development of Switchboard.
I've avoided the stuff that's on public record — the big fund raising events, the grandiose announcements of plans, the celebrations of our survival.
What still seems most important to me, after seven years, is still the callers and the way that we do or don't service their needs.
Whatever we need to go through to continue to do  that — raising money, training new volunteers, finding more efficient ways of managing our information and our office, contributing to public debate on the state of lesbian and gay rights — I hope we have the sense and the energy to endure.
Switchboard as an organization has probably had some effect on more of us, as callers and as volunteers, than any other single campaign or group has done in the recent history of lesbian and gay rights in this country.
I hope that we are never foolish enough to take what it does for granted — because that is when it will begin to crumble and fail like so many others have done.
In joining London Gay Switchboard, I'm not sure quite what I expected.
What I got was a group of men who ranged from those with a more developed line on women's issues than mine to those who were frankly misogynistic, and a woman who went on record as saying that, in her opinion, feminism put women off being lesbians.
And all this within an organization which within a year changed my life, my career and my character.
It sounds rather extravagant, but then my whole relationship with the organization could be called that.
We may not be lovers any more, but we're still very good friends despite a few attempts to pull us apart.
Don't ask me to be objective.
The liberation of affection
Bill Thorneycroft, Jeffrey Weeks and Mark Sreeves
Bill Thorneycroft (born 1926), Jeffrey Weeks (born 1945) and Mark Sreeves (born 1958) talk about becoming gay, about gay male identity, about gay male relationships and about the gay male community.
Bill : I had been having sex, occasionally, with men since I was about fourteen but I had no gay social life at all.
I just used to do a bit of cottaging, picking people up, particularly during the war; that was the heyday in picking people up so easily — in crowded trains, in the blackout — but it was always just the one-off.
People I met never became friends, people never spoke in those days at all, in fact, I found that if you did try to speak they always ran away.
In the fifties I got into a set of about a dozen or so gay men in South London.
I had been travelling the country flogging Soviet magazines — I was working for Collet's bookshops — and I stayed with a comrade in Edinburgh who kept a boarding house.
It was a terribly cold winter and she said, ‘You won't mind sharing a room with my son, will you?’
So we got into bed together.
He was very much more out than I was and he knew where the gay scene was, not only in Edinburgh but also in London.
He introduced me to this world that I had never really come across before.
Most people met through casual pick-ups, going through to the Black Prince, which was the equivalent of the Vauxhall today.
The sort of things we did was go to private parties, go to gay clubs, troll around pubs in South London where they  had drag shows.
I never did like drag shows and I didn't want to spend the evening in the pub but I did it just to be with gay people.
We were all pretty open with each other but very discreet outside.
Most of them were pretty determined to have a totally straight image outside the ghetto.
It was very much a sort of double life.
We camped about and we had our little parties, but we never really discussed it; just accepted it as a fact of life.
I used to talk about being gay to my straight, but enlightened, friends — mostly women; it was a relief to me and they were perfectly happy to talk about it.
But once I got into this set of gay men, it took over my social life almost completely.
I more or less gave up cottaging for a while.
However none of them actually shared my interest in politics….
Most of them were clerks or shop assistants, although there were one or two manual workers, a couple worked on the railways; nobody was upper class.
I was an electrician, doing house wiring and things like that in the fifties, and then my lover and I had a greengrocer's shop with another gay man.
My lover and I lived together for eight years and then when we got rid of the greengrocer's shop, he ‘went back to mother’.
I still see him but we don't have sex any more.
Jeffrey : My first sexual encounters were in South Wales, where I grew up.
My very first was with someone I was at school with, but he subsequently got married and vehemently denied he was gay.
The first sexual casual pick-up I had was also in South Wales; this must have been about 1965–6 when I was nineteen or twenty.
I was a student in London but I was at home on this occasion when I met someone in the park.
We had sex in the park and I felt a tremendous nausea for what I had done.
I can remember walking away, swearing that I would never do this again, feeling physically sick.
Of course, by that evening I couldn't think of anything else and it set up a pattern of repetition which I followed once I went back to London.
It wasn't difficult to pick up people for casual sex but it was difficult to transfer that casual sex contact into any sort of relationship.
Building up relationships was very much like collecting little islands — you jumped from one to another to another  to another — and if you were lucky you eventually had a network.
By the time the gay movement started in 1970 the gay friends I had were people I had picked up or met through a pick-up; I probably knew about half a dozen gay people intimately.
Some of my friendships from then I have retained and someone I met twenty years ago I still live with.
It is not as if that period was a failure in terms of personal relationships but it was very hard work to build up those relationships.
It was that I think which was fundamentally transformed by my involvement with the gay movement.
‘Swinging London’ of the mid-sixties was not a particularly exciting place for ‘queer people’as we called ourselves.
There was a generally growing permissive attitude, although I don't think that the attitude towards homosexuality was particularly permissive.
But I didn't find it at all difficult to come out to my student friends.
I graduated in 1967 and then I did postgraduate work till 1969 and so I was in a student milieu until a year before the gay movement started.
The straight people I was friendly with were quite realistic about my gayness, even intrigued by it and grew to know what I did and who I met.
I managed to introduce some of my gay friends to some of my college friends — some of my college friends also turned out to be gay.
The first person I ever came out to as a student was a person I suspected of being gay and everyone else thought he was gay; in fact, he vehemently denied it after I came out.
Ten years later, of course, he did come out after a rather agonizing process and he is now a gay activist himself in South London and the Labour Party.
I think I was mentally prepared for gay liberation in 1970 when it came along and when I did encounter it it swept me along quite easily.
I was emotionally prepared because I had just had what seemed to me then an incredibly traumatic experience.
A close friend who was gay — we were never quite lovers but we were inseparable for a while — went off with a woman and I was incredibly devastated by this.
It was not just that he had gone off with someone else but he had actually gone off with a woman and it seemed to me like a betrayal of my identity.
This happened just before I went to the first gay liberation meeting in London.
The second element was that I had just started working at the London  School of Economics in October 1970, which was exactly the same time as GLF started meeting there and LSE was in one of its periods of turmoil which involved me as someone working on the staff and excited me politically.
Going to the first GLF meeting brought together these two aspects of myself as I saw for the first time the emotional need to have a context where I could be open and proud of my gayness, as well as the political context where my sexuality would seem relevant to all the other things that were going on around me at work and in the country at large.
It was an immediate transformation of my personal and social outlook and it started in me a new sort of excitement — it was as though you'd been shot full of adrenalin.
For three of four months I couldn't think or do anything else.
Within the first month of my being involved with the gay movement I met Angus, who became my lover then and remained my lover for ten years.
We still live together.
Immediately, therefore, I was involved in the gay movement and for the first time in my life in a couple relationship.
Everything I did personally and everything I explored in my own life seemed part of this much wider political and social movement.
There was a period of incredibly intense excitement which, I think, probably sustained me for the next five or ten years.
Bill : The gay movement for me really started with the South London GLF in 1972.
The impact it had on me was that here were a lot of gay people who were interested in politics; for whom it wasn't just a social thing to do after work.
They were a totally different set of people from the ones I knew before.
They weren't very conventional, they were mostly younger and were into being public and talking about it.
Also I remember a very, very early meeting when somebody said, ‘Let's think of the reasons why we are glad to be gay,’ and I thought, ‘Rubbish, there aren't any, what nonsense.’
When I actually began to realize that there were advantages to being gay, that changed my whole attitude — up till then I had always thought of it as something to be sorry for, to apologize for.
That was the turning-point in my whole attitude to myself.
Mark : I suppose the point at which my public coming out  started was 1976–7, though I'd known that I was gay from a much earlier age.
I was aware that I was attracted to boys and men from about the age of twelve or fourteen, but although I was brought up in London I still didn't find it very easy to have any sort of contact with other gay men.
I was extremely scared of actually meeting people and, having read Homosexuality by D.J.
West, it really terrified me, the prospect of meeting these strange people.
It didn't give me a very positive image to actually find other people, but I used to go to South London drag pubs, such as the Vauxhall, with schoolfriends when we were in sixth form.
I wasn't acknowledged as being gay.
I went with a lesbian and some other friends.
At the end of 1976 I actually met several people, whom I could talk to, who acknowledged that they were gay and, as a consequence, I then subsequently admitted — and that's the word I still use — that I was gay.
It was like a little explosion because it wasn't just a question of telling one other person; I had to tell my parents and I had to tell all my schoolfriends and make sure that my world existed and to a great extent it did.
I'd left school in 1976, I was unemployed and it all happened through a drama group at the Royal Court Theatre where I met people who were out.
There was a youth group being set up to perform a play which was about teenage gay men and lesbians and their experiences.
I got involved in that so that by mid-1977 I was performing in a play which was actually saying that I was gay.
I had  initially met a lot of people who were gay but I didn't really identify with them and sort of felt, ‘Yes, but is this it?’
I really wanted to meet people I felt far more at ease with and at that time it was the still the punk era and I met a lot of other people who were into that.
I knew a lot of other people who were both gay and punks; there was no question of having to  establish yourself.
But there was a great thing about the Prince Albert — whether or not the Prince Albert would let people in who were punks.
Being gay for me meant identifying with people who were of a similar age to myself and with a particular way of dressing.
At the same time I can remember going along to clubs, like the Vortex, and being slightly hassled because I was kissing my boyfriend.
He was a follower of Sham 69 and I remember  going to a concert of theirs at the LSE and almost getting beaten up by skinheads.
I had an image of GLF existing through meeting people and talking to them, but the only physical evidence I saw at that time was badges saying GLF.
I wasn't quite sure whether GLF was an actual entity or an attitude of mind.
Jeffrey : I like the idea of seeing the gay movement as an attitude of mind.
For me it was fundamentally feeling part of a community, a word we didn't use in those days.
From the mid-sixties I had had a homosexual identity and I did say to people that I was homosexual; but in the early seventies that had a completely different meaning.
It was in the context not of an isolated individual saying it to another isolated individual, but actually feeling that this identity had a social location, a political and moral location, because it involved a whole series of things which meant you weren't just a voice crying in the wilderness.
So what fundamentally came out of those early years was this sense of community.
There were differences between lesbians and gay men in those days as there continue to be; there were differences of race; there were differences of class; differences of interest; so the community isn't a particular thing — it's a whole series of different things.
But the fundamental point for me was that it involved a positive recognition of my identity and mutual recognition of our identities and that made it much easier to form more personal sorts of relationships on various social levels with other people you met naturally through the things you were doing, whether it was political or social or whatever.
Mark : I certainly found quite a distinct difference between actually going out looking for sex, which I often associated with going to discos and, on the other hand, just making friendships which happened in a much more natural and less forced way.
Actually, it just happened because I found I was engaging with people who had similar interests to myself.
One early significant occasion for me was actually meeting someone in a bookshop in the Finchley Road when I was about sixteen.
There was obviously some sort of sexual  element to it but I just didn't know what to do next and expected this man, who was about two or three years older than me, to, in some way, tell me or indicate to me and so I followed him without talking to him.
There was all this unstated sexual intention and we went to the toilets at Finchley Road tube station and I didn't know what was going to happen.
He went into a cubicle and I thought I should follow him but he pushed me away, locked the door and left me standing outside.
It was totally outside my experience and so I just stood there and walked out.
I just didn't know what to do — that was it.
It was very disappointing really.
Jeffrey:When I first recognized that I was homosexual, I could recognize my feelings but I didn't know actually what you were supposed to do — not just to meet people, that was difficult enough, but I didn't know what to do physically.
My fantasies were never about specific sexual activities, they were always on the level of some emotional transcendence — someone would come along and embrace me and that would be it; I couldn't really envisage what the nitty gritty practical things were.
Mark : I never fantasized about particular sexual activities until after I had had sexual activities.
Bill : I was the same but I still find that I'm totally different from people who think of sex as just screwing.
When I first thought about fancying men, it was about kissing and cuddling.
It was just a great romantic thing, when one somehow fell into this man's arms — like Hollywood films.
I think it's straight from Hollywood really; but instead of falling into the arms of Barbara Stanwyck, it would be Tyrone Power.
My sexual encounters seldom included fucking.
After my first I felt totally guilt-ridden and swore never to do it again.
Mark : The feeling of guilt is quite predictable, or certainly one of nausea or revulsion or fear.
Presumably it's also a lot to do with isolation, a lot to do with the fact that there was no one to talk to about the sexual experiences you were  having and the only surrounding attitude was one of, ‘This is something which shouldn't happen’, whereas the situation when I had my first sexual experience was one where I knew other people who were gay whom I could talk to.
It was a question of a different sort of climate, different surrounding circumstances.
I was not going back into a situation where I only had myself to talk to.
Jeffrey : There was something very odd about attitudes in Britain in the seventies towards sex.
I found when I got involved in my relationship with Angus in 1970 there was a real sort of tension.
On the one hand what the gay movement had done was to involve me in a very intense one-to-one relationship, a couple relationship, and at the same time the ideology that the movement was instilling in me was away from the idea of couple relationships and away from the idea that sex should be conventionally tied to relationships or a single relationship.
I think that this was a tension, a sort of contradiction which went through all the seventies, a real problem about sex which was never really confronted.
I wrote a lot about gay politics during the seventies, including a book on it, but when I look back on it, I don't actually talk about sex at all.
What I am talking about are the contexts in which people have sexual relationships.
My work has been mainly about the development of a sense of identity and of a sense of community, the development of relationships but not actually about sex.
Yet in the States at this time there was a real explosion of sexual activity, of public sexual activity, the development of gay saunas, the development of sexually explicit magazines; there was a huge migration, really, to New York, San Francisco, Los Angeles by gay people, a whole burgeoning of a literature and expression of new sexual activities which I don't think was really echoed to the same extent until quite late in the seventies in this country.
Gay politics here was much more about what we conventionally regard as political activity.
Actually for radical gays it was much more about the relationship with the Labour movement; much more about building social identities; about relating to the need for social change.
Lots of the most active gay activists in this  country had pretty poor sexual lives in the seventies, I think.
They spent so much time talking about gay things that they didn't actually have much time to do many gay things — which is why I think the really crucial thing that happened in the seventies was not the liberation of a particular sexuality but actually the liberation of a particular set of relationships through which people could enjoy sex, or not have sex, as the case may be.
Mark : I certainly identify with the attitude of a contradiction between my one-to-one relationships and the image of what should happen to try to get away from the heterosexual attitude to relationships.
It's only now that I feel that I could actually decide to have a relationship which is specifically going to be monogamous, which is a really big change for me…that makes me think immediately of AIDS but I'm not sure.
Previously, my close relationships would have been with people where we would perhaps be living together or just lovers, but they would have been quite explicit that they would have been non-monogamous.
If either one of us wanted to sleep with other people then that should be OK and it was a question of something we could work out and that would not necessarily break the relationship even if in fact it actually did.
It was as though there was a sort of non-resolved question of wanting to commit myself to a particular idea of having non-monogamous relationships and not buying into the feelings of jealousy.
And, personally, I don't see the difference between emotional jealousy and sexual jealousy.
If my lover was having sex with someone else and it was just a one night stand or something insignificant, it would be far less important to me than some sort of emotional thing that he might be having with someone else.
But this jealousy actually happened because it was a question of making a decision without actually thinking through the consequences of it.
It was something which I don't feel I have totally resolved in myself now.
Bill : I don't know if anybody feels they have, but this is a thing which I felt was central to the gay movement of the seventies and I think I would go so far as to say that I assume  that most of my close friends feel, like Mark, that it's fine to have special relationships but it isn't fine to have ones where you aren't allowed to have anything else and also that there's nothing more deadly to a relationship when you are trying desperately not to have it off with anybody else because you feel guilty about it.
Jeffrey : You feel guilty if you do and guilty if you don't, that's the problem.
Bill : I know that it isn't always possible but the idea is not only not to feel guilty if you do, but to feel quite happy about it and about your lover/lovers doing it too.
I think this is quite realistic except during that period when you are ‘in love’, which I think is a hysterical state where you can't even bear for your lover to go to the loo without you going too.
But when that's passed I think that being able to have sex with other people is an essential part of your relationships; otherwise, one does, or I do, feel very trapped, feel the sort of heaviness of a conventional marriage.
Jeffrey : I think that lesbians and gay men have been very creative in the sort of relationships they have tried to develop over the last fifteen years — because it's very easy simply to copy the models which we are presented with.
The problem is that try as you might to obliterate jealousy, jealousy keeps cropping up — that's certainly my experience.
I don't think it's reasonable to expect that you will ever get rid of jealousy or fear or anxiety.
What is realistic is that you should not allow these feelings to hamper either your own or your partner's development.
I'm beginning to wonder whether a certain amount of agony isn't inseparable from having relationships anyway; that's what relationships are, in fact, and that's the pleasure of them.
I think relationships, in the end, are involvement with other people and that does lead to all sorts of tensions and conflict.
The illusion that I had and perhaps many others had in the early seventies was that somehow we could reach a blissful state where all tensions and anxieties would not be there and we would be sexually, as well as emotionally, free.
That's one of the utopian hopes of the early seventies which it's right to  abandon — we should be more realistic, but that does not mean trapping people in relationships which are sterile or unsatisfying.
Bill : There's something I'd like to mention before we go too far away from the halcyon days of the gay movement.
I don't know whether it affects anyone else but what happened to me was that for the first time in my adult life I began to feel part of a community.
It was the actual feeling that you could walk down Railton Road and go to Brixton and you would meet several gay people in the street who would recognize you and probably kiss you.
It's all out there on the street and it's the closet I've ever been and probably the nearest I will ever be to actually feeling part of the world.
Like a lot of people in the sort of society we live in, you feel very isolated from everything around you and you don't know the neighbours and you are only barely on speaking terms with the shopkeeper.
But what happened to Brixton and it still, to some extent, exists there is a feeling that there are gay people in all these houses and you're probably going to meet them when you go into Woolworths.
That was an enormous transformation from the world where you only met gay people at specific times of day in specific places under specific circumstances.
Mark : I can't say that to the same extent, but where I live at the moment I know a lot of people within five minutes' walk and there are ten or fifteen gay people I know who live locally; there are people I can visit without any great effort whatsoever, whom I'm likely to meet in the shops.
Jeffrey : It's also a sort of invisible network.
I don't think that it actually needs to be geographically located.
I feel part of a London-wide network of lesbian and gay friends.
Just by knowing that they exist and knowing that if I went to places whether it's a bookshop or a coffee shop or a pub or the streets of Brixton or Tescos or Budgens in Crouch End you bump into people you know or might know.
The interesting thing about it is when Bill's talking he's describing a sort of village atmosphere and, of course, it's a re-creation of a village sort of atmosphere, but it's a village  of choice, a community of the mind rather than one you were born into.
There's an interesting historical paradox in the impact of AIDS on the gay community because without the existence of an international gay community I don't think AIDS as a disease could have had the rapid impact it's had on gay men.
On the other hand, without the gay community there would not have been the collective response of support which has made it possible for many gay men to live with AIDS or the fear of AIDS.
I think the real historical tragedy is that AIDS has emerged just at the moment that the gay community was reaching a sort of maturity and openness.
It's a tragedy which will probably set us back a generation.
People are already beginning to think of pre- and post-AIDS periods just as we in the seventies grew accustomed to thinking of pre- and post-gay liberation periods.
There are two really significant dates in recent lesbian and gay history — 1969–70 with the emergence of the gay movement in America and Europe, and 1980–1 with the emergence of AIDS as a major threat to the health of gay men.
What's really moved me over the last three or four years, as AIDS has become a major threat in this country, and especially since spring 1985 with the rising public hysteria about it, is that it's brought out tremendous reserves of strength in lesbians and gay men which show the importance of the achievements of the previous fifteen years.
Mark : I was in a relationship from about 1981 to 1984 and, in a sense, I did not think AIDS affected me very greatly and it was not very high in my consciousness.
It was there certainly but, at the same time, I was not willing to think about it and what impact it could have on me.
But since the end of that relationship, I have just been very clear — or attempted to be — about what I am going to do sexually and what I am not.
In terms of actual support, I think for me personally it's been within a gay men's group.
AIDS is an issue which has enabled people to talk to one another and also think about issues which they might otherwise not have thought about — specifically about death at an early age.
When I meet people who are HIV positive or who have got AIDS, I am always surprised at how positive they are; it's personally inspiring  for me to meet people who have thought out what they are doing about their lives and the changes they have made.
Bill : I was wondering recently what effect the AIDS hysteria has had outside the gay movement and I was talking about it a bit in a pub I use down in Sussex.
Obviously, the real nasties,Sun readers, are just as they have always been, vile and pretty anti-gay.
But other people have voluntarily talked to me about being gay in the context of AIDS.
They never would have initiated it before, although they knew I was gay.
One of them, the landlord of the pub, got pissed and kissed me on the mouth and talked about the problems of these demarcations — and this is in spite of all the AIDS hysteria.
I think there's a possibility of overestimating the negative effect, because one sees newspapers and thinks, ‘Oh, my God, they're going to start shooting us at any minute.’
It doesn't seem to have had as bad an effect on a lot of people as it might appear — they haven't immediately turned round and gone back to the very worst anti-gay feeling.
Jeffrey : I don't think that it will halt the development of a sense of gay community and, in a way, it makes it more essential that there is a gay community.
There's an important element in this crisis and, in a sense, the government's reaction, belated as it is, shows a recognition that the crisis, as it affects gay people, can only be stopped or delayed, deferred or whatever through involvement with the gay community — and that's an odd recognition in this climate.
Bill : It's certainly very odd to see government posters use the words, ‘gay or straight’.
Jeffrey : For many people involvement in campaigns around AIDS is having a similar effect to involvement in gay liberation campaigns, in that you get a tremendous sense of common feeling, almost a sort of euphoric sense of working together.
I have heard people describe their involvement in AIDS support groups in the same terms as  people used to describe their involvement in the Gay Liberation Movement.
Mark : In order to combat the spread of AIDS among gay men specifically there's a need for more communication, and a greater amount of closeness and explicitness about issues between us.
But at the same time it's wonderful that the government is recognizing the kind of work that gay organizations have put into this issue.
Bill : But they are trying to keep it as quiet as possible.
Did you see the poll published in the Sunday newspapers about public attitudes to AIDS which avoided any reference to the Terence Higgins Trust or any of the other gay support groups?
Jeffrey : I think what our discussion shows is the importance over the last fifteen years, and particularly in the age of AIDS, of the friendship and support networks which we have developed.
It seems to me that the really critical thing that has happened since the emergence of the gay movement is the affirmation of our identity through a sense of community, through an involvement with each other.
The message I draw from this is that the gay movement is not ultimately about the liberation of any particular sexuality but actually about the liberation of a whole set of relationships; an affirmation of relationships which are sexual or non-sexual, relationships through which sexuality can be realized or transformed or denied or changed or just lived.
The really important thing is that a public context for this has now developed and I don't think that this can be fundamentally changed despite the impact of AIDS and the revival of the moral right.
It's now a sociological and historical fact that gay men and lesbians have constructed this dense network of relationships and communities.
We are on the map for keeps.
Amnesia and antagonism: anti-lesbianism in the youth service
Val Carpenter
My boss knew he had taken on a lesbian when I was appointed.
A straight feminist had brought me out by telling him she ‘thought’ I was a lesbian.
I'd only met her once, so perhaps it was her way of telling me or him or someone else that she was ‘in the know’.
Whatever her intentions, he turned out to be a good old-fashioned liberal.
He called me into his office and proceeded to deliver a very embarrassed speech about how he would support me and anything I might do.
I think he expected that to be the end of it, since he continued to be surprised and concerned every time lesbianism came up, in whatever form, over the following seven years.
Sometimes he would interpret my involvement in discussions or groups as me being ‘got at’ by outside influences.
At others, he would simply imply that I was going overboard — not quite being myself.
Had he lost his memory?
I asked myself that question on many occasions and wondered how I was supposed to refresh his and other people's memories without risking the accusation of going on about it all the time.
I work for a national voluntary youth work agency.
My job is to help youth workers develop their work in ways which are relevant and accessible to girls and young women.
We — me and the five other women with whom I work — develop resources and printed materials, and get involved in training youth workers.
It is a fast-growing area of work.
Unfortunately there are still many people who think it is nothing but a fringe event, an extra little treat grafted onto  their work without need for fundamental or organizational change.
And the organization I work for is a little like that too.
I wasn't there long before things started to happen.
My first little skirmish took place over a film, one about rape.
It had been purchased by my immediate boss just before she had left to work somewhere else.
I therefore inherited the dubious honour of making it available on loan to youth workers.
The film was dreadful.
A white middle-class man gave a lecture to American High School students about how to avoid rape, giving demonstrations to some of the young women of how to avoid him raping them.
No relevant issues were raised, no acknowledgment that rape is about male power, or even that it is wrong.
The message seemed to be that women who are raped are at fault for not having successfully avoided it.
Nor was it of much use to youth workers, as what it boiled down to was a couple of blocking techniques, a punch and a bite: a self-appointed, self-defence expert showing off.
I'd seen the film myself in a mixed audience of youth workers, and it had left many of us women upset and shaken.
We were critical, and also complained about the audience being mixed.
We were slated for our views, and spent the rest of the weekend being ignored or branded as extremists.
Most of us who'd complained were lesbians.
I wasn't therefore able to recommend this film when a few months later a woman from Nottingham requested a loan.
I explained why.
The same afternoon, my departed heterosexual colleague, who had bought it, and who had shown it at the conference, was on the phone: would I change my mind?
My answer was no, and about an hour later my boss called me into his office to put the pressure on.
I never gave in, but within weeks the networks were buzzing with the news that I was into censorship and as bad as Mary Whitehouse.
Sometimes heterosexism is crude.
But just as often it's too subtle for you to pinpoint, especially if you're working in liberal organizations with well-intentioned colleagues.
Nobody openly pointed to my lesbianism, over the film or subsequently, as the feature causing them problems.
It has  always been my ‘extremism’ or my ‘unpreparedness to compromise’, even though of course I have to compromise all the time.
The irony is that what gave me and other lesbians the
ability to develop a fuller understanding of rape at that time (1978) was the very fact that we are lesbians.
While heterosexual feminists recognized rape as an important issue, they still had an investment in men, which to some extent meant not upsetting those men too much.
It was as difficult for them to develop a public analysis of rape eight years ago as it is for them today publicly to acknowledge the extent of sexual abuse of girls and young women inside and outside the home.
I'm not writing-off all heterosexual feminists.
Their position is complex, sometimes contradictory and occasionally uncomfortable.
Nor would I dismiss their contributions to the analysis of sexism, or deny the contribution, in my own profession, they have made to the re-emergence of work with young women.
But while they gave support and commitment, it was lesbians who were at the forefront of change when the Girls' Work Movement came to life in the late seventies and early eighties.
And it was lesbians who, without heterosexual credentials or cover, took the heavy risks and, consequently, the heavy blows.
It was our unclouded commitment to women, and greater insistence that the fundamentals of sexism should be tackled without compromise, that brought youth service attention back to the young women who for decades had been excluded by boys and men.
Without lesbians there would be no Girls' Work Movement today.
There would also have been no organization to employ me had it not been for our foresisters at the turn of the century.
At that time (1911–39) there were girls' clubs all over the country.
Many of the organization's leading figures were, and still are, ‘spinsters’ who ‘teamed up with each other’or with women outside the youth work world.
These unmarried women were thought to be a good influence on the girls and good role models.
There was little room for lesbians to be out in the first half of this century, unless of course they moved in the right literary or aristocratic circles.
As a result there was no public discussion of lesbianism and  rarely any acknowledgment that these ‘splendid’, ‘dedicated’ and strong examples of ‘magnificent womanhood’were in fact lesbians.
It was because of this denial of the importance of lesbians and lesbian strength within the organization (by lesbians as much as heterosexual women) that heterosexual women were encouraged to take over key positions.
Before too long heterosexual women had in fact taken over and they began to encourage men into the organization and to instigate the mixing of boys and girls into provision previously available to to young women on their own (but preserving the boys' clubs).
Men soon outnumbered the heterosexual women in the key positions, and by the sixties the organization had changed in perspective and in name.
Single-sex work with girls had not only disappeared.
It had become taboo.
The single women who hitherto had been considered a good influence on the girls were relegated to obscurity whilst the married heterosexual women were left to emerge as the (acceptable and healthy) role models.
Women youth workers, both lesbian and heterosexual, had almost disappeared, and this all in the name of ‘fair play for men’ which heterosexual women claim, whilst simultaneously denying lesbian energy, strength and commitment.
The emergence of informed lesbian feminist workers in the seventies brought a wave of energy and projects; setting up girls' nights, girls' work conferences, women workers' groups and training events.
Our national women youth workers' conferences were widely successful with heterosexual women.
They liked the good organization, the atmosphere of safety and support and the well-run crèhes we d organized mainly for their benefit.
(At that time the lesbians involved in the organizations of the conferences had all long since made positive decisions to be child-free.)
They joined in our events for young women, and devoured our publications, because it gave them the springboard for taking action themselves.
Most of all they enjoyed the space we created for them to get on and do their work in relative peace.
However, heterosexual women still complain that lesbian workers are ‘too threatening’, we're ‘too exclusive’ and we're always ‘pushing lesbianism down their throats’.
Perhaps  the biggest insult of all is when they claim that we've taken over girls' work!
Meanwhile it is male colleagues who have largely benefited from this anti-lesbianism.
Not always content to watch from the sidelines, some of them have joined in with their more confident brand of anti-lesbianism.
The result has been a consolidation of their power as men, over heterosexual women and lesbians, within the work, and the organization.
Work with girls continues to be undermined and marginalized because ultimately it is the boys — well, the heterosexual ones — who count.
Single sex work with girls and young women ruffles the feathers and produces a frantic and strident response, a response that can also be physically aggressive and violent.
The platform of this abuse is inevitably anti-lesbianism.
All young women who attend girls' nights at their youth centre, or who go to girls' days and weekends, and every woman youthworker involved (whether in single-sex or mixed settings) is likely to get labelled a lesbian.
This is enough, it would seem, to precipitate the verbal and physical abuse which follows.
Heterosexism ensures that the gut reaction of every heterosexual woman and young woman, as well as many lesbian workers and young lesbians, is to deny the ‘accusation’— for that is certainly what it is meant to be.
We've all got a lot to lose: our jobs, friends, respect and our safety.
In the end it's our integrity and knowledge that the pay-off isn't big enough which stops many lesbians from colluding.
A few heterosexuals struggle, mainly unsuccessfully, not to be anti-lesbian themselves and against the desire to render their own position safe.
In any case, virtually no heterosexual feminists have an analysis of heterosexism, which would enable them to deny they are lesbians without making it seem as if they are happy not to be.
So, in making their denials, they often make unseemly proclamations about their own heterosexuality, in the worst cases (only too common) dis-associating themselves from ‘radical feminists’(read lesbians) and presenting themselves as the ones who are the reasonable moderates.
And there are many others who  simply remain silent in the face of overt anti-lesbian comments.
Male power, both in male colleagues and in the boys using the clubs, is increased by the lack of a concerted resistance to this anti-lesbianism.
As soon as any woman gets a bit uppity, or any two or more women or young women want to spend time together, or even if we just plain disagree with the men or boys, the ultimate sanction can be applied: call her a lesbian — that will soon bring her back into line.
And it all too often does.
While nothing is challenged, nothing is changed.
Anti-lesbianism controls all women's lives and the result in youth work with young women is that lesbians and young lesbians are presented as the unreasonable and unacceptable face of the work.
Meanwhile, with our ideas and work dismissed, heterosexual women colleagues are welcomed as the ones who can provide the model of acceptable girls' work.
While this struggle has been in the making, gay men in youth work have remained silent.
Perhaps they have been fearful that supporting lesbian colleagues would mean they too would have to come out.
They may have been reluctant to lose the tenuous support and camaraderie of heterosexual men and women who think of them as safe.
Or they could be afraid of the implications girls' work might have for their own work.
Whatever the reason, gay men have never united to take action or develop work with young people which challenges heterosexism — or sexism for that matter.
They probably fear that coming out and working around issues of sexuality would leave them vulnerable to accusations of paedophilia (child sexual abuse by any other name).
It's something both they and lesbians have always been blamed for, despite the now well-publicized fact that it is heterosexual men who commit by far the most assaults on boys, as well as girls.
In addition, it is an unfortunate fact that some gay men are paedophiles, however few in comparison with heterosexual men.
For all these reasons, their fears in this respect as youth workers are based on the realities of heterosexism.
Some gay men are out to their colleagues, especially perhaps to heterosexual women, while remaining in the closet with the young people with whom they work.
But the  absence of an analysis; of sexism and heterosexism has rendered them unable to develop any anti-heterosexist perspectives within their work.
Such inaction provides an ideal foil which leaves their assumed image of heterosexuality intact.
Such pacts of silence with heterosexuals inevitably work against the challenges to heterosexism being made by lesbians.
Thus lesbians are left to challenge the oppression alone.
In doing so, we have to come out every day and, once we're out, it's on our record for life.
In the absence of an analysis of heterosexism, heterosexuals can (and do) reduce our gayness or lesbianism to just living with someone of the same sex, thus enabling them to remove the possibility of challenge from our relationships with them.
It's our work around heterosexism which makes a direct and daily challenge to them, and in a sense this work is a pure act of coming out in that it no longer allows them to treat us as one of the girls (or boys) who is really just like them.
We make daily decisions about whether or not to say, whether or not to interrupt the assumptions being made about our presumed heterosexuality.
We weigh up the risks and possible repercussions of each and every situation.
We come out to colleagues who, like my boss, know but seem to lose their memory with annoying regularity.
We constantly come across situations where colleagues treat us as if we were just raising points of sexuality to be difficult, or as a piece of axe-grinding.
We know, and they know, that if we were not on the project, in the meeting, or in any way involved, the issue of sexuality would simply be entirely glossed over.
In short lesbians and gay men are assumed to influence young people over their sexuality, whilst heterosexuals assume themselves to be neutral.
In many ways we've come full circle: in the early days of lesbian feminism, lesbian theorists demonstrated that anti-lesbianism is the most intense form of woman-hating.
After several years of thinking of sexism and heterosexism as different forms of oppression, we've come back to seeing them as inextricably linked.
In fact it has been mainly the lesbians in the girls' work movement who have been developing a determination to make the links between all oppressions, and who have become very clear about the need for that work to be accessible to all young women.
When we were first creating the model for girls' work, those of us who are white, both lesbian and heterosexual, developed work that was racist, that is, based on our ideas about how sexism affected white girls, and what kind of provision white girls might need.
During our efforts to spread our ideas about girls' work we encountered much anti-lesbianism, while at the same time we began to be challenged about our racism by Black women, among whom were some out Black lesbians.
It was during this period of considerable stress and pressure that we began to move towards a multi-oppression analysis as a basis for training and for the work.
But of course, it wasn't quite as simple as that.
Much of the confrontation around oppressions arose through the national women youth worker conferences, which, as I have already mentioned, were predominantly organized by lesbians.
However, getting agreement at the planning meetings that we could have lesbian-only workshop space was hard work.
So was dealing with the repercussions when we distributed the finally agreed programme.
On two consecutive years the venue, one used for many conferences, tried to cancel our booking.
Meanwhile individuals and organizations also wrote to my boss complaining.
Some employers tried to make potential participants swear allegiance to heterosexuality before they would pay their conference fee.
Many heterosexual women stayed away specifically because there would be out lesbians there.
Most of the problems found their way to me.
My boss again felt I was being influenced by outside ‘extremists’.
He wanted to withdraw our organization's financial support for the conference, and tried to discourage me from remaining involved.
I thought it unlikely that it would come to a showdown about me being a lesbian, but felt clear that the chances of being disciplined were high.
The pressure was on.
There seemed nowhere to take discussions of these dilemmas except to the conferences' lesbian workshops, where they took up almost all the time.
Any time left over was spent on the heterosexism we were experiencing from heterosexual women at the conferences.
However, we never put heterosexism itself on the conference agenda, nor did we  ask heterosexual participants to discuss it.
But after two years of such conferences, things began to change.
All the women in the conference planning group had so far been white, and we were only just beginning to respond to Black women's demands that we examine our racism, and tackle it.
The following conferences did place racism on the agenda, and all white participants were expected to take it seriously.
Our fear was that not to focus solely on racism would mean it slipping onto the edges of our concerns once again.
In our attempts to take racism seriously we denied the importance of heterosexism by allowing it to remain excluded from the agenda.
It was then very hard to come back to it.
We didn't yet know how to challenge the anti-lesbianism from the very heterosexual colleagues we depended on, or indeed how to challenge heterosexual Black women's anti-lesbianism whilst maintaining a challenge to racism.
Meanwhile the anti-lesbianism from our organizations and from heterosexual workers did not abate.
As white lesbians, because of our racism, we had not been able to work out a joint analysis of heterosexism with Black lesbian workers, because we had no knowledge of the implications and ramifications of heterosexism in their lives.
In short, our singular approach and our racism, along with heterosexuals' inability to take heterosexism seriously, combined to close down the possibility to focus on heterosexism at these conferences in a generalized way.
There followed a period of reassessment — one that was widespread among feminists in general— through which we examined oppressions and questions of priorities and hierarchies, something we are still centrally concerned with.
In girls' work, for example, we began to learn from our experiences and commit ourselves to ensuring that facilities were genuinely available also to Jewish young women — that we tackled anti-Semitism; that young women with disabilities were not excluded, and that we looked at our oppressive attitudes to disability and the institutions in which these were enshrined.
Our increasing understanding of heterosexism brought many of us to realize the importance of diversity in our training work — taking a multi-oppression approach.
It was by placing racism and heterosexism, along with sexism, at the centre of my training work that helped me stop being nervous about challenging heterosexism.
Whilst I worked only daring to place sexism at centre stage, it was difficult to give racism its rightful place in our considerations.
In fact it would keep slipping off the agenda.
But if it was difficult to keep racism on it, it was impossible to even breathe the word heterosexism.
We'd been playing safe for our own survival, and scores of heterosexuals went unchallenged in their continued acts of heterosexism.
But everyone was left feeling dissatisfied, because everyone knew, or feared, there was more to this than they were letting on.
People were left feeling disconnected from sexism until we made all oppressions centre-stage.
It was only then that people were able to make the connections to their own lives and their other experiences of oppression, and how different oppressions overlap and intervene.
It has made it easier for participants in training courses to understand the concept of oppression, to recognize oppressive attitudes and behaviour, and to identify oppressions which may be new to them: heterosexism is often a new concept to heterosexuals.
It's touching at their core because it helps them to recognize and understand their own experience of oppression, or what life must be like for their own sister, brother, mother or a member of the youth club.
It creates the possibility for them to meet the lesbian or gay man inside who may be trying to get out.
It's helping them to understand the immense pressures on them to stay forever in the closet.
Just as important, gay men are beginning to recognize other connections as they come to understand male sexual abuse and male violence, whilst white lesbians are making the connections with their racism.
So our gains in youth work have been marked by surges of confidence based on a developing analysis.
We have been able to take on increasingly risky campaigns and projects.
At first it was difficult enough to claim single-sex space for girls (and maintaining it still isn't easy), and to challenge the male resistance and violence that often ensued.
More recently it has meant developing a sex education practice for  all youth workers which means avoiding heterosexual assumptions and presenting lesbianism as a positive option, something which sticks in the throat of many workers.
It has led to the establishment of a network of groups for young gays and lesbians.
And we are developing our work so that it meets the needs of incest survivors.
Despite the growth of our work and our self-esteem, we still remain marginalized and at risk.
We've created so much space for heterosexual women workers to carry out projects, and yet up till now they have not returned the compliment.
It's not unusual on girls' weekends or at women workers' conferences for them to be demonstrative with each other, or with the young women, while we remain caught in the straight-jacket of frigidity while we are in the public eye.
It remains perfectly acceptable for heterosexual women to enjoy the benefits of relaxing in an all-women atmosphere, even kissing and hugging with other women, while dropping Tom, Dick or Harry into conversation as convenient.
But as soon as any lesbians stand ‘too close’ to each other, or to them, they get jumpy.
All lesbians are familiar with this response.
We recognize their resistance to having our lesbianism made as public as they make their heterosexuality.
It is difficult to relax with them, and even with each other, under such circumstances, perhaps especially in those ‘social’ events where we have a perfect right to do so, events which we ourselves have organized.
This catalogue of pressures and constraints is not the entire story of my life as a lesbian involved in work with girls and young women.
It's the part that can be told in an article which is tracing some of the effects of heterosexism.
Just to give a flavour of the more joyful side: as a result of so many of us being out and being there, many other women workers, and many young women have come to feel that the time was right for them too, that they too have lesbian potential.
Some have come out there and then, while others have waited until later, like Ruth at a club I once worked in.
She and her best friend cried when they heard I was leaving for another job.
I'd had them sussed for ages and had been encouraging them to articulate their growing awareness of their lesbianism.
I told them not to worry, that I was sure I'd  see them again — on the scene.
They seemed delighted that I'd said it, and to know just what I meant.
Four years later I saw Ruth — on the scene.
I know some young women rightly feel that they came out as a result of their own strength — and of course many of them do come out without any youth work involvement.
But ideas and structures don t come from nowhere, and nor does strength.
What we've helped to provide is the backdrop that makes it possible for today's girls to grow into young women, and into women, confident in their lesbianism.
Epilogue
Throughout its life of eight years, myth building encouraged people to think of the unit as being on the margins of the organization.
The organization fostered and developed such myths because they were then freed from having to take on board the understandings and implications of carrying out the work.
However, a multi-oppression approach demonstrated to youth workers once and for all the importance of making the connections, and that Girls' Work is Youth Work.
This was too much of a threat to the rest of the work of the organization which is rooted in competition and activities.
Four months after this article was written the unit focusing on girls and young women was closed down by the management of the national organization, and we all lost our jobs.