

Centre brings health taboo into open
A NEW centre to tackle the unmentionable subject of incontinence has opened in Essex.
The Colne Centre at Severalls Hospital, Colchester, is aimed at the estimated ten per cent of the population who suffer from incontinence.
The joint venture between two NHS trusts in the area will provide help and advice for sufferers in the county.
At the official opening yesterday Colchester MP Bernard Jenkin praised the work of the driving forces behind the project — Brenda Coward, continence advisor for Essex Rivers Healthcare Trust and Mary Kennedy, continence advisor for North East Essex Mental Health Trust.
One of the main tasks of the centre will be to help people overcome their embarrassment.
A survey by MORI estimates one in five sufferers never tell their partners.
Chief executive of NEENHT Christopher Bridge said: ‘Incontinence unfortunately remains a taboo subject.
But there are a number of treatments which can make an enormous difference to the quality of people's lives.’
Attack on British breakfast
THE traditional British breakfast of eggs, bacon and bangers came under attack yesterday on health grounds.
Dr Jan Stjernsward, chief of the World Health Organisation Cancer Unit, said Britain needed to change its eating habits in the battle against cancer.
He told delegates at a conference in Kensington town hall about his luxury London hotel: ‘My goodness, what a breakfast?
With sausages, ham and eggs — it is so unhealthy.
‘When we were hunters, two and a half million years ago roaming round with the monkeys, only 15–20 per cent of our diet was fat.
‘Today it is 40pc-plus and we must cut it down if we are to improve survival rates of colon, rectal, breast and other cancers as well as cardio-vascular disease.’
Dr Stjernsward said children had to be taught about the need to eat more fresh green vegetables and fibre.
Decision on water firm's plan put off
PLANS for water treatment works to reduce levels of pollution in drinking water have upset councillors because the works would be situated in an area of outstanding natural beauty.
Essex Water Company have applied for permission to build five new buildings on the site of its existing Langham Valley treatment works in Boxted.
The water company is under an obligation to enhance drinking water standards because of a European Community directive and is liable to be prosecuted by the UK government if the improvements have not been undertaken by the end of 1995.
Members of Colchester Borough Council's planning committee heard objections from the Dedham Vale Society who consider the buildings would create a ‘monumental blot on the landscape’.
Dedham councillor George Williams commenting on the plans said: ‘An industrial process is being brought into the heart of the Dedham Valley.’
Essex Water is giving a presentation explaining its reasons for the application and answering questions on March 25.
The planning committee decided on Monday evening to defer its decision about the application until after that meeting.
Permission is being sought to build an oxygen production building, a pump house with an ozonation and filtration plant, a chlorine house and a nitrate removal plant.
A new service road, parking area and tanker turning area is also proposed together with extensive new planting on the periphery of the site.
Water quality manager at Essex Water John Devall yesterday said the main part of the plant was for pesticide removal although the company was making a provision for a nitrate removal plant.
All Essex Water's water treatment works have got to comply with the EC water directive and the company is having to spend £80 million on new buildings, said Mr Devall.
‘We don't believe that the proposal will affect the site of Dedham Vale; most of it won't be visible from the roads,’ he said.
Nitrate worries
Councillors at the planning meeting had expressed worries that nitrates would be released into the river Stour when effluent from the plant flowed into the river.
Mr Devall said if the nitrate removal plant house was built it would take water from the Stour, remove nitrates from part of it for drinking water in Essex and return the rest into the Stour.
He said that portion returned to the river would have a higher concentration of nitrates but would be diluted very quickly.
General situation: Parts of Scotland and Northern Ireland will have a touch of frost at first, but most of England and Wales should be frost free.
It will be another cold, but largely dry day across the country.
There will be a lot of cloud again over many parts of England and Wales, although it might become a little brighter at times.
The best of any bright weather is expected in sheltered western areas of Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
A few wintry showers are likely in eastern parts of England and Scotland, especially coastal counties.
Fairly windy again in England and Wales, especially in the east, which will make it feel raw.
East Anglia: Scattered sleet and snow showers.
Wind north-east fresh to strong.
Raw.
Maximum temperature 4C (39F).
Outlook for tomorrow and Friday: Scotland will become more cloudy with a little rain.
Mostly dry and cold elsewhere.
SEA PASSAGES
Southern North Sea: Wind north-east strong to near gale.
A few wintry showers.
Visibility good.
Sea rough, perhaps very rough.
Sizewell C plans await outcome of energy review
PLANS for a £1.6 billion Sizewell C nuclear power station have been fully developed and are ‘on hold’ pending the outcome of the Government's energy review, local community leaders were told last night.
The plans include an environmental statement demanded by EC law.
Sizewell B project manager Jim McFarlane told a meeting of the local community liaison committee: ‘We believe the case for more nuclear power is irresistible but we have to see what the Government says before deciding whether to submit the C station application.
The sooner Sizewell C is built the better as far as we're concerned.
Mr McFarlane said a ‘temporary’ jetty, built to allow large pieces of plant to be delivered to the site, would not be dismantled before a decision was made on the C station.
Nuclear Electric officials agreed to a request from Leiston district councillor John Geater for details of the costs of nuclear generation to be presented at a future meeting.
The state-owned company claims that nuclear is the best option for power generation in terms of economics and environmental impact.
Environment groups disagree.
The meeting heard that a Sizewell B worker had been sacked as a result of a dangerous driving incident between Blythburgh and the site.
Local residents have been pressing for action to curb the speed and behaviour of some drivers.
Another worker has been sacked for a shoplifting offence in a local store.
General: Rain and drizzle over north-west Scotland, and some snow on the hills at first, will spread south-eastwards across the rest of Scotland and Northern Ireland.
The rain will turn light and patchy and parts of Northern Ireland should stay dry.
Scattered wintry showers over southern and south-east England should die away in the morning.
Most of England and Wales should then be dry although some light rain or drizzle is likely in northern England during the evening.
It will be a brighter day in the South with some sunshine.
Mild and windy in the North, and feeling less cold in southern parts.
East Anglia: Scattered wintry showers dying out, then brighter.
Wind north-east moderate to fresh backing north-west.
Max 5–7C (41–45F).
Outlook for tomorrow and Saturday:
Some light rain or sleet on Friday in the north and east, otherwise mostly dry.
Becoming milder.
SEA PASSAGES
Southern North Sea: Wind north-east moderate backing north-west later.
A few wintry showers at first.
Mainly good.
Sea moderate.
No need to get into a spin with the washing
THAT bane of the working mother, the repairman who promises to call ‘sometime’, will soon be a thing of the past — according to BT boffins at Martlesham.
Scientists carrying out research into the home of the future predict domestic appliances will be able to ‘talk’ to each other.
So, if the washing machine goes wrong, it will diagnose the problem itself, call the repairman, get a quote and call its owner at work to find out whether to go ahead.
A videophone will allow the owner to watch the repairs being carried out from their office desk and release payment once the machine has checked itself.
Included in the future home will be devices which will allow the owner to be welcomed home to lights switched on, curtains drawn and possibly even the dinner in the oven.
Virtual reality will turn the weekly supermarket shop into a pleasure to be enjoyed from the comfort of the armchair.
New world-patented TV glasses designed by two Hungarian engineers allow the wearer to walk and watch television at the same time.
Mini television sets are fixed to the spectacles' frames and the image is directed towards the eyes by mirrors
Student stylists are put to the test
MORE than 100 students set out to prove they were a cut above the rest when they took part in Colchester Institute's first hairdressing competition yesterday.
The contest was open to all hairdressing students at the institute but also included a category for senior stylists and salon owners.
Awards were on offer for the best use of individual techniques, plus a section judged on the ‘total look’.
Judges said the standard of entries had been exceptionally high for such an event, with many of the styles created being ‘very innovative’.
Students on the institute's two-year hairdressing and beauty course learn the art of hairdressing, cosmetic make-up, manicure and other beauty-related subjects.
During the second year, having learned techniques in the institute's own well-equipped salon, they gain work experience by spending four weeks in a commercial setting.
First-year hairdressing student Alison Parriss with model Carrie Heckford
TV idea for level crossings
TWO level crossings earmarked to receive automatic barriers could now be fitted with safer gates monitored on closed circuit television.
County councillors voted yesterday to investigate the cost of providing the more expensive gates at junctions in Colchester and Kelvedon.
The move by a sub-committee of the council's highways committee follows public concern over plans by British Rail to replace manned barriers at Chitts Hill, Lexden, and Church Street, Kelvedon, with automatic barriers covering only half the carriageway.
Although Her Majesty's Railway Inspectorate has expressed concern over driver's behaviour at automatic barriers, it believes they offer the best blend of safety and cost efficiency.
This has not satisfied Essex County Council, which has produced statistics showing fatal accidents are four times more likely to happen at automatic gates.
Old craft keeps sea at bay
As EAST Anglia awaits next week's potentially dangerous North Sea tides, timber from the region's small woodlands is being harvested in the constant fight to keep flooding at bay.
‘Mattresses’ formed by bundles of brushwood are being sunk, weighed down with rock, to stabilise river beds and protect banks from erosion.
The method is more environmentally friendly than building concrete walls.
It is also very effective and has been practised in Holland for centuries.
Despite modern-day technology, no better materials have been developed which will do the job as well.
More than 13,000 bundles of brushwood, harvested by coppicing hazel and willow trees, are being supplied to the National Rivers Authority through the Anglian Woodland Project which is supported by the region's county councils.
It has been set up to ensure the future of small woodlands by finding markets for the produce of traditional management practices, such as coppicing, which also improve wildlife habitat.
Brushwood is being harvested from woodlands in the Ipswich area by Bill Foreman and other coppice workers to help stabilise the river bed of the Great Ouse in Cambridgeshire.
In Essex, the NRA is using brushwood, including coppiced willow grown by Robert Goodwin at Kelvedon, to bolster flood defences near Burnham-on-Crouch.
It is being made into groynes to help re-create saltmarsh which has been eroded.
The brushwood groynes 200 yards off-shore hold the sediment as the tide retreats through them and NRA officials hope it will lead to the development of new saltmarsh to reduce the impact of waves hitting the sea wall.
Vince Thurkettle, director of the Anglian Woodland Project, said the flood defence work, grant aided by the Ministry of Agriculture, was an ‘exciting opportunity’ for woodland owners.
‘An important modern task is being carried out in harness with an ancient woodland system,’ he said.
Coppice worker Bill Foreman, who is harvesting wood for a river stabilisation project, and his dog Meg in the woodland he manages near Sproughton
Flood risk alert issued
FORECASTS of the highest tides for decades have prompted an Essex council to distribute flood warning leaflets to people living in low-lying areas.
Prepared by Colchester Borough Council, the leaflet explains how to protect yourself and your home from flooding and lists useful phone numbers.
Measures recommended in the leaflet include preparing sandbags, stocking up with essential foods, checking insurance policies and helping elderly or infirm neighbours.
The council's emergency planning officer, Mike Hill, said: ‘High tides alone don't necessarily mean flooding, there has to be a combination of winds and tides, and this may not happen.
Warnings
‘We certainly don't want to alarm anyone, but it is important for people to know what they can do in advance to prepare their homes against damage.’
If necessary flood warnings will be issued by the National Rivers Authority and police will try to warn residents using local radio, television and loud hailer vans touring risk areas.
The council will provide emergency shelter for anyone evacuated at schools, village halls or community centres, and will help co-ordinate relief and clear-up operations.
General situation: Sunny spells with some drizzle.
Patchy light rain over central parts of England and Wales will move south and peter out by the evening.
Drier weather will follow south with sunny spells, particularly in the more eastern parts.
Northern England will be mostly dry, with the best of the sun in the east.
Thicker cloud will bring patchy drizzle over north-west-facing coasts and hills.
Scotland and Northern Ireland will be cloudy with patchy drizzle in the west, but there will be sunny intervals, particularly in the east.
It will become milder everywhere.
East Anglia: Patchy light rain.
Becoming clearer and dry from the north.
Wind north-west moderate.
Cold start, becoming milder later.
Maximum temperature 10C (50F).
Outlook for tomorrow and Sunday: Mainly dry and mild, with sunny intervals after clearance of any early mist or fog.
SEA PASSAGES
Southern North Sea: Wind west, becoming north-west, moderate, locally fresh.
Patchy rain at first.
Visibility moderate, becoming good.
Sea moderate.
Slimmers' joy at piling on the pounds
SLIMMERS have piled on more than a thousand pounds in little over a month…and they are delighted.
The reason the Weight-Watchers from Bury St Edmunds, Haverhill, Newmarket and Saffron Walden are so satisfied is that the pounds they collected — £1,200 of them — will all be going to charity.
Class leader Lynn Lawrence, 46, of Hawthorne Close, Bury, has handed the money over to the Imperial Cancer Research Fund.
Mrs Lawrence, who lost five stone within a year of joining Weight Watchers in 1985, said 250 Weight Watchers had raised the money in a series of table sales, raffles and draws.
Following the donation at the United Reform Church, in Whiting Street, Bury, she said the money was a tribute to local slimmers who had developed cancer in the past year.
Research
‘The amount we raised was magic.
I never thought we would get anything like that sum, but the nature of the charity obviously struck home.
The ICRF is such a worthy cause and what makes it particularly so is that it uses just 8p out of every £1 for administration, meaning 92p really goes on advancing the research,’ she said.
Cancer Research's area retail manager Pam McMillan said the organisation relied almost totally on public generosity to fund its vital work.
‘We're very grateful to Weight Watchers for this magnificent sum.
Everyone who took part can be sure that the money they helped to raise will be well spent in the fight against cancer,’ she said.
General situation: Much of England and Wales will have a dry, bright day.
The best of the sunshine will be in the south and east.
Western coasts will be more cloudy, perhaps with a little drizzle.
Northern counties of England and north Wales will become cloudy with rain in places by midnight.
Southern and eastern Scotland and much of Northern Ireland will start dry, but rain over northwest Scotland will spread southeast during the day.
Mainly dry weather will follow to northwest Scotland this afternoon and to most of Northern Ireland and Scotland by midnight.
Temperatures will be similar to yesterday's generally.
East Anglia: Patchy fog at first.
Dry with sunny spells.
Wind south to southwest light.
Max temp 15 to 17C (59 to 63F).
Outlook for tomorrow and Wednesday: Outbreaks of rain will spread across northern parts.
Patchy rain over England and Wales on Tuesday will be followed by dry, bright weather.
SEA PASSAGES
Southern North Sea: Wind mainly south light to moderate.
Fair.
Visibility mostly good.
Sea slight.
Brain injuries group launches appeal to extend its day centre
A VOLUNTARY group which provides support for the families of people who have suffered brain injuries has launched an appeal to extend its day centre.
Colchester and North East Essex Headway, which is affiliated to the National Head Injuries Association, has been seeking larger premises for some time.
Now it has submitted a planning application to double the size of its current premises — a two-bedroom bungalow on the Severalls Hospital site in Colchester.
Up to 15 people with brain injuries are cared for at the centre each day and the main feature of the extension will be a large activity room.
It will also provide a new wheelchair ramp, porch and entrance area and allow an existing room to be designated as a quiet area.
The scheme is expected to cost a total of about £100,000 and the Headway group can press ahead with building work, thanks to funding from the Catalyst Trust charity.
However, it still needs to raise £25,000 towards the £80,000 construction cost plus £20,000 for furnishing and equipment, some of which it hopes will be donated by local companies.
A variety of fund-raising schemes are planned, including a relaunch of the group's Penny Appeal, which encourages people to collect and donate their small change.
Plans for the extension will be on display at the group's annual meeting on March 25, when future activities and fund-raising will be discussed.
More people are also wanted to act as committee members — particularly people who have a relative with a brain injury — to help the present team by spreading the workload.
New type of refrigerator is harmless to ozone layer
PRODUCTION of the world's first ozone-friendly refrigerator began yesterday at a small eastern German factory.
It is free of  chlorofluorocarbon gases which have been used to cool most fridges for decades.
They are being banned worldwide from 1996 because they cause holes in the ozone layer, the shield which protects the earth from the sun's harmful ultraviolet rays.
The new fridge uses a mix of butane and propane gases as coolants.
General situation: Cloudy in Scotland and Northern Ireland with rain, heavy at times especially over the hills.
The rain will move south into northern England and Wales during the afternoon, with heavier bursts over western coasts.
Clearer conditions will follow into northern Scotland and the northern isles later.
Southern counties, although rather cloudy, will be mainly dry, except for outbreaks of drizzle over south-west England and South Wales.
Many sheltered central and south-eastern areas might stay dry with perhaps some sunny intervals.
It will become windy in the far north and west, and remain warm in the south.
East Anglia: Rather cloudy, mainly dry, some sunny intervals.
Wind light to moderate south-west.
Maximum temperature 14C (57F).
Outlook for tomorrow and Thursday: Outbreaks of rain in the north tomorrow.
Drier with sunny spells for all areas on Thursday afternoon.
SEA PASSAGES
Southern North Sea: Wind south-west or west, moderate to fresh.
Fair.
Visibility good.
Sea moderate.