

Benetton plan early update for car
MOTORSPORT: Benetton will give their B193 Formula One car its racing debut at next week's South African Grand Prix— and then replace it with an even newer model after just three races.
The team's engineering director Tom Walkinshaw said that the quick change was part of the programme for the 1993 season in which Benetton plan to deliver their strongest championship challenge to date.
The team have announced a new partnership with Elf, who supplied the fuel which carried Williams and Nigel Mansell to the constructors' and drivers' titles last year.
Fame for Wimbledon champion
Tennis: Great Britain's 1961 Wimbledon champion Angela Mortimer Barrett is to be honoured by a place in the International Tennis Hall of Fame.Mortimer Barrett, 60, and promoter Lamar Hunt, will be inducted on July 10 in Newport, Rhode Island, to raise the Hall of Fame's membership to 160.
Mortimer Barrett captured three of the four Grand Slam singles championships.
As well as Wimbledon she won the French championship in 1955 and added the Australian title in 1958.
Ten in a row for Higgins
Snooker: Scottish teenager John Higgins stretched his unbeaten run to 10 matches in the £250,000 Wickes Home Improvement British Open at Derby yesterday to earn a dream quarter-final against defending champion Jimmy White.Stephen Hendry's 17-year-old practice partner and Cuemasters stable-mate defeated Troy Shaw 5–2.
Troon 1997 hosts
Golf: The 1997 Open Championship will be staged at Royal Troon.
American Mark Calcavecchia triumphed when the Scottish club hosted the championship on the sixth and last occasion four years ago.
Northants profit Cricket: NatWest Trophy holders Northamptonshire have announced a net profit of £19,312 for last year.
The figure represents a rise of £848 compared to the 1991 surplus.
Marathon men's car is ready to go
TWO Suffolk men who are involved in a London to Sydney car marathon receive their rally Volvo car today.
Former Red Arrows pilot Derek Bell, of Sproughton, near Ipswich, and Canadian Terry Kingsley will be taking part in the 25th anniversary Lombard rally during April and May.
Ex Hercules navigator Chris Betson, of King George's Avenue, Leiston, is dealing with the commercial aspects of the ambitious project.
The team receive their specially restored Volvo 144s at Pretty's Bodyshop in Scole, near Diss, at a handover ceremony so they can begin their run-up to the start on April 17.
The car will be one of 106 which will leave the start at Chelsea Harbour with the intention of finishing at Sydney Opera House in May.
The event, which should last about 30 days, will be run to International Classic Rally regulations, with entry restricted to pre-1969 models.
In the original event Derek Bell and Terry Kingsley drove the Red Arrows entry, a works prepared BMC 1800 and finished 19th.
Esden gives Falcons victory
LADIES' soccer: Kate Esden's goal four minutes from the end brought two points Colchester United Falcons way against Luton Town reserves in a match disrupted by a blizzard.The 1–0 win ensures them of at least a runners-up spot in their first season in Division Two of the Women's FA Eastern League.The League's plate competition takes centre stage this Sunday as the Falcons travel to Stalham Seahawks, Norfolk, and the Eagles entertain Hemel Town at Alderman Blaxill School, Shrub End (ko 2pm).
Narrow in for Farrow
Boxing: Colchester Boxing Club's Andy Farrow showed his versatility when faced by a tricky opponent as he moved into the national schoolboys under-42 kilos semi-finals.Up against a spoiling boxer in the shape of Greg Algar of Eltham BC at Sandwich, Farrow persevered and kept himself out of trouble to win by the narrowest of points decisions.The judges awarded the fight to the 14-year-old Alderman Blaxill pupil 60–58, 59–58, 58–60.
Ron's rink gives Clacton a boost
Indoor bowls: Visit Clacton-on-Sea is the advice being offered to the selectors of county bowls teams in Essex following the indoor club's latest success over strong opposition.The seasiders moved through to the third round of the London Southern Counties Shield with a 76–67 victory over Essex County, secured largely through the efforts of Ron Marrable's rink.
Moving clear
Table tennis: Simon Woods and Steve Kerns were unbeaten for Chelmsford in their victory over Brent Juniors in a British table tennis league match.
Rick James and Alison Gower also recorded a win in the 6–2 result which sees them clear of the relegation zone.
Mid Essex squad Soccer: The Mid Essex League Representative side to play Romford and District at Aveley FC tonight (kick off 7.30 pm) will be chosen from: Wizac (Whitbread Sports), Hanson (Tillingham), Cooch, Blane, Tuke, Williams (all Boreham), Leach (Southminster), Robson, Coldham, Chapman (all Delafield), Raymond, Plaster (both Weir House), Harman (Crown Royals), Kochan (Writtle Vic) and Morgan (Braintree United).
Hustler to clean up
YOUNG Hustler, normally a Saturday runner, has his routine disrupted with a midweek engagement at Worcester today.
Only a six-year-old, Young Hustler is seeking his sixth successive win — and his eighth in all this season.
Televised Saturday successes in the Golden Spurs Handicap Chase at Doncaster, Sandown's Scilly Isles Novices' Chase and the Arlington Final at Newbury have made him one of the most popular finds of the season among the nation's punters.
Trainer Nigel Twiston-Davies had intended to send him straight to the Cheltenham Festival, but the lure of the £25,000-added Cavalier Chase has proved too tempting.
And he will be pleasantly surprised to see that only three horses line up against his rising star.
Danger
The Illywhacker rates the main threat on his remarkable effort in the King George VI Chase, when he was beaten just 13 lengths in third behind The Fellow.
He looked a genuine danger from the home turn, but mistakes at the last two — a terrible one at the final obstacle — let him down, and he had no more to give on the flat.
Jumping was again the problem when he ran an appalling race at Ascot subsequently, and he simply cannot be relied upon to reproduce his Boxing Day effort.
Beebob has been gradually coming to hand this season, and can strike winning form in the Guildhall Handicap Hurdle.
Three of her rivals are well out of the handicap; Celtic Bob will not be improving at 13; and Petty Bridge needs a much longer trip.
So Beebob's effort when nine lengths behind stablemate Sweet N' Twenty at Ascot last time makes worth ano0ther chance.
Selections
WORCESTER: 2.00 Holy Wanderer, 2.30 Derring Valley, 3.00 Beebob (n.b.), 3.30 Young Hustler, 4.00 Monsieur Le Cure, 4.30 Colonel O'Kelly, 5.00 Tip The Dove.
WETHERBY: 1.50 Common Council, 2.20 Material Girl, 2.50 Wild Bramble, 3.20 Southern Minstrel, 3.50 Chichell's Hurst, 4.20 Uranus Collonges, 4.50 I'm Toby.
SOUTHWELL: 2.10 Chadwick's Ginger, 2.40 Northern Nation, 3.10 Norstock, 3.40 Seraphim, 4.10 Tristan's Comet, 4.40 Johnsted.
Martin Pipe…trains Beebob, Crusader's next best at Worcester today.
Indoor bowls
Top two clubs clash
INDOOR bowlers from Towerlands and Ipswich will contest all four events in the area finals of the Manchester Unity National Championships, with the winners going on to Melton Mowbray at the end of the month.
The singles, at Haverhill on Saturday at 10 am, features Martin Green and England's John Rednall, who whitewashed the unfortunate Arthur Corcoran 21–0 in his semi-final.
Karl Lodge and Martin Raymond face brothers Ian and Glyn Clouting in the pairs, which will be staged at Risbygate this Sunday at 10 am.
THe triples final, also at Haverhill on Saturday, is between Jack Hicks, Ray Marshall and Dave Pudney and Andrew Sale, Andrew Friend and Adrian Wyatt.
Newly-opened
The Pudney trio are joined by Malcolm Smith for the fours, which will be played in the newly-opened Walton club on Friday evening, against England's Roy Cutts' team of John Rednall, John Barrell and Colin Rumsby.
Cutts did the grand slam of all four events in last season's area finals, but following two eliminations in the last round, will have to fight hard to qualify for just one in the current campaign.
Area semi-final results
Singles: M Green (Towerlands) 21, J Martin (Towerlands) 20; J Rednall (Ipswich) 21, A Corcoran (Ipswich) 0.
Pairs: M Raymond (Towerlands) 23, K Groves (Towerlands) 15; G Clouting (Ipswich) 22, R Cutts (Ipswich) 21.
Triples: D Pudney (Towerlands) 22, M Raymond (Towerlands) 15; R Cutts (Ipswich) 11, A Wyatt (Ipswich) 16.
Fours: D Pudney (Towerlands) 23, E Josh (Colchester) 18; R Cutts (Ipswich) 22, A Chambers (Mid Suffolk) 14.
Veterans leap for the needy
A 70-YEAR-OLD man and his former comrades will perform a parachute jump to mark the 50th anniversary of their wartime drop into the ‘killing fields’ of Arnhem.
Len Wright, who narrowly escaped death during the battle, made famous in the film,A Bridge Too Far , has not made a parachute jump for nearly 40 years.
However, despite suffering a minor heart attack 15 years ago, Len from Fressingfield, Suffolk, said he felt as ‘fit as a fiddle’ and intended to make next year's drop.
The final decision will be made by military doctors before the event, expected to raise thousands of pounds in sponsorship for needy families of ex members of the airborne forces.
About 80 daredevils, most in their 70s and 80s, plan to live up to their reputation for unparalleled courage.
One of those intending to make the jump is blind and another has one leg.
Mr Wright, a widower with one son and two grandchildren, was making his first operational parachute drop when he bailed out of an aircraft over Arnhem in September 1944.
A platoon commander in the 3rd Parachute Battalion, he was among the only company of Allied soldiers to reach the bridge where he and his comrades came under heavy fire.
He was caught by the Germans and spent seven months in a prisoner of war camp before being freed and returning to continue his army career, retiring as a captain in 1955.
Organiser of the jump, Geoff Holmes, said doctors would inevitably refuse to allow some of the veterans to jump.
‘We're all a bit mad but several have responded by saying they've now got something to live for,’ he said.
Mr Wright, who lives at Hedgerows, Harleston Road, is seeking sponsors for his planned jump and has already received donations from his former employer, Thames Valley Eggs, and from the Norwich and Peterborough Building Society.
…and, left, when he was captured on 
Len Wright at his home in Fressingfield
September 20, 1944 at Arnhem
Annual meeting
COLCHESTER and East Cricket Club's annual meeting takes place at Castle Park pavilion tonight (8pm)
FA Premier League
Cup-conscious Town are humbled again
Ipswich 0 Middlesbrough 1 By Tony Garnett
IPSWICH Town may have had their minds on Saturday's sixth round FA Cup tie against Arsenal because they were certainly a long way below their best against struggling Middlesbrough at Portman Road last night.
Boro scored only their second away win of the season in the FA Premier League — the other was at Manchester City in September — and they fully deserved the success that keeps survival hopes alive.
The goal that decided the contest came after 35 minutes from a Paul Wilkinson header, but the man who tormented Ipswich the most was roving raider John Hendrie.
Baker was busier than Ironside although both goalkeepers were forced to bring off vital saves.
Ipswich were lightweight up front, lacking dominance in midfield and often stretched at the back — which was the recipe for a shock defeat.
For some reason Ipswich have struggled against clubs at the foot of the league this season.
They have been doubled by Oldham, been beaten by Sheffield United and last night went down to a Middlesbrough side which had lost its previous six matches.
Superb
Middlesbrough, though, welcomed back skipper Kernaghan to the heart of their defence after being out since November with a stress fracture.
Kernaghan was superb at the back and seemed to inspire those around him.
Boro manager Lennie Lawrence has a reputation for engineering great escapes and on this form he may achieve yet another.
As to whether Ipswich can raise their game against the Gunners is quite another matter and certainly the atmosphere from a full house on Saturday will be very different to last night.
Middlesbrough had the better of the first half once they survived the opening quarter of an hour when Ironside, deputising for the injured Pears, kept them on terms.
After eight minutes Thompson caught the Middlesbrough defence square with a through ball.
Stockwell hustled into the penalty area on his own but Ironside was off his line quickly and Stockwell hit a hurried shot over the bar.
Four minutes later Bozinoski, taking the creative role of Dozzell who had a thigh strain, played Guentchev in for a shot which Ironside blocked.
Baker showed his worth for Ipswich in the 20th minute when he saved a low angled drive from Wright.
Middlesbrough were growing in confidence all the time, winning the midfield battle and occasionally opening the Ipswich defence.
In the 27th minute Kamara, on loan from Luton, found Hendrie and squared for Wilkinson to put in a fierce shot which Baker touched over the bar.
At the other end Thompson's flag kick was headed into the net by Linighan wide of the far post but a linesman had his flag up very early and the effort did not count.
It was no great surprise when Middlesbrough took the lead.
Williams fouled Hendrie just outside the penalty area on the Middlesbrough left.
Wright knocked the free kick head high across goal and Wilkinson escaped his marker to nod home at the far post.
There seemed a strange lack of conviction about the Ipswich display and three minutes before the interval there was another scare when Hendrie crossed from the right but Wilkinson headed wide at the far post.
Limped off
Kamara limped off to be replaced by Falconer after 48 minutes and it needed a well-timed sliding tackle by Phillips to deny Guentchev four minutes later.
Ipswich could have fallen further behind after 54 minutes when Wilkinson sent Hendrie tearing through on the left on his own.
Hendrie fired across the face of goal and Wilkinson, sprinting towards the far post, was unable to get the vital touch.
In the 59th minute Ironside brought off a full-stretch save to touch the ball away when Wilkinson was perilously close to heading into his own goal from Thompson's free kick.
Then Yallop, who made several enterprising runs, brought the crowd to their feet.
First he dispossessed Hendrie in full flight and then set off on a spectacular 50-yard solo run down the right.
His good work, however, went to waste.
After 68 minutes Hendrie split the Ipswich defence playing in Mustoe whose angled drive was blocked by Baker's legs.
Ipswich made their first substitution after 75 minutes when Whelan came on for Bozinoski.
Goddard arrived in place of Yallop for the final 11 minutes but Ipswich never looked much like pulling a goal back until injury time when Williams fired narrowly wide.
Teams
IPSWICH TOWN: Baker, Yallop (Sub Goddard 79 mins), Thompson, Stockwell, Wark, Linighan, Williams, Guentchev, Whitton, Bozinoski (sub: Whelan 75 mins) and Kiwomya.
Unused sub: Forrest.
MIDDLESBROUGH: Ironside, Morris, Phillips, Kernaghan, Peake, Whyte, Hendrie, Mustoe, Wilkinson, Kamara (sub: Falconer 48 mins) and Wright.
Unused Subs: Slaven and Roberts.
Referee: Mr Keren Barrett (Coventry).
Attendance: 15,430.
Booed off the field
IPSWICH Town team manager Mick McGiven said he understood why the fans booed his side off the field after their worst display of the season at Portman Road last night.
‘We started off quite well but then showed a lack of imagination, which is unusual.
Our clear frustration showed in the second half and we are as disappointed as our fans.
The crowd is entitled to expect Ipswich to do well at home.
We fell way below the standards which we now expect.’
Ipswich's three injury worries Jason Dozzell (bruised thigh), Gavin Johnson (sore back) and Chris Kiwomya (strained thigh) are all hopeful of playing in Saturday's FA Cup tie against Arsenal.
David is a model of bravery Cancer is beaten
By Lynn Abbott
MODEL David Wood has proved himself to be the brave face of '93 by winning a top modelling event — just after a successful fight against cancer.
David, 28, became one of the two Faces of '93 at a glittering spring fashion show at Ipswich Corn Exchange.
David's celebrations were shared by Donna Dale, of Kesgrave, who became the female Face of '93.
Both have won a contract with the International Model Agency of London.
David was the oldest competitor and said his win surprised him and his wife Denise, who was there to share his big moment.
‘I thought he would be too old,’ said a delighted Denise.
‘But I am very, very happy he has won — and so proud.’
David, of Brooks Hall Road, Ipswich, did some modelling work until two years ago when cancer was diagnosed.
He lost his hair through chemotherapy treatment and has spent the time since recovering from the disease, which spread to his lungs.
He now works as a lorry driver.
He said the care of the staff at Ipswich Hospital and Denise helped him through the most difficult time of his life.
He is now looking at the win as the foundation to his future.
‘I feel staggered at being chosen as a winner, and it has made me really thrilled, even though I am a few years older than the others,’ he said.
Denise was expecting the couple's daughter Liberty, now 17 months old, when his cancer was diagnosed and David visited his wife and new baby — born in the same hospital — connected to a drip.
Donna, 21, of Histon Close, Kesgrave, said: ‘I feel numb.
I know I'll wake up in the morning and think this didn't really happen, but I am thrilled to bits.’
She works for an Ipswich insurance company but eventually wants to do something ‘really worthwhile’ to help others.
‘I don't think I could stand being a nurse because I would get too involved, so I hope one day to join the fire brigade,’ she said.
The event was supported by the EADT's sister paper the Evening Star, Ipswich Borough Council and Hairaisers.
Judges were Tom Sheridan, managing director of International Model Agency Ltd, Paul Tennant, photographer with IMA Ltd, Victoria Biddulph, fashion writer for the Evening Star and Billy Brennan, general manager of Ipswich Corn Exchange.
Rugby Union
ENGLAND forwards Brian Moore,above , and Jason Leonard will have allegations they switched footwear illegally before last weekend's cup tie at Waterloo, investigated by the Middlesex County Union.
Before passing the row on, Rugby Union Secretary Dudley Wood confirmed there was no threat to Moore or Leonard's place in the England team to play Scotland on Saturday.
Harlequins yesterday warned the players about using illegal studs after three forwards were ordered to change boots during the match.
The Rugby Union then received the report from Yorkshire referee Stewart Piercy, whose verdict was that the studs he inspected before the start were not the studs he later outlawed when he inspected the boots of Moore, Leonard and lock Alex Snow during play.
Now Middlesex must decide if the players showed one set of studs to the referee before playing in another set that were longer and more dangerous.
The players deny that charge.
Police to meet Pipe
POLICE will today enlist the help of champion trainer Martin Pipe as the hunt continues for racing's dopers.
Devon and Cornwall police last Friday took up the case of Pipe's Her Honour, found to have been doped when flopping at Kempton in January.
Det Supt Michael Walsh, the officer leading the inquiries, plans to meet Pipe this afternoon.
A spokeswoman for Devon and Cornwall Police said today: ‘It might be that we will be able to make further comments after the meeting.’
Sam takes his potty training too far
IT WAS all cisterns go yesterday for firemen as two-year-old Sam Britton-Gant took his potty training a little bit too far.
For after using his plastic seat in the conventional manner, he thought it would make a nice necklace.
Picture by Andy Abbott .
Full story — Page Four.
Sam takes potty training too far
IT WAS all cisterns go yesterday when a Sudbury toddler let potty training go to his head and firefighters were called to the rescue.
Two-year-old Sam Brit-ton-Gant's enthusiasm for his child's plastic toilet seat was so great that, having used it in the traditional way, he decided it might make an attractive necklace.
However, when his mother, Adele Britton, tried to remove it, she realised she would have to call in the professionals.
‘First of all I phoned the doctor.
After the receptionist picked herself off the floor she told me I had better call in the fire brigade.’
Adele duly did just that, fondly imagining that a lone fireman would come out to her East Street home in an anonymous van with the suitable cutting equipment.
What she got, however, was a fire engine, complete with flashing lights and six burly firemen.
‘I felt really embarrassed, but they weren't at all bothered by it — in fact they were killing themselves laughing.’
Using sheet metal cutters the crew set to work and a minute later a rather shocked Sam was free.
And, flushed with success, they treated Sam and his mother to a celebratory ride round the block before leaving the pair to get down to the essential business of a trip to the shops for a new plastic seat.
Ice hockey
Stars stunned by Chieftains
Oxford City Stars 3 Chelmsford Chieftains 18
SUCH a scoreline would have been unimaginable this time last year, but Chelmsford's new-found strengths more than Oxford's incredible decline engineered this crushing English League win.
The Chieftains needed to win following Guildford's midweek victory at Streatham and the ruthlessness of their display is sure to keep the pressure on the Flames until the very end.
Guildford moved two points clear in Conference B with an emphatic, expected victory over Basingstoke and still have three games in hand, but a late slip-up in not inconceivable.
On the other hand, Chelmsford are looking stronger by the game and the thumping dished out here was the second of its kind inside eight days, following the 26–3 humiliation of Sunderland.
Apart from Dan Prachar, Oxford iced a fairly similar side to last season, including John Gravelle, Daryl Williams, Paul Donohoe and Jason Lester in their line-up.
However, the exciting days of last February and March when the Stars were challenging with Chelmsford for promotion have long been forgotten by the home fans.
Oxford are one off the bottom in Conference A with only eight wins from 27 games.
With this fact duly logged, Brad Doshan boarded the coach confidently but was slightly surprised at the size of the win, which was signed, sealed and delivered before half an hour had been played.
There are few better punishers of poor opposition than Rick Smith, who when given a freer role and told to forget about defending, responds by slaughtering teams single-handed.
Supporting
In past meetings between these sides, the top British goalscorer in 1991 and ‘92, Scott Gough, has grabbed more of the attention, but since flopping in a brief spell at Chelmsford, his form has slipped considerably.
He managed only one goal on Sunday, whereas Smith hit seven, starting with Chelmsford's first in the 26th second and finishing with the team's last in the 56th minute.
In supporting roles, Mark Stokes scored four and four assists and Andrew Hannah notched four plus one, with singles from Barrie Aisbitt, Karl Rogers and Mark Norfolk completing the rout.
County schools side in semis
Suffolk County Schools under-19 A side take on Sussex in the semi-finals of the Corinthian Casuals Cup at Diss FC tonight (ko 7pm).
Suffolk, who were unbeaten in their qualifying games, will face Kent or Essex in the final if they win tonight.
Squad: Lee Bray, Kirkley; Ross Challis, Leiston; Mark Westcott, Stowmarket; Ryan Nicholls, Sir J Leman; Mark W–atson, Stowupland; Lawrence King, Stowmarket; Brett Girling (captain), Suffolk College; Peter Varley, Bungay; Simon Sutherland, Lowestoft College; Barry Willingham, Suffolk College; Philip Ashton, Mildenhall; Chris Whyte, Suffolk College; David Matthews, Kirkley; Kevin Potter, Eye, Hartismere; Mark Wickens, Suffolk College.
St Audry's sign McKenna
Sudbury Town reserve goalkeeper Jim McKenna has signed for Melton St Audry's in the Pubmaster SIL Senior League.
He will take over from Mark Brighty who will be out for five weeks with a broken toe.
Football club aids charity event
THE Jacqueline Annis School of Dancing received a boost to its charity show, being staged at the Clacton County High School on March 12 and 13.
It has been given a signed framed photograph of Gary Lineker and a football signed by all the Tottenham Hotspur players.
Sponsors for the show include Saffron Walden, Herts and Essex Building Society, Clacton Lions, the Rotary Club of Clacton Jubilee and also an anonymous donator.
More than 50 children and 24 women will be taking part in the school's first stage show.
A draw is being organised and the two football items will be auctioned.
The show is to raise funds for the Great Ormond Street Hospital.
Mrs June Goodier, one of the organisers, said they were delighted with the response for help to run the show.
‘We are very grateful to the EADT.
It has all happened since the story appeared in the EADT appealing for sponsors.’
Tickets for the show, at £3, are available from Barbara Wilby, telephone (0255) 426044.
Town's Cup clash sold out
IPSWICH Town's FA Cup opponents Arsenal face a tough Premier League encounter with Norwich City at Carrow Road tonight — which completes a hectic 72 hours for their supporters.
On Monday Arsenal played Chelsea at Stamford Bridge and yesterday hundreds of their fans travelled to Portman Road to queue for tickets for Saturday's Cup quarter-final.
Police were called when arguments broke out among the fans.
The trouble started when ill-feeling over ticket allocations threatened to turn to violence as supporters of both sides braved the cold to make sure of their seats.
But there were no major problems, and by the afternoon all 22,000 tickets for the game at Portman Road had been sold.
By the time the ticket office opened, there were hundreds of people in the queue.
In the past few days, tickets have been on sale to season-ticket holders and those with ticket stubs from selected previous matches.
Arsenal supporters travelled from London because they had been unable to get tickets from Highbury.
Arsenal, who received around 2,000 tickets for Saturday's clash, have made plans to show the game live at Highbury on a giant video screen.
Fixture backlog
Meanwhile, Arsenal outcast Paul Davis is back to face Norwich at Carrow Road tonight as manager George Graham tackles injury problems, a mounting fixture backlog and the Gunners' dismal form in the Premier League.
Stylish midfielder Davis, 31, was fined and dumped from Graham's first-team plans more than a year ago when he wrote an article in a national newspaper criticising the manager's tactics after Arsenal's exit from the European Cup by Benfica.
With David Hillier becoming Arsenal's latest casualty in the defeat at Chelsea, Graham turns to Davis to help prop-up his crippled squad.
Top scorer Ian Wright and skipper Tony Adams are extremely doubtful.
Wright is still suffering with the groin injury that ruled him out of England's World Cup qualifier 12 days ago, while Adams also missed the Chelsea defeat after falling down some stairs on a night out last week, and needing 29 stitches in a cut forehead.
Victory will lift Norwich to within four points of leaders Aston Villa with a game in hand.
‘I've never heard of an easy game against Arsenal and all matches at this stage are tough ones,’ said Canaries' manager Mike Walker.
Town Reserves are in action tonight against Crystal Palace Reserves at Ram Meadow, Bury St Edmunds (kick off 7.30).
Ipswich: Forrest, Tanner, Youds, Connell, Scowcroft, N Gregory, Pirie, Theodorou, K Weston, M Weston, Dolvy, Goddard, Whelan.
Ipswich Town and Arsenal supporters in jovial mood as they queued at Portman Road yesterday for tickets for Saturday's FA Cup quarter-final clash.
Picture: DAVID KINDRED
Indoor bowls
Top two clubs clash
INDOOR bowlers from Towerlands and Ipswich will contest all four events in the area finals of the Manchester Unity National Championships, with the winners going on to Melton Mowbray at the end of the month.
The singles, at Haverhill on Saturday at 10 am, features Martin Green and England's John Rednall, who whitewashed the unfortunate Arthur Corcoran 21–0 in his semi-final.
Karl Lodge and Martin Raymond face brothers Ian and Glyn Clouting in the pairs, which will be staged at Risbygate this Sunday at 10 am.
The triples final, also at Haverhill on Saturday, is between Jack Hicks, Ray Marshall and Dave Pudney and Andrew Sale, Andrew Friend and Adrian Wyatt.
Newly-opened
The Pudney trio are joined by Malcolm Smith for the fours, which will be played in the newly-opened Walton club on Friday evening, against England's Roy Cutts' team of John Rednall, John Barrell and Colin Rumsby.
Cutts did the grand slam of all four events in last season's area finals, but following two eliminations in the last round, will have to fight hard to qualify for just one in the current campaign.
Area semi-final results
Singles: M Green (Towerlands) 21, J Martin (Towerlands) 20; J Rednall (Ipswich) 21, A Corcoran (Ipswich) 0.
Pairs: M Raymond (Towerlands) 23, K Groves (Towerlands) 15; G Clouting (Ipswich) 22, R Cutts (Ipswich) 21.
Triples: D Pudney (Towerlands) 22, M Raymond (Towerlands) 15; R Cutts (Ipswich) 11, A Wyatt (Ipswich) 16.
Fours: D Pudney (Towerlands) 23, E Josh (Colchester) 18; R Cutts (Ipswich) 22, A Chambers (Mid Suffolk) 14.
Volleyball
Colchester team still in chase for second spot
COLCHESTER Honywood overcame Sussex Nomads 3–2 in Division Three of the Royal Bank of Scotland National Volleyball League.
Nomads have been hovering near the relegation zone all season while Colchester are chasing second promotion spot.
Solent look booked for the Division Three title but the battle for second place may run on until the final game.
At first Colchester stumbled around court looking anything but promotion contenders, Nomads outserving and outhitting the Essex side early on.
Held off
Colchester only scored six points in the first set but held off the Nomads for more than 27 minutes thanks to solid defence.
Colchester hit back to level at one set all and both sides were showing signs of strain.
Colchester dominated net play but Nomads still kept within a couple of points.
Matthews entered the game at 3–4 as Colchester went to a one-setter system.
This was effective for a while with Colchester taking the set 15–7 and then moving into a 2–1 lead, but it was less successful in the fourth set as Nomads began equalling Colchester's attacking strength.
Colchester switched to a two-setter system, but it was too late to save the set which they lost 15–12.
Inhibited
In the final set both teams played with inhibitions.
Colchester's ability to turn defence into attack finally divided the teams and they went on to win 15–7.
Colchester women decided not to enter the National League for 1993–94 season, mainly for financial reasons.
Colchester junior club's open session at Colchester Leisure World attracted more than 50 youngsters It is hoped to have a junior team linked to the seniors with training on Wednesday from 5.30 to 7 at Highwoods Leisure Centre.
Soccer
More away woe for Dragons
St Albans 3 Wivenhoe Town 0
A MEDIOCRE St Albans performance was still enough to easily beat the Dragons in this Diadora League Premier Division game.
With only four home games left away points are soon going to have to be picked up but with performances like this, it looks unlikely.
Early on Dowman almost put through his own goal when his flicked header was just wide of the post.
In the ninth minute McClean broke free down the left and his cross into the penalty area was completely missed by Coleman but made its way to Abrahams who was forced wide and straight into the arms of Westwood.
–Then followed a sustained period of pressure on the St Albans' goal which culminated in a 25-yard shot from Springett which was well saved by Westwood.
St Albans went into the lead in the 23rd minute when a cross from ex-Dragon Jimmy King was headed home by Brett.
Another ex-Dragon Steve Clark then forced Wood to make two good saves in quick succession.
In the 36th minute the Dragons had their best effort of the half when Coleman was found by a precise ball from Springett but he shot wide.
In the second-half the Dragons had a strong wind at their backs and almost made good use of it straight away as a long ball found McClean and his shot was pushed round by Westwood.
But two goals in two minutes midway through the half killed off the Dragons.
In the 69th minute Duffield stroked the ball home from 12 yards and then in the 71st minute the ball fell to Brett who was free on the right and he drove across goal into the far corner.
With four minutes to go Wivenhoe almost snatched a late consolation when Westwood tried to clear a back pass but his kick only found Collins, whose shot hit the post.
Heybridge 0 Maidenhead 1KICK-off in this Diadora League Division One was delayed 25 minutes due to Maidenhead's late arrival.
After a goalless first half, Dave Matthews netted for Heybridge only to be given ruled offside.
The game was won by a solitary goal in the 64th minute coolly slotted home by Maidenhead substitute Paul Reeves, who guided his shot past the advancing keeper.
A MORE direct and purposeful Erith and Belvedere side deservedly took the Beazer Homes Southern Division points at Cressing Road as Braintree failed once again with another disappointing display.
Braintree 0 Erith and Belvedere 2
Despite having a fair share of the play throughout, Braintree never really made any real impression and what chances there were came for the visitors.
John Hunt, the former Chelmsford forward, had three good opportunities in the first half, the first effort being well saved by goalkeeper Cheesewright.
Three minutes after the interval the Kent side found the target when a lob from Hunt caught Cheesewright off his line and Leslie was on hand to apply the final touch.
In injury time Erith made absolutely certain of victory when Battram turned the ball in from close range as the Braintree defence was caught out.
Town's Second Division Championship medal-winning midfielder Steve Palmer is to enter a Cambridge hospital for a thigh operation.
The 24-year-old has been dogged by persistent thigh trouble since the club's pre-season tour of Finland.
Angling notes
Clacton
CLACTON knew they would be struggling at the weigh-in when they entertained Felixstowe in the first round of the Turner Cup and Inter Club Trophy.
Only Vic Claydon and George Lord bought fish to the scales for Clacton while there was a steady stream of small fish from the Felixstowe anglers.
The 13 Clacton members could only muster an average of one oz per man to the two oz per man of the 18 Felixstowe members.
Vic Glaydon with a flounder weighing just over seven oz won the match but the next two places were filled by Felixstowe members.
Steve Drewery, who caught two small rockling and a pout for just under seven oz and Mark Tomkin with a six oz flounder.
The second leg will take place at Dunwich on March 28.
Tickets for the March 21 Open Fishing Festival sponsored by Greene King are going quickly.
To avoid disappointment contact Richard Holgate on (0255) 675680 (day only) or Stephen Durrant on (0255) 672224 (evenings only).
Singles, doubles and trebles are available at £5 per head with optional pools available on the day.
This week's match is on Walton on the Naze pier, fishing from 9.30am to 2.30pm.
Suffolk County AAA
OVERALL winner of the third round of the Suffolk County AAA teams of eight competition will receive the Brinded Cup at Dunwich and Minsmere on Sunday.
Exact positions of the 120 pegs will depend on the state of the beach due to the recent coastal erosion.
The draw is in Dunwich car park at 7.30am with fishing from 9am to 2pm.
Individual anglers are requested to reserve a ticket for this event at £5 including pool with county secretary Dave Gunson on Ipswich 716530.
Non-team places are limited.
Long Melford AA
LONG Melford hosted Essex inter-clubs' league delegated match.
The competition was fished on the River Glem which looked uninviting, running gin clear and low, but it provided excellent match for the hard working delegates.
Winner was Colin Moran (Billericay) with chub and dace for his total of 8–8–8.
Close behind was Gary Pearce (Kelvedon) with 8–4–0.
The remaining places were also close with Mark Davis (Colchester) in third place with 4–13–0, Trevor Hayden (Billericay) fourth with 4–12–0 and Peter Thompson (Braintree) fifth with 4–10–8.
The penultimate leg of the Nunn Shield series for members of both Long Melford and Sudbury is scheduled to take place at Alton Water Reservoir on Sunday.
Further details from Norman Mealham.
Dick Meekings leads the series with 364 points with Barrie Clarke in second on 315.
Long Melford are running Open matches on both Friday and Saturday, March 12 and 13 on the Stour and Glem respectively.
Tickets for both matches available from Norman Mealham, Sudbury 377139.
Mildenhall AC
FROST and snow wreaked havoc on the area's fishing and condemned all but the most intrepid of anglers to a day of domesticity.
Some matches were cancelled and attendances at those that went ahead were decimated.
Forty-four tickets had been booked for the Mildenhall AC open on West Row drains but 20 of those were cancelled and a further 12 anglers failed to put in an appearance.
Two anglers from London arrived at the draw but immediately set off for home again fearful of travelling conditions.
The match was reduced to a four hour event.
Water levels in the drains had been reduced to only about one foot and, in view of the conditions, it was surprising that anything at all was caught.
J Seabourne needed just 14 oz to win.
Second and third places were shared by J Wing and C Hitchcock who each caught 11 oz.
Combination
Ipswich Town Res 1 Crystal Palace Res 0
A SOLITARY strike by Neil Gregory was enough to steer Ipswich to victory in a scrappy encounter at Ram Meadow last night.
Gregory pounced on Graham Connell's driven cross ten minutes into the second half.
The goal continued his recent run of form, making it 13 in 20 Combination appearances, but it was not a game that will linger long in the memory of a sizeable crowd.
They did however, witness a return to form of Craig Forrest.
The keeper, who has not played a first team game since October, made several fine saves to keep a Palace-dominated opening period goalless.
After a patchy opening the Canadian International tipped a Mark Holman blockbuster onto the bar and followed it with two more notable saves to deny Ricky Munroe and Stuart Massey.
Town lifted their game in the second half with Phil Whelan and Eddie Youds snuffing out any threat.
Gregory should have added a second but he headed tamely over after Gary Thompson had stormed down the right.
IPSWICH RESERVES: Forrest, Connell, Theodorou, Tanner, Youds, Whelan (sub: Mortley 78 mins), Scowcroft, Thompson, Goddard (sub: Knight 65 mins), N Gregory, Pirie.
Angler ‘codded' by his friends
FRIENDS fed Anthony Gray a load of codswallop during a fishing trip.His fishy tale of finding a missing gold wristwatch inside a cod's stomach appears to be a wind-up.National and local papers, television and radio crews fell hook, line and sinker, for the 29-year-old Sizewell B steel erector's story, but the EADT decided to investigate the claims further.Mr Gray found the watch in the belly of a fish which he landed at Aldeburgh.
But friends say they found the watch hours earlier.
One of them saw a tarnished wristwatch lying on the beach and decided to play a practical joke.
‘After Anthony caught the cod he returned to the car park because his car was blocking somebody in,’ explained a colleague at Sizewell B. ‘One of his mates then stuffed the watch down the cod's throat with a stick — I can imagine Anthony's surprise when he started to fillet the fish back home.
However, he is convinced the watch was there already.
He won't believe it was a trick, but everyone here knows it was,’ he said.A spokeswoman for Sizewell B said: ‘We believe it's not a wind-up, but if it is his friends will get a good ticking off!’
However, an angry Mr Gray said: ‘It is very simple.
I got home, cut open the fish and found the watch.
The two friends I went fishing with have been at work today but they have said nothing about any practical joke.
‘I don't mind a joke but some people are carrying this thing too far, and have even phoned my wife.
Some of them are just being rude.’
Cod and ‘ticks' for Tony Gray as Gandolph the cat looks on.
Picture by OWEN HINES 
Chelmsford's Graham Sheward captured during cycle training.
Indoor bowls
Essex avenge Norfolk rout and now set sights on title
Essex 170, Norfolk 163
INSPIRED by Warren Whiteman, Essex took a step closer to capturing the Eastern Counties (Senior) League title and closed the book on an embarrassing chapter in the county's bowls history.
Last season, Stan Sivell had all but picked the spot on his mantlepiece where the trophy would stand when Norfolk took all 15 points on offer in an amazing triumph over the champions-elect.
Essex had seemed well on course for a second successive success in the competition before that 206–119 defeat, and the title looms again after overall victory at Colchester and Diss on Sunday.
Whiteman, who played in the 1992 debacle, must have been spurred on by the memory as his rink took 13 shots over the last six ends while preventing the opposition from any further score.
Rob Morris, David Jarrold and John Stephens had helped the Barking skip to a 15–7 lead after 12 ends, but let Martin Christmas close the gap to just one by the 15th end.
But with Essex six behind at Diss overall, a supreme effort was needed and Whiteman scored a four, three singles, a two and a final count of four to take the match 28–14.
Alongside him, Chris Bryan also staged a marvellous late recovery, coming back from 14–11 down to win 21–16.
David McCathie fought back from 22–12 down at 17 ends and almost pulled off a five on the last which would have secured another point for Essex but Paul Maynard continued his winning momentum to ensure the overall venue win.
The Falcon's Joe Stamper was the only winner at Colchester — Essex play notoriously badly on their own carpets — but the late surge in Norfolk had done enough to secure the majority of the points.
The nine gleaned from this encounter puts Essex ahead of the field on 30 points, with Norfolk one-and-a-half behind as the six-time winners prepare for a final match against Cambridgeshire.
Essex thrashed them back in December, taking 13 points from the encounters at Towerlands and Chesterton, so Sivell knows that a massive win over Hertfordshire is an absolute must.
There were nearly panic stations at Diss as Towerlands' Andy Cook was forced to drop out because of flu, but Herbert Taylor, the County's Senior Deputy President, managed to haul in David Baxter at short notice from his own Clacton-on-Sea club.
He played well as lead to Chris Bryan, but it was Whiteman's all-Barking rink and again Paul Maynard's all-Essex County quartet of youngsters who particularly caught the eye.
Sivell seems to have the old and young balanced quite well and he will have to stop himself from dusting down the mantlepiece once more.
Rink details
At Colchester:
Richard Hart (Essex County), Brendan O'Connor (Tye Green), Malcolm Rothon, Nigel Smith (both Barking) 22, R Thacker 24.
Ian Barker (Falcon), Keith Blackman (Essex County), Dave Gildersleve (Falcon), Steve Pickford (Barking) 20, P Wilson 26.
Nathan Birkett (Southend), Keith Watkins (Essex County), Paul Clapp (Tilbury), Scott Reading (Barking) 17, D Goodley 28.
Mark Christmas (Tilbury), Graham Arnold (Barking), Graeme Caparn (Tye Green), Joe Stamper (Falcon) 23, T Kelly 16.
At Diss:
Andrew Blake, Steve Cooper, Andrew Skilbeck, Paul Maynard (all Essex County) 19, P Ellis 16.
Rob Morris, David Jarrold, John Stephens, Warren Whiteman (all Barking) 28, M Christmas 14.
Derek Ross (Tilbury), Andrew Squire, John Morgan (both Falcon), David McCathie (Essex County) 20, I Daines 23.
David Baxter (Clacton), Ray Marshall (Towerlands), Alan Hayward (Tilbury), Chris Bryan (Barking) 21, J Sparrow 16.
Wood is the star
WITHAM Town A have prised themselves clear of the relegation battle in Division One of the Chelmsford and District Table Tennis League with victories over NatWest A and Maldon A.
Derek Wood was the star of their respective 6–4 and 7–3 wins, taking all six of his singles matches.
ECC C were comfortable 7–3 winners over the struggling Baddow Village A side in Division Two.
Lisa Ashdown scored a useful win over the new junior boys' champion Paul Davison.
ECC D are starting to look like the team to beat in this division, after beating Maldon B 7–3, although OCs C are keeping the pressure on them as they beat ECC E by the same scoreline.
Champions elect of Division Three, Prison A, scored two more wins, although both games were evenly contested affairs.
Mark Nolan took all six singles as they beat Boreham 7–3 and Danbury C by 6–4.
Dave Hutley was also unbeaten against Boreham A which included a mind-blowing 21–16, 8–21, 34–32 success over Edward Cook.
The game between Danbury B and SJP B was another close affair which ended in a 5–5 draw.
The SJP lads had to rely on a topsy-turvy 6–21, 21–8, 22–20 victory for league stalwart John Wickers over Peter Hance to secure their share of the points from the last game of the evening.
Suffolk Premier Cup semi-final
Cornard denied by Williams goal
Cornard United 1 Sudbury Town 1
CORNARD United were desperately close to pulling off a famous victory, with cup holders Sudbury being saved by a late goal to force a replay, writes ALAN COCKSEDGE.
The Beazer Homes League visitors have displayed a knack this season of stealing last-gasp cup match goals, and it was another 89th minute affair which helped check Cornard for the second time in two months.
A last minute goal also sunk United at Priory Stadium in the recent East Anglian Cup clash between the local rivals.
Last night the Jewson League team put up a tremendously committed performance to underline their quality and give the visiting attackers and mid-field men a hard time.
Sudbury, however, were battling under the handicap of having goalkeeper Steve Mokler off the pitch from the 15th minute, with central defender Trevor Gunn taking over between the posts.
But in a game of few clear openings, Gunn coped well and the absence of the Sudbury 'keeper, who took two heavy knocks in the opening exchanges, made little material difference to the pattern of the game.
A biting, end-to-end wind did not assist the enjoyment of the night for players or spectators, and goals from both sides were each scored in the dying moments of the halves.
Sudbury had the advantage of the wind in the first half, but when they did press forward failed to unsettled Cornard's well-knitted defensive combination.
In the 43rd minute United took the lead when involvement by Aaron Gardiner and Brian Devereux led to the ball being pulled across from the left to the far corner of the penalty area.
Warren Brown, moving up and in acres of space, did not bother to move on, but just slammed a low, first time shot into the far corner of Gunn's net.
For Sudbury Neil Denny, brought on for Mokler, had been struggling to match Cornard's midfield tenacity and was substituted by Gary Hollocks in the 57th minute.
Soon after Gunn pulled off the save of the match when Andy Smiles had a chance from 10 yards, but the stand-in 'keeper dropped to thwart the effort.
At the other end Sudbury began to launch some promising attacks, but their final delivery was off-key, until their last gasp equaliser came with a minute left when defender Ian Williams drove low into the net after two previous shots had been blocked.
The replay could be next Tuesday, which could force Sudbury's Barclays Commercial Services Cup semi-final second leg with Dover to be postponed.
The teams
SUDBURY: Mokler (Denny/Hollocks), Henry, Osman, Stafford, Gunn, Williams, Low, Farthing, Parnell, Smith.
CORNARD: Garnham, Featherstone, Cornish, Schultz, Arnold, Brown, Devereux, Gardiner, Young, Stratton, Smiles.
Subs: McLaughlin, Salt.
Action from last night's Premier Cup semi-final at Cornard.
Picture: KEITH MINDHAM
Barclays League Division Three
Martin's loan deal cut short
By Carl Marston
COLCHESTER United, with a host of attacking options, have decided against keeping West Ham forward Dean Martin for a third month on loan.
Player-manager Roy McDonough, who has been confined to bed with flu for the past couple of days, is happy with the likes of Robert Hopkins, Steve McGavin, Gary Bennett, Paul Abrahams and himself from which to choose as the U's bid to launch a late bid for the end of season play-off phase.
So 20 year-old Martin, secured from West Ham during the Christmas period, has returned to Upton Park after just two months of Third Division action.
Martin netted a peach of a goal within 17 minutes of his debut at Walsall on January 2, but he only managed one more goal in the following seven appearances and failed to live up to his Hammers pedigree — he had played for the West ham first team on three occasions.
Originally partnering McGavin up front, Martin was tried wide on the right flank at Shrewsbury but missed the U's latest match against Halifax due to illness.
McDonough is now likely to team up with McGavin in attack on the long run in with Hopkins filling Martin's role on the right, but the Layer Road worries at present are of a defensive nature.
Firstly, there is the troubled keeper position to review after loanee Carl Emberson has made his final permitted appearance against Cardiff City before returning to Millwall.
‘We will see how the results go this weekend and how we fair against Cardiff before making a decision over the keeper dilemma.
‘We are certainly bearing in mind Nathan Munson, who has been in excellent form for the Youths over the last couple of months,’ explained McDonough.
But if the U's beat Cardiff City on Friday, March 12 — their next league game — then there is a possibility that another new senior face will be arriving on loan to take up the goalkeeping duties.
Suspension
There is also a centre-half crisis looming with Tony English and Peter Cawley set to miss two matches through suspension.
Andy Partner and Paul Flowers, regular central defenders in the youth team, thus have a chance to impress in the friendly fixture at Chelmsford City on Saturday (3 pm kick-off at New Writtle Street) with a view to being involved in the Cardiff and more especially the Carlisle clash.
The young duo will also have a run out in an arranged match behind closed doors against Cambridge United at Layer Road on Monday.
Dean Martin…back at Upton Park
ENGLAND'S cricketers may refuse to play tomorrow's final tour match in India if any more missiles are thrown in today's one-day international at Gwalior.
Play could also be abandoned today in the fifth one-day international after an agreement reached yesterday about what to do if there is crowd misbehaviour among the 25,000 sell-out crowd.
A meeting between English and Indian cricket chiefs, local police and the two match umpires produced a united front in how to react to any hooliganism.
England tour manager Bob Bennett confirmed: ‘There is now a very clear chain of action which has been agreed if there are any repetitions.
‘The player in question will report the incident to the captain.
The captain will then inform the umpires who would make the decision whether the game should be suspended or whether the players should leave the field.
‘The captain has the authority to make his position clear but if the umpires are in any doubt about what to do they will immediately consult with the match referee whose decision would be final.
‘We have also been given assurances that there will be a cordon of police both inside and outside a perimeter fence which surrounds the playing area.’
Said Bennett: ‘If there was any repetition of an incident similar to the one involving Devon Malcolm (at Jamshedpur) then we would have to consider the position very seriously as to what action we took next.’
Devon Malcolm…victim at Jamshedpur.
Sprinter Johnson denies drug claims
BEN Johnson last night rejected claims that he had again tested positive for performance-enhancing drugs.
The 31-year-old Canadian sprinter hired a Toronto law firm to issue a denial of the story in the Toronto Star.
The paper claimed Johnson had been tested three times in six days in mid-January, and that at least one of the tests was positive for abnormally high testosterone levels.
International athletics officials insisted they could neither confirm nor deny the report.
But a source close to the IAAF, the sport's governing body, suggested it was accurate.
The law firm's statement said: ‘Mr Johnson denies taking any prohibited substance or engaging in any improper practice since his return to competition.
Neither Mr Johnson nor his representatives have been notified of any positive test.’
Johnson was suspended for two years after testing positive for steroids after winning the 100m at the 1988 Seoul Olympics.
A second offence carries a life ban.
The IAAF sent its own doping officer, London's Bryan Wotton, to the International Olympic Committee-accredited lab in Montreal when Johnson's second sample was opened, the report said.
Three independent sources confirmed he gave the positive test, it added.
IAAF general-secretary Istvan Gyulai said a meeting of its five-man doping commission would probably be held in a fortnight.
He added: ‘We will stick to our procedures.
In no way do we speculate on anything before it is 100 per cent confirmed evidence.’
Brian Langley, chairman of Athletics Canada, said: ‘We would have been informed if there had been a positive test on any Canadian athlete.’
Johnson recently appeared to be rediscovering his best form after two inauspicious seasons following his return to the track in January 1991.
The latest controversy could not be worse timed for the IAAF, with one of their showpiece events, the World Indoor Championships, to be staged in Toronto next week.
It also follows severe criticism of the IAAF's handling of the Butch Reynolds and Katrin Krabbe drugs cases.
Britain's chief national coach, Frank Dick, said: ‘If it's confirmed, then it's almost unbelievable.’
Ben Johnson — drugs claim
Family history trail guide
ANYONE interested in doing research in Essex into their family history should find the task made easier by a book newly published by the county Record Office.
Essex Family History: A Genealogist's Guide to the Essex Record Office provides information about the records and using them.
It includes a list of all Anglican and non-conformist parish registers of baptisms, marriages and burials deposited with the office, as well as details on census returns, wills, election records and many more useful sources.
However, the booklet is intended to be more than a list of records.
‘Many people who are just beginning to trace their family tree need help and guidance about what is available and how to understand and interpret the documents,’ said Janet Smith, principal archivist in charge of public services.
‘They also need to know where other information about Essex families is to be found in other record offices.’
The guide would be particularly useful to people who lived some distance away and who needed to find out if a visit to the record office would be helpful.
The book is available from the record office bookshop at County Hall, Chelmsford, CM1 1LX, priced £6 including postage.
Glider club makes compromise offer
A GLIDER club which wants to develop full-scale gliding activity on an abandoned wartime airfield has put forward a compromise package.
The Essex Gliding Club's plans for the former bomber station at Ridgewell near Clare, due to be discussed by Braintree planner on March 29, have aroused unprecedented opposition among residents.
In a bid to defuse local hostility to the scheme, the 150-strong club has offered Braintree District Council a range of conditions it says would be acceptable if planners granted permission.
But the proposed restrictions on the type and number of powered aircraft, flightpaths and hours of operation have already been dismissed as ‘not strict enough’ by a leading protester.
The club wants to develop an existing small-scale permission for gliding at Ridgewell by erecting permanent buildings, increasing the area of the runway and adding other on-site facilities.
The proposed conditions include limiting the number of aerotows — launches using a powered tug aircraft — to 50 a day on Sundays and 60 a day on other days, up to a maximum of 2,000 a year.
The club is also offering to enter into a legal agreement with Braintree to end overflying of villages, limit membership to 200, keep full records and liaise regularly with local councillors.
However, last night Adrian Corder-Birch of AJAG, the Airfield Joint Action Group, said despite the suggested restrictions the proposed level of activity was still unacceptably high.
‘AJAG is firmly of the view that the original conditions of casual, low-key use by local people should be maintained,’ he said.
‘Most of the club's members don't even live in the area.’
Hockey
Rivals to clash in quarter-final
THE draw for the quarter-finals of the AEWHA Cup has brought together Ipswich ladies and their arch rivals Chelmsford for a local derby that should provide all the excitement and drama the two sets of supporters could wish for.
Ipswich knocked out Hightown last week in a tense but skilful game, while Chelmsford disposed of the mighty Slough after a penalty shoot-out at Chelmer Park.
Chelmsford captain Lyn Bollington, on hearing the draw, said: ‘We were hoping to avoid Ipswich until the final and wanted to play one of the weaker sides.
But after our win against Slough confidence is high and anyway we like being the underdogs.’
Ipswich captain Debbie Rawlinson is quite happy to be playing Chelmsford, especially after the 3–1 win away to them in the league.
‘I wasn't worried as soon as I knew we had a home draw.
The fact that it is Chelmsford adds some spice to the game as local derbies are always more interesting.’
While Ipswich are one game away from the National League title, Chelmsford are one place away from relegation to the Second Division but when it comes to March 28 the league will seem a million miles away and both sides will have their sights set firmly on a semi-final place.
This Saturday Ipswich play the East Super League side Blueharts in a friendly game at Tuddenham Road (11.30 am).
The season is reaching an exciting climax for the Suffolk side with one league game left, against Wimbledon on Sunday, March 14 at Tuddenham Road (12.05 pm) and the prospect of the enthralling cup match against Chelmsford at the same venue two weeks later.
Ipswich's thoughts are currently concentrating on beating Wimbledon to make sure of the National League title and qualify for next season's European clubs championship.
The Blueharts game should provide them with a confidence-building win.
The squad has recovered from their two away matches last week in Leicester and Liverpool and there are no injury worries for the captain Debbie Rawlinson.
The match will provide Ipswich with a chance to give some of the players who have spent a considerable amount of time on the bench with some badly needed match practice.
Ipswich have used the new rolling substitutes rule to their advantage this season but it often means that the first choice players are only off the pitch for five or ten minutes at a time.
With a squad of 16 it means that five players spend a majority of their time watching.
But they are vital members of the team and have played an important role in the season's success so far.
Ipswich second team play their last East Super League game against Hemel Hempstead on Saturday and are still without a win in the league.
With relegation to Division Two almost certain Ipswich might well relax and find their goal-scoring touch which has proved so elusive so far.
Mark Pitman, who ended the five win run of Young Hustler when riding The Illywhacker to victory in the £25,000 Cavalier Chase at Worcester yesterday.
Speedway
Rickardsson to the rescue
By Elvin King
TONY Rickardsson is ready, willing and able to help put speedway back on its feet.
The 22-year-old Swedish super star has arrived in Suffolk in determined mood.
One of the first top riders to sign for the 1993 British League season, Rickardsson has no sympathy with riders who are refusing to sign this year because of the promoters' strict pay policy.
‘I feel I have a responsibility to help speedway out of a difficult period,’ said Rickardsson, who is about to begin his third season with the Witches.
‘I have worked hard during the winter on sponsorship and have three good backers, including Jawa.
The money may not be brilliant, but it is not very different to what I was on last year.
I cannot understand why riders are holding back just when the sport needs them most.
They will soon be back when things improve.’
Rickardsson is to concentrate on Ipswich this year, although he will also be riding league speedway in Sweden and Poland.
With his new mechanic, Stuart Hare, he has been working day and night for the last three weeks to get three bikes in tip-top condition.
‘My best bikes are over here and they are the ones I shall be using in the world championship.
Last year I had a number of problems after perhaps rising too quickly in 1991,’ added Rickardsson, runner-up in the world final two years ago.
‘I tried to do things too quickly and ended up feeling unwell for much of the time.
This year, however, after a winter riding moto-cross and with a more achievable target, I cannot wait to get going.’
Talks are still going on with Witches skipper Chris Louis, who has yet to put pen to paper.
‘There is no great problem, it is more a matter of principle,’ said Louis.
A replacement is still needed for the transfer-listed David Norris and for Shane Parker, who will be out of action until June with a foot injury.
This time last year the Witches were interested in Miroslaw Kowalik, a youngster who impressed in a training camp held at Mildenhall but who had too many Polish commitments to be considered in 1992.
Tony Rickardsson — raring to go this season
Racing preview
Obligation to follow up
SUSAN Pitman caused a stir in the West Country when Holy Foley, one of three horses in her Dartmoor stables, won the hunter chase at Newton Abbot by 15 lengths.
But the 11-year-old pointer was lucky that odds-on favourite Ocean Link fell at the first, bringing down another fancied runner Material Girl.
This time Holy Foley faces the John Upson-trained course and distance winner Some Obligation and will be hard pressed to overturn him in the Ludlow Hunters' Chase today.
Rough time
Some Obligation bounced back from a season in the doldrums with a five-length win at Hereford last month and is capable of following up.
The Forbra Gold Challenge Cup Handicap Chase provides an ideal chance for Major Match to return to the form which saw him win the Charisma Gold Cup last season.
Major Match was favourite to follow up in the latest running of the Kempton contest, but had a rough time, getting knocked around before trailing in last behind Far Senior.
Most of Frank Jordan's 24 horses are fast ground specialists and his First Crack, successful at Wolverhampton by seven lengths just over a week ago, can make a winning reappearance in the Henley Hall Gold Challenge Cup Handicap Hurdle.
Myhamet, who scored by three-and-a-half lengths at Taunton last month following a break of almost four months, looks to be the main danger.
Formal Invitation should open his account in the Corvedale Novices' Hurdle.
A promising runner-up to Her Honour at Taunton, the Be My Guest colt was also second a week ago to Zamirah but should improve.
Selections
LUDLOW: 2.00 Formal Invitation, 2.30 Stated Case, 3.00 Major Match, 3.30 First Crack (n.b.), 4.00 SOME OBLIGATION (nap), 4.30 Sausalito Boy, 5.00 Pims Gunner, 5.30 Grey Power.
WARWICK: 1.50 Lemon's Mill, 2.20 Hope Diamond, 2.50 Derab, 3.20 Do Be Brief, 3.50 Please Please Me, 4.20 Jailbreaker, 4.50 Pectorus.
LINGFIELD: 2.10 Express Service, 2.40 Stardust Express, 3.10 Awesome Power, 3.40 Debacle, 4.10 Comet Whirlpool, 4.40 Spanish Refuge.
Strained ankle fails to slow Princess
Kathmandu: THE PRINCESS of Wales strained her ankle yesterday on a pebbly path in Nepal's Himalayan foothills — but went on to tease puffing press photographers who still could not match her pace.The Princess walked briskly through the rough, rocky terrain on a walkabout during the second day of her solo visit to Nepal.After straining her ankle on a pebbled road in Dharan in eastern Nepal she began to limp slightly, but her pace still left Overseas Development Minister Baroness Chalker and several photographers gasping for breath.The Princess could not resist the temptation to chide them.
‘I thought these photographers were supposed to feel fit.
They look like extras from Mary Poppins,’ she joked.A visit to the home of an old Nepali woman in Dharan town left her moved.As she came out of the tiny thatch-roofed hut with mud floors and no electricity, in which she was huddled with the old woman for several minutes, she said: ‘I shall never complain again.’
The Princess, dressed simply in a white blouse and dark skirt, was draped with crimson flower garlands as she flew over Mount Everest in a helicopter, 40 years after a British-sponsored expedition became the first to reach the summit of the world's highest mountain.As she flew past the snowy peak a relative of a Nepalese climber who accompanied Sir Edmund Hillary up Everest in 1953 was leading a seven-member Australian team up the mountain.Although the Princess did not see any climbers she told fellow passengers aboard her Super Puma helicopter that she had a wonderful time seeing the mountain through clear skies.
A garlanded Princess of Wales on the first full day of her visit to Nepal
FA Premier League
Wright is a shooting star again
IPSWICH Town's great rivals Norwich and Saturday's FA Cup quarter-finals opponents Arsenal fought out a 1–1 draw at Carrow Road last night.
The big worry for Town is that Arsenal's goal came from the prolific Ian Wright, his 23rd this season, although it was only The Gunners' fourth goal in 15 games.
Wright also missed a penalty and was booked, but his goal dented Norwich's title hopes even further.
The Norfolk side are now six points adrift of leaders Aston Villa.
Arsenal boss George Graham confirmed afterwards that absentees Alan Smith, David Hillier and Stephen Morrow are doubtful for Saturday's cup clash.
Paul Merson, who was another missing last night, was simply rested and should play at Portman Road.
Graham was very unhappy with another poor striking performance.
‘I am disappointed with the forwards and finishing.
They've got to keep working and going for the second ball.
They are not anticipating enough.’
The draw cost Norwich crucial points in the championship race and assistant manager John Deehan said: ‘It would have been nice to close that gap at the top because we now find ourselves a bit adrift.
But there is still a quarter of the season to go and you can't rule us out.
‘Arsenal were worth a draw.
When England's centre-forward played like he did tonight you have to score two goals because I always thought Wright would get one.’
The Arsenal equaliser came in the 82nd minute and denied a Norwich side that had taken the lead after 36 minutes when Ruel Fox scored his first goal for six months.
Coventry midfielder Micky Gynn ended Sheffield Wednesday's 16-match unbeaten run and lifted his side into fifth.
He shot past Chris Woods a minute before half-time for the only goal of the game.
Coventry became the first team to complete the double over fourth-placed Wednesday this season after winning 2–1 at Hillsborough in September.
Roy Keane showed why he is British soccer's hottest property with a superb equaliser to scrape a point for Nottingham Forest in a 1–1 relegation battle with Crystal Palace at the City Ground.
Gavin Southgate had put the Londoners ahead but Keane levelled immediately.
Everton came back from a goal down to beat Blackburn 2–1.
The Merseysiders scored through Tony Cottee and a Colin Hendry own goal.
David May had put Rovers ahead.
Tim Sherwood was sent off.
Premier League
Quadriathlon
Taking triathlon a step further
By Carl Marston
JUST when you thought that marathons, duathlons, biathlons and triathlons were the pinnacle of endurance tests, along comes another awesome challenge.
The quadriathlon, still in its infancy, is basically a triathlon with a gruelling canoe leg thrown in for good measure, and East Anglia has one of the leading exponents in this new sport.
Graham Sheward, a 54-year-old from Colchester, is no stranger to gritting his teeth and mixing with the best in various stamina events, feeding off an Army career which included a back-breaking spell in the Parachute Regiment.
Dabbling with such challenging pastimes as mountaineering and long distance canoeing, Graham was in his early 50s when he took up the quadriathlon just as the sport was getting off the ground.
Last year he was selected for the World Quadriathlon Championships at Salinas Bay in Ibiza.
A fine 27th place overall earned him third spot in the over-50s category as Britain scooped the team prize.
Peterborough's Eric Hatliff and Leicestershire's Bill Sampson joined Graham in the three-strong team.
Selected
He has again been selected to represent his country at this September's World Championships, again to be held in Ibiza, although he desperately needs sponsorship to repeat his feats of last season.
‘It was a hair-raising experience at Ibiza because for the sea swim and the canoe leg we had to contend with very high winds and huge waves.
‘In fact, it was only after some debate that the organisers decided to carry on with the event, and some changes had to be made to the canoe course to make it easier for the rescue boats to assist competitors.
‘Not surprisingly, many athletes didn't even start and more than half retired during the swim and canoe sections,’ said Graham.
Last year saw the fifth staging of the Quadriathlon World Championships with competitors faced with a 5K swim, 20K kayak leg, 100K cycle ride and 21K (half-marathon distance) run.
Graham finished in a time of 10hrs 07mins 40secs, not bad considering the terror canoe section, but this season he is convinced that he can knock as much as an hour off that effort with more intense training and kinder weather.
Whereas the bulk of athletes being attracted to this new four-pronged sport have spilled over from the more established triathlon ranks, and so have found the canoeing discipline particularly tough, Graham has the advantage of a fine record with the paddle.
‘I was asked to supervise canoeing when a scout leader, so I went off to master the sport and was a senior instructor after a couple of years.
When a friend suggested that I take up racing, my initial reaction was that at 42 I was too old.
That was 12 years ago, and after winning the first race that I entered between Sudbury and Bures in a non-racing canoe, I had caught the bug.’
Since then, victories have followed at a pace, including a class win in the renowned 125-mile international Devizes to Westminster canoe race, and several successes in the Essex Canoeing Association Winter Series Championship.
Graham trains with both Colchester Rovers Cycle Club and Chelmsford Canoe Club.
He clocks approximately 1hr 10mins for a 25-miler on the bike and runs at seven-minute mile pace, and is keen to improve on his weakest activity, swimming, during the summer.
Champions League
Huistra's vital strike cheers Rangers
PIETER Huistra, left out of Rangers' two past cup final occasions, made up for those past disappointments last night by hitting the crucial equaliser against Bruges in the European Cup.
And the Dutch winger, who kept Rangers' hopes of reaching the final very much alive, said: ‘It was a very important goal for myself and the club.
There are many good foreigners here at Rangers and only three of us can play at one time.’
Rangers manager Walter Smith still believes that Marseilles have a slight edge as they have to face Rangers at home on April 7 but he said: ‘I'm still optimistic about what we can do in our home games.’
CSKA Moscow's Ilshat Fayzullin thwarted Marseille's hopes of two vital points in Group A of the European Cup with a second half goal to level the scores 1–1.
Sports land for housing
Sir,— Many readers will be saddened by the news that housing is to be built on the Tolly Cobbold sports field and paddock beside Cliff Lane and Landseer Road, Ipswich.
This development on the green belt of Ipswich is partly because of the Conservative Government withering away the planning powers of borough councils, who in the past would have dismissed such a planning application as this, on the grounds that housing and industry should not mix and that it is desirable to have a green buffer zone between the two.
At the Tolly Cobbold site, this is even more crucial following the recent explosion at the near-by petrol depot, while terrorist activity in the Midlands has shown that the environment can be just as an effective target as military ones.
Had the Borough Council objected to the application for 60 housing units, then Pubmaster might have appealed against their decision to a Government inspector who might have overruled the Council.
This would mean the Council incurring all legal costs.
Nevertheless, there is a need to protect what little green field sites we have left in the Borough and if the Council can be swayed in such a manner against the interests of the town, then what will happen to the face of our town is anyone's guess.
The future inhabitants of this mini-estate can look forward to persistent heavy traffic noise made more acute by the amphitheatre effect of being on a hillside.
Car drivers will now have to negotiate the dangers of an access road hidden by a bend on a hill.
These are just two reasons why an environmental impact survey is needed but the planning committee have not considered this.
In the future, Suffolk people will reflect on this decade and they will find it strange that at a time when environmental issues were more prevalent than ever both county and borough councils made such an effort to be seen to be environmentally friendly, that so much development took place on the green belt of Ipswich.
Roger Allum 
Quality football lacking by Town
Sir, So far Ipswich Town's surprisingly high league position and points total have diverted attention from the basic lack of positive quality football in their performances.
Hard work, 10 man defending, clearing the ball as far as possible and snatching goals against the run of play, have given safety and enjoyable results, but poor entertainment.
Now that their opponents are also prepared to sacrifice entertainment and match Town for effort, the goals and points are drying up.
Messrs Lyall and McGiven will soon realise that you can only get away with boring, negative football whilst is bring results — ask John Duncan.
Home and away regular Chelmsford.
Fans deserve greater respect
Sir,— There have been numerous reports this year of Ipswich Town's failure to get to grips with the increased demand for tickets.
This demand may become a thing of the past if the club management and ticket allocation, in particular, is not reorganised.
The treatment of individual supporters has at times been shoddy and the club need to radically improve their attitude towards the paying customer.
We have all heard the stories of season ticket holders being found to stand for a match because someone else had been allocated a ticket for that seat.
But the work of the ticket office needs looking at.
Decisions made on the spur of the moment by so called‘officials' puts unnecessary pressure on those behind the counter.
The distribution of tickets late in the day on Tuesday for the sale of Saturday's Cup match are a good example.
The need to call police to sort out minor disturbances only skims the surface of a problem that does the name of the club no good and reduces its image to that of second rate.
The loyal and paying supporter demands greater respect from the club.
In return the club may see a return to even greater loyal support.
D F Lidden 
Quality football lacking by Town
Sir,— So far Ipswich Town's surprisingly high league position and points total have diverted attention from the basic lack of positive quality football in their performances.
Hard work, 10 man defending, clearing the ball as far as possible and snatching goals against the run of play, have given safety and enjoyable results, but poor entertainment.
Now that their opponents are also prepared to sacrifice entertainment and match Town for effort, the goals and points are drying up.
Messrs Lyall and McGiven will soon realise that you can only get away with boring, negative football whilst it bring results — ask John Duncan.
Home and away regular Chelmsford.
ALEC Stewart made light of being struck on the head by a stone during yesterday's one-day international defeat at Gwalior.
Yet, when India were four for two in reply, it seemed as if England's 256 would be easily enough.
Manoj Prabhakar was lbw first ball to Phil DeFreitas and Vinod Kambli was out mishooking Devon Malcolm.
However, Sidhu and Mohammed Azharuddin then set up India's victory with a scintillating stand of 175 in only 29 overs.
India's win cut England's series lead to 3–2 with the final match also at Gwalior today.
Point-to-point
Dunston go for safety first on Ampton card
By Carolyn Tanner
DIVIDED races have become the rule rather than the exception at East Anglian meetings this season, and there will be an eight race programme again tomorrow when the Dunston Harriers stage their fixture at Ampton.
Gee-A and Jaaez, who chased home Carl's Choice at Cottenham, re-oppose in the Men's Open, in which Cherryhill Beauty and Easy Over will also be well fancied.
The fitting of blinkers on Spartan Sprite had the desired effect at Higham, and it will be interesting to see whether this ploy works a second time should Nigel Bloom opt to ride her rather than Jaaez.
Impressive victory
Easy Over also holds an engagement in the Ladies' Open, along with True Dowry, already a course winner this season.
Rubie's Choice appeared to blow up at Marks Tey and should have come on for the race, while Zoe Turner, on her home track, can choose between As You Were and Royal Sting.
Karen Bridge may elect to ride True Dowry in the Novice Riders' race, which is for those who have not ridden more than five winners.
Old Dundalk is the class horse in the race and was very impressive in victory at Marks Tey, but he has a mind of his own when it comes to racing and much depends on his current mood!
Melton Park would have a very easy passage in the Members', but may instead go for the Restricted, where his main opposition could come from The Grey Boreen.
The grey was always trailing at Marks Tey, where his saddle slipped, but had earlier scored a runaway success at Cottenham.
The guideline for division of any race is usually when entries reach double the safety factor, but the Dunston have sensibly taken the decision to divide their Maiden even though the original entry of 29 falls one short of this maxim.
The amount of grief in the Cottenham Maidens last Saturday was mainly caused by a combination of large fields and an injudicious pace, and once again gives rise to concern that the safety factor on most courses is far too high.
It is always hoped that the point-to-pointers of today will become the National Hunt stars of tomorrow, but young horses will learn nothing if they are subjected to a bumping match every time they run.
Nobody will deny that point-to-pointing is a dangerous sport, but everything possible should be done to minimise the risks, and to cut the numbers of those competing in any one race would surely be a major step in reducing the chances of a serious accident.
The first race at Ampton is at 12.30.
Rubies Choice…blew up at Marks Tey
Basketball
Struggle for Arena to find their form
ONCE again, Arena failed to turn in the level of performance of which they are undoubtedly capable as they struggled to overcome a depleted but game Novas' side 54–47 in the men's division of the Mid-Essex Gravel League.
It seems the Colchester team are in a phase of ‘going through the motions’ and are certainly guilty of an unacceptable number of turnovers and missed shots.
The game was slow and low scoring and after seven minutes of the first half, Arena had scored only four points to the visitors' ten.
Novas turned around 27–26 in front, but met a more solid defence and by the ninth minute had scored only five to Arena's 15.
The home side lapsed again.
Novas got their shooting game going and had closed the gap to 48–47 before a succession of shots slipped wide of the basket to end their chances of a comeback.
Other results:
Men's Division: Brentwood Eagles 82 (Dave Churches 20, Steve Hurd 15, Colin Gregg 15), Billericay Bears 44 (Brett Wall 14, Scott Davis 10, Graham Cornish 10).
Women's Division: Southend Scorpions 32 (Tracy McCoo 11, Atlas Diesels Colchester 59 (Susan Gibson 19).
Man stole boat to sail to sweetheart
A YOUNG man was so desperate to see a French schoolgirl he had fallen in love with he stole a 10ft inflatable boat and tried to cross the Channel in it, a court heard yesterday.
Boat worker David Burnett, 18, planned to use a diary map to navigate across some of the busiest shipping lanes in the world.
When he came alongside a trawler 25 miles out from the English coast he asked: ‘Am I going in the right direction for France?’
‘Schoolgirl'
The crew told him: ‘No.
You are heading out into the Atlantic and the next landfall is Canada.’
The trawler took him in tow and took him back to Falmouth, Cornwall, where he was arrested by police, Truro Crown Court was told.
‘He met a French schoolgirl called Falrinne when she was on a study course in Falmouth and was keen to see her again,’ Mr Ian Taylor, prosecuting, said, ‘but the only way he could get across the Channel was to take a boat.
Burnett stole a Zodiac inflatable, worth £3,200, from the Penryn river last March and set off.
‘He did not know a great deal about navigation, although he had enough fuel to get to France, but all he had with him was a holdall with a spare pair of shoes, a sandwich and a sports diary with a map of the world in it.’
Worried friends alerted coastguards after Burnett told them his plans and a full-scale alert was broadcast to shipping.
‘He was about 25 miles offshore when he approached the fishing boat and the crew was so alarmed at his ignorance they radioed coastguards and brought him back to Falmouth,’ Mr Taylor said.
Adjourned
Mr Robert Macrae, for Burnett, told the court: ‘He realises he was irresponsible and he has not seen or heard from the girl involved since.’
Burnett, of Tresillian Road, Falmouth, admitted taking a boat without consent.
Assistant Recorder David Bartlett adjourned sentence for two weeks.
Clubs set out to help cancer fund
ALL four of East Anglia's League clubs, Ipswich Town, Norwich City, Colchester United and Cambridge United are to help the Imperial Cancer Research Fund in memory of late England soccer captain Bobby Moore.
Collectors will be inside and outside the grounds at the following matches: March 12: Colchester United v Cardiff City at Layer Road; March 13: Norwich City v Oldham Athletic at Carrow Road; March 16: Ipswich Town v Coventry City at Portman Road; Cambridge United v Peterborough United at The Abbey Stadium.
Volunteer collectors are required and should contact appeals manager, Janet Mason (tel. 0603 664164).
Stock cars
Stars launch formula
THE closure of Aldershot Stadium the former headquarters of promoter Spedeworth International, rounded off a disappointing season of short circuit motor racing last year, but the rapidly approaching 1993 season already promises much more (writes Kevin Wegg).
Foxhall Stadium opens its doors for the first time on Sunday (2.30 pm) with the Bangers and new formula stock cars.
Introduced last summer to bring stock car racing back to a more affordable level, their early outings showed promise, with the Christmas meeting at Foxhall producing 30 starters and some excellent racing.
Several ‘big' names among the 44 booked are marking their first appearance at Foxhall in their new formula.
‘Tich' Gardener, former European champion in the Stock Saloon formula, heads the list, which also includes Steve Mayes (Diss), Roy Fuller (Halstead) and Paul Brown (Braintree), and the builder of the first-ever 1300 cc car, Dave Sparkes.
Bruce Wilcox currently leads the points chart and he locked horns with John Halifax (Sutton St James) at Wimbledon last month.
Wrecked car
On that occasion, Wilcox ended up pinned against the ropes as the two fought it out ‘Banger' style.
Despite a wrecked car, Wilcox actually won that race, as it was stopped shortly afterwards and awarded to him on count-back.
Kevin Smith, brother of Hot Rod superstar Steve, took a heat and final double that night, and must be one to watch.
Ipswich Championship Bangers series starts again with Peter Brown Autosales again offering sponsorship.
Derek Caton (Dunmow) will be defending the title.
The rivalry between three Ipswich drivers could grab most attention.
Robbie Warner, who led the championship for a short time last year and Geoff Baker exchanged paintwork, during their last encounter and with Baker's team-mate ‘Taffy' Gillingham unlikely to stand back and watch, it could be an entertaining afternoon of contact motor sport, all sponsored by BBC Radio Suffolk.
Dates: March 7, 14, 28; April 12, 24; May 8, 31; June 19; July 3 and 4 (Spede Weekend), 17, 31; August 14, 30; September 11, 25; October 9, 23, November 5, 14; December 28.
£5,000 to catch the dopers
THE Jockey Club stepped up its battle against the dopers yesterday by offering a reward of up to £5,000 for information leading to a conviction of those responsible.
The sport's governing body is hoping the cash will help its investigators and the police gain vital leads on crime in racing.
The reward will be available for information bringing a conviction for any serious offence against racing, not just involving doping.
The information will be collected on a confidential hot line, called Raceguard, operating on a 24-hour answerphone from next Tuesday.
It is one of a number of initiatives being introduced in the wake of the ‘nobbling’ of Flash Of Straw last August and Her Honour last month.
In future, trainers and jockeys with any suspicion that their horse has been ‘got at’ can withdraw from the race at any time and request a dope test.
Jockey Club Head of Security Roger Buffham explained: ‘It will be treated as a private test so there will be no charge, and then, if it is positive, the trainer will be absolved of his normal responsibility.’
Newmarket report
Golf
Pair reach matchplay
SUFFOLK golfers Julie Hall and Joanne Hockley have both qualified for the matchplay stage of the Spanish Ladies golf championship.
Defending champion Hall produced two steady rounds of 77 and 78 to qualify in sixth place.
Her opponent in the first round of the matchplay today is Ada O'Sullivan of Ireland.
Hockley just earned a qualifying spot with rounds of 83 and 82, but that means she has a very tough opening match against Catrina Lambert.
The players had to contend with unusually cold conditions, including the first snowfall in the area for more than 50 years.
Working to make park attractive
WORK is under way at Belstead Brook Park on the outskirts of Ipswich to make the area more attractive and accessible to visitors.
A new car park and bridge over the brook is being created for ease and safety of access at all times of the year.
This weekend local residents will be planting-up gaps in a hedge which has recently been ‘laid’— an ancient country skill — by an Employment Training team.
Work on the park is being co-ordinated by Simon Mockford, on behalf of Suffolk County Council, from Ipswich Borough Council and Babergh District Council.
Harwich boss considers future
SOCCER: Harwich and Parkeston manager Martin Head is currently thinking over his future with the Jewson League club, which suggests he will have left by the start of next season.Head says, ‘Both the club and myself are looking to next season and we are in the middle of talks.
There are no disagreements, and it is normal at this time of year to look ahead, but I cannot confirm my commitment to next season.
‘I want the club to be ambitious and reach the Beazer Homes League.’
Head, who with Don James led Sudbury Town to Wembley in the final of the FA Vase in 1989, has managed Harwich to the final of the Essex Senior Trophy where they play Essex Senior League club Southend Manor
Course for groundsmen
Cricket: Seminars covering cricket wicket preparation and repair will be held at Mildenhall CC on March 20, and at Ramsey CC on March 27, both starting at 10am.
Prior application should be made to Mike Clarke, 2 West Drive, Mildenhall IP28 7JN (0850 372533) at least seven days before the chosen date.
Cost of the seminar is £10.
Venue switched
Bowls: The venue for tonight's fours match between Towerlands and Ipswich in the area finals of the Manchester Unity National Championships has been switched from Walton to Clacton Bowls Club.
Halstead squad Soccer: Halstead Town entertain Gorleston (3 pm) tomorrow for a Jewson League Premier Division match at Rosemary Lane.
Halstead Town (from): Loach, Goodwin, Selby, Rayson, Skeggs, Jewitt, Dakin, Deveraux, Streetly, Sinclair, Bailey, Elliot, Leversuch.
Cricket: The Suffolk Premier League will operate under a new name this summer.
Following a change of sponsor it will be known as the Rutherford's Suffolk Premier League, with sports goods distributor Alan Rutherford taking over from Dairytime.
McKenna signs
Soccer: Sudbury Town reserve goalkeeper Jim McKenna has signed for Melton St Audry's in the Pubmaster SIL Senior League.
IPSWICH Jaffa return to Stopsley Park, Luton, tomorrow bidding for an incredible fourth successive win in the Today's Runner Cross Country League national finals.
Their domination of the event has demonstrated the strength in depth of the club, since scoring is based on the finishing positions of both men and women, plus veterans.
The unusual part of the scoring system is that after a club's 10 scoring runners have crossed the line their club-mates can still influence the results.
Although they cannot add points to their own club they can take points away from the others by finishing ahead of their rivals.
Jaffa are sending a party of 50 who could all play a part in the bid to retain the title.
Their rivals tomorrow will include Tiptree Road Runners, runners-up to Jaffa in the North Essex League, and St Edmunds Pacers, the Suffolk representatives.
FA Cup
Brothers in a battle for cup glory
Big clash divides the Linighan family
BROTHERLY loves goes out of the window at Portman Road tomorrow for 90 minutes when Linighan meets Linighan with an FA Cup semi-final place at stake (writes Dave Allard).
Ipswich Town's centre-half and skipper David Linighan confronts Arsenal central defender Andy Linighan in the FA Cup quarter-final saying: ‘I will be out to put one over on him and he on me.
Andy has got a job to do and so have I. But if I lose he will be gutted for me at the end and if I lose I will be gutted for him.’
Proud parents Olwyn and Brian Linighan will be coming from home town Hartlepool for the big match along with the brothers' 12-year-old sister Gemma.
‘Mum and dad will be coming just as they are with no red and white or blue and white scarves,’ said David.
‘They will be hoping that we both play well and, unless it is a draw, they will be so happy for one of us and so sad for the other.’
Ipswich are out to sharpen up in a big way tomorrow and get back to winning ways after a draw and two defeats in the league following the FA Cup fifth round home 4–0 win over Grimsby.
The 1–0 defeat at home to relegation-threatened Middlesbrough at Portman Road on Tuesday night was the latest setback and Linighan admits: ‘It was a rotten night for us.
I must hold my hand up and say that their goal was down to me.
The Cup tie will be different.
The ground will be bursting at the seams and buzzing and we can be encouraged by the fact that have tended to produce our best form against the big sides.
‘When we drew 0–0 at Highbury on Boxing Day it was one of our worst displays of the season.
We didn't seem to do anything apart from defend.
We hardly attacked at all.
It will be a different story this time.
All the lads are looking forward to the game.
It will be a great occasion and we go into it full of confidence in ourselves.’
Midfield men Jason Dozzell and Gavin Johnson missed Tuesday night's match.
Dozzell had a thigh injury and Johnson a back problem.
Both should be fit for the big game although neither trained yesterday.
Also out of training was striker Chris Kiwomya with a thigh injury.
operation at a Cambridge nursing home next week.
Town midfielder Steve Palmer will have a thigh
Town pair given seal of approval
By Dave Allard
IPSWICH Town's successful management duo of John Lyall and Mick McGiven have signed new contracts with the Suffolk club.
The news comes as a shot in the arm for players and supporters in a week when the Town face a testing FA Cup sixth round tie against Arsenal at Portman Road.
Chairman John Kerr said he was ‘absolutely delighted’ that the former West Ham pair had agreed the fresh deal.
The length of the arrangement remains a secret although Lyall described it as being ‘for the foreseeable future.’
The three year contracts that Lyall and McGiven signed in the summer of 1990 were coming up for expiry so the Town board have been working to keep their highly successful pair with the club to put a stop to speculation and rumours that were beginning to start.
Progressed
Kerr said: ‘We are so pleased with what has been achieved by John and Mick in the time they have been here.
We want it to continue.
In the past few years they have done such a great job in establishing a platform to build on.’
Lyall accepted the manager's job in succession to John Duncan almost three years' ago after a year as technical adviser to Terry Venables at Tottenham.
Before then he had 14 years in charge of West Ham, the club he joined as a schoolboy player and where he progressed through the ranks.
Lyall, 53 last week, was shocked when his contract at Upton Park was not renewed at the end of the 1989–90 season.
However he landed on his feet.
Lyall, who piloted Town to the Second Division Championship in only his second season, said: ‘Ipswich came to me out of the blue and brought me back into management.
I owe the club a lot and thought it only sensible to continue.’
He continued: ‘Mick and I would like to think that some of the things we set out to achieve here have happened.
We have great ambitions for the club and are looking to greater heights.’
McGiven and Lyall have worked together since McGiven joined West Ham as player from Sunderland in 1973.
After a four year first team career was ended by injury he became reserve player-coach and progressed to become Lyall's first team coach.
Lyall, who like the 42-year-old McGiven had his career cut short by injury at West Ham, groomed McGiven in the way that Ron Greenwood had groomed him on the coaching ladder.
When Lyall left Upton Park, McGiven served for a short time at Chelsea as youth coach before reforming a partnership in Suffolk.
Promoted
McGiven's first two years with Town were as first team coach but in the summer, at Lyall's suggestion, he was promoted to team manager.
Both Lyall and McGiven have remained at their London homes since coming to Ipswich.
Both are looking at property in Suffolk and Lyall has his London home up for sale.
Lyall and McGiven in the dugout taking Town to success.
Rugby Union
Shujan warms up for Lincoln
Ante-post offer may dry up
ROBERT ARMSTRONG'S Shujan can win this afternoon's Normanton Handicap at Southwell to continue the increasingly popular trend of using the all-weather surface as a build-up to a bid for the Lincoln at Doncaster later this month (writes our Newmarket correspondent).
This lightly raced four-year-old may have been underrated by the handicapper as he has twice been beaten since he made a winning debut at Doncaster late in the 1991 season as a two-year-old.
The Diesis colt had only two runs last season and on his final outing at York in July he was fourth to Golden Chip after which injury kept him off the course.
His connections have kept him in training because he showed plenty of ability on the gallops and their decision can pay its first fruits with a win today as he looks a cut above Debsy Do and Nellie Dean.
In fact, it might be worth having an ante-post bet before he runs here for should he win or figure promisingly, the 33–1 currently on offer will dry up quickly!
Jimmy Quinn looks like landing the jockeys all-weather crown and he can take another step towards that landmark by winning the Milton Handicap on Westfield Moves.
The Newmarket based light-weight has a good record for Westfield Moves's trainer Hugh Collingridge, who sent the five-year-old out to win on the grass at Pontefract last season.
The well run small yard is in cracking form and could surprise the two course specialists Tempering and Horizon.
On the upgrade
Armstrong could also be among the all-weather winners with the improving and well weighted Quattro in the Ascom Tele-Nova Handicap at Lingfield tomorrow.
Like Shujan he has had his training setbacks but Armstrong has shrewdly got enough runs into him to go for this handicap and his recent home form suggests it is worth taking a chance with him as he is on the upgrade.
Neil Graham has always held a high position of Gold Blade, who will be backed to get back on the winning trail in the Conquest Cup.
His gallops have always impressed me but after a couple of disappointing runs on the flat his attentions were turned to the all-weather surfaces.
After breaking the ice last month he was desperately unlucky in an amateur riders' race having to be switched in the final furlong after getting off on the rails.
Granted better luck he should get his head back in front and is likely to start at a reasonable price in this company.
Tom Jones held his young hurdler Jackson Flint in enough esteem to enter him in a race at the Cheltenham National Hunt Festival meeting even though he does not yet have a win to his credit.
His best effort was a second to Chief Celt at Towcester, when he was not fully wound up but he went great guns for Steve Smith-Eccles in a fast bit of work I watched on the Line gallop on Waterhall on Wednesday morning.
He looks likely to run in Doncaster's Flamborough Head Novices Hurdle tomorrow though do not be surprised if he is rerouted for the Grade 2 Berkshire Hurdle at Newbury.
Interestingly Tom Jones told me, ‘Even if he runs well I might miss Cheltenham with him and keep him fresh for another good race at the Grand National meeting at Aintree.’
Mark Tompkins could have found the right opening for his consistent but one paced Rosgill in the Eastleigh Handicap Hurdle at Newbury tomorrow.
This galloping course will suit his action and he is not badly treated at the weights on his best form.
Volleyball Partners find it tough in London
CHELMSFORD Partners travelled to West London for a pair of Royal Bank of Scotland National Volleyball League Division Four games and suffered the consequences of taking only a squad of six players.
In their first game against PARSS, Partners were unable to control the home team's floating services which dipped unpredictably and lost the match 3–0.
Only in the third set did Partners find any form and at one stage, they were 13–11 up until service errors handed the hosts the points.
Against Team Cotswold, Partners started slowly and went 5–0 down and a late recovery was not enough to save the set.
In the second, player/coach Paul Bohannon changed the cover system, which seemed to work as Partners levelled the match.
With Ruggles and Parkinson hitting high and hard in the third, Partners held a 14–11 advantage but again failed to capitalise, although a couple of refereeing decisions left them puzzled.
At 2–1 up, Team Cotswold played it steady and Chelmsford were plagued with bad luck on net cords and injuries.
Even then they battled until the service run was broken and Cotswold took the set 15–12 to win the match 3–0.
Squad; Bohannon, Day, Rosser, Parkinson, Ruggles, Edwards.
Jaffa chase fourth title By Malcolm Grubb
RUNNERS from all over the country have set their sights on lowering the Ipswich Jaffa colours in tomorrow's final of the Today's Runner Cross Country League.
Standards have gone up consistently over the six years of the league and, although still dominated by a new wave of running clubs that have burgeoned over the last decade, more and more of the traditional athletics clubs have been paying more attention to the competition.
Last year Jaffa only completed their hat-trick of national titles following a lot of slide-rule calculations and a tantalising, nail-biting tally of the results.
They came out on top by just eight points from the Ford Hailwood-Liverpool club, who had arrived with a strong squad and a determined look in their eyes.
The Liverpudlians should be back in action tomorrow so Jaffa are prepared for another tough contest.
David Salter, eighth last year and fifth in 1991, will be joined again by Tom McKeith, who was third in the initial Ipswich success in 1990 but has been missing since.
Another regular scorer in the finals, veteran Paul Turner, is also in the squad.
The other Ipswich scorers last year were Graham Todd, Eric Searle, Jim Sneddon, Brian Rogers, Ron McCullough, Val Jennings, Jackie Flewitt and Carol Gould.
All 10 placed in the top 40.
In 1991 Salter, Sneddon, Rogers, Davy, Turner, Todd and Jennings were joined by Andy Breakwell, Kathy Barfield and Sarah Gould, and they all finished in the top 20.
‘We've got a good team, on paper,’ said vice-captain Rogers.
‘Tom McKeith and David Laing are good additions to the team and we've always felt we had great strength in depth.
We put a high priority on this league and have chosen to neglect the Norfolk and Suffolk Cross Country League in favour of it.
Not all clubs do that but more are taking it seriously.’
Jaffa chairman Dave Smith said the event was growing in stature.
‘A lot of clubs are looking to knock us off our perch,’ he said.
He added that the club had always enjoyed the atmosphere of the league, the depth of scoring allowing every participant to feel they have a role to play.
‘We've built up a great spirit and really enjoy taking part,’ said Smith.
Suffolk section winners St Edmunds Pacers could well present a challenge.
They are the first Suffolk representatives to take part in the national finals.
Last year, although they qualified, they did not take part in the final.
The ladies have improved dramatically, which has boosted the team's overall effort.
Pauline Field, Clare Finch, Karen Mead, Wendy Jimenez and Elaine Keeble will lead the challenge, while the top men for Pacers are Bob Mott, Dave Skelton, Alan Dawson, Peter Kent, Tim Johnson, Peter Howlett, Robert Price and Harry Morris.
Les Ball, one of the top performers in the league programme, will miss the final due to footballing commitments.
Having won the Norfolk and Suffolk League, as well as the Suffolk Championship and the Today's Runner League, the Pacers have had their best season.
Tiptree, runners-up to Jaffa in North Essex, are also in the finals.
Tiptree's main hopes are for veteran Sue Baker, who should finish high up in her category.
She won the Essex Half Marathon last weekend.
Tiptree spokesman Tim Huxtable said that they were looking forward to their day out, and that Peter Richardson, Michael Beckett, Rob Hadgraft, Gerry Madden, Liz James and the others were keen to make an impression.
The spirit of winter cross country…competitors in one of the Today's Runner League events stream across a frozen field on a winter's morning
NOW for our belated Under Siege competition.
We have three limited edition silk bomber jackets, five sweatshirts and five baseball hats to give away this week.
And all I want to know is which television series featured Under Siege co-star Erika Eleniak?
The first 13 correct entries opened on March 11 will be declared the winners.
Normal EADT competition rules apply.
Answers should be sent to:Under Siege competition, East Anglian Daily Times, PO Box 400, Ipswich IP4 1AN.
Cricket
Stewart plays down crowd's stone attack
ALEC Stewart made light of being struck on the head by a stone during yesterday's one-day international defeat at Gwalior.
The England vice-captain afterwards jokingly wore a bandage around his head as England treated the latest missile thrown at them by an Indian crowd as an isolated incident.
But perhaps quite not so funny was why Stewart was fielding on the deep square-leg boundary in the first place during England's three-wicket defeat.
Once again Stewart, selected for the tour as England's wicketkeeper-batsman, was let off the keeper's job because of a forced late change in the team line-up.
When Mike Gatting pulled out with stomach trouble, England brought in not their other specialist batsman — Michael Atherton — but deputy keeper Richard Blakey.
Blakey won his first two Test caps on this tour in similar circumstances — first at Madras when Graham Gooch was ill and Atherton was again ignored, and then at Bombay when Neil Fairbrother was unwell.
On all three occasions, Stewart has handed over the gloves to Blakey — even though he is clearly a far superior keeper.
Yesterday Blakey dropped India's matchwinner Sidhu, who had then made 94 of his eventual 134 not out, and bagged his second successive first-ball duck in international cricket.
England team manager Keith Fletcher denied that Stewart's problems with a bruised and misshapen right index finger were preventing him from keeping wicket and defended the decision to include Blakey.
Selection mysteries have abounded on this tour but at least the move to use Robin Smith as an opener is working.
He dominated an opening stand of 101 with Stewart and went on to add 53 and 73 for the next two wickets with Graeme Hick and Neil Fairbrother.
But an almost farcical, frantic late collapse saw England lose their last seven wickets for just 10 runs in 20 balls.
Yet, when India were four for two in reply, it seemed as if England's 256 would be easily enough.
Manoj Trabhakar was lbw first ball to Phil DeFreitas and Vinod Kambli out mishooking Devon Malcolm.
However, Sidhu and Mohammed Azharuddin then set up India's victory with a scintillating stand of 175 in only 29 overs.
India's win cut England's series lead to 3–2 with the final match also at Gwalior today.
England opener Alec Stewart is bowled for 33 in the one-day international at Gwalior yesterday.
The England vice-captain was later hit by a stone thrown from the crowd when he was fielding on the boundary
Brian finds Costa success
GOLF: Brian Smart, a 15 handicapper from Bury St Edmunds, won the Sovereign Golf Costa Azul Cup at Aroeira in Portugal.
He had 71 points from the 36 hole competition, seven points clear of the rest of the field.
Smart partnered Len Ramsbottom of Diss to take first prize in a four ball better ball with 40 points.
Runners-up were John Farrow and David Kerswall of Bury St Edmunds with 39 points.
Smart had a clean sweep when, partnered by Les Coulins and Bob Grant (all Bury), he won the Texas Scramble with 77 points from Kerswall, Ramsbottom and Keith Battersby from Kent.
Stowmarket competition
Snooker: A Spring Open competition is to be held by Stowmarket Snooker and Squash Club on Sunday, May 9 starting at 10am.
Entry fee is £10 and the winner's prize is £300.
Matches are over five frames and there are no table charges.
Details from Mr M Bateman, 12 Delius Close, Stowmarket (tel. 0449 676641) or the Club at Stowupland Street, Stowmarket (tel. 0449 675571).
Bronze success for Suzanne
Gymnastics: Fifteen year old Sudbury Upper School pupil, Suzanne Mealham, led the Eastern Region team in the British Schools' Gymnastics Associations Championships in Birmingham.
Newmarket Gym Club trained Suzanne and her five team mates took the bronze medal behind teams from West Midlands and Wales.
Suzanne's individual score of 35.05, her highest score to date in a National Championship final, gave her 15th place overall and sixth place in the under 18 section.
Youth meeting
Sports Link: Ipswich sports clubs with junior sections are being given a rare opportunity to get together in the town.
The Suffolk Sports Link scheme is holding an information and discussion evening at Ipswich Town Hall Library on March 11, from 7.30 pm until 9 pm.
Tonight's soccer
(7.30 unless stated)
Barclays League Division Two: Swansea v Stockport
Division Three: Doncaster v York
World Youth Championships Group A: Australia v Colombia (10.30)
Neville Ovenden Combination Division One: Norwich City Res v Chelsea Res
Friendly Matches: Drogheda Utd v Aston Villa
Fixed odds
Seven homes: Notts County (10–11), Southend (5–4), Mansfield (6–5), Plymouth (5–6), Crewe (8–13), Wrexham (8–15), Hibernian (10–11).
Four draws: Blackburn (9–4), Wimbledon (9–4), Barnsley (9–4), Scunthorpe (9–4).
Four aways: Manchester United (11–8), Port Vale (6–4), Barnet (6–4), Clyde (11–10).
Above odds can be found on the Super Soccer coupon.
Rugby Union
Sudbury prepare for crucial League clash
SUDBURY Rugby Club entertain Stockwood Park of the Midlands League at Moorsfield tomorrow in a friendly.
This is part of the preparation for the crucial Courage National League Division Four South match against Basingstoke.
Kelly Wagland plays in the centre after injury while Greg Forster and David Minter have the chance to operate as the first string half back pairing.
Open side flanker Guy Atherton is rested.
His place goes to David Alecock.
SUDBURY: Dyble; Hett, Wagland, Cowling, Titcombe, Forster, Minter, Griffiths, Excell, Prentice, C Pinnegar, Saward, Alecock, Cook, M Pinnegar.
Replacements: Glen and Newman.
HADLEIGH will face a tough task with several of their first team players missing for their clash with Stowmarket tomorrow.
Hadleigh are forced to make several positional changes with players out through injury and the international at Twickenham.
Joseland moves from blind side flanker to the second row and with skipper Jones not available Fison takes the inside centre berth
Swaffham greyhounds
TONIGHT'S runners at Swaffham:
7.30 (440m): Tickets Please, Idle Run, Glens Victory, Forever Flash, Cuilin Dancer, Leaps N Bounds (W).
7.46 (480m): Roscoe Hound, Bally Slipper, Rath Soda (W), Lilleys Delight (W), River Glory (W), Rathbeg Jewel (W).
8.02 (440m): Jans Joy, Opencast, Orchardstown Jet (W), Fleadh Express (W), Shamrock Flash (W), Adeyfield Dream (W).
8.18 (440m): Megabyte, Lils Princess, Milltown Jam, Roxtown Victor (W), Speckled Ike (W), Meadow Lark (W).
8.36 (440m): Lisheen Go Go, Susanah, Lady Elizabeth, Brookville Ways (W), Glenrath Leader (W), Spot The Red (W).
8.53 (440m): Stay Inside, Black Cat Beo, Leesas Lancer, Absalom, Desert Wave (W), Slick Sally (W).
9.10 (480m): Bucks Manor, Grenadine, My George, Sevastapol, Urla Echo (W), Forever Dan (W).
9.27 (480m): Dancing Shoes, Claremount Lise, Mr Vander Brooke, Davis Room Champ (W), Dutch Booster (W), Shining Post (W).
9.44 (440m): Kathys Lark, Cave Canem, Jennalou, Pats Bouncer (W), Wait There (W), Two Spots (W).
10.0 (440m): Mossgreen Mead, Gentle Calandra, Mexborough Boy, Glenview Dancer (W), Monroe Villa (W), First Delivery (W).
10.15 (440m): Killeady Heights, Easy Lodge, Aoifes Star, Rock Again (W), Sonic Flash (W), Van Willdermiss (W).
10.30 (440m): Debs Dazzler, Cabra Rose, Laka Tip, Hopping Stopper, Us and Joe (W), Brooklawn Dan (W).
(W) denotes wide runner.
Race-walking
Joggers scoop county team bronze
COLCHESTER sent the largest contingent of athletes to the Essex 10-miles race-walking championships at Ilford, and took home a small share of the medals.
After the home club and Southend took the top places, Colchester Joggers got in on the act with the team bronze, a first for the club over this distance.
The race winner was Ilford's Stu Phillips, who was nearly four minutes ahead of his junior team-mate Scott Davis.
The leading Jogger was Roger Hanks, who crossed the line in tenth place (89.12), with Steve King next (89.52).
After Maban Dane had finished 14th (91.39), Colchester Walkers' John Hedgethorne reversed recent form to clock 94.48 in 15th, Glen Robertson came home 17th (96.25), ahead of brother Duncan in 19th (98.54).
Lance Williams was 20th (102.53), John Har was 22nd in his first race (104.15), Mick Self 23rd (105.21) and Donna Robertson completed the Joggers line-up in 29th (111.34).
Alan Hinson, of the Walkers, made a welcome return to competition by strolling in 26th (108.42).
The race formed a part of the Essex Walking League and Joggers took third place and 134 points to remain third overall behind Ilford and Southend.
On the individual list Hanks is seventh, King ninth and Hedgethorne 11th.
Ten pin bowling
Mandy takes title
WALTON Pier staged their eighth annual open Coca-Cola match play singles tournament with over £900 in prizes.
Bowlers qualified for the final over the previous weekends to fill the 32 places in the double elimination final.
Top seed John Mills set a blistering pace with scores of 221 and 254 to record the highest game and series of the day.
Reigning champion Jacquie Winter was eliminated by Martin Green.
Alan Hickey, Peter Heffer, Green, Robin Garton, Mandy Welham and Colin Cooper filled the final six places.
After final was contested by Mandy Welham and Colin Cooper with Welham the winner.
She took the trophy, £400 cheque, Coca-Cola track suit and jacket and an engraved glass decanter.
These were presented by Coca-Cola's Southern Area Manager, Jacquie Bell.
Table tennis
Injury fails to lift the Buzzards
PLAY came to a halt when Ken Beach injured his foot playing against Windsor Buzzards in Division One of the Clacton and District Table Tennis League.
The Brotherhood player retired hurt and conceded two matches to Buzzards, who still lost 8–2.
Relegation is looming for Thorpe A despite Dave Austin's surprise win over Dennis Bacon, their sole success against Walton B.
Silver Dawn A returned to the top of Division Two with two wins over Windsor sides, 7–3 against the Condors and 8–2 over the Falcons.
Edward Holden was undefeated.
It was good to see Terry Howse back in action for Post Office A and he contributed a win in the 6–4 victory over Windsor Hawks.
The top match in Division Three saw Brotherhood F clash with Silver Dawn B. Six of the matches went to three games but Brotherhood took the match 8–2.
Brotherhood I were merciless in their 10–0 win against Post Office C in Division Four.
The remaining Division One sides in the cup made it through to the semi-finals.
Walton B beat holders Silver Dawn A 5–0, but St Andrews had to fight to beat Windsor Hawks 5–3.
In the semi-finals Walton B play Green Lodge D, and Saints face Brotherhood I.
Closing date for entries for the Closed Champion-ships, sponsored by Paul Newbould Planning and Building Design Services, is Monday, March 15.
Tickets for the quiz evening at Firs Caravan Park on Saturday, are available from Shirley Rowlen (tel 671116) or Tony Oswick (tel 429869).
Clacton juniors strengthened their position at the top of Division Three in the Essex Inter League when they beat Colchester B 9–0.
Rugby Union
Sudbury move step closer to title
SUDBURY took another giant step towards winning Courage League National Division Four South after a heart-warming performance at Basingstoke on Saturday.
The Suffolk champions had to dig deep and resist a late rally from their Hampshire hosts, but a try from Steve Glen and some inspired kicking from Steve Dyble nursed Sudbury to their eighth league win.
Second-placed London Welsh had a blank weekend, giving Rob Lane's troops the chance to extent their lead at the top to three points with just three games left.
And Lydney, the only other club with a realistic chance of snatching the one promotion place available for next season's new-look National Division Four, tumbled to a shock defeat at home to Southend.
Unbeaten in the league and through to the semi-finals of the Spicers Eastern Counties Cup, Sudbury have enjoyed a dream season, and two wins from their last three league games would secure them the championship.
Saturday's battle was confined, for the most part, to a forward battle with Colin Pinnegar marshalling his men in true captain's style.
There was little to choose between the sides in the line-out and scrums, but Sudbury always had the edge away from the forward skirmishes.
For once, Steve Titcombe and Mark Hett saw precious little action out on the wings but full-back Dyble was outstanding when joining the line and fly-half Nick Gregory was a master at finding touch.
It was Dyble who broke the deadlock with a penalty in the first minute and centre Kelly Wagland came within a whisker of scoring an early try when stopped inches short of the line.
Basingstoke full-back Richard Rowledge levelled the scores with a penalty of his own, but Sudbury were back in the lead after Dyble's initial break was continued by Hett with Tim Newcomb being pushed before receiving the pass.
Dyble again converted the penalty.
Sudbury gained a little breathing space at half-time thanks to a third penalty from Dyble, and the only try of the match came within seconds of the restart.
Wagland created the chance with a mazy run that saw him elude several desperate challenges.
Number eight Dave Cook provided excellent support and it was his pass to Steve Glen that allowed the scrum-half to scamper over for the score.
Dyble added the conversion and another big victory looked on the cards, but Basingstoke showed a good deal of spirit in the final half-hour.
Rowledge sliced a penalty wide of the target before having better luck with a kick just inside the half-way line, and there was a real setback for the visitors when Cook was carried off with a leg injury.
There were a few nervous moments late on but Sudbury defended stoically to the final whistle, Basingstoke having to make do with another late penalty from Rowledge.
This was a crucial victory for the Moorsfield men.
The final whistle was greeted with triumphant cheers from players and travelling supporters alike, happy in the knowledge that the destiny of the championship is still in their hands.
Sudbury: Dyble, Titcombe, Wagland, Newcomb, Hett, Gregory, Glen.
Prentice, Excell, Griffiths, C Pinnegar, Saward, Atherton, M Pinnegar, Cook (sub Minter 68 mins).
Hot-shots Braintree are in the goals again
Braintree 5 Andover 0
BRAINTREE provided five more good reasons to justify their claim of being the most attack-minded team in the whole league.
Another nap hand at the expense of Andover took Iron's league tally for the season to 82, a figure that cannot be bettered in any of the three divisions of the Beazer League.
What is even more significant is that 24 different players have shared the scoring honours, emphasising the team's strength.
Fielding a side containing only one recognised striker, Braintree still had too much all-round power for their visitors.
Brought in to fill an unfamiliar forward role John –Bishop made his presence felt with well-taken goals in the 21st and 31st minutes.
–Full-back Gary Culling, who excels in getting into scoring positions, also helped himself to a brace in the 45th and 61st minutes.
The most spectacular of the lot was Glenn Russell's magnificent effort in the 63rd minute.
The powerful running of the big front man had been a constant threat to Andover all afternoon and they just had no answer as he finally surged through shrugging off vain attempts to check him before delivering the perfect finish.
–
Fareham 1 Sudbury 0
SUDBURY were always the better team and would have considered themselves unlucky to have drawn, let alone lose.
But they went down 10 minutes from time to a disputed penalty.
In a rare Fareham attack Taylor fell over Williams' outstretched leg and a penalty was awarded.
It was Taylor himself who slammed home the spot-kick.
caption for centres 
David Linighan beats Tommy Widdrington to put Ipswich ahead at The Dell and, below, Paul Goddard beats Tim Flowers for the second.
Pictures by WARREN PAGE
Dazzling Ipswich win championship
A dazzling display of high quality hockey saw Ipswich clinch the National Division One championship with their biggest league win of the season.
Before a bumper crowd at Tuddenham Road, Ipswich tore Wimbledon apart, as from the off they poured forward in numbers, anxious to return to European competition.
It took a mere two minutes for them to open the scoring through Tracy Fry's fine solo run, and by the time Helen Bray shot home from the spot with nine minutes remaining, Wimbledon had been reduced to chasing shadows.
‘It was a brilliant performance,’ enthused Toby Mullins, the ladies' coach who has led them to the championship in his first season in charge.
‘There were some incredible passing moves, such as for Sandie Lister's goal.
We went from one D to the other with six passes; it was a superb goal.
‘Before this game, individuals had been performing well, but this was the first time we really played well as a team and it shows just what we are capable of.’
Ipswich had gone into the game needing to win to take the title.
In their previous league match two weeks ago, they had travelled to Leicester knowing that a win would all but give them the championship, but that day they slumped to a surprise 3–2 defeat.
There was never any danger of a repeat yesterday, as the Tuddenham Road side shattered Slough's previous domination of the National League.
Since the competition took on its present format in 1989, Slough had won it every year.
But this season is undoubtedly Ipswich's.
Only one league defeat and only seven goals conceded by a mean defence gave Ipswich the crown.
They are also still well on course to complete the double, having reached the AEWHA Cup quarter-finals.
But, as 84 times capped England star Vickey Dixon said: ‘It would be nice to win both, but this was the important one.
It was our second chance and we were spurred on by some great support.
‘This was a win for everybody here.
We couldn't really fail at home, not with this support.’
It was a supreme team performance by Ipswich that oozed class and confidence.
With the defence ensuring a frustrating afternoon for the league's leading scorer, Michelle Clark, the rest of the team were able to set up camp in the Wimbledon half.
The Suffolk side had the perfect start, as the impressive Fry waltzed through the visitors' defence to settle any early nerves and just six minutes later the title was effectively Tuddenham Road bound.
Sarah Bamfield seized on a loose ball and swung the ball across the D for Lucy Youngs to poke home at the far post.
With Wimbledon wobbling Ipswich turned on the style.
Fry and top scorer Bray had shots scrambled off the line, as Youngs and skipper Debbie Rawlinson pulled the Wimbledon defence apart with probing runs down the flanks.
Bray cleverly lobbed the third from a penalty corner, before Lister scored the goal of the day.
Ipswich moved swiftly out of defence and slung six passes together, with Youngs, Fry and Colleen Adcock all involved, before Bamfield crossed for an ecstatic Lister.
It was left to Bray to wrap things up with a penalty flick, her eighth league goal of the season, after Dixon's storming run was impeded.
Ipswich then enjoyed the final few minutes of a memorable league campaign.
Squads
Ipswich: Thompson, Howell, Lister, Adcock, Dixon, Fry, Bray, Spencer, Bamfield, Rawlinson, Youngs, Butcher, Larbey, Runnacles, Rose and Thomas.
Wimbledon: Orford, Blacker, Raynham, Roberts, Veal, Gillett, Green, Rice, Quester, Bowering, Penny, Roberts, Batchelor, Jacklin, Clark and Hoskins.
We were spurred on by great support
Programme fetches £500
A RARE 1966 World Cup Final programme autographed by the England team went under the hammer for £500 at an auction this weekend.
A spokeswoman for Lacy Scott Auctioneers, off Risbygate Street, Bury St Edmunds, said the programme had been expected to fetch several hundred pounds.
Bidding at the antiques and collectors items auction had been lively and the programme was bought by a man from Chelmsford, she said.
Every member of the 22-man England squad and many of their West German opponents had signed the programme which was previously owned by a retired policeman, from Brandon.
Ipswich Town ended their goal famine in style — but still finished on the losing side in a thrilling see-saw match at The Dell.
Town team manager Mick McGiven said: ‘We had fluent movement and good possession, but we left the back door open.
‘Different styles made it thoroughly entertaining and nobody was complaining apart from me!
‘Watching it as a professional I had to be concerned about poor defending, but the decision to play three up front certainly caused Southampton problems,’ he added.
This sentiment was confirmed by Saints' boss Ian Branfoot who admitted that the attacking Town tactics had taken him by surprise.
‘It was a great game to watch, except for managers.
Their front three drifted all over the place and were hard to pick up.
We had a lot of trouble coping with their formation.
‘When I watched them win 2–0 at Tottenham they kept it ever so tight, so I was surprised at how much they came out and attacked.’
The star of the show was Le Tissier.
What tremendous skill be displayed as his runs and passes, especially in the second half, stretched Ipswich to the limit and sometimes beyond.
Economic on movement perhaps, but Le Tissier had a field day and earned high praise from Branfoot.
‘Matt is one of the best passers of the ball in the game.
He puts it where he wants it, and over long distances as well.
He provided great ammunition for Banger and Maddison.’
Ipswich had enough chances to have won convincingly yet, but for the reflexes of goalkeeper Baker, they could have ended well beaten.
It was that sort of game with goalmouth excitement at both ends.
After 410 minutes in the Premier League without a goal Ipswich threw their usual caution to the wind in an effort to check Saints' run of five successive home wins.
The adventurous plan came so close to working and certainly won Ipswich a host of new admirers.
Substitutions played a big part in setting up the amazing finale that produced three goals in the final five minutes when both defences looked wide open.
Cockerill, the club captain, really set the Saints buzzing by personal example when he took over from Widdrington in the 64th minute.
Goddard's departure was a pity.
He may have been looking a bit weary, but he was doing a splendid linking job and Whitton found it hard fill the gap.
The match could have swung either way in the final gripping 20 minutes.
A long, dipping shot from Le Tissier almost caught Baker off his line as it skimmed the bar.
Then Linighan saved the day for Town with a crucial tackle on Banger.
In the 75th minute Whitton had his big chance of glory — but wasted it.
Guentchev, Wark and Kiwomya laid on the opening but Whitton's shot was wild.
Le Tissier went on a run that took him ghosting past two defenders only for Baker to save.
Le Tissier then provided a precise through ball for Banger whose lob did not fool Baker.
The action moved to the Saints' end where a cross from Kiwomya eluded Dozzell and Whitton but fell kindly for Guentchev only for the Bulgarian to blaze his shot over the top.
The Saints' offside trap, infuriating when it works and potentially costly when it fails, let in Kiwomya on the end of a cross by Whitton.
While the Saints' defenders were glaring at the linesman, Kiwomya was putting a great chance over the bar.
A minute later Kiwomya made amends, to the embarrassment of Monkou, making it 3–3 with four minutes to play.
Even then both sides went for victory.
Adams set off an a solo run down the left reminiscent of his days at Leeds, and in the end Southampton's adventure was rewarded leaving Ipswich with nothing to show for an entertaining afternoon's work.
A draw would have been a fairer outcome.
Defensively there will be questions asked in both camps.
Baker did well apart from losing possession for the Saints' third goal while Wark earned a first half booking for a challenge on Banger.
Ipswich skipper Linighan said his side failed in their tracking of the Southampton raiders.
He must have been more fed up than most at the defeat after opening the scoring in the 13th minute, his first goal of the season.
It was a match to remember and the second time that Ipswich have lost 4–3 at The Dell after leading.
The other occasion was in the 1981–82 season.
David Linighan beats Tommy Widdrington to put Ipswich ahead at The Dell and, below, Paul Goddard beats Tim Flowers for the second.
Pictures by WARREN PAGE
A mother's pride in tasty chocolate cake
On The Boil With Fiona Eves
MOTHERS have been celebrated for centuries.
The ancient Greeks and Romans had festivals to honour divine motherhood and our own traditions of Mothering Sunday go back some 400 years.
If nothing else Mothering Sunday is a day to take stock.
Good mothers, like good cakes, don't come ready made.
It was my mother who taught me to cook and who taught me too about being a mother.
I have a great deal for which to thank her.
I have had a few years in which to practise cooking and, somewhat immodestly, I think this cake recipe could be classed as excellent.
My mother has had longer to practise being a mother and I think she has perfected the art.
Rich Chocolate Cake
(serves 16) Cake: 6oz (170g) soft margarine 6oz (170g) caster sugar 3 eggs, beaten 4oz (115g) self-raising flour, sifted 1oz (30g) cocoa powder, sifted 1oz (30g) toasted hazelnuts, ground 2 tablespoons chocolate liqueur Filling: 4 tablespoons strawberry jam 3oz (85g) butter or margarine, softened 60z (170g) icing sugar, sifted 2 tablespoons chocolate liqueur Topping: 4oz (115g) plain chocolate 2oz (55g) butter or margarine 8oz (225g) icing sugar, sifted flaked chocolate, to sprinkle 
Put all the cake ingredients except the chocolate liqueur in a mixing bowl and beat with a wooden spoon or with a food mixer until light and fluffy.
Beat in the chocolate liqueur.
Spoon mixture into two greased and base-lined deep 9-inch (23cm) sandwich cake tins.
Bake at 180C/350F/Gas 4 for 25 minutes or until the top springs back when pressed with a finger.
Cool on a wire rack and then spread one half with the jam.
For the filling, beat the butter with the icing sugar until light and fluffy, then beat in the chocolate liqueur.
Spread the filling on the other cake and sandwich the two together.
For the topping, melt the chocolate and butter in a bowl over simmering water or in the microwave.
Beat in the icing sugar to make a stiff paste.
Add boiling water and beat to make a smooth frosting.
Allow to cool a little until the mixture is thick but still pours, then spoon onto the top of the cake and gently work it down the sides.
The frosting will harden as it cools and, as you are spreading it, it will cool more rapidly.
Sprinkle with flaked chocolate and leave in a cool place to set.
Calories per slice: 395
Fruit Scones with cinnamon Butter
(makes 12)
8oz (225g) self-raising flour
pinch salt
2oz (55g) butter or margarine
1 tablespoon caster sugar
2oz (55g) sultanas
1oz (30g) dried apricots, chopped
1oz (30g dates, chopped
pint (140ml) milk
Cinnamon Butter
3oz (85g) butter, softened
1 tablespoon icing sugar, sifted
2 teaspoons ground cinnamon, or to taste
Sift the flour with the salt, cut in the butter until no lumps remain, then stir in the sugar and dried fruit.
Using a round-ended knife, stir in the milk to make a soft but no sticky dough.
Gather the mixture together, then divide into two and lightly rock each ball of dough backwards and forwards to make a smooth surface but do not knead it.
The less scones are handled the lighter they are.
Pat each ball gently to inch (2cm) thick and cut each round into six triangles.
Brush lightly with a little milk and bake at 220C/425F/Gas 7 for 12–15 minutes until well risen and golden brown on the bottom of the scones.
To make the cinnamon butter, beat the butter with the icing sugar and cinnamon and spread onto the split scones.
Calories per whole buttered scone: 193
13 MINUTES: Goddard, whose return to the side made the team tick, crossed for Guentchev to beat the Saints' offside trap.
Linighan was through on his own to shoot past Flowers for a somewhat overdue first goal of the season.
It ended a run of 423 minutes of FA Premier League football without a goal for Town.
18 MINUTES: Le Tissier took a corner from the right and Hall, escaping his marker, connected with a tremendous header to score against the club who rejected him as a 15-year-old.
His career is blossoming.
He has England under-21 honours and at the weekend picked up a Barclays Young Eagle of the Month award for the East Anglia and South to celebrate his 21st birthday.
This former Suffolk Schools' player is fast becoming one of Kesgrave High School's best known old boys.
35 MINUTES: Ipswich regained the lead when Guentchev, thriving on having better support up front, picked up a ball from Whelan in his own half and sent a long ball for Goddard to chase through the middle.
The Southampton central defenders left it to Flowers — but Goddard's challenge won him the ball and left him with a simple chance.
Flowers looked at fault, but the happy Town fans chanted ‘Goddard for England’ while the band was serenading them during the interval.
64 MINUTES: The arrival of Cockerill as substitute livened the Saints, his extra urgency leading to Stockwell tripping Maddison.
It looked outside the penalty area but referee Elleray thought otherwise.
Le Tissier showed no mercy beating Baker from the spot.
85 MINUTES: Saints' defender Kenna started a move and followed up into the penalty area to fire home a loose ball after Baker had lost possession in a hectic skirmish after a shot by Banger.
87 MINUTES: Kiwomya slipped the ball past the advancing Flowers after Monkou had tried to head a long ball from Guentchev back to his keeper.
Sloppy Saints' defending was punished.
89 MINUTES: Saints' last-gasp winner came when Dowie was free on the left.
His deep cross was met by Monkou whose header hit the far post.
Le Tissier was first to the rebound to score his 13th goal of the season.
Lamont could save racing industry
THE multi-million pound horse racing business at Newmarket could be saved from huge losses thanks to this week's Budget.
Chancellor Norman Lamont is expected to announce a solution to the VAT problem that threaten's the industry's future in Britain.
UK breeders face rates of 17.5 per cent compared with just 2.7 pc in Ireland and 5.5 pc in France.
The difference has prompted Tattersalls, Europe's leading bloodstock auctioneers, to move their top sale from Newmarket to Ireland this year.
The EADT has been campaigning to save the Newmarket industry, which is one of the best-known employers in Suffolk.
A sharp run-down in the business would be a devastating blow to the local economy.
Mr Lamont is set to sanction VAT registration of owners, which will allow owners to claim back money paid in VAT.
The move could save thousands of jobs and valuable revenue from the business.
Tattersalls will consider its position as soon as the Chancellor's decision is definite.
Company secretary Philip Potts said: ‘If we are going to bring the sale back to Newmarket, then we would have to act quickly because time is running out.
‘The VAT issue has been very important and that is why we have spent nearly five years on it.
We have been at the heart of the action.
We can't tell whether our decision to move the sale to Ireland has helped influence the Chancellor but it went right home in Government circles,’ he said.
At the Tote's annual lunch last week, attended by Mr Lamont, chairman Lord Wyatt predicted the Chancellor's ‘forecast disentangling of the VAT problem from the VAT minefield will save thousands of jobs in the horse racing industry’.
And Conservative MP Jim Paice, chairman of the all-party Bloodstock Committee, said yesterday: ‘I think it is looking very promising for registration.
Everybody would prefer a low rate of VAT but it has is has been accepted that that is a non-starter politically.
‘If introduced, it would be a boost right through the industry, particularly to breeders who can hopefully keep their operations going in this country.
It would also cheapen owners costs by allowing then to retain VAT on training fees,’ he said.
McKean crowns excellent weekend for the Scots
TOM McKean completed a wonderful weekend for Scottish athletics when he led from gun to tape to take the 800 metres crown.
Following Yvonne Murray's golden 3,000 metres win and the silver medal run of little-known David Strang from Saturday night, the 29-year-old Glasweigan continued the tartan success story with a superb run.
The man so often pilloried for fouling up on the big occasion was determined to make no mistake this time, racing to the front immediately to keep out of trouble and defying his opponents to get past.
Dominated
Brazilian star Jose-Luis Barbosa pushed the Scot in the back on the opening back straight, but McKean remained undeterred as he dominated proceedings from the front.
When Barbosa tripped up during the pursuit on the penultimate lap, McKean opened daylight over the rest of his rivals and maintained a three-stride advantage to the line, winning in 1min 47.29secs, ahead of Burundi runner Charles Nkazamyampi (1:47.62).
Controversial American sprinter Butch Reynolds marked his return to championship racing following the end of his drugs ban by powering to the 400 metres crown in a new championship record 45.26secs.
Second best
Meanwhile, Colin Jackson once again had to settle for second best after a dramatic and controversial 60 metres hurdles final.
The Welsh star was edged out by just two-hundredths of a second by his best friend Mark McKoy — but could have been forgiven for feeling he had been robbed of gold after the Canadian had seemed to get away to a false start.
McKoy, the home town favourite, had already been called up for one false start — and it seemed certain that he would be disqualified after appearing to have another flyer second time around.
But the race was not stopped, and both Jackson and American Olympic silver  medallist Tony Dees found themselves trailing McKoy badly by the first barrier.
Both made great inroads into the Canadian's lead and all three hit the line almost together, but McKoy dipped fractionally ahead.
He was timed at a Canadian record 7.41secs, the fastest time in the world this year, with Jackson adjudged to have gained the silver, though both he and Dees were clocked at 7.43secs.
Though Jackson was the first to congratulate Olympic champion McKoy, the disappointment was written all over his face.
Oystermen come close to victory
LOWLY Brightlingsea United came agonisingly close to recording their first Jewson League Premier Division win of the season against top of the table Wisbech.
The Oystermen led the match 2–1 with just three minutes remaining when Mel Mattless struck the equaliser.
Sean Duffett had given Brightlingsea a 13th minute lead from a corner and Jackie Gallagher did not head Wisbech level until the 80th minute.
Five minutes later David Gray restored Brightlingsea's lead, but then came the Mattless goal.
Four games
Wisbech are now 12 points ahead of second-placed Wroxham, who beat Felixstowe Town 5–0 and have four games in hand.
Cornard United's 3–0 win over Norwich United moves them up to third position.
Andy Smiles raced onto a Micky Stratton through ball to net the opener after 26 minutes.
Adrian Hunt, the new signing from Stowmarket, proved his worth when scoring the second when put clear by Scott Young six minutes later.
Hunt was again on the mark when scoring the final goal.
Chatteris Town's 6–1 home win over Harwich and Parkeston was their biggest win in the League since the 1976–77 season when Clacton Town were beaten 7–1 at West Street.
The first goal came from Tim Cliss in the 39th minute.
Peter Munn's diving header was parried and Cliss was on hand to net the rebound.
Cliss scored a second in the 55th minute and two goals in the following ten minutes from Steve Hudson put the game well beyond Harwich.
Craighton added a fifth for Chatteris and Dave Lee netted a consolation goal for the Shrimpers four minutes from time.
Cliss completed his hat-trick two minutes later.
Unbeaten run
A 3–3 draw at home to Lowestoft Town was enough to extend Tiptree's unbeaten run to six.
Andy Jackson gave the Jam Makers the lead from Lee Sonnex's cross after five minutes, but a minute later Vince Woods sliced the ball into his own net to level the scores.
Gary Tuttle gave the Blues the lead but Sonnex lobbed in an equaliser on 34 minutes.
Matthew Barbrooke restored Lowestoft's lead when heading home Paul Mobbs's cross, but they were denied their first win in eight matches when Gary Taylor made it 3–3 on 74 minutes.
The race for the two promotion places in Division One appears to be between top three sides Sudbury Wanderers, Soham and Woodbridge, who were all victorious.
A Steve Day header on 64 minutes gave leaders Sudbury Wanderers a 1–0 away win over Warboys Town.
Leisure project price tag of £2.1m
THE White Court West development near Braintree will include a leisure centre, community hall and a country park.
The £2.1 million community facilities are to be provided by site developers Countryside Properties.
The leisure centre, which will cost the company £1.4 million, will include a badminton court, a dance studio/gymnasium, changing facilities, reception, an office, stores and a bar.
There will also be a floodlit multi-purpose outside court, and two hockey and football pitches.
The £300,000 community hall will contain a main hall, a creche/meeting area, changing rooms, toilets, a kitchen and bar area, office and stores.
The country park, between the A131, the A120 and a proposed business park, is likely to cost £400,000.
It will include an adventure programme, with landscaping, substantial tree planting and footpaths.
Lessons from the past on behaving
‘March Search, April Try, May will prove whether you live or Die’
A LEGEND originating in the island of Kythnos, Greece, tells how March was so angry with an old woman for thinking he was a summer month that he borrowed a day from his brother, February, and froze her and her flocks to death.
March is often a windy month and because the winds are unsteady at this time of year there is always a chance of very changeable weather from day to day.
How true were the observations of Ecclesiastes: ‘The wind goeth towards the south and turneth about into the north: it whirleth about continually and the wind returneth again according to his circuits.’
However, what I would like to know is, where is Phoebe, the sun, these days?
So many days of late, although dry, have been dull and overcast, but as someone said to me, you can't wait too long for a good thing, so here's hoping.
There has been a lot lately in the Press and on TV about crime and violence and it is sad to see so much wrong being done by the very young of today.
Why?
I asked friends, over a cup of tea.
Television, said one; mothers going out to work, said another, but one word was missing — discipline.
Reading a letter from Miss Joan Rix in the EADT last week, I find that she had the same thoughts as myself.
It was nice that Sir Anthony Hopkins turned down a chance to play Dr Hannibal Lecter again.
In the film,The Silence of the Lambs , Sir Anthony plays the cannibalistic serial killer and says he fears that it glorifies violence.
It is true that many films and television programmes are about violence and murder and it doesn't take long for children to copy ideas.
A lot must reflect on the upbringing and family life.
I know mothers have to go out to work to help with the bills but this is no new thing.
Whatever has happened to the good old-fashioned values?
As children, we all got up to tricks like pinching a few apples or knocking on someone's door and running away — all rather harmless, but if our parents found out, we would be in for a good hiding, a cut on the backside.
Many a time I had the hand-brush and so did my brothers and sisters but it never did us any harm.
I know some readers won't agree that a hard slap on the bottom or leg won't hurt, but I would never agree to a clip round the ear or head.
We hear of teachers being afraid of their pupils.
When my sons went to the village school there was respect and they knew that they could not ‘nannick’ about in school, even if they did while on the way there.
Our teachers cycled to school and as soon as they were seen coming up the road, children walked along and behaved like little angels — if not, they would be in trouble as soon as they got into school.
But they were good teachers and well respected, a fact which I have heard my sons repeat often.
At one time, I used to think that living in our little villages we were safe from all the crime, but sadly, no.
How nice it was when we could leave the back door undone for the baker to put the bread on the table, the butcher to walk in and even put the meat in the pantry safe and the insurance man to pick up his money from the table.
Even the grocery man would go in, leave the goods on the table, take his money and leave the change.
How different today.
I wonder why there is so much crime or is it the world we live in which makes people so greedy?
How sad to see our old people not just robbed but beaten up so badly as well.
Sadly, I know there is less work today and many have turned to drugs and drink.
Our police are so busy trying to catch the culprits, but then I read in the Press last week of a young man causing £60,000 of damage by graffiti and getting off free because it would be a waste of public money to put him on probation.
No wonder he was laughing when he left court.
Just think of the trouble the police had gone to in catching this young person.
I wonder what his parents thought of him, but doesn't it all boil down to what life at home has been like.
Soccer
Hard target for Canaries
NORWICH are setting themselves the toughest of targets over the last nine games of the season as they bid to become champions.
‘Our attitude is ‘let's go out and win all nine.'
We'll need a few lucky breaks on the way to do it, but it's not impossible,’ said midfielder David Phillips.
‘The last four home games are all against good footballing sides — Aston Villa, Liverpool, Manchester United and Leeds — and I think that will be to our advantage.’
It was Phillips's 13th minute shot which allowed the Canaries to close in on the leaders, although there was more than a slice of luck about it as the ball hit Nick Henry before bouncing over the stranded Oldham keeper Paul Gerrard.
Both Gerrard and his opposite number Bryan Gunn made outstanding saves in a thrilling climax to the game, and Norwich manager Mike Walker feels his side are now returning to their early season form.
The Canaries title rivals Manchester United and Aston Villa fought out a thrilling 1–1 draw at Old Trafford yesterday.
Aussie Mark Bosnich, the Villa goalkeeper who rejected the sun and surf of Bondi beach, turned up the title heat on former club Manchester United with a magnificent display.
Steve Staunton put the Midlanders ahead with a stunning 53rd minute strike, but Mark Hughes levelled with a header.
final of the Coca-Cola Cup with a 2–1 semi-final second leg win over Blackburn to win 6–3 on aggregate.
They now face Arsenal in the final on April 18.
Sheffield Wednesday duly reached the
Swedish midfielder Patrick Andersson put Rovers 1–0 up on the day, but goals from David Hirst and Mark Bright settled the issue.
‘It's just like when you're a player,’ said Wednesday boss Trevor Francis.
‘Going to Wembley is what I've wanted as a manager.
It's a relief.
It's been a great weight on my shoulders over the last month.
I felt as if half of Sheffield expected us to get to Wembley so it is a relief that we've actually done it.’
Cambridge boss Ian Atkins described his team's performance against Portsmouth on Saturday as ‘disgraceful’.
In Barclays League Division One
After the 1–0 defeat he said: ‘The quality of our passes into the box was just diabolical and we had no one apart from Steve Claridge showing any aggression in there.
As far as quality of play went it was probably the worst since I took over.’
The only goal was an own goal by Gary Clayton.
A strike out of the blue by top scorer Stan Collymore 12 minutes from time gave Southend a 1–0 win at Oxford and a boost in their fight against relegation.
a great save in a penalty shoot-out against Mexico to earn England a place in the semi-finals of the World Youth Cup in Melbourne.
Barnsley's David Watson pulled off
With England leading 4–3 on penalties after James Pollock, Darren Caskey, Alan Thompson and Chris Bart-Williams had scored Watson denied Mexico with a stunning save from their captain Juan Salis.
England will now play Ghana in the semi-finals on Wednesday and Brazil, 3–0 winners over the USA, take on Australia.
Point-to-point
High Easter treble for Bloom
Nic Bothway a popular winner
By Carolyn Tanner
Nigel BLOOM was in excellent form again on Saturday, and his treble at the Essex fixture at High Easter not surprisingly earned him the very handsome trophy presented by ‘Pleasure Prints’ to the meeting's most outstanding rider.
He kicked off with a very comfortable success in Division One of the Restricted on Jim Papworth's Melton Park, who made light of his 7lb. penalty in his fourth victory of the season, and followed up in Division Two on Paylins.
Alan Aldridge's chestnut quickened well approaching the penultimate and was in no danger from then on.
Purchased out of Tim Forster's yard three years ago, Paylins has always been perfectly genuine, but his form has improved dramatically since trainer Neville King decided to equip him with blinkers.
Enterprising ride
The third leg of Mr. Bloom's treble was Gillie Mann's Ovac Star in the first Maiden.
Mount Patrick appeared to have the race sewn up after he collared Radiant Monarch two out, but he stopped to nothing on the run-in and Ovac Star swept past.
Mrs. Mann and her husband Rodney now live in Oxfordshire, but they have retained their East Anglian loyalties, having had horses in training with Mike Bloom for several years.
They have leased Ovac Star from the Moore family, in whose colours he ran at Higham earlier this season.
A former inmate of the Bloom yard, Lady Somerleyton's Beau Seigneur, took the second Maiden under an enterprising ride from Lucy Hollis, who kicked for home at the fourteenth.
‘I thought I'd gone too soon,’ she admitted afterwards, but her mount battled on well when challenged by Copper Thistle to win by a length and a half.
Beau Seigneur is now trained at Linstead, near Halesworth, by John Ibbott, for whom Mike Bloom was full of praise.
‘This horse used to be so difficult,’ he stated, ‘and John's worked wonders with him.’
Euan Nicolson, sporting a Caribbean suntan from a recent holiday, took the Confined on his Sneakapenny, who never looked like falling but who did his utmost to demolish most of the fences on his way to victory.
‘He's so strong that nothing stops him,’ commented his trainer, Lucy Wadham.
‘He's just like a battering ram.’
Front runner
An even less flattering appraisal of her charge came from Libby Heath after Clare Villar's Quick Reaction had made all to win the Men's Open under Simon Andrews.
‘He's a selfish little swine who behaved appallingly at Catterick,’ was her assessment of Quick Reaction's display in a Hunter Chase three days earlier, ‘so I ran him here as a punishment!’
Another front runner was Cherryhill Beauty, who scored the expected easy win in the Intermediate under Matthew Gingell.
The grey is trained by the rider's mother Angela, who attributed the horse's fitness to working on ‘the only hill in Cambridge’ on Val Banks's land at Harlton.
The Ladies' Open was a popular success for Nic Bothway on her stepfather Gurney Sheppard's Rubie's Choice, who ran on well to hold the challenge of Shedid after the last.
Back to winning form
This was Miss Bothway's first winner between the flags for two years.
The former area champion was travelling abroad in 1992, but kept her hand in by riding a winner on the flat in the United States during August for Mr. Sheppard's brother, Jonathan.
A competitive Members' race went to Robin Gill riding his father's Foxy Games.
Mr. Gill overdid the waiting tactics in Foxy Games's previous outing at Cottenham, but made no mistake here, going on five out and comfortably holding the late run of the favourite, York Royal.
Nic Bothway and Rubie's Choice are flying for home.
Miss Bothway recorded her first win between the flags for two years at High Easter on Saturday.
Results from High Easter
Going: good to firm
Confined Hunts' Race: 1 Mr. E. Nicolson's SNEAKAPENNY (Suffolk)(Owner); 2 Mr. J. M. Turner's DROMIN LEADER (Suffolk)(Miss Z. Turner); 3 Mr. G. Cooper's SHOTINGO (E & Suffolk)(Owner).
Also: Old Dundalk, bl (4), Bustamente (5), O Catina (6), Cleddau King (ur), Connex, bl (pu), Fine Tudor (pu).
One: half.
Time 6.31.
Tote £2.50.
DF £5.00.
SP 6–4 fav.
Restricted, Division 1: 1 Mr. A. J. Papworth's MELTON PARK (Dunston)(N.Bloom); 2 Mr. M. J. Jerram's MASTER STRIDES (Essex)(T. Moore); 3 Mr. C. Sporborg's CARDINAL RICHELIEU (Puck)(W. Sporborg).
Also: Red Poucher (4), Baracus (5), Bay Gunner (6), Shades of Oak (7), Hatton Cross (pu), Jimmy Green (pu), Kettlebrig (pu), Russett King (pu), True Poetry (pu).
Two: fifteen.
Time 6.33.
Tote £3.10.
DF £3.60.
SP 4–6 fav.
Hunt Race: 1 Mr. D. Gill's FOXY GAMES (R. Gill); 2 Mr. M. J. Jerram's YORK ROYAL (Mrs. K. Moore); 3 Mrs. J. Marriage's TAKEOVER BID (Miss J. Walker).
Also: Loan Hill (4), Royal Raga, bl (5), Balacomment (6), Spring Sale (7).
Two: four.
Time 6.36.
Tote £2.30.
DF £2.00.
SP 9–4 (York Royal 4–5 fav).
Restricted, Division 2: 1 Mr. A. Aldridge's PAYLINS, bl (Thurlow)(N. Bloom); 2 Mr. D. Gill's WOODREDON LAD (Essex)(R. Gill); 3 Mr. B. Joyce's BEACH TIGER (Fitz)(S. Andrews).
Also: Hyperwash (4), Lampass (5), Rondo Veneziano (6), Sassy Nephew (7), Romanit (8), Wistino (9), The Grey Boreen (10), Kelly's Twilight (pu), My Opinion (pu), Santano (pu), Three Jays (pu).
Three: five.
Time 6.32.
Tote £5.40.
DF £6.00.
SP 5–1 (The Grey Boreen 7–2 fav).
Men's Open: 1 Mrs. A. Villar's QUICK REACTION (Suffolk)(S. Andrews); 2 Mr. J. Horn's BIGSUN (Essex)(P. Harding-Jones); 3 Mr. J. Whyte's LAD LANE (Waveney)(Owner).
Also: Roars of Applause (4), Lions Gate (f), Stegsman (pu).
Twelve: eight.
Time 6.25.
Tote £1.70.
DF £2.60.
SP 5–4 fav.
Intermediate: 1 Mrs. A. Davies's CHERRYHILL BEAUTY (Cambs H)(M. Gingell); 2 Miss S. Weatherhead's TAM'S ARIA (Cambs H)(S. Andrews); 3 Mr. J. Waterson's RUN TOKEN (Essex F & U)(Owner).
Also: Copper Dynamo (4), Suny Sorell (5), Slemish Way (6), Whistling Eddy (7), Gale Force Ten (8), Up The Cherries (pu).
Ten: two.
Time 6.34.
Tote £1.30.
DF £4.40.
SP 1–2 fav.
Ladies' Open: 1 Mr. M. G. Sheppard's RUBIE'S CHOICE (Cambs)(Miss N. Bothway); 2 Mrs. P. Rowe's SHEDID (Puck)(Miss L. Rowe); 3 Mr. D. Scott's SOUTH SUNRISE (C U Drag)(Miss M. Seward).
Also: Freelance (4), Gay Melody (5), Elegant Stranger (6), Llanpadrig (pu), Marney Barle (pu), Vintage Lad (pu).
One: one.
Time 6.26.
Tote £1.50.
DF £2.00.
SP 1–2 fav.
Maiden, Division 1: 1 Mrs. I. R. Mann's OVAC STAR (Dunston)(N. Bloom); 2 Mr. N. Padfield's MOUNT PATRICK (Enfield)(S. Andrews); 3 Mr. C. Yule's MUCK OR MONEY (Waveney)(Miss L. Hollis).
Also: Radiant Monarch (4), Paulena Dual Chance (5), Druid's Lodge (f), Great Amwell, bl (pu), Pendil's Nephew (pu), Strontino (pu), The Braughingbaron (ur), True Illusian (pu), Wayward Quay (pu).
One: two.
Time 6.35.
Tote £20.20.
DF £40.70.
SP 14–1 (Radiant Monarch 4–6 fav).
Maiden, Division 2: 1 Lady Somerleyton's BEAU SEIGNEUR (Waveney)(Miss L. Hollis); 2 Mr. M. G. Sheppard's COPPER THISTLE (Cambs)(P. Taiano); 3 Mr. D. Clark's SQUEEZE ME (E & Suffolk)(Miss K. McKillop).
Also: La Fontainova (4), Half a Sov (5), Millers Ty (6), Kindled's Clown (7), Fierce Bad Rabbit (f), Harmony Walk (pu), Pastrami (f), Potamos (pu), Quarndon (pu).
One & a half: five.
Time 6.39.
Tote £3.90.
DF £2.30.
SP 7–2 (Copper Thistle 2–1 fav).
Nolan notches up a hat-trick
Top riders compete at Poplar Park trials
Report by Carolyn Tanner.
Pictures by Owen Hines
PIPPA Nolan completed her hat-trick at Poplar Park yesterday when, riding Heron's Flight, she won the main class at this popular event for the third successive year.
Nolan, the reigning British Open champion, has moved her base from Norfolk to Surrey, where she has ten competition horses in her yard.
Her main concern at the moment, though, is the difficulty of keeping away from cigarettes — her resolution to stop smoking is just four days old!
This traditional curtain-raiser to the horse trials season attracted a star-studded line-up, among them former world champion Ginny Leng, who was one of only two riders to take the direct route at the computer horse link V rails.
Leng won an Open Intermediate class on Welton Houdini and also finished third on Welton Romance, who is part-owned by Ron Huggins, managing director of the event's main sponsors, Kimberly-Clark.
The current world champion, Blyth Tait, was paying his first visit to Poplar Park and was very satisfied with the performances of his trio, Messiah, Ricochet and Tempo.
Tait intends to remain at his Berkshire base until the 1994 World Championships, after which he may return to his native New Zealand.
Like all the other competitors, Tait had nothing but praise for both the fences and the state of the going at Poplar Park.
His only criticism was the proximity of the showjumping arena to the start and finish of the cross-country course.
Obstacles
‘My horses were very excitable and got a bit fired-up by all the activity,’ he said.
‘But then I'd have been worried if they'd been lethargic, so you can't have it all ways!’
There were very few problems at any of the cross-country obstacles, although a rebuilding job was needed on both the Suffolk Saddles triple bars and the Dengie Crops fan rails towards the end of the day.
Happily there were no injuries to those few horses and riders who did part company.
Horse trials and eventing are attracting a larger following each year, and without doubt Charlotte Hollingsworth's victory at Burghley last year on The Cool Customer has helped to popularise the sport in Suffolk.
Competitors
The Cool Customer finished second in an Open Intermediate class yesterday and Hollingsworth was also in the money on Sir William Aldous's Solo Performance.
Hollingsworth, whose parents live at Erwarton, near Shotley, now has a yard at Westley Waterless, near Newmarket, where she will be making her home when she marries Newmarket vet Andy Bathe in June.
The awards for Suffolk competitors at Poplar Park went to Emma Hicks (best cross-country score in Novice sections), Brook Staples and Rebecca Molineaux (Open Novice), and Charlotte Hollingsworth.
Hollingsworth took both the Advanced Intermediate award and the trophy for the combined Intermediate and Open Intermediate sections.
Prost's stylish return
Only seven finish at slippery Kyalami
Frenchman Alain Prost made a victorious return to formula one in an incident-filled South African Grand Prix on his first outing with his new Williams team.
In a race which ended in chaos with thunder, lightning and heavy rain, Prost cruised home 1min 19 secs ahead of Brazilian Ayrton Senna in a McLaren.
His win enlarged the Frenchman's record total of Grand Prix victories to 45 and maintained the Williams's team complete superiority over their rivals in the season-opening race.
Briton Mark Blundell came home third, one lap down, to score his first podium finish on his first drive with the Ligier team.
Spun off in rain
Brazilian Christian Fittipaldi was fourth in a Minardi ahead of Finland's J J Lehto who grabbed fifth place in the rain-drenched closing stages for the new Swiss team Sauber.
Austrian Gerhard Berger was sixth in a Ferrari, also on his first outing after returning to the team, having stolen through on the penultimate lap.
This left Briton Derek Warwick, in a Footwork, in seventh place after he had spun off on the final lap in the rain.
Only seven cars were classified as finishers from the 26 who started.
Prost and Senna produced a thrilling duel early on.
The Frenchman on pole made a poor getaway and Senna took the early lead, holding it for 23 laps before Prost, after several previous attacks had been rebuffed, forced his way by.
The Frenchman then had an untroubled run to the flag except for the downpour on the final two laps.
All the leading cars traded places briefly during a flurry of pit-stops but it had little effect on Prost who was able to pull clear and win comfortably.
Senna struggled for a long time with what he later described as an undriveable car and he collided with Germany's Michael Schumacher after 40 of the 72 laps.
Schumacher in a Benetton tried to force his way by but Senna pulled across, their wheels touched and the German spun out of the race.
Race of life for Blundell
MARK Blundell produced the race of his life in South Africa today when he finished third on his debut with the Ligier Renault team behind triple world champions Alain Prost and Ayrton Senna.
Royston-based Blundell finished one lap behind the brilliant duo but had every reason to be proud of a fine drive in his first Formula One race since 1991.
He said: ‘It was very emotional for me and I had a tear in my eye as I came across the line.
‘I have been working for a moment like this for nine years and finally it has arrived.
This is my reward for all of that.’
Luckless
Blundell's great finish behind Prost, who won comfortably in his Canon Williams Renault, ahead of Senna's Marlboro McLaren Ford, was some compensation for team-mate Martin Brundle's luckless retirement in his 100th grand prix.
As the Ligier team provided Blundell with a champagne celebration in the pits, they wheeled out a giant cake to mark Brundle's special, if disappointing landmark.
‘I'm feeling a bit choked about it,’ said Brundle.
‘Everything seemed to be going well and I looked like finishing well in the points when I went off, all on my own, towards the end.
And that was that.’
Damon Hill's challenge in his first race with the Williams team also ended early as he collided with Italian Alessandro Zanardi in a Lotus after 16 laps.
Lacked experience
Hill said: ‘I shouldn't have been in that position in the first place if I had not spun on the opening lap.
That was my fault because I got too close to Senna.
I was second and I lacked experience.
‘There was nothing I could do about the accident.
I had Philippe Alliot in front of me and there was nowhere to go when I was hit by Zanardi.’
Derek Warwick was also out of luck after a storming drive in his Footwork Mugen Honda.
After a bad start and an early tangle with Michael Andretti's McLaren, which saw a wheel ripped off the American's car, Warwick worked his way through the field.
He was running sixth and looking good for a point after a tense battle in the final laps when he span off the rain-soaked track on the last lap.
‘What can I say,’ said Warwick.
‘The race was really lost at the start when I got bogged down and Andretti went into the back of me.
‘After that my car gave a big flick in the fast corners and it was difficult to drive.
I pushed hard and I picked up some places, but then in the bad conditions Lehto caught me and I went off into the wet and that was it.’
Damon Hill walks back to the pits after colliding with Italy's Alessandro Zanardi in the South African Grand Prix yesterday.
Victory for Clifford
BRAVE teenager Clifford Wilde took first place in a charity wheelchair race at the weekend which should help other people with disabilities become more mobile themselves.
The event, held at the leisure centre in Vista Road, Clacton, was a fundraiser for the £7,000 Shopmobility appeal being spearheaded by Tendring District Council.
It aims to provide a fleet of electric wheelchairs and scooters which will be available free of charge to help the disabled get about the town centre.
Clifford, 16, who attends Clacton County High School, has brittle bones but his determination saw him through to victory in Saturday's race, which was also open to the able-bodied.
Relieved City ease fears of relegation
Chelmsford City 1 Halesowen Town 0
CHELMSFORD City players were cheered off the pitch at the end of their 1–0 victory over Halesowen Town, a demonstration stimulated by a sense of relief rather than the quality of the performance.
City went into this game knowing that anything less than three points would leave them looking over their shoulders toward the relegation area.
The satisfaction in the City camp was aptly summed up by manager Joe O'Sullivan in his after the match comment: ‘These are three points which takes us two short of the 40 mark, which I think will be enough.’
This success also gave City their first League double of the season, but it was a little ironical that in a game where the respective goalkeepers played a prominent part in keeping it goalless for 70 minutes, an error by the Halesowen custodian should have produced the match winning goal.
Antonio Rowe, in the Halesowen goal, distinguished himself with important saves, particularly during the first 20 minutes, when City were well in control.
Apart from Rowe, City were also denied by an upright, which got in the way of a volley from Tony Rogers.
When Halesowen began to show their attacking prowess there was plenty of action from Mervyn Cawston, the former Southend keeper, called upon to deputise for Kevin Foster, who was nursing a broken finger.
Halesowen, in fact, looked a little sharper in attack than City did.
Their main threat came from Paul Joinson, back with the club for his second spell and Ian Brown, a clever left winger recruited from Burton Albion.
It was, however, City's Ian Brown who eventually scored the match winner, but his success was due to the one slip of the game made by goalkeeper Rowe.
With 20 minutes left the goalkeeper had to make what looked like an orthodox clearance, but the ball hit one of his own defenders and Brown's quick reaction put him in possession.
Although he made a meal of applying the finish, the ball eventually finished in the net.
Thanks to Cawston, that goal had three points stamped on it.
In the last minute Cawston denied Malcolm Hazlewood from a chance set up by their man Brown.
As the game stretched into injury time, Dave Jacques was close to deflecting a corner into his own goal and from that corner Cawston flung himself amongst flying feet.
City are thus able to check the Premier table to find they have eight teams below them with a gap of nine points separating them from the relegation zone.
Sports TV
THERE'S a feast of live football this week — but only if you can get near a TV set with a satellite.
It starts with the normal Monday night live Premier League game on Sky Sports at 7pm, this week between Crystal Palace and Chelsea from Selhurst Park.
If you are one of the people who think all that pre-match razzamattazz is so over the top, the actual kick-off is 8pm.
Then tomorrow evening, Sky is also screening the Sheffield United v Blackburn Rovers FA Cup quarter-final replay from Bramall Lane, live again at 7pm (but kick-off at 7.45), and on Wednesday evening the second quarter-final replay between Sheffield Wednesday and Derby County from Hillsborough (same times as Tuesday).
Us mere mortals with ‘normal’ channels have to be satisfied with highlights of Wednesday's Hillsborough replay at 10.20pm on BBC1 with the goals from Tuesday's Bramall Lane replay.
Meanwhile, ITV gets a look-in with highlights of Glasgow Rangers v Belgian champions Bruges in the European Champions League from Ibrox, plus reports on the other Champions League matches on Anglia on Wednesday at 10.50pm.
Aren't the majority of fans being short-changed a little here?
Perhaps it's a case of money talking and the fans coming second.
However, rugby union and racing fans are well catered for on BBC this week as both the Five Nations Championship reaches its exciting climax and the Cheltenham National Hunt Festival gallops out of the stalls.
In Grandstand on Saturday (BBC1, 12.15pm), there is live coverage of the whole of Ireland v England from Lansdowne Road, where England will be looking for their seventh consecutive win against Ireland, and live coverage of the first half plus highlights of France v Wales from Paris — Wales will be trying for their first win there since 1975.
Of course, there are highlights of both games on Rugby Special on Sunday (BBC2, 5pm).
Coverage of the Cheltenham Festival begins on BBC1 with four races on Tuesday afternoon (1.50–4.20pm) followed by four more races on Wednesday afternoon (BBC1, 1.50–3.50pm and BBC2, 3.55–4.30pm) reaching a climax with the big one, the Tote Cheltenham Gold Cup, at 3.30pm during Thursday's coverage (BBC1, 1.50–3.50pm and BBC2, 3.55–4.30pm).
KEVIN Rayson (left), the Halstead Town captain and sweeper, clears his lines during his side's 4–0 victory over Stowmarket at Rosemary Lane.
Stowmarket, now under new manager Trevor Wardlaw, have gone 12 Jewson Premier League matches without a win.
Halstead's goals came from Neale Dakin (58), Colin Sinclair (68, 85) and James Goodwin (77)
Care charity aiming to run into cash
A COMMUNITY care charity in north-east Essex is planning a major fund-raising fun run later in the year.
Family Support (Clacton) was formed by local voluntary services in 1982 and has been independent since 1985.
It specialises in helping carers who look after relatives in their own homes.
The aim is to relieve the stress of carers and other members of the family, preventing elderly or handicapped people becoming institutionalised and avoiding an increased burden on hospitals.
Volunteers usually act as ‘sitters’ caring for a client while the rest of the family is away, perhaps for a few hours for a weekly shopping trip.
Other families need help over a longer period, although the group is careful not to overlap with the work of professional staff from the social services.
Outings and social events are also organised by the group for housebound people, using its own minibus.
On Sunday, May 16, the group is staging a charity half-marathon in Clacton and the surrounding area, starting from the Clacton Leisure Centre at 10 am.
Runners of all ages are welcome, although minors will have to obtain parental permission and those under 14 must be accompanied on the run.
The fee is £3.50 per runner and entries, with cheques made payable to Family Support (Clacton), should be sent to Roy Buckley, 762 St John's Road, Clacton-on-Sea, CO16 8BN, by Friday, May 14.
Family Support (Clacton) also covers the Holland, Jaywick, Weeley, St Osyth and Brightlingsea areas.
Details about its work can be obtained by calling Clacton (0255) 432132.
Children enjoy a bumper day out at centre
FIFTY children were treated to an afternoon of fun, games and food by Round Tablers on Saturday.
Members of the Colchester Colne Round Table Club collected the party of eight-to-12-year-olds from the Greenstead estate by minibus and took them to the Wilson Marriage Centre in Barrack Street.
There, nearly four hours of games and sports were laid on, including rounders, basketball, five-a-side football, a bouncy castle and face-painting.
All that activity helped the youngsters work up an appetite, which was satisfied thanks to food and sweets provided by McDonalds and the Trebor company.
The event was the Colchester Colne club's contribution to a nationwide day for children supported by some 20,000 Round Tablers across Britain and Ireland.
Members of the Chelmsford Tindal club organised a blood donor session on behalf of the Anthony Nolan Trust, which seeks to find matching donors for those needing bone marrow transplants.
On the ball: 12-year-old Zaneta Daniels learning football skills on Saturday
England concede initiative as Tufnell fails to impress
England finally had the chance of putting another team through the Test mincer — and they blew it.
And to make matters worse after their own slide from 316 for three to 380 all out, the second day in Colombo ended with Phil Tufnell again struggling for form.
Tufnell took nought for 50 from 13 overs, with six boundaries being plundered from his first five overs, as Sri Lanka moved smoothly to 140 for one in reply.
England's batsmen, led by Robin Smith, had set up a perfect platform to build the huge total that would have put Sri Lanka under great pressure.
But, as so often during their 3–0 Test series humbling in India, indifferent batting against the spinners by the lower middle order gifted wickets to the opposition.
Slow bowlers
And now England could have a fight on their hands in their second innings on a pitch beginning to help the slow bowlers.
Yet again, however, England's spinners looked far less dangerous in such conditions.
Sri Lanka opener Roshan Mahanama hit 64 off just 84 balls before a fine reflex catch by Smith at silly point ended an entertaining innings in which he cut and turned England's spinners with relish.
Mahanama struck 11 fours and Tufnell, in particular, found him a handful.
The Middlesex slow left-armer began this winter's campaign as one of the world's top ranked spinners, but he has not lived up to that reputation.
Once more he struggled to maintain a line that did not drift towards leg stump.
John Emburey did take Mahanama's wicket, but the 40-year-old off-spinner is clearly not the bowler he was back in 1982 when he bowled England to victory in Sri Lanka's inaugural Test in Colombo with a second innings six for 33.
Heat and humidity
But it was England's batting which disappointed most of all, especially after Smith had defied the heat and humidity for seven and a half hours to make 128 and both Graeme Hick on Saturday and Alec Stewart yesterday had compiled five half-centuries.
Smith, on 91 when England resumed at 245 for three, soon completed his first overseas Test hundred, and his eighth in all in his 40th Test.
He faced 335 balls, hitting 20 fours and, in eight innings in his new role as opener in the last few weeks, he has totalled 451 runs.
Acting captain Stewart, his delightful 63 taking 122 balls and including ten fours, gloved to short-leg a delivery from Jayananda Warnaweera that bounced and turned disconcertingly.
But Neil Fairbrother and Chris Lewis still looked well capable of boosting England's total significantly before Sri Lanka's spinners were further rewarded for their persistence.
Fairbrother, on 18, was bowled by a quicker full length ball from Warnaweera.
Lewis was then run out needlessly when failing to react to Emburey's call for a third run, and Paul Jarvis was lbw to his first ball.
Tufnell was also adjudged leg before, his decision perhaps harsh, and a couple of sixes by last man Devon Malcolm off Muralitharan was the sum total of England's late order resistance.
Warnaweera and  Muralitharan both finished up with four wickets apiece — but for the second day running very few Sri Lankan spectators turned up to watch.
At least half a crowd of 1,000 were English holidaymakers but most of Colombo's cricket fans are currently hooked on a series of college matches in the city which over three days have attracted a total of 20,000 spectators at three venues.
M Atherton lbw b Ramanayake’ 13
R Smith b Muralitharan’ 128
M Gatting c Jayasuriya b Muralitharan’ 29
G Hick c Tillekeratne b Muralitharan’ 68
A J Stewart c Tillekeratne b Warnaweera’ 63
N H Fairbrother b Warnaweera’ 18
C C Lewis run out’ 22
J E Emburey not out’ 1
P W Jarvis lbw b Warnaweera’ 0
P C R Tufnell lbw b Muralitharan’ 1
D E Malcolm c Gurusinghe b Warnaweera’ 13
extras’ 24
Total’ 380
Fall: 1–40, 2–82, 3–194, 4–316, 5–323, 6–358, 7–366, 8–366, 9–367.
Bowling: Ramanayake 17–2–66–1; Gurusinghe 5–1–12–0; Warnaweera 40.1–11–90–4; Hathurusinghe 8–2–22–0; Muralitharan 45–12–118–4; Jayasuriya 12–1–53–0; Ranatunga 3–0–11–0.
R S Mahanama c Smith b Emburey’ 64
U C Hathurusinghe not out’ 54
A Gurusinghe not out’ 11
extras’ 11
––]
Total (for 1 wkt)’ 140
Fall: 1–99
Bowling: Malcolm 5–3–9–0; Jarvis 6–0–26–0; Lewis 6–0–18–0; Tufnell 13–1–50–0; Emburey 10–1–33–1; Hick 1–0–1–0.
ENGLAND
First innings
SRI LANKA
First innings
Below-strength Wivenhoe crash
Dulwich Hamlet 5 Wivenhoe 0
WIVENHOE were without three influential players on their first ever visit to Champion Hill in the Diadora League Premier Division.
Springett and McClean were suspended and March was ill, and the outcome was a five goal defeat for the Dragons.
Simon Gray, Paul Fraser and new signing Wayne Bond came into the Wivenhoe side.
Dulwich went ahead after 22 minutes when Hewitt found acres of space down the left before cutting in to drive a shot into the net via the inside of the far post.
Four minutes later Hedman's powerful shot was parried by Wood, but still ended up in the net.
After 34 minutes, Dulwich were presented with a third goal.
Wood's attempt to clear a back pass fell at the feet of Norris, who sidefooted into the net.
Wivenhoe's only chance of hauling themselves back into the match came in the 48th minute when Gray was pulled down by keeper Caskey, who then saved the spot kick from Abrahams.
Norris powered home a header after 63 minutes to put Dulwich out of reach before Leaburn's half-hit shot bobbled over the line for number five.
Hunter headed clear to deny Norris his hat-trick and by the end the Dragons were hardly breathing fire.
Heybridge Swifts 0 Purfleet 1
PLAYING their first game for 11 days, Heybridge Swifts again found the outcome settled by a single goal.
They are now in a really precarious position in the table, following a day when results generally went well for their fellow strugglers.
Their hopes of returning to full strength were again dashed with defender Chris Moore a victim of German measles, recently signed midfielder Steve Cox unavailable, and Tony Scofield still out of action and facing an operation on his knee.
Mindful of their situation they began well, forcing a first minute corner and pressing strongly.
Yet with their very first attack, the visitors struck a cruel blow.
Jason Spiteri sped unhindered up the right in the seventh minute and prolific goalscorer Alan Brett ran through to connect at the near post, giving the keeper no chance.
Thereafter Heybridge fought well throughout and had far the better of the play.
Twice they were denied penalties for handball, one in each half, and when Colin Johnson hit the upright 16 minutes from time, it looked more and more obvious that this was not going to be their day.
Purfleet had a couple of players booked and one sent off in quick succession but their reshuffled ten men held firm.
In the dying stages they broke away, only to hit the woodwork twice from good positions, but their early goal enabled them to double their hosts.
Tomorrow's fixture: Heybridge v Leyton, kick-off 7.30 p.m.
Chertsey 1 Witham Town 1
AFTER Monday night's good performance against league leaders Ruislip Manor, which resulted in a draw, Witham kept their good form going and won another point, this time against second-placed Chertsey.
Witham dominated most of the first-half but did not score until just before half-time when Adcock cleverly chipped the ball over the keeper.
It was a different story after the break with the Witham defence under pressure throughout with Banks saving a penalty, but he could do nothing when a free kick by McCarthy took a deflection on its way into the net.
Speedway
Young Witches trio given their chance
By Elvin King
THREE Ipswich Witches youngsters will be thrown in at the deep end on Thursday when Foxhall Stadium stages the Star of Anglia on the opening day of the 1993 speedway season.
Savalas Clouting (17), Shaun Tacey (18) and Laurence Hare (23) will be fighting it out for a place in the Witches reserve berths after graduating from last season's double-winning junior side.
And they will celebrate their elevation to senior speedway by riding against world stars like Sam Ermolenko, Jeremy Doncaster and Simon Wigg.
Witches team manager John Louis was impressed by all three at last week's Press Day.
‘They deserve a chance and I had no qualms about putting them in this quality field.
‘We shall know whether they sink or swim by putting them in at the deep end, and I have every confidence that they will all do well.
It would be lovely if we could produce another top local rider and these three boys could fit the bill.
Thursday will be an ideal starting point for them.’
Clouting, a former St Albans School, Ipswich pupil, has the benefit of lucrative sponsorship from Suffolk farmer Tim Woodward.
He has two machines and a van and the use of a modern workshop in one of Mr Woodward's barns.
He impressed last year on his rare appearances in the first team and is highly rated.
Tacey, who lives near Diss, is also receiving help from Woodward.
The tyre fitter said: ‘I have two machines and am raring to go.
We worked well as a team last year with Ben Howe and we learned how nice it was to win things.
The pressure will be on us more this time but it doesn't worry me.
‘My main aim will be to stay in the team and help Ipswich finish high up in the First Division.’
Hare, a panel beater from Belstead, is likely to be battling it out with Tacey for the number eight race jacket.
New format
‘He has more experience than the other two, and showed a great deal of improvement last year.
He might have to settle for a reserve place on Thursday.’
The Evening Star sponsored Star of Anglia takes on a new format this year.
The top eight riders after 16 heats will go into the semi-finals.
These will be held over six laps with the first two from each race taking the front grid in the six-rider, eight-lap final.
The riders who finish third in the semi-finals will ride off the back grid.
The winner of the coveted trophy will be the winner of the final race.
Tony Rickardsson, Chris Louis and Sam Tesar will head the Ipswich challenge along with Howe, while other riders booked are Brian Karger, Greg Hancock, Claus Jakobsen, Richard Knight, Charles Ermolenko and Josh Larsen.
John Louis is still searching for riders to complete his 1993 team.
The league season starts on Thursday week with a home match against Belle Vue and with Shane Parker injured and Miroslaw Kowalik unable to obtain a work permit, the Witches only have four riders signed for their top six places.
‘I am working hard to complete the team,’ said Louis yesterday.
Dancers raise £3,000 for charity
THE Clacton Jacqueline Annis School of Dancing raised more than £3,000 at its charity show held last week at the Clacton County High School.
A cheque for £3,017 was handed over for the Great Ormond Street Hospital.
Mrs June Goodier, one of the organisers, said they were delighted with the amount raised with still more money to come in.
She also thanked the sponsors for their support.
More than 50 children and 24 women took part in the school's first staged show named Footsteps.
Bids are currently being invited for a football signed by the Tottenham Hotspur players and a signed framed photograph of Gary Lineker.
The money raised will be added to the final total.
Bids can be made by telephone (0255) 860055 or (0255) 221473, or alternatively by telephoning Radio Mellow during John Hyde's show on Wednesday between 6.30 pm and 9 pm.
So far £40 has been offered for the ball and £5 for the framed picture.
Good start to play-off quest
Braintree Ladies 1, Pelicans 1
ESSEX champions Braintree's challenge for promotion to the East Super League started well in the first of three play-off matches against Pelicans, from King's Lynn.
The home team dominated the first half, although both defences looked solid.
Pelicans had some quick players who were dangerous on the break, but Clair Ward and Debbie Wadforth kept cool.
Braintree goalkeeper Sylvie Reynolds was called upon to make two important saves and Emma Wooding looked assured, making some penetrating runs on the left.
Braintree started to control the midfield in the second half and only the final touch in the circle let them down.
They were finally rewarded when Wadforth fired them in front from a short corner but they momentarily relaxed and Pelicans replied almost immediately with a well-worked move from a long corner which caught out the defence.
Overall, the Braintree team worked hard and produced a creditable performance which must be repeated at Lincoln on Saturday.
Their third round-robin game is back at Panfield Lane against Letchworth a week later.
Other results:
St. John Payne Wanderers 1, Braintree Ladies Seconds 1 (Tracey Peat); Braintree Ladies Fourths 5 (Stella Layzell 5), Colne Ladies 2.
An evening with Johnners is not to be missed
BRIAN Johnston is not so much a ball-by-ball cricket commentator, more a national institution.
Devotees of the 81-year-old broadcaster can spend a delightful evening with Johnners at Colchester Arts Centre on Thursday.
The master raconteur looks back at the many amusing moments of his 47-year career at the BBC.
He told Arts Scene: ‘I do my waffle with a few little inserts from tapes.’
As well as covering such memorable state occasions as The Queen's Coronation and the funeral of King George VI, he once hid inside a red letter box all day for In Town Tonight.
Brian Johnston — a national institution
Rebel stars set to stage final in UK
MANCHESTER'S hopes of staging the World Chess Championship between Gary Kasparov and British challenger Nigel Short received a boost yesterday.
Champion Kasparov said the match would definitely take place in Britain and Manchester had not been ruled out.
Last month the world chess federation Fide accepted a £1.2 million bid from Manchester to stage the championship.
But in a surprise move Short and Kasparov snubbed the ruling body and rejected the offer.
They said they had not been properly consulted about the venue and formed a rival organisation, the Professional Chess Association, to manage the championship.
The match was put out for new offers and Kasparov is due to make an announcement in London on March 22.
Yesterday, Fide gave the two rebels until March 23 to reconsider their breakaway.
School's contest bid faces failure
By Kevin O'Connell
NICHOLAS Pert-Haran Jogeesvaran, Suffolk Under-18 Championship 1993.
Black thought that he could play 1…f6 here to chase the white bishop away from e5.
He was wrong and soon had to resign.
Why?
Solution (easy/moderate) below.
Ipswich School's bid to reach the finals of The Times British Schools Champion-ship has almost certainly failed in the round of the last 16.
Paired against Grantham, Ipswich enjoyed draw odds because their team was younger and needed to score 3/6 to qualify.
Ipswich scored 2/5, with one game, which is evenly balanced, to be adjudicated.
The adjudication system places the position of an unfinished game before a moderately strong player (usually about 2200), who then decides what the result ought to be.
The world number three, Anand (2710), is sure that the position is a draw.
Final scores of the strongest tournament in the history of chess, this year's Linares tournament: Kasparov, Russia 10/13 (7 wins, 6 draws); Anand, India, and Karpov, Russia 8; Shirov, Latvia 8; Kramnik, Russia 7; Ivanchuk, Ukraine, and Salov, Spain 6; Beliavsky, Ukraine 6; Bareev, Russia, and Kamsky, USA 5; Timman, Holland, and Yusupov, Germany 5; Bielorussia 4; Ljubojevic, Yugoslavia 4.
Solution
Cricket
England salvage pride in Colombo
ENGLAND'S cricketers dug deep into their last remaining reserves of energy to salvage some pride in the fierce heat of Colombo yesterday
A Sri Lankan total of 408 for eight, and a first innings deficit so far of 28, would not normally be a cause for satisfaction.
But this has been no ordinary tour for England, beaten 3–0 in the Indian Test series and consistently outplayed on the pitches of the sub-continent.
Being even on level terms with the opposition after three days of a Test match is a position almost of luxury for the current England team.
Yet once again yesterday England's spinners were largely ineffective — with slow left-armer Phil Tufnell failing again to live up to his pre-tour billing as the tourists most likely match winner.
Diving catches
Chris Lewis and Paul Jarvis were the pick of England's attack, making up for the spinners' lack of success with gutsy new-ball spells either side of tea.
And acting captain Alec Stewart did his best to inspire his team to greater efforts with two brilliant diving catches and a smart stumping.
Stewart made just one error with the gloves on a day of sweat and toil — failing to hold a difficult leg-side catch offered by Aravinda DeSilva on 74 off Devon Malcolm — but also impressed with the handling of his bowlers.
The turning point for England was provided by Stewart, in the final over before tea, when the accomplished DeSilva aimed a leg glance at Jarvis.
Taking the new ball at 294 for three had not immediately provided a breakthrough, and DeSilva, on 80, looked set to steer Sri Lanka to a sizeable first innings lead.
But Stewart dived a long way to his left to scoop up the ball one handed just inches from the turf.
After tea Lewis produced one of his best, and fastest spells of the tour to reduce Sri Lanka to 349 for six.
And the home side's innings continued to mirror that of England's just over 24 hours earlier with John Emburey and the returning Jarvis picking up a wicket apiece to further England's fightback.
SRI LANKA First Innings
U C Hathurusinghe c Stewart b Lewis’ 59 A Gurusinghe st Stewart b Tufnell’43 P A de Silva c Stewart b Jarvis’80 A Ranatunga c Stewart b Lewis’64 H P Tillekeratne not out’51 S T Jayasuriya c Atherton b Lewis’4 A de Silva c Gatting b Emburey’9 C P H Ramanayake c Lewis b Jarvis’1 M Muralitharan not out’7
extras’ 26
Total (8 wkts)’ 408
Fall: 1–99, 2–153, 3–203, 4–330, 5–339, 6–349, 7–371, 8–376
Bowling: Malcolm 19–6–45–0 Jarvis 22–2–68–2 Lewis 24–4–53–3 Tufnell 30–4–106–1 Emburey 26–5–95–2 Hick 8–0–27–0
England captain/wicketkeeper Alec Stewart congratulates Chris Lewis who took three wickets for 43 runs on the third day of the Test.
Dowman gives an assurance
STEVE Dowman has promised there will be no repeat of Saturday's ‘inept’ performance when Wivenhoe Town take on second-placed St. Albans City in the Diadora Premier tonight.
The Dragons went down 5–0 at Dulwich Hamlet and positional changes are guaranteed.
Dowman is also unlikely to play 4–3–3 again as the Fraser-French-Abrahams frontline was ineffective.
Wivenhoe were missing the suspended Mitchell Springett and Christian McClean, two of the club's top three scorers, but Dowman still felt the display was ‘unacceptable.’
The influential pair are still out, but new signing Wayne Bond, on the left side of midfield, came out of the game with some credit and Jon March makes a welcome return after illness.
Harrow defeat
St. Albans average two-and-a-half goals a game away from Clarence Park and ex-Dragons Steve Clark and Jimmy King are having excellent seasons, but they did lose 2–1 at home to Harrow Borough on Saturday and let Chesham go nine clear at the top.
Wivenhoe have not won for eight games — included in that run is a 3–0 defeat at St. Albans.
With sides below having games in hand, a first point since early February would be most handy.
Halstead Town are in the thick of a Jewson League Premier Division relegation battle and tonight travel to Watton Utd (7.45 pm).
Their hosts are Halstead's nearest rivals for survival.
Halstead (from): Loach, Goodwin, Selby, Rayson, Skeggs, Jewitt, Dakin, Deveraux, Streetley, Sinclair, Bailey, Elliot, Leversuch, Proctor.
All-conquering Essex on course for double
ESSEX set up the chance of completing a senior and under-21 national double with breathtaking, all-conquering performances over the weekend, despite being hit by key absentees.
The men's side lost Old Loughtonians' influential Nick Thompson with a groin strain, but still won the East Championship easily, without even conceding a goal.
The under-21s were without John Stannard, their number one short corner specialist, whose car broke down en route, but they managed comfortable wins in the regional qualifiers with goals all scored from open play.
The seniors, managed jointly by County President Peter Woodward and Richard Morris and coached by Chelmsford's Paul Morris, beat Lincolnshire 3–0 in the first round and Cambridgeshire 5–0 in the semi-finals.
In the final, expecting a tougher time against Norfolk, they ran out 7–0 winners with Old Loughts' Ian Barker and Krishnan both notching hat-tricks and Chelmsford's Phil Benton adding the other.
The county's National League sides supplied all but one of the Essex team, but as odd ones out go, they do not come much more newsworthy than Grant Peters.
The Brentwood goalkeeper, making his debut at this level, is the son of 1966 World Cup soccer hero Martin.
The Old Loughtonians' ground, in Chigwell, is one of eight regional qualifying venues for the re-jigged county championships and Woodward believes Essex are in with a great chance of winning through to Cannock.
After those three emphatic wins which continued the Essex domination of the East region for a fourth year, Woodward thinks his team has a strikeforce capable of beating Dorset, Northamptonshire, Somerset and Bedford on March 27–28.
The under-21s are more even highly-fancied to retain the national title, which they won last year for the first time by beating Nottinghamshire in the final.
Rick Horne is still in charge and his confidence is high despite losing a number of his players, who are now too old.
He has been able to involve many more clubs than the senior side.
After qualifying for the East semi-finals in impressive style, Essex beat Hertfordshire 3–1 and trounced Cambridgeshire 5–1 in the final, after taking a 2–0 lead at half-time.
The outstanding performers were Scott Loftus, of Old Loughts, who scored four, and Old Felstedians Chris Maitland and Paul Surridge, who has been holding down a place with National League First Division outfit Canterbury since leaving school.
Without Stannard, Essex failed to convert any of 14 short corners in the final and with him back in the team, they can go purposefully to Cannock on April 17–18.
Woodward fears a club v county clash
PRESIDENT Peter Woodward fears a club versus county conflict breaking out between Chelmsford and Essex, who are pursuing separate ambitions later this month.
Chelmsford, hoping to preserve National League status, have to compete in the arduous relegation play-offs, while Essex need players for the County Championship campaign.
In his last year as President, Woodward is desperately keen to give Essex their first senior national title and has taken up the role of joint-manager to that end.
He is worried, however, that the team which won the East Championship so well could be broken up if Chelmsford insist on retaining all their players for friendly matches.
Essex have to get through regional qualifiers at Old Loughtonians on March 27–28, but Chelmsford coach Dick Clarke believes unity is all important at so crucial a time.
He does not want his team disrupted and is even more concerned that one might be injured while playing for the county.
Five Chelmsford players — Keith Wiggins, Rowan Healey, Ed Daubeney, Phil Benton and Ade Smith — were involved last weekend.
Woodward believes the quintuplet would benefit from playing alongside and against players of National League First Division and international standard.
He also said there was as much chance of a player becoming injured by falling down the stairs as playing for Essex, but admitted there was a conflict of interest which he hoped to resolve in the very near future.
Harwich aiming higher
HARWICH'S bid to gain respect from East Anglia's better clubs continues to gain momentum.
They beat Bury II 34–0 and captain Paul Thomas is convinced the result will lead to improved fixtures next season.
Centre Paul Gale and flanker Michael Scarfe both scored two tries, with another added by Simon Tinny, who also hit a conversion.
Peter Brown completed the rout with two conversions and a penalty.
Thomas said their improved performances should lead to better fixtures next season.
Brave Ipswich are beaten again
Ipswich 6 B. Stortford 12
DESPITE a display full of commitment and endeavour, Ipswich lost their eighth Courage League game of the season, going down by a goal and a try to two penalties.
In the first 20 minutes, Ipswich were all over their visitors and were camped permanently in their half.
However, all they had to show was two beautifully struck penalties from full-back Jordan, which was scant reward for the pressure.
On the half-hour, however, Stortford scored an opportunist try when winger Ridgewell intercepted a pass from Cummings to his centre and touched down between the posts.
Scrum-half Campbell converted to give them the half-time lead.
Despite this setback, Ipswich fought back with scrum-half Bryn Kerr leading the charge with an outstanding display on his return to his preferred position.
He rightly earned the man of the match award.
Ipswich were unfortunate to lose winger Jeremy English with fractured ribs, ruling him out for the remainder of the season.
Lawrence came on as replacement and was thrust into the action immediately with some solid tackling as Bishop's Stortford started to attack.
Full-back Jordan made a try saving tackle as Stortford tried to exploit the disruption to the Ipswich back division.
The Ipswich forwards were out-scrummaged by the solid Stortford pack and it was from a push-over try after 20 minutes of the second half that Stortford scored their next points.
Despite the result, it was an encouraging performance by Ipswich.
John Kornjaca and Bryn Kerr, restored to the No 8 and scrum-half positions respectively, both had sound games and were well supported in the back row by Edmonds and Bisdee, the latter moving back to his preferred position on the blind side.
Cummings kicked intelligently and Jordan had a more mature game at full-back.
Next Saturday, Ipswich visit old rivals Southend in a friendly before tackling their two remaining league games of the season against Upper Clapton and Lensbury.
Ipswich can still survive relegation by winning both these games subject to the results of other teams at the bottom of the table.
Ipswich man of the match Bryn Kerr is tackled and looks for support from flanker James Bisdee.
Kerr, returning to his favoured scrum-half position, was the best player for Ipswich
Crusaders 0 Maldon 37
MALDON kept alive their hopes of promotion from Courage League Eastern Counties Division One with this convincing victory.
Crusaders were pinned back in their own half for the first 20 minutes as the visiting pack was dominant.
This gave the backs quality possession and the defence eventually cracked.
With the ball inches from the line hooker Sean Culleton burrowed his way under the bodies for an unconverted try.
Richard Battye increased the lead with a penalty.
Maldon scored their second try through Jack Redfern and Battye converted.
The third came soon after when flanker Chris Clapcott crashed over for another converted try.
Battye kicked a further penalty to make it 25–0 just before the interval.
Maldon were met with stiffer resistance in the second half and did not score for 20 minutes, until scrum-half Willcocks dived over in the corner.
He also scored the final try of the game.
Battye converted.
Scu's Granville all the rage
‘I hope I've got it right' — Scudamore
GRANVILLE Again moved to the forefront of the Smurfit Champion Hurdle betting yesterday when Peter Scudamore chose to ride him in today's big race at Cheltenham.
He now heads Ladbrokes's market at 6–1 (from 7–1) with Coulton and Flown, after the champion jockey preferred him to Martin Pipe's other challenger Valfinet, to be ridden by Jonathan Lower.
Scudamore resolved the first of his Cheltenham dilemmas after working Granville Again on Pipe's gallops this morning.
Scudamore said: ‘It was a very difficult decision, and I hope I've got it right.
I rode Granville Again this morning and he seems in great form.
I know Martin is very pleased with the horse.’
In the Gold Cup, Scudamore still has to pick between Rushing Wild and Chatam.
Rushing Wild was beaten last time by Country Member, who attempts to upgrade the value of the form in tomorrow's Ritz Club National Hunt Handicap Chase.
Scudamore said: ‘I'll watch how Country Member runs before deciding on my Gold Cup ride.’
Wide open
Granville Again, an unlucky faller when poised to deliver his challenge in the race 12 months ago, has been off the track since he finished eight lengths third behind Mighty Mogul at Kempton over Christmas.
But Scudamore's decision could see him start clear favourite in a race that has lacked a dominant performer since the death of Mighty Mogul.
Ladbrokes spokesman Rob Hartnett said: ‘It is the widest open Champion Hurdle in living memory, but Granville Again has been a warm order since Scu climbed aboard.’
A field of 18 will line-up for the big race after eight horses dropped out, among them Muse and Mole Board, whose chances were considered slim on ground now good to firm and good in places on the hurdles course.
Punters were concentrating their interest on horses with proven form at Cheltenham, in particular Oh So Risky, Kribensis, Ruling and Duke Of Monmouth (cut to 25–1 from 50–1).
Docklands Express was the best backed horse in the Gold Cup today.
He is now 8–1 with William Hill, 9–1 with Corals and 10–1 with Ladbrokes.
Toby Balding will see how conditions are at Cheltenham tomorrow before deciding whether to run Cool Ground in the Gold Cup.
Last year's winner could miss the race because of the fast ground.
Champion Hurdle betting
LADBROKES: 6–1 Coulton, Flown & Granville Again, 9–1 Vintage Crop (from 8–1), 10–1 Oh So Risky (from 12–1), 11–1 Halkopous (from 9–1) & Kribensis (from 16–1), 12–1 Ruling (from 16–1), 16–1 Valfinet & Morley Street, 25–1 bar.
WILLIAM HILL: 9–2 Flown, 11–2 Coulton, 13–2 Granville Again (from 8–1), 7–1 Vintage Crop, 10–1 Halkopous & Oh So Risky (from 12–1), 14–1 Valfinet, 16–1 Kribensis & Morley Street (both from 25–1), 20–1 bar.
Young players put on a fine display
COLCHESTER played host to 24 clubs for the annual under-14 tournament where the trophy at stake was a new one.
The John Motum Plate was named in recognition of the current assistant treasurer of the RFU who spent many years as general secretary of Colchester.
The weather was ideal and the quality of rugby was extremely high.
Teams travelled from Chelmsford, Basildon, Bishops Stortford, West Norfolk, St Olave's School, Ipswich, Uckfield, Norwich Crusaders, Brentwood, Westcombe Park, Bury St Edmunds, Braintree, Beccles, Romford, Old Albanians, Sevenoaks, Sudbury, Rochford, Harlow, Chingford, Burgess Hill and Tunbridge Wells.
Colchester were defeated in the semi-final of the runners-up competition by Rochford, the eventual winners.
In the main trophy final Sevenoaks defeated St Olave's School in a game worthy of rounding off an excellent day's rugby.
John Motum, presenting his trophy, paid tribute to both the players and the coaches.
Results
Runners-up competition, semi-finals: Colchester 0, Rochford 17; Brentwood 0, Old Albanians 19.
Final: Rochford 7, Old Albanians 0.
John Motum Plate, semi-finals: St Olave's School 5, Tunbridge Wells 0; Uckfield 0, Sevenoaks 19.
Final: St Olave's 0, Sevenoaks 15.
Soccer
Bulgarians may turn to Guentchev
By Tony Garnett
WHILE Bontcho Guentchev is linking up once again with his Bulgarian colleagues in Tenerife, his former Sporting Lisbon team mate, Australian Vlado Bozinoski, is named in the Ipswich Reserves squad for tonight's Combination match against Luton Reserves at Leighton Buzzard (7.30).
Guentchev is very much back in international reckoning after his goalscoring exploits in the FA Premier League with Ipswich Town.
The Bulgarians wanted Guentchev to join their squad for the match with Austria in Vienna, but Town's schedule at the time was too hectic.
Now he is hoping to be picked for the match against Spain in the Canary Islands to give his career a real boost.
The Canadians will soon be ready for the second stage of their World Cup qualifying programme and Town goalkeeper Craig Forrest and defender Frank Yallop will be in action in a group that includes Mexico.
Forrest plays for the reserves tonight and will welcome the match practice as he has been unable to win his first team place back from Clive Baker.
Mixed team
The reserves field a blend of youth and experience.
Steve Whitton, who played the final 18 minutes in Saturday's FA Premier League 4–3 defeat at Southampton, is named together with defender Eddie Youds who stayed on the subs bench.
One of the most promising of the younger brigade is Adam Scowcroft who is one of 10 yet to have first team experience.
IPSWICH RESERVES (from): Forrest; Connell, Theodorou, Tanner, Youds, Mortley, Scowcroft, Pirie, Whitton, Dolby, Bozinoski, Vaughan, M Weston and Norfolk.
Leon Bell of Stoke High School in Ipswich has been called into the England Schools' u-15 squad for their match against Wales next Monday.
Now fully fit Bell, an associate schoolboy with Ipswich Town, joins Ipswich-based goalkeeper Richard Knight in the squad.
Knight was not included in the England side that lost 2–1 to Scotland at Wembley on Saturday.
Guide to the TV races on BBC-1:
2.15 Race: Frickley can overturn likely market leaders Boro Eight and Satin Lover.
Gordon Richards's star novice created a tremendous impression when beating Dreamers Delight at Doncaster and possesses scope for considerable improvement.
The Irish are raving about Boro Eight but fast ground will not suit.
Satin Lover, unbeaten in six starts over timber, seems sure to make the frame, but might prefer better ground, and is reluctantly passed over.
2.50 Race: Sybillin looks in a class of his own.
There was no fluke about his comfortable victory over Wonder Man at Nottingham, and he had previously recorded a top-class performance for a novice when beating Deep Sensation and other experienced handicappers in the Victor Chandler Chase at Ascot.
Travado has plenty of potential and excellent each-way prospects.
3.30 Race: Only class horses win the Champion Hurdle and the pair which best fit that definition are the brothers Morley Street and Granville Again.
Morley Street seems to have lost interest this season but a strongly-run race on fast ground could trigger a revival.
Peter Scudamore's late decision to partner Granville Again was no surprise.
Absolutely cruising when falling two out in last year's contest, the chestnut has also been below-par this term, but freshened by a three-month break, can arrive fast and late to claim the crown.
Coulton lacks top-class form, Flown still has plenty to prove, Valfinet lacks class, and former champion Kribensis is not the force of old.
4.05 Race: Fast ground performer Country Member is reportedly Andy Turnell's Festival banker.
A six-length dismissal of Martin Pipe's Gold Cup hope Rushing Wild at Sandown looks red-hot form.
Stirrup Cup, unbeaten in six races this season, faces much his stiffest test.
Rejuvenated veteran Cavvies Clown, who beat two former Gold Cup winners, Garrison Savannah and Cool Ground, at Wincanton, can chase Country Member home.
Rugby Union
Braintree hang on in captivating encounter
Romford & Gidea Park 6 Braintree 6
ALTHOUGH this match was largely devoid of running rugby, it was a classic of its type, the spectators held captivated by the tense battle.
With Mark Wadforth at full back for Braintree and Stuart Lewis partnering Matthew Wadforth in the centre, skipper Steve Jarlett opted for the replacements' bench and looked on with approval as Nigel Brand led the team to its second successive draw at Crow Lane.
There was, however, much more at stake in this season's London Division Three North East clash, and Braintree were full value for their point.
The Black and Ambers pack, with Clive Brooks at number eight, were given a thorough work-out in the early stages.
Scrum-half Dan Phillips was under extreme pressure with sparse possession invariably accompanied by the host side's back row, but the Braintree pack dug in.
They tackled like demons and when they were able to run the ball back at the Londoners their refusal to capitulate eventually wore down the opposition.
An early penalty put Romford in the points but Braintree's three-quarters were magnificent, denying their counterparts room to use their abundant possession.
It was obvious that the visiting backs wanted to run the ball with what crumbs came their way but were foolhardy when an attempted break out of defence ten metres from the line resulted in a five-metre scrum.
Braintree prevented the try but were offside in doing so and went in at half-time 6–0 down.
Having survived the worst Braintree hit back well and it became a question of how much damage Dean Ford could inflict, firing away with penalties as Romford became increasingly fractious.
Successive efforts from inside his own half went close before a 40m chance was tucked away.
With the exception of one line-out five metres from the Braintree goal line, where McDonald plucked the ball from the air to enable Mark Wadforth to make a pressure kick to reverse the attack, it was the visitors who were on top.
With a minute to go, justice was done when Ford sent home his second penalty.
Other results: Braintree Hornets 11, Romford II 22; Romford III 18, Braintree III 36; Braintree IV 24, Romford 0; Romford V 5, Braintree Exiles 15.
Saffron Walden 0 Colchester 17
CONFIDENT Colchester had to fight all the way to finally see off some resolute opposition in this London Division Three North East clash.
Walden are next to bottom without a win all season but their brave defence reduced Colchester to a kicking game on a day which seemed perfect for running rugby.
Colchester played up the hill in the first half and began solidly, their pack pushing Walden back onto the defensive.
After just eight minutes a strong drive by centre Pete Manning was stopped short of the line but the ball was quickly moved for scrum-half Watts to score.
Hepburn converted to make it 7–0.
The pack kept winning good ball for Colchester but they were unable to do much with it and the only other score of the half was a penalty by Hepburn.
After the break Walden began to win more ball, which they ran with great vigour, and were unlucky not to score on a couple of occasions.
But, 10 minutes from time, Colchester finally put the result beyond doubt.
From a scrummage on the 22 a double mis-move by Hepburn created the gap for centre Wilcoxon to score under the posts.
Hepburn converted to seal the victory.
Rochford 30 Chelmsford 3
MISSING three of their better players, Chelmsford were over-run by Rochford and cannot ignore the possibility of being relegated from the London Division Three North East.
Kevin Lander's team must win at least one of their three remaining fixtures to be safe.
Heads began to drop as Rochford's forwards took charge, the absence of Graham Mackleworth as motivator and hooker being very apparent.
Calum Leays' kicking was also off.
John Lyons and winger Phillip Tett were also both out and, as Lander admitted, when a trio of above average players are taken out of an average team problems are going to arise.
Leays hit only one of a number of penalties in the first half and Rochford led 15–3 at the interval.
Facing up the slope and against the wind in the second half, Chelmsford had no chance of making up the deficit.
Rochford ran in a couple more tries, condemning Chelmsford to a fifth defeat in nine league games.
The seconds gained some revenge by winning 18–5 at Coronation Park.
Talk on beekeeping
BEEKEEPING is the subject of the last talk of the season at the Chelmsford and Essex Museum on Friday.
Apiarist Eric Fenner will be giving expert advice on the hive, honey, royal jelly, pollination and botany during a slide show which starts at 8 pm.
Entry is £1 (Museum Friends free).
Bookings are being taken by the Chelms-ford and Essex Museum, Oaklands Park, telephone (0245) 281660.
Tolly cheers deal exporting brew to Italians By Helen Robertson
TOLLY beer from Suffolk is going down a storm among the wine drinkers of Italy.And ale from Tolly's Cliff Brewery in Ipswich could soon be wetting the whistles of beer-lovers in Canada, Germany, Holland and France.Tolly bosses are celebrating after exporting 1,200 cases of their special Year Beer, Cantab, to Italy — and they have received inquiries from four other countries.Brian Cowie, Tolly's joint managing director, said interest from abroad had initially come since the brewery's name had been publicised on BBC television's recent Troubleshooter programme.
‘We have not particularly been trying to sell export.
Exporting was not actually mentioned on the programme, but it must have helped,’ said Mr Cowie.
‘I think it's like foreign lagers becoming quite popular in this country, English beers have a growing reputation abroad,’ he added.Although the Italians liked the taste of Tolly's 1048 Cantab beer, they were not so impressed with the brewery's taste in labels.The controversial naked lady, the Bacchante, on the label of Cantab beer, had already been described by Cambridge students as ‘sexist’and the Italians felt it was ‘not very English’.
Tolly soon remedied the problem and the bottles of Cantab were sent to Italy with pictures of the Suffolk Punch on every label.The beer's name was also changed to conform to its traditional image, and will be known by the Italians as Tolly's Strong Ale, an English ale.
Susan Bumstead, barmaid at The Tap, with the ale going that is down a treat in Italy
Powley bounds to race success
THE Bildeston Bounders 10km race was won by Nigel Powley of Felixstowe Road Runners in a time of 31 mins 34 secs.
The Speake brothers William and Douglas, from the host club, finished second and third.
Dee Guite won the ladies' race in 39.04, while Colchester Joggers' Jo Bennett was sixth in 42.55 and Lynn Tanner, of Colchester and Tendring, was the leading veteran in 44.28.
Tiptree's Michael Beckett was the top men's veteran in 35.23.
In the two-mile fun run Darren Beckett clocked 12.00 mins.
The start of the Bildeston 10km road race.
Nigel Powley (53) successfully defended his title, although William Speake (66) was catching him late in the race.
Other runners in the top ten included third-placed Douglas Speake (64), Jon Davy (16) and Chris Starmer (67).
Picture by Owen Hines
Ladies likely to keep three teams
CHELMSFORD Ladies Hockey Club are unlikely to disband the A team, whose existence many first team players feel would hinder their prospects for the 1993/94 season.
After escaping relegation from the National League on Sunday with a 1–0 win over Ealing, the management team want changes made to the club's infrastructure over the Summer.
If a status quo is preserved, Chelmsford seem sure to struggle in the new eight-team Premier League unless a number of quality players show a willingness to come to Essex.
Manager Sue Frost said the club did not have the strength in depth to support the firsts, seconds and As, who were relegated from the East Super League.
Because of injuries and unavailability, Chelmsford were often stretched to field three teams this season so much so that the first team was left short of substitutes.
Chelmsford could certainly have done with a bigger pool of players.
Frost was often only able to name squads of 12 or 13 players, thus losing the benefits offered by the rolling substitutions law.
‘At this level, you need depth on the bench,’ she said.
‘We had aimed to be in the top three and we need a real re-think.
Most of the dates clash and next season with home and away matches, we will need continuity.
We have to give priority where it's due.’
However, President Ros Marsh said after the Ealing game that the club's main aim for next season should be to get the As back into the East Super League, where Chelmsford deserved representation.
The side was important in the development of young players with first team potential and the women should not allow an unbridgeable gap to emerge between the Premier side and the rest of the teams, as the men had.
Hockey
Chelmsford bemoan draw
CHELMSFORD have not had the best of luck in the draw for the National League relegation play-offs, which take place at the Oulton & West Warwickshire Club on April 2,3 and 4.
Besides Oxford University, the side everyone wanted to avoid, Dick Clarke also has to prepare for confrontations with in-form Anchorians from Surrey and Essex rivals Crostyx.
The ex-England indoor coach believes Brean, the other National League Second Division strugglers, have been slightly more fortunate in drawing Edgbaston, Sheffield and Gloucester City.
A win in the opening game, against Crostyx, will be crucial.
A fortnight ago, the Norwich Union East Champions lost to Redbridge and Ilford, who Chelmsford have beaten this season, but form would count for nothing in a derby game, he insisted.
Peaked
Anchorians peaked at just the right time to win Division A of the Peroni League, while Oxford University have one of the country's best outdoor coaches pulling the strings.
Gavin Featherstone, an ex-England and Great Britain player, is a professional, taking seminars and making videos.
Clarke said he had ‘an enormous CV’, having managed the U.S.A at the Los Angeles Olympics in 1984.
The team itself is young and talented and the presence of many foreign students gives Featherstone plenty to work with.
Clarke said Chelmsford would be approaching the tournament as one of the favourites, but much depended on who prepared the best, had the most luck and stayed free of injuries.
On that basis, Chelmsford should do well.
They are without right half Chris Maitland, who is on holiday, and reserve goalkeeper Chris Routes, who has a knee injury, but otherwise had every reason to be confident.
They are travelling to play Oulton in a friendly this Saturday to get acclimatised and each player has been given a personal training programme to get ready for three games in three days.
The draw
Group A: Anchorians, Chelmsford, Crostyx, Oxford University.
Group B: Brean, Edgbaston, Gloucester City, Sheffield.
Family puts home up for sale after pet cat is shot
By David Carter
A FAMILY has put its home up for sale because of what it fears is a vendetta against their pet cats.
Mrs Sandra Ellis, of Fernie Road, Braintree, found one of her three cats hit by an airgun pellet.
The shooting incident happened on Sunday evening, but the cat, Inkie, is still being treated by a local vet after losing an eye when the pellet lodged in his head.
Mrs Ellis, 41, a nurse at St Michael's and Courtaulds Hospitals in the town, said she was in her garden with her husband Chris and their two children, Katharyn, 12, and Matthew, nine, when the incident happened.
She said: ‘I heard a click and then a shot and one of our cats, Fluffy, came running into the garden.
Then there was another shot.’
Mrs Ellis said Inkie, a small black cat, ran behind the sofa, crying in pain.
‘His eye was a complete mass of red, it was bulging out.’
The shooting followed incidents over the last two or three weeks where the family's other two cats have returned home and have been violently sick.
‘I am convinced someone has been trying to poison them,’ she said.
‘The shooting has meant we are putting our house up for sale,’ she said.
‘We can't live in fear.’
She said she believes she knows who shot the cat, but has been told by police that unless there were witnesses there was not a lot that could be done.
Inspector Clive Butler said the police would treat the matter as one of criminal damage.
He said people were allowed to use air rifles in their own gardens, and if a cat strayed into the path of the pellet in those circumstances it would be regarded as an accident.
Sandra Ellis and her children, Matthew and Katharyn, with their injured cat Inkie
Speedway
Permit fight goes on
IPSWICH Witches have not given up hope of 23-year-old Pole Miroslaw Kowalik riding in tomorrow's Star of Anglia meeting at Foxhall Stadium (writes Elvin King).
The Witches have received backing from the Speedway Control Board and the BSPA for their appeal to the Department of Employment over last week's ruling to refuse a work permit.
Kowalik is waiting for a telephone call from Ipswich and will come straight over if requested.
Team manager John Louis said last night, ‘Miroslaw has all the status of a world star and I cannot understand why the request was refused.
‘He reached the World semi-final last year at Bradford which makes him one of the top 32 riders in the world.
He is in the Polish Best Pairs and World Team squads.
He is still very much in our 1993 plans.
‘Through no fault of our own we are currently two riders short.
I have heard nothing on the Dave Norris situation for some while, but we must consider that he has gone.
‘Shane Parker badly injured his foot in virtually his last race in Australia before leaving to fly to Ipswich.
I am working on a replacement for him as it does not look as though he will be available until June.’
Ipswich say they are not interested in 33-year-old New Zealander Mitch Shirra, who is available at Swindon with a £10,000 fee on his head.
He was skipper of the relegated Robins side last year and missed just one match.
Fitness is the goal for soccer players
PROFESSIONAL footballers talked about their personal goals when they gave a talk on physical fitness to an Essex joggers' club.
Ipswich Town players John Wark, a Scottish international, and Craig Forest, the Canadian international goal-keeper, spoke to nearly 50 Colchester Joggers' Club members at the town's Arena sports centre on Monday.
The invitation was the idea of club member David Heather who said the pair provided ‘perfect role models’ for the club's young athletes.
He said: ‘They gave a very interesting and enthusiastic presentation on the necessity for commitment and standards in sports.’
Topics in the talk included alternative training methods, particularly for building up leg strength.
Ipswich Town players John Wark and Craig Forrest with a young member of the joggers club
HA bring strong squad
THE HOCKEY Association have again named a strong side for the annual visit to Felsted School today, with Great Britain stars John Shaw and Russell Garcia the main attractions.
The match at 2.45 pm will be preceded by lunch and a training session for the pupils, who have won nine and drawn two of their 12 games this season.
Among the names supplementing the HA line-up are Old Felstedians Clive Felton and Paul Surridge, the cousin of the school's hockey master Mark Surridge.
The teams
FELSTED: Mark Young; Chris Heron, John Forrester, Stuart Edwards (capt), Robert Wildig, Mark Wood, Chris Watts, John Ward, Oliver Balch, Robert Miebach, Robert Price.
HA: Dick Bechner, Guy Gisborne, John Shaw, Soma Singh (all Southgate), Russell Garcia (Havant), Chris Maskery (Slough), Paul Surridge (Canterbury), Clive Felton (Richmond), Dick Bentley, Jerry Garner (both Loughborough University), Mark Norton, Jon Dye (Colchester).
Jewson League
Newmarket 3 Histon 1
WHILE Premier Division leaders Wisbech lost 1–0 at Wroxham, Newmarket moved up to third place with this win.
The Jockeys were three-up after 35 minutes.
Central defender Kevin Crisp headed his 11th goal of the season after 15 minutes and Andy Morton (28) and Colin Vowden (35) added the others.
Histon keeper David Norman went off with a back injury but Newmarket did not give his replacement, ex-Newmarket defender Dick Hall, too many problems after the break.
Indeed, Histon got a goal back through Mark Chelford.
Norwich United 3 Haverhill 1HAVERHILL's run of poor results continues.
Sadd put the home team ahead after seven minutes and the same player made it 2–0 five minutes into the second half.
Brown pulled a goal back for Haverhill after 65 minutes, but –––Norwich sewed up the points when Gill scored their third.
Katabatic has look of a champion
REMITTANCE Man's early season setback has paved the way for Katabatic to regain the Queen Mother Champion Chase crown at Cheltenham today.
Katabatic looked set to dominate the two mile championship in similar fashion to previous winners Badsworth Boy (1983–85), Pearlyman (1987 and 1988) and Barnbrook Again (1989 and 1990) when storming seven lengths clear of Waterloo Boy in 1991.
However, connections were unfortunate to come up against a fine-tuned Remittance Man last March and, although Katabatic ran a cracker, mounting a ferocious challenge up the final climb, he was held by a length at the line.
That undoubtedly represents the best two mile chase form around.
Waterloo Boy, placed for the third year in succession, was three-and-a-half lengths adrift in third, and it is highly unlikely that he can reverse the form.
Old foes Katabatic and Waterloo Boy clashed in the Game Spirit Chase at Newbury last month, and with a three-pound weight concession, Waterloo Boy took the honours by a length.
But Katabatic had reportedly been working lethargically in the build-up to Newbury and his trainer is now much happier with the 10-year-old's general well-being.
And, of course, today is the day that really counts, with the two mile championship and £100,000 in added prize money at stake.
Crusader's choice
CHELTENHAM: 2.15 TRAINGLOT (nap), 2.50 Ashfold Copse (n.b.), 3.30 Andrew's First, 4.05 Katabatic, 4.40 Claxton Greene, 5.15 Emsee-H, 5.50 Southolt.
HUNTINGDON: 2.10 Armala, 2.40 The Can Can Man, 3.10 Thats The Business, 3.45 Veleda II, 4.15 Antonin, 4.45 Greenwich Bambi.
NEWTON ABBOT: 2.00 Mine's An Ace, 2.35 Abu Muslab, 3.15 The Fly Boys, 3.50 Side Of Hill, 4.25 Greenhill Raffles, 4.55 Passed Pawn.
Record breakers' magic
Pipe calls on Dickinson's expertise
THE magic touch from record breaking champion trainers past and present conjured a brilliant winning formula when Granville Again won Britain's top hurdle at the Cheltenham Festival yesterday.
Martin Pipe enlisted the help of Michael Dickinson, the now US-based trainer who saddled the first five home in the 1983 Cheltenham Gold Cup, in the preparation of Granville Again who hit form on the day it mattered to scoop the £140,000 Smurfit Champion Hurdle.
Following the same victory route as his full brother Morley Street two years ago, Granville Again fought off the challenge from 50–1 shot Royal Derbi to win by a length.
Halkopous, who had been in line with the first two turning for home, faded to finish third, with King Credo fourth.
Extra special
Numerically, Pipe has re-written the racing annuals, topping the double century mark in the last four consecutive seasons.
But this win was extra special — his first in a top championship event.
With a little gentle persuasion, Pipe encouraged Peter Scudamore to switch from his intended mount Valfinet, who finished 16th, to the winner who had fallen two flights out when poised to strike in last year's race.
With a smile, the champion jockey recalled: ‘For a long time I was always going to choose Valfinet because he has done so well and Granville Again was running terribly.
But Martin kept putting me on him at home and in the end I fell for it.
I'm glad I did.’
Scudamore hopes his judgement holds good for tomorrow's Gold Cup.
He has opted for Chatam over former hunter chaser Rushing Wild who will now be ridden by  Jonathon Lower.
Cool Ground is likely to miss the Gold Cup if ground conditions remain fast.
The first day attendance of 35,051 continued the downward trend at major meetings.
It was only a minimal drop of 242 over last year, but 3,580 fewer than 1989.
Police urged racegoers to be on their guard after six separate incidents of forged £20 notes were reported on the first day.
The defeat of Flown in the Smurfit Champion Hurdle proved costly for many punters.
Four single wagers of £9,000-£2,000 were recorded.
How they finished
Finishing order in the Smurfit Champion Hurdle:
1 Granville Again 13–2, 2 Royal Derbi 50–1, 3 Halkopous 9–1, 4 King Credo 20–1, 5 Oh So Risky 10–1, 6 Vintage Crop 9–1, 7 Flakey Dove 50–1, 8 Flown 7–2 fav, 9 Jinxy Jack 25–1, 10 Eyelid 50–1, 11 Kribensis 16–1, 12 Morley Street 20–1, 13 Coulton 9–1, 14 Athy Spirit 200–1, 15 Duke of Monmouth 25–1, 16 Valfinet 16–1, 17 Staunch Friend 20–1, Ruling 14–1 pulled up.
Jewson League
Wilson goal decisive
Watton 1 Halstead 0
HALSTEAD went down in this crucial Jewson League Premier Division relegation battle to the only goal of the game, scored after half an hour by –George Wilson.
They had most of the game throughout but did not make the most of their opportunities in the first-half while in the second-half, with the driving rain at their backs, they pressed Watton back with a series of corners.
Their cause was not helped when they lost Neale Dakin with injury early on.
In the top of the table clash, Wroxham defeated Wisbech 1–0 in front of the largest League crowd of the season, 1,011.
Reverse head out
POLICE dog handler Barry Barlow is seeking a mutt with ‘a bit of sparkle’ to be his new partner against crime.
Pc Barlow's present dog, Ben, is due to retire later this year and the officer from Thorpe-le-Soken is trying to find a replacement.
He said: ‘I have had two dogs in the past four to five weeks.
They were pleasant dogs, but they don't have that certain something.’
Pc Barlow, 38, needs a German shepherd that is not shy, but is not too boisterous either.
He must be male and aged about 12 months, the best age to begin training.
The successful canine candidate will live at home with Pc Barlow, his family and his drugs search dog, Morris, a black labrador.
Before the new dog goes on the beat, he will have to attend a 13-week training course with Pc Barlow later in the year.
That will prepare him for his duties which will range from tracking people making off from crimes, public order incidents and searching for missing people and property.
Anyone who has a German shepherd they would like to offer to the police is asked to telephone Sandon dog section on (0245) 223616.
It's a dog's life — Pc Barlow with Ben.
Picture by NICKY LEWIN
Division One
Atkins blasts referee
Cambridge Utd 2 Peterborough 2
CAMBRIDGE manager Ian Atkins was seething last night after seeing his side concede a controversial goal.
Atkins felt that Peterborough's first goal, which came in the first minute of the second-half, should have been disallowed because Cambridge goalkeeper John Vaughan had the ball kicked out of his hands by sliding Peterborough midfielder John McGlashan.
‘At the end of the season, if we go down that could cost me my job,’ said Atkins, whose side are deep in relegation trouble.
‘I don't know how the referee can sleep at night after that.
How he can justify that I just don't know.’
Vaughan needed lengthy treatment after the incident.
Farewell Ajax
DEFENDING champions Ajax Amsterdam were knocked out of the UEFA Cup last night when a 1–0 home victory was not enough to claw back a 4–2 first leg deficit to French club Auxerre in the quarter-finals.
Squash
Harris faces tough task to qualify
DEL Harris of Colchester, for so long in the top three of the British squash rankings, has dropped down the list because of injury and a recent loss of form.
Surprisingly he must take part in the qualifying section of the Daily Express Newspapers and Pursers inaugural British Squash Players' Championship to be played between March 23 and 28 at Bromley, Beckenham and Cheshunt.
This event sprung up following the failure of the Squash Rackets Association to secure a sponsor for this year's national championships and a resultant boycott from most of the leading professionals.
Harris faces a tough opener against fast improving Surrey youngster Tim Garner at noon on the opening day.
If he wins his group he will meet Colchester colleague and world number seven Chris Walker, the second seed, in the main event which starts on the Thursday at Beckenham and Cheshunt.
Mark Allen of Colchester, losing finalist against Phil Whitlock in the SRA national event, must also qualify.
Whitlock, who has been at the centre of the storm, has not made himself available to take part.
Tony Hands of Colchester has leap-frogged above Harris in the rankings and goes straight into the main event.
He is in the same half of the draw as top seed Peter Marshall, the world number five.
Scotland's hopes will rest with Mark Maclean while Adrian Davies carries the flag for Wales.
The qualifying matches and the final will be at Bromley.
The winner will receive £1,500 from a prize fund of £7,700.
Tickets are available by phoning 081 559 4106.
Cricket
Cup tickets on sale
TICKETS for the NatWest Trophy first round match between Suffolk and Essex go on general sale on Monday, March 22.
Suffolk are expecting a crowd of around 5,000 — the largest in the county's history — for the tie at the Victory Ground, Bury St Edmunds, on Tuesday, June 22.
Ground admission for all tickets sold before the day is £7 for adults and £3.50 for seniors (over 65) and juniors (under 18).
These prices for pre-match sales only have been specially approved by the Test and County Cricket Board, who have agreed to a reduction on normal prices.
Ground admission tickets, however, do not guarantee a seat and because of the expected large crowd, reserved seating will be available in uncovered tiered stands.
The additional cost for a reserved seat is £4 for adults, seniors and juniors.
Members
As two days are allocated for the match in order to obtain a result, refunds cannot be made and nor can tickets be accepted back for exchange or re-sale.
Cheques or postal orders should be made payable to ‘Suffolk CCA Tickets’ and a stamped addressed envelope should also be enclosed with applications.
These should be sent to Suffolk Cricket, PO Box 91, Ipswich IP3 9BG.
Six weeks should be allowed for the dispatch of tickets.
Tickets will go on sale to Essex CCC members at the County Ground in Chelmsford on the same day, March 22.
Ice hockey
Runners-up spot suits Doshan
Chelmsford Chieftains 6, Trafford Metros 7
By Danny Wheeler
ROUGH and ready Trafford's Ukrainian import Oleg Sinkov struck three minutes from time to kill off any outside chances of Chelmsford winning the English League Conference B title.
Guildford duly collected the crown with a 12–6 win on the Isle of Wight, but Chelmsford coach Brad Doshan believes the final placings could actually work out in his team's favour.
The Flames now have to fit in a home and away Championship decider with the A winners, likely to be Solihull, some time over the three weekends of the promotion play-offs.
That could lead to problems with players' stamina or injuries for the play-offs.
There are rumours that the BIHA will split the play-off groups on a north and south basis, in which case Chelmsford would not be coming up against Trafford again — which is good news.
The Metros were the hardest side, quite literally, they have faced this year.
The Mancunians' chances of beating Blackburn into the play-offs were dented by defeat at lowly Oxford the following night, a result which bore absolutely no relation to form.
Aggressive
Chelmsford had their chances to beat Trafford as well, however.
Trafford are statistically the worst sinners in the League and Doshan was a little upset their very aggressive manner was only penalised three times.
Nevertheless, Doshan knows he has to hone the team's powerplay instincts if Chelmsford want to get serious about the Heineken League.
Between now and the end of the regular season, he also plans to give as much ice time and responsibility as possible to the younger players.
That could start tonight as Chelmsford go to Medway in the Essex Radio Midweek League.
Tomorrow they entertain Stevenage (face-off 8pm) with a crowd likely to be boosted by employees of potential sponsors, Midland Bank.
It looked like the crowd would be in for a treat against Trafford at Riverside when Rick Smith, back to his sharpest, opened the scoring after 63 seconds.
The Finn Ari Pekka-Mikkola equalised, Smith struck again on 4.29 before Igor Urchenko and Kel Land gave the visitors a 3–2 First Period lead.
Smith completed his hat-trick, followed by goals for Andrew Hannah and Karl Geobel as Chelmsford went 5–3 ahead.
But then Sinkov, billed by Doshan as ‘a world class player’, decided it was time to show off.
He pulled back two within ten seconds of each other to level the scores, struck again 21 seconds into the Third Period, and after Karl Rogers' equaliser, he hit the winner through goalkeeper Marc Dowd's legs.
Standings
Conference A: 1 Solihull Played 30, Won 21, Drawn 2, Points 44; 2 Bristol 29–19–2–40; 3 Blackburn 28–16–1–33; 4 Trafford 27–15–0–30; 5 Oxford 30–9–1–19; 6, Sunderland 28–2–1–5.
Conference B: 1 Guildford 29–24–1–49; 2 Chelmsford 29–19–3–41; 3 Streatham 30–18–0–36; 4 Wightlink 31–15–0–30; 5 Stevenage 28–9–0–18; 6 Basingstoke 31–2–1–5.
Road running
New signing West breaks club record for a big win
COLCHESTER Joggers' latest signing, Peter West, shattered the club record for the 20-mile event at the Essex Championships at Chelmsford.
West headed the race from the start, pursued by a pack of Thurrock runners, Colchester club-mate Dave Lacy and Tiptree veteran Peter Richardson.
As the race wore on, West stretched his advantage to win in 1 hr 49 mins 43 secs, two minutes ahead of last year's champion, Michael Bumpstead.
Colchester's Lacy finished in sixth spot in 1.54.02, his best 20-mile performance for six years.
Lacy is fast approaching his 50th birthday and scooped the bronze medal in the veteran class.
Colchester Joggers' ladies struck gold again.
Bridget King smashed the club record with 2.27.40, Liz Cudmore broke the club veteran record with 2.32.01 and Donna Robertson completed the winning team in 2.39.06.
It is the third time in four weeks that Colchester ladies have won team medals.
As expected, Sue Coxshall romped to an individual victory.
The Springfield Striders veteran, fresh from her success at the previous weekend's Border Half-Marathon, clocked 2.06.13.
Tiptree Road Runners' Sue Baker, celebrating her 33rd birthday, was runner-up, 11 minutes adrift.
Results
Essex 20: Top three men: 1 P West (Colchester Joggers) 1.49.43; 2 M Bumpstead (Thurrock); 3 M Sewell (Thurrock).
Top three ladies: 1 S Coxshall (Springfield Striders) 2.06.13; 2 S Baker (Tiptree Road Runners) 2.17.39; 3 M Joyce (Orion).
Male veterans: 1 M Bumpstead (Thurrock): 2 M Sewell (Thurrock); 3 D Lacy (Col/Jog).
Other Colchester Joggers: R Hanks 2.10.28; P Barrett 2.10.45; G Clarke 2.11.12; S Garnham 2.17.20; J Everett 2.29.20; B Gould 2.21.59; D Wright 2.22.15; C Akehurst 2.27.40; J Hart 2.25.00; M Dang 2.25.46.
D Simpson 2.39.06; T Cudmore 2.34.19; G Noble 2.39.50; G Robertson 2.39.00; J Blundell 2.52.12.
Other Tiptree Road Runners: Peter Richardson 1.57.40 (ninth overall); Martyn Byford 2.05.27 (PB); Tony Price 2.16.08 (PB); Colin Knight 2.18.13 (first 20); David Kingsnorth 2.24.05; Tim Ford 2.26.47 (first 20); Barry Dobson 2.48.49 (first 20).
Halstead Road Runners: Kieran Woulfe 2.06; Brian Brown 2.07; Don English 2.14; Neil Salmon 2.15; Tony Bird 2.20; Andy Wilmot 2.25.
Jane Archer 2.32; Colin Richer 2.34; Paul Frindle 2.35; Terry Rivers 2.39; Steve Wade 2.56; Maurice Young 2.56. completed the Portsmouth British Wheelchair half-marathon in a personal best time of 1.25.41 as his training intensifies for the London Marathon.
Joggers' wheelchair athlete Gerrard Oxford
Essex runners in top 100 at Wymondham 20: 13 K Kettridge (Witham RC) 2.10.46; 66 C Short (Witham RC) 2.28.27; 89 J Tadd (Witham RC) 2.33.23.
The race was won by Anthony Pooley, of Saint Edmund Pacers, in 1.49.35, which equalled the course record.
FA Cup
Kelly is cup hero as Rovers crash
Sheff Utd 2 Blackburn 2
(aet — United won 5–3 on pens)
ALAN KELLY made the crucial penalty shoot-out save that crowned Sheffield United's FA Cup fightback against Blackburn and clinched their first semi-final for 32 years.
He flopped onto Jason Wilcox's feeble first effort to complete 48 hours of cup misery for Kenny Dalglish and his expensive stars.
Mitch Ward, Charlie Hartfield, Alan Cork, Glyn Hodges and John Pemberton all scored from the and United now meet either neighbours Sheffield Wednesday or Derby County on April 4.
It was a cruel blow for Blackburn, who had bounced back from Sunday's Coca-Cola Cup semi-final defeat at Hillsborough to twice lead through Steve Livingstone and Mike Newell.
But each time they were pegged back by United substitute Ward, who had not scored in 21 previous outings this season.
Fittingly the local-born lad took the first spot kick which completed the first leg of what could see the city's two clubs meet for the first time in the last four.
But what an ironic way to set it up.
Dave Bassett's side have only had one penalty in 90 games in the last two seasons.
And last time they were involved in a shoot-out, against Notts County in the Zenith Data last year, they missed three out of the first four.
For Dalglish it was the result he just could not afford, having spent more than £11 million to realise benefactor Jack Walker's dream.
If they were down to the last dregs of their confidence after their Hillsborough defeat it did not show and it took Kelly's superb reflexes to deny Newell after only three minutes.
United, without the injured Franz Carr and suspended top scorer Brian Deane, had recalled Cork and Adrian Littlejohn but they found it hard going against a Rovers defence boosted by the return of Irish skipper Kevin Moran.
Their best chances fell to Littlejohn, but he volleyed over from David May's misplaced header when he had time to bring the ball under control, and was then denied by Bobby Mimms.
They seemed costly misses when Livingstone, playing only his second game in more than a year, rose unmarked beyond the far post to head in Wilcox's 47th minute corner.
If Tim Sherwood's long range blast in the 73rd minute had gone in instead of smacking against the bar, it would have been all up for United.
Instead, they snatched extra time in the 80th minute when Cork got a touch onto Glyn Hodges' cross and as a defender attempted to clear, the ball was driven against Ward and back past a helpless Mimms.
Rovers were ahead again in the 104th minute when Livingstone put Sherwood in on the byline and when he pulled the ball back £1.2 million Newell could not miss.
But again Bramall Lane roared United back into the game, Cork running onto Paul Beesley's pass down the left and turning the ball into the middle for Ward to hook in his second equaliser.
So to penalties — and a smile as broad as the Dales as Bassett reached his first FA Cup semi-final.
Now it's up to Wednesday to complete Sheffield's cup charge tonight.
Sheffield United goalkeeper Alan Kelly saves from Blackburn's Jason Wilcox.
The same pair played a big part in the penalty shoot-out, Kelly making the crucial save from Wilcox's spot kick