

WILLIAMS' CASE: MEMBERS DISSENT OVER ADOPTION
SELECTIVE CONSCIENCE
THE CIRCUMSTANCES surrounding Amnesty's adoption as a prisoner of conscience of Vic Williams, the British soldier currently serving a 14-month prison sentence for desertion, are to be fully aired at the AGM on 10–12 April.
Williams was found guilty on 11 September 1991 on three charges relating to deserting his regiment and speaking out against the Gulf War.
Amnesty International believes Williams was imprisoned for acting in accordance with his conscientiously-held beliefs, and calls for his immediate and unconditional release.
He was denied ‘reasonable access’ to classified information about procedures for registering his conscientious objection to military service in the Gulf War.
The issue has divided members in the UK.
Motions challenging Amnesty's position on Vic Williams are to be tabled at the AGM:
The Hammersmith & Fulham Group recommends that the change in Amnesty's Mandate, extending the right of conscientious objection to include members of the armed forces who object to serving in a particular war, ‘be rescinded’.
The Golders Green and Hendon Group urges Amnesty's British Section to examine the circumstances in which ‘non-conscripted military personal’ may be adopted as prisoners of conscience, ‘with a view to full clarification on the issue’.
An individual member of Amnesty, urges the International Secretariat to withdraw prisoner of conscience status from ‘those volunteer soldiers in Britain and America who wished to be conscientious objectors to the war in the Gulf’.
A spokeswoman for the International Secretariat said that Vic Williams' case ‘fitted precisely’ the definition used by Amnesty to determine prisoners of conscience throughout the world.
‘It would be courting double standards to remove that status from Vic Williams’, she said.
She said Amnesty International ‘believes in selective objection to a particular war; Vic Williams is a complicated case, because he was willing to go to Northern Ireland, but he wouldn't go to the Gulf.
‘During Vietnam, we adopted thousands of prisoners of conscience; they were willing to defend their country, but they were not willing to kill Vietnamese.’
That Vic Williams was a voluntary and not a conscripted soldier was irrelevant to the issue of conscientious objection, she added.
Amnesty's British Section has received dozens of letters concerning Vic Williams.
A selection will be published in the June/July issue of AMNESTY.
Amnesty's ‘own country’ principle of impartiality rules out British members campaigning on Vic Williams behalf.
AN AUDIENCE WITH KING WANGCHUCK
BHUTAN: AI visited Bhutan for the first time in January at the invitation of King Jigme Wangchuck.
AI drew the King's attention to the prolonged detention without charge or trial of suspected government opponents, reports of torture, deaths in custody, and the practice of keeping prisoners in manacles.
During 1991 hundreds of Nepali-speaking people from Southern Bhutan were reportedly subject to human rights abuses by the security forces.
Government opponents are reported to have arbitrarily killed civilians.
In February the King released 313 political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience Jogen Gazmere and Sushil Pokhrel, who had been detained for over two years without trial.
AI urges King Jigme to release the last remaining known prisoner of conscience, Tek Nath Rizal, who is starting a third year in detention without trial at Wangdi Phodrang Prison.
PERU'S DEATH SQUADS
PERU: Reports of ‘disappearances’ and extrajudicial executions have continued despite President Fujimori's 1991 directive calling for the Armed Services and National Police to respect human rights.
Rafael Magallanes Huamán Lupe Angulo Vela, Isabel Lozano Rios and Ricardo Saavedra Fernández reportedly ‘disappeared’ on 15 October.
The four were taken to the Aucayacu military barracks on 15 October.
The severely mutilated body of Isabel Lozano was found three days later.
The same patrol allegedly executed at least seven people on 15 October, including Abel Santa Mariá, Rafael Ortiz Conzález, Ely Sifuentes and Susy de Sifuentes.
President Fujimori has branded Amnesty International's condemnation of Sendero Luminoso (Communist Party of Peru) as ‘really weak — weak and unacceptable to Peru’.
Peru's Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated in November that it was ‘unacceptable’ for AI ‘to say that the security forces have ‘disappeared’or…executed thousands of people…’
Over the past 10 years AI has documented more than 4000 cases of ‘disappeared’ people in Peru, scores of summary executions and at least 15 massacres by the security forces.
The Government acknowledges that a total of 5000 ‘disappeared’ persons had been reported since 1981.
INTERNATIONAL NEWS
ISRAELI SILENCE OVER DETAINEES
SHI ‘A SIX ‘APPEAR’
ISRAEL: Six Lebanese Shi ‘a Muslims who ‘disappeared’ in Lebanon in 1990 are now known to be in Israeli custody.
The six were taken prison in Beirut at the end of 1987 by the Lebanese Forces militia.
They were suspected of belonging to Hizbullah (Party of God) and were allegedly tortured.
The six were moved to Israel in mid-1990, but the Israeli authorities refused to acknowledge that they were holding them.
The Red Cross discovered them in Israeli custody in January 1992 and informed their families.
AI has so far received no response to its requests to Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir to clarify the detainees' situation.
AI learned on 4 February that Mustafa ‘Akkawi, a Palestinian from Jerusalem, died in Hebron prison in the custody of the General Security Service (GSS).
Arrested on 22 January, he had been accused of belonging to the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
While in detention he was ‘shaken and poked’, deprived of sleep and held hooded and handcuffed in a freezing hallway.
On 3 February he was brought before a judge who noted bruises on his chest and ordered a medical examination.
Instead ‘Akkawi was taken back to interrogation where he suffered a heart attack.
According to a US pathologist, who participated in the autopsy, ‘Akkawi suffered from a severe heart condition, which Israeli doctors had failed to detect.
His heart attack was triggered by the physical and emotional pressures suffered under interrogation.
Medical negligence was also said to have contributed to his death.
AI called for an independent investigation into ‘Akkawi's death and urged Prime Minister Shamir to intervene swiftly to stop torture and ill-treatment.
It also called for a review of official guidelines allowing the use of ‘a moderate measure of physical pressure’ during interrogation.
Husayn Ahmad and Ahamad Jallul: two of six ‘disappeared’ Lebanese now being held in Israel
MOTHERS RECEIVE DEATH THREATS
BRAZIL: The mothers of 11 people who ‘disappeared’ in July 1990 from a farm in Magé, Rio De Janeiro State, have reportedly received death threats.
The mothers have  publicly denounced the ‘disappearances’ and have actively campaigned for an investigation.
According to a Rio de Janeiro State Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry Report, hooded police officers in plain clothes raided the farm in search of certain youths who were involved in theft and drug peddling.
Mothers of the ‘disappeared’ gather together at night to try to protect one another.
One mother said she believed their sons' kidnappers will never be brought to justice because ‘justice when imparted to the poor is only in the form of punishment’.
GHOST HOUSES
SUDAN: Horrific reports of torture, secret detention and unfair trials continue.
At least 80 prisoners arrested in August 1991, including former government ministers Abd al-Rahman Abdallah Nugdalla and Mirghani Abd al-Rahman Suleiman, were reportedly beaten with rubber truncheons, had their testicles compressed with pliers and were subject to mock executions.
Others were subject to burns and suspended from prison walls for up to three consecutive nights.
The prisoners are accused of plotting a coup against the Government.
In September, 53 faced unfair trials before a military tribunal, held in camera .
Each individual hearing lasted only a few minutes and none of the accused was allowed legal representation.
In December it was announced that 11 prisoners had been given the death sentence, commuted to life imprisonment.
Seven were acquitted.
The Government acknowledged holding just three prisoners, including Mirghani Abd al-Rahman Suleiman.
At least 80 civilians and army officers, arrested in August 1991 on suspicion of plotting a coup, were held in secret detention centres known as ‘ghost houses’ where they were severely tortured.
CASE REPORTS
MALAWI
CRIMINAL prisoners in Malawi are denied food, severely beaten and kept naked as part of a special punishment programme introduced in 1983 to deter persistent criminal offenders, AI said in a report published in March,Malawi: Prison conditions, cruel punishment and detention without trial (see p 9).
Available from AI's Information Office
ARGENTINA
PEDRO Molina Toledo died after being tortured in police custody in Mendoza city.
He had been detained in connection with a fraud investigation.
According to a report by the National Human Rights Directorate of the Ministry of the Interior, there were 698 complaints of ‘unlawful coercion’ in Buenos Aires between 1984 and 1986, 879 in 1989 and 870 in 1990.
HOME NEWS
FREED POET OPENS SCOTTISH OFFICE
THE PIPES BLEW OUT and an enormous haggis was paraded through the hall as Neil MacCormick, Home Affairs spokesman of the Scottish National Party, rose to his feet to toast ‘the Immortal Memory of Rabbie Burns’.
Labour's Shadow Chancellor John Smith responded, explaining why the great poet would definitely have joined Amnesty had it existed in the 18th century.
It was a thoroughly Caledonian opening for the new Amnesty Scottish office on 24 January.
Twenty four of Amnesty's Scottish groups gathered in Edinburgh University's chaplaincy to celebrate the occasion.
They came from the Borders and the Shetland Islands, from Inverness, Aberdeen, Perth and Glasgow, in a strong showing of Scotland's commitment to human rights.
The Scottish media were out in force as Sir David Smith, Principal of the University, and the Lord Provost of Edinburgh — both keen Amnesty supporters — welcomed Ruth Adler as the new Scottish Organiser.
The star of the show was the remarkable Malawian writer Jack Mapanje, perhaps Africa's best known English language poet, who read some of the poems which landed him in Zomba jail without charge or trial for almost four years.
Mapanje said that he owed not only his liberty but possibly his life to Amnesty International.
More than 15,000 Scottish people signed the Glasgow appeal for Mapanje's release, and Glaswegian children sent hundreds of Christmas messages.
Margaret Taylor of the Dumfries Group addressed the haggis before fiercely slitting it with a huge kitchen knife.
Dan Jones, Head of Campaigns, replied on behalf of guests with poems of liberty which had been smuggled from the jails and prison camps of the world.
Ila Steven played reels on the fiddle and Jean Bechar sang Burns songs.
Mapanje reads Burns
AMNESTY FOR JOURNALISTS
THE Amnesty International Journalists' Network, launched officially in London on 21 March, has already adopted the cases of more than 20 journalists throughout the world who have been tortured, threatened or killed because of their work.
The Network was set up to enable journalists in the UK to campaign on behalf of journalists overseas who suffer human rights abuses.
The Network is arranging this year for a Peruvian editor, now living in exile in Europe, to address members about the human rights record in his country.
John Tusa, head of the BBC World Service, delivered the keynote address at the London launch.
BBC TV PRISONERS OF CONSCIENCE: SERIES UPDATE
BBC 2 broadcast the cases of 10 prisoners of conscience between 25 November and 8 December 1991, and asked viewers to phone or write in for details of how to help them.
Here is an update on the cases in the 1991 Series:
Iraq:Sayed Qazwnin, imprisoned since 1991 — no change.
Kuwait:Osamah Suhail Hussaid — under sentence of death, commuted to life imprisonment.
Israel:Abie Nathan — peace activist, imprisoned for 18 months for meeting Yasser Arafat (see Replies, this page).
Iran:Nezameddin Movahed, aged 74, imprisoned for three years.
He has been in hospital since November, but has been told he must shortly return to prison (see Replies, this page).
Saudi Arabia:Zuhair Al-Safwani, imprisoned for 4 year—no change.
Syria:Ghassan Najjar — released
China:Yula Dawa Tsering, Buddhist monk, imprisoned in Tibet for 10 years — no change.
Malawi:Vera Chirwa, originally sentenced to death, commuted to life imprisonment.
Her husband is also in prison, and was held until recently in leg irons, reportedly supplied by a British company (see Campaign Impact p9).
India:Devinder Singh Pujari, ‘disappeared’ in India — no change.
Burma (Myanmar):Daw Cho Cho Kyaw Nyein, arrested in 1991, and imprisoned for seven years — no change.
Mexico: Jose Ramon Garcia Gomez, ‘disappeared’ in Mexico — no change.
Indonesia:Ruslan Widjayasatra, has been under sentence of death for the last 17 years.
He could be executed at any time.
REPLIES
ISRAEL
THE ISRAELI Embassy in London replied last month to members who wrote urging the release of Abie Nathan, a peace activist jailed for 18 months for ‘openly meeting with Yasser Arafat and other members of the PLO’.
The Embassy's letter, from Zvi Rav — Ner, information counsellor, stated that Mr Nathan was charged with breaking the law after having met Arafat on several occasions in 1990 and 1991.
This behaviour, states Rav-Ner, is impermissible in a democratic society.
‘A democracy would cease to function if every individual were free to obey only the laws of his or her choice.
IRAN
THE IRANIAN Embassy's Public Relations Department in London replied on 4 March to members who wrote supporting the immediate and unconditional release of Mohammadreza Nezameddin, the 74-year old retired civil servant serving a three year sentence for criticising President Hashemi Rafsanjani.
The Iranian reply states that Mr Nezameddin ‘was collaborating to take action against the national security of the country’.
Amnesty's research reveals that Mr Nezameddin was detained for signing a letter to the President calling for constitutional guarantees, freedom and justice.
The letter did criticise the state of the Iranian economy.
NEWS BRIEFS
ELECTION
THE CANDIDATES BARELY MENTIONED HUMAN RIGHTS IN THEIR ELECTION CAMPAIGNS; BUT THREE ISSUES ARE RETURNING TO HAUNT THE INCOMING GOVERNMENT
Richard Dunstan of AI's Refugee Office urges members to campaign for a new Asylum Bill, Here's why…
ASYLUM BILL; CASUALTY OF ‘FORENSIC MYOPIA’
UNCERTAINTY surrounding the fate of the Asylum Bill was finally removed by the announcement of the General Election.
The Government confirmed that the Bill would not proceed — it fell with the dissolution of Parliament on 16 March (unfinished legislation cannot be carried over to the new parliament).
The Asylum Bill, published in November 1991, intended to ensure ‘a substantial acceleration and simplification of the procedures used to deal with applications for asylum’.
Amnesty International believes it was deeply flawed.
The Bill's central feature was the creation of a new right of appeal against a refusal of asylum.
However, this right — for which Amnesty International had been lobbying since 1985 — was rendered meaningless by critical flaws in the proposed appeals procedure.
The most glaring included:
an unprecedented  requirement that would-be appellants first obtain leave to appeal, based upon a simple re-reading of their papers, and not a full, oral hearing.
an unreasonable time limit — 48 hours — for the preparation of appeals, seriously limiting appellants' chances of obtaining advice and representation; and
the absence of any opportunity to challenge a refusal of leave to appeal.
Compounding the problem were proposals to remove asylum seekers right of access to a solicitor under the legal aid scheme.
The Bill's blatant unfairness drew a torrent of criticism from a range of sources, including the Law Society, the Bar Council, the Commission of Racial Equality, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, and church leaders such as the Archbishop of Canterbury and Cardinal Basil Hume.
The Bill completed its passage through the House of Commons in January this year, with only minor amendments.
But in ran into determined opposition in the House of Lords — one senior Conservative described the Bill's provisions as ‘remote from reality’, while a Law Lord described the proposed appeals procedure as ‘forensic myopia’.
The Government announced on 19 February that it was abandoning its plan to abolish legal aid in asylum cases.
Within a few days the troubled Asylum Bill itself disappeared from the Lord's timetable for the remainder of the current Parliament.
The strength of the opposition to the Asylum Bill and the climbdown on legal aid show that a concerted campaign can succeed in overturning unfair and unworkable proposals.
The task now is to ensure that the incoming Government acts swiftly to introduce a fair and effective Asylum Bill, after full and proper consultation.
The existing asylum procedures were clearly inadequate to deal fairly and effectively with the current level of asylum-seekers.
Chronic under-resourcing of the Home Office's Asylum Division, and the long-ignored deficiencies of the existing procedures, have resulted in a backlog of more than 60,000 cases.
With a newly elected Government, there is now an urgent need for a thorough review of current asylum policy and practice and the introduction of appropriate legislation.
British doors are shut
ACTION
Write a polite letter to your new MP at the House of Commons, London SWA OAA.
Ask him or her to urge the new Home Secretary, as a matter of urgency, to consult with relevant organisations with a view to drafting a new Asylum Bill;
Stress that the new Asylum Bill must establish fair and effective asylum procedures, with an oral hearing and reasonable time limits on the preparation of appeals;
Stress that the new Asylum Bill should guarantee access to free legal advice
Please send a copy of any reply to the AIBS Refugee Office.
Jane Cooper argues that the UK's retention of the death penalty hinders Amnesty's fight for abolition worldwide
NO APPEAL FROM THE GRAVE
THE DEATH PENALTY is retained in law in the UK for high treason, various offences committed by members of the armed forces during wartime and, in England and Wales, for piracy with violence.
Amnesty International is committed to the removal of the death penalty from the UK statute books.
Until that happens, the UK is hindered in its support for international initiatives to encourage abolition in other countries.
Capital punishment for murder was abolished in 1969 and repeated attempts to reintroduce it have been defeated by an ever-increasing majority.
Kenneth Baker echoed the views of most MPs in a Commons debate in 1990: ‘If the concept of British justice is to mean anything, we must retain the possibility of rectifying a mistaken verdict.
Capital punishment denies that redress.
There is no appeal from the grave.’
Peter Archer QC, the former Attorney-General, argued that: ‘I do not believe that Parliament ever decided, on the merits, to retain capital punishment for treason and piracy.’
Executions continue to be carried out an alarming rate in China, USA, Russia, Iraq, Iran and Nigeria.
Nevertheless, the global trend, promoted by the United Nations, is towards abolition in all countries.
The UK Government has pressed beneficiaries of UK development aid to respect human rights, but the death penalty has not been raised in the negotiations.
Under John Major as Prime Minister efforts have been made to bring China's attention to the plight of pro-democracy activists.
However, no pressure has been put on China to remove the death penalty.
Since the Tiananmen Square massacre, unofficial sources claim that more than 20,000 people have been executed.
UK help is ‘hindered’
ACTION
With a new Government assuming office, AI urges members to write to their new MPs appealing for the speedy removal of the death penalty bringing the UK into line with international progress towards abolition.
Brian Wood and Andy McEntee plumb the depths of a grisly marketplace in ‘implements of repression’
THE UK TORTURE TRADE
A UK company installed an electronic ‘torture chamber’ inside the headquarters of the Special Branch in Dubai, reported The Observer in January 1991.
Nicknamed the ‘House of Fun’, the chamber was fitted with a sound-system and a strobe light, designed to intimidate and disorientate the victim.
At a trade exhibition in Miami in February 1991, ‘legcuffs’ were being promoted at a stall registered in the name of ‘Hiatt and Company Ltd of Birmingham’.
The sales brochure indicated that the legcuffs were manufactured in Birmingham, England.
Following questions in Parliament, the Department of Trade and Industry announced last October that ‘oversized’ cuffs and certain linking chains, which could be used for the same purpose as leg irons, had been evading UK export controls, and would be restricted.
Early research into the UK repression trade revealed that British telecommunications equipment was installed in Idi Amin's notorious ‘State Research Centre’, where as many 500,000 political opponents were tortured or murdered.
The equipment, supplied by Pye Telecommunications company, improved the operational capacity of the secret police.
But these tools of torture, confinement or intimidation are not the only products available in the UK to foreign regimes seeking to suppress or intimidate their citizens.
UK training and military equipment is in big demand abroad.
Between 1979 and 1990, the UK Government provided military training for the forces of 110 different countries.
Between 1985 and 1990, some 25,000 trainees were trained here as a result of agreements with other governments.
The defence lawyer for a captain of the Fijian army (who was convicted in 1990 of planning the abduction of university lecturer Dr Anirudh Singh) said that his client ‘was merely passing on…= the skills he got overseas’.
The lawyer was referring to training the captain had received from the British SAS and the New Zealand SAS.
British army counter-insurgency specialists helped train the Presidential Guard in the Philippines, which had been accused of torture and summary execution of opposition activists.
The products of the repression trade may be of two types: equipment for torture, execution of those which result in ‘cruel inhuman or degrading treatment’ such as leg irons; or equipment which can have an every day use, such as computers and telecommunications (this category also includes items such as tear-gas and hand guns which can be used legitimately for law-enforcement or crime prevention).
ACTION
AI urges members to contact their local MPs to push for a law which: provides that all transfers of repressive technology, equipment and training be disclosed in advance; takes into account the human rights situation of the receiving country; establishes channels for the receipt of information from non-governmental organisations on human aspects of such transfers; and demonstrates, before such transfers take place, that they will not contribute to human rights violations.
The law should prohibit: the export of military, security and police equipment and training where these can reasonably be assumed to contribute to human rights abuses; the manufacture of equipment which can only be used for torture or other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of prisoners.
Prohibited items should include gallows and leg irons.
CAMPAIGN ACTION
ROB BEASLEY REPORTS ON BRUTAL ABUSES OF HUMAN RIGHTS IN INDIA, WHERE CHILDREN AS YOUNG AS SIX ARE TORTURED
TORTURE IN INDIA
A 25-YEAR-OLD tribal woman, Moti Birua, was arrested by Bihar police in October 1988 on suspicion of killing her boyfriend.
She was raped and tortured to death.
The police claimed she had escaped and then hanged herself from a tree.
In March 1991, a student in Assam was arrested and held in an army camp for five days, where he was beaten and electric shocks were applied to his body.
In June 1989, 11 slum-dwelling children in Delhi were arrested on suspicion of theft and tortured.
They were released the following day when a crowd of 4000 people gathered outside the police station.
Security forces across India employ the same method to investigate crime and deter offenders.
In every single state, regardless of the political party in power, the police, army and paramilitary forces use torture as a matter of daily routine.
To extract confessions or exact revenge, the police may use beatings, electric shocks, crushing with heavy rollers, burning and sexual mutilation against their prisoners.
Thousands are reported to have died in custody over the past decade as a result.
They occur so often the press simply refers to them as ‘lock up deaths’.
In many remote rural areas, such deaths do not even get reported.
The overwhelming majority of victims are from the poorest, most disadvantaged sectors of Indian society — members of Scheduled Castes (or Dalits ) and Scheduled Tribes (or Adivasis ), tribal people in the northeast of India, migrant workers, landless labourers and others who are poor and underprivileged.
The victims may be criminal suspects.
They may be suspected political opponents.
They may be picked on in revenge raids by the security forces after attacks by armed opposition groups or protests by political groups.
Or they may simply be in the wrong place at the wrong time.
They share one common characteristic: they have little power to challenge the authorities.
INDIAN security forces use torture to ‘deter’ people from political activities and in revenge for the violence of armed opposition groups.
Torture is also routine in criminal investigations, even for the most petty  offense .
Children as young as six have been tortured.
In June 1989, a group of children from a Delhi slum were tortured for theft; a 13-year-old girl was stripped and beaten; a 12-year-old boy was given electric shocks and beaten.
The Indian government claims that it investigates all allegations of torture, but this rarely happens without public pressure.
Officially, inquiries by a magistrate must take place after any death in custody.
In practice they occurred in less than a quarter of the cases recorded by Amnesty International since 1985.
Even when investigations do take place, the police version of events, is often accepted without question, regardless of the implausibility of their story.
Many politicians, judges, lawyers, journalists, civil liberties groups and police officers in India actively oppose the use of torture.
Some of those who have recorded human rights violations have been dismissed as trouble-makers and on occasion have themselves been threatened, tortured and killed.
‘When the police are pressurised to deliver results…they take short cuts to achieve their ends.
In this process violations of fundamental rights do occur.’
Former inspector general of police in Tamil Nadu, May 1991
Media reports of torture often generate widespread public outrage.
In response to frequent reports of rape and other sexual abuse, the High Court in Guwahati has prohibited the interrogation or detention of any women in army installations in the north-eastern states.
What is lacking, however, is the political will in government to bring torture to an end.
Senior political figures do not even acknowledge that torture exists, let alone accept that it is a widespread and routine event.
RAPE is frequently used against women as part of their interrogation about criminal or political activity, or as a ‘proxy’ assault on relatives who evade capture.
In areas where armed secessionist groups are active, women face rape and torture to extract information about their relatives and to deter them from giving shelter to members of armed opposition groups.
Moti Birua hanged herself, according to the official version.
But a post mortem found no evidence of serious wounds on her body.
Two police officers were suspended and a case of murder was registered.
A judicial inquiry was ordered, but witnesses were threatened by the police and none would testify.
Fourteen women were gang raped in May 1990, when paramilitary soldiers raided five villages in Assam in search of armed opposition groups.
Two years earlier, 23 women were raped by Bihar police officers after villagers refused to for a minimum wage.
THE security forces in India are not out of control.
Police actions are frequently directed by ruling politicians and the government controls the legislation which grants the army immunity.
The police use a range of methods to cover up rape, torture and deaths in custody, including the writing of false arrest reports, organising phoney post mortems and rapid cremations and threatening those who try to expose them.
Doctors, magistrates and state officials have been known to assist in such cover ups.
Of the 415 cases of death in custody recorded by Amnesty International since 1985, police officials were imprisoned for murdering prisoners in just three cases.
The Indian government could stop human rights abuses if it tried.
It could adopt an official human rights policy which prohibits torture.
It could also ensure that allegations of torture, rape and deaths in custody are impartially investigated, that those responsible are brought to justice and that the victims and their families are compensated.
Laws which encourage such violations could be amended or repealed.
Above: Torture victim Manoji Singh, aged 12, seen after his arrest on suspicion of stealing a purse.
Opposite: Police evict Sikh militants from Delhi's main Sikh shrine
ARMED CONFLICTS IN INDIA
ARMED struggles in support of independence, autonomy or radical social change are widespread in India.
The main secessionist conflicts are in Punjab, Jammu & Kashmir, Assam and the north-eastern states.
In these states, the security forces enjoy legal immunity from prosecution for  offences committed while on duty.
Torture, rape and extra-judicial killings are frequently reported during the course of counter-insurgency campaigns.
The previously rare phenomena of ‘disappearances’ are now regularly reported in Punjab and Kashmir.
At least 40 armed revolutionary Maoists groups, known as Naxalites , operate in a number of states, notably Andhra Pradesh and Bihar.
The most active of these groups is the Peoples' War Group (PWG).
Where armed groups operate, it is common for the police or military to claim that political suspects have died in an ‘encounter’.
‘Encounters’ rarely result in any police casualties and invariably the only witness to these alleged events are the security forces themselves.
Armed opposition groups in India are themselves responsible for gross human rights abuses, including extra-judicial executions.
WHAT YOU CAN DO
Write to the Prime Minister of India, expressing your concern about the widespread use of torture by the security forces to interrogate and intimidate detainees.
Call for prompt and impartial judicial investigations into all deaths in custody, for officials responsible for torture and other violations to be brought to justice and for the victims and their families to receive compensation.
Get an official letter sent from any organisation to which you belong.
CAMPAIGN IMPACT
PRESSURE CURTAILS PERU'S FLAGRANT ABUSE OF HUMAN RIGHTS
PRISING OPEN PERU
AMNESTY International's unrelenting pressure on the Peruvian authorities to respect human rights, initiated by the Peru campaign launched in November 1991, appears to have a direct effect in helping to reduce the number of people who have ‘disappeared’ by the security forces.
Certainly it has kept up pressure on the Government to continue its public commitment to human rights, exemplified by President Fujimori's directive warning that those securities services responsible for violations would be severely punished; and the granting of access to Public Ministry prosecutors and representatives of the International Red Cross (ICRC) to all centres of detention in the emergency zones, including military bases, to check on the condition of detainees.
AI recorded however 63 ‘disappearances’ between 1 August 1991 and 29 February 1992, compared with 382 reported ‘disappearances’over the previous twelve months.
Extra-judicial killings by the security forces increased over the same period.
Armed opposition groups — notably Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path or Communist Party of Peru)— have continued to commit human rights abuses.
Sendero Luminoso are now active around Lima and have deliberately killed civilians not involved in the armed conflict, including leaders and activists in popular organisations in the shanty towns.
AI's documentation has been well received by non-governmental organisations and the press inside Peru.
The main report has been widely cited as an objective statement on the persistent pattern of human rights violations which has continued under President Fujimori.
By launching the campaign through a press conference in Lima itself, Amnesty was also able to gain unprecedented coverage in the press and on TV and radio.
MALAWI LAWYERS DENIED FREEDOM
‘WRONG IN LAW’
PRISONERS of Conscience Orton and Vera Chirwa, whose case was highlighted by Amnesty's 30th Anniversary Campaign, are still in detention after being unfairly tried and jailed in 1983 for expressing their non-violent political beliefs.
It was reported in October 1991 that 73-year-old Orton was subjected to a special regime known as ‘cell punishment’— forced to squat on the floor with arm and leg-irons chained to a metal rod behind his knees for up two days and nights.
The leg irons used on Orton Chirwa were made by the Birmingham company, Hiatts (see p4).
Both Orton and Vera Chirwa trained as lawyers in Britain during the 1950s.
Within weeks of Malawi's independence six cabinet ministers, including Orton, were forced from office and exiled.
In May 1983, the Chirwas were tried before a traditional court, convicted of treason and sentenced to death.
They were denied legal counsel or the right to call witnesses in their defence.
An appeal court later agreed that their first trial was ‘wrong in law’, but upheld the death sentence.
This was later commuted to life imprisonment, but Dr Banda has stated since that the Chirwas should be executed.
WORLDWIDE APPEAL
GHANA
JACOB JABUNI YIDANA: a former Chief Superintendent of Police, he served an eight-year prison sentence and is now being held in administrative detention without charge or trial, apparently because he implicated his government in the 1982 murders of three High Court judges and a retired army officer.
Yidana had reported the results of his investigation to a Special Investigations Board, which concluded that 10 people should be prosecuted for murder, including the head of National Security.
Four people were convicted of these murders in 1983 and executed.
They had been tried without benefit of defence counsel before the Public Tribunal, a special court which was subject to Government influence.
Five others who had been implicated, including the head of National Security, were not prosecuted, allegedly due to political considerations.
Yidana was further convicted, without right of appeal, in 1983 of harbouring one of the leaders of the failed coup and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment.
Prosecution witnesses were allegedly tortured or subjected to other pressure to fabricate evidence against them.
Yidana was transferred to administration detention in July 1988.
This prevented his release on parole then or at the end of his sentence in 1991.
In December 1991 a habeas corpus application for Yidana was dismissed and the Government issued a Preventative Custody Order retroactively authorising his detention.
The 1982 Preventative Custody Law provides unlimited powers of arbitrary detention without charge or trial ‘in the interest of national security’.
The right to challenge detention in the courts was removed by the Government in 1984.
Since 1981 hundreds of people have been detained under this law, some for more than eight years.
Ali  Haxhiu 
YUGOSLAVIA
MIKEL MARKU and ALI HAXHIU: ethnic Albanians, they died in November 1991 following alleged ill treatment in custody in Kosovo-Methohija province in southern Serbia.
Mikel Marku, a 62-year-old lawyer from Péc, was stopped by police on the evening of 31 October 1991 while driving a friend's car.
He and three passengers travelling with him were arrested, on the grounds that the car was not registered in the name of the driver.
During the arrest the four men were reportedly beaten with rubber truncheons and then taken to the local police station in Péc, where they were again beaten and held overnight.
That night Mikel Marku suffered a brain haemorrhage and lost consciousness, apparently as a result of blows to the head, but was denied medical treatment until the following morning.
He underwent surgery, but died 10 days later on 11 November 1991.
In January, after the authorities reportedly failed to take action on this case, his family filed a suit against three police officers on charges of murder.
Ali Haxhiu, a 45-year-old Albanian refugee in the village of Sazli, was sentenced to 30 days' imprisonment in May 1991 after making a ‘V’ for victory sign in the presence of two policemen in a café.
He was allowed to postpone serving the sentence in order to attend his daughter's wedding.
He was arrested on 25 November 1991 and held overnight in a police cell in Urosevac.
The following day he was taken to Pristina prison to serve his sentence and was reportedly found dead in a prison cell two hours later.
His body allegedly severely bruised, was returned to his family on 27  November.
Despite their requests, the family had not received a copy of his autopsy report by the end of December 1991.
KUWAIT
‘UMAR SHEHADEH ‘ABDALLAH HAMDAN ABU SHANAB: a 31-year-old hospital worker, he was sentenced to 15 years’ imprisonment for ‘collaboration’during Iraq's occupation of Kuwait, following an unfair trial by the Martial Law Court in June 1991.
He is reportedly being held incommunicado at Kuwait Central Prison.
‘Umar Abu Shanab is a Palestinian with Jordanian nationality who was born in Kuwait.
He ‘disappeared’ following his arrest by Kuwaiti armed forces at al-Razi Hospital at the end of February 1991.
His fate and whereabouts remained unknown until June 1991, when the Kuwait authorities informed his family that he had been convicted of ‘collaboration’ and sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment.
He was said to have given medical treatment to Iraqi soldiers who came to the hospital for treatment.
Legal proceedings in Kuwait's collaboration trials were defective in all the critical phases: many defendants were not allowed legal representation and there was no right of appeal to a higher tribunal.
‘Umar Abu Shanab was allegedly tortured while in detention and his relatives fear that he continues to be tortured or ill-treated.
Although he was allowed family visitors following his conviction, he is once again being denied visits and his relatives are not allowed to communicate with him.
SOUTH KOREA
CHONG SON-HEE: a 33-year old artist, she was sentenced to two years’ imprisonment under the National Security Law in July 1991 for carrying out activities allegedly benefiting North Korea.
Son-hee was a member of Somiryon , the Seoul Regional Alliance of National People's Fine Art Movement Organisations.
Somiryon practises and promotes realism in art and campaign for freedom of artistic expression.
The works of its members depict scenes of working people and often political messages, particularly in support of Korean reunification.
Son-hee was arrested on 18 March 1991.
As a member of Somiryon she was accused of various activities.
These included convening its general meetings since April 1990, organising lectures on popular art theory and on the North Korean Juche ideology, organising meetings where slides of North Korean art were shown, and painting both a banner advocating Korean reunification and a mural about Im Su-Kyong, a student detained for illegally visiting North Korea in 1989.
Ten other Somiryon members were arrested with Son-hee.
Two of them are still in prison, where they are serving 18-month sentences.
AIBS considers Son-hee to be a prisoner of conscience, detained for the peaceful exercise of her rights to freedom of expression and association.
TUNISIA
MONCEF TRIKI: a father of four, he was held in prolonged incommunicado detention, tortured and then sentenced in August 1991 to 15 months' imprisonment after an unfair trial.
Moncef Triki is President of the Tunis office of the Association for the Defence of Human Rights and Public Liberties and worked with families of Islamic detainees investigating details of their arrest and detention.
He was arrested on 11 May 1991, having been previously arrested twice and released without charge.
He was held in incommunicado in Bouchoucha Detention Centre for nearly three months, over 70 days beyond the maximum 10-day period allowed by Tunisian law.
During this time his family and lawyer sought information on his whereabouts, but received no response.
In July 1991 he was transferred to 9 avril Prison in Tunis.
Moncef Triki was tried on 1 August 1991 for membership of al-Nahda (Renaissance), an illegal Islamic organisation, and for holding an unauthorised meeting, although no evidence of any such meeting was presented during the court hearing.
He denied all charges and said that he had been severely tortured.
The court failed to consider the allegations of torture and prolonged incommunicado detention.
Amnesty International considers Moncef Triki to be a prisoner of conscience.
He is currently being held in 9 avril Prison where he has reportedly been held virtually naked for up to four days in cachots (small damp isolation cells).
He is allowed visitors for 10 minutes once a week.
EL SALVADOR
MARIA CRISTINA GÓMEZ: a member of a teacher's union, she was killed in San Salvador by a ‘death squad’ on April 1989.
Three years ago this month, five armed men in civilian clothes forced Gómez, a schoolteacher, into a car while her students and other witnesses watched helplessly.
Gómez was an active member of the teacher's union and a woman's organisation.
Her ‘death squad’ style murder was attributed by witnesses and human rights groups to members of the Air Force.
But the authorities did little to identify those responsible; eyewitness evidence was never followed up and no autopsy was performed.
Her family is still waiting for justice to be done.
Gómez is one of countless civilians believed to have been extrajudicially executed since 1980 by the military or ‘death squads’ linked to them.
Members of trade unions and other grass roots organisations have been particular targets of killings and ‘disappearances’ by the armed forces, who have accused them of supporting the armed opposition Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN).
Most cases have never been investigated and extrajudicial killings have continued with impunity.
In January 1991 a peace accord between the government and the FMLN committed both sides to a series of agreements on human rights.
A Truth Commission was established to investigate selected acts of violence committed by both sides since 1980 ‘whose mark on society makes most urgent the public knowledge of the truth’.
Those human rights abuses not investigated by the Commission are covered by an amnesty law passed in January, which grant immunity to the perpetrators.
All victims of human rights violations and their relatives have the right to have the full truth about their cases brought to light.
Cases like that of Gómez cannot remain uninvestigated and those responsible should be brought to justice in order to prevent such atrocities occurring.